THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN; A POEM, IN ELEVEN BOOKS.

BY TIMOTHY DWIGHT.

Fired, at first sight, with what the Muse imparts,
In fearless youth we tempt the height of arts.
POPE. HARTFORD: PRINTED BY ELISHA BABCOCK. M, DCC, LXXXV.

To his EXCELLENCY, GEORGE WASHINGTON, ESQUIRE, Commander in chief of the
American Armies, The Savior of his Country, The Supporter of Freedom, And the
Benefactor of Mankind;
This Poem is inscribed, with the highest respect for his character, the most
ardent wishes for his happiness, and the most grateful sense of the blessings,
secured, by his generous efforts, to the United States of North America,

by his most humble, and most obedient servant, TIMOTHY DWIGHT.
Greenfield, in Connecticut, March 1, 1785.
AS this poem is the first of the kind, which has been published in this
country, the writer begs leave to introduce it with several observations, which
that circumstance alone may perhaps render necessary.

He has taken to himself the liberty of altering the real order of the two last
battles, because he imagined the illustrious events, which attended the battle
of Gibeon, would make it appear to be the catastrophe of the poem, wherever
inserted.

He has varied the story of the embassy from Gibeon, for reasons, which he
thinks will be obvious to every reader, and which he hopes will be esteemed his
sufficient justification.

To give entire Unity to the Action, he has made Jabin the Canaanitish hero
through the whole poem; and has transferred the scene of the battle, between
Hazor and Israel, from the shores of the lake Merom to the neighborhood of Ai.

In the Manners, he has studied a medium between absolute barbarism and modern
refinement. In the best characters, he has endeavored to represent such
manners, as are removed from the peculiarities of any age, or country, and
might belong to the amiable and virtuous, of every age: such as are elevated
without design, refined without ceremony, elegant without fashion, and
agreeable, because they are ornamented with sincerity, dignity, and religion,
not because they are polished by art and education. Of such manners, he hopes
he may observe, without impropriety, that they possess the highest advantages
for universal application.

He has made use of Rhyme, because he believed it would be more generally
relished than blank verse, even amongst those who are esteemed persons of tas^e.

It may perhaps be thought the result of inattention or ignorance, that he
chose a subject, in which his countrymen had no national interest. But he
remarked that the Iliad and Eneid were as agreeable to modern nations, as to
the Greeks and Romans. The reason he suppo^ed to be obvious -- the subjects of
those poem^ furnish the (...) opportunities of exhibiting the agreeable* the
novel* the moral, the pathetic, and the sublime. If he i^ not deceived, the
subject he has chosen possesses, in a degree, the same advantages.

It will be observed that he has introduced some new words, and annexed to some
old ones, a new signification. This liberty, allowed to others, he hopes will
not be refused to him: especially as from this source the copiousness and
refinement of language have been principally derived.

That he wishes to please he frankly confesses. If he fails in the design, it
will be a satisfaction that he shall have i^jured no person but himself. As the
poem is uniform^y friendly to delicacy, and virtue, he hopes his countrymen
will so far regard him with candor, as not to impute it to him as a fault,
that he has endeavored to please them, and has thrown in his mite, for the
advancement of the refined arts, on this side of the Atlantic.

THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK I.

ARGUMENT.
Subject proposed. Invocation. After the battle, mentioned in the beginning of
the seventh chapter of Joshua, the Israelites, in correspondence with the
sacred history* are represented in circumstances of extreme distress. With this
event the poem opens, in the evening. Morning. Scene of war. Story of Zimri,
and Aram. Zimri returns to the assembly of Israel, and brings an account of the
death of Aram, and of an army, sent by Jabin, king of Hazor, to assist Ai.
Distress of the Israelites. Character and oration of Hanniel. After a pathetic
address, and rehearsal of their miseries, he attempts to prove the
impossibility of succeeding in their present design, because of the strength,
skill, and numerous allies of their enemies; foretells their approaching ruin,
asserts that GOD is opposed to them, that they were led out of Egypt to silence
their murmurs, and, the end being accomplished, ought to return. Panegyric on
that country; obviates objections to a return, and informs them that, if they
should conquer Canaan, they will be ruined, during the war, by the necessary
neglect of arts and agriculture, difficulty of dividing the land, of settling a
form of government, and of avoiding tyranny; and concludes with a new
exhortation to return to Egypt. Applause. Joshua replies, and beginning to
explain the dispensations of Providence, is interrupted by Hanniel, who first
obliquely, and then openly accuses him of aiming at the usurpation of kingly
authority; and asserts the return to be easy. Joshua vindicates his innocence
with severity upon Hanniel; and allowing they can return, paints to them the
miseri^s, they will experience from the Egyptian king, lords, people, and
manners, and from providential dispensations terminating in their ruin. He
appeals to them to judge of the fal^ehood of Hanniel's ideas of the purposes of
Heaven, in leading them out of Egypt; and declares the certainty of their
success from their union, with a few exceptions, their previous prosperity, and
the ^avour and revealed ^esigns of Heaven, and exalts in their future glory.
App^^use. Preparation for war. Caleb opposes immediate war, and advises a fast
of two days. Jos^ua approves of it.

THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK I.
THE Chief, whose arm to Israel's chosen band
Gave the fair empire of the promised land,
Ordained by Heaven to hold the sacred sway,
Demands my voice and animates the lay.
O thou, whose Love, high throned above all height,
Illumes the immense, and ^unn^ the world of light;
Whose distant beam the human mind inspires,
With wisdom brightens, and with virtue sires;
Unfold how pious realms to glory rise,
And impious nations find avenging skies:
May thy own deeds exalt the humble line,
And not a stain obscure the theme divine.
When now from western hills the sun was driven,
And night expanding filled the bounds of heaven,
Over I^rael's camp ten thousand fires appeared
And solemn cries from distant guards were heard,
Her tribes, escaped from Ai's unhappy plain,
With shame and anguish mourned their heroes slain,
Line 1.) Wherever Chief, Hero* Leader, etc. with a capit^l, respect the
Israelitish army, Joshua is intended; when th^^ respect ^he (...) army, J^bin
is intended. The (...), wi^^ a (...).
Pierced with deep wounds the groaning warriors stood;
Their bosoms heaved, their tears incessant flowed;
Their sons unburied on the hostile plain,
Their brothers captived, and their parents slain.
The tender father clasped his lovely child,
That thoughtless-sporting innocently smiled,
To his fond arms with soft endearments leapt,
Gazed on his tears, and wondered why he wept.
Her woes with his the trembling mother joined,
Edged all his fears, and sunk his drooping mind,
Arrayed in tenfold gloom the approaching light,
And gathered foes unnumber'd to the fight.
Thus trembling, sad, of every hope forlorn,
The hapless thousands watched the coming morn.
In Joshua's ear their sad complaints resound,
As slow, unseen, he traced the camp around.
Wherever shrill cries, or groans distinguished flowed
Propp'd on his lance, the Hero listening stood:
For often the secret hour of night he chose,
To hush their tumults, and to learn their woes;
Each tear, each cry his feeling mind oppressed,
And schemes of pity filled his laboring breast.
And now bright Phosphor waked the dawning day,
The tents all whitening in the expanded ray;
The sun's broad beam the scene of war displayed,
A wide extent, with distant groves overspread;
A tall, dark forest gloom'd the northern round,
And eastern hills over hills the horizon bound:
Far south, a plain in vivid green (...),
And one un^^ried level filled the view;
Beyond, Ai's grandeur proudly rose on high,
And azure mountains pierced the western sky.
Around their Leader's tent, the unnumber'd train
Thronged from the camp, and gathered on the plain*
When Zimri slow approached; of Asher's race
The first in merit, as the first in place.
Him, not a chief, that dared the battling field,
In swiftness equaled, or in strength excelled;
Save Joshua's arm, that still unconquered shone;
From every rival every prize he won.
In night^s last gloom (so Joshua's will ordained)
To find what hopes the cautious foe remained,
Or what new strength, allied, increased their force,
To Ai's high walls the hero bent his course.
Aram, his friend, unknowing vile dismay,
With willing footsteps shared the dangerous way.
In virtue joined, one soul to both was given;
Each steered his path, and led his friend to heaven.
Over earth's dim verge as dawned the cheerful day,
Near slumbering Ai they cours'd their fearless way;
Unseen, in twining shrubs, a heathen sat,
Marked their still path, and boded Aram's fate;
Swift hurled, his javelin sought the hero's side,
Pierced to the heart, he groaned, and gasp'd, and died.
The heathen flew, fierce Zimri clave his breast,
But Aram's eyes were closed in endless rest.
Thus, while fond Virtue wished in vain to save,
Hale, bright and generous, found a hapless grave.
With genius' living flame his bosom glowed,
And science charmed him to her sweet abode:
In worth's fair path his feet adventured far;
The pride of peace, the rising grace of war;
In duty firm, in danger calm as even,
To friends unchanging, and sincere to heaven.
75.) While, amid, and among, are used throughout this poem, euph. great.
instead of whilst, amidst, and amongst.
76. Hale bright) The comparisons of this kind were all written in the early
stages of the late war, and annexed to the poem to indulge the Author's own
emotions of regard to the persons named in them. As it was impossible to pay
this little tribute of respect to all the deserving characters, who have fallen
in defense of American liberty, the Author determined to desist, after the
first attempt. The lines on Major Andre are an exception to the above remark,
as are those on General Mercer.
How short his course, the prize how early won!
While weeping friendship mourns her favorite gone.
With soul too noble for so base a cause,
Thus Andre bowed to war's barbarian laws.
In morn's fair light the opening blossom warmed,
Its beauty smiled, its growing fragrance charmed;
Fierce roared the untimely blast around its head;
The beauty vanished, and the fragrance fled;
Soon sunk his graces in the wintry tomb,
And sad Columbia wept his hapless doom.
As now over eastern hills the morning burned,
Alone brave Zimri to the camp returned;
Pale in his front despair and anguish sat,
And each kind bosom feared for Aram's fate,
When thus, the Leader -- Say, exalted chief.
What dire misfortune clouds thy mind with grief?
O best of men, he cried, my tears deplore
The hero's sat, brave Aram is no more.
Weep, weep, my friends: his worthy life demands
This last, poor tribute from your grateful hands,
Nor weep for him alone: dread scenes of grief
Surround our steps, and Heaven denies relief.
The insulting wretch, that sealed the hero's fate,
In death proclaimed what terrors round you wait.
I die, he cried, but know, thou culprit, know,
To the dark tomb thy harbinger I go.
Over Israel's race ascend, from realms afar,
The clouds of ruin, and the storms of war.
The hosts, that bow to Jabin's great control
From Hazor's rocky hills, in thunder roll;
Hosts, that never knew the tender tear to sh^d,
Born in the field, beneath the standard bred;
That raptured fly, where shrilling trumpets call,
Plunge on the pointed spear, and climb the kindled wall.
These dauntless bands (to Ai the message came)
Shall sink in night thy nation's hated name;
Even now brave Oran, Jabin's martial boast,
Speeds his glad course and moves a countless host:
Raptured I see thy camp in flames arise,
And Israel's ashes cloud the angry skies.
He spoke. Astonished at the impending doom,
Round the pale thousands breathed a solemn gloom*
Rent were their martial vestments, torn their hair,
And every eye spoke pangs of keen despair.
Mid the sad throng, in mournful robes arrayed
Vile dust besprinkled over his down-cast head,
Pale Hanniel rose, and with dissembled woe,
Clouded his front, and urged the tear to flow.
Of princely blood* his haughty ^ire, of yore
Proud Pharaoh's favorite on the Egyptian shore,
Over Israel's race was sceptered to preside,
To rule their tributes and their toils to guide.
In the son's mind again the parent lived,
His pride rekindled, and his art revived.
Wherever pride called, his changing soul would turn;
Grieve with the sad, and with the envious burn;
Vaunt with the (...) with the wise,
And cheat the pio^^ with uplifted eyes;
In Youth's fond sports with seeming zeal engage,
Or list, delighted, to the tales of Age.
When Joshua's hand the sacred rule adorned,
With pangs he saw, but still in secret mourned:
His close revenge the Hero's fate decreed,
And smooth, sure slander taught his name to bleed.
With friendly grasp he squeezed each warrior's hand;
With jests familiar pleased the vulgar band;
In (...), sh^ewd hints the Leader's faults disclosed;
Praised his whole sway, but single acts opposed;
Admired how law so stern a face could wear;
Styled combat rashness, and named caution fear:
With angels the^ his fame and virtue joined,
To tempt coarse scandal from each envious mind:
Blessed his own peaceful lot, and smiled, that Heaven,
To minds, that prized them, empire's toils had given.
Yet base-born fear his vigorous soul disdained;
Each danger shared and every toil sustained;
Joy'd, in terrific fields, the foe to dare,
And claimed the honors of the fiercest war.
Now the blessed period, long in vain desired,
His fond hope flattered, and his bosom fired;
To end his rival's sway, his own secure,
Resolved, his fancy deemed the triumph sure.
In seeming anguish often his hands he wrung,
And words imperfect murmured on his tongue;
At length, with feeble voice, he thus began,
While round the tribes a mute attention ran.
Friends! brethren! sires! or by what tenderer name
Shall I address the heirs of Jacob's fame?
Dear to my soul, as those red drops, that flow,
Through my warm veins, and bid my bosom glow,
If chilled by grief's cold hand, the vital flood
Still pours its warmth, nor yet forsakes the road!
Long has this heart with deep compassion viewed
Your generous tribes, by countless ills subdued;
Ills, these pained eyes foreboding, long beheld,
And this sad warning voice in vain revealed.
Those counsels, now by sure experience proved,
That voice, alone by Israel's welfare moved,
Once more attend. Ye guardian powers, be near,
Enlarge their minds and give them hearts to hear!
Let base-born prejudice no more control
The native candor of each generous soul;
Assert yourselves; your future conduct scan;
Reason's the noblest privilege of man.
Long have our feet with restless error roved,
And the sad waste with all its miseries proved;
That waste, by Heaven's unerring sentence cursed
With ceaseless hunger, and eternal thirst,
The tyger's rage, the lion's fearful path,
Bestrew'd with bones, and red with recent death,
The sun's keen fury, midnight's gloomy dread,
And all the horrors of the impoison'd shade.
How often those eyes the hapless child have viewed,
By hunger famished and by pain subdued,
While the fond parent over his beauties hung,
And looked distress, that froze his faltering tongue,
Distress, to hear the young, the piercing cry,
That claimed relief, when no relief was nigh;
To see the babe, its face with death overspread,
Stretch forth its little hands, and sue for bread:
While friends, all impotent, rolled down the tear,
Rocks learned to feel, and forests bent to hear.
When pale Disease assumed her fatal reign,
Chased the warm glow, and racked the joint^ with pain,
Often have these failing eyes the chief beheld,
In counsel famed, and glorious in the field,
Condemned the pangs of sickness to endure,
Far from relief, and hopeless of a cure;
No downy couch to rest his drooping head,
The skies his covering, and the earth his bed;
No softening plant his stiffen'd wounds to heal,
Soothe his racked nerves, and learn them not to feel;
Nor sweet, embowering shade to drive away
Night's baleful damps, and summer's scorching ray.
But who the various ills can number over.
Or tell the sands that form the sea-beat shore?
Even now by slow degrees our thousands fall,
Till one wide, common grave involve us all.
For see what woes surround our daring course,
That tempts the terrors of unmeasured force;
Safe in high walls, insulting foes deride,
Our boastful impotence, and banner'd pride;
On boundless wealth, with careless ease, rely,
And hosts unnumber'd never taught to fly;
Proud of the dreadful steed, the wasting car,
And all the strength, and all the art, of war.
These foes to aid, what countless throngs will join!
What peopled realms against our arms combine!
From Gibeon's walls, and where tremendous powers
Surround imperial Hazor's hundred towers,
Or where proud shores the western main behold,
Or orient Gihon's haughty tides are rolled,
I see to fearful combat millions rise,
Chiefs mount the car, and point the fated prize;
See in the vanguard haughty Conquest ride
Lo, murdered thousands pour the ruddy tide!
Over Israel's camp the clouds of vengeance lower,
Fear wings our flight, and flames our race devour.
At that dread season, chained in bonds forlorn,
Of men the proverb, and of Heaven the scorn,
Hissed by ^ile slaves, our tribes the rack shall feel,
Or gasp, (...) ^appier, on the griding steel:
Slow round the ^orm the fires of Molock burn;
Chiefs mount the pile, and babes to ashes turn:
Impaled with anguish, bleeding sires behold,
Their wives polluted and their virgins sold;
Their sons, sweet solace of declining age,
In sport tran^fix'd, or cleft in causeless rage;
While threats, while insults rend with sore dismay,
And hungry hounds stand gaping for their prey.
But cease my faltering tongue; ere these befall,
Oh Heaven, let Hanniel's blood bedew yon impious wall.
And will no happier hand direct the road,
And tell, where Quiet builds her sweet abode?
Where is the sage, on whose ^^gelic tongue
Bright wisdom dwelt, and soft persuasion hung?
Does no kind breast with patriot virtue glow,
And claim an interest in hi^ country's woe?
Here then* ye h^ir^ of Jacob's name, behold
A f^iend, whose bosom terror never controlled;
Whose voice, though envious thousands dare oppose,
Shall pour the balm, and heal his country's woes.
How long, brave heroes, shall your feet pursue
Such keen distress, as nations never knew?
How long your host the chains of slavery own,
And millions die, to swell the pride of one?
Against Heaven's decree let folly cease to rise,
And tempt no more the vengeance of the skies.
To other lords that firm decree ordains
The expected mountains, and the promised plains.
Our every path unnumber'd woes surround;
Our blood in streams bedews polluted ground;
No glad success arrays our steps in light,
And smiling Victory triumphs in our flight.
Search ancient years; through time's long course return,
When earth first wantoned in the beams of morn;
Success unchanged attends, when GOD approves,
And Peace propitious smooths the path he loves.
Base flight, and dire amaze, and creeping shame,
Man lost in guilt, and alien'd skies, proclaim.
If still your fettered minds, by folly swayed.
Doubts wavering toss, and leaden fears invade,
To yon bright dome your eyes convicted turn;
Say why forgets the guiding flame to burn?
Why round its point forgets the cloud to roll,
Sublime pavilion of the all-moving soul?
The dreaded truth must Hanniel singly own?
Fled is the smile of Heaven, the Guardian gone.
But Virtue asks, Why, led by GOD's command*
Roved this brave host through many a weary land?
Each hour, with pains replete, each field replies,
And with dread language, loud as clarions, cries,
In Egypt's realms, where every pleasure smiled,
And, far from famine, laborers lightly toiled,
Wanton with feasts, our thankless hearts repined,
And tainted prayers provoked the all-ruling Mind;
Tired by long scenes of woe, the ungrateful host,
Learned humbler thoughts, and prized the good they lost:
Reclaimed, each spotless mind adores his ways,
And every blessing wakes the voice of praise.
The end thus gained, his terrors lifted high
Bid his warned sons the unblessed purpose fly.
See, swiftly borne, the storm of vengeance rise!
Cloud after cloud invades the angry skies;
Even now over earth, fierce peals commencing roar,
And round the concave flames vindictive pour;
Hark, with what din the distant whirlwinds roll!
How the floods threaten from the thundering pole!
Rise, nimbly rise, burst every dead delay,
And fly, ere fury sweep our race away.
But where, oh where shall hapless Israel fly?
Where find a covert, when the ruin's nigh?
Will no kind land the wished recess disclose!
No friendly refuge soothe our long, long woes?
Yes, the fair, fruitful land, with rapture crowned,
Where once our sires a sweet retirement found,
That land, our refuge Heaven's high will ordains,
Pleased with our prayers, and piteous of our pains.
Hail favored realms, where no rude tempest blows!
Serene retreats, and shades of kind repose!
Ordained, the union'd bliss of life to prove,
The wreaths of glory, and the bowers of love!
There the great prince, with awful splendour crowned,
From foes shall guard us, and with peace surround,
In no rude combat ^ated to engage,
Nor fired by clarions to vindictive rage.
There cates divine shall yield the sweet repast,
Charm the palled eye, and lure the loathing taste;
With die refulgent crimson vestures glow,
And robes of kings succeed this garb of woe:
Our tribes, in spicy groves, at ease recline,
Press the swelled fig, and pluck the clustered vine;
Her floods of boundless wealth the river roll,
And spring, with autumn joined, beam temperate round the pole.
For these blessed joys, what mind, so left to shame,
Can grudge the tribute, regal glories claim?
Return, how due! Devoid of decent snow,
How soon would Power to trampled weakness grow?
How soon base minds the feeble judge deride,
And beggared rulers quake at wealthy pride?
Nor the just doom can Avarice' self deny,
Who share the blessing must the tax supply.
No danger now even timid minds can fear,
Lest stern Oppression lift her rod severe:
Unlike our fires, who raised impatient cries,
A fairer doom awaits us from the skies.
Taught by our hated flight, the nation knows
How, joined with ours, their vast dominion grows;
Disjoined, how swift the weakened tribes decay,
To foes a triumph, and to schisms a prey.
Even now with friendly joy their bosoms burn,
And with fond prescience hail our wished return;
Bid our own hands the grateful covenant frame,
Prepared to give, what avarice scarce can claim;
Our sons invite their boundless wealth to share,
Garlands of fame, and sweet repose of care.
Here, warriors, here the dreaded miseries flow,
Scenes of dire scorn, and seats of thickening woe.
For blessed as hope can paint, over all our toil
Let conquest flourish, and let glory smile;
Still in long train, what ceaseless ills await!
The waste of war, and frowns of adverse fate!
While sheathed in arms, the conquered realms we (...),
End of long pains, and patience' wished reward,
Those realms what culturing hand shall ^each to (...)
Or bid bright vesture purple over the loom*
Unfed, unclothed, our tribes shall (...)
Our lands grow wild, and every art (...)
Whose wisdom then shall equal lots divine,
And round each province lead the bordering line?
Will none, for fancied wrongs, the falchion draw,
His arm the umpire, and his will the law,
Over his friend's prize with rude irruption pour,
Burst nature's bonds, and bathe in kindred gore?
Whose chosen hand the scepter then shall sway?
What system'd rule the union'd tribes obey?
To my pained eyes what hideous prospects spread,
When impious Faction rears her snaky head!
Arrayed in savage pomp, Destruction reigns
Over flaming cities, and over crimson plains;
Friends, against friends, that knew but one fond heart,
Aim the dark knife, and lift the secret dart;
In brother's blood unseeling brothers wade,
And parent's bosoms sheath the filial blade.
Let Pity round the scene extend her veil,
And thrilling virtue shun the dreadful tale!
Or shall one arm the state forever sway?
And, sunk to stocks, our torpid race obey?
One voice, through ages, Jacob's pride control,
Ourselves the clay, and he the all-moving soul*
Perish the thought! to oppose a tyrant's reign,
One patriot life shall flow from every vein;
In Israel's cause shall burst this fearless voice,
And this bold arm avenge the freeborn choice.
Rise* warriors, rise! desert this dreary plain.
These fields of slaughter, and these haunts of pain!
To scenes of brighter name, to happier skies,
To other Edens lift your raptured eyes!
The world's fair Empress chides our dull delay,
Spreads her fond arms, and bids us haste away,
To bliss, to glory; seize the ^^spicious road,
And claim your interest in the blessed abode!
The hero spoke. As when, in distant skies*
Slow-roll'd, the darkening storm begins to rise,
Through the deep grove, and through the sounding vale,
Roar the long murmurs of the sweeping gale:
So round the throng a hoarse applause was heard,
And growing joy in every face appeared.
On a tall rock, whose top o'erlook'd the plain,
The Leader rose, and hushed the reverent train.
By Hanniel warmed, with airy visions fired,
He saw gay hope their glowing minds inspired,
In prospect bright, at hand fair Egypt lay,
Divine the pleasure, and secure the way;
With calm, frank aspect, that serenely smiled*
His port all-winning, and his accent mild;
Too wise, to thwar^ at once the general choice,
Or hope to sway alone by reason's voice,
He thus began. Ye heirs of Jacob's name,
Let Joshua's voice your generous candor claim.
In Israel's sacred cause my toils ye know,
My midnight watchings, and my morning woe.
Your long, lone path my wakeful eye surveyed,
Charmed the sad wild, and cheered the languid head;
Soothed drooping sickness, banished fear's alarms
And clasped the orphan with delighted arms:
Against fierce invasions raised a guardian shield,
The first to seek, the last to leave, the field;
For all your tribes a parent's fondness proved,
Fulfilled each wish, and even your wanderings loved.
In those sad scenes, when pity owns applause,
Not Hanniel's tears adorn a fairer cause.
For Israel's woe does Hanniel singly feel?
Are these eyes blind? or is this bosom steel?
When ceased these hands from toil? or what strange sun
Saw Joshua's feet the haunts of danger shun?
Your eyes have seen, these honest scars proclaim
How often this breast has poured the vital stream:
Still be it poured. A nation's cause to save,
Life's a poor price; the field an envied grave.
Whatever voice your welfare shall divine,
My heart shall welcome and my hand shall join:
But, calmly weighed, let Truth our counsels guide*
And Reason's choice the destined course decide.
So prone the mind in error's path to rove,
TO explore is wisdom, and it is bliss to prove.
Charmed, at first fight, when pleasures rise to view,
Each painted scene our ventrous thoughts pursue;
In airy visions far-seen Edens rise,
And isles of pleasure tempt enamored eyes.
On the calm tide, to aromatic gales,
Our fearless hands exalt impatient sails;
Through sapphire floods the bark foresees its way,
While wanton billows smoothly round it play,
Nor heeds the angry storm, that with dread power,
Climbs dark behind the hill, and hopes the avenging hour,
Warned by my voice, such hidden dangers fly,
And each gay prospect scan with searching eye.
In realms far distant spreads the expected shore,
Hills rise between, and boiling oceans roar:
Two tiresome ways invite our wearied bands,
Through trackless deserts, or through hostile lands.
Say, shall our steps again the waste pervade,
Dare the fierce heat, and tempt the impoison'd shade?
Consult yon chief; his voice again shall tell
Those dreary scenes, he painted now so well.
Or shall our feet, its dangers hid from view,
Through peopled realms, a nearer path pursue?
I blush, when falsehood leads the chosen tribes,
Where folly dictates, and where fear prescribes.
One foe to shun, shall fiercer foes be tried?
Death their delight, and war their earliest pride.
Lo the fierce wrath, at Taberah's plain that burned,
And Korah's host to instant corses turned,
Roused to more dreadful flames, our guilt to spy,
And see our feet to hated Egypt fly,
Shall wing Philistia's host to death and war,
And bid fierce Midian whirl the thundering car;
Full on her prey avenging Amalek fall,
And guilt and terror every heart appall;
Our wives, our sons, to savage wrath be given,
Feast famished wolves, and glut the hawks of heaven.
No fancied doom my b^ding words declare:
Truth, fixed as mountains, fills your startled ear.
To every beast the lamb presents a prey,
And coward bands invite the world to slay.
But will ye tremble for one shameful fall?
Shall one lost combat Abraham's race appall?
Is Aram dead! to rapid vengeance fly;
By me his orphan babes for vengeance cry;
Fired by his fate, your nerves let ardour string,
Exalt the standard, and to combat spring.
Even Zimri fears, by strong affections led,
While his fond bosom mourns his Aram dead.
Of all the sympathy, that woes impart
To the soft texture of the good man's heart,
Departed friendship claims the largest share,
And sorrow in excess is virtue there.
But timid passion! Grief, with startled eye
Spies fancied ills, and quakes, ere danger's nigh*
Yon chief demands, why fled the guardian fire?
What unknown folly bade the cloud retire?
That base distrust, which glorious fight delays,
That smooth, close fraud which tempts to dangerous ways,
These claim the scourge of Heaven: be these atoned,
Each fear shall vanish, and each hope be crowned.
While thus the Chief their bosoms warmed anew,
And every ear, and heart, to virtue drew;
Their kindling zeal impatient Hanniel eyed,
Shook for his cause, and frowned with startled pride:
When those, he cried, whose choice our warriors lost,
Of truth expatiate, and of wisdom boast,
With just disdain my rising spirits burn,
And my pained heart, at times, forgets to mourn*
To shame, to flight, does sacred Wisdom lead?
Does sacred Truth command our sons to bleed?
Rouse then to arms; lo Ai impatient stands,
And yields the doom, our eager wish demands;
In wisdom's cause with active zeal engage,
And fall, a splendid triumph to their rage.
Far happier lot, to meet the falchion's sway!
Than, one by one* thus lingering, waste away.
Far other end yon Chief ambitious eyes;
Concealed by virtue's mask the danger lies.
Unbrib'd, unawed, the honest task I claim,
To burst the veil, and ward the impending shame.
Long versed in wiles, the lust of power his guide,
He lulls our caution, and inflates our pride;
With sense, that darts through man a searching view,
With pride, that rest, or limits never knew,
To deep designs mistrustless hearts he draws,
With freedom soothes, and cheats with flattered laws;
A crown to seize, the patriot's fire can claim,
And mock with seeming zeal the fearful Name.
Full well he knows that, worn by slow delay,
Our generous tribes shall fall an easy prey;
That long-felt influence, great by habit grown,
Climbs to firm sway, and swells into a throne.
Be warned, be warned; the threatening evils fly,
And seek repose beneath a kinder sky.
Short is the toil, the well-known path secure,
The pleasure endless, and the triumph sure.
Rejoiced, each land will open the destined road,
And smiling guide us to the wished abode.
Freed from the fearful storm that round them spread,
Their hearts shall hail us, and their hands shall aid.
No giant chief in terror there shall rise;
No dreadful Jabin spring to seize the prize:
From Madon's hills, to fierce vindictive war
No frowning Jobab roll his iron car:
From death's alarms the potent king shall guard,
And bowers of transport yield the bright reward.
He spoke. Like Angels dressed in glory's prime,
With conscious worth, and dignity sublime,
While the still thousand^ gazed with glad surprise,
His great soul living in his piercing eyes,
The Chief returned. By wild ambition tossed,
To shame impervious, and to virtue lost,
Here bend thine eye, thy front unblushing rear;
Let frozen Conscience point no sting severe;
Then tell, if falsehood lends thee power to tell,
Thy mind believes one scene, thy lips reveal;
One black aspersion, formed to blot my name;
Or one vain prospect, raised for Israel's shame.
Disclose what dreaded toil this arm has fled;
On what dire plain this bosom failed to bleed:
Tell, if thou can, when, lured by interest's call,
One nerve, one wish forgot the bliss of all.
In virtue armed, while Conscience gayly smiles,
I mock thy fraud, and triumph over thy wiles:
Thy darts impoison'd peace and glory bring;
It Is guilt alone gives slander strength to sting.
Blush, Hanniel, blush; to yonder tent depart;
Let humbler wishes rule thy envious heart;
Calm the wide lust of power; contract thy pride;
Repent those black designs, thou can not hide;
Once more to Heaven thy long-lost prayers revive,
And know, the mind that counsels can forgive.
Can I, as GOD, unfailing bliss assure,
Foil with a wish, and peace at choice secure?
What nature can* this arm unbroke shall bear,
Whatever man dared, this breast unshaken dare
Canaan's host, those eyes with pain shall view
My falchion vanquish, and my feet pursue;
On Israel's faithful sons this hand bestow
The bl^ss of quiet, and the balm of woe.
Should then these thoughts* to base ambition grown,
With impious madness bui^d the envied throne,
To wing my doom let rapid lightnings ^ly,
And pampered hounds the peaceful grave deny.
Mine be the bliss, the bliss supreme to see
My long-lov'd nation blessed, and blessed by me:
Let others rule; compared with this pure joy,
A throne's a bubble, and the world a toy.
In reason's face let all thy wishes speed;
Let foes befriend thee, and let Heaven succeed:
Then count thy gains; the mighty prize survey;
And straws, and bubbles, shall those gains outweigh.
Wrought in gay looms, thy golden robes shall glare;
Rich banquets tempt, and luscious wines ensnare:
But to vile show shall Men their bliss confine?
Or sink to brutes, and only live to dine?
On these poor joys what dreadful ills attend?
Fears ever rising! miseries never to end!
Though whelmed in floods one impious tyrant lies,
In the throned son shall all the father rise;
The same black heart; the same beclouded mind;
To pity marbled, and to reason blind.
Search ancient times: the annal'd page (...) over;
With curious eye the sun's long course explore;
Scarce can each age a single king confes^,
Who knew to govern, or who wished to bless:
The rest, of earth the terror, or the scorn,
By knaves exalted, and by coward^ borne*
To lords like these shall Israel's millions bow?
Bend the false knee, and force the perjured vow?
A few short years, our wealth content to shore,
The rest their greedy hand to toil may (...):
But soon, fu^l soon, their ^nvious mi^d^ (...) know
Our growth their ruin, and our peace their woe.
Then all the plagues, from jealous power that spring*
And death, the tender mercy of a king,
Your breasts shall feel; and, racked with anguish, mourn
The day, when madness counseled to return.
Can I forget, how, from the dunghill raised,
Villains who bowed, and sycophants who praised,
Over Jacob's heirs were sceptered to preside,
Their tributes gather, and their labors guide?
From them, each cruel pang your heart shall rive,
That coward minds, or offic'd slaves, can give:
Their daring hands profane the spotless charms,
That yield soft transport to your melting arms;
Each generous thought the brandished scourge control
And Insult rend the agonizing soul.
Then too shall Egypt, fired with wrath, recall
The plagues they felt, their king's, their nation's fall;
Against your race, while Vengeance spreads the wing,
With fury arm them, and to torture spring;
Your sacred dome shall burn; your altars rend;
Your priests destroy; your hated worship end.
In that dread period, what auspicious shore
Shall banished Virtue's lifted wings explore?
In what new realm, when, crushed, her vo^aries fail,
Build the bright dome, and spread the hallowed veil;
Her priests inspire; her altars teach to rise,
And waft her morning incense to the skies?
Her final ^^ight your hearts in vain shall mourn;
In vain, with anguish, call her wished return;
In vain the hour extatic sigh to find,
And the sweet sabbath of a guiltless mind.
To Egypt's crimes our sons shall fall a prey,
And learn her manners, while they own her sway:
From many a bower obscene the poison gli^e,
Taint the young soul, and freeze the vital ^ide;
The sacred Law our rising hope forsake*
And lisp out curses, ere they kn^w to sp^^k:
Sad Conscience bow beneath an iron rod,
And torpid Reason own a reptile God.
Then, roused to wrath, shall Heaven refuse to hear;
Mock all your pangs, and hiss your bitter prayer:
In poisoned gales, its wasting curses rise;
The plague empurpled taint the sickly skies:
The fields all wither, famine rend the breast,
And babes, sad victims! yield the dire repast.
Then from Sabean climes, with hideous sound,
Swift cars shall roll, and savage war resound;
To blood, to vengeance, chiefs their hosts inspire,
Spread boundless death, and wrap the world in fire:
Our sons, blessed refuge of the waning year!
Charm of sad toil, and sweet repose of care!
Against their own hapless sires with foes combine,
And with new anguish point the dart divine.
Thus over our race shall matchless misery ro^l,
And death, and bondage blast the rising soul;
Till the last dregs of vengeance Heaven expend,
Blot out our race, and Israel's glory end;
In final darkness set our sun's pale beam,
And black oblivion shroud our hapless name.
For this dire end, were such bright scenes bestowed?
For this, the eternal covenant sealed by God?
For this did ocean's trembling waves divide,
And over pale Egypt roll their whelming tide?
For this, the seraph lead our sacred bands?
For this loud thunder speak the dread commands?
From the hard rock refreshing waters rise?
The food of angels shower from balmy skies?
The sun-bright waste its flaming heats allay,
And Jordan's parting billows yield our way?
But Hanniel cries, These wondr^^^ signs were given,
To scourge our guilt, and bend our hearts to Heaven.
Were this the end, fierce famine had annoyed;
The plague had wasted, or the sword destroyed.
To fairer bliss he led the chosen train
Through the dark wave, and over the howling plain,
Ordained, when yon proud towers in dust are hurled,
To found an empire, and to rule a world;
Over earth's far realms bid truth and virtue shine,
And spread to nature's bounds the Name divine.
What though a few base minds the course oppose,
Slaves of poor pride, and Israel's bitter foes;
For pomp, for banquets would their race destroy,
And smile, to sell a nation for a toy;
What though of lifeless mold, a feeble race
With souls of maids the shape of men disgrace;
Think life no life, unblessed with torpid ease,
Shrink from a shield, and shiver at a breeze:
Against those let Justice' angry falchion flame,
And hissing Vengeance blast their impious name:
These dress the inglo^^^us loom; in sleep decay,
And to their kindr^^ nothing fleet away,
Far other mind our true-born race inspires;
Keen bravery prompts, and Abraham's virtue fires:
I see to combat ardent heroes rise;
I see bright glory flash from sparkling eyes;
Hark a glad cry! that every danger braves,
"Perish the day, ere Israel's sons be slaves;"
Swift pour new transports through my thrilling veins;
Heaven's voice in thunder calls to hostile plains:
Mark, mark the sound divine! cease every care;
Gird on your arms, and wake to manly war:
To bright possessions glory points the way,
And calls her sons, her heroes, to the prey.
By friendship's ties, religion's bands combined,
By birth united, and by interest joined,
In the same view our every wish conspires,
One spirit actuates, and one genius fires;
Plain, generous manners vigorous limbs confess,
And vigorous minds to freedom ardent press;
In danger's path our eyes serenely smile,
And well-strung sinews hail accustomed toil.
Against hosts like these what foe with hope can arm?
What numbers daunt them? or what fears alarm?
To reeds before them deadly spears shall turn,
Swords blunt their edge, and flames forget to burn;
To the s^ight mound descend the heaven-topp'd wall,
The floods grow dry, and hills and mountains fall.
Rise then to war; awake to bright alarms;
Hail the glad trump, and seize your eager arms!
Behold, my sons, behold with raptured eyes,
How slight the toil, how vast the glorious prize!
These golden robes the fate of Sihon tell,
How Midian yielded, and how Amalek fell;
How sunk proud Jericho's invaded wall,
And wide Canaan trembled at her fall;
How through each region rings the dreadful cry,
And their wild eye balls see destruction nigh.
That faith, that arm of steel, that dauntless soul
That bade over Bashan's walls destruction roll,
Over fields, over towers, shall Israel's standard bear,
Turn realms to flight, and wrest the prize of war;
Fill life with glory; Heaven's complacence gain,
And call fair Peace to cheer the crimson plain.
Then over wide lands, as blissful Eden bright,
Type of the skies, and seats of pure delight,
Our sons, with prosperous course, shall stretch their sway,
And claim an empire, spread from sea to sea:
In one great whole the harmonious tribes combine;
Trace Justice' path, and choose their chiefs divine;
On Freedom's base e^ect the heavenly plan;
Teach laws to reign, and save the rights of man.
Th^n (...) Art shall wrap the fields in bloom,
Fine (...), and guide the useful loom;
(...) towers in golden pomp arise;
Then (...) cities meet auspicious skies:
The soul on Wisdom's wing sublimely soar,
New virtues cherish, and new truths explore:
Through time's long tract our name celestial run,
Climb in the east, and circle with the sun;
And smiling Glory stretch triumphant wings
Over hosts of heroes, and over tribes of kings.
The Leader spoke; and deep in every breast
A thrilling joy his cheerful voice impressed.
Round the wide train, late drowned in sad dismay,
His eyes refulgent cast a living ray:
Soul caught from soul the quick, enlivening charm;
Each parent's visage bade his children arm;
In every heart the undaunted wish began;
Over the glad field a pleasing murmur ran;
On Ai's high walls they cast a longing eye,
Resolved to conquer, or prepared to die.
So, when the northeast pours a deepening storm,
Night shades the world, and clouds the heaven deform,
Loud on some ship descends the driving rain,
And winds imperious toss the surging main;
Dissolved in terror, sailors eye the wave,
Lift ardent prayers, and wait the gaping grave:
Is chance in beauty's bloom the morn arise,
Still the rough roar, and charm the troubled skies,
Serenely opening, far the billows over,
The blue-seen mountains, and the native shore;
Raptured the newborn day with shouts they hail,
And stretch their canvas to the joyous gale.
When sickening Hanniel saw their bosoms glow,
Their fierce eyes burn, and tears of transport stow,
The loved, the fond design, his changeful mind,
With secret pangs, to happier hours consigned.
High over the rest his shouts distinguished rose;
With well feigned smiles his artful visage glows,
And thus his voice -- When pierced with Israel's grief
I strove in vain to lend the wished relief,
Perhaps this heart, by nature prone to know
The good man's interest in his country's woe,
Of peace, and prosperous arms too soon despaired,
Unreal ills foresaw, and fancied dangers feared.
Yet still those views a kind indulgence claim,
Your fame their glory, and your bliss their aim.
Should this bold course be doomed to woe severe,
Pure is my warning voice, my conscience clear;
On destined fight should friendly Conquest smile,
With joy, my soul shall welcome every toil;
In Israel's cause, to scenes of danger driven,
To war is transport, and to die is heaven.
The hero ceased: a faint applause was heard,
And half-form'd smiles around the plain appeared,
With startling sound the trump's deep voice began;
To seize their arms the raptured thousands ran;
When Caleb, reverend chief, all white with age,
Serenely rose, and hushed the tumult's rage.
Deep thought fate musing on his furrowed face;
Calm wisdom round him cast an awful grace;
With smiles just Heaven surveyed his constant truth,
Innerv'd his limbs, and lengthened out his youth:
Even now his arm rejoiced the sword to wield,
To lead the contest, and to sweep the field.
Near the great Chief, in purple robes he stood;
Sense, from his tongue, and sweet persuasion flowed;
Round the wide plain attentive silence hung,
And thus sage counsels swayed the listening throng.
My voice impels to arms; but let the sky
Lead on our host, and bid the heathen s^y.
Were Israel spotless in the ETERNAL'S sight,
Ai had not boasted a victorious fight.
When Virtue dressed us in divine array,
Joy cheered each hour, and smoothed the rugged way:
To scenes of fame each warrior ardent ran,
And claimed the glories of the dreadful van.
But when black Vice our breasts with poison stained,
We shook for dangers timorous Fancy feigned;
Each shameful field beheld our squadrons sly,
And heroes a^m'd for bat^le but to die.
And ^ow some sin, some solly, not bemoaned,
Rebellion bold, or injury unaton'd,
Pours on our heads their flood of grief and care,
Bids Ai exult, and all our sons despair.
Else round the heavenly dome the cloud had spread,
And sacr^d fires illum'd the rightly shade.
Let the whole race to GOD submissive bend;
Let ceaseless prayer to Mercy's throne ascend;
'Till the third morn, the pious fast endure;
Each d^^d be holy, and each bosom pure;
Then over our path wi^h joy shall HEAVEN preside,
Our guilt discover, and our counsels guide.
Then, nor 'till then, to war let trumpets call;
Lead forth these bands, and mount the yielding wall.
But should our course, this day, to fight be driven,
Should arms be brandished in the face of HEAVEN,
Look round your steps; survey the dreadful road;
Think if the sword and shield can war with GOD.
Thus spoke the sage. Blessed man! the Chief replied,
The war's first honor* and the council's pride!
Thine is the voice of GOD: the inspiring ray
Shines through thy breast, and gives the brightest day.
Two days shall combat cease. The camp around,
Let the sad fast in every ten^ be found:
Two days to HEAVEN be raised by pious fear
The grateful tribute of a humble prayer.
So shall we wipe away the crimson stain,
And Israel's glory gild the conquering plain.
He spoke. Each warrior with delight obeyed;
Each cheerful face the obsequious mind displayed.
The host dispersed; and prayers, and reverent sighs
Rose in soft incense to the approving skies.
THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK II.

ARGUMENT.
Morning. Gibeonites assemble for the worship of the Sun. Mina refuses to join
them in this worship; the king enquires the reason. She mentions her adoration
of the true GOD. The king being anxious to know more of the matter, after an
apology for speaking in such an assembly, she gives a general account of the
Deity, and his dispensations. As he is still further inquisitive, she gives him
a more minute account of the Divine works, in a history of the creation -- our
first parents -- the fall -- general succeeding apostasy -- deluge -- second
apostasy -- calling of Abraham -- Israelites journeying into Egypt --
oppression and plagues of Egypt -- Israelites' deliverance -- journey through
the wilderness -- promulgation of the divine law -- destruction of Sihon, and
Og -- last prophecy, death, and burial of Moses, and the commission of Joshua.
The Gibeonites being much afflicted at the prospect of their destruction, Mina
proposes an emb^ssy to Joshua, to solicit peace. The king approves the
proposal. Conclusion.

THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK II.
BEYOND those western hills, whose haughty brow,
To heaven exalted, scorned the world below,
A plain outspread, with growing verdure bright,
And stole, extensive, from the aching sight.
Here, in proud pomp, adorned with countless spires,
That mocked the glories of the solar fires,
Gibeon's imperial towers sublimely rose,
And spurned the terrors of surrounding foes.
Now over the hills red streams began to burn,
And bursting splendors ushered in the morn;
With living dies the flowers all-beauteous glowed;
Over the glad fields etherial odours flowed;
The forest echoed with a boundless song,
And rising breezes poured the strains along.
Adorned with green, before the palace lay
A spacious square, and smiled upon the day.
Here, ere the dawn the kin^^ing skies illum'd,
Or opening flowers the frag^ant gales perfumed,
Of every age, a v^st, assembled train
Poured from the lo^ty (...) and filled the plain.
High in the midst two sacred al^ars shone,
Adorned with honors to their God, the Sun.
This, decked with art, and (...) in royal pride,
With sable go^e the quivering victim died:
On that gay flowers in rich profusion lay,
And gales of Eden bore their sweets away.
Here, white with age, in snowy vesture dressed,
Aradon stood, their monarch, and their priest;
Red in his hand a torch refulgent shone,
And his fixed countenance watched the rising sun.
When first the flaming Orb, with glorious rays,
Rolled over the hills, and poured a boundless blaze;
Charmed at the sight, the monarch stretched his hand,
And touched the tributes with the sacred brand;
Through freshen'd air perfumes began to rise,
And curling volumes mounted to the skies.
Thrice to the earth the raptured s^ppliants bowed,
Then struck the lyre, and hymn'd the rising God.
O thou, whose bursting beams in glory rise,
And fa^l, and brighten, through unbounded skies!
The world's great Parent! heaven's exalted King?
Sole Source of good! and life's eternal Spring!
All hail, while clothed in beauty's endless ray,
Thy face unclouded gives the newborn day!
Above all scenes is placed thy heavenly throne;
Ere time began, thy spotless splendour shone:
Sublime from east to west thy chariot rolls,
Chears the wide earth, and warms the distant poles;
Commands the vegetable race to grow,
The fruit to redden, and the flower to blow.
This world was born to change: the hand of Time
Makes, and unmakes the scenes of every clime.
The insect millions scarce the mo^n survive;
One transient day the ^lowery nations live:
A few short years complete the h^man doom;
Then pale Death summons to the narrow tomb.
Line 28. Arad^n stood, their monarch,) Gibeon is generally supposed to have
been a commonwealth. But as most nations, in that ^^rly age, had a chief
magistrate, vested with more or less civil and ^^ligious powers, I have
supposed such a magistrate, and given him (...).
Las^'d by the flood, the hard rocks wear away;
Worn by the storm, the lessening hills decay;
Unchanged alone is thine exalted flame,
From endless years to endless years the same;
Thy splendors with immortal beauty shine,
Roll round the eternal heavens, and speak thy name divine*
When thy bright throne, beyond old ocean's bound,
Through nether skies pursues its destined round,
Lost in the ascending darkness, beauty fades;
Through the blank field, and through the woodland, spreads
A melancholy silence. Over the plain
Dread lions roam, and savage ^errors reign.
And when sad Autumn sees thy face retire,
And happier regions hail thy orient fire.
High in the storm imperious Winter flies,
And desolation saddens all the skies.
But when once more thy beam the north ascends,
Thy light invigorates, and thy warmth extends;
The fields rejoice, the groves with ^ransport ring,
And boundless nature hails the sky-born spring.
Nor even in winter's gloom, or night's sad reign,
Darts the warm influence of thy beams in vain.
Beyond the main some fairer region lies,
Some brighter isles beneath the southern skies,
Where crimson War never bade the clarion roar,
Nor sanguine billows died the vernal shore:
No thundering storm the day's bright face conceals,
No summer scorches, and no frost congeals;
No sickness wastes, no grief provokes the tear,
Nor tainted vapors blast the clement year.
Round the glad day star endless beauties burn*
And crowned with rainbows, opes the imperial morn;
A clear unbounded light the skies display,
And purple luster leads the changing day.
Over conscious shades, and bowers of soft repose.
Young breezes spring, and balmy fragrance blows;
The fields all wanton in serenest beams,
Wake fairer flowers, and roll diviner streams;
Through the long vales aerial music roves,
And nobler fruitage dies the bending groves.
Through spotless nations as the realm refined,
Thine influence there sublimes the immortal mind;
Its active pinions swift through nature roam,
Lose the low world, and claim a nobler home.
Their limbs, of endless life, with glory crowned,
New youth improves, and growing charms surround:
On the blessed shore thy splendors love to shine,
And raise thy sons each hou^, to raptures more divine.
Thus ceased the sound: the harp's melodious strain
Joined the glad hymn, and charmed the listening train;
A sparkling joy each (...) face displayed,
While light exp^nding lesse^'d every shade.
Fair as the lucid s^ar, that up the sky
Leads the gay morn, and bids the darkness fly,
Beside the king a lovely Virgin st^^d,
Nor joined the (...), no^ with the assembly bowed.
A sweet disple^sure tinged her melting eye.
And her sad bosom heaved the o^pressive sigh.
Her soft dist^^ss the watchfu^ king su^^ey'd,
And th^s, with friendly smile, addressed the maid.
Say, loveliest fair one, whence the meaning gloom,
That damps our joys, and clouds thy rosy bloom!
Why does thy soul the reverence due deny
To yon bright orb, that gilds the orient sky?
Far other God, replied the fair, demands
My vocal transpo^ts, and my suppliant hands;
A GOD, whose power raised (...) yon azure round,
Formed the wide ea^^h, and fixed the ocean's bound;
Who more the (...) transcends, ^han his gay gla^e
The transient glimmerings of some half-seen star.
Strange seenes, the monarch crie^, the voice declares*
And breathes sweet music through our raptured ears.
But can thou, unconvinc'd, yon orb behold,
Over earth, over heaven, in endless triumph rolled?
What boundless joy his gladsome course attends!
What glory brightens! and what good descends!
Round the blue void his beams unchanging shine,
And speak his nature, and his name, divine.
Yet still my curious thoughts the tale demand,
And ask improvement at thy lovely hand.
Say then, O fair, what all-exalted Power
Thy wishes reverence, and thy hands adore.
With down-cast eye, and cheek of crimson bright
That sweetly mingled with the spotless white,
Replied the virtuous maid. To bolder tongues
Of man's bold sex, the arduous task belongs.
But thy fond cares, that saved my life, demand
Toils far superior from my grateful hand.
Thy bliss, thy endless bliss, my voice shall bribe
To pass the bounds, the maiden's laws prescribe.
Far, very far beyond this lower sky,
Beyond the sun, beyond the flames on high,
Dwells in pure light, in heaven's serene abode,
The Source of life, the Spring of endless good;
All scenes, all heights above, sublimely reigns;
All worlds created, and all worlds sustains.
Yon orb, whose brightness wakes thy raptured praise,
Is but a beam of his unbounded blaze.
His breath illum'd, his hand exalted high,
And rolled him flaming through the expanded sky.
His bounteous influence, through all nature driven*
Warms the wide earth, and cheers the wider heaven.
All scenes, all beings his pure fight surveys,
Where morn begins, and where pale eve decays;
Where hell's dark shores the glooms of night display;
Or heaven's broad palace glows in lasting day;
Through worlds of endless youth, where angels shine,
And unknown nations rove in light divine.
He moves, informs, directs, and rules the whole;
Their cause, their end, their guardian, and their soul.
He wakes the beauties of the vernal morn;
He bids the flames of sultry summer burn;
He showers the autumnal wealth; and his dread power
Sounds in the wintry storm, and bids the wild waves roar.
In these vast regions countless beings move,
Live in his smiles, and wanton in his love:
In all, his power, and boundless wisdom, shine,
The works, the glories of a hand divine.
Throned in high heaven, in starry mansions reign,
Of purest intellect, the angelic train
All sense, all soul, all love, eternal power
Their thoughts contemplate, and their songs adore.
Through earth's wide realms unnumber'd tribes we find,
Of different ranks, for different ends designed.
On every leaf the insect millions swarm,
Hum round the flower, or in the sunbeam warm;
The birds, on painted pinions, gayly fly
Through the wide regions of the sapphire sky;
Beasts climb the cliff, or walk the savage wood;
And fishes sport around the foamy flood.
These, with the reptile race, to time a prey,
Of dust were fashioned, and to dust decay.
To man of nobler rank, two parts were given,
This formed of earth, and that inspired by heaven.
Such as the texture, such the allotted doom;
His body moulders in the narrow tomb:
But the winged soul, when earth in dust is hurled,
Shall spring, immortal, from the sinking world;
Ordained, if crimes its earthly course distain,
To bathe in fire, and waste with endless pain;
If cleans'd from guilt, with active joy to rise
To the pure transports of angelic skies;
But man, unmindful of his nobler birth,
In vain seek^ pleasure from surrounding earth.
Far different, far, the scenes by Heaven designed
To fill the wishes of the active mind.
This bounded point is but our being's morn;
To endless life the etherial Soul was born.
Upward with nimble flight her thoughts should soar,
And, winged by virtue, brighter worlds explore*
Earth's grovelling joys disdain with conscious pride,
Like angels fashioned, and to heaven allied.
For this fair train our nature to prepare,
And the pure fragrance of immortal air,
To raise the downward heart from earthly toys,
And mould our wishes to sublimer joys,
Through earth's wide realms, afflictions first began,
The noblest blessings HEAVEN bestows on man.
Toil, disappointment, hunger, thirst, and pain,
A long, long, dismal, melancholy train,
Cleanse the dim eye, dissolve the powerful lust,
And loose the chains, that bind our hearts to dust.
From sorrow's fire, like silver well refined,
Freed from vile earth, shall rise the undrossy mind,
Each hour, with beams of clearer beauty shine,
And ceaseless claim an image more divine.
At length, when sickness brings the expected doom,
Its powers shall rise triumphant over the tomb,
Forward to nobler scenes with rapture spring,
And hail the message of the undreaded king;
While life's long stream its farthest shore shall lave,
And seek the bosom of the eternal wave.
Then shall we see diviner winds arise,
The main grow calm, and smiles invest the skies:
Then shall our happy hands exalt the sail,
Launch on the deep, and call the etherial gale;
With joy, our spirits leave the fading shore,
And hear the less^ning storms at distance roar.
Inwrapp'd in beams of uncreated light,
All heaven, disclosed, shall burst upon the sight;
Streams of immortal bliss in vision roll,
And hosts of angels hail the kindred soul.
With rosy smiles, thus spoke the lovely maid,
While over the plain a boundless silence spread.
Like the tuned lyre, the music of her tongue
Poured soft persuasion on the truths she sung:
Pleased, her sweet grace, and sparkling eye, they view,
And the frank mein, that Falsehood never knew.
To all, Aradon bent a yielding ear;
For Heaven inspired his honest heart to hear.
Mid savage realms, fair Gibeon's sons inclined
To manners gentler, worship more refined:
Each social art adorned the generous door;
The stranger welcomed, and relieved the poor;
And hence they lived. From nature's bounteous Lord,
Even virtue's semblance finds a sure reward.
A calm delight exulting in his eyes,
With gentlest voice, the monarch thus replies.
O brightest of thy sex, an angel's tongue
Alone can boast the sweetness of thy song.
Led by thy voice, my raptured mind would know
The mighty Power, from whom all blessings flow;
Would learn what holy seers his will explain,
What prayers delight him, and what offerings gain;
Safe in his smiles, beyond the grave respire;
Ex^lt over death, and flee from endless fire;
To whose immortal regions speed my flight,
And prove some humble seat, amid the sons of light.
But say, O fair, when formed the Power divine
The lamps that round yon sky forever shine?
Know thou the day when earth's wide realms were made,
The hills exalted, and the (...) spread?
Whose hand thine infant mind to reason wrought,
In virtue nursed thee, and in wisdom taught?
Though age my trembling brow has whitened over,
Strange unknown scenes thy curious thoughts explore.
Returned the lovely maid, Thy glad request
Wakes my fond hope, and warms my grateful breast --
Know, mighty prince, when Elam's deathful spear
Pierced the fell foe, and loosed my soul from fear,
From Israel's camp, through unknown paths, I strayed,
My lone steps wandering round the woodland shade.
'Twas there, the sacred truths the prophet sung,
And thus sweet music tuned his heavenly tongue.
From realms divine high-rais'd beyond all height,
The almighty Parent cast his piercing sight;
With boundless view, he saw the etherial vast
A clouded gloom, an undelightsome waste:
Around the extended wild, no sun's broad ray
Marked the clear splendour of immortal day;
No varying moon, ordained at eve to rise,
Led the full pomp of constellated skies;
No day in circling beauty learned to roll;
No fair spring smiled, nor frost congealed the pole;
Substantial darkness space unmeasured filled,
And nature's realms lay desolate and wild.
He spoke: at once, over earth's far distant bounds
The heavens wide-arching stretched their sapphire rounds
With hoary cli^^s the far-seen hills ascend;
Down sink the vales, and wide the plains extend;
Headlong from steep to steep the billows roar,
Fill the broad main, and toss against the shore.
He spoke: and beauty through all nature flowed;
With springing verdu^e earth's wide regions glowed;
Forth rush the slowery tribes, and trees on high
Shroud their tall summits in the ambient sky.
He spoke; the heavens with sudden glory shone;
In godlike pomp burst forth the golden sun;
Far through immensity his kindling ray
Shot life and joy, and poured the newborn day;
With milder luster rose the charms of even,
The moon's broad beam, and all the pride of heaven.
He spoke; and fishes filled the watery rounds,
Swarmed in the streams, and swam the Ocean's bounds*
The green sea sparkled with unnumber'd dies,
And varying beauty waved upon the skies;
Whales through the foaming billows proudly r^de,
And unknown monsters gambol'd over the flood.
From the deep wave, adorned with nobler grace,
In countless millions sprang the feathered race;
Through the far clouds the eagle cleft his way,
And soared and wantoned in the flames of day;
Full on the morn the peacock opened his beams,
And swans majesti^ rowed the expanded streams.
He spoke; and, wondering, from disparted plains
In throngs unnumber'd rose the bestial trains:
Their snowy robes the harmless flocks revealed;
Gay steeds exulting pranc'd the vernal field;
The lion glar'd, and mid the gazing throng
Shook his rough main, and grimly stalked along.
The wide earth finished, from his western throne,
In splendid beauty looked the gladsome sun;
Calm were the skies, the fields with luster crowned,
And nature's incense filled the etherial round.
Enshrined in sacred light, the Maker stood,
Complacent smiled, and owned the work was good.
Then from his hand in silent glory came
A nobler form, and Man his destined name;
Erect, and tall, in solemn pomp he stood,
And living virtue in his visage glowed.
Then too a fairer being showed her charms;
Young Beauty wantoned in her snowy arms;
The heavens around her bade their graces fly,
And Love sat blooming in her gentle eye.
O pair divine! superior to your kind;
To virtue fashioned, and for bliss designed!
He, born to rule, with calm, uplifted brow,
Looked down majestic on the world below;
To heaven, his mansion, turned his thought sublime;
Or roved far onward through the scenes of time;
Over nature's kingdom cast a searching eye,
And dared to trace the secrets of the sky;
On fancy's pinions scanned the bright abode,
And claimed his friend, an Angel, or a GOD*
Her he indu'd with nature more refined,
A lovelier image, and a softer mind.
To her he gave to kindle sweet desire,
To rouse great thoughts, and fan the heroic fire:
At pity's gentle call to bend his ear;
To prompt for woe the unaffected tear;
In scenes refined his softening soul improve,
And tune his wishes with the hand of love.
To her he gave with sweetness to obey,
Inspire the friend, and charm the lord away;
Each bleeding grief with balmy hand to heal,
And learn his rending sinews not to feel;
Each joy to improve, the pious with to raise,
And add new raptures to his languid praise.
To this loved pair a blessed retreat was given,
A seat for angels, and a humbler heaven;
Fair Eden named: in swift succession, there
Glad scenes of rapture led the vernal year;
Round the green garden living beauty played;
In gay profusion earth her treasures spread;
The air breathed fragrance; streams harmonious rung,
And love, and transport, tuned the aerial song.
With tranquil beams the seventh bright morn appeared
And thus, from firey clouds, a voice was heard.
This day, O Man, to sacred transports rise,
And pass the hours in converse with the skies:
To prayer, to praise, be all thy wishes given:
Soar from the world, and here begin thy heaven!
So shall thy sons pursue the virtuous road,
And, each returning sabbath, wake to GOD.
The sovereign voice the reverent pair obeyed;
A solemn beauty earth and heaven arrayed:
With joy the pinioned tribes, in every grove,
Hymn'd the blessed influence of immortal love:
Man joined the concert, and his raptured lays
Charmed the gay fields when angels ceased to praise.
Mid Eden's groves the tree of glory stood,
That taught the unaltered bounds of ill, and good:
Its fruit, all beauteous to the ravished eye,
Denied to man, and sacred to the sky:
Denied alone; a boundless store was given,
Food for bright angels, transcript fair of heaven.
And thus the law -- If vain desire to taste
Prompt thee, rebellious, to the dire repast;
Hear, hear, O man! on that tremendous day,
Thy life, thy bliss, thy virtue, pass away;
No more the heir of endless joys refined,
But guilty, wretched, to the dust consigned:
Toil here thy lot, thine end the dreary tomb,
And hopeless anguish thine eternal doom.
The sovereign voice the pair obsequious heard,
The injunction reverenced, and the danger feared:
'Till urged by impious lust, by hell ensnared,
They plucked the fruit; the guilt, and sentence shared,
For one poor banquet* one unreal joy,
Rebelled, and yielded bliss without alloy;
To how^ing deserts were from angels driven,
And lost the sweet society of heaven.
Then ills on ills unnumber'd rose forlorn;
No more the ^^ient beamed the angelic morn;
Fragrance (...) Beauty closed their blissful reign
Nor Sprin^ p^^ennial danced along the plain.
Cold Nig^^ her fearful clouds around them spread,
And gave new terrors to the howling shade.
Lost in the bosom of the ascending storm,
The sun's faint beam in winter ceased to warm;
Over plains, and hills, the chilling frost congealed;
The snow tempestuous sadden'd all the field;
On the wide wave the headlong whirlwind poured,
And all the thunders of the ocean roared.
Where late gay bloomed the harvest's waving pride,
And purpled fruits the bending branches died,
Impervious thorns, and clinging brambles spread,
And unblessed famine gloom'd the autumnal shade:
For blood, the raging wolf began to arm;
Fierce, hungry tigers rung the dread alarm;
The lion's sovereign voice, with thrilling sound,
Cleared the wide grove, and shook the hills around.
The sacred stamp the mind forever lost,
The skies' perfection and the angel's boast:
Else had our life rolled on, from sorrow clear,
A semblance bright of heaven's eternal year.
Now stained with guilt, the soul to hatred turned;
With pride was lifted, and with envy burned.
Fierce bickerings rose; with conquest noise was crowned,
And Reason's still, small voice in curses drowned:
In vain sweet Friendship charmed the stubborn ear;
She sung, and wondering found no heart to hear.
By hands, not wisdom, next the cause was tried,
And blows obtained what argument denied.
Revenge soon taught to point the murdering knife,
And secret ambush hedged the hated life.
The villain's gloomy path black night concealed,
And virtuous blood bedewed the lonely field.
Then rousing banners War with transport raised;
Forth flashed the steel; the far-seen signal blazed:
Over the scared hills the warning clarion rang,
And swift to combat startled nations sprang;
In floods of streaming gore the fields were drowned,
And slaughtered thousand^ heaped the embattled ground.
The regal dome, the tarret's golden gleam
Graced the sad triumphs of the imperious flame;
The Monarch spoke; and over the circling throng
Bright smiles broke forth, and pleased applauses rung;
A beauteous semblance of the fields around,
Starr'd with young flowers, and with gay verdure crown'^
Where airy songs, soft proof of raptured love,
Waved on the gale, and echoed through the grove;
While the clear sun, rejoicing still to rise*
In pomp rolled round immeasurable skies.
From wall to wall insulting engines frowned,
And all the pride of art fell crumbling to the ground.
To earth's wide realms, from scenes above the sky,
The Almighty Ruler turned his searching eye:
Deep sunk in boundless guilt the regions lay,
And vice exulting claimed a single sway.
Her countless millions, lured by Pleasure's charms,
Bask'd in her smiles, and sported in ^er arms;
The song the feast, inspired the jocund hours,
And Lewdness wantoned in luxurious bowers.
In vain from door to door the beggar strayed;
His portion hunger, and the frost his bed:
In vain sad Sickness raised her feeble cry;
No friendly hand appeared, nor melting eye:
Virtue, fair pilgrim, cast a wishful view,
And spread her wings, and sighed a last adieu.
He saw, while terror veiled his awful face,
And bade fierce ruin wrap the guilty race,
Borne by the vengeance of his lifted arm,
Far rolled the black immensity of storm;
From east to west were poured the glooms on high,
And cloudy curtains hung the unmeasured sky.
Shook by the voice that rends the immortal plain,
In one broad deluge sunk the etherial main*
Huge floods, imprisoned in the vaulted ground,
With wild commotion burst the crumbling bound;
Over earth's broad climes the surging billows driven
Climbed the tall mountains, and invaded heaven:
The pride of man, the pomp-embosom'd tower,
Towns wrapped in gold* and realms of mighty power,
All plunged at once beneath the unfathomed wave,
And nature perished in the boundless grave.
From realms* where su^s with milder glory shine,
His voice awaked the western wind divine.
At once the balmy wind obedient blew,
And springing beauty clothed the world anew;
In rosy youth her climes emergent smiled,
And flowery visitants rejoiced the wild.
How, doomed to pass beyond the liquid grave,
The ark's rich treasure triumphed over the wave;
How the blessed favorite, rising from the main,
Ruled orient lands, and peopled earth again,
Thou know. The wondrous tale, through every clime,
Tradition wafts along the stream of time.
With circling splendour, and etherial die,
The covenant bow spread sudden round the sky,
From those gay heavens, that arched with pomp divine,
Fair over the angelic world forever shine,
To earth removed, and fixed by GOD'S decree,
An endless barrier against the ambitious sea.
Safe in the sacred sign, ungrateful man
New s^enes of guilt with eager zeal began.
Again black Vice over nature stretched her sway,
And magic Pleasure charmed the foot astray.
No sacred anthems climbed the bright abode;
Nor Reason blushed to hail a golden god:
With rage, and conflict, earth was covered over;
Towns sunk in flames, and fields were drenched in gore.
With impious jests they mocked a future doom;
Sung over the shroud, and danced into the tomb.
From land to land the clouds of death unfurled,
And one wide lethargy benumbed the oblivious world.
Then too, proud Ashur, queen of realms, began
To forge her chains, and bind inglorious man.
Hence, tyrants sprang, and dared with impious claim,
Demand the honors of the sacred Name;
Hence stern Oppression raised his iron rod,
Hence crimson Slaughter wrapped the world in blood:
Through every clime the night of slavery spread,
And Heaven repenting grieved that man was made.
From this black mass, this min^led host of foes,
One sainted friend the Almighty Ruler chose;
For him, blessed champion of his yielding cause!
He changed the stable course of nature's laws;
(An hundred summers saw the circling morn,
Ere his first hope, the promised heir was born)
To him, to his he gave Canaan's shore,
'Till the bright evening gild the west no more.
To Idol guilt the world beside was given,
Their name, their memory blotted out of heaven.
When the dire famine over all nations spread,
His hand the favorite race to Egypt led.
As some fair tree, where fruitful streams are rolled,
Lifts spiry shoots, and bids its leaves unfold;
Over the green bank ambitious branches rise,
Enjoy the winds, and gain upon the skies;
While opening flowers around it gayly spring,
And birds with transport clap the painted wing*
So each fond sun, and each successive shade
Beheld with smiles the infant nation spread;
From field to field the rising boughs expand,
Share the glad smiles of heaven, and fill the jealous land.
Their sudden growth the envious tyrant viewed,
And impious hands in infant gore imbrued,
With bold oppres^ion bathed the streaming eye,
Racked the sad soul, and roused the suppliant cry.
Their bleeding wrongs the omniscient Mind surveyed,
And bade fierce Vengeance bare her flaming blade.
No (...) the limpid wave serenely flowed;
But through sad shores the river rolled in blood;
Unnumber'd reptiles climbed the stately dome,
Croak'd over the feast, and crawled the pillar'd room;
Insects in countless millions earth overspread;
The sickening murrain gloom'd the pastur'd shade;
From darkened skies the storm's red b^lts were hurled,
And hail, and lightening swept the wasted world;
Like cloudy curtains, locusts h^^g the day;
Pale death, and famine marked their baleful way:
Three days blank midnight wrapped the realm in gloom*
And all her firstborn sunk in one broad tomb.
Then, high in air his lucid banner spread,
To the bright sign collected Israel fled,
With transport traced the finger of the sky,
Winged their glad path, and hailed redemption nigh.
In vain its countless ills the waste disclosed;
In vain the sea their sacred path opposed;
Back rolled the instinctive main; and round their side
In crystal splendour stood the conscious tide.
In the bright front, a cloud his dark abode,
Throned on the rushing winds, an angel rode,
The spreading volumes marked their path by day,
And guiding flames illum'd their nightly way.
Behind, the tyrant, urged by Heaven's decree,
Drove his pale host, and trembled through the sea.
On the tall shore sublime the Prophet stood,
And stretched his hand above the eager flood;
Wide-circling all, far closed the billow'd womb,
And Egypt's glories found a watery tomb.
Through spacious climes of fierce and scorching day,
The cloud expanded led their lonely way,
'Till, white with cliffs, and crowned with many a shade,
In cloudy pride famed Sinai reared its head.
On this lone mount, the all-discerning Mind
To teach his name, to unfold his law, designed;
On earth to witness truth and power divine,
And bid over Jacob's sons his splendors shine:
Beneath its haughty brow the thousands lay,
And hoped the wonders of the expected day.
Fair rose the dawn: from heaven's sublime abode,
The almighty Power in boundless glory rode;
Long dusky folds a cloud around him spread,
His throne surrounding with impervious shade.
Its flame-bright s^irts with light excessive shone,
A noontide morn, that dimmed the rising sun.
Forth from its womb unusual lightnings fly,
And thunders, hurled on thunders, rock the sky:
To Sinai's top the wondrous scene descends;
Down plunge his cliffs; his tottering summit rends;
Over all the mountain burn devouring fires,
Wreathed in dread smoke, and crowned with lofty spires.
Loud as hoarse whirlwinds earth and heaven deform,
Loud as the thousand thunders of the storm.
With clear, dread voice, in pomp tremendous, roll
The trump's long-sounding terrors through the pole.
The Seer majestic climbs the towering height,
And, bosomed deep in glory, leaves the fight.
There, while the world was hushed in silent awe,
The Sovereign Mind disclosed the eternal Law;
And thus the dread commands. O Israel, know,
I am the LORD, who snatched thy sons from woe,
From Egypt's bondage traced thy various ways;
Nor shall base Idols share my sacred praise.
Let no vain words my fearful Name profane;
Nor toil, nor sports my holy sabbaths stain.
Thy parent's voice with reverent mind obey:
Thy hand from dire revenge, and murder stay:
Let not a thought thy neighbor's couch ascend;
And not a wish to others wealth extend:
Let truth thy converse, truth thy oaths confine:
And every passion to thy lot resign.
Unnumber'd statutes then his voice ordained,
The poor protected, and the rich restrained;
And taught, what manners prosperous rule assure,
Their foes to vanquish, and their peace secure.
Then through long, weary climes their course was turned,
Still moved the cloud, and still the glory burned.
With ceaseless care he filled their hearts with good;
The skies dissolving shower'd immortal food:
With wondering joy they saw the streamy rain
Pour from the rock, and spread along the plain;
And clouds of quails, from every region driven,
Blackened the fields, and filled the bounds of heaven.
See Book IV, Line 239.
'Twas then, near Edom's realms the thousands lay,
And her proud prince denied the expected way.
Whatever their state, whatever their GOD concerned,
From their great Seer my curious parent learned;
Charmed with the scene, he left his native soil,
Shared all their wants, and bartered ease for toil.
Through long, lone paths we bent our circling course,
Untir'd by winter's rage, or summer's force;
Bright angels led the van; and round the road
Dread scenes of terror marked the present GOD.
Even now I see fierce Sihon's hostile train,
Sheathed in dire arms, and frowning over the plain.
In childhood then, around my sire I clung,
Danced in his arms, and in his bosom hung*
With nimble steps the sacred warriors sped,
Blew the shrill trump, and filled the field with dead.
Like drifts of rushing dust, that sweep the skies,
On fear's light pinions swift the remnant flies;
From town to town we wing our rapid way,
And the wide region sinks an easy prey.
Then giant Og his heroes drove to arms,
Whirled his proud car, and thundered hoarse alarms:
In distant fields I saw the storm ascend,
Its shades all darken, and its clouds extend;
Down the grim hills I heard the volumes roll,
And bursting terrors rend the s^uddering pole.
As snows, slight fabric* in warm s^ns decay,
The impious squadrons sudden melt away.
Now over the Seer had six-scor^ summers run,
And (...) locks around his temple^ (...)*
When sounds melodious, opening from the sky,
To the sad train declared his end was nigh.
His mind inspired with more than mortal sight,
Saw future scenes and ages rush to light;
And thus his voice. On Israel's chosen train,
Like vernal showers let endless blessings rain:
Each rising age, ascend thy glory higher,
With time roll on, and with the skies expire!
But oh, my sons, this voice attentive hear;
Let these last strains command the listening ear!
To unborn years I stretch my raptured eyes;
I see the promised seed in glory rise!
The etherial star triumphant mounts on high,
And fairer beams adorn the unmeasured sky:
All heaven impatient waits the sacred morn;
Jesus descends; the filial GOD is born:
Hosts of bright angels round the favorite shine,
And earth is ravished with their hymns divine.
It Is he, whose offering guilt shall wash away,
And raise Mankind to climes of ceaseless day;
The bliss of truth, and virtue, shall inspire,
And warm the bosom with seraphic fire.
Haste, haste, ye days of heaven! with rapid wing,
To this sad world the hope of nations bring!
Descend, O Prince of peac^! thy love bestow;
Cleanse the dark soul from seeds of endless woe;
With all earth's myriads Jacob's sons unite,
And bid immortal glory spring to light.
No more the gentile realms in dust shall mourn;
Nor evening altars to the in^ernals burn;
But waked, revived, by thy celestial name,
One cloud of incense, one unbounded flame,
To heaven ascend: the sun shall brighter rise,
And peace, and light, and glory gild the skies.
Thus the great Seer; and warmed with he^venly grace,
Besought all blessings for hi^ dar^ing race;
Then up famed Pisgah's side sere^^ly drew,
Where all Canaan met his rapturous view;
Thence his glad soul explored her native day,
And left, for bliss, the tenemental clay:
His soul, scarce lower than the angels made,
With glory mitred, and with truth arrayed.
As the bold eagle, borne from humble vales,
Lifts his strong wings, and up the expansion sails;
Over groves, over hills, over mountains, wins his way,
And climbs exulting in the noontide ray;
Now far beneath him sees each birdling fly;
Now clouds light-flo^ting skim the lower sky;
In prospect wide, with piercing ken, descries
Far, lessening towns, and spacious empires rise;
Here rivers wind, the lakes their borders spread;
And there the blue-seen ocean smooths his bed;
In pride sublime, he holds his upward way,
And bas^s, and triumphs, in the flame of day.
So, borne with angel-flight, his mighty mind,
Ascending, left the common wing behind;
Pull on the sun's great Source superior drew,
'Till truth's wide regions stretched in glorious view;
There fair Creation spread her boundless plan;
There opened, mysterious, all the world of man:
With every splendour bright Redemption shone;
And, one immense of beauty, God the Son.
Still up the heavens he winged his solar flight,
And soared, and mingled with unborrow'd light.
Far in a wild vale's solitary gloom,
Jehovah formed his favourite's lonely tomb;
For life distinguished, there his limbs refine,
'Till morn's last beams in purple glory shine;
Then, robbed in beauty, shall the Prophet rise,
And sail, the peer of angels, through the skies.
But, ere his spirit sought celestial day,
To Joshua's hand he gave the destined sway,
A Chief divine! with every virtue crowned,
In combat glorious, and in peace renowned,
To him the Almighty voice -- Thy chosen hand
Shall guide my sons, and rule the promised land.
That land, where peace, and every pleasure reigns,
Over hea^en-topp'd hills, and fair, extended plains;
Where countless nations build the lofty dome,
Nurse purpling vines, and teach the vales to bloom;
That land is thine. Wherever thy foot shall tread,
From the parched climes where Midian's thousands spread,
To realms, where Hazor, armed with potent sway,
Bids kingdoms bow, and conquered chiefs obey:
Or where Euphrates winds his gentle flight;
Or the broad ocean rolls in evening light;
All, all is thine. Who dare thy course withstand,
Shall feel the fury of the Eternal hand.
Lost in black crimes the torpid nations lie,
And claim fierce vengeance from an injured sky.
Rise, rise to arms! over Jordan's yielding flood
My guardian hand shall point the destined road.
Thus spoke the fair: and while the etherial strain
Breathed a soft music over the wondering train,
With anxious look the impatient monarch cried --
O best of maids, thy sex's noblest pride!
Far round the neighboring realms by fame is rung
The wondrous race, thy lovely voice has sung.
Often have I heard, how, armed with dreadful rod,
Before his votaries marched their mighty GOD:
How kings in vain their rapid course opposed,
Their hosts all vanquished, and their empire closed.
But still, misled by Rumour's dubious tongue,
In sad suspense my mind all-anxious hung.
Now with clear truth the scenes tremendous shine;
Of force convinced, I own the Power divine.
And must our race with one wide doom expire?
These turrets sink? these walls be wrapped in fire?
Must yon bright maid, whose so^t and lovely smile
Could murderers cha^m, and wolves of rage beguile;
These beauteous infants, scarce to reason born,
Sweeter than flowers perfume the vernal morn,
To war's unpitying fury yield their breath,
And helpless close their little eyes in death?
O thou great GOD, whose sway over heaven presides,
Whose searching eye the world's vast empire guides:
Stay, stay thine band; this guilty nation spare;
Let these sweet babes thy boundless pity share!
Unformed our infant prayer -- but cries sincere
And honest hear^s will find a bounteous ear.
He spoke; around, the melting voice of woe
Breathed (...) complaints, and tears began to flow;
When thus the Prince again -- O loveliest maid!
Where, where shall Gibeon find the needed aid?
Can no kind hand the friendly refuge give?
No pitying savior bid my children live?
Say, loveliest fair, can thou no succor lend?
Our teacher thou -- be thou our guardian friend.
Perchance thy bounteous Ruler, formed to bless,
Over suppliant realms may lift the branch of peace.
The maid returned -- perhaps a virgin's mind,
Though wisdom fail, the wished retreat may find.
To Israel's camp two trusty heroes send;
Let me, restored* their peaceful steps attend.
The maid, thou see by blessed adoption shares
Their mighty Leader's fond, parental cares.
Pleased with the offering, Joshua's hand may give
The palm of peace, and bid thy nation live.
Charmed with the thought, joy sparkling in his eyes,
With voice exulting, strait the king replies.
O fair divine! thy mind, with wisdom bright.
Even age out^soars* and climbs an angel's flight.
Let peace thy life surround. The task be mine
Soon to prepare, and end the blessed design.
Thy lovely voice must find a generous ear;
So sweet a strain even oaks would bow to near.
THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN: BOOK III.

ARGUMENT.
Characters of Hezron, Irad, and Selima. Morning. Irad and Selima walk out on
the plain, northward of the camp, and hold a conversation on the justice of the
War. As they are returning to the camp, they overhear two Israelites conversing
on a design of returning into Egypt. Irad communicates the discovery to Joshua.
The alarm is given, and an army percieved, coming from Ai to attack the camp.
Joshua goes out to the place of rendezvous, marshals a body of troops, and
sends them, under the command of Zimri, to meet the army of Ai. In the mean
time the camp is in a general uproar, and a large body of the Israelites
assembled, westward of the camp, for the purpose of returning into Egypt* After
the confusion is in a degree allayed, Tadmor harangues the insurgents, with a
list of grievances, and stimulates them to perseverance. Caleb who, with
Hezron, had been sent by Joshua, upon Irad's information, to watch the motions
of the camp, replies to him. Ardan answers him, with impudence, and Hezron him,
with severity. Insurgents march. As they are quitting the plain, Joshua comes
out, with a body of troops (...) attack them. The chieftains set their forces
in array. Joshua orders them to disperse. Ardan affronts him, and is killed.
The insurgents disperse, and the chiefs return to the camp. Irad goes out to
view the battle. Armies engage with violence, and equal success; until the
chiefs of Ai, influenced by superstitious fears, excited by the appearance of a
thunder storm, order a retreat. Zimri also retires. Scene of the beauties of an
evening after the storm concludes the book.

THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK III.
OF Judah's thousands Hezron held the sway;
And love, and reverence, bade them all obey.
The chief, of simple manners, knew no art;
Truth was his language; honesty his heart:
To bless mankind his life's unvaried end;
His guest the stranger, and the poor his friend.
So fair his strong, and stubborn virtue shone,
Heaven crowned his wishes with a lovely son.
To mould young Irad was his darling care;
To form for peace, to animate for war;
His limbs to innerve; his vices to control,
And lead to wisdom's fount his thirsty soul.
In earliest years, the favorite Youth began
To show those charms, which rarely grace the man.
To rashness brave, his bosom burned for fame;
Yet knew a milder, and a nobler flame:
Love's gentle fire his passions could control,
And pure Religion warmed his manly soul.
Not that, which broods upon the surly brow.
Or walks on frozen joints, demure, and slow;
At truth, and virtue, points the fatal wound,
Swells on the tongue, and vanishes in sound:
But that, whose influence fires the angelic band;
Smooths the rough bosom; op^s the narrow hand;
Serenely brightens in the cheerful face;
Casts round each act unutterable grace;
With rising morning, bows the secret knee,
And wafts, great God! the humble soul to thee.
His raptured father wished no second son;
But found both parents' charms combined in one:
His own strong sense, and daring thought, refined
By the soft graces of a mother's mind.
His lively duty cheered the waning year;
With hand all gentle wiped the aged tear;
Explored each wish, prevented each request,
And thought it heaven to make a parent blessed.
Nature's politeness, unaffected ease,
Moved in his limbs, and framed his soul to please;
To worth complacent gave the just reward,
And notic'd humble life, with kind regard.
Nature can form the soul, or rough, or fine;
But all her clouded beauties faintly shine:
Religion bids a new creation rise,
Fragrant as spring, and fair as spangled skies.
Thus, on the canvas, West, with raptured view,
See^ newborn worlds his magic hand pursue;
The impassioned forms dissolve in soft desire,
Or glow, and tremble, with seraphic fire;
They breathe, they speak, they move, the field around*
And the ea^ listens for the expected sound.
But these must fade: while Virtue's strokes shall live,
Transcend earth's sky-built tomb, and with the heaven^ revive.
Beyond his peers, by nature, Irad shone;
By virtue, ripened to the duteous son;
By virtue, aimed at life's sublimest end,
Rose to the saint, and softened to the friend:
Pleased his fond nation saw his glories rise,
And a new Joshua charmed their raptured eyes.
The virgins viewed, how could they not approve?
Esteem's the silent harbinger of love.
The kind e^e, glistening with a frequent tear,
The conscious blush, that saw discovery near,
T^' unbidden sigh, that swelled the beating breast,
And the fixed gaze, that scarce could be repressed,
The soft emotions to his eye revealed,
And new, strange tremors through his bosom thrilled.
But far over all Selima's charms prevailed,
When his pleased heart her piercing eyes assailed.
His youngest birth, blessed Caleb owned the fair,
His life's chief solace, and his favorite care.
Not nature's hand her beauty could improve;
Her voice was melody; her mind was love;
Her stature tall; her air intrancing ease;
Her skin the lilly, opening to the breeze;
Her cheek was health's inimitable die,
And the bright soul sat sparkling in her eye.
No vile cosmetic stained her lovely face;
No affectation murdered real grace:
Her robes all neatness, told the world how fine,
How pure, the angelic habitant within.
Sweetness etherial majesty controlled,
And formed an Irad of a softer mould.
Such was her soul, as when, of darkness born,
Over young creation rose beginning morn,
Fair, in her front, a blushing Virtue stood,
Just sprung to life, and e^'d the forming God;
From grace to grace with glowing wisdom grew.
And smiled, and triumphed, in the rapturous view.
Now twice nine years had over the fair-one rolled,
Illum'd her eyes, and bade her charms unfold;
When her quick fancy, self-inspir'd to rove,
Attun'd her feelings to romantic love.
Often on the youth she fixed a secret gaze,
And often, with transport, listened to his praise.
The charms of (...), the beauty of desert,
Stole soft, and silent, through her yielding heart*
Esteem, which hermits scarce could disapprove,
Bloomed in his smiles, and opened into love.
Nor shone her glances on his breast in vain:
The gaze, that gave, returned the pleasing pain.
Judgment, in both, the spotless flame improved;
They liked from fancy, but from reason loved.
Often would each sire his tender wish declare,
To see one band unite the lovely pair
Often sighed the youth to unfold his anxious mind;
But still a modest fear his lips confined:
In pleased attention on her charms he hung,
And half-heard wishes trembled over his tongue.
At length, kind Heaven, propitious to the pair,
Led his fond steps, where love had led the fair.
In a lone walk, far-distant on the plain,
Surpised, his tongue unbidden told his pain.
The beauteous maid, of frank and gentle mind,
Smiled in his hopes, and blessed with love refined,
In truth's mild beam the spotless union grew,
And gave such joy, as youthful angels knew.
Now waked the dim-seen dawn. Over hills afar
Rose in gay triumph morn's refulgent star;
Up the gay skies fore-running beauty spread;
The gray mist sailed along the mountain's head;
In clouds the embosom'd lark her matin sings,
And from his couch impatient Irad springs,
To morn's unnumber'd sweets invites the fair,
G^y prospects, magic songs, and fragrant air.
Rapt with the charms, which nature gives to view
The great, the high, the beauteous, and the new,
To her s^ft power the^ (...) the yielding mind,
Warmed (...) as they gazed refined;
In flowery tribes, where (...) splendors play;
When (...) prospect holds the lingering da^;
When brightened Evening spread^ (...) train,
And (...) young Hes^e^ to his (...);
In cloudy wilds, where gloomy thunder lies,
The pale moon mourns, and mountains prop the skies.
Over northern plains serene the lovers stray,
And various converse charms their easy way --
How sweet, O fair -- the Youth with rapture cries --
Earth's beauteous scenes, and wonders of the skies!
The folding clouds! the gates of morn unbarr'd!
The dewy plains, with slowery gems instarr'd!
The cliff-topp'd mountain! the deep-waving grove?
The air all odor! and the world all love!
Thrice fair are nature's works -- the maid replied,
And her face bloomed in beauty's living pride --
When round her fields my thoughts untroubled roll,
An easy joy steals softly on my soul:
Fired as I gaze, my breast with rapture warms,
Her glories ravish, and her music charms.
But oh the fate of Ai's unhappy field,
That every joy, and every hope, dispelled!
Fled are the charms, that nature once attired
And lost the sweets, that either once inspired.
As now through well-known paths, retired I stray,
And seek accustomed beauties round my way;
At every turn, the seeming trump alarms,
Pale corses rise, and groans, and clashing arms;
From my pained bosom heaves the unbidden sigh;
The still tear trembles in my laboring eye;
Lo^^, but to grief, my feet bewildered love,
And my heart deadens to the self, and love.
O fatal hapless combat! cause unjust!
That blends the noblest heroes with the dust;
From sad Canaan's sons their wealth demands,
The docks they tended, and their cultured lands;
Bids over their peaceful domes destruction flame,
And blots with deep dishonor Israel's name.
The Prince rejoined, By all-creating Heaven,
To Abraham's sons th^se fruitful fields were given.
Whatever he made, the Maker claims his own;
Gives, and resumes, advised and ruled by none.
By him bestowed, a righteous sword demands
These flocks, these cities, and these promised lands,
Yet not 'till crimes, beyond long-suffering great,
Had filled their cup, and fixed their changeless state,
Would Heaven permit our race its gift to claim,
Or seal the glory of the almighty Name.
In vain mild Mercy hoped their hearts to gain,
And Patience looked for Penitence, in vain.
As rolling streams one course eternal keep,
All rush impetuous down the guilty steep.
The maid returned, The nations' foul disgrace,
Stained with black guilt, I grant Canaan's race.
But not alike are all from virtue driven;
Some, more than others, claim the sword of Heaven:
Yet undistinguished falls the general doom,
The best, the worst, we destine to the tomb.
Where Hazor's hundred towers majestic rise,
Frown over her plains, and dare avenging skies;
In all that elegance of artless charms,
Which prompts mild love, and rival hate alarms;
In that sweet union of serene desires,
Which blows with fragrant breath unmingled fires;
Young, beauteous fair-ones, through her regions known,
Out^ie the maid, thou love to call thy own.
To these bright virgins chosen ^rads bow;
Less wise, less virtuous, and less fair than thou;
But crowned with many a grace; of thoughts resin'd,
Of pleasing person, and of dauntless mind,
Shall this blessed train, so young, so fair, so brave,
Fall, with black wretches, in a ^irey grave?
Or round wild regions must they hapless roam,
Exiled from joy, and forced from cheerful home?
To hunger, thirst, and sorrow, sink and pray,
And breathe, with lingering death, their lives away*
Should thou, when war to Salem drives her course,
Seize the keen steel, and join the conquering force,
W^ile thy bold breast with glory's warmth beats high,
And wreaths well-twin'd approach thy ravished eye,
To some love hamlet loos^ly wandering come,
Where simple swains had built their peaceful home,
Where care in silence smoothly passed away,
And homebred happiness deceived the day;
Should there sweet, helpless children meet thy view,
Fair as young rosebuds look through early dew,
With infant wonder, on thine armor gaze.
And point, with artless hands, the steely blaze:
Say could thy heart one angry purpose know,
Or doom such cherubs to a single woe?
Charmed by soft smiles, I see thy heart retire,
And mild compassion breath^ a gentler fire;
Thy love parental over them kindly yearn,
Prompt pleasing hope, and all their wishes learn;
Thy bounteous hand each needed bliss bestow,
And in the angel lose the intended foe.
Yet should dread war over these fair regions fly,
Unnumber'd virgins, bright as those must die;
To flames unnumber'd babes resign their breath,
And ere life blossoms, meet untimely death.
To thee* O prince! without a blush, I own
Such woes tremendous freeze my heart to stone.
^re Irad's arm such precious lives destroy,
Let me, far guiltier, cease from every joy;
Quick to the dreary grave my form descend,
Our love all vanish, and our union end.
The Prince rep^ied, Blessed gentleness of mind!
The grace, the glory of a ^eart refined!
When newborn, helples^ beings meet our eyes,
In noble minds, such thoughts resistless rise:
Even brutes, when young, our tender wishes try,
And love forbids the infant whelp to die
Yet often this kindest impulse of the soul
Bids wild desire in murmuring tumults roll,
And blames the Power, whose love alone, to earth.
And all earth's drear and dark events, gave birth.
In thy pure bosom, angels must approve.
For sad Canaan's youth, this generous love.
But once as fair, as young, as soft as they,
As white with innocence, with smiles as gay,
Were those black throngs, whose crimes as mountains rise*
And wipe out pity from the all bounteous skies.
As eggs innoxious, often in meadows strewn,
Break into asps, and pour the viper's brood;
Nursed in rank soils, to strength the reptiles grow,
Resound the hiss, the sting of vengeance throw,
Uprear the crest, inroll the snaky spire,
Light the keen eye-ball with terrific fire;
From fields, and forests, death, and poison gain,
And scatter wide destruction round the plain:
So, harmless once, by vile affections lured,
In guilt, and years, those babes alike matur'd;
A thirst for sin, all patterns left behind,
The form all putrid, poisoned all the mind,
To every crime, to every madness, driven,
Cursed the sad world, and hissed the name of Heaven.
There the sot reels, the murderer prowls for blood;
There the starved orphan sues in vain for food;
For man man burns, with Sodom's tainted flame,
And the world sickens with incestuous shame.
Even nature's ties their bosoms bind no more,
Wives wade in nuptial, fires in filial gore;
To howling Molock blooming babes expire,
And mothers round them dance, and light the funeral fire,
Should then those infants to dread manhood rise*
What unheard crimes would smoke through earth and ^kies!
What hosts of demons sin's dark realm would gain!
How hell gape hideous round Cana^n's plain!
This sea of guilt unmeasured to prevent,
Our chosen race eternal Justice sent,
At once the bright possession to reclaim,
And against its victims point the vengeful flame*
Thus crimes their d^e and dire reward shall know;
Thus God be witnessed sin's unchanging foe;
From land to land Jehovah's glory shine,
And fear, and homage, wait the Name divine.
But, O unrivaled maid! the kindest doom
These babes may destine to an early tomb.
To manhood risen their guilt, beyond control,
Would blot their names from life's c^lestial roll.
Now, in fair climes, their souls, forever blessed,
May bloom in youth, and share immortal rest;
And hail the boundless grace, that snatched its foes
From sins unnumber'd, and from lasting woes.
And, O bright maid! whatever high Heaven designed
Is just, is glorious to the omniscient Mind.
When Heaven commands, the virtuous ask no more:
His will i^ justice, as his arm is power:
Led by his voice, our cause divine we know;
We tempt no evil, and we fear no foe.
All gentle Youth! Selima soft replied --
How well thy words from falsehood truth divide!
Wi^h what sweet tenderness, thy voice displays
The truth, the luster, of the Eternal ways.
But say, blessed Prince! will Heaven our race succeed?
Shall we victorious gain the darling meed?
So often our h^st rebellion blackens over,
I fear, lest triumph crown our arms no more.
When will the friendly cloud again return?
When over yon dome the nightly glory burn?
Rejoined the smiling Prince; too anxious maid,
Let faithless terror never thy ^eart invade,
To Abraham s^al'd the sacred covenant stands --
Thy countles^ sons shall rule Canaan's lands. --
Guilt's impious train these tumults shall destroy;
Too vile, too base, to share the promised joy.
And he, whose soul, a plant for earth too fair,
Has grown, and ripened for a kinder air.
Full soon may feel the hand of blasting time,
By Heaven transplanted to a nobler clime,
Pass the cold winter of the frozen tomb,
And rise, and flourish in eternal bloom.
But to glad fields, beyond those hills that lie,
And drink mild influence from the western sky,
The rest triumphant soon shall wing their way,
Seize their vast towns, and reign from sea to sea.
Then joined in love, in hands connubial joined,
Each passion calmed, and every taste refined.
Our fears shall end, unclouded hope begin,
Peace' gentle morning over Canaan shine*
In soft beatitude the seasons roll,
And growing union mix the kindred soul.
The maid returned -- O day supremely fair!
Not blooming Eden owned a happier pair.
But, Youth beloved! my bosom, racked with pain,
Tells me, sad tale! the darling wish is vain.
Tells me that chosen morn will never come,
Nor bli^s be finished, but beyond the tomb.
For earth too bright were these love-lighted fires!
Too blessed the indulgence of such pure desires!
He^e unallay'd, no lot, no joy appears;
Grief poisons hope, and pleasures mix with tears.
Ah fairest, wisest, loveliest of thy kind!
Of ^orm all finish'd' and of matchless mind!
Sweet smiling visitant from yonder s^y!
Too bright to live, and O too dear to die!
Why, hapless Mina! why from friends, and home,
Did thou, unguided, in the wi^d wood roam?
Perhaps the hungry wolf around thy way
Lurked with grim rage, and seized his helpless pr^y.
Perhaps, O lot of anguish! brutal men
Thy path unguarded, with fell eyes, have seen.
Or do thou pale, unseen, unburied, lie.
Sad sorrow's victim, in the inclement sky?
How soon is thy fair course of glory run!
Thy hopes all ended! all thy duties done!
Sleep, lovely maid! in hollowed silence rest,
Let fragrant gales thy form with leaves invest;
There with new sweets, the lovely wild-rose bloom,
And pitying strangers raise thy verdant tomb.
Ah hapless maid! the tender prince rejoined --
How thy rich graces charmed each generous mind!
Even Joshua's love how nobly did thou claim,
Thy wishes virtue, and thy actions fame!
When his toils rose, when dangers dire oppressed,
And Israel's griefs hung heavy on his breast,
Thy gentle mind, a soul-supporting stay,
Seren'd those toils, and charmed those griefs away;
A calm retreat from fear, and doubt, and strife,
And all the hidden pangs of sceptered life.
Rest in mild slumbers, lovely maiden! rest;
Thy life be copied, and thy memory blessed!
Each soft-eyed virgin bid thy fame revive,
Attune her lyre, and in her actions live;
So, joined with thee, in beauty's distant clime,
Her praise shall triumph over the death of time.
As thus the converse passed, with many a tear,
To the still camp approached the sadden'd pair.
In the utmost skirt, a tent at distance stood;
Whence mingling voices, scarce-distinguish'd, flowed.
Heard'st thou -- a warrior low his zeal expressed --
When generous Hanniel Jacob's sons addressed?
How on his words the thousands listening hung!
How sweet persuasion charmed us from his tongue!
From pride, from pomp, from love of titles free,
He loves the poor; he feels for thee and me.
Oh, could our tribes by sad experience learn
Wha^ children tell, and what the blind discern,
Him for their leader would they raptured claim,
And fly from endless toil, and endless shame.
From hideous war my wearied soul recoils;
I ask no treasures raised from battle's spoils.
To painful arms let sons of slaughter run;
By them be glory's painted bubble won:
To peace, of aims far different, would I fly,
In peace inglorious live, inglorious die:
While peace, while plenty, much-loved Egypt knows,
^ears no shrill trump, and dreads no banded foes,
These boasted flocks, and towns, and promised fields,
To them my first, last with delighted yields.
With earnest voice, his fellow pleased replies --
Since toil and pain have taught thee to be wise,
Know, my brave friend, a secret, faithful band
Soon point their course to Egypt's darling land.
When first to combat Joshua bends his way.
To guard the camp these bold associates stay;
With one firm heart, our path we then begin,
And noble Hanniel leads the blessed design.
But hushed in silence must these counsels rest,
Scarce even to tried, and faithful friends confessed;
Lest the dread Chief's all-watchful, piercing eye,
With sun-like ken, the hated plot descry.
Thou know what ills a plot disclosed attend;
Our names must perish, and our lives must end.
His friend returned -- The loved, the bold design
My glad soul welcomes, and my hand shall join.
Hail happy tidings! hail auspicious fields!
Where genial nature every pleasure yields --
Too blessed, to that sweet native land I fly,
That cot, that heri^age, that friendly sky --
Dear scenes of yout^* where peace and pleasure mild,
With cheerful health, and ceaseless plenty smiled --
Might these, O envied lot! again be given,
'Twe^e bliss too great: I claim no higher heaven*
This heard, Selima to her tent withdrew;
While strait to Joshua ardent Irad flew,
To him, apart, the dangerous plot disclosed,
And what the tribe, and where the tent, exposed.
As some fond parent eyes his darling child,
Pleased, the great Hero on the favorite smiled,
His zeal, his prudence praised, and on his head
Besought the Heavens their choicest bliss to shed.
Mean time from distant guards a cry ascends,
And round the camp the dinning voice extends;
The alarming trump resounds; the martial train
Pour from the tents, and crowd the accustomed plain,
In mazy wanderings, thickening, darkening, roll,
Fill all the field, and shade the boundless pole.
As where proud Erie winds her narrowing shores,
And over huge hills a boiling ocean pours,
The long white-sheeted foam, with fury hurled,
Down the cliffs thundering, shakes the stable world,
In solemn grandeur clouds of mist arise,
Top the tall pines, and heavy, seek the skies:
So spread the volumes of the dust afar;
So roar the clamors of commencing war.
Anxious, and active, there the Leader strode.
Nerv'd every heart, and steeled for death and blood;
From rank to rank, he hushed the tumult's sound,
And spread deep silence over the attentive ground:
Then while the chiefs combined the dread array,
Towered a high rock he bent his rapid way;
From the tall height, to Ai he cast his eyes,
And saw, in southern fields, her squadrons rise;
A cloud, far-spreading, over the plain impelled,
Rolled up the expanse, and wrapped the gloomy field:
Approaching, widening, slow the darkness came,
Emblaz'd with gleams of intermitted flame.
So, long and black, like skirts of rising even,
Thick clouds, now gathering, filled the northern heaven;
Borne on slow winds, that ceaseless changed its form,
Over the dark mountains sailed the expanding storm;
In rising grandeur far-off thunders roll,
Dim lightnings flash, and gild the clouded pole;
More wide, more vast, the solemn gloom ascends,
And frowning, deepening, round the horizon bends.
At once the Hero gave the loud command;
In awful silence moved the chosen band;
Compact, to Ai they cours'd their dreadful way,
And generous Zimri ruled the long array,
Mean time new scenes around the camp began,
The tribes all motion, man conf^s'd with man;
From tent to tent swift-hastening feet appeared:
Low-murmuring voices, mingling sounds were heard;
Loud, and more loud, the earnest clamors grow,
Hum through the tents, and all the camp overflow.
To Egypt's realms -- resounds the general cry --
From these sad scenes, with prosperous feet, we fly,
These hosts of foes, these fields of ceaseless fight,
This sway of bondage, and this war of flight.
Haste, freedom's sons, and seize her happy shores,
For all her peace, and wealth, and joy, are yours.
Thus round the host the mingled clamor slew,
And loud, and fierce, debates tumultuous grew;
They urged, persuaded, threatened, flattered, cried,
With love conjured, with stubborn breast denied;
Friends left their friends, with answering look severe,
Sighed sad departure, dropped the expressive tear;
From parents children headlong burst away,
While groans recalled them from the dire affray;
To brothers brothers gave the parting ^and,
And Virtue eyed, with tears, the swerving band.
All dressed in arms, and clothed in rich array,
Forth from the camp the warriors bent their way:
Their hands their gold, and favorite treasures bore,
And each fond bosom hailed the Egyptian shore.
Over the broad circuit of the western plain,
From all sides gathering, moved the numerous train,
This way, and that, in thousand paths impelled,
Immingling, rushing, darkening, hid the field,
To one great central phalanx swiftly driven,
Gloom'd the sad ground, and cast a shade on heaven,
Frowning, and fierce, expanded over the plain,
And, proud of numbers, deemed resistance vain.
Of name obscure, before the increasing throng
Two haughty chieftains proudly stalked along;
Felt all the joys, which little minds o'errun,
From sway first tried, and influence scarce begun;
Looked wise, inportant hurried over the field;
Commanded, questioned, with loud threats compelled;
Spoke with stern voice; advising, wavering stood,
And scarce the ground was printed, where they trod.
Far round the plain the mingled tumult ran,
Chief answered chief, and man rehearsed to man.
Through each small circle loud the murmur spread,
Of spoils ungiven, virtues unrepaid,
Woes unextinguish'd, labors never to end,
The starving household, and the naked friend --
Where now is the heart, that blessed the prophet's sway,
That soothed the tribes, and bade the soul obey,
Swept Bashan's fields, o'erthrew proud Sihon's throne,
And to poor warriors left the spoils they won?
But now new chiefs, in wiles and learning trained,
Wield a dread scepter, with an iron hand;
All, all but Hanniel; Hanniel singly glows
With Israel's good, and weeps for Israel's woes.
Hail then, oh hail the blessed, auspicious day,
That opes to brighter realms our happy way!
The chief^, we chose, the glorious path shall guide*
Un^ur^'d with learning, and unstained with pride.
Thus round the plain the tumult shrill resounds;
Of different note, immix unnumber'd sounds;
High tossed in either helms confusedly fly,
And clashing shields to clashing shields reply:
Loud, hoarse, and rough, wide jars discordant noise,
And raging passions swell the clamorous voice.
So, where on ocean's brim the long beach winds*
Breaks his proud waves, and all his fury binds,
Unnumber'd fowls, of various wing, arise,
And toss in wild gyrations to the skies;
From each harsh throat hard strains of discord roar,
Break with dire din, and grate along the shore;
Loud, and more loud, the nations heaven deform,
Or gloom the strand, and croak the coming storm.
As round the plain the mingled tumult ran,
Tadmor, the elder chieftain, thus began --
Hail, sons of freedom! Jacob's fairest boast!
Heirs of the sky, and virtue's genuine host!
Well did brave Hanniel teach, in words divine*
How fast our tribes, with toils, and griefs, decline;
Full well he marked what deep designs are laid
By chiefs, of man, nor truth, nor Heaven, afraid;
That, swelled with pride, and trained in artful lore,
O'erleap all right, and crush the hapless poor.
To us no leader tells the deep design,
What hosts oppose us, and what lands combine*
What towns are next besieged; what dangers tried;
What spoils are won, and who those spoils divide.
In Egypt's realm the long-wish'd rule to gain,
They found each art, and each bold effort, vain:
Thence through the waste they urged our fatal way,
And hoped, in this dire land, untroubled sway;
Yet there the poor a lot far happier found,
With fasts unburden'd, and with rites unbound:
Our tributes paid, at plenteous feasts we sat,
Stretched in soft ease, and every dainty ate.
Oh, why from those fair regions did we come?
Why, blind and headlong, leave our darling home?
Here our own leaders Egypt's kings outdo*
And change of lords is all the good we know.
Haste then, from these dread fields of misery fly;
With chiefs you chose again to Egypt hie;
Where ease, and wines, and feasts, and soft delight,
Earth ever fruitful, skies forever bright,
Awake sweet pleasure, raptured love revive,
And teach poor mortals what it is to live:
Now seize the hour, by Joshua's folly given,
Or opened for Israel by a pitying Heaven.
Ai's gallant sons will sweep his host away,
Worn by long labors, and to fasts a prey;
Or, escaped the field, their weary feet must fail;
Or, joined in fight, our arms will soon prevail;
This day beyond pursuit our course removes,
And leaves the tyrant to the slaves he loves.
He spoke; at once, from all the impatient train,
A bust of triumph shook the sounding plain;
Thence rose the shout; as often the heavens replied;
And, borne through fields, and woods, the far-off murmur died.
Thus, when the vernal storm forbears to rave,
And the wild river swells his torrent wave,
Huge isles of ice, along the clifted shore.
Float slow, and cumbrous; solemn thunders roar,
In deep gradations, rise, and burst, and ^oll,
Wave over the sounding hills, and lessen to the pole.
When first from Joshua faithful Irad went,
He summoned Judah's heroes to his tent,
Bade them the tribes with prudent caution eye,
Pursue their motions, an^ their views deserv,
Their tumults hush, or should their efforts fail,
With speed to him (...) the unpleasing tale.
When round the camp disordered scenes began,
Strait to the sound the attentive heroes ran;
Watched all the murmurs of the gathering train,
And followed anxious to the troubled plain;
But first the tidings to (...) Leader sped,
What bands assembled, and what chieftains led,
Urged him with haste to arm a numerous force,
And against the insurgents bend his rapid course.
And now, when Tadmor ceased* the shouts decayed,
With sweet, mild accent, thus grave Caleb said --
How slight the toil, mistaking chief, to prove
It Is wisdom's voice directs the path, we love!
Though thorns, though serpents hedge the fatal way,
The fond heart bids, and answering feet obey.
Each truth, each argument, thy voice runs over,
Forbids our host to seek the Egyptian shore.
The waste's dire ills thy plaintive words resound,
Yet through that waste the darling realm is found;
Again those countless woes our race must try;
Again with toil, and thirst, and famine* die.
Or shall we free, by Hazor's bands compelled,
To meet fierce Amalek, in the hostile field.
Will hosts that tremble, where Ai^s sons appear,
Abide the conflict, when Philistia's near.
But to what end* against unnumber'd ^oes,
Shall Israel war to gain Egyptian woes;
Shame, vice, idolatry, and bondage, joined,
The wrath of Heaven, and hissing of mankind?
If war is destined Israel's fearful doom,
With war, let freedom, wealth, and glory come:
Let peace, let realms, let empire crown the toil;
The world applaud us, and the Eternal smile
In this fair land, shall each poor warrior reign
Lord of himself, and monarch of the plain.
His house, his herd, his harvest all his own,
And changeless law transmit them to his son.
But Egypt's wealth her king alone commands,
Her sons, her gold, her products, and her lands.
For him our hands, in slavish woe, must toil,
And pamper splendour on the beggar's spoil,
Poor beyond thought, suspended on a breath,
Our life a sufferance, and a nod our death.
But Israel's chiefs are trained in dangerous lore,
And hence regardless of the humble poor.
Say, Tadmor, say, the wiles of art to shun,
To Egypt's realms impatient do thou run?
To courts, to lords, with smooth deceit o'erhung,
Where art first budded, and where learning sprung?
Truth, conscience, Heaven, thine idle dreams deny;
Repent, return; nor, snared by treasons, die.
The hero spoke. From all the angry train
A rising murmur waved along the plain:
As 'twixt tall hills, where rushing torrents roll,
A slow, and lingering groan ascends the pole;
Through gloomy caverns hums the solemn sound,
Fills all the hollow realm, and shakes the shady ground.
Ardan, the younger chieftain, quick returned,
And from his eye balls kindling fury burned --
Imperious prince, I know thy heart of s^eel
Never loved the poor, and never knew to feel.
But that proud voice, which awed my breast before,
Now fails to rule, and guides the host no more.
I mock thy threats, thy utmost power defy,
Thy reasons trample, and thy words deny.
Changed is the scene. Thy pride must now obey
In worth thy betters, and thy lords in sway.
Go tell yon (...)* that base, and bestial train,
Thy arts, thy (...), and threats are vain;
Bid them (...) gallant brethren foe,
A host of (...) daring to be ^^ee,
Of number^ (...), bravery never awed,
Dup'd by (...) blinded by no God,
Their (...) to the (...) shore,
Where peace (...) bid the cup ^un o'^r:
While they, poor reptiles! in dread bondage lie,
Drag life in misery, and unburied die.
Haste, haste, ere vengeance on thy helmet light,
And plunge thee swift to everlasting night.
Base, reptile miscreant! -- Hezron fierce replied --
Go dream of Egypt; swell thine insect pride;
Thy wings expand; around thy dunghill fly;
Buzz thy small moment, and forgotten die.
For know, vain wretch! the voice of peace is over;
The hand of Mercy lifts her branch no more;
To speed thy doom impatient Justice flies,
And wings the vengeance of affronted skies.
The hero spoke. A rising hiss began,
And round the plain contemptuous murmurs ran:
Quick towered the camp the princes bent their course,
And, turned to Egypt, moved the rebel force.
Their standard rose: a shout to heaven ascends,
And wide, and deep, the gloomy host extends.
F^r round the ^iles each casts exulting eyes;
Each feels the prowess of his arm arise:
By pride their force, their numbers doubled over,
All foes despised, and Joshua feared, no more;
From voice to voice the haughty tale rebounds,
And air re-echoes with the mingling sounds.
As near the distant groves the warriors drew,
And homeward cast a lingering, parting view;
B^hold! in eastern field^* a numerous train
Poured from the camp, and hastened over the plain.
There trembled Ephraim's ensign in the skie^;
There the bull's veng^anc^ (...) from wrathful eyes;
In a^t to wou^^* (...) horns, he stood,
Fel^ h^s vast (...) rival's blood.
B^hind the (...), impelled,
The darkening (...) the field;
Sublime, the Hero winged his dreadful way,
And round the rebels (...) a dire di^may.
Amazed, the chieftains saw his hastening course,
And ranged, with active speed* their numerous force;
In wild, disordered ranks, confused they stood,
Spoke sounding boasts, and thirsted loud for blood.
As near the noisy squadrons Joshua drew,
Round the rude files he cast a searching view:
For Hanniel's steps he gazed; but gazed in vain,
Nor found the hero on the troubled plain.
For well his mind, by sad experience, knew
What fearful ills defeated plots pursue,
How sway accustomed, (...) wild o'erthrows,
And sudden tumults end in certain woes.
Thence, to his tent by cautious thoughts confined,
Disjointed counsels thronged his restless mind;
He viewed, he wished; but knew the wish wa^ vain,
And boded ruin to his favorite train.
Too wise the Chief, too fixed the host, he saw;
Too firm the obedience to the sacred law;
In sullen silence mourned his lot severe,
And wail'd devoted treason, with a tear.
High in the van, the Leader raised his voice,
The hosts all trembling at the dreadful noise --
Haste to your tents, with (...) obedi^nce haste,
That Mercy's veil may hide the follies past;
Haste, ere this hand, by injured justice driven,
Plunge in your breasts, the avenging sword of Heaven:
Your Maker's voice, with cons^ion^ speed, obey,
And let deep sorrow w^sh your guilt away.
Thus he. Bold Ardan with shrill voice replied --
Let no vain hope instate thy swelling pride --
Know, proud, mis-deeming leader ^ Heaven designed
Jacob's brave sons to bow with willing mind;
The chiefs, we freely chose* our hearts obey,
And crouch no more, obseq^ious to thy sway.
To happier realms, with prosperous feet, we go,
And leave thy bondmen here to every woe*
Leave them to toil, to groan, to mourn their doom.
Languish out life, and die without a tomb:
While we, fair freedom's sons, superior fly
To peace, and transport, in a kinder sky.
The Chief disdained return. With wrathful look,
His eyes streamed terror, as the culprit spoke;
Forth from the van, with awful port, he strode;
Over his bright arms reflected lightnings glowed;
With lifted hand, he drove the avenging blade,
And plunged proud Ardan swift to endless shade.
The astonished train, like hunted hearts impelled,
Scattered in ^eadlong terror, over the field.
So, on heaven's plain when war and tumult sprung,
By Britain's pride, and earth's bright Phoenix, sung,
When Satan, madden'd with Tartarean rage,
Dared Michael's sword, and Michael's might engage;
In pomp divine the great Archangel stood:
A sun's broad splendors round his forehead glowed:
(...) his long wings thick, branching ligh^nings fell;
D^^e as ten thunders, rushed his flaming steel;
The Apostate sunk; fear winged the rebel train,
Swift as the rapid whirlwind, over the empyreal plain.
Pleased, the great chief, and Judah's heroes viewed
The flying train, by guilt and fear subdued;
While to high heaven their grateful praises ^ose,
Whose guardian hand had saved from countless woes.
Then loud the cries proclaim -- to Egypt's land
Whatever wretch shall lure a guilty ^and,
By stones oppressed, his life shall f^ll a prey,
And dread oblivion sweep his name away.
While thus the rod of vengeance Joshua swayed,
And the dread tumults of the plain dec^y'd,
The approaching hosts, at distance, Irad viewed,
And Zimri's thousands, with ^^ad feet pursued,
Tree'd all the pomp of war, with wild delight,
And wished, unarmed, to s^are the i^pending f^ght.
Like ocean's waves, the sons of Ai were driven,
And lowering Israel cast a gloom on heaven;
Proud chiefs, in golden splendour, trod the plain,
And tower'd majestic over the vulgar train.
So, straight and tall, beyond the forest fair,
The pine, ambitious, stands without a peer;
Over every grove beholds his boughs ascend,
Oaks climb beneath, and humble cedars bend;
Shares the mild winds, the sullen storm defies,
And towers, and waves, and wantons, in the skies;
In pride sublime, demands the sylvan reign,
And glows, and triumphs, in immortal green.
As now the tempest hid the orb of day,
The threatening fronts approached, in dark array;
Swift through the expansion clouds of arrows fly;
Stones shower on stones, and whizz along the sky;
Sing the shrill strings; the hissing darts resound;
From clanging bucklers rattling pebbles bound;
Now here, now there, the warriors fall; amain
Groans murmur; armor sounds; and shouts convulse the plain.
With deep amaze, the sons of Ai beheld
Their foes, with ardour, tempt the deathful field.
For now, elate, they sought the early fight,
To certain victory marched with fierce delight;
And fondly hoped, ere Oran's hosts should come,
To seal devoted Israel's hapless doom.
But vain their hopes: for with firm duty strong,
Undaunt^d Zimri fired the martial throng --
Now, warriors, ^ow -- the gl^wing leader cried --
Shall Israel's arms regain their ravished pride;
Ai now shall learn, untaught our force to flight,
What virtue warm^ u^ to the generous ^ight:
That one lost field shall never (...) race dismay,
Nor shame, nor terror, (...) glorious day.
While tha^ untroubled (...) hi^ words confessed,
All anxious fears disturbed hi^ boding breast.
The host he knew distrustful of the sky,
Propense to terror, and prepared to fly;
He saw them sad move lingering over the plain,
New arm their foes, and double all their train:
And the great Chief a strong injunction gave,
Each post with care to guard, each band to save,
Each opening fair for wise retreat to embrace
To tempt no loss, and hazard no disgrace.
But far beyond his thoughts, the sound of war,
The clash of arms, the shouts that rend the air,
The inspiring tumults of the dreadful plain,
New strung their nerve^, and roused their hopes again.
In quick oblivion, flight and fear were lost;
Increasing ardours every bosom tossed;
Firm-wedg'd, unshaken, rushed the darkening train;
Spears flew; air murmured; corses heaped the plain;
One flight of twinkling arms, all ^ther shone;
Earth roared one shout confused, one mingled groan;
Each host pressed eager; each disdained to fly;
And wide confusion blended earth and sky.
Mean time the storm, along dark mountains driven,
Hung over the plain, and wrapped the midday heaven;
More frequent lightnings blazed the skies around,
And peals more dreadful shook the solid ground.
From the black clouds the whirlwinds burst amain,
Scoured all the groves, and raged along the plain;
Beneath, huge shouts the murmuring concave rend,
And drifts of dust in gloomy pomp ascend.
With boding hearts, the chiefs of Ai surveyed
The sun's pure splendour lost in cloudy shade;
The sun, their god, his smiling face withdrew,
And round the world a fearful darkness flew:
Hence unapprov'd they deemed the doubtful day,
And ^^ann'd, with careful looks their homeward way:
As thus they backward gazed, the driving rain
(...), with impetuous fury, over the plain;
Fierce down the expansion streaming torrents shower'd,
And blood-stained brooks along the champain poured.
The clash of arms, the long-resounding cries
Waved over the world a hoarse, tumultuous noise;
From heaven's huge vault loud-rolling thunders came,
And lightnings blazed insufferable flame.
Then sad, disheartened, from the dreadful fire
Ai's generous leaders (...) their host retire.
Reluctant, flow, disdaining base defeat,
From Israel's sons the grisly ranks retreat;
Surpised, fierce Israel see their backward course,
Hang over their rear, and press with gathering force;
Intenser shouts ascend; the lightning's flame
Casts over the shields a strong alternate gleam;
Loud thunders roll; the fields all quake around:
And the rain rushing roars along the ground.
Then Zimri's piercing voice, with stern commands,
Restrains the fury of his eager ^ands.
So fierce the thousands burn for raging war,
Even single warriors urge their foes afar;
'Till near the chief, they see the standard rise,
While yet the tempest fills the midway skies,
Then deep-embosom'd in the obscuring rain,
Their foes untroubled cross the homeward plain.
Mean time the winds were passed, the storm was over,
And streaming torrents ceased from heaven to pour;
Strait to the camp, by Zimri's voice compelled,
The bands slow-moving crossed the spacious field.
With joy, the chief revolved the troubled day,
The ^ate, and influence of the fierce affray;
Ai, in fierce conflict, failed the wreath to g^in,
And Israel, da^^tless, ^rod the skirmish'd plain;
He saw the ho^t again to combat won
Their hope^ n^w kindled, and their terror gone;
^
And promised triumph on the future ^ield.
And now the Youth they passed, as, with fond eyes,
He saw the varying fate of combat rise;
To him, deep-pondering, blew the storm in vain,
Scarce heard the peals, or marked the battering rain:
'Till Ai, retired, the doubtful strife resigned*
And calmed the tumults of his anxious mind.
Then gentler scene^ his rapt attention gained,
Where GOD'S great hand in clear effulgence reigned,
The growing beauties of the solemn even,
And all the bright sublimities of heaven.
Above tall western hills, the light of day
Shot far the splendors of his golden ray;
Bright from the storm, with tenfold grace he smiled,
The tumult softened, and the world grew mild.
With pomp transcendant, robbed in heavenly dies,
Arched the clear rainbow round the orient skies;
Its changeless form, its hues of beam divine.
Fair type of truth, and beauty; endless shine,
Around the expanse, with thousand splendors rare,
Gay c^ouds sailed wanton through the kindling air;
From shade to shade, unnumber'd tinctures blend;
Unnumber'd forms of wondrous light extend;
In pride ^^upendous, glittering walls aspire,
Graced (...) bright domes, and crowned with towers of fire,
On (...) burn; over mountains mountains roll:
A burst of glory spreads from pole to pole:
Rapt with the splunder, every songster sings,
Tops the (...) bough, and claps his glistening wings:
With newborn green, reviving nature blooms,
And sweeter fr^^rance freshening air perfumes.
Far (...) the storm withdrew its troubled reign;
Descending twi^^ght dimmed the dusky plain;
Black night arose; her curtains hid the ground;
Less roared, and less, the thunders solemn sound;
The bended lightning shot a brighter stream,
Or wrapped all heaven in one wide, mantling flame;
By turns, over plains, and woods, and mountains, spread
Paint, yellow glimmerings, and a deeper shade.
From parting clouds, the moon out-breaking shone,
And sat, sole empress, on her silver throne;
In clear, full beauty, round all nature smiled,
And claimed over heaven, and earth, dominion mild;
With humbler glory, stars her court attend,
And blessed, and union'd, silent luster blend.
All these bright scenes revolved, his raptured mind,
With sweet transition, heaven in all divined;
Where, round the prospect, grandeur, beauty, glowed,
They shone, the grandeur, beauty, of a God;
God looked through all, as, with resplendence ^ay,
They raised, and bore him from himself away.
THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK IV.

ARGUMENT.
Morning. Tribes assemble. Story of Achan. Embassy from Gibeon. Story of Mina,
Joshua gives her to Elam, prince of Gibeon, in marriage, and makes (...) with
the Gibeonites. Feast. Joshua's prayer. Cloud descends on the tabernacle. Elam
sollicits leave to return to Gibeon. Joshua consents. Sports of the Israelites.
Conduct of Hanniel. Walls built around the camp. Story of Helon.

THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK IV.
NOW the third sun illum'd the azure main,
And Israel anxious gathered on the plain.
In every face suspense and grief appeared,
Each son was doubted, and each parent feared.
Brothers on brothers cast a side-long eye,
And trembling fair-ones pressed the rising sigh.
Mid the wide concourse great Eleazar shone,
The sacred minister of Heaven's high throne.
White were his aged lo^ks, and round his face
Calm contemplation cast a solemn grace;
Over his pure vesture shining unguent spread,
And breathed the fragrance of the Arabian shade:
Full on his breast the star-bright Urim glowed,
And over his brow beamed HOLINESS TO GOD.
The sacred rites performed, he bent his way
To the bright (...) that mocked the rising day.
The train with reverence bowed. Around his head
Red spires of lambent flame serenely played;
On the clear splendors gazed the crowd around,
And deep attention hush^d the shady ground.
Now in the sacred place the Priest adored,
And thus his voice Jehovah's smiles implored.
O thou, whose wisdom built the bright abodes,
Great KING of KINGS, and sovereign GOD of GODS,
Almighty Father hear! Let grace divine
Shower on our host, and cleanse from every sin!
Thou see, Omniscient Mind! what guilt unknown
Pollutes our race, and dares insult thy throne:
Thou see; and oh may thy all-gracious voice
That guilt declare, and bid thy sons rejoice!
He spoke. A rushing sound of winds began,
Sung in the vail, and through the temple ran;
A sapphire flame, unutterably bright,
Shot from the gloom, and wrapped the walls in light;
The dome all trembled; earth beneath it shook;
And over the ark a voice in thunder spoke --
To Israel's thousands, from the Eternal throne,
This mighty mandate by thy voice be known.
Of Judah's race, a wretch, by madness driven,
With impious hand, has dared the wrath of Heaven:
S^ones shall his house destroy, and flames devour;
I AM commands; let all my sons adore. --
Nor more; an awful darkness round him spread,
Still as the gloomy mansions of the dead.
All sad, all slow, returned the mournful priest,
And strong impatience every eye expressed --
What the decree of Heaven! the Leader cried --
With solemn voice, the sacred Seer replied --
Of Jud^h's race, a wretch, by madness driven.
With impious hand, has dared the wrath of Heaven:
Stones shall his house destroy, and f^ames devour;
I AM commands; let all his sons adore.
He spoke; and ^^rrow gloom'd the plain: in ^aste,
So Joshua's voice decreed, the lots were cast;
The wretch, so long concealed, arose to view,
And Achan's name to fear^^l vengeance drew.
Forth from the crowd, with languid steps, and ^low,
The victim s^rode, and looked un^tter'd woe*
His useless (...) hung feebly by his s^de;
His tottering knees their w^^ted and denied;
His front was clouded with a wild dismay;
For hastening ruin darkened over his way.
And thus the youth forlorn -- My hated name
Sinks in the misery of undying shame,
Passed is the day of grace; my dimmed light
Fades in the skirt of everlasting night.
From the rich spoils my ^and a store conveyed,
Helped by the night, and safe in covert laid.
Beneath my tent the mischi^f may be found,
Where spreads the flooring over the secret ground.
Why did my heart resist that lovely fair,
Who sweetly warned me of the tempting snare?
Hear, all ye warriors! fly the fatal r^ad,
And learn, that vengeance waits the foes of GOD!
Great Joshua heard; and though his feeling mind
To crimes was gentle, and to misery kind;
Fierce on the youth he cast a dreadful eye,
That withered all his strength, and bade him die.
And could no honor, and no law, control
The grovelling wishes of thy gloomy soul?
How durst thou, impious, face the Almighty rod,
Put forth rebellious hands and steal from GOD?
Did thou not know, weak man! the avenging Sky
Traced thy dark footsteps with all-searching eye?
Did thou not fear, amidst the gloomy deed,
Its vengeance bursting on thy guilty head?
Did thou not fear the stings of conscious shame?
The thunder's terror; or the lightning's flame?
Go, raise to Heaven the sad, repenting eye,
A Heaven that hears, when Misery li^ts her cry!
Perhaps so^t Mercy yet may lend an ear,
While thy (...) glimmers in his last career*
Not pity'^ ^i^h, but ^o^ly's, hides from view
The wretch* whom Justice awful feet pursue.
Go then, unpardoned, sink in shame forlorn,
Of Heaven the victim, and of earth the scorn;
A warning lamp, over guilt's benighted way,
To light bewildered error back to day.
He spoke. The victim, with dread horror pale,
Walked trembling onward to a distant vale;
His look of anguish asked a hand to save,
And Pity's eye pursued him to the grave.
Mean time around their Chief the princes stood,
And kind compassion in their bosoms glowed:
When robbed in fair attire, two strangers came,
And bowed respectful, at the Hero's name.
One, passed his strength, was graced with manly scars,
Crown of the brave, and palm of glorious wars;
Tall was his frame, his countenance roughly kind,
And his calm front with honest boldness shined.
Dressed in light robes, as flowers adorn the wild,
In nature's prime his young companion smiled
Sweetness ineffable. Devoid of art,
His eye, soft-glowing, looked the friendly heart.
Hail strangers, hail! the mighty Hero cried,
Whose port bespeaks a nation's fairest pride.
Bring your kind hands the peaceful branch from far?
Or pant your bosoms for the fate of war?
The elder chief replied -- From Gibeon's king
Our friendly hands no hostile message bring.
Though once in sight renowned, now silver age
Serenes his brow, and cools ambition's rage.
It Is his first glory, Gibeon's weal to increase,
To soothe sad woe, and widen human bliss.
Passed are five morns, since round the extended plain,
With fond impatience, rushed a chosen tr^in,
Over rocks, and streams, the nimble deer pursued,
Traced the wild marsh, and scoured the devious wood.
From the lone mansions of the unpierc'd shade,
At once deep cries our wondering ears invade.
Led by the unknown voice, we nimbly hied
Through the thick grove, and strait the scene descried
'Twixt two rough savages, whose hungry eyes
Lowered death, and ruin, over their helpless prize,
Fair as the star of morn, a lovely maid.
In pangs of terror, called in vain for aid.
Her robes embroidered loosely met the view;
Her hair, unbound, in wild disorder fl^w;
All pale she stood, and to the pitying sky
Stretched her white hands, and raised a piercing cry.
In vain, on terror's wings, the caitiffs flew;
His eager sword this generous hero drew;
Their heads in twain the steely vengeance clave,
And hungry vultures yield the horrid grave.
To Gibeon's domes we led the beauteous fair,
Repo^'d on down, and nursed with tenderest care.
Pleased with our pains, her sweet, angelic tongue
Strange truths divine, with heavenly music, sung.
Of nature's Sovereign Lord, the tale began,
How earth was formed, and how created man;
How the tall mo^ntains heaved their cloud-wrapp'd spires,
And heaven was starr'd with thousand thousand fires.
Then too she told how, roused to fearful ire,
JEHOVAH bade the deluged world expire;
Thy nation's rise; the rod of Sovereign power,
That shook proud Egypt's realms from shore to shore,
The cleaving main; the wonders of the wild*
Where hard rocks slow'd, and sands with ve^dure smiled;
^ood, shower'd from heaven, perfumed the morning blast,
And quails in millions peopled all the waste.
I^ these dread scenes, Aradon's mighty mind
The clear displays of boundless power divined;
Scenes nobler far than ancient sages knew,
Than age ever taught, or airy fancy drew.
At once, inspired with eager zeal to learn
What wondrous truths the glorious scheme concern*
This prince, his only hope, the monarch cho^e.
And joined with me, his pleasure to disclose.
Sweet peace by us his friendly heart demands;
His gold he proffers, and his warlike bands;
At thy request, to arms the thousands fly,
With thee we conquer, or with thee we die.
Should thou consent, some bright, and generous Sage,
Famed for pure manners, and grown wise with age,
Skilled with unseen, yet all-persuasive art,
TO inform the mind, and softly win the heart,
Whose tenets, nobly raised over pride, and strife,
Grace the fair conduct of a virtuous life,
He asks, to spread Religion's sacred sway,
To lure his sons to heaven, and point the way.
And O what price immense can thou demand!
What golden hoards? or boundless breadth of land?
One precious prize our grateful hands restore,
Unbought by gems, or loads of shining ore,
In thy own tent, behold thy favorite fair,
Child of thy choice, and darling of thy care!
Thus spoke Hareshah. While glad smiles expressed
The Leader's joy, he thus his chiefs addressed.
Even now, propitious, on our lengthened toils
Behold the all-watchful Eye complacent smiles!
In other realms our growing fame is heard,
Our triumphs numbered and our Guardian feared.
But say, brave princes, shall these bands be tied?
And Gibeon's sons to Jacob's heirs allied?
Shall some blessed sage her thousands teach to rise
To peace, to tru^^, to virtue, and the skies?
Your choice I (...) -- he said. Quick Hanniel rose,
Whose life was contest, and whose joy to oppose.
To save the suppliant race his wish inclined,
For Heaven had formed him with a feeling mind:
But well he knew how fair his matchless art
Could gild the latent mischiefs of his heart;
How thousands on his words enchanted (...),
Touched by the magic of his wi^y tongue.
All paths with him were smooth, that showed a name,
Though slaughtered nations paved the road to fame.
Thrice rose the chief to thwart the Leader's cho^^e,
And thrice strange faltering seized his opening voice;
^ar round he casts his keen, experienced view,
And peace, the wish of every bosom, knew;
With shame his dauntless front was covered over,
And the cheek blushed, that never blushed before.
Pleased the great Leader saw his failing eye,
And voice, in vain, attempt a base reply,
Then smiling thus -- Untaught the wiles of art
I see mild aspects speak the friendly heart.
Yes let fair Peace, over Gibeon's happy land,
Raise her sweet voice, and lift her sacred wand.
Against hostile realms alone our falchions rise,
Foes to high Heaven, and victims of the Skies.
But far removed from Israel, very far,
Be every wish to extend the waste of war:
To sooth vain pride with conquest's dreadful name;
To pamper avarice with the spoils of shame;
To take one hour from man's too hasty doom,
Or force one widow to a husband's tomb.
From death's sad scenes, and battle's horrid toils,
The real hero's generous mind recoils:
When swords alone can plead the righteous cause,
The crimson steel his hand reluctant draws;
Grief walks his partner to the dreadful plain,
And glory's mansions prove the haunts of pain.
It Is Israel's boast, the human weal to inc^ease;
To stretch the reign, and nurse the arts of peace;
The fierce, the wild, to tame; the weak defend;
Late to begin, and soon the strife to end;
To teach vain man the bliss to virtue given,
And with new saints to enlarge the bounds of heaven.
But now, brave chiefs, to Joshua's tent repa^r --
My fond heart pants to find the lovely fair --
Her sire, in Edom's realm, our nation joined,
Urged by the dictates of a virtuous mind:
Her, a sweet babe, his hand indulgent bore,
To virtue formed, and nursed in sacred lore.
As some bright lilly, daughter of the morn,
Swells its young leaves, and bids its splendors burn;
Fair, and more fair, the expanding beauties glow,
Dance in the sun, and shame the driving snow;
So, born for heaven, still brightening to the view,
From truth to truth, from charm to charm, she grew;
Soft was her temper; all her thoughts refined;
Beauty her form, and virtue was her mind.
Now at the tent arrived, the fair they found;
With many a lovely maid encompassed round;
With smiles of joy, their friend the virgins hailed,
And gentle tears on every cheek prevailed.
When first her Sire appeared, around his form
She cast, with sweetest grace, each snowy arm;
Pleased the great Hero eyed his lovely child,
And gave the fond embrace, and over the charmer smiled.
Sweet maid! he cried, where rov'dst thou from the plain?
With tears we sought thee, but we sought in vain.
Far in the wood, replied the fair, I strayed,
No care disturbed me, and no fear dismayed;
Charmed with the flowers, that, undistinguished, smiled
With solitary beauty round the wild.
A plumed musician, on her verdant throne,
Hymn'd, with soft transport, to the falling sun.
Slow I approached; the bird before me flew;
I heard the sound; how could I not pursue?
So long I wandered, day forsook the sky;
I gazed, and gazed; but found not where to fly.
In different paths, I roam'd the woody plain;
But faint, and trembling, still returned again.
Line 243, Her, a sweet ^a^e,] This epithet is given merely from ^enderness.
The wolf began to howl; and all around,
The hungry panther shook the shuddering ground;
Lou^ ^^ar'd the approaching lion's dread alarms,
And death rushed by me, in a thousand forms.
The long, long, dismal night at length was gone;
And cheerful day with pleasing beauty shone.
Hushed was the world, save where, along the wood,
Rung the soft current of a silver flood.
Down verdant banks, with trembling steps I strayed;
Each breeze alarmed me, and each leaf dismayed;
Till, near the confines of the lonely stream,
Rose two barbarians, as the tiger grim.
My hated garb displeased their savage eyes,
And female weakness bade their lust arise.
O why was strength to miscreant villains given?
Why lovely virtue left unarmed by heaven?
Why must the helpless fair-one's glory stand
A prey, for every monster's brutal hand?
Thus mourned my heart; when Elam rushed to sight,
Clave the dire foes, and calmed my wild affright*
At once low-whisper'd Virtue's heavenly friend --
Weak are the fair, that heroes may defend.
She spoke. The blush that gives the brightest charm,
Glowed in her face, and told her heart's alarm.
Skilled in the science of the human soul,
The experienced Chief beheld her passions roll,
Smiled at the expressive language of her eye,
The dancing bosom. and the deep drawn sigh*
On Elam's face he turned a searching view,
Traced his young flame, and all his wishes knew.
Often on the virgin glanced his earnest gaze;
She glance for glance, and blush for blush, repays;
Their eyes prove faithful to the melting heart.
Waf^ the fond wish, and all the soul impart.
Line 287. (...) ^ated garb,) She were the Israelitish dr^s^.
No pride of beauty waked his young desires;
Nor eye that sparkles, fraught with ^ambent fires;
Nor cheek, that gaily shines with morning glow;
Nor downy bosom, dipped in spotless snow.
He sighed for charms of nature more refined,
The Maker's image, in the fair one's mind;
Such charms, as found in heaven, delight improve,
And placed in angels prompt an angel's love.
Thus while they paused; with sweet, and modest grace,
^ear in his eye, and blushes over his face,
The trembling youth began -- O Chief divine!
My parent's voice thou heard'st, disdain not mine.
To this bright maid my wishes would aspire --
O blame not! frown not on the spotless fire! --
Thou know the joy her virtues yield to thee;
Then think her hand were paradise to me*
Pleased the Chief saw his eyes with fondness shine,
And mien all modest, merit's faithful sign,
And thus -- O fair! it is thine alone to choose.
Say, must this heart so soon its darling lose?
Can thou to Elam yield a willing hand,
And seek a guardian in a distant land?
With voice sincere, unused her thoughts to hide.
And bosom frank, the virgin's lasting pride,
The guise, low-creeping Cunning must approve,
Fair mark of worth, and friend to virtuous love,
The maid replied -- O sire! it is bliss to me,
To be by him beloved, approved by thee.
The Chief returned; Blessed heir of spotless fame!
Thy choice and wisdom ever ask the same.
Receive, brave Elam! Joshua's favorite care,
As angels virtuous, and as Eden fair.
Her hand, her heart shall heal thy bleeding mind,
Warmed with pure love, and graced with truth refined,
Thy fainting strength, thy languid eye inspire,
Improve thy joys, and wake the hero's are,
Charm, with soft tenderness, thy griefs away,
And gild alike the darkness and the day.
And thou, brave Elam! still, as morn returns,
While early transport in thy bosom burns,
On firm foundations let thy fondness rest,
Nor cold indifference canker in thy breast.
Know, all the vows by heedless lovers given,
Though often on earth forgot, are sealed in heaven:
Then let thy fond connubial actions show
Truth was the language of the lover's vow.
And thou, my child, to Heaven thyself approve*
Act all the soft commands of duteous love:
So shall your lives serenely dance away,
And bliss unclouded light the setting day.
But now, brave friends, let pleasure round us roll;
Enjoy the genial feast, and share the bowl;
Three days, with me, and every pleasure, stay*
The fourth glad morn shall gild your homeward way*
Thus he. The feelings of each grateful breast
With manly dignity the chiefs confessed.
In converse mild they sat. With busy care,
The attendant train the cheerful feast prepare;
With kindly warmth the smoking ^auldrons glow,
And sweet through either rising odours low.
So vast, so various, was the Leader's mind,
It roved through every region, unco^fin'd;
From scenes sublime, with soft transition, ran
Through all the duties, all the weal, of man;
At once his friends, his race, his Maker, served;
At once his own domestic bliss preserved;
In nice dependence ranged the servant train,
And over his house bade beauteous order ^eign.
Through all their minds Religion's influe^^^ ran --
Men, true to Heaven, he knew were true to (...) --
Her sons be chose; and with all-(...) sway,
Rewarded, ruled, and led in virtue's way:
Hence, rich return of all his watchful toil,
No murmur pained him, and no household broil.
Peace round his mansion shed her influence mild,
And cheerful, friendly, each domestic smiled.
Now the loved maid had 'scap'd from savage bands,
With twofold pleasure, wrought their active hands.
So just, so gentle was her angel mind,
To want so bounteous, and to all so kind,
Her, as the Leader, each alert obeyed,
And thought it bliss to please the heavenly maid,
Mean time, selected for the genial feast,
To Joshua's tent came many a princely guest;
Their courteous hearts the noble strangers greet,
And hail the fair with gratulation sweet.
Over a vast board a wide pavilion spread,
With grandeur shined, and cast a pleasing shade.
There sat the guests; there cates delight the soul;
There wines inspiring tinge the spacious bowl:
They taste, enjoy, and, with light converse gay,
In calm oblivion roll their cares away.
Over all great Joshua shone, with aspect mild,
Cheered every guest, and with soft splendour smiled:
Touched by his eyes, each heart with rapture glowed,
And sweet complacence every face o'erflow'd.
So round the immense the sun's broad glories stream,
Spread boundless life, and pour the etherial flame;
Warmed with pure light, the golden planets roll,
And smile soft-beaming joy from pole to pole,
In endless pride, at beauteous distance, rise,
Swell the great pomp, and glad the earth, and skies.
There, like the day star, beauteous Irad shone,
His splendors lessening in the nearer sun;
Full on the Chief a sparkling eye he turned,
And as he gazed, with bright ambition burned,
Marked all the glories of his awful f^ce,
His solemn grandeur, and his matchless grace;
While hoary Hezron watched with boding eyes,
And saw, well-pleased, the future hero rise.
There too, in transport brightened Caleb's pride,
With tears, embracing Elam's lovely bride;
Yet felt soft pain, to see her favourite's charms,
The destined treasure of a stranger's arms,
To see her days at distance doomed to roll,
And mingling friendship soothe no more the soul.
In easy converse passed the hours away;
Each face shone cheerful, and each heart was gay;
In glad succession went the goblets round,
And blended voices gave a jocund sound.
Mean time thronged numerous round the Leader's door,
The stranger, orphan, widow, and the poor;
Called from each tribe, by Joshua's kind command,
A rare-felt joy inspired the friendless band;
They feasted, sang, and in the dance combined,
Poured forth the raptures of the oblivious mind:
Then, moving various, over the camp they spread,
Each bliss imploring on the Leader's head.
When now the feast was over, the sun drew nigh
The gilded borders of the western sky:
Forth to the temple marched the illustrious train,
The thousands gathering over the extended plain.
From a tall rock, amid the silent crowd,
The suppliant Hero raised his voice aloud --
O thou, whose hand illum'd yon rolling fire,
Stretched the wide plains, and bade the hills aspire,
Ruled by whose power, the stars unnumber'd rise,
And swift-wing'd lightnings flame athwart the skies,
Storms ride majestic over the etherial plain,
And wake the sleeping thunders of the main!
Empires, at thy command, arise, and fall;
And flight and triumph hasten at thy call!
Disclose, O Power Divine! thy sovereign voice --
Does combat please thee? combat is our choice --
Do^s peace delight thee? peace alone we prize,
Led by thy will, and guided by thine eyes.
By thee this land to Abraham's race was given,
'Till suns withdraw, and stars are lost in heaven:
If now the bright possession GOD ordain,
And crowns await us, on the crimson plain,
By some great sign the eternal smiles display,
And point our footsteps to the fierce affray!
At once a hollow wind began to roll,
As distant thunders rumble round the pole;
The fields grew black, the forests felt the alarm,
And swift through either rushed a cloudy storm,
High heaven all trembled with the dreadful sound,
And peals on peals, convulsive, shook the ground.
Far round the sacred dome the darkness spread;
The sun's clear splendour vanished in the shade:
Red flames burst forth; the conscious mountains nod,
And the world smokes beneath the approaching GOD.
In silent awe, the camp astonished stood;
And each burned fiercely for the day of blood.
Fixed in still wonder, gazed the stranger pair,
And marked, with anxious mind, the darkening air,
The dome, invelop'd in the sable shroud,
And peals deep-murmuring in the hollow cloud:
With solemn look, each frequent eyed his friend,
And felt, instinctive, half-form'd prayers ascend.
Mean time the Leader every chief commands --
Two days, let peace refresh the fainting bands;
The third glad sun, awaked by trumpet's sound,
Shall light our falchions to the deathful ground.
Sleep, hapless Ai! thy last returning day
Soon gilds thy turrets with a pitying ray.
And let the chief, the important charge who owns,
Of all our wealth, our wives, and blooming sons,
Bid a long trench wind through the tented ground,
And guardian walls the spacious camp surround.
He spoke. With joy the attendant chiefs obeyed,
And round the camp the glad commands conveyed.
The squadrons ardent wait the appointed morn,
Cleanse their blue shields, and polished coats adorn.
So Joshua willed; for well the Hero knew
How glittering s^eel allured the ravished view;
Thence praised the chief, in shining neatness armed,
Averse from toys, but with true beauty charmed;
And thence in glorious panoply he blazed,
A great example, acting all he praised.
Now round the world pale Eve her sadness threw;
Still, solemn darkness cloudy curtains drew:
Through the wide camp the Leader traced his way,
To learn what wishes marked the busy day.
Ai, full in view, each heart to combat fired,
And with gay prospects every breast inspired.
No thought of Egypt boding minds embraced;
No childish fear even vulgar souls disgraced*
In deep oblivion sunk the painful wound,
And fierce impatience hoped the embattled ground*
Pleased the great Hero heard the exulting strain,
And wandering, listening, sought his tent again.
When now the morn looked mildly from the east,
To Joshua Elam thus his voice addressed --
O Chief of Israel, crowned with grace divine!
Let health's green garland round thy temples twine.
To bless mankind be still thy loved employ;
To serve thy Maker still thy sacred joy;
No hour of thine to wasting grief be given;
Let each more brightly roll, and antedate thy heaven!
But now, his years impatient of delay,
My hoary father hopes our homeward way.
Indulge, great prince, our eager wish to bear
The rapturous tidings to his longing ear.
His soul rejoiced will ^mile at nature's pains,
And life flow swifter through his icy veins.
Bid us with speed our destined path resume,
And bless a parent, sinking in the tomb.
He spoke. Hareshah joined the youth's request:
Even Mina's eyes a secret wish confessed.
In love's kind heat, like ice in summer's ray,
All former ties, dissolving, pass away;
To newfound friends the soul oblivious flies,
New objects charm us, and new passions rise.
The Hero saw, and kindly bade depart
The loved, the long-lost favorite of his heart;
With arms impassioned clasped the bright-eyed fair,
Kissed with fond look, and dropped a tender tear.
On gay-dress'd camels, toward the setting day,
With converse sweet, the lovers bent their way;
Like two fair stars, that shed a lonely light,
And sink in clouds, above the mountain's height.
Two seers their steps attend, to point the way,
That ends in ma^^ons of unchanging day.
And now, over all the camp, the raptured throng
Crowd the wide plain, and wake the enlivening song.
Here cheerful thousands bid the walls ascend;
And broad, and deep, the lengthening trenches bend.
Here the strong arm the falchion learns to wield,
Or hurls the javelin over the measured field.
With shouts of praise the conquerors often are crowned,
And clanging bucklers swell the applauding sound.
Part, joined in crowds, in mimic fight engage,
Range their small hosts, and sport with seeming rage;
From force unequal here the vanquished fly;
There, with deep groans, dissembling victims die.
Mean time all-watchful. Hanniel, round the plain,
From crowd to crowd, inspi^'d the busy train.
He knew the plot, the generous Youth disclosed,
To dark suspicion saw his name exposed;
To wipe disgrace, his influence to recall,
And, with ^^ght, sec^et (...)* to (...) all,
From tent to tent he urged his active way,
And blamed with words severe, the wild affray.
Me, cried the hero, Israel's thousands know
A fair unchanging friend, or open foe.
To generous war since Israel's voice is given,
To war I fly, and hope the smiles of Heaven.
Rouse then to arms; for glorious fight prepare;
Each thought of peace, each terror vile forbear:
Let glory's fire each warrior's breast inflame,
And deathless deeds shall brighten Jacob's name.
Thus he. The wile the thoughtless thousands drew,
Snared by soft words, and caught by gilding show;
For war, invigor'd, glowed the undaunted mind,
And kindling eye balls with new luster shined.
No walls they need, to stay the impending foe;
Yet, with light labor, swift the barriers grow;
Hope high in view displayed unmeasured spoil,
Soothed every pain, and lessened every toil.
As thus serenely passed the cheerful day,
And care* and grief, oblivious rolled away,
At once shrill rang, from eastern woods afar,
The cry of foes, and growing sound of war.
The sporting warriors, prompt at dread alarms,
Ceased from each game, and braced for fight their arms;
Over eastern fields, with rapid steps they hied.
And bands conjoining swelled the embattled pride.
From the wood hastening, flew, with wild surprise,
Two timorous youths, and raised lamenting cries,
With trembling voice, they said -- Of naught afraid,
Through yonder grove, with easy course, we strayed;
A savage band, by twining shrubs concealed,
Burst on our path, and half enclosed the field.
Amazed we flew. Snared by the tangling vine,
Our heedless Partner fell; of Simeon's line;
He^on his name: they seized him fallen; in vain
Uplifting cries, and bore him over the plain.
Quick, at the sound, a warrior raised his voice --
It Is my own son; the spring of all my joys --
Haste, haste, brave friends, my darling Helon save;
Nor yield your faithful Shallum childless to the grave.
The train, inspired, with nimbler footsteps flew;
Each pressed his shield, and each his falchion drew;
The youths, before them, showed the sadden'd way,
Where the fell heathens bore their hapless prey;
Where the close thicket wrapped the ambush'd force,
And bending shrubs, and footsteps marked their course.
Thence the glad train, with ease, the foe pursued,
And hoping, hastening, scower'd the devious wood.
Now, where all-anxious through the favoring shade,
Their hapless prize the heathens swift conveyed;
Weening, ere morn, through Oran's camp to bear
The youth, with tidings of the expected war,
The heroes rushed: his friends glad Helon knew;
Loud rose his voice; the warriors eager flew;
While the bold heathens stayed their useless flight,
New-brac'd their shields, and strung their nerves for fight.
Shrill through the woods the clash of arms arose;
These, fix^d to hold, and fierce to rescue, those;
The forest shook. In front, confessed to view,
Full on the heathens raging Shallum flew.
One with his lance, and one with griding steel,
He slew: the victims gave a hideous yell.
To his son's voice he winged his furious course;
Naught stayed his speed, and naught withstood his force.
Where two huge heathens struggling Helon led,
He wildly sprang; one flew; the other bled:
With frantic joy he seized his raptured hand,
And urged him trembling toward the friendly band.
There scarce arrived, a javelin pierced his side;
He groaned, he sunk, grew pale, and fainting died.
Aghast, his darling's fate the fire beheld,
Then rushed delirious round the woody field;
On the fled heathens stretched his raging course,
O'ertook, and singly drove the gathered force:
Three fierce he flew; the rest, in devious ways,
Fled over the field, and 'scap'd the hero's chase.
At length returned, with a deep, bursting groan,
In strong embrace he clasped his hapless son.
Pressed to his bosom, bore him over the plain,
And* mid the weeping warriors, sought the camp again*
THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK V.

ARGUMENT.
^vening. Irad and Selima walk out on the plain southward of the camp, and
begin a conversation concerning the nature and designation of the visible
heavens. Original state of Man, and of Creation. Ref^^ctions on the fall of
Man. Wisdom and benevolence of the present system asserted. Threefold state of
man, emblematized in the butterfly. Fanciful ideas of Heaven. An old man, in
the habit of a beggar, sollicits alms of Irad* and is directed to repair to
H^zron. The old man informs him that his request was but a pretense, and he
came out of the Camp to stimulat^ him to the war, and uses a variety of
arguments to accomplish the design. He retires, and Irad and Selima, terrified
by the appearance of a meteor, return to the Camp. Morning. Irad goes to his
father, and with earnest solicitations, obtains leave to go out to the next
battle. He communicates the intelligence to Selima. A thousand young volunteers
choose him their leader. Evening. Joshua sends Zim^i with a body of troops to
lie in ambush on the western side of (...).

THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK V.
NOW sunk the sun beneath the western main,
And deepening twilight shaded every plain:
To the known tent untroubled Irad sped,
And forth, with proffered hand, Selima led.
Through southern fields they traced their easy way,
And love, and rapture, changed the night to day.
The western beam decayed: the expanding sky
Spread clear, and boundless, to the attentive eye:
Scarce filled, the moon ascends the vaulted even,
And slow behind rolls on the pride of heaven;
With joy, the unenvious planet^ round her play,
^oin their glad beams, and swell the mimic day;
From star to star the mingling luster flies;
Unmeasured beauty clothes the lucid skies;
Hushed in calm silence sleeps the world serene,
And floating splendour gilds the shadowy scene.
Round the mixed glories of the spacious sky
The pair instinctive turned a raptured eye,
From scene to sc^ne with rising wonder ran,
And mild, with accent sweet, the maid began --
In yon broad field what scenes of glory shine!
The bright effusions of a source divine!
Great as the hand, that formed yon lucid way!
Fair as the morn, that opened immortal day!
In earliest youth, when first my feeble mind
In nature's works celestial power divined,
To those gay regions fancy stretched her flight,
And roved, and sported, mid the gems of light.
For whom, I cried, ascend yo^ glowing fires?
What favorite firstborn of the ange^ic choirs?
Those azure curtains? that sublime abode?
A tent of glory for some darling God!
Say, loveliest Prince! for thy superior mind
Walks, with sure step, in wisdom's path refined,
Why rove so far the unnumber'd flames on high?
Why cast their endless beauty through the sky?
Is yon blue frame, hat limits morn and even,
The sapphire pavem^nt of some nobler heaven?
Are stars but gems of unborn light, that spread
With dust of gold the streets where angels tread?
Or if for man these works of glory shine,
For earth-born reptiles furniture (...);
Say why so s^range the acts of H^aven appear,
There such bright pomp^ such wondrous meanness here.
The Youth returned -- Fair as those lucid eyes,
All lovely maid! thy bright ideas rise.
In vain proud man, wi^h self-applause runs over
His arts of Egypt, and his Ea^^ern lore,
Thy soul, on nature's pinion^, takes her flight,
And* self-instructed, gains a nobler height.
When from the deep* ascended earth, and heaven,
To man, sole heir, the mighty (...) was given.
Un^i^e his sons, no guilt his mind (...);
His life, his lim^^^* no fierce diseases stormed;
Nor d^ath's cold poison pal^d his growing bloom,
Nor knew his feet the journey to the (...).
(...) beauty's purple splendour round him played;
Immortal Health his vi^^^ous limi^^ arrayed;
(...) of the (...),
(...), and b^ossom'^ in his eye.
Arrayed in endless light, his infant mind
S^one with fair truth, and glowed with grace refined;
Her robe sky-tinctur'd, Virtue round him threw;
Unchanging jubilee his passions knew;
Heaven's living* lamp, with clear, and constant shine,
Sunn'd the pure regions of the world within.
Far other glories then arose to view;
Parts answering parts, and beauties ever new.
With strong, bright charms the heaven angelic shined;
The varying prospect charmed the enchanted mind;
Soft strains of rapture bade all either ring;
The gales, all fragrance, shed the light of spring;
From stars, from moonbeams, life's sweet influence flew,
Inspired the streams, and glowed in fostering dew;
Bade with strong life the purpling fruits refine,
And warmed the bosom with a youth divine.
Then reigned fair Love, the immortal bliss of heaven;
Then social angels came on clouds of even:
Here traced new wonders of the omniscient Mind,
Strange to their world, and first on earth designed;
In countless forms, where love and beauty glowed,
And stamped a rival of the bright abode.
His hand such nature to the man assigned,
His form so tempered, and so wrought his mind.
All gave delight; where spring displayed her prime;
Or where blank winter froze the desert clime:
The vale's soft pride; the flower's etherial form;
The mountain's grandeur, and the solemn storm.
But when foul guilt debased the beauteous mind,
The skies grew dim, and sickening nature pined.
With converse sweet* no more kind angels came:
No (...) morning shed the eternal beam;
No more from starry realms life's influence fell,
And pe^ce, and Eden bade the world farewell.
Yet still with clear, though faded luster, glowed
The love, the greatness, of a bounteous GOD.
What though cold east winds withered all the plain;
Though blasts, and mildews shrunk the golden grain;
Pale evening's, skirts the frost, and damp o'erhung;
Air bred disease, and worms the fruitage stung:
Still over the mountains stars serenely rise;
Still the soft moonbeam trembles from the skies;
The sun, fair image of unborrow'd day,
Lights heaven, and earth, and cheers the boundless sea;
Reviving seasons, crowned with luster, roll,
And plains of plenty glad the expecting soul.
These splendid scenes surprise thy curious mind;
For worms too noble, and for foes too kind.
But not too noble, or too kind, they shine,
The works of wisdom, power, and love, divine.
From morn's gay bounds, to skirts of distant even,
They teach the hand, and spread the name, of Heaven;
In beauty, grandeur, make JEHOVAH known,
But mark, with faded charms, a world undone.
Yet these, could man the common bliss pursue,
Would gentle peace, and smiling joy, renew,
Light, with soft-beaming hope, the cheerful day,
And drive grim war, and cankering hate, away.
Thus spoke the Prince. The tender maid replies,
While her sad bosom heaves unbidden sighs.
Fair scenes of bliss thy living words disclose,
Realms of gay youth, and times of sweet repose.
Oh had our fire! but hence, ye wishes vain!
No fancied joy shall edge returning pain --
Yet too, too blissful is the fond employ,
To nurse gay hope, and dream unreal joy;
Abroad in fields of airy light to roam,
And fly the envenomed grief, that lurks at home.
Ah, had the fatal fruit, untasted hung,
What bliss had brightened! and what glory sprung!
In gentlest union these blessed hands had joined,
One wish informed us, and one soul intwin'd;
On some lone hill our envied mansion stood,
There rich perfumes in morning breezes flowed;
Sweet Peace around it waved her balmy wing,
And Youth unchanging dressed eternal spring.
There, O blessed lot! each innocent employ
Had formed, and cherished mild, domestic joy:
The walk all-pleasing, virtuous love refined;
Our flocks, our prospects, soothed the improving mind;
For me, the garden opened its spicy bloom;
For thee, soft vesture whitened over the loom;
Our growing bliss the sun delayed to see,
And the poor heathen been as blessed as we.
Ah dire reverse! while round this field of gore,
War's hoarse rough-grating clangors ceaseless roar;
While sons, and fathers, in one hour are slain,
And each bright youth must tempt the fatal plain;
While the sad virgin sees, with wearied eye,
No hope remains her, but to weep, and die;
While pain, and grief, and half-form'd joy invade,
And suns gay-rising set in mournful shade.
Kind, tender maid! the smiling Prince returned --
The hapless fall how sweetly have thou mourned!
Thy voice, all music, wins the raptured ear;
Yet more persuasive drops that melting tear.
But, O bright maid! by strong affections driven,
Let no fond wish oppose the choice of Heaven.
To man's first guilt ten thousand ills adjoin'd,
Writhe the torn limbs, and agonize the mind:
Pain, famine, toil, the sword, the ruthless wave,
Care, envy, broken faith, sad sorrow, and the grave.
Yet GOD's high acts unerring wisdom guides,
And boundless love his every choice decides.
Hence all events, and hence all beings right,
Best in their places, to best ends unite.
Hence from small ills unmeasured good shall flow;
Hence joys unnumber'd spring from every woe:
Through the vast whole the eternal glories shine,
One great I AM, all-beauteous, all divine.
Thus the great Prophet sung; and often my sire
With these blessed truths my tender heart would fire,
When, won to virtue, on his lips I hung,
And learned pure wisdom from his friendly tongue.
Heaven's high behest, had faithless man obeyed,
A peaceful earth his eye had still surveyed;
Mild hours and seasons soft over nature run;
His sons, in millions, spread to lands unknown;
To Eden's bowers the filial nations come,
Hailed their great fire, and owned their happier home.
While from his throne, supreme of all below,
He saw well-pleased, his mighty kingdom grow;
His subjects children, love his potent sway,
And one vast household spread to every sea.
But, sprung from earth, and still to earth confined,
No fairer bliss had flowed for poor mankind:
No law had given the high, stupendous claim,
To soar, and brighten in the immortal flame.
Now to those climes where, 'twixt delight and pain,
Expands, untravers'd, night's eternal main,
Worms, born of dust, may point their lofty way,
And seize the bliss of ever-rising day.
Often on the flower, embosom'd in perfume,
Thou see gay butterflies in beauty bloom;
With curious eve, the wondrous insect scan,
By Heaven ordained a threesold type of man.
First from the dunghill sprang the shining form,
And crawled to view, a hideous, loathsome worm;
To creep, with toil, his inch-long journeys, cursed;
The ground his mansion, and his food the dust:
To the next plant, his moment over, he drew,
And built his tomb, and turned to earth anew.
Often, from the leaf depending, have thou seen
Their tombs, with gold bedropp'd, and clothed in green;
There slept the expectant, 'till the plastic beam
Purged his vile dross, and bade his splendors flame.
Then burst the bonds: at once in glory rise
His form etherial, and his changing dies,
Full on the lucid morn his wings unfold,
Starr'd with strong light, and gay in living gold;
Through fields of air at large the wonder flies,
Wafts on the beams, and mounts the expanded skies,
Over flowery beauties plumes of triumph waves;
Imbibes their fragrance, and their charms out-braves;
The birds his kindred, heaven his mansion, claims,
And shines, and wantons, in the noonday flames.
So man, poor worm! the nursling of a day!
Springs from the dust, and dwells in humble clay;
Around his little molehill doomed to creep,
To drag life's load, and end his toil with sleep.
In silence to the grave his form descends,
And waits the trump, that time and nature ends,
There strength imbibes, the beam of heaven to bear:
There learns, refined, to breathe its fragrant air;
Of life the bloom, of youth the splendour, gains,
And, clothed in beauty, hopes empyreal plains.
Then, winged with light, the deathless man shall rise,
Sail through yon stars, and soar from skies to skies;
See heavens, over heavens, beneath him lessening roll,
And feel the Godhead warm his changing soul;
From beauty's fount inhale the immortal ray,
And grow from light to light, in cloudless day;
Mid morn's fair legions, crowned with grace, be known,
The peer of angels, and of GOD the son.
But O what scenes in that far region glow!
What crowns of patience! what rewards of woe!
From yon tall hill, when morn's inviting air
To woodland wandering lured thy chosen fair,
Thou know how sweet gay prospects to descry,
And catch new Edens with the ravished eye.
In living green, the lawns at distance lay,
Where snowy flocks moved round in vernal play:
High tower'd the nodding groves; the cliffs sublime
Left the low world, and dared the assaults of time;
Huge domes heaved haughty to the morning fires,
And the sun trembled round a thousand spires:
All heaven was mild; and borne from subject vales,
A cloud of fragrance cheered the enchanting gales.
Such pleasing scenes if this drear earth supply,
What scenes, what glories bloom beyond the sky!
There with strong life the plains immortal glow;
There Beauty bids her streams of rapture flow:
There changing, brightening, reigns the extatic power;
Smiles in each fruit, and burns in every flower;
In solemn domes, with growing pride, aspires;
Gems with fair stars, and robes in living fires;
Round the trees wantons; on the mountains blooms;
Charms in new songs, and melts in strange perfumes.
And O, of liquid light what seas extend!
What skies impurple! and what stars ascend!
But cease, my tongue! nor headlong rush too near
The sun, that kindles heaven's eternal year.
When great Messiah shall those gates unbar,
Where grief r^cedes, and pain, and death, and war;
Then freed from dross, from every stain refined,
And dressed in all the elegance of mind,
To her own mans^on shall thy Soul aspire,
And add new raptures to the sainted choir.
With love divine thy heart has learned to glow;
Smiled at each joy, and wept at every woe;
In each soft station amiably stood,
And sh^wn the bright amb^tion to be good;
The best, the loveliest daughter, sister, friend;
Thy life all virtue, and the heavens thine end.
Scarce, of thy years, can blooming cherubs claim
A purer conscience, or a fairer name.
Pleased as he spoke, an aged Form drew near,
The moon-beams whitening over his silver hair.
His quivering limbs a tattered garb arrayed;
A staff his slow, and faltering footsteps stayed --
Oh youth! he said, in wealth thy lot is cast;
Let humble Poverty thy bounty taste.
Large as thy treasure be thy heart to give;
Thy bread impart, and bid my children live.
Sire! cried the Youth, to Hezron's tent repair;
The poor, unfriended, never entered there.
To share his wealth the Heaven-sent strangers come;
There orphans, beggars, find a constant home.
His pious acts in sweet memorial rise,
And prayers of thousands bless him from the skies.
Returned the sage. To life's far distant end,
On thee may Judah's envied bliss descend!
From Asher's race I spring, nor of thy sire,
Nor thee, fair Prince! or clothes, or food require.
My highest wish the gifts of Heaven exceed;
Though small my portion, yet far less my need.
But O loved Youth! my faithful counsels hear;
Let hoary Age command thy listening ear.
Thy growth, thy beauty, nobler than thy peers,
Mine eyes attentive marked from earliest years:
I saw thy limbs in fair proportion rise,
And thy face smile the image of the skies.
Thy mind all-lovely, every voice proclaimed;
For sense distinguished, and for virtue famed;
Bounteous and brave thy heart; thy tongue discreet;
Thy manners courteous, and thy temper sweet.
Often on these plains when gathering armies spread,
The long van darkened, and proud ensigns played;
Absorbed, I saw thee war's gay splendors view,
Trace the deep files, and moving chiefs pursue;
I saw the martial flame instinctive rise,
And growing lightnings tremble in thine eyes;
I saw, and smiled; and Israel's voice approved,
That destined empire to thine arm beloved.
But still, impelled by strong desire to find
If Fame well sung the beauties of thy mind,
I watched thy steps, when evening hid the main,
Assumed these rags and sought thee on the plain.
For know, fair Prince! in Truth's unbiased state,
The proud are little, and the lowly great,
From man, man claims, of high, or low degree,
The courteous manners, I have found in thee.
Now over thy head have twice ten summers ^un;
The Youth is ripened, and the man begun:
Thy shapely limbs are sinew'd into force,
To hurl the dart; to speed the nimble course:
Yet on what plain in triumph have thou stood?
When, bold and active, dared the strife of blood?
No scar of thine attests the patriot wound;
Thine arm inglorious, and thy wreaths unbound:
Should thou, when Joshua sleeps, the scepter bear;
How shall thy untaught mind conduct to war?
How know what counsels wisdom bids embrace?
What strength to arm? the ambush where to place?
Where on the field to stretch the dreadful wing?
Or with what words of fire the languid arm to string?
Rise then, brave Youth! from ease unhonour'd rise!
Let sun-bright glory tempt thine eager eyes!
When next approaching combat threats the field
Seize the strong lance, and grasp the sheltering shield;
If Hezron grant, the van's bright station claim,
And leave the foremost in the chase of fame!
Ill fits vile ease a Prince of worth divine,
Whose countless graces fair as angels shine;
At home, unnotic'd, stretched in sloth, to lie,
While friends, while fathers toil, and bleed, and die;
Line 323. Twice ten summers) This is a mistake of the Sage.
To share the spoils distained with others' gore,
A mean, false plunderer, when the battle's over.
Then while to war thy bold companions run,
While deeds of glory, wreaths of life, are won;
On the dread sword while Israel's cause suspends;
While empire victory, ruin flight attends;
While in full view the field of promise lies,
And the brave arm shall win the unmeasured prize;
Demand thy share, thy share of danger claim;
The toils of danger give the crown of fame.
To thee, through tribes, through nations yet to come,
Let grateful Israel owe her prosperous doom;
Her endless rule; her land in beauty dressed;
Her stream of glory, and her ages ble^^'d.
Thus, in far distant times, when Joshua's name
Shall pass, all-fragrant, down the tide of fame;
When future heroes to their sons s^all tell
How Hezron triumphed, and how Sihon fell;
Combined with theirs, thy deeds shall waft along,
Swell the glad theme, and mingle in the song.
No shameful sloth, no dread of manly toil,
No mean, false wish to share in others' spoil,
No love of ease, the generous Youth replied --
To tents confine me, and to Hezron's side.
Far other wish my glowing mind inspires;
Fame wings my thoughts, and war my bosom fires.
When Glory's sons assembling hosts array,
The extatic view bears all my soul away.
My pulse beats high; my bristling hair ascends;
My heaving heart a thrilling anguish rends:
Sighs, prayers, and tears confess the growing pain;
But sighs, and prayers, and melting tears are vain.
By love, beyond my highest claim impelled,
My sire constrains me from the embattled field.
Youth, frowns the chief, to ruin heedless flies;
From arms refrain, 'till years shall make thee wise.
Go tell thy sire, the kindling sage returned,
Thy hated absence Israel long have mourned.
In forceful language, ask their wondering eyes,
Why sunk in sloth, their darling Irad lies,
Their voice demands thee to the important plain,
To generous toils, and glories bought with pain:
They pant, they burn, to see thy splendors shine,
Thy falchion triumph, and thy garlands twine.
Not fame alone, but duty points the way,
And truth and virtue chide the dull delay.
This said, the Ancient over the plain withdrew,
And, fading from the moon-beam, left the view.
As lost in silence stood the wondering pair,
Or mazed, bewildered, roved they knew not where,
A cloud ascending eastern skies overspread,
Involved the moon, and wrapped the world in shade:
A dim-seen luster clothed all heaven around,
And long, black shadows floated over the ground.
As deep and solemn the far whirlwind roars,
Or waves run rumbling under cavern'd shores,
With murmuring noise, over western mountains came
A broad, and dark-red meteor's awful flame:
Far over the woods, and plains, its sanguine hair
Streamed wild, and dreadful, on the burdened air.
As eastern groves its lessening light absorb,
Like thousand thunders, bursts the rending orb;
Wide-shooting flames the glimmering sky surround;
A gloomy glory spreads the twilight ground;
Loud over the world a long, hoarse echo roars,
And sad Canaan groans through all her shores.
Quick to the camp returned the astonished pair,
And half, in broken slumbers, lost their care.
Over anxious Irad hovering visions played,
Called up ^air scenes, or dismal terrors shed;
Often from his co^ch, in act to smite, he sprang,
And often his voice in shouts imperfect rang.
When first through broken clouds the morning shined,
In purpose firm he fixed his doubtful mind;
At Hezron's feet, with graceful reverence stood,
And claimed the blessing, ever with joy bestowed.
With dawning smiles, he blessed his lovely son,
And sweet complacence round his aspect shone.
Will Hezron bend his ear? the favorite cries --
Speak, my beloved -- the indulgent sire replies.
Thou know my bosom feels the warrior's flame,
Sighs for gay arms, and pants for generous fame;
For Israel weeps, to aid her cause aspires,
And burns tumultuous with resistless fires.
When next our host the shining falchion wield,
Blessed sire! command me to the embattled field.
Youths, over whose heads a few more months have run
In sport, the peers, the rivals of thy son,
In glory's bright career with heroes join,
And their fair names even now begin to shine.
Grant, best of parents! grant one blissful day,
And threefold duty shall thy love repay.
Why do thou bring -- the anxious sire replied --
The dread request, my love has often denied?
Why must thy sire his favorite treasure lose?
Why will thy heart the path of danger choose?
That path, concealed where various evil lies,
And the brave perish, while the dastard flies.
More circling summers have those youths beheld;
Th'accustom'd age commands them to the field.
Scarce nineteen suns thine infant eyes have seen;
Secure from shame, enjoy thy hours serene.
Let truth, let wisdom be thy virtuous care;
And the sweet converse of thy darling fair.
Still with thy partners draw the mimic field;
The javelin hurl, the heavy falchion wield:
So taught their use, shall thou, when battles join.
With fairer names, with veteran heroes shine*
In marshaled hosts a nobler office claim,
And stride more swiftly in the chase of fame.
Returned the favorite -- To thy faithful son
Whenever thy choice, indulgent sire, was known,
No counter choice unduteous words confessed,
But my sole answer was obedience blessed.
When last mild evening closed the cheerful day,
Over southern plains I traced my careless way;
There as I gazed the works of Heaven around,
A chief, of Asher's race, my footsteps found --
Youth, cried the hoary sage, the changing sun
Beholds, well pleased, thy riper years begun.
The scenes of dangerous war thy breast demand,
And thy loved nation asks thine aiding hand;
Their eyes require thee on the hostile plain,
Nor let a nation claim thy aid in vain.
Go tell thy sire, while friends, while brothers die,
It Is shame, it is guilt, in torpid ease to lie.
His duty bids him dress thy limbs in arms,
And thine strait summons to the trump's alarms.
Haste, virtuous Youth! thy nation's voice obey,
And fly, where Glory points her envied way.
Ah sire beloved! to shame, to fatal shame
Yield not thy darling Irad's opening name.
Think, best of parents! with what stings of gall,
Contempt and scorn a generous mind appall.
Save me from piercing scorn; from ruin save;
From dastards snatch me; rank me with the brave;
Thy nation's call, more loud than thunders hear;
Though Irad fail, let Israel gain thine ear.
With anxious look, the unwilling sire replies,
The tears fast-streaming from his reverend eyes --
O son beloved! beyond expression dear!
The ground of every joy! and every fear!
This painful tale disparts my troubled soul,
And bids my tears in large effusion roll.
How can my heart to savage war resign
My wealth, my boast, my glory, all that is mine;
The child, the joy, the image, of my mind;
The best, the only trace, I leave behind;
To prayers long-tried, all-fervent, kindly given;
The richest bounty of indulgent Heaven?
From infant years thy lovely form to raise,
To lure thy mind to all that merits praise;
Against fatal snares thy youthful heart to arm,
With truth illumine, and with virtue warm,
Ten thousand sighs I breathed, ten th^^^^nd prayers,
Watched countless nights, and felt ^^^umber'd cares.
Each opening wish, each rising th^^ght, I scann^^;
Each newborn virtue nursed with fostering hand:
The flower etherial saw, with rapture, bloom,
Glow with strong light, and charm with choice perfume*
And each glad morn beheld my praises rise,
A grateful tribute to the bounteous skies.
As, touched with joy, thy beauties I behold,
Thy limbs invigorate, and thy thoughts unfold;
Thy pure complacence eye the all-lovely Mind;
Thy love, thy goodness flow to all mankind;
Thy aims expand beyond the flight of youth;
Thy tongue unvarying yield the voice of truth;
Thy cheerful bounty make the poor thy care;
Thy spotless mind affect so bright a fair;
Thy sweet obedience every wish forerun,
And my bliss double in my darling son;
Too blessed, I wish, my pains, my toils reviewed,
Each pain repeated, and each toil renewed.
But chief, when that bright fair, who gave thee breath,
Sunk, pale and hapless, in the arms of death,
Thy hand so gently soothed her long decay;
So sweetly guileful lured her pains away;
Whole nights, whole days, sustained her drooping head;
Dried her sad tears, and watched her weary bed;
Like some mild angel, sent from pitying skies,
Shed dew^ slumbers on her languid eyes;
Illum'd the grave, seren'd the rugged way,
And cheered each fainting Hope of future day:
Me from myself thy matchless duty stole,
And chained thee lovely to my inmost soul.
Now to far regions is that parent gone,
And, but for thee, thy sire were left alone:
From thee removed, no second self I know;
And, O blessed favorite! solitude is woe.
When winged, my sweet companion traced her flight,
A wildering gloom obscured the cheerful light;
Each joy was banished from my hapless doom,
And not a wish remained me, but the tomb.
Her tent, forsaken, seemed in shades to mourn;
Her empty seat implored her blessed return:
Friends graced my board; her vacant place I viewed;
Down rushed the tear, and every pang renewed.
Through distant fields I roam'd; the fields were sad;
No more her presence bade the flowers be glad:
A solemn twilight round all nature spread,
Drear as dun caves, that house the silent dead.
Alone in crowds I stood, in fields alone;
My hope, my friend, my lovely solace gone.
But thou wast left. In thy angelic face
Smiled her loved image, glowed her matchless grace:
To thee I flew; and, in thy duty, viewed
Her power to charm, her wish to bless, renewed.
That peace, the world beside could never give,
I found in thee, and loved again to live.
Too rich, too great, I own my Heaven-lent store;
On earth, if thou may live, I ask no more.
Shall then thy sire that dread persuasion hear?
Or feel the urgence of that forceful tear?
Ah! how can Hezron thy loved life destroy,
And yield the insatiate grave my only joy?
For, O fond Irad! all the pride of state,
Fair dreams, and painted bubbles, of the great,
No real joy, no gentle peace, contain,
But gay deceit, and undiscovered pain.
Whatever in Wisdom prompts a wish to live,
Soft, calm domestic scenes alone can give.
Should thou be slain, even these must ceaseless mourn;
No joy betides me, and no hopes return;
A poor, despairing stranger, here I stay,
'Till Death's loud voice shall summon me away.
But ah! to combat Israel Irad calls --
The piercing sound my struggling heart appalls --
Was all my bliss for Israel's weal bestowed?
And is a nation's voice the voice of GOD?
Go then, my son, may he thy bosom guard,
To triumph lead thee, and with fame reward;
Bright, and more bright, extend thy prosperous doom,
Or speed my footsteps to an early tomb.
Thus the great chief; and rising as he spoke*
In his right hand a sword suspended took;
Forth from the sheath the blade refulgent drew,
And his sad eye balls kindled at the view.
Behold, brave youth -- with earnest voice he cried --
Thine is the sword, thy sire's, thy grandsire's pride;
By death of kings, and generous chiefs, renowned,
With wreaths ennobled, and with triumphs crowned.
When Egypt's sons, on proud Sabea's plains,
By Moses guided, poured their countless trains;
High in his haughty car a chieftain rode,
Bore down whole troops, and rolled through brooks of blood;
Deep in his breast, while thousands round him fell,
Thy generous Grandsire lodged this shining steel*
Then ceased the fight; Sabea's millions fled,
And the earth groaned beneath the piles of dead.
Line 589. Egypt's sons) See the account of the event referred to in Josephus.
To Jahaz' deathless field when Sihon drew,
When combat thickened, and when dangers grew,
This arm, this falchion clave the monarch's side,
And low on earth abas'd his impious pride.
From Hezron's hand the honored gift embrace,
Dread of thy foes, and glory of thy race;
And while thy arm their weapon learns to wield,
Let the same spirit prompt thee to the field.
Each wild excess, each useless danger shun;
But first in virtue's course auspicious run:
Outstrip thy peers; To Joshua's height aspire;
Let real glory all thy wishes sire:
Let mine, my sire's, my tribe's, my nation's fame
Imbibe new splendors from thy added name.
Yet not one fear my b^ding mind alarms,
Lest Irad's deeds distain his parent's arms;
I know thy generous mind; and, fore'd to yield,
Assured, behold thee grace the embattled field.
And oh ^ will thou, whose hand from every foe
My life preserved, and soothed in every woe,
My darling son defend! from thee he came;
Scarce born, I gave him to the eternal Name;
Thine are his virtues; round his youthful head
A guardian shield may thy good angel spread.
Thus spoke the chief. In Irad's feeling soul
A strange, tumultuous joy began to roll:
As often to unfold his grateful heart he tried,
The suffocated sounds in silence died.
Down dropped the sword; and strait, with homage due,
The Youth enkindling from the tent withdrew;
Quick to the lovely fair-one traced his way,
And strove the tumult of his thoughts to allay.
Her in the tent, with maidens compassed round,
Select companions of her sports, he found.
There, sweetly welcomed with instinctive smiles,
He smoothed his face with new, but harmless wiles,
And, while soft art her tender mind prepared,
His own design, his (...) consent declared.
With guarded lips he spoke; but dire surprise
Pierced her sad heart, and gloom'd her starry eyes;
With one deep sigh, she felt her strength decay,
Slid to the ground, and breathed her life away.
Quick to her aid the Youth impassioned flew:
And, with the virgins, bade her life renew;
Again revived the splendour of her eye,
And tinged her cheek with health's ^ranscendent die.
O best beloved! with tender voice he said --
Let not such anguish wound my beauteous maid!
Let cheerful hope thy timorous thoughts inspire,
And thine eye languish with a brighter sire!
When over my head a few short days shall roll,
My hastening feet must reach the appointed goal*
To manhood grown, the law, from heaven revealed,
Resistl^ss calls me to the imbattled field.
If Israel's sons my falchion earlier claim,
And kindly summon to the path of fame,
Why should thou mourn? it is duty points the way;
When duty calls us, safety bids obey.
Thou know when evening last the skies attired,
The sage, reproving, generous thoughts inspired;
First from his mouth my nation's choice I knew;
And swift to war my soul obsequious flew:
No place, no hope, to vile delay was given;
The call of nations is the call of Heaven.
Led by his voice, I trust his guardian care;
With equal ease he saves in peace, and war.
The same good hand, that through the woodland shade,
To friends, to safety, loveliest Mina led,
Though thousands fall* may Irad's bosom shield,
And wing the averted javelin through the field.
Thus he, with softest voice, and fondest eye --
Then stopped; and anxious, hoped the maid's reply.
She, plunged in grief, and lost in dread amaze,
Sat silent, solemn, fixed in mournful gaze:
With tenderest action on her looks he hung,
And thus vain solace tunes again his tongue*
But, doomed to fall, should Heaven my life demand,
And death betide me from a heathen's hand,
I fall in virtue's cause. Far happier doom,
In that blessed path, to find a speedy tomb!
Than, lost in sports, or sunk in shameful ease,
To drag a worthless life, and swell in glorious days.
And O bright maid! without one guilty fear,
My thoughts can view resistless death draw near.
In that far clime, where joy extends her reign,
My pinioned soul shall spring to life again;
Strong with empyreal youth, shall trace her way,
And join the nations of immortal day.
Thence, when thy form is summoned to the tomb,
Perchance my spirit, winged with light, shall come,
Hail thy release from toil, and grief, and pain,
And raptured guide thee over the trackless main;
In bonds etherial there our souls be joined,
And prove the extatic nuptials of the mind.
With silent, sad, and discontented air,
And face averted, sat the listening fair.
While the deep woe her feeling bosom mourned,
With a long, heavy sigh, she thus returned.
With boding heart I heard the sage's tale,
But felt fond hopes the dire design would fail;
That Hezron's choice, so often tried in vain,
Would still confine thee from the fatal plain.
Yet thy loved maid, with gentle words, designed
To change thy wish, and sooth thy eager mind*
But my soul trembled at the dreadful light,
And every sense was lost in wild affright.
Now to dire fate my fondest hope must yield,
While empty fame allures thee to the field.
But O blessed youth! by soft entreaties won,
Where duty calls not, hideous danger shun.
Let not thy ardour fame's high impulse feel,
Tempt nearer fight, and try the deathful steel.
The fatal front to veteran warriors give;
Be thy rich boon, thy blessed reward, to live.
I know thy bosom burns with glory's fire;
I know what visions war's bright beams inspire.
I fear, would Heaven the cause were less to fear,
Lest thy bold footsteps headlong rush too near;
Lest, winged with zeal, on instant death thou fly,
And leave thy hapless maid to weep, and die.
For ah! on Irad all my joys suspend;
Grow with thy bliss, and with thy life extend.
Should then dread war compel thee to the grave,
The sad, untimely portion of the brave,
Whither, ah whither can Selima fly?
Where find a friend, to bid her early die?
Robbed of thy face, the world's a desert drear;
The house of pain, and grief, and cankering care;
Forlorn, and friendless, life's lone path I tread,
And ask no lot, but with the silent dead.
Nor all those joys, thou know to paint so fair,
Can sooth sad woe, or lighten dark despair.
With thee conjoined, ^ claim my only doom,
Alike well-pleased, or here, or in the tomb.
Scarce would my soul, without thee heaven explore,
Where the first joy shall be to part no more.
Oh, would the Chief thy anguish'd maiden hear,
And mark thy station in the humbler rear!
There no fell heathen would thy life annoy;
Nor fatal danger threat Selima's joy:
'Till age, 'till art, from sure experience won,
Had taught thee caution's every wile to shun.
And then, ah then might peace our days serene;
War cease to rage, and foes no more be seen;
Bliss, in glad streams, around our land extend,
And every sigh, and grief, and terror end.
Thus spoke the saddening maid. With pleasing guile,
The tender Prince recalled her vanished smile;
With tales amusive lured her grief away,
And cheered her soul with hope's inlivening ray.
Meantime, through Israel spread the rumor far,
That matchless Irad joined the coming war.
Charmed with the tale, a bold and generous train
Of youths, his rivals, thronged the vacant plain;
And there, with one glad voice, the hero chose
To guide their footsteps against the expected foes.
To him too youths the flattering message bare;
With modest grace, and sweet, becoming air,
Surpised he heard, and while their hearts he won,
Assumed the trust, and owned the honor done.
And now decayed the sounds of busy day;
The sun descending beamed his final ray;
In starry grandeur rose the boundless night,
And tempered either with a milder light.
As through the host a general silence flowed,
To Zimri's tent the watchful Leader strode,
And thus -- Brave chief, to Ai direct thy course;
Thy sole command awaits a chosen force:
Through the deep forest steer thy southward way,
Where stately portals hail the setting day.
When first the clarion's voice to conf^ict calls,
Forsake thy ambush, and ascend her walls;
Over all her domes let sudden flames aspire,
And her proud turrets sink in hostile fire:
Then through her northern gates direct thy way,
And lead thy squadrons to the fierce affray.
I go -- the chief replied. The moon's broad round
Looked in full luster on the tented ground;
Fair over the shadowy hills she gently rose,
And showed a path for A^'s exulting foes.
In glimmering steel, a long, refulgent train,
Stretched in just ^iles, and dazzled all the plain.
Slow to the wood their fading steps they pressed,
The Chief, in silent joy, retired to rest.
THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK VI.

ARGUMENT.
Morning. Army assembles under the command of Hezron, and Joshua. Irad
sollicits, and obtains a post, in the front of the western division. Orders.
Israelites march. Army of Ai. Characters of Oran, and Carmi. Battle. Feigned
retreat of the Israelites. Hanniel's disobedience, and overthrow. Joshua
rescues him. Signal of return to battle. Joshua's address. Battle renewed.
Joshua retires, and gives Caleb the command. Exploits of Irad. Exploits of
Hezron, and of Caleb, Death of Ludon. Oran. Death of Hezron. Exploits of Carmi.
His death* Irad rallies Judah. Joshua descends to battle, kills Oran, and puts
the Heathens to flight. Zimri, having set Ai on fire, comes out upon the rear
of the enemy. Final rout, and overthrow of the Heathens. Irad's distress at the
fate of his father. Interview of Irad and Selima. Evening.

THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK VI.
NOW dawning light concealed the worlds on high,
And morn in beauty clothed the cloudless sky:
Loud over the field the trump's shrill sound began,
And swift to arms the startled thousands ran;
From all the camp burst forth the numerous throng,
Shook their tall spears, and waked the martial song;
Wide waved their plumes, refulgent flashed their shields,
And spiry banners trembled over the fields,
South of the camp, in two deep squares they stood,
And fierce for combat, faced the plain of blood.
Before the western band great Hezron rose,
Joy of his race, and terror of his foes:
Averse from pomp, in useful steel arrayed,
Pleased, his just ranks the mighty chief surveyed;
Pleased to the well-known field of combat drew;
When duty called, his soul no terror knew
Of equal strength battalions eastward stood,
And high in front exalted Joshua strode.
By nature fashioned millions to control,
In peace, in war, the great all-moving soul,
His mind expanded looked existence through;
His heart undaunted danger never knew;
With calm endurance, toils and fears engaged,
Climbed as they rose, and triumphed as they raged;
Patient, serene, as ills and injuries tried,
Meek without meanness, noble without pride,
Frank yet impovious, manly yet refined,
As the sun watchful, and as angels kind.
His Maker first, his conscience next he feared,
All rights kept sacred, and all laws revered;
Each wandering friend, with faithful friendship blamed;
Each foe applauded, as fair merit claimed:
Alike his kingdom wealth and want approved;
The noble reverenced, and the peasant loved.
His form majestic, seemed by GOD designed
The glorious mansion of so vast a mind:
An awful grandeur in his countenance sat;
Calm wisdom round him cast a solemn state:
His deathful arm no single force withstood;
His speed, his skill, no vigor could elude;
His piercing eye his mighty soul displayed;
His lofty limbs resplendent arms arrayed;
With varied lightenings his broad falchion shone,
And his clear buckler mocked the rising sun.
Fair in the front of Judah's manly train,
A young gay band, adorned the gladsome plain.
Bright was their steely mail; their polished shields
With dazzling splendour streaked the smiling fields;
Soft breezes sported through their plumy pride;
Their trembling falchions glittered by their side;
(...) their bravery, and their thirst of fame;
(...) age, their stature, and their arms the same.
(...) fair front, more beauteous than the morn,
(...) ^loudless splendors orient skies adorn,
First of his race exalted Irad stood,
His soul inflamed, his falchion drawn for blood;
On Joshua's step^ his ceaseless eye was turned,
Charmed with the pomp, that round the hero burned;
Tall was his stature, lofty was his mien,
His eye refulgent, and his brow serene:
Topp'd with two snowy plumes, that played in air,
A silver morion crowned his auburn hair:
Far over the train his form sublimely shone,
By nobler arms, and manlier beauty, known.
So, when calm spring invests the sparkling plain,
And night sails silent up the etherial main,
Round the broad azure stars unnumber'd glow,
And shadowy luster robes the world below:
Throned in the western heaven young Hesper shines;
His silver car to nether realms declines;
Over the gay mountains smiles his living eye,
And sinks, in splendour, down the gladsome sky.
From host to host the Chief majestic strode,
Inspired their hopes, and steeled their souls for blood;
Their perfect ranks his skilful eyes divide,
And his great bosom swells with manly pride.
As towered the western square he bent his way,
Where hoary Hezron led the long array;
To meet his steps impatient Irad ran,
And bent one knee before the godlike man;
And thus -- To youth will Joshua lend an ear? --
-- Speak my brave son; thine every wish declare --
-- With gentle voice, he said -- The Youth replied --
See that fair train, inwrapp'd in steely pride!
In war, though young, our bosoms pant to shine,
And feel the wish, that brighter glows in thine.
Give, best of men! this brave, though youthful band
In the bright front of charging fight to stand.
Oh, by my father's toils in fields of blood,
Whose love this freedom, and this sword bestowed,
Indulge this ardent wish! nor let thy frown
Quench a young flame, that emulates thy own.
I grant thy wish -- the mighty Chief replied,
Smiling superior over his manly pride, --
Go, first of youths, defend thy Maker's laws,
And lift the falchion, in thy country's cause.
May GOD's good hand thy tender footsteps guard,
With caution bless thee, and with fame reward!
He spoke, and kindly raptured Irad reared;
His swimming eye the grateful mind declared;
Swift he returned, on high his shield displayed,
Shook his blue sword, and thought the fight delayed.
Near the blessed scene enraptured Hezron stood,
And life ran nimbler through his languid blood;
Charmed with the kind regard, to Irad given,
He kneeled to earth, and blessed all-bounteous Heaven,
That Heaven which gave, his every wish to crown,
The Chief to Israel, and to him the son.
Now, ranged for combat, wait the warrior bands,
And his brave leaders Joshua thus commands --
'Till this right hand exalt the javelin bright,
Let every rank conduct a mimic flight:
Slow, firm, and close, be moved the fair retreat;
Nor winged with ruin wild, and foul defeat:
Meantime a missive death let arrows rain,
And slings unnumber'd tempest all the plain.
But when the javelin's beams in either burn,
Swift to the fight let every rank return;
Each vigorous arm the sword's broad terrors rear,
Or hurl the vengeance of the slaughtering spear;
Brace firm the spacious shield; disdain to fly;
Rush to glad conquest, or with glory die.
He spoke: over southern plains, in long array,
To Ai's high walls the squadrons bent their way.
Undaunted Ai, the approaching storm beheld,
And roused her heroes to the darkening field;
Her chiefs command, her northern gates unsold,
Bright arms burst forth, and hosts to fight are rolled;
Like gloomy clouds, the blackening thousands rise*
And shrill-voic'd clarions thunder in the skies.
Two warlike chiefs the embattled heathens guide,
Their forms majestic clothed in golden pride.
Wrapped in blue mail, insufferably vain,
With cruel front, that frowned a stern disdain,
Around, dark Oran cast a sanguine eye,
Waved his broad shield, and dared the avenging sky.
Grim in the van, with lofty stalk, he strode,
And shook his spear distained with drops of blood,
Blood, by his hand, in ancient battles shed,
In wasted realms, and fields bestrew'd with dead.
Sheathed, in his hall the crimsoned weapon lay,
Lest cankering time should cleanse the stain away;
There, often retired, he turned it over, and over,
And with fierce transport viewed the purple gore,
There called to mind the orphans of his spear,
Smiled horrid over the scene, nor knew to drop a tear.
Behind him darkly rolled a cloudy band,
Roused to the war from many a distant land,
With various arms in one great host combined,
And various banners streaming on the wind.
Against Joshua's host the chief imperious strode,
And with fond prescience hailed the scenes of blood;
A gloomy smile arrayed his shaggy brow,
And thus his horrid joy began to flow.
Blessed be the Gods, who gave this rapturous hour!
For this their fires shall many a youth devour;
While their gored children bleeding parents view,
And tears in vain their lifeless forms bedew.
Warriors rejoice; yon troop forgets the day,
When Ai's brave squadrons swept their host away;
Soon shall our spears be bathed in brooks of blood,
And fields grow fruitful with a genial flood.
Against Judah's hosts, enclosed in burnished arms,
With matchless bravery and unrivaled charms.
Ai's dauntless sons to fight young Carmi led,
And now the helm first sparkled on his head.
Moved by his ceaseless sighs for martial fame,
His royal fire the parent's fears o'ercame.
Reluctant sent him to the deathful plain,
And fondly hoped his lovely steps again.
There pleased with fame's imaginary charms,
He clasped the phantom in his eager arms,
On the bright glories turned a raptured eye,
And gazed, and gazed, and fancied bliss was nigh.
Now, mid the grandeur of the deep array,
A dreadful space in gloom tremendous lay:
No banners wave in air, nor trumpet's sound;
But silent terror saddens all the ground.
Loud burst the clarion's voice, and trembling far,
Shoot the broad ensigns over the frowning war;
As thousand stars through kindling either stream,
Bright showers of arrows cast a transient gleam:
From slings tempestuous countless pebbles rain,
Whizz through the skies, and whiten all the plain;
The shrill helms clatter, death pursues the wound,
And prostrate heroes clothed the sprinkled ground.
So, when red summer burns the sultry pole,
Over darkening hills a cloud's black volumes roll;
Hoarse rush the winds; hoarse drives the rattling hail,
Batters the craggs, and tempests all the vale;
Deep groan the forests, torn their branches fall,
And one tumultuous ruin buries all.
Ere the loose combat long suspense had hung.
"Retire," the great command around them rung;
Then, closely wedged, recedes the yielding fight,
And well-feign'd terror clothes the mimic flight.
Swift towered their yielding foes the heathens spring,
Their bucklers blaze, their flashing lances sing:
Often they rush forward, often the bands retreat;
For Israel's host disdains a base defeat;
From ranks behind unnumber'd arrows shower,
And stones unnumber'd down the concave pour;
Thick fall the foremost, clanging arms resound,
And streams of crimson die the embattled ground.
Meantime, fierce Hanniel, burning still for fame,
And sickening still at Joshua's envied name,
Deemed this the destined hour, to pluck the crown
From the Chief's head, and plant it on his own.
Oh heaven, he cried, shall Israel ever flee,
The dupe of cunning, and the coward's prey*
Must these pained eyes again our ruin view,
Curse our wild counsels, and our follies rue?
Come every generous chief, whose bosom brave
To foul disgrace prefers a hero's grave,
Join Hanniel's path; and soon proud Ai shall see
A few, bold warriors yet disdain to flee.
Whatever my voice commands, my hand shall dare,
My deeds unspotted, as my dictates fair; --
Far nobler doom, to fall in manly fight,
Than share, with titled names in splendid flight. --
This said, his course the hero forward bends,
No chief applauds him, and no chief attends:
Two vulgar warriors, sad rebuff to pride!
Alone rush on, and clamor at his side.
Their dauntless course their raptured foes descry,
And well-aim'd lances glitter through the sky;
Thick round the warriors, sinks the hissing steel,
And death's cold hand the brave attendants feel;
In Hanniel's thigh expands a painful wound,
And the stunned hero raging bites the ground.
Swift to his aid, impassioned, Joshua flew,
Though well proud Hanniel's dark designs he knew,
Heard all the vaunts, the close injustice saw,
And felt the infractions of his prudent law:
Yet now the chief lay weltering in his gore;
Foes in distress to him were foes no more --
Over the pale form he threw his guardian shield,
And bore him languid through the dreadful field:
Thick shower the stones, the flashing javelins sing;
And his bright arms with ceaseless murmurs ring.
Borne by four warriors over the distant plain,
Reluctant Hanniel sought the camp again:
There friendly plants his dying strength renew,
And sleep's soft influence aids the balmy dew.
While Joshua thus -- Hence taught, ye warriors, know,
Wild, headstorng wishes guide to certain woe,
In peace, laws only claim a righteous sway;
In war, one voice commands, the rest obey.
Proud disobedience Heaven consigns to shame;
The path of duty leads alone to fame.
He spoke -- With awe the silent squadrons heard,
The precept reverenced, and the teacher feared;
Each saw, abashed, the terrors of his frown,
And pleased, condemned rebellion, not his own.
Meantime, brave Irad, on the western plain,
With pangs retired from Ai's contemptuous train.
As often the imperious taunt his rage inspires,
And his scorched bosom flames with eager fires,
Their utmost strength his vengeance promps to try,
He longs, he pants, to bid the insulters fly:
Often toward the host his course instinctive turns;
His drawn sword trembles, and his buckler burns;
But still his soul, in childhood taught to obey,
Restrains the wish, and backw^^^ ^urns his way.
Now with pure splendour glowed meridian light,
And Ai triumphant chased (...) imagined flight,
When gay in dazzling arms, great Joshua turned:
His eyeballs sparkled, and his bosom burned:
The glittering lance his mighty hand uprear'd;
Loud rose his voice, and distant squadrons feared.
Behold, he cried, yon sheets of smoke ascend!
What heavy volumes round the skies extend!
Brave Zimri's conquering arm, while Heaven inspires*
Bursts Ai's proud portals, and her turrets fires;
Now wheel your course; to active vengeance spring:
Brace the strong hand: the bloody falchion wing;
See, Heaven's propitious finger points the way!
Fear chains their limbs, and terror yields the prey;
Over our glad course commencing glory smiles,
And boundless treasures crown triumphant toils.
He spoke; the warriors eyed the exalted sign;
And thrilling bosoms owned the voice divine;
Swift wheeled, the ranks to combat vigorous rise;
Red lances shower, and shouts convulse the skies.
An equal ardour Ai undaunted brings,
Fronts the dire foe, and fierce to danger springs --
As, borne by warring winds, through either roll
Two rising storms, and cloud the northern pole;
Over some dark mountain's head their volumes driven
With floods of livid lightening deluge heaven;
Peal following peal, careering thunders fly,
Burst over the world, and rend the shuddering sky.
With equal noise the storms of war resound;
The blackening volumes cloud the hostile ground;
Through the shocked air in mingled tumult rise,
The conqueror's triumphs, and the victim's cries.
And now the chief to prudent Caleb's charge,
While the cloud thickens, and the sounds enlarge,
Commends the host that own his mighty sway,
And bends to distant rocks his backward way.
Here high in air he lifts the lance's beam,
And power divine supplies a ceaseless stream;
With pointed circles glows the weapon bright,
And casts the effulgence of excessive light.
Long over the plain, impatient to pursue,
Had panting Irad fixed an anxious view,
Sighed the great Leader's ^^^rning voice to hear,
Or catch the radiance of the expected spear:
The ready sword his hand all eager pressed;
The well-brac'd buckler gli^^er'd over his breast:
In the utmost western ranks he silent stood
And looked far onward through the field of blood:
Pained, lest the destined sign, forgot should fail,
Or (...) base dart the Leader's life assail.
But when the sun-bright point insta^^'d the air,
The blooming hero ken^'d the b^am afar;
To his brave peers, with ardent joy he cries,
And all the warrior sparkled in his eyes.
Lo, generous youths, on yon delightsome plain
Shines the fair javelin, wished so long in vain!
Now spurn the hated flight; to combat spring;
Let virtue rouse you, and let glory wing.
Now shall our sires, and now the Leader, know
What flames heroic in our bosoms glow;
Ai now shall learn, ^^taught our strength to slight
Not fear, but wisdom planned our seeming flight,
On their own heads redoubled vengeance feel,
Or fly inglorious from the conquering steel.
Rise then, brave youths, their impious scoffs repay;
My arm to triumph leads the envied way.
He spoke; the voice each active hero warms;
With dreadful din they clash their glittering arms,
Full on their dauntless foes impetuous fall,
And break resistless over the embodied wall.
As winter's shrilling blast begins to roar,
And drives, in gloomy rage, along the shore;
Torn, in it is path, the trees confusedly lie:
The white waves roll, the boughs tumultuous fly.
Not with less force, over piles of warriors slain,
Pours the bold band across the bloody plain;
Death leads their way: with youthful vigor light,
They deal swift vengeance through the dusty fight,
Regardless of the storm, that round them flies,
Of dying murmurs, and of conquering cries.
High in the van exalted Irad strode,
And now commenced the toils of death and blood.
When first his arm, immingling in the strife,
Drew the red stream, and spilt a human life,
(A lovely youth opposed his hapless head,
And with pure crimson died the infant blade)
Through his chilled veins a new, strange horror ran,
And half-form'd tears in either eye began;
In his young heart, unused to create woe,
Instinctive sympathy began to glow;
The dreadful scene he gazed, and shook to hear
The hollow groan and see pale death so near*
But soon fresh transports in his bosom rise,
Roused by shrill arms, and fired by barbarous cries:
Again his spirit claims the imbattled foe,
And bids two heroes to his falchion bow;
Through cleaving ranks he wings a dreadful way,
And clouds of rolling dust obscure the day.
Meantime in Judah's van great Hezron sped,
His voice arous'd them and his footsteps led;
With fixed firm course, the hoary hero strode*
His brown arms purpled with the bursting blood;
Ranks after ranks against his falchion rise,
And chief on chief in swift succession dies.
For now each breast such active vengeance warms;
They spurn the trifling toil of missive arms;
Each braces firm the shield, and joys to wheel
The surer vengeance of the griding steel.
Full on great Hezron's course the heathens rushed,
And the first chiefs by following chiefs were crushed:
In solemn pomp, against the growing storm
The mighty hero reared his moveless form.
In vain bright swords around him ceaceless hung,
Troops pressed in vain, and clattering armor rung.
So, on some hill, while angry tempests lower,
In stately grandeur, stands the moss-grown tower;
Loud roar the winds; impetuous drives the rain,
And all the fury of the etherial main;
Still, reared to heaven, it frowns with pride sublime,
Spurns the fierce storm, and mocks the waste of time.
Far distant, Caleb swept the crimson plain,
Guided the fight, and pil'd the numerous slain;
Round his great arm the cloudy squadrons hung;
Clash'd on his buckler countless weapons rung;
Chiefs after chiefs opposed his wasting course,
Met his broad steel, and felt its fatal force.
Ludon, the Hivites' prince, his arm defied
All rough with gold, and gay in barbarous pride;
With giant strength the heathen hurled his spear,
Its terrors quivering through the parted air;
Loud over brave Caleb's shoulders sung the steel,
And pierced a warrior's breast; the warrior fell;
His blue mail clang'd; to rise he tried in vain,
But writhed in dying anguish on the plain.
The mighty leader raised his sword on high,
Its transient lightnings circling in the sky,
Full on the Heathen's neck a griding wound
Sunk; the loosed head fell spouting to the ground,
Amazed, the Hivites saw their monarch lost.
And deathlike murmurs groaned around the host.
Near the bold leader Oran reared his steel,
Where the storm thickened, and the fiercest fell*
Imperious taunts provoke the rage of war,
Loud threats insult, and tumult sounds afar;
Wedged in a moveless throng, the battle grows,
Cries deeper roar, and shriller ring the blows.
With joy, unfeeling Oran strides the slain,
And hails the ruins of the accustomed plain;
No anguish melts, no wound his pity charms,
No fate impassions, and no groan alarms*
Through the red scenes he hews a raptured way,
And mingling darkness intercepts the day.
Meantime fierce Irad over the field is driven,
And boasts the assistance of a ^avou^ing heaven
Though new to war, with war his bosom glows,
And knows no transport, but the flight of foes.
In scenes of distant death bold Hezron stands,
Dies his blue arms, and pains his aged hands;
Full many a chief his veteran falchion crowns,
Thick flit the shades, and blood the verdure drowns.
Impetuous Carmi springs the chief to meet,
Conscious of youth, and light with nimble feet;
His arm all active strews the sanguine ground,
Wakes the deep groan, and deals the frequent wound:
Full on his angry sword the warriors rush,
Impel the upright, the falling heedless crush:
No chief the fury of his arm withstands,
And ruin widens over bold Hezron's bands.
Amazed, the hero saw the deluge spread,
And wide, and wider rise the piles of dead,
Flight first commence in hosts that own his sway,
And proud Ai hail a second conquering day:
From his sad bosom heaved a heavy groan;
Round the whole war he missed his favorite son:
Untaught to droop, he hopes congenial fire
May yet ward shame, and yet the troops inspire. --
Where now, he cries, are fled the boasts of morn?
The towering stalk? the brow of lifted scorn?
Then Judah's warriors promised deeds of fame,
Hissed impious flight, and spurned the dastard's shame.
Far other scenes now rend these hapless eyes;
The foe advances, and the boaster flies;
Broke but by fear, ye wing inglorious flight,
Giants in words, and maidens in the sight;
Oh had kind Heaven dispensed a speedier doom,
And this frail form in Bashan found a tomb!
Then had these palsied limbs, in peace reposed;
Unpain'd with shame, these eyes in triumph closed;
Pleased to the last, surveyed my favorite race,
Viewed no base flight, and bled for no disgrace. --
Hence, hence, ye timorous souls, to Joshua fly,
And tell the Chief, ye saw your leader die.
The hero spoke; and urged by passion's force,
On furious Carmi bent his aged course;
Awful in gleam of arms, the chiefs appear,
Here the bold youth, the white-hair'd hero there:
But ere his sword great Hezron could extend,
Or circling bands their ancient chief defend,
A long, bright lance his wary foe beheld,
And snatched it glittering on the bloody field;
Swift through the hero's side he forced the steel;
Pierced to the heart, the aged warrior fell;
There lay, a corse, bespread with purple stains,
The form, that triumphed on a hundred plains.
On Ridgefield's hills, to shame to virtue dead,
Thus dastard bands the foe inglorious fled;
When Wooster singly braved the deathful ground,
Fired hosts in vain, and met the fatal wound.
In dangers born, to arms in childhood trained,
From Gallia's heroes many a palm he gained;
With freedom's sacred flame serenely glowed
For justice armed, and sought the field for GOD;
With steady zeal his nation's interest loved;
(No terror touched him, and no injury moved)
Far in the front, with dauntless bosom bled,
And crowned the honors of his hoary head.
Bent over his foe, the lovely Carmi stood,
And viewed, with tears of grief, his bursting blood;
And thus -- Unhappy sire, he sadly cried --
Perhaps thy monarch's joy, thy nation's pride. --
How like my father's bend^ thy hoary brow^?
His limbs, his countenance, and his lo^ks of snow,
All in thy venerable face I (...) --
Perhaps the parent of a son like me --
He spoke; and fiercely wheeled his bloody sword,
Spr^ng to the ^^ght* and many a (...) go^'d;
His voice, his eyes the joyful host inspire,
And through the sweetness flames a dreadful fire.
Active as light, over trembling ranks he hung;
Shouts shook the plains, the frighted forests rung:
Unnumber'd sullen groans were heard around;
Unnumber'd corses clothed the purple ground:
From post to post retired pale Judah's train,
And chief on chief increased the piles of slain.
Dark as an evening cloud, bold Ai was driven,
Gloom'd all the fields, and cast a shade on heaven;
Wide rolled the storm; wide drove the dust along,
And ruin hovered over the flying throng.
Meantime, brave Irad turned his sparkling eyes,
And saw in distant fields the clouds arise;
Sad flight and terror filled the backward plain,
And the foe shouted over his kindred slain.
As, when autumnal clouds the skies deform,
Bursts the wild whirlwind from the gloomy storm;
Hoarse crash the pines; oaks stiffly stubborn fall,
And sudden thunders listening swains appall:
So, winged by Heaven, impetuous Irad flew;
As swift their darling chief the youths pursue;
Whelmed in their path, the falling bands expire,
And crowds of warriors from their steps retire.
Now, where brave Carmi swept the purple ground,
Terrific Irad shook his buckler's round;
Alike in years they seemed, alike in arms,
Of equal stature, and of rival charms:
Nor this, nor that, the dangerous sight can yield;
But each demands the empire of the field.
From the fierce chiefs the wondering bands retreat;
Blows following blows their sounding shields repeat;
Uncleft, each faithful orb the stroke rebounds,
Blunts the keen blade, and intercepts the wounds:
'Till Irad's nimble arm, with sudden wheel,
Through Carmi's side impels the fatal steel,
Pure streams of crimson stain the subject ground,
And the freed soul pervades the gaping wound.
Not that fair pride, that soul-supporting flame,
That lights the splendors of the immortal name;
Not all the bravery nature can impart,
Nor the fond wishes of a virgin's heart,
Nor parents' vows, nor nations' prayers could save,
The young, bright hero from an early grave.
He fell, with beauty's fairest beams adorned,
While foes admired him, and while Irad mourned.
Ah youth, too soon allotted to the tomb;
Oh had kind Heaven dispensed a softer doom,
On thy fair deeds a sweet reward bestowed,
And opened the mansions of the blessed abode!
Thus, where sad Charlestown lifts her hills on high,
Where once gay structures charmed the morning sky,
Ere Howe's barbarian hand in savage fire
Wrapped the tall dome, and whelmed the sacred spire,
In life's fair prime, and new to war's alarms,
Brave Warren sunk, in all the pride of arms.
With me, each generous mind the hour recall,
When pale Columbia mourned her favourite's fall;
Mourned the bright statesman, hero, patriot, fled,
The friend extinguished, and the genius dead;
While he, the darling of the wise, and good,
Sealed his firm truth, and built his name in blood.
Loud as the rushing storm, the din of war
Burst over the plain, and shook the fields afar;
Pierce Irad raised a loud, distinguished cry --
Here see, my friends, their gasping leader lie. --
Through Ai's wide host my sword shall hew your way;
Shall Judah's sons alone desert the day?
Shall Joshua know you fled? to glory rise;
Lift all your arms, and pierce the knave that flies.
The hero spoke* abashed the warriors heard,
Rung their blue arms, and high the standard reared;
Aloft in air a Lion's gloomy form
Lowered, like the darkness of a sullen storm;
Around his head his shaggy terrors frowned,
And his red eyeballs gleam'd destruction round.
Swift from the bearer's hand fierce Irad drew
The banner'd staff, and mid the heathens threw;
With joy they sprang to seize the glittering prize,
And smiles of triumph sparkled in their eyes.
Shame flushed the cheeks of Judah's glowing train;
Their bosoms heaved; their faces flashed disdain;
To seize the shining spoil each warrior sprang;
The combat thickened; and all either rang;
Far rolled the darkness of the dusty cloud;
Loud rose their cries, and armor clash'd aloud.
The blackening tempest Ai undaunted kenn'd,
Pleased to procure, and stubborn to defend;
Scarce Irad's arm could cleave the firm-wedg'd train,
As fierce he strove the standard to regain;
Through ranks on ranks he forced a sanguine way,
Ere his red falchion won the splendid prey;
With smiles, he saw the crimson tumult grow,
And hailed the vengeance gathering over the foe.
From the tall rock great Joshua cast his eyes,
And saw the varying scenes of combat rise.
To Carmi's force beheld pale Judah yield,
And rose to save the triumphs of the field;
But soon new shouts ascend the clouded sky,
His friends now triu^ph, and the Heathens fly.
Now nearer scenes his searching view demand,
Where mighty Caleb rules the warrior band;
Fierce Oran's sword begins inglorious flight,
And his loud clamours animate the fight:
Scarce Caleb's arm the conflict can sustain,
His voice arouse, or deeds inspire, the train;
So fierce the heathens throng the embattled ground,
So thick the warriors fall, the groans resound.
The Hero viewed, and towered the fainting throng,
Swift as a rapid whirlwind, rushed along;
As against a mound, when tempests ride the gale,
The raging river foams along the vale;
Down the wall crumbles, and with dreadful reign
Sweeps a wild deluge on the wasted plain.
Bursting upon the dark embodied throng
Thus the wide ruin Joshua drove along;
Around his course increased the piles of dead,
The brave sunk fighting, and the coward fled.
Now, where unfeeling Oran crushed the slain,
All grim with dust, and red with many a stain,
While smiles of transport gathered on his brow,
His fierce eye sparkling over the bleeding foe,
While high for death he reared his sanguine arm,
And a brave warrior bowed to shun the storm,
Great Joshua's full-orb'd buckler caught the wound,
And lightnings darted from the moony round,
Then, by his hand with rushing thunder thrown,
On Oran's helmet burst a mighty stone,
That, bounding onward against a warrior's side,
Crushed his strong ribs, and shed a plenteous tide.
Stunned by the staggering blow, the leader fell,
Writhed with the pain, and gave a hideous yell;
Furious he lay, with heaving, panting breath,
Rolled up his whitening eyes, and frowned in death;
Cursing the shield, which seized his nimble dart,
And stopped its passage to the warrior's heart:
Swift on his throat descends the indignant blade,
Bursts the black gore, and leaps the grisly head.
Loud over the tumult rose the Hero's cry;
The host all quakes, the distant groves reply --
Rush on, bold heroes, conquest crowns the day;
Now spring to fight, and seize the trembling prey.
This arm on Oran drove the final wound;
Let shouts of triumph shake the hostile ground:
Wealth, and fair peace, the generous contest yields,
And wreaths of glory bloom in bloody fields. --
As in the enkindled wood fierce winds arise,
And storms of fire are blown across the skies;
In blazing trains, the towering pines descend,
And rushing thunders all the forest rend:
So, loud and furious, Israel thronged the fight,
And their blue armor flashed a dreadful light;
Over the pale rear tremendous Joshua hung;
Their gloomy knell his voice terrific rung;
From glowing eyeballs flashed his wrath severe,
Grim Death before him hurled his murdering spear;
Heads, severed from their necks, bestrew'd his way,
And gushing bodies round his footsteps lay.
Meantime Ai's sounding portals wide unfold,
And fierce to combat bursting bands are rolled;
In dreadful pomp ascends the widening train;
Battalions on battalions cloud the plain:
There glowing Zimri wings his rapid force,
And eager thousands darken round his course,
Ai's ghastly sons the smoking walls surveyed,
And wild amaze each pallid front arrayed;
Here lay in gore their brethren, and their sires;
There sunk their mansions in terrific fires;
Before, behind, their foes increased alarms;
They raised one shriek, and dropped their useless arms:
Wherever an opening rank received the day,
Or dust obscure disclosed a glimmering ray,
Borne by light fear, they left the lingering wind,
They fled, they flew, nor cast a look behind;
Often on the spear's protended point they ran;
While thronged resistless, meeting man with man,
Steel stretched to steel, and shield to shield opposed;
On every side the power of Israel closed.
So thick they thronged, no spear could miss its course;
In vain no ^alchion spent its ardent force:
Less heard and less, resounded piercing cries,
And dust besprinkled ceased to fill the skies.
So, when tall navies lift imperial sails,
And hope the indulgence of propitious gales,
When the cold north's fierce wind the main deform,
And, filled with thunders, rolls the raging storm,
Heaved from the bottom, foaming billows rise,
And climb, and climb, and roar against the skies;
Over shivered masts unroll the surging waves,
And the pale sailors plunge in watery graves.
Swift as a whirlwind, over the southern plain,
Impetuous Zimri drove the Hivite train:
With prosperous course, they sped their hasty flight,
Sunk in the wood, and vanished from the sight.
And now, obedient to the Chief's command,
Round the tall standard thronged each wearied band;
A smile of transport every face adorned,
Their wounds unheeded, and the dead scarce mourned.
Nor knew fair Irad how his parent lay,
But, fired with glory, steered his careless way;
Near the great Chief he moved with conscious grace,
And conscious blushes crimsoned over his face;
When, pale and ghastly, on the bloody ground,
Stained with black dust, and pierced with many a wound,
Stiff gore besprinkling all his locks of snow,
And a cold cloud around his reverend brow,
Hezron appeared: at once his nerves congealed;
His frozen lips a dumb, dead silence sealed;
A moveless statue, over the sire he hung,
Nor streaming tears released his marbled tongue.
Then round the corse impassioned arms he threw,
And washed the clotted gore in filial dew;
Glu'd to the form with strong embraces lay,
And kissed, with quivering lips, the senseless clay.
At length the Chief, soft pity in his eyes,
Reached his kind hand, and forced the Youth to rise:
Four mournful warriors Hezron's body bore,
And their eyes glisten'd with a tender shower.
The sun declined; besmeared with dust, and blood,
Slow over the plain the wearied squadrons trod;
When, fair as Phosphor leads the morning train,
Dressed in new beams, and beauteous from the main;
Crowned with white flowers, that breathed a rich perfume
And clothed in loveliness, of gayest bloom,
Rose in soft splendour Caleb's youngest pride,
A thousand maidens following at her side.
In snow-white robes of flowing silk arrayed,
First of the virgins walked the blushing maid;
Her long, dark hair loose-floated in the wind;
Her glowing eyes confessed the etherial mind;
A wreath of olive flourished in her hand;
A silver lyre obeyed her soft command;
With sounds harmonious rang the warbled strings,
And thus the maids, and thus Selima sings.
Who comes from Ai, adorned with gay attire,
Bright as the splendour of the morning fire?
Fair as the spring, ascends the lovely form,
And dreadful as the blaze, that lights the storm!
Ye maids, with flowerets strew the conqueror's way,
Strike the loud harp, and sing the dreadful day!
To Irad's steps the matchless fair-one came,
Her breast quick-panting, and her cheeks on flame;
Her beauteous hand the verdant crown displayed;
Graceful he bowed, and placed it on his head.
Slow to her train the trembling fair withdrew,
The charmed youths following with a moveless view,
So, winged with light, and dressed in strange array,
The mantling glory of the rising day,
With sweet complacence, such as angels show
To souls unprison'd from this world of woe,
Parted soft-smiling from our general sire
Some bright-ey'd Virtue, of the heavenly choir,
Far in the solar walk, with wanderous flight,
The form celestial lessened on his fight.
Again the youth his wonted life regained;
A transient sparkle in his eye obtained;
A rising glow his tender thoughts confessed,
And the soft motions of his melting breast.
But soon dark glooms the feeble smiles overspread;
Like morn's gay hues, the fading splendour fled;
Returning anguish froze his feeling soul,
Deep sighs burst forth, and tears began to roll.
THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK VII.

ARGUMENT.
Evening described. Irad's dream. He goes out to the walls of Ai. His
lamentation for his father. Reflections on the fate of Ai. Appearance of an
army. Irad returns in h^ste, and alarms the Camp. Joshua, at his request,
allots him a body of forces, with whom he goes out to attack the Heathens.
Battle by the burning of Ai, between Hazor, etc. and Israel. Irad's exploits.
He kills Adnor, and pursues Samlah to the eastern part of the host. Uzal.
Shelumiel. Jabin's character, and exploits. He kills Shammah, and Seraiah.
Jobab. Confusion of the Israelites. Irad returns, and rallies them. He attacks
Jobab, with success. Kindling of the neighboring forest separates the
combatants.

The scene of this battle is partly on the plain east of Ai, partly in the
forest still eastward, and partly northward of the forest.

THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK VII.
OVER the wide world immeasurably spread,
Night, still and gloomy, cast a solemn shade.
In heavens half-clouded stars unfrequent hung;
Scarce heard, the blast with mournful murmurs rung;
Above tall, eastern hills, the moon's pale eye
Looked sad, and dreadful, from the cheerless sky:
Her cold, wan face, half-hid behind a cloud,
That wrapped the mountains in a sable shroud,
With feeble luster streaked the shadowy plains,
And edged her vapoury robes with dismal stains.
All, but the savage race, to sleep retired,
And the last gleams of western skies expired.
Stretched in his tent, unhappy Irad lay,
And sad oblivion bore his toils away.
In that still hour, when rapt on eagle-wings,
To distant climes bewildered fancy springs,
A death-like slumber sealed his tearful eyes,
And thus unreal scenes in vision rise.
Through lonely fields, in russet gloom arrayed,
Lost in mute grief, with weary steps he strayed.
A shadowy light, like evening's dusky ray,
Spread over the world, and formed a twilight day.
Before his wandering path, a northern grove
Shed midnight round, and pierced the clouds above:
Slow waved the tall, dark pines: a hollow sound
Rolled through the wood, and shook the autumnal ground.
Dull-murmuring fell the sullen, swelling streams,
Lulling to sleep, and blue in glimmering beams.
With broad, black horrors over its bosom spread,
An eastern mountain reared its shaggy head;
High hung the hoary cliff; the cedars height,
Less seen, and less, withdrew beyond the sight.
Strange unknown scenes the regions wild display,
And solitary music slowly die^ away.
From the thick grove, in dark-brown robes revealed,
A form stalked solemn over the shuddering field;
Of other worlds he seemed; nor cast an eye
On the brown plain, or on the gloomy sky.
Regardless of the scenes that round him mourned,
On Irad's path his sad, slow steps he turned;
Pale stood the Youth; the stately shape drew nigh;
Gash'd was his cheek, and fixed his lofty eye;
Like a light flame, low hung his beard of snow,
And death's cold terrors hovered on his brow.
'Twas Hezron's self. With weak, but solemn sound,
As sullen graves beneath the foot resound,
His voice began -- On fate's dark verge I stand,
Whence thickening dangers roll across thy land.
Night wraps the world; approaching storms arise,
Hang over thy race, and cloud the southern skies.
My mouldering bones a colder night detains,
Closed in the tomb, and bound in icy chains:
But the winged spirit fairer climes surround,
And heaven un^ol^^ng bids her songs resound.
Faintly he spoke. By strange, immortal spell,
His wounds grew smooth, his sightless garments fell:
His pallid face a sudden beauty fired,
And with strong life his changing eye inspired;
Over his white robes a purple splendour ray'd;
Long glittering pinions loosely round him played;
In dreadful pomp, sublime the Vision stood,
And living fragrance breathed along the wood.
At once the hero, startled, raised his head;
Still was his tent, and all the tumult fl^d;
Again to sleep he closed his wearied eyes,
And broken slumbers over his toils arise.
Sudden, his name re-echoing from the walls*
A wild, and visionary murmur calls --
Irad awake; my voice thine ear invades,
From the dark mansions of imprisoned shades;
In southern plains the clarion's thunders rise,
And shouts of triumph fill the rending skies.
Swift from his couch the Youth astonished rose,
(While every vein the dreadful murmur froze)
With active hand his arms around him braced;
With nimble feet the glimmering champain passed,
And towered Ai's flames, that raged with awful force,
Suspense, but fearless, steered his lonely course.
Still over his head the airy phantom hung;
Irad awake -- the voice unreal rung:
Sad grief, and anxious doubt his thoughts oppressed,
But love's soft whispers still disturbed his breast.
Now solemn silenee sailed along the air;
No bird complained; no ^choing voice was near;
Save the slow murmur of the passing gale,
That swept the plain, and sounded through the vale.
The flames dark-glimmer'd on the hero's shield,
And cast long shadows over the pallid field:
Round the dread scenes he turned regardless eyes,
And thus began, with intermingled sighs --
And art thou fled forever? this thine end,
Thou best of parents, and thou surest friend?
And could thou fall, a prey to murdering war?
What cruel demon drove my feet so far?
Was no kind angel hovering over the throng?
Where looked the Power, thy virtue served so long?
Thy soul so pure -- thy life so firmly just --
Scarce Heaven's own law could more demand from dust.
Why, O thou righteous Mind? but cease my tongue,
Nor blame the dread decree, that cannot wrong.
Mine the sole fault -- and mine the single blame --
Wild with the magic of that phantom, fame.
Did thou for this the guilty shield bestow,
To leave thee naked to the fatal blow?
Did thou for this the sword accursed impart,
That should have plunged beneath the murderer's heart?
Far other love, far other faithful cares
Nursed my young limbs, and watched my rising years;
My early steps, from pleasure's slippery road,
Lured with soft smiles, and led them up to GOD;
Thy own bright actions prompting to pursue,
To virtue charmed me, and to glory drew;
With Joshua's self my wishes forced to vie.
Boast of mankind, and chosen of the Sky.
Pale, in the visions of the guilty bed,
Thy form affrights me, and thine eyes upbraid.
There scenes of dire distress thy words unroll,
Doomed for my life, and opening on my soul.
Or does thy mind its loved employ pursue,
To guard from ill, and hidden dangers show?
Perhaps thy thoughts, beyond the silent tomb,
Watch, as in life, thy nation's secret doom;
Some rushing fate unknown discern afar,
Some threatening ambush, or some wasting war.
Perhaps the first of maids thy care demands,
And claims her safety from aerial hands.
Ah! knew the fair what crimes to me belong,
Her lovely voice had spared the applauding song;
A breast more pure her melting arms embraced,
And the bright garland worthier temples graced.
Thus spoke the chief, when now his steps were nigh
Ai's awful flames, that waved across the sky;
All pale, and gloomy, climbed the dreadful blaze,
And smoky volumes curled above the rays;
A dreary gleam enrolled the shady ground,
And the brown land-scape faintly rose around.
Touched by the solemn scene, the hero cried --
Where hapless Ai! is now thy towery pride?
Where now thy manly sons, whose sinewy arms
Rose, a strong bulwark against impending harms
Where now the heaven-topp'd spire? the gilded wall?
Thy kings, thy heroes? whelmed in ruin all --
Destruction's clouds sailed blackening over thy light,
And wide oblivion's never-ending night.
Where yon tall dome shoots forth the greedy flame,
Perhaps some hero hoped a deathless name.
Often when returned from war, his tender race
Climbed his fond knee and asked the sweet embrace:
Often, with a parent's glistening eye, he viewed
His face, his virtues in their forms renewed.
Perhaps some daughter, darling of his care,
Beamed, like Selima fairest of the fair:
And could those flames some lovely maid destroy,
A nation's glory and a parent's joy?
Could babes, sweet-smiling, claim no hand to save,
But find, unwept, a furnace for a grave?
Thus mourned his generous heart the doom severe,
And paid lost Ai the tribute of a tear.
Like ocean's long, deep roar, a rushing sound
Burst from the wood, and poured along the ground;
At once wide trembled over the awful fields
The sudden gleam of spears, and helms, and shields,
Impetuous rolled unseen the rattling car,
And banner'd terrors waved the approach of war.
Loud rung bold Irad's voice; the dreadful sound
Stopped the long host, and s^ook the affrighted ground;
Thrice, like the burst of thunder, hoarse he cried;
Thrice, stood the host; and thrice the sky (...).
The cry waved solemn through the winding vales;
Night shook, and murmurs filled the rushing gales.
The southern guards soon caught the boding sound,
And spread the alarm the startled camp around;
Loud as tall billows rend the rocky shore,
Rose the sonorous clarion's bursting roar:
Swift to the camp the hero winged his way,
Roused all the host, and scattered wild dismay --
Arm, warriors, arm! to instant battle fly!
The foe's at hand! ye combat, or ye die.
Swift to these tents unnumber'd bands repair;
Hark! how the trumpet fills the troubled air!
In southern fields ascends the wasting war,
And fierce as whirlwinds rolls the rapid car.
Arm, ere our camp be wrapped in one broad flame,
And Israel's manly thousands want a name,
Thus, round the host, his animating cry
Urged sleep's oblivious hand from every eye;
Each waking mind the strange alarm appalls;
Arm, warriors, arm! each startled hero calls:
From tent to tent the wild confusion flies;
Shouts rend the plains; groans murmur; shrieks arise;
A rushing noise invades the listening ear;
In swift succession half-seen forms appear;
Shrill rings the rattling mail; the trump's big sound
Cleaves the dun heaven, and shakes the gloomy ground.
Round a broad flame, that, by the Chief's command,
Shoots lofty spires, and gleams along the sand,
Deep throng the squadrons; high the standards stream,
And wave, and glimmer, in the livid beam.
There, while the terrors of the lovely fair
Froze every breast, and breathed a wide despair,
A quickening glow the Leader's voice inspired;
Hushed were their cries; their lessening fears retired;
Through every bosom thrilled a new delight,
And braced each sinew for the manly sight.
Now, ranged in ranks, the host expectant stood,
Prepared for combat, steeled to death and blood;
Sudden, before the Chief, with panting breast,
The generous Youth preferred his bold request --
Near Ai's red flames I steered my careless way,
Robbed of wished slumbers, and to grief a prey,
When sheathed in gleaming arms, a mighty train,
Poured from the wood, and covered all the plain:
On foaming coursers, chiefs impel the war,
Or whirl the terrors of the wasting car.
And will thou, Chief divine, from Irad hear
The dictates of a mind, that knows no fear?
Shall this young arm again the lance command,
And lead to fight a strong, undaunted band,
To Ai's wide ruins wing our active course,
And tempt the fury of barbarian force?
Shall thine unconquered sword the camp defend,
And ward the fate, if shame our steps attend?
Safe in thy prudence shall the race endure,
And Joshua's name our wives, and sons secure.
Lo, dressed in steel, we wait thy ruling breath!
Counsel is ruin, and delay is death.
Go, in JEHOVAH's name -- the Chief replied --
Forth stalked the Youth, and warmed with martial pride;
Over southern fields the bands appointed steered,
Squared in just ranks, and not a warrior feared.
Now where Ai's sons bestrew'd the plain, they came,
Faintly illumined by the distant flame;
No foe appeared: the world more gloomy grew,
And, lost in clouds, etherial realms withdrew;
Save where lone stars diffused a feeble beam,
Like the far taper's solitary gleam:
Slow winds breathed hollow through the dark profound,
And deepening horror brooded over the ground.
East of proud Ai, an ancient forest stood,
And southward far was stretched the lofty wood;
North lay fair plains; and next the walls, arrayed
With scattered trees, a spacious level spread.
Now near the burning domes, the squadrons stood,
Their breasts impatient for the scenes of blood:
On every face a death-like glimmer sat,
The unblessed harbinger of instant fate.
High through the gloom, in pale and dreadful spires,
Rose the long terrors of the dark-red fires;
Torches, and torrent sparks, by whirlwinds driven,
Streamed through the smoke, and fired the clouded heaven.
As often tall turrets sunk with rushing sound,
Broad flames burst forth, and sweep the etherial round,
The bright expansion lightened all the scene,
And deeper shadows lengthened over the green.
Loud through the walls that cast a golden gleam,
Crowned with tall pyramids of bending flame,
As thunders rumble down the dardening vales,
Rolled the deep solemn voice of rushing gales:
The bands admiring gazed the wondrous fight,
And Expectation trembled for the fight.
At once the sounding clarion breathed alarms;
Wide from the forest burst the flash of arms;
Thick gleam'd the helms; and over astonished fields,
Like thousand meteors, rose the flame-bright shields.
In gloomy pomp, to furious combat rolled
Ranks sheathed in mail, and chiefs in glimmering gold;
In floating lu^^re bounds the dim-seen steed,
And cars unfinished, swift to cars succeed:
From all the host ascends a dark-red glare,
Here in full blaze, in distant twinklings there;
Slow waves the dreadful light, as round the shore
Night's solemn blasts with deep concussion roar,
So rushed the footsteps of the embattled train,
And send an awful murmur over the plain.
Tall in the opposing van, bold Irad stood,
And bid the clarion sound the voice of blood.
Loud blew the trumpet on the sweeping gales,
Rocked the deep groves, and echoed round the vales;
A ceaseless murmur all the concave fills,
Waves through the quivering camp, and trembles over the hills.
High in the gloomy blaze the standards flew;
The impatient Youth his burnished falchion drew;
Ten-thousand swords his eager bands displayed,
And crimson terrors danced on every blade.
With equal rage, the bold, Hazorian train
Poured a wide deluge over the shadowy plain;
Loud rose the songs of war, loud clang'd the shields,
Dread shouts of vengeance shook the shuddering fields;
With mingled din, shrill, martial music rings,
And swift to combat each fierce hero springs.
So broad, and dark, a midnight storm ascends,
Bursts on the main, and trembling nature rends;
The red foam burns, the watery mountains rise,
One deep unmeasured thunder heaves the skies;
The bark drives lonely; shivering and forlorn,
The poor, sad sailors wish the lingering morn:
Not with less fury rushed the vengeful train;
Not with less tumult roared the embattled plain.
Now in the oak's black shade they fought concealed*
And now they shouted through the open field;
The long, pale splendors of the curling flame
Cast over their polished arms a livid gleam;
An umber'd luster floated round their way,
And lighted falchions to the fierce affray.
Now the swift chariots against the stubborn oak
Dashed; the dark earth re-echoes to the shock.
From shade to shade the forms tremendous stream,
And their arms flash a momentary flame.
Mid hollow tombs, as fleets an airy train,
Lost in the skies, or fading over the plain;
So visionary shapes, around the fight,
Shoot through the gloom, and vanished from the sight;
Through twilight paths the maddening coursers bound,
The shrill swords crack, the clashing shields resound.
There, lost in grandeur might the eye behold
The dark-red glimmerings of the steel, and gold;
The chief; the steed; the nimbly-rushing car;
And all the horrors of the gloomy war.
Here the thick clouds, with purple luster bright,
Spread over the long long host and gradual sunk in night;
Here half the world was wrapped in rolling fires,
And dreadful valleys sunk between the spires.
Swift ran black forms across the livid flame,
And oaks waved slowly in the trembling beam:
Loud rose the mingled noise; with hollow sound,
Deep-rolling whirlwinds roar, and thundering flames resound.
As drives a blast along the midnight heath,
Rushed raging Irad on the scenes of death;
High over his shoulder gleam'd his brandished blade,
And scattered ruin round the twilight shade.
Full on a giant hero's sweeping car
He poured the tempest of resistless war;
His twinkling lance the heathen raised on high,
And hurled it, fruitless, through the gloomy sky;
From the bold Youth the maddening coursers wheel,
Gash'd by the vengeance of his slaughtering steel,
'Twixt two tall oaks the helpless chief they drew;
The shrill car dashed; the cracked wheels rattling flew;
Crushed in his arms, to rise he strove in vain,
And lay unpitied on the dreary plain.
Now Samlah's hands to war the chariot guide,
^air, beauteous, tall, famed Hamor's youngest pride;
Over Achsaph's towers he stretched a potent sway,
And saw surrounding realms his rod obey.
Adnor* an elder birth, proud grandeur spurned;
Lord of his soul, inferior realms he scorned;
Nor felt one pang, nor showed one envious frown,
When doting Age to Sam^ah gave the crown.
Round his young steps he cast a kind survey,
And taught the blessings of an equal sway;
The pride of arts a^lur'd him to pursue;
To wisdom formed him, and to virtue drew;
To reason's rules his stormy passions wrought,
And shone, a pattern of the truths he taught.
From Jabin's loins a matchless virgin sprung,
And every voice with Salma's praises rung.
Her, Adnor led to share his brother's throne,
And made, delighted, Samlah's bliss his own.
Five weeks the prince beheld in transport glide,
Blessed in the beauties of his lovely bride:
Heedless of war he dwelt, 'till Jabin's voice
Roused him to arms, and called to ruder joys.
Now, where bold Irad scattered blood and fate,
In the same car the friendly brothers ^ate;
When Adnor thus -- Oh fly yon miscreant's arm;
Nor tempt the terrors of the sweeping storm!
Its wonted aid my broken spear denies --
With a fierce look, the impatient youth replies --
Me do thou urge to base, unmanly flight?
Leap from the chariot; hide in covering night?
Shall Salma hear? shall Samlah's growing name
Waste with the pangs of never-ending shame?
He said, and furious, urged his rapid car,
Crushed the firm ranks, and shouted to the war;
On Irad's course he drove; the hero turned,
And a brown glimmering from his buckler burned:
'Twixt the bold leaders poured an ardent band;
Sword clash'd on sword, and hand rose up to hand;
They fell; new squadrons over their corses rise,
And louder tumults echo from the skies.
Imperious Samlah lifts a haughty cry --
Hence, on your lives, presuming dallards fly*
Who dares transgress shall find a sudden doom:
Give Samlah place -- give kings, and heroes room --
He spoke. His friends, all anxious for their king,
Still crowd the war, and swift to danger spring;
Loud sung the vengeance of his pointed steel,
And a bold veteran, deeply wounded, fell;
Enraged, the bands on either side retreat,
And leave the furious monarch to his fate.
Swift from the chariot faithful Adnor sprang;
On Irad's shield his rushing falchion rang:
The Youth's quick wheeling, through his shoulder glides;
Drops the cleft arm, and gush the living tides.
He sunk; and Irad, touched with pity, cried --
Ah youth! whose bosom glows with generous pride,
To scenes of endless gloom thy spirit flies;
Wing, wing thy voice, for pardon, to the skies!
Oh, Sire of all, may this brave warrior's mind,
In life's fair climes, some lowly mansion find!
He spoke. The chief his answering mind addressed --
If soft compassion warm thy friendly breast,
Oh hear! nor spurn a dying brother's prayer!
Let Samlah's tender years thy pity share!
Oh may a sire, a bride, thy bosom move!
The charms of beauty, and the calls of love!
Thus the kind youth, and fainting, as he cried,
He lived for Samlah, and for Samlah died.
So frowned dread night on Abraham's fatal plain,
When thou, Montgomery, pride of chiefs, wast slain.
Spare, sons of freedom! spare that generous tear;
To heaven resign, nor name the doom severe --
Great, brave, and just, to ward Columbia's shame,
He hunted toil, in fields of growing fame;
Alive, fair Victory never forsook his side;
He lived in triumph, and in glory died.
Still bards shall sing, to earth's remotest clime,
He bled for all, and every heart for him.
Glued to his side, to untimely fate a prey,
There bright Macpherson breathed his life away.
Round the fair youth in vain soft graces glowed,
And science charmed him to her sweet abode;
In vain fond parents hoped his steps again,
And worth approved, and realms admired, in vain.
Yet patriot virtue writes the glory high,
With such a chief, in such a cause, to die.
Soft spoke the chief -- O youth! thy virtuous bloom.
Asked a lot milder, and a later tomb.
Is there no blissful seat, by Heaven assigned
To the fair efforts of a clouded mind?
To life well-acted, can no grace supply
A sweet remission, and a happy sky?
But thou, base coward, claim'st the avenging sword;
Could thou look on, and see thy brother gored?
That best of brothers, whose concluding breath
Restrains the falchion, and delays thy death?
Pale Samlah heard, and over the embodied wall
He rushed, regardless of his brother's fall,
From rank to rank with panting breast he flew,
Where the war opened, and the coursers drew;
Behind, fierce Irad drove his dreadful way,
And left at distance far the pallid ray;
Ten thousand spears around him pierce the gloom;
Ten thousand warriors rush to hastening doom;
Through the black either smoky volumes flow,
And with brown light their skirts all-umber'd glow;
Far over conflicting trains the sheets descend;
The deep night thickens* and the shades extend.
There Uzal brave a stubborn fight maintained,
And crowned with matchless strength, retreat disdained;
Dan's mighty chief -- On Ai's inglorious plain,
When vanquished Israel left their kindred slain,
His stiff, strong buckler braved the fierce affray,
Sheltered the flight, and covered all the way.
Now, in the center, shrill his armor rung,
Where the darts shower'd, and where the javelins sung,
But still his dauntless footsteps onward drove;
Nor thronged battalions could those footsteps move.
On all sides round, a thousand twilight forms
Invade the war, and strike their ringing arms;
Here, against the chief, prepared to pierce his foe,
The lance unheeded aimed the fatal blow;
There, whilst the warrior listened to the alarm,
High over his helmet hung the uplifted arm.
Unnumber'd bucklers twinkle round the field,
In light now dreadful, now in shades concealed.
Still more remote, involved in deeper gloom,
Where hands unnotic'd dealt the frequent doom,
Shelumiel fought; the prince of Simeon's trains,
Famed in the contests of a thousand plains.
Meantime, dark Hazor's sons to battle rolled,
And vast Madonians, wrapped in barbarous gold:
These, with their leaders, near the dreadful ray,
Whirled the swift car, and drove their rapid way.
There, dressed in gold, tremendous Jabin shone,
And winged the terrors of his moving throne.
He Hazor's realms with mighty scepter swayed,
And his proud nod unnumber'd hosts obeyed.
A genius vast, with cool attention joined,
To wisdom fashioned his superior mind:
No scene unnotic'd 'scap'd his searching view;
The arts of peace, and arts of war, he knew;
To no kind wish, or tender tear, a prey;
But taught by keen discernment equal sway:
Interest, of all his life the unshaken guide,
Unmoved by passion, and unmoved by pride.
He first, inventive, to the waste of war
Led the tall steed, and drove the dreadful car.
To arms, beneath the standard, veterans trained,
And every movement, every f^int, explained:
Close, lest his conduct watchful chiefs should arm;
Slow to decide, and vigorous to perform:
With firm, fierce bravery forced his foes to fly,
And gave one law -- to conquer, or to die.
Now his great mind, by long successes fired,
To matchless fame, and single rule, aspired;
In the same cause, beneath his banner joined,
His voice, his art, this countless host combined,
In night's concealing hour, prepared the affray,
And promised triumph, ere the dawning ray.
High in his flame-bright car his spear he raised;
A crimson glory from his armor blazed;
Conquer, he cried, or fall, ye dauntless bands,
The noblest heroes of a thousand lands.
Shall this brave host to Israel yield the night?
Few in their numbers; timorous in the fight --
Shall we, inglorious, blot our ancient fame?
Forbid it virtue, and forbid it shame.
Lo here the man, ye chose to guide your path,
Prepared for glory, or prepared for death;
This arm shall guide you through the dastard band;
First in the fight, as first in sway, I stand.
He spoke, and fiercely winged his rapid car;
As fierce the squadrons rush to glorious war;
All dropped the javelin* all the falchion wheeled;
A copious slaughter drenched the glimmering field;
From their dire arms a fearful splendour came,
And over their faces waved the gloomy flame.
Hand joined to hand, the vengeful thousands raged;
Man challenged man, and sword with sword engaged;
The victors rushed; (...) pierced in anguish cried*
No flight; no fear they conquered, or they died;
For Israel's dauntle^s sons maintained the field,
And chief with chief the dread assault repelled;
Round the wild region mingled horrors reigned;
Nor those would yield, nor these the victory gained.
First, in the van, imperious Jabin's car
Bore down whole tro^ps, and broke the thickening war.
High over the rest his dreadful voice was heard;
High over the rest his lofty form appeared;
His shield a crimson moon, before him spread,
And over his visage hovering horrors played;
His steeds, like rapid winds, impatient flew;
His sword the first, his spear the distant, slew;
Round the dark chariot countless weapons hung,
And groans, with sullen murmur, ceaseless rung;
Rank after rank he turned to hated ^light,
And joyful Hazor thronged the stubborn sight.
Before this dreadful path, two heroes sought,
And warmed with vengeance, countless wonders wrought.
Sons of one sire, that in the desert fell,
When impious Korah bade the host rebel.
The helpless orphans generous Caleb bred,
In arms instructed, and to combat led.
With mutual flame their friendly bosoms loved;
In peace together lived, in war together moved.
Now, side to side, the manly heroes stood,
And sable torrents from their falchions flowed;
When Shammah thus -- thou best of friends, behold
Yon heathen's car, in gloomy terror rolled.
How his fierce coursers wing their rapid way!
How his keen falchion cleaves the yielding prey!
Say, shall our force the mighty Chief defy,
His arm experience, and his falchion try?
Or death, or triumph, shall the deed await;
And what is death, in Israel's dubious fate?
To prove fierce danger for his maker's laws,
And proffer life to save his country's cause,
Thou know, brave chief, Seraiah quick replied --
The good man's duty, and the brave man's pride.
He spoke* and fiercely plunging through the war,
Hewed a wide path, and burst upon the car,
Nor Shammah stayed. On Jabin's spacious shield
His rapid lance Seraiah's hand impelled;
Through the thick orb the point no passage found,
Its shade dark-quivering in the flamy round.
With a short flash, across the thickening air
The furious Heathen drove the greedy spear;
Swift on Seraiah's helmet sunk the steel;
His red arms rang; the hero groaned and fell.
With pangs, bold Shammah saw his brother's doom,
And wheeled his fiery falchion through the gloom;
From Jabin's hand a second javelin sped,
Sung through his ear, and pierced his gushing head;
Shrill rose the conqueror's shout; and all around
The plains remurmur, and the woods resound.
Now, more remote from Ai's decreasing light,
Slow moved a giant to the dreadful fight.
As when dun smoke, over all the horizon spread,
Pours round the setting moon a crimson shade,
Distained with blood, her broad, and dreadful eye
Looks death, and ruin, from the shuddering sky,
So gleams the circuit of his flame-bright shield,
And casts wide terror through the quaking field,
A beam-like spear commands his horrid way,
And all, before him, shun the dire affray.
And now fierce Israel's sons, with sad surprise,
To find brave Irad turned their boding eyes.
Far round they gazed; his form no more appeared;
They listened; but his voice no more was heard.
Then every bosom sudden fears appall;
Their nerves all stiffen, and their falchions fall;
A timorous fight their frozen hands sustain,
And sighs, and backward looks, confess their pain.
With shouts of triumph, swift the Heathens rolled,
And a bright terror flashed from flamy gold;
A thousand moony shields before them burned;
Ranks fell at once, and troops to flight were turned;
Each fatal step increased the piles of slain,
And boundless ruin ravaged all the plain.
As when a storm in midnight pomp extends,
And a broad deluge on the world descends,
From steep to steep, disdaining every goal,
Swelled with hoarse thunders, mountain-torrents roll;
The vales all echo to the dreadful sound;
The torn rocks roar; the cracking trees resound.
Meantime bold Irad far had crossed the fight,
And Samlah vanished with auspicious flight;
Round the dread region gazed the Youth serene,
And eyed the grandeur of the solemn scene.
Unnumber'd phantoms crowd the dusky war;
The half-seen hero, and unfinished car:
Black were the shades, as midnight in the tomb,
And floating glimmerings spread a fearful gloom.
Now rolled the distant cries an awful sound;
Now nearer clamors shook the embattled ground.
At once, from western fields, a shout ascends;
The plains all tremble, and the concave rends:
Quick turned the chief, while sad alarms inspire,
And saw dark forms, that passed along the fire;
Slow towered the camp the shouting squadrons move,
And long pale spires tremendous wave above.
Ah wretch! he cried -- to childish heat a prey!
How soon wild passion drove my steps astray!
What chief, less vain, shall lay the increasing fear?
Who cheer the bands, my presence ought to cheer?
Ah! should disgrace, and dire defeat, ensue,
No more this guilty face shall Joshua view;
These eyes never open on a host undone,
But death, or glory, by this arm be won.
Thus as he spoke, he crossed the deep array;
To his known form they yield an easy way:
Red flash his arms; and high above the field,
Gleams the drear luster of his orbed shield.
So, pale, and dreadful, through the midnight shade,
Sails a broad meteor over the mountain's head:
Dim rise the cliffs; and on the kindling air,
Stream the long terrors of its sanguine hair.
His voice resounding through the gloomy fight,
Revived their strength, and turned the increasing flight.
Fly, dastards, fly; desert your Maker's laws;
Your name dishonor; yield your country's cause;
But come, ye friends of Israel's injured name,
Sons of the skies, and heirs of deathless fame!
Know, round the distant plains, by chiefs inspired,
By virtue prompted, and by vengeance fired,
Bold, manly warriors, never taught to yield,
Cleave their fell foes, and sweep the dusty field;
Let this bright pattern every breast inflame;
Here lift your swords, where Irad leads to fame.
Thus every rank his voice invites to arms;
His presence actuates; his example charms;
From band to band, with nimble course, he flies,
Wheels the long host, and wakes intenser cries;
Thick flash the falchions; thick the javelins rain;
And shooting banners tremble over the plain;
In every scene, alert, the youth appears;
Each chief, each rank, his cry with transport hears;
Shouts fiercely bursting listening earth appall,
And hovering Conquest yet suspends her fall.
And now bold Irad, through the thickest war,
Drove the tall chief, and darkly rolling car,
When, lo! the giant full before him stood,
Involved in death, and covered over with blood:
Like some vast wave, approached the horrid form,
Heedless of spears, and raptured with the storm.
His wondrous size the admiring Youth beheld,
And snatched a lance that glittered on the field;
Loud rang the weapon on the monster's brow;
Backward he quick recoiled, and bending low,
Stood staggering. Irad waved his dreadful sword,
Springing impetuous; swift between them poured
Two gloomy chariots, of their lords despoiled,
And fierce around them thousand heroes toiled:
No more the chief could find his destined prey,
But turned, and mingled in the fierce affray.
Now loud, and solemn, through the roaring vales
Swelled the hoarse murmurs of the sounding gales,
With deep confusion shook the cliff's tall brow,
And rushed tempestuous on the world below;
From grove to grove the blast impatient flies,
Rends the stiff oak, and howls along the skies,
On Ai's broad flames, with wild dominion, falls,
And pours ten thousand thunders round her walls.
More wide, more b^ight, the folding fires ascend,
Heave the dun smoke, and far in either bend;
The glittering brands, by rapid whirlwinds driven,
Stream, like dim meteors, over the blackened heaven;
Swift through the woods red paths expanding roll;
Long heavy volumes thicken round the pole;
From all the concave sparks in torrents rain,
And fiery tempests rush along the plain.
Far through the groves the furious flames had spread,
And thousand fires rose scattered in the shade,
Ere Hazor's bands (so eager raged the fight)
Beheld, wi^h sad amaze, the fearful sight.
Then Jabin's voice, terrific, bade retire,
And the g^ad warriors sled the widening fire.
Israel pursued; but Jab^n's deathful arm
Whole troops repelled, and braved the wasting storm:
With the fierce giant, over the rear he rose,
And cooled the vengeance of his ardent foes,
Then to the sight, that still, with dreadful sway,
Rent eastern plains, brave Irad winged his way.
Part of the foes, that in the wood remained,
Had fled the heat, and safe recesses gained;
Part, lodged in open fields, maintained the war,
And sho^ts rebe^^ow'd to^e the murmuring air.
Sudden, over all the bands, resounds a cry --
Fled are our friends; we conquer, or we die:
Lo round the wood the kindling torrents burn;
Fix here our ranks; no warrior can return --
Then fierce despair the dauntless bosom fired,
Winged the keen falchion, and the arm inspired;
The chiefs exhorted, threatened, shouted, cried;
The ranks rushed onward, met the steel, and died;
For Israel's sons a moveless fight maintain,
Glued to the field, and cleaving man to man;
Brave Irad's dreadful voice the heroes armed,
Strung every nerve, and every weapon warmed;
On friend, and foe, alike the blind sword fell;
And the son sunk beneath the parent's steel.
Wild, and more wild, the ruin raged around;
Shouts rung; groans murmured; thunders rocked the ground;
Through the rent concave rushed the loud acclaim,
Swelled with the roaring wind, and fierce resounding flame,
At length a heathen's voice -- Retire, retire,
Where yon black opening parts the raging fire --
Quick, at the sound, along the glimmering shade,
Through the wide forest panting heroes fled,
In different courses, where the moory ground
Cleft the deep blaze, and formed a verdant mound.
Swift as the rapid blast, the youthful train
Nimbly precipitated over the plain;
On every side, the flames, with wild career,
Roared near their path, and added wings to fear;
None turned a gazing eye; but, with blessed flight,
Streamed through the grove, and escaped the vengeful light.
Behind, his path pale age more slow dragged on*
And wished, in vain, impending fate to shun;
Now here, now there, with feeble steps, they turned;
And here, and there, the fire terrific burned.
From tree to tree it flew; and all around
The moulder'd pines, with hoarsely rushing sound,
Fell thundering. Kindled ruins hedged their path;
Behind them swift pursued the blazing death;
Before, beside, and bending over their head,
The bright, and scorching splendors fiercely played;
Weak, and more weak, the cries of anguish came,
Drowned in the roaring fury of the flame.
To the dire forest Israel's sons pursued,
And heathen blood their reeking swords imbrued;
Then by the chief's command returned from fight,
The attentive squadrons eyed the wondrous sight,
Far sound the dreadful region, trees on high,
Wave their tall blazing summits in the sky;
Through the dark air, in crimson terror, sail
Broad sheets of flame, and bend along the gale;
Loud, and more loud, the raging whirlwind pours;
From wood to wood the rushing deluge roars;
Then, up vast eastern hills with fury driven,
Rolls over aerial cliffs, and kindles heaven:
The mountain groves, a long, long ridge of fire,
Shoot their tall flames, and through the clouds aspire.
Over dim-seen rocks, brown plains, and glimmering streams
Floats the pale luster of the trembling beams;
The camp astonished casts a quivering gaze,
And distant towns are lost in dumb amaze:
Retired the squadrons, range in dread array,
And watch the splendors of approaching day. --
THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK VIII.

ARGUMENT.
Morning. Joshua joins Irad. Jobab's character, and challenge. Irad accepts it,
and kills Jobab. Battle. Irad kills Samlah, and engages Jabin. His death. Judah
routed with great slaughter. Death of Uzal, and Shelumiel. Caleb* with a large
division, marches out, rallies Judah, and renews the battle. Irad's death
throws the whole army into confusion. Joshua inspirits them, and makes great
havoc of the enemy. Zimri's exploits. He kills the king of the Hittites, and
routs them. Joshua kills the king of Shimron, and routs the center. Jabin,
perceiving the other divisions of the army defeated, orders a retreat, which is
performed with regularity. Joshua's lamentation over Irad. Scene of Selima's
distress at the sight of his corpse. Evening.

THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK VIII.
OVER misty hills the day star led the morn,
And streaming light in heaven began to burn;
Wide scenes of woe the boundless blaze displayed,
Where the steel triumphed, and the deluge spread.
On wasted plains unnumber'd corses lay,
And smokes far scattered climbed upon the day,
Still clouded flames over eastern mountains rise,
And Ai's broad ruins sadden all the skies.
When lo! in glimmering arms, and black array,
Like storms low-hovering in the etheriatl way,
Far round the north a gloomy cloud ascends,
Its horror deepens, and its breadth extends.
Compact and firm, as moved by one great soul,
A front immense, the widening squadrons roll;
Thick shoot the spears; the trembling helmets beam,
And waving bucklers cast a moony gleam.
As the dire comet, swift through either driven,
In solemn silence climbs the western heaven;
His sanguine hair, portending fearful wars,
Streams down the midnight sky, and blots the stars;
Pale death and terror light the dusky gloom,
And quivering nations read their sudden doom.
So in the flaming van great Joshua rose,
And shot red glories on the wondering foes.
At his command the trumpet sounded high,
Aerial ensigns dancing in the sky;
Near and more near, they traced a dreadful way,
Joined Irad's host, and stretched in long array.
From Hazor's ranks that now before the wood,
In three embattled squares, refulgent stood,
Great Jobab strode. In Madon's realms he reigned:
Red was his eye, his brow with blood distained;
A beam his spear; his vast, expanded shield
Shot a bright morning over the crimson field;
His head sublime a mighty helmet crowned;
His quivering plumes with sable horror frowned;
Six cubits from the earth, he raised his frame;
His wish was battle, and his life was fame.
Proud was his father, prouder was the son:
Naught moved his pride; the tear, nor piercing groan:
Unmatched his force, he claimed a matchless fame,
And every combat decked his brightening name.
Princes, his captived slaves, before him bowed,
Stalked in his train, and round his chariot rode;
While their fair partners, first in triumph led,
Held the rich cup, or graced the brutal bed.
Often had surrounding realms his aid required,
Ere Zimri's hand Ai's hapless turrets fired;
But still their prayers, and still their gifts were vain,
Till Joshua's glory roused his fierce disdain.
Else had no proffer moved his haughty mind,
That deemed himself the champion of mankind,
When the joint wishes of the various band
To nobler Jabin gave the first command.
But Joshua's triumphs filled his anguish'd ear;
Fired at the sound, he snatched the deathful spear,
Resolved at once to prove the hero's might,
And claim, alone, the wreaths of single sight,
'Twas he, when Irad raised his dreadful voice,
And inmost Hazor trembled at the noise,
When prudent Jabin urged a nightly storm,
Ere the Youth's voice the slumbering camp should arm:
Bade his vast squadrons in the wood delay,
Nor lift a spear, till morn should lead the day.
Shall this brave host the unmanly path pursue,
Fight ambush'd foes, and basely creep from view?
Shall Jobab, like the thief, to conquest steal,
And bravery call, what coward minds can feel?
And now, from Jabin the proud chief demands,
To lead, as first in place, the central bands.
He, coolly wise, resigns the shadowy name,
And, pleased with substance, boasts a nobler fame.
Forth from the host, in steely pomp, he strode*
And 'twixt the embattled lines sublimely stood.
His towering stride, vast height, and awful arms
Chilled all his foes, and scattered wide alarms:
When thus the chief -- Ye sons of Israel know
The dauntless challenge of no common foe.
If in your host three heroes can be found,
(Be Joshua one) to tempt this dangerous ground,
Here shall they learn what strength informs the brave,
And find no God can shield them from the grave.
Stung with the insult cast upon his God,
To the great Leader Irad nimbly strode,
And thus -- Shall yonder heathen's haughty cry
Dare Israel's host, and Israel's God defy?
Let me this boaster whelm in instant shame,
Avenge my nation's cause, my Maker's name.
Exalted Youth! the smiling Chief replied,
This elder arm shall crop his towering pride.
Scarce in thy breast has manhood fixed her seat;
Blot not thy bloom, nor urge untimely fate.
Line 60) See Book 7, Line 165.
Brave as thou art, his strength must win the fight,
And Israel's glory sink in endless night.
Think not, he cried, of Irad's tender age,
Nor heed the mockery of yon heathen's rage.
This hand, though young, shall boast a conquering day;
Blind is wild rage, and pride an easy prey.
Here too shall Joshua's potent prayers be given,
And the blessed aid, that Virtue hopes from Heaven.
Should Irad perish, none the wound shall know;
Should Joshua fall, our race is whelmed in woe:
Heaven gave his chosen to thy guardian care,
To rule in peace, to save in dangerous war;
On thee alone our fates suspended lie,
With thee we flourish, and with thee we die.
Oh best of youths! provoke not hasty doom,
Nor rush impetuous to an early tomb.
I loved thy sire, the good, the just, the brave --
And shall this voice consign thee to the grave?
Swift thy name ripens into matchless praise;
My son, my chosen, still prolong thy days.
In future fields thy arm shall brighter shine;
Thine be the glory, but the danger mine.
Ah grant my wish! the impatient Youth replies,
While two full tears stand glistening in his eyes --
This arm, unhurt, shall bid the monster bleed;
Angels will guard my course, and Heaven succeed.
My spear, when night her latest darkness spread,
Had sunk him breathless in the field of dead;
But some kind spirit saved his life, till morn
Should grace the fight, and Irad's name adorn*
Aid me, oh aid me, Hezron's every friend!
Your voice, your wishes, must the Leader bend.
Won by his earnest cries, the generous Chief
Forced his consent; but could not hide his grief.
A sigh steals silent from his bleeding breast,
As his slow tongue permits the sad request.
Wrapped in bright arms, while smiles his joy revealed,
The Youth stalked fearless over the horrid field;
The ho^t, with rapture, viewed his lofty stride,
The leap alert, the port of conscious pride;
But each grave chief, by long experience wise,
With faltering accent, to his comrade cries --
I fear, I fear, lest, on the bloody sand,
The bold Youth perish, by yon monster's hand.
What bravery can, fair Irad will perform,
But can the opening floweret meet the storm?
Ah, that such sweetness, such etherial fire
Should fall, the victim of a heathen's ire!
Thy votary's course, all-gracious Heaven, survey!
Let some kind angel hover round his way!
Now near the scene bold Irad urged his course,
Where Jobab triumphed in resistless force;
When the huge warrior, swelled with angry pride,
With bended brow, and voice contemptuous, cried --
Art thou the champion of thy vaunting race?
Shall this poor victory Jobab's falchion grace?
Go, call great Joshua, long to war inured,
Whose arm has toils, whose skill has hosts endured,
With him, ten chiefs; this hand shall crush them all;
Shame stains the steel, that bids a stripling fall;
Retire, ere vengeance on thy helmet light;
Fly to yon troop, and save thy life by flight.
His haughty foe the Youth undaunted heard;
Vain, empty threats his bosom never feared;
Over the vast form he turned his smiling eyes,
And saw unmoved the livid vengeance rise.
Then, with a rosy blush of conscious worth,
Calm from his tongue his manly voice broke forth --
Do threats like these become a hero's voice?
Can courage find a vent in empty noise?
To every brave man give the well-earn'd praise,
Nor think on scoffs a bright renown to raise*
True bravery claims a noble generous fame;
But the base wretch from vaunts expects his name.
Let shame, let truth, those coward words recall;
Thou seek'st my life; I glory in thy fall.
To me thy pride to me thy threats are vain;
Heaven sees alone whose arm the prize shall gain.
And know, wheree'er may light his angry rod,
I fear no boaster that defies my GOD.
Now shield to shield, and lance to lance, they stand;
With taunts imperious shout the heathen band;
While hopeless Israel heaven with prayer assails,
And grateful incense fills the rising gales.
Stung by the just reproof, with whizzing sound
The giant plunged his javelin in the ground:
For passion, ever blind, impelled his arm,
Steered a wild course, and saved the youth from harm;
He, calm and fearless, with a pleased surprise,
Surveyed its curious form and mighty size;
Then against his foe, with sure, unerring eye
Drove the swift lance, and lodged it in his thigh.
Enraged, the warrior saw his bubbling gore,
Writhed with keen anguish, and the javelin tore.
The flesh pursued; a copious, sable stream
Poured from the wound, and stained the steely gleam;
Then high in air he shook his sunlike shield,
And waved his falchion over the astonished field.
With matchless force the vengeful weapon fell;
The wary hero nimbly shunned the steel;
And while his foe with foaming fury cried,
Often pierced his arm, and wounded often his side.
Wild, and more wild, the giant's strokes resound,
Glance from the shield, and plough the cleaving ground:
Till, gathering all his strength for one vast blow,
Dark as a storm, he rushes on his foe;
Lightly the hero springs; the monster falls,
Like sudden ruins of a turret's walls;
Full on his neck descends the gladsome blade,
And from the trunk disparts the grisly head.
Loud shouts of joy, from Israel's thousands driven,
Burst over the plain, and shook the walls of heaven:
Amazed the heathens saw their champion lost,
And a wide, sullen groan was heard from all the host.
Alert, bold Irad seized the giant's shield,
His sword, his spear, and bore them through the field;
At Joshua's feet, with self-approving smiles,
He cast the grandeur of the glittering spoils;
The hoary warriors gathered round his way,
And gazed and wondered at the curious prey;
Then blessed the chief, with transport in their eyes,
And owned the assistance of auspicious Skies;
While youths unhappy raised less ardent prayers,
And wished the deed, and wished the glory, theirs.
Led by soft impulse towered the imbattled train,
Roved sad Selima down the spacious plain.
Afar she stood, and cast an anxious eye,
And strove in vain her favorite to descry.
At once, with distant din, the shouts ascend,
And painful fears her tender bosom rend;
Slow towered the camp her lingering steps inclined;
But often the fair-one cast a look behind.
Now the long thunders of the clarion sound,
Reclam'd from hills, and plains, and groves around,
Over the dire field the rushing squadrons driven,
Extend their shady files, and blacken heaven:
High in the central front great Joshua stands,
And shoots wide terror through the astonished bands;
Mid eastern thousands Zimri towers along,
And Irad shines before the western throng.
Unfurled, the sudden banners stream afar,
And, wrapped in thunder, joins the dreadful war;
Wide roll the volumes of the dust around,
And clouds on clouds envelope all the ground.
As floods, increased by long-descending rains,
Pour a brown deluge over the wintery plains,
Loud from a thousand hills, the torrents join,
Where azure bonds the river's course confine;
The maddening ice, in boundless ruin driven,
Bursts, like the thunders of a falling heaven;
The white rocks foam; the gloomy blasts arise,
Toss the wild stream, and roar along the skies.
So closed the squadrons of the unnumber'd foes;
So stormy shouts and hollow groans arose.
Long in an even balance hung the affray,
Nor those would loose, nor these could gain, the day.
'Till Irad's rapid path, like heaven's red fire,
Shot through the ranks, and bade the foe retire;
With joy, their chief surrounding warriors view,
And troops on troops the generous course pursue.
At distance small, proud Samlah's glittering car,
Whirled by white coursers, tempts the grisly war;
Over all the plain, with piercing sound, arise
His stern injunctions, and his conquering cries.
With shouts bold Irad darts along the field,
Now bright in arms, and now in dust concealed,
From rank to rank the well-known chief pursues,
And often his flashing steel in blood imbrues.
Vain, impious wretch, he cried, thy nimble flight,
And vain the covert of surrounding might.
Once have thou fled the swift-pursuing spear,
But fled'st in vain, for vengeance finds thee here.
Learn from this hand what fate betides the knave,
Who yields, unmoved, a brother to the grave.
If now thy feet escape the righteous doom,
Let Heaven protect thee to a peaceful tomb!
In dread amaze astonished Samlah stood;
From his pale face retired the freezing blood;
His wild eye star'd; all bristling rose his hair:
Quick from his quiv^ring hand the useless spear
Dropped; his teeth rattled, and the falling reins
At random trembled on the coursers' manes;
Behind he gazed, and found no path to fly;
For aid he panted, but no aid was nigh.
Deep in his back was lodged the fatal steel;
His breathless form, before the rolling wheel,
Plunged headlong; mournful rung a pitying groan,
So fair, so mild his beauteous aspect shone:
Even Irad, touched by Adnor's kind request,
Felt soft emotions stealing through his breast.
Then swift he wheeled the lightening of his sword;
Behind him, Judah's host like torrents poured;
Shrill rose the tumult of the fields around,
Trembled through heaven and waved along the ground:
With souls undaunted, both the hosts contend;
Spears fill the air, and shouts the concave rend.
Far distant, Joshua moves his awful form,
Swells the confusion, and directs the storm.
Beyond him, Zimri, swift as rapid fire,
Darts through the fight, and bids the foe expire.
A mingled horror clouds the dreadful plain;
Here rush the fighting, and there fall the slain.
Now the mid sun had finished half his course,
When Irad raging with resistless force,
And far before him breathing wide dismay,
On Jabin's chariot drove his rapid way.
Brave youths around him thronged the crimson fight,
Eyed the blessed chief, and smiled a fierce delight;
From every sword increasing vengean^e fell,
And Death sat hovering over the sanguine steel.
Throned in proud state, the savage Monarch rode;
Like two red stars his wrathful eye balls glowed;
Hoarse from his voice a dreadful thunder came,
And his bright ^rmour flashed a sudden flame.
Two steeds, bedropp'd with gore, and pale to view,
Emblems of death, his smoking chariot drew.
Cheered by his hand, the coursers swiftly sprang;
Beat by their hoofs, the brazen bucklers rang;
Towered Irad's path the heathen* winged his way,
And, boding conquest, snuff'd the fancied prey.
Unmoved, the angelic Youth, with wearied hands
Paved his red path, and drove the circling bands --
Stay, lovely hero! stay; thy course forbear;
Enough that sword has ruled the glorious war --
Ah stay, till Israel's sons thy steps surround;
Return, return, and be with glory crowned!
Great Jabin stood, and over the bloody field
Raised the broad terrors of his flaming shield;
His grimly brow, all blackened over with dust,
Frowned like a storm, and froze the trembling host;
Near beauteous Irad streamed the sounding car,
And opening squadrons yield the dreadful war.
The foaming Chief, serene the Youth beheld,
And reared his javelin over the purple field;
Shrill sung the lance along the dusty sky,
Bored the strong shield, and pierced the Monarch's thigh*
Enraged, to earth the haughty Warrior sprang;
His red eyes flamed; his arms descending rang;
With lofty action, each his hand uprais'd;
The falchions flashed; aghast the squadrons gazed;
Two generous youths between them nimbly broke,
And bowed their lives beneath the fatal stroke.
Their lovely heads (their helmets cleft in twain)
Died the keen swords, and spouted on the plain.
More fierce the Monarch's disappointed ire
Glowed in his face, and blazed with gloomy fire.
In Irad, innocence serenely mild,
And beauty's sweetness with soft splendour smiled;
Round his fair forehead beams of bravery play,
Nor stained with rage, nor mingled with dismay.
Again in either rose the dreadful steel;
Again it lightened, and again it fell;
The Heathen's, ringing, leaped from Irad^^ shield;
The Youth's in fragments, treacherous, strewn the field.
Held by a chief, swift-leaping from the band,
A second falchion touched his reaching hand,
When -- loveliest Youth! why did thy buckler's bound
Shield but thy breast? why not thy form surround?
Where stood thy friends? was no kind hero near,
To guard thy life, and stay Selima's tear? --
From some base arm unseen, in covert flung,
Through his white side a coward javelin sung,
He fell -- a groan sad-murmur'd round the host,
Their joy, their glory, and their leader lost.
Forth from the train a youth impatient sprung,
Spread his fond arms, and round the hero clung,
With soft endearments stayed the fleeting breath,
And wished to save him from the hand of death.
But Jabin's sword, driven through his friendly side,
Stained his white armor with a spotless tide:
In kind embrace their heaving bosoms lay,
And all life's blooming beauty died away.
Through fields of air, their social spirits joined
Winged their light way, nor lost a look behind;
While two bright forms, on rosy pinions borne,
Sailed round their path, and opened the gates of morn.
Mid countless warriors Irad's limbs were spread,
Even there distinguished from the vulgar dead.
Fair as the spring, and bright as rising day,
His snowy bosom opened as he lay;
From the deep wound a little stream of blood
In silence fell, and on the javelin glowed.
Grim Jabin, frowning over his hapless head,
Deep in his bosom plunged the cruel blade;
Foes, even in death, his vengeance never forgave,
But hailed their doom, insatiate as the grave;
No worth, no bravery could his rage disarm,
Nor smiling love could melt, nor angel-beauty charm*
With dreadful sound, he raised his voice on high,
Froze the pale bands, and thundered through the sky --
Haste, warriors, haste; your conquering arms display;
Here gasps their leader, to the dogs a prey.
See the slaves fly; ere evening's dusky hour,
The beasts shall ^end them, and the hawks devour.
Receive, illustrious Oran! here receive
The poor, the sole reward, thy prince can give.
This victim first; a nation soon shall come
To pay due honors at thy sacred tomb,
Wide streams of gore in rich libations ^low,
And shades unnumber'd wait thy call below.
Here, dastards, here the worthless carcass yield,
Nor wait the vengeance of a future fie^d.
To day this raptured hand your camp shall burn,
And sires, and wives, and sons to mingled ashes turn.
Thus spoke the haughty Chief: with flashing eyes,
To fiercer fight inspired the warriors rise;
Clouds after clouds in gloomy pomp ascend,
And stormy clamours troubled either rend.
The thickening tempest Judah's host surveyed,
And wedged their volumes in the dusty shade;
Man locked with man, and helm with helm combined,
And sword with sword in glimmering order joined,
A long dread front, impervious, hides the fields,
Clothed with the grandeur of a thousand shields.
First, in the flaming van to vengeance rose
Bold Irad's train, and dared their ardent foes.
Their young, brave minds immortal same inspires;
Each glowing thought the patriot's virtue ^ires;
Serene they smiled to see the ruin nigh;
In death they triumphed, but they feared to fly.
Over the dark deep, as some tall wave impends,
Its white foam hisses, and its point ascends;
Against hoary rocks the bursting ruins roar,
Shake all the main, and echo ^ound the s^ore*
(...) car with gloomy terror flew,
(...) ranks that near him rashly drew;
Rolled in one mighty mass, the heathen force,
The swift-wing'd chariot, and the foaming horse,
Over all the lovely band resistless fly,
And countless warriors round their Irad die.
Thus, on the stream's fair bank in beauty rise
Young, towering trees, and feel indulgent skies;
In spring's mild beam their lovely boughs aspire,
Wave over the flowers, and call the plumy choir:
At once the floods descend, the torrents roar;
The trees lie withering on the wasted shore.
All firmly brave, imbrown'd with dust and blood
Against the rude tempest Judah's veterans stood;
Fixed, even to death, their nation to defend,
With stout, stiff strength, the stubborn ranks contend;
To fate undaunted many a hero springs,
The shouts redouble, and the concave rings.
Full in the front brave Uzal moveless stood,
His falchion reeking with incessant blood;
Fight, warriors, fight, or fall -- he said, nor more;
But wheeled his arm, and stepped in floods of gore;
Above his feet the purple torrents ran,
And high before him man was pil'd on man.
So thick the swords around his helmet hung,
That sword clave sword; aloud his armor rung;
Panting he stood; in floods the sweat distilled:
Nor moves the Hero, nor the squadrons yield.
From his bright car, that rattling poured along,
With shouts, and threatenings, Jabin fired the throng;
Man leaped over man: from every side they rushed;
Bold warriors fell* by other warriors crushed;
'Till, hurled by Jabin's hand, a javelin flew,
Pie^^'d Uzal's heart, and life's fair current drew,
Pleased, the great hero gave his parting breath;
My nation owned my life, and now demands my death.
Thus hung with wounds, a prey to savage steel,
In Princeton's fields the gallant Mercer fell.
When first his native realm her sons decreed,
In slavery's chains, with want and woe to bleed,
Checked, through his bosom fond remembrance ran,
The cause of freedom was the cause of man.
In that fair cause he barred his manly breast,
The friend, the hope, the champion, of the oppressed,
From height to height on glory's pinions rose,
Blessed by his friends, and praised by generous foes;
Swift flew the shaft; the eagle ceased to rise,
And mourning millions traced him down the skies.
He fell; the throng, that pressed against his shield,
Plunged in one heap, and spread along the field;
Bucklers on bucklers rang; steel clash'd on steel;
Their own swords gash'd them, wounding as they fell.
In one broad ruin lay the mingled crowd,
And cries, and hollow groans were heard aloud.
So some tall prop, that bears extended walls,
Mouldering, gives way; the mossy structure falls,
The long beams thundering echo round the skies,
Earth shakes beneath, and clouds of dust arise.
Thus sunk the warriors, some to rise no more,
Some, nimbly bounding, bathed their spears in gore.
Now haughty Jabin lifts a louder cry,
The tall hills echo, and the fields reply.
Fly, dastards, fly; death haunts your impious way;
Your proud name sinks; your squadrons swift decay:
Where now 's the chief, that led your hosts abroad?
Your far-fam'd bravery, and fictitious GOD?
Call the dread Power, that cleft the Egyptian wave,
To mourn your fate, and open your heads a grave.
Pour on, my heroes, while yon friendly light
Shines in the heaven, and joys to view the fight.
He spoke, and onward winged his dreadful form;
Hazor behind him, like an evening storm,
That rides on gloomy blasts above the hills,
And wakes the thunder of the mountain rills,
Rolled blackening. Israel's sons in sad dismay,
Bent towered the camp their slow, unwilling way.
Enraged Shelumiel raised his angry voice,
But raised in vain; no hero heeds the noise:
Hoarse with shrill cries, and wild with deep despair,
He rushed resistless on the thickest war,
From Jabin's lance a grateful exit found,
Sunk in his arms, and stiffen'd on the ground.
Far from the fight, despoiled of helm and shield,
Slept beauteous Irad on the mournful field;
Deaf to the groans, and careless of the cries;
His hair soft-whistling over his half-shut eyes.
On either side his lifeless arms were spread,
And blood ran round him from the countless dead.
Even there, two warriors, rushing over the plain,
Over crimson torrents, and over piles of sl^in,
Stopped, when the lovely form arose to sight,
Surveyed his charms, and wished no more the fight.
Ah! hapless Youth! cried one, with tender voice,
The Gods' fair offspring, formed for milder joys!
A face like thine the gentlest thoughts must move,
The gaze of Beauty, and the song of Love.
Sleep on, fair hero! for thy corse must lie
Bare to the fury of a stormy sky.
Thus he. His friend, by softer passions warmed,
By grief afflicted, and by beauty charmed,
Cries sadly -- No; for when my steps return,
This bleeding breast thy early fate shall mourn;
The melting song declare thy hapless doom,
And my own hand erect thy head a tomb.
But now, outspread over all the northern plain,
In sable grandeur rolled a countless train,
With trembling spears, with waving bucklers, bright,
And the quick gleams of interrupted light.
When Joshua strode the heathen host to dare,
To guard the camp was prudent Caleb's care.
He, coolly wise, had summoned all the train,
Disposed in ranks, and guided over the plain,
All armed for war, at distance meet to stay,
And wait the changes of the dreadful day.
In even scale while dubious combat hung,
And far in southern fields the tumult rung,
Silent, they listened to the blended cry,
And heard faint shouts in distant murmurs die.
But now the approaching clarion's dreadful sound
Denounces flight, and shakes the banner'd ground;
From clouded plains increasing thunders rise,
And drifted volumes roll along the skies.
At once the chief commands; the unnumber'd throng,
Like gathering tempests, darkly poured along:
High on the winds, unfurled in purple pride,
The imperial standard cast the view aside;
A hero there sublimely seemed to stand,
To point the conquest, and the flight command;
In arms of burnished gold the warrior shone,
And waved and brightened in the falling sun.
Swift towered the fight approached the impatient throng,
And wider poured the thickening dust along;
Loud, and more loud, victorious clamours grow,
And, more distinguished, breathe the sounds of woe;
Pale Judah's sons a yielding fight maintain,
And many a face looks backward over the plain,
When Caleb's mighty voice, in thunder driven,
Starts all the host, and rends the clouded heaven.
What dismal scenes, enraged the hero cries --
Convulse this heart, and pierce these bleeding eyes!
Shall Judah's race, my brethren and my boast,
Flee, vanquished, driven, before a heathen host?
Can men, can warriors own so black a part,
The best of chiefs, your Joshua to desert?
Say with what pangs will Heaven the wretches try,
That know no honor, and that feel no tie?
On yon bright plain, the conquering Chief behold,
Troops winged before him, cars tumultuous rolled,
With Heaven's imperial sword the fight commands,
And drives fierce ruin over decreasing bands!
Say, shall the Man, who fights, who bleeds for all,
See your base flight, and perish in your fall?
The Chief, as angels kind, as angels true,
Sink in the doom, he warded long from you?
Fly then; but know, a few short furlongs past,
Yon camp wild flames, and savage swords shall waste;
Besmeared with streaming blood, your parents lie,
And, dashed on stones, your gasping infants die;
Your wives, betrayed by such base culprits, feel
Abuse, more dreadful than the griding steel?
No arm, no sword the falling nation save,
But this dire evening open our common grave.
^an these dread scenes even dastards fail to arm?
Spring from the trance, and burst the sleepy charm;
Rise, rise like men; with shame, with vengeance burn;
Wipe foul disgrace, and swift to fight return.
And ye brave chiefs, that never knew to yield,
Or turn a backward foot from glory's field,
But, led by me, the van's bright honors claim,
Smile at fair death, and shrink from torturing shame;
Lift high the avenging sword, from pity free,
And cleave the wretch that basely dares to flee.
He spoke: the sound their manly bosoms sir'd,
Wheeled their long ranks, and every arm inspired;
Even cowards now to generous combat armed,
And fainting heroes with new vengeance warmed:
Fierce Hazor's sons with equal fury driven,
Like one wide cloud, that shades the skirts of even,
Rushed dark and dreadful: ranks, by ranks impelled,
Felt the keen lance, and heaped the streaming field.
Poised in a dire suspense, the combat hung;
Swords clash'd, mail rattled, striking bucklers rung;
Here his bold ranks great Caleb's arm inspired:
There Jabin's mighty hand his warriors fired:
No more the foaming steeds could trace their way,
So thick the squadrons wedged their black array:
Loud tumults roar, the clouded heavens resound,
And deep convulsions heave the laboring ground.
Meantime, great Joshua, lightening over the plain,
Hedged his dire path with heaps of ghastly slain;
Back rolled the squadrons; death's encircling shade
Involved his course, and hovered over his head.
At once a quivering voice fair Irad named,
Announc'd his ruin, and the flight proclaimed;
From ranks to trembling ranks, the mournful sound
Waked a sad groan, and breathed a gloom around,
With livid paleness clouded every face,
Congealed each vein, and stopped the growing chase.
On the far camp they turned a frequent view;
Their fainting falchions scarce the fig (...) renew:
Thronged in a blackening storm, the foe descends;
Swift drive the chariots; far the dust extends.
With smiles, bold heathens hail commencing flight;
Their lances shower; their eye balls flash delight.
Loud as old ocean beats the rocky shore,
Loud as the storm's deep-bursting thunders roar,
Vast shouts unrolling rend the etherial round,
Trembles all heaven, and shakes the gory ground.
Amazed, the Hero saw the wild despair:
Nor knew the cause, 'till Irad filled the air;
Irad, re-echoing with a fearful noise,
Pal'd the blank face, and froze the faltering voice.
Loud over the bellowing shouts resounds his cry --
My sons, my heroes, whither will ye fly?
Will ye pursue the camp? desert the slain?
And leave your Irad on the bloody plain?
Alas! you fly to more tremendous fates;
There ruin seeks you, and base death awaits:
There, in sad horror, will your eyes behold
Flames round your camp, your wives, your children rolled:
Let vengeance rouse, let Israel's name inspi^e,
Let danger steel you, and let Irad fire,
Turn, turn, this instant seals your final doom;
You gain the day, or fall without a tomb.
He said, and waved his broad, ensanguin'd shield;
Turn, warriors, turn, resounds along the field;
A newborn bravery fires the meanest soul:
Thick spears protend; ranks lengthening onward roll:
Less loud fierce whirlwinds through the valley pour:
Less loud broad flames the spiry town devour,
When, winged by blasts, red conflagrations rise,
Blaze in the cloud-capp'd towers, and scorch the skies.
Black drifts of dust smoke through the vast profound*
Shouts hoarsely rage, and hollow groans resound.
As, when through ether's fields dark storms are driven,
The swift-wing'd flame, descending, kindles heaven,
Scath'd by the dreadful stream, the huge pines fall,
And bursting glory wraps the smoking ball;
Over the tall mountains rolls the voice of GOD,
The plains all tremble, and the forests nod:
So swift, so bright, the rushing hero poured;
With every stroke his sword a life devoured;
Full on his foes he bore resistless storm,
Pale squadrons opening to his angry form;
His shield blazed horror, and his lofty hand
Fell, with swift ruin, on the lessening band;
Gash'd by his hand, the coursers burst their reins,
And hurled their riders on the bloody plains;
Gash'd by his hand, the prostrate riders die;
Crack the round wheels, the splendid trappings sly.
Meantime, far eastward Asher crowds the war,
Nor heeds the terrors of the rattling car.
Swift as on wings of fire a meteor driven,
Mounts over the hills, and sweeps the nightly heaven,
When the pale wanderer, lost in devious ways,
With bristling hair, starts at the sudden blaze,
Rushed rapid Zimri through the parting host;
Marked by his eye the hapless foe was lost;
Over quivering ranks his sword incessant hung;
Loud in their ears his voice funereal rung
Death's hideous peal; hard-following on the sound
Sunk the last stroke, and corses clothed the ground.
Now while the Hittites sled the dire alarm,
Their haughty king withstood the invading arm.
Shrill rose the thunders of his piercing cry,
Lost in deaf ears, and echoing through the sky;
With swifter steps, his warriors urged their flight,
And dark behind them rushed pursuing night.
Fierce on the king's bright car, with rapid force,
Resistless Zimri drove his dreadful course;
The dauntless monarch cast his mighty spear,
That sung, and trembled through the enlightened air;
Full on brave Zimri's helm the polished steel
Clash'd harmless, and to earth, rebounding, sell.
Regardless of the shock, the nimble chief
Sprang to the car; no sword could lend relief;
Caught by his arm, the heathen beat the ground;
Wide on his bosom sunk the fatal wound;
The greedy blade, deep-plunging, gash'd his side,
And down his buckler poured a bubbling tide.
Winged with fierce ardour, Zimri mounts the car,
And calls his heroes to the crimson war. --
Rush on to conquest, every generous band,
Lo the blessed triumphs of this happy hand!
Here, through his side the sword indignant thrust,
Their furious leader, gasping, bites the dust. --
Fly, miscreants, fly, and let your lives remain
To grace the falchions of a future plain.
From (...) like foes what warrior hopes a name?
(...) the purchase, victory scarce is fame. --
(...), loud and taunting, rose the hero's cry;
Swift rush his bands; the heathen swifter fly:
High in the chariot, in dread pomp revealed,
His gloomy hand the firey steeds impelled;
In dusty clouds the hosts are snatched from sight,
And Death, and Zimri, darken over the flight.
While thus brave Asher trod the conquering plain,
And drove wild ruin on the heathen train,
In the dire center, to resistless war
Proud Shimron's monarch urged the thundering car.
In early youth, he saw fierce Jabin's hand
Seize his fair crown, and rule his fertile land;
Then to the victor's court a captive brought,
In arms was trained, in arts politic taught,
Won by soft wiles, his throne of Jabin held,
And bade his realm imperial tributes yield.
There, fired to glory by the monarch's voice,
He mocked his pattern, and obeyed his choice,
And hoped from conduct, formed by rules so just,
Alone to reign, when Jabin slept in dust.
Full on his lofty breast the flashing shield
Gleam'd a bright terror through the clouded field:
As when the Sun, over scorched Peruvia's plain,
Disease, and Death, and Horror in his train,
Unveils his crimson face, distained with blood,
Burns the brown hills, and sickens every flood.
Loud rang the hero's voice; his lances flew,
And every lance the foremost warrior slew.
On him great Joshua glanced a darkening eye,
And rushed impetuous, with a deathful cry:
His sword, swift-circling, hewed his dismal way,
Felled ranks at once, and broke the deep array.
Amazed, the heathen cast a look behind,
And thus in doubt, explored his mighty mind* --
Shall I resisting dare that arm of death,
And ^each his heart, or nobly yield my breath*
Or with some distant band the foe engage
Where bravery fail^, and turn the battle's rage?
This arm, this spear may spill his hated life;
And O what wreaths shall crown the happy strife!
What bright rewards shall Jabin's hand bestow!
What matchless honors round my temples flow!
I claim the contest -- hence base flight and shame --
To fight is glory, and to die is fame.
He spoke; while Ruin, riding through the plain,
Burst over his ranks, and marked her path with slain:
On Joshua's helm she sat; tremendous hung
His arm on high, his voice like thunder rung:
Near the bright car he wheeled his streaming blade,
And dust around him cast a night-like shade.
Full on his buckler clash'd the heathen's spear,
Pierced the thick plates, and flashed behind in air;
Grazing his side, it cut the folded garb,
And drops of crimson stained the polished barb.
With joy, the king his faithful javelin viewed,
Leaped from his car, and with his sword pursued.
Then Joshua's hand uprear'd his falchion high,
Its flames bright-circling in the dusky sky;
First his foe's arm dropped on the bloody field;
The second stroke divides his glittering shield;
Full on his throat the fierce avenging blade
Sinks; the freed spirit flits to midnight shade.
"Pour on to glory" -- rung the Leader's voice,
The trembling host shrunk backward at the noise;
Sad Shimron's sons beheld their monarch dead,
Raised one deep howl, and, winged with horror, fled.
Thronged in a gloomy storm, their headlong foes
Round the dire slight with listed falchions rose;
Broad streams of blood o'er-ran the scenes of death,
And sullen groans proclaimed the parting breath*
As boiling Etna rolls a flood of fire
Down her rough rocks; and plains, and towns expire,
Licked by the flames, exhaling rivers rise,
And crumbling groves smoke upward to the skies,
Swift pours the blazing deluge on the shore,
The scorched main foams, the hissing billows roar:
So fierce and dreadful, flew the victor host,
In night involved, in dusty volumes lost.
Squadrons thick-strown were scattered over the fields.
And helms, and swords, and spears, and sanguine shields.
Huge piles of slaughter gathering round his course,
On Shimron Joshua winged his mighty force.
Like two red flames his vivid eye balls glow,
And shoot fierce lightenings on the astonished foe;
Before, expanded, his meteorous shield
Blazed a broad ruin through the stormy field;
Round the wild war his flashing terrors fly;
Cars burst before him; -- steeds, and heroes die.
So rushed an angel down the midnight gloom,
When Egypt's firstborn sunk in one broad tomb;
High in dark clouds the avenging Vision hung,
His path, like distant thunder, hoarsely rung*
Flames shot before him, whirlwinds rolled around,
Bowed the tall hills, and heaved the trembling ground.
Not with less terror blazed the Leader on;
'Twas ruin all and one unbounded groan;
None looked behind, none turned a hearkening ear;
Nor hills, nor streams impede the full career:
High over the ragged rocks they nimbly bound,
Dash through the floods, and scower the level ground:
First in the tumult, Youth impels his flight;
Springs over the field, and scapes pursuing night:
Pale Age with quivering limb^, and slow-drawn pace,
Feels the keen sword, and sinks beneath the chase.
Far distant, Zimri, like a sweeping storm.
Crim in the chariot raised his gloomy form;
Still on the hindmost fell his fateful sword;
Earth shook, air trembled, heaven with thunder roared:
Often, from the car descending to the plain,
He streamed, like lightening, over the ghastly slain,
Then swiftly rose, and on the heathens sped,
His wheels dark-rolling over the unnumber'd dead.
Meantime, with all the rage of combat fired,
While throngs of warriors round his steps expired;
While now, first disobedient to his call,
The balanced victory doubted where to fall:
While Caleb's arm with youthful vigor warmed,
Shamed Judah's thousands and their vengeance armed;
From rank to rank impatient Jabin flew,
Drove these with threats, and those with praises drew.
But now the eastern plain loud thunders rend;
The shrill cars rattle; hoarser cries ascend;
Progressive clouds, in thickening volumes driven,
Roll towered the south, and shade the dusty heaven.
From the tall car the Chief surveyed the field,
And every circling scene at once beheld,
Even the far wood, with sudden flashes bright,
And the dire omens of tumultuous flight.
Around the war he cast a searching view,
Saw the day lost, and all its evils knew;
Deep from his inmost soul burst forth a sigh,
And momentary sadness gloom'd his eye.
But soon his brow resumed a cheerful grace,
And living ardour fired his artful face.
Full well the monarch knew that fears begun,
From breast to breast, like glancing lightenings, run;
That one rank fled instructs a host to fly,
And cowards' eyes teach heroes' hearts to die --
Then, ere his friends the dire event divine,
Or Judah's sons their kindred victors join,
A wise retreat his mighty mind ordained,
And thus the rage of war his voice restrained.
Hear, all ye chiefs, brave Hazor's bands that guide,
Your nation's pillars, and your monarch's pride.
Your matchless deeds this raptured eye has told,
And fame's bright hand to distant years enrolled.
But see, over western hills the sun's low fire
Cuts short the day, and bids the host retire.
Firm be your ranks, man fast inlock'd with man,
The rear led onward, fixed the generous van;
At once let chief with chief inspired combine,
And against the foe extend the embattled line;
Brace firm the shield; the moveless spear protend;
Join hand and heart, and every rank defend.
Your prince behold; when Hazor claims the strife,
My wounds are transport, and a toy my life.
The hero spoke: as by one soul inspired,
Swift to their well-known posts the chiefs retired;
At once, by banners rang'^ (...) brave the storm,
Firm, dreadful lines the (...) squadrons form.
Dire over the vanguard, sh^^^d with shield combined,
Spear locked with spear, the undaunted leaders joined;
Against Judah's host, with ridgy terrors bright,
Rose a long wall, and flashed a fearful light.
Over the tremendous scene the Monarch's car
Poured death around, and ruled the grisly war:
Fierce on the foe, wherever their steps pursue,
From rank to rank the mighty warrior flew;
Hearts formed of stubborn steel his deeds appall;
The distant tremble, and the nearer fall;
Till Caleb's voice commands the chase to stay,
And yields his foes an unmolested way.
Then, still and slow, while Judah's host admired,
In gloomy strength the sullen storm retired.
So, when in heaven propitious breezes rise,
And on the deep the nimble vessel flies,
Shagg'd with brown shades, that over the billows lower,
In grim, dark pomp recedes the clifted shore;
Less seen, and less, the awful scenes decay,
And lost in blue confusion fade away.
With gore all hideous, and with dust imbrown'd,
In the dire front terrific Jabin frowned;
His lifted arm prepared the fatal blow,
And menaced vengeance to the approaching foe. --
So, forward driven by earth's convulsive pangs,
The tall, hoar cliff in dubious terror hangs;
High poised in dread suspense, its hovering brow
Lowers swift destruction on the world below:
Amazed, the swain, while sudden fears appall
Starts, as the tottering ruin seems to fall.
Enjoy, he cried, imperious foes, enjoy
The fancied triumph, combat shall destroy:
But know, ye boasters, soon this arm shall tear
The short-lived crown, your haughty temples wear;
Soon your vain chiefs, your nation want a name,
And all your glories sink in endless shame.
But now, sublime in crimson triumph borne,
The sacred standard mocked the etherial morn;
Wide on the winds its waving splendors flowed,
And called the warriors from the distant wood.
Behind great Joshua, Hazor's sons to dare,
Pour the bold thousands to the western war,
Beyond Ai's walls, the lessening heathen train
In well-form'd squadrons cross the distant plain:
Part still in sight their shady files extend;
Part fill the wood, and part the hills ascend;
To cease from toil the prudent Chief commands,
And balmy quiet sooths the wearied bands.
Half lost in mountain groves, the sun's broad ray
Shower'd a full splendour round his evening way;
Slow Joshua strode the lovely Youth to find*
The unwilling bands more slowly moved behind.
Soon as the matchless form arose to view,
Over their sad faces shone the sorrowing dew;
Silent they stood. To speak the Leader tried,
But the choked accents on his palate died.
His bleeding bosom beat with inward pains,
And leaden languors ran along his veins.
Ah, best and bravest of thy race! he said,
And gently raised the pale, re^lining head --
Lost are thy matchless charms, thy glory gone --
Gone is the glory which thy hand has won.
In vain on thee thy nation cast her eyes;
In vain with joy beheld thy light arise;
In vain she wished thy scepter to obey;
Vain were her wishes; vain the destined sway.
Oh! Irad, loveliest Irad, nature's pride!
Would Heaven, myself for thee, for thee had died!
Nor more; the thoughts lay struggling in his breast;
But tears, expressive tears forbade the rest.
Borne by six chiefs, in silence, over the plain,
Fair Irad moved before the mournful train;
Great Joshua's arm sustained his sword, and shield;
The afflicted thousands lengthening through the field.
When, crowned with flowers, the maidens at her side.
With gentle steps advanced great Caleb's pride.
Her snowy hand, inspired by restless love,
Of the lone wild-rose two rich wreaths inwove;
Fresh in her hand the flowers rejoice to bloom,
And round the fair-one shed the mild perfume.
Over all the train her active glances roved;
She gazed, and gazing, missed the Youth she loved;
Some dire mischance her boding heart divined,
And thronging terrors filled her anxious mind.
As near the host her quickening footsteps drew,
The breathless hero met her trembling view;
From her chilled hand the headlong roses fell,
And life's gay beauty bade her cheeks farewell;
Over her fair face unmeaning paleness sat,
And, sunk to earth, she felt no hapless fate.
With anguish Caleb saw her fading charms,
And caught the favorite in his hastening arms.
Revived with piercing voice, that froze his soul,
She forced the big, round tear unwish'd to roll;
By all his love, besought him soon to lead
Where cruel friendship snatched his lovely dead.
In vain the chief his anguish strove to hide,
Sighs rent his breast, and chilled the vital tide.
To Joshua then, whose heart beside her mourned,
With gaze of keen distress, the charmer turned. --
Oh, generous Chief, to misery ever kind, --
Thou love my fire -- support his sinking mind!
Thy friendly wish delights to lessen woe --
See how his tears for fallen Irad flow!
He claims thy friendship -- generous hero, see,
Lost to himself, his fondness bleeds for me. --
To view th^^ hapless Youth, distressed he fears.
Would wound my soul, and force too copious tears.
But lead, oh lead me, where the Youth is borne!
Calm is my heart, nor will my bosom mourn --
So cold that heart, it yields no pitying sigh --
And see no tear bedews this marbled eye.
She said, and looked resistless; soft reclined
On Joshua's arm, she forced his melting mind.
Pressing her hand, he traced a gentle way,
Where breathless Irad, lost in slumbers lay.
From the pale face his chilling hand withdrew
The decent veil, and gave the Youth to view.
Fixed over the form, with solemn gaze she hung,
And strong, deep sighs burst over her frozen tongue.
On Joshua then she cast a wishful look;
Wild was her tearless eye, and rolling spoke
Anguish unutterable. Thrice she tried
To vent her woes, and thrice her effort, died.
At length, in accents of ecstatic grief,
Her voice bewildered, gave her heart relief.
Is this the doom we dread? -- is this to die?
To sleep? -- to feel no more? -- to close the eye? --
Slight is the change -- how vain the childish fear*
That trembles, and recoils, when death is near?
I too, methinks, would share the peaceful doom,
And seek a calm repose in Irad's tomb.
This breath I know, this useless breath must fail,
These eyes be darkened, and this face grow pale --
But thou art pale, oh Youth! thy lot I crave,
And every grief shall vanish in the grave.
She ceased, the tender chief without delay,
Soft pressing, kindly forced her steps away.
Slow towered the camp, with solemn pace, they drew;
The corse moves on; the mournful bands pursue.
Pale Uzal follows, virtuous now no more;
And brave Shelumiel, black with clotted gore.
Unnumber'd tears their hapless fate bewail,
And voice to voice resounds the dreadful tale.
But Irad, matchless Irad, called in vain,
Breathes wide a solemn sadness round the plain:
Unhappy, to their tents the host retired,
And gradual; over the mountains day expired*
THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK IX.

ARGUMENT.
Evening. Interview between Selima and her parents. Morning. Distress of the
Camp. Joshua directs Zimri to bury the dead. Funeral of Irad. Burial of the
dead. Hareshah informs Joshua of a combination of the surrounding nations
against Gibeon, and solicits his assistance. Story of Elam and Mina. Hareshah
is directed to wait until the divine pleasure shall be known. Eveneng. Joshua
walks out on the plain, northward of the camp, and hears Selima lamenting the
death of Irad. Affected by the scene, he breaks out into a soliloquy on hi^
distress, and is reproved by an angel, who delivers him a message from the Most
High, and directs him to prepare for a vision of futurity.

THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK IX.
NOW sober evening hung her curtains round,
And gloomy sadness brooded over the ground.
All pale, and solemn, rose the languid moon,
And shed a feeble twilight from her throne.
Sad in her tent, the feeling maiden sat,
Fed on her woes, and sighed her hapless fate.
Dissolved in tears, her render parents came,
To share her grief, and stay life's parting flame.
Like dull, cold lights, that hover over the tomb,
A lone lamp languish'd round the silent room:
Beside her couch, two lorn attendants stayed,
And drooping, lingering, eyed the unconscious maid.
Over the sad scene the pair attentive hung;
Then round the favorite form all-anxious clung:
Her tearless eye balls scarce the virgin turned,
But, fixed in blank despair, her slumbering Irad mourned.
Awake! oh wake! the tender mother cried --
My child! my darling! nature's loveliest pride!
Awake, and hear! oh hear thy mother's call!
Behold these tears for thee in anguish fall!
Ah see thy sire, with mighty woes oppressed!
His sighs hard-bursting from his heaving breast!
Turn, turn thine eye! thy hapless parents save!
Nor speed our footsteps to the dreary grave!
She spoke. Overwhelmed in bitterness of fate,
Still the sweet maiden unregardful sat:
Fixed on the parent, drooped her failing eyes*
And deep, and heavy, heaved her long-drawn sighs.
Again the mother, lost in sad amaze,
Cast on her woes a strong, expressive gaze*
And thus -- O child of parents once too blessed!
Let not such anguish tear thy bleeding breast.
Swell not, with other pangs, thy miseries dire,
A dying mother, and a widowed sire:
The balm of patience summon to thy soul:
Let Heaven's high voice excessive grief control.
He called, from earth's dark wild, the Youth away;
And called complacent, to the world of day.
To nobler scenes his mind seraphic flies,
To bliss, to Hezron, angels, and the skies.
Thus spoke the parent. Struggling rose the fair,
And looked unmeasured woe, and blank despair:
Again she languish'd; to the couch she fell,
And life sad-lingering seemed to bid farewell.
Pierced to the soul, the tender father stood,
And, lost in woes like here is, the darling viewed,
He saw the mild reproof her sense recall,
Her strength revived her tears in silence fall;
A beam of glimmering hope his grief allayed,
And thus, with grave, but gentle voice, he said --
O child of love! sweet daughter of delight!
Let not that death-like gaze our souls affright.
Arise to thought I to sense, and reason, rise!
Nor dumb and marbled grieve against the Skies.
Such mighty woes no earthly loss requires;
Not Irad claims them, nor true love inspires*
All is not lost; thy parents still survive*
And for thy bliss, and in thy life, they live.
He spoke. Again the virgin, whelmed in woes,
With slow, and forceful effort seebly rose.
His voice revered arous'd her quickening soul,
Loosed her sad tongue, and taught her tears to roll;
Pressing her mother's hand, with head reclined,
She thus disclosed the anguish of her mind.
O best of parents, ever to daughter given!
Loved, next to Irad! reverenced, next ^o Heaven!
Let not these frowns your hapless child destroy,
Bereft of every hope, and every joy!
What hand, what power, can Irad's breath restore?
Those eyes shall beam, that face shall smile, no more;
That voice never warble music's sweetest sound;
And that pale form must moulder in the ground.
It Is this, awakes the anguish of your mind;
But ye can weep, and weep to Heaven resigned.
Not so your daughter: formed of feebler frame,
Grief rends her soul, and damps the vital flame.
Yet even her heart but shares the common pain,
Partakes the tears of all, and breathes their sighs again.
Far round all Israel cast attentive eyes,
And see for him the general anguish rise.
See his own son the childless sire forget;
The childless mother only weeps his fate:
His fate alone the virgin's shrieks proclaim;
And the poor, wailing infant lisps his name.
Even lifeless nature mourns him, wrapped in gloom,
Overcast with woe and conscious of his tomb.
I saw the sun forlorn, and slow, retire;
I saw the silent evening sad expire;
In shades of double gloom ascend the night*
And the stars languish, with a mournful light.
How cold yon moon extends her widowed beam!
Announcing death, and pale with sickening gleam!
How faint her feeble glimmerings spre^d the plain!
How still, and lonely, light the azure main!
While thus impassioned, lifeless nature all,
In speechless sorrow, mourns the hero's fall;
Shall I, beloved, beyond all merit dear,
His best Selima, and his chosen fair,
Shall I, O sire! with common anguish weep?
And over his grave, with dull indifference, sleep?
Dumb fields, and senseless forests would reprove
Such base oblivion of so bright a love.
Pleased, the great sire beheld her thoughts return,
And heard her melting accents Irad mourn;
And thus -- O brightest, loveliest of thy kind,
Graced with each charm, that robes the angel's mind,
More dear than ever child to sire was dear,
As virtue lovely, and as truth sincere!
Think not thy parents on their darling frown,
Or feel a thought less tender than thy own.
Like thine, our wishes the blessed Youth approved;
Like thee, we chose him, and like thee, we loved.
But O all beauteous daughter! shall thy sire
Behold thee, whelmed in boundless grief expire?
Or see thy life to hopeless anguish given?
Or hear thee murmur against a righteous Heaven?
Again to earth could thy fond Youth remove,
His heart would chide thee, and his voice reprove;
Bid thee, submissive, to thy Maker fall,
Embrace his hand, and wake at duty's call;
Bid thee to him thy patient thoughts resign,
And blame thy wanderings, with a love like mine:
From grief's excess, thy parent would restrain,
Assert Heaven's right, and fix the bounds of pain.
Ah sire revered! the pleading maid returns --
No common loss thy hapless daughter mourns.
Search the wide world. Can all her regions boast
One youth so fair, so bright, so early lost?
How Age admired him! how all Israel loved!
The world applauded! and the Heavens approved!
His form was all, the brightest thoughts can frame;
His mind was all, the fondest wish can claim;
Whatever is great, or good, or soft, or fair,
Refined, or lovely, fixed its mansion there.
Even he, whose hand the sacred scepter bears,
Is but an Irad, of maturer years.
It is, O it is, as if, in yon fair clime,
Some prince of angels, bright in glory's prime,
Transcending every peer, in worth supreme,
Mitred with truth, and sunn'd with virtue's beam,
In youth's gay morn, in beauty's endless bloom,
And life, superior to the potent tomb,
Had closed his smiles, while Heaven refused to save,
And sunk his glories in the dreary grave.
What tears, for such a loss, would seraphs shed?
Tears, rich as theirs, should mourn their rival dead.
And where, O where shall poor Selima find
One beam of light to cheer her drooping mind?
All sad, I wander round ^he earth, and skies;
But no soft solace meets my failing eyes.
To friends I fly: those weeping friends I see
Sunk in the deep despair, that buries me.
For him, O kindest, tenderest mother! rise
Thy heartfelt anguish, and thy hopeless sighs.
Thy tears, all-gentle sire! resistless shed,
Approve my grief, and weep the hero dead.
No cheering hope your fondest love can give,
Sooth your sad child, or make her Irad live:
Then bid me mourn; this last relief bestow,
And yield my bosom to the peace of woe.
Oppressed with grief, the feeling sire rejoined --
Sweet, lovely charmer of thy father's mind!
From earth, from friends, thy hope can never flow;
Too poor, to yield the balm of real woe.
When real ills invade; when Want annoys;
When hissing Shame, with lingering death destroys;
When pain torments, or sickness wastes our bloom;
Or friends too dear desert us, for the tomb:
This barren world no solace can supply:
But all earth's portion is to weep, and die.
Yet there are springs whence hope and comfort rise,
Springs of pure life, and flowing from the skies:
Thence gentle Mercy sends her treasures down,
And bright Religion makes the bliss her own.
To famished Want she spreads a boundless store,
With that unblessed, the heir of worlds is poor:
Repentant Shame she bids to crowns aspire,
Grace ever new, and glory ever higher:
On earth, in heaven, her wealth and honors rise,
Ennoble angels, and enrich the skies.
Decay and Pain to cheerful peace she leads,
With patience arms them, and with comfort feeds;
And points the realms, where Health and Beauty bloom,
And Life, with smiles of triumph, braves the tomb.
When Friends, if Virtue's friends from earth retire,
And waste the bosom, with corroding fire;
She sees those friends again immortal live,
Rise from the grave, and dying worlds survive,
To each the form, the mind, of angels given,
Fair sons of light, and habitants of heaven.
She too, and she alone, a Friend secures,
That through all times, and in all scenes* endures
At hand, to hear, to love, to bless, to save,
In life, and death, and worlds beyond the grave;
As heaven over earth sublime, all friends above,
In power in wisdom, truth, and boundless love.
In grief, even vast as thine, his hand can heal,
And teach the heart its anguish not to feel.
Bright from the tomb, she sees thine ^rad rise
To peace, and life, and glory, in the skies;
One little moment separate from thy arms;
Again to meet thee, with superior charms;
To hail thy rising soul, from realms above;
To smile as angels, and as Heaven to love.
Then, O thou child of truth! to her control
Resign the tumults of thy troubled soul.
She on thy wounds shall shed her healing power,
Thy faith revive, thy wonted peace restore;
With softest music charm the passing day;
Bid Heavenly visions over thee nightly play;
The tents of angels round thy curtains spread:
Invite the guardian cherub to thy bed;
Calm, with sweet slumbers, every stormy care,
And dry, with downy hand, the plaintive tear.
She too shall life's rough path with flowers adorn;
With spring's mild splendour, cheer the wintry morn;
Thy yielding feet, in strong temptations save;
Welcome grim death, and triumph over the grave?
To brighter scenes, in happier regions, fly,
And lift to thrones of glory in the sky.
The parent spoke. The hapless maiden sat
Forlorn, and sad, bewailing Irad's fate.
Silenced, but not relieved, her drooping mind
Failed not to sigh, nor yet to Heaven resigned:
At length with vast, and heavy woes oppressed,
She sunk in slumbers of tumultuous rest.
Mild rose the morn; and, round the tented plain,
The cries of thousands mourned their kindred slain.
In silent woe the hoary parent stood,
And wail'd his hopes, all sunk in fields of blood;
His sons, sweet charm of ^ature's evil day,
^air light of age, and life's most pleasing stay,
Now left him helpless, and alone, to find
Some foreign aid to sooth a drooping mind.
Strong pangs of sorrow fixed his speaking eye,
And his racked heart heaved deep the heavy sigh.
The pale, sad widow cast a tender view
On her sweet race, and shed the plaintive dew:
Touched with her woes, the beauteous orphans mourned,
And artless tears their infant cheeks adorned.
The bride deplored a young, fond husband's doom,
Snatched from her arms, and banished to the tomb;
Her joys all ended in one dreadful day;
Her brightest hopes forever swept away;
No prospect left her, but long years of woe;
No wish, but ransom from these realms below.
These scenes, with anguish, pierced the Leader's breast,
Blank'd his fair prospects, and his soul depressed*
Yet still, before the host, a cheerful grace,
With blameless art, arrayed his tranquil face.
In all their pains, to him they cast their eyes;
Like a fond sire, he heard their plaintive cries:
From his calm brow they caught the placid smile,
Forgot their miseries, and despised their toil.
Now in the silence of his tent, alone
He mourned their fears, and made their grief his own,
When Zimri came, with anxious care oppressed,
And Joshua thus his faithful friend addressed.
Hear'st thou what sorrows fill the murmuring air?
The warriors' groans? and terrors of the fair?
What tears of anguish every face bedew!
What throngs of orphans crowd upon the view!
Oh heavy, heavy pangs Jehovah's hand
On this sad heart, and on his chosen band!
Ah, where is Hezron? chief of spotless name!
His life so virtuous! and so pure his fame!
How soon, O pride of nature, art thou fled
To the dark, lonely mansions of the dead!
How soon to thy compeers, thine angels, given,
All-beauteous Irad! fairest plant of heaven!
But still superior grace may point a way,
Through the long darkness to the promised day*
These mournful thoughts with prudent care conceal;
Nor let thy guarded brow a pain reveal.
Thy face they watch, the motions of thine eye,
Know all thy fears, and number every sigh.
When leaders smile, their looks the host inspire;
Are leaders brave? the vulgar catch the fire;
With us they faint, they tremble, and they grieve;
With us they joy, they dare, they die, they live.
But now more solemn scenes thy care demand;
Choose twice ten thousand of the warrior band;
To yonder hapless field thy footsteps speed,
And pay the last, sad honors to the dead.
In one broad pit, our slaughtered friends entomb;
Nor grudge our foes the same unenvied doom:
Let men, let brave men, never refuse the brave
The humble blessing of a peaceful grave.
I go, the darling hero's fate to close,
And bid the matchless Youth a sweet repose:
It Is all we can, the friendly tear to shed,
And raise the light (...) his lovely head.
With soft affection^ ^hus the mighty Chief*
And Zimri slow (...), with answering grief.
Meantime, grave warriors, in black robes arrayed,
And many a youth, and many a lovely maid,
Along the northern green, the Chief pursued;
Flowers graced their hands, and tears their cheeks bedewed.
For now brave Irad closed his final doom,
Borne to his darksome, everlasting home.
Behind the bier, that slow, and solemn moved,
Pensive Selima followed him she loved;
On the sad coffin fixed a steadfast eye;
Nor dropped a tear, nor breathed a tender sigh.
Her dark-brown hair a wreath of roses crowned;
Her robes of sable flowed along the ground:
A flower, just opening to the morning dew,
Blushed in her hand, and brightened to the view.
Now in the grave the breathless Youth was laid:
Sadly serene advanced the lovely maid;
With speaking eyes, bewailed her hapless doom,
And dropped the sloweret in the lonely tomb.
High on the plain the funeral earth was spread;
The turf's gay verdure flourished over his head:
Each gentle face deplored his lot severe,
And spoke the expressive language of a tear.
Near the fair maiden stood the exalted Chief,
Fixed in mute woe, and great in manly grief.
No ill-timed comfort would he strive to lend,
Nor ape the flatteries of the specious friend:
Yet the soft texture of his heart could feel --
Why should he open the wound he could not heal?
As thus their bosoms wail'd his hapless end,
And mourned, as each had lost his chosen friend;
Admired why Heaven had made such worth in vain,
And why confined it to the dreadful plain;
His generous deeds in deep despair ran over,
And saw him live, and speak, and act, no more;
Through the sad silence of the solemn scene,
The bands of Zimri crossed the gloomy green.
Unnumber'd widows, on the field, they found,
Whose sons, whose husbands, strewn the crimson ground:
Slow moved the fair-ones round the dreadful plain,
Washed the black gore, and proved the countless slain;
And when the partners of their joys they knew,
They cleans'd their stiffen'd wounds in briny dew;
Wail'd their hard lot, that swept, in life's gay bloom,
Each hope, each rapture, to the sullen tomb;
With tears of anguish, envied earth its trust,
And grudged the grave the loved the precious dust.
Three days, above the undistinguished dead,
Their friends, and foes, the gathered earth was spread.
A hill of stones, sad wound to human pride!
Just marked the place, where countless warriors died.
As there, in future years, the lonely swain
Drove his small flock, to feed the grass-grown plain,
Near the rough mass, in solemn thought, reclined,
Thus sad reflections filled his pondering mind.
Ah proud inglorious man! whose insect life
Is lost in pain, in vanity, and strife.
What mighty toils, to gain immortal fame!
What wastes, what slaughters, build the darling name!
Yet this rude tomb, this shapeless pile, contains,
Of chiefs, of kings, the poor, the sole remains.
This prize to win, must nations then expire?
And seats of peace, and joy, be whelmed in fire?
Oh Heaven, in pity, loose the ties, that bind
To man's black race, a just and honest mind!
Low sunk the sun. As now the chief returned
From midst the camp, and hapless Israel mourned,
Hareshah sad, beside his tent, he found;
Prostrate he fell, and reverent kissed the ground.
Uprais'd by Joshua's hand, again he stood,
And thus his fear in plaintive accents flowed.
Hail mighty prince! to thee alone ti^ given,
To taste the favor of indulgent Heaven;
To guide, with prosperous hand, the race he chose,
And hurl destruction on resisting foes.
Thou know, with thee how Gibeon's sons are joined:
What views unite us, and what covenants bind;
This, through the circling realms by fame was sung.
And round each realm, the alarm of vengeance rung:
To waste her domes the general voice decreed,
And millions haste to atchieve the barbarous deed.
Salem's imperious sons, in proud array,
And haughtier Hebron, thither bend their way;
In martial pomp unnumber'd-Lachish shines,
And Jarmuth brave with savage Eglon joins;
With these, fierce nations speed from realms unknown,
Near the first glimmerings of the dawning sun.
There too* O Prince! tremendous Jabin stands*
^rings all his chiefs, and leads his veteran bands,
Wings the dread lightenings of the war around,
And rolls his thunders over the embattled ground.
From these dread powers, so numerous, and so brave,
Naught less than Heaven, and thy own hand, can save.
Worn with long years, Aradon's trembling arm
Ill wards the vengeance of so fierce a storm.
And, -- O exalted Prince! prepare to hear
A tale more sad than ever pierced thine ear --
In the dark grave is generous Elam laid,
And near him sleeps the Heaven-instructed maid.
How fell the lovely pair? the Leader cried;
And, with sad voice, the stranger chief replied.
When cheerful morn walked forth in golden air,
Rode the young hero, and his blooming fair,
With nimble hounds, that bade the forest roar;
To chase the buck, to wound the bristly boar;
On two white steeds they bounded over the plain,
And gayly round them pranc'd a youthful train*
No coats of steely mail their limbs invest;
No buckler sparkles over the fearless breast;
Through sylvan shades they traced an easy way:
Each mind was sunshine, and each face was gay.
At once, with dreadful din before them rose
The trump of death, and shout of savage foes.
From the thick covert burst a barbarous throng,
Rang clashing arms, and scream'd a hideous song;
His gallant friends, a young, but chosen few,
The prince, serenely brave, around him drew;
With firm, bold breast, they fought, and at his side,
In death they triumphed, for with him they died.
As through his bosom sung the fatal steel,
He raised his hand, and waved a long farewell:
On the sweet maid his eye all-wishful hung,
And half-form'd accents ceased upon his tongue.
Quick round the youth a tender arm she threw.
Fell as he fell, and wished to perish too.
The quivering form she pressed, in icy death,
Kissed his pale lips, and sucked his parting breath.
No more her careless thoughts attempt to fly;
No more her ear attends the horrid cry:
Close to the wound her snowy hand applied
Withdrew the lance, and stopped the purple tide.
A grim barbarian to the fair-one came,
Pierced her white side, and forced the vital stream;
With one weak gasp, on Elam's bosom laid,
Her bloom all vanished, and her spirit fled.
In distant fields, we heard the trumpet's sound,
And strode impatient to the fatal ground.
On the sad scene, by favoring shrubs concealed,
A youth, unarmed, the dire event beheld:
He, drowned in tears, disclosed the fierce affray,
And showed where Mina, and her Elam, lay.
On the cold earth, the withered leaves he pressed;
The fair yet panting at his lifeless breast.
Her hand was feebly laid against the spear,
Still in her side, and in her eye a tear.
So blooms a flower beside the autumnal stream,
And waves, and wantons, in the solar beam,
Nor knows the frost, that in the midnight sky
Lurks for its charms, and bids its beauty die.
The hapless pair in snow-white robes arrayed,
To the same grave our friendly hands conveyed.
Kind youths, and virgins, there at dawn appear,
Strew fragrant flowers, and drop the tender tear;
There the sad wild rose yields its withering bloom,
And melancholy music mourns their doom.
Pierced through his thigh, and weltering on the ground,
A savage wretch, beneath an oak, we found.
By favors won, he showed the impending doom,
What bands are gathered, and what heroes come.
To spy these realms, he cried, from Hebron's land,
Through many a forest roved our warlike band --
Led by bold Hoham, from far distant shores,
Thence countless hosts invade yon shining towers;
There giant Zedeck's lofty car is rolled;
There beams young Piram in refulgent gold;
High raised in air, ten thousand standards play,
And chiefs unnumber'd hail the deathful day.
Thus spoke the wretch. As over yon mountain's brow
I steered my path, and eyed the world below,
From distant fields, the trump's approaching sound
Waved over the plains, and filled the groves around;
Swift towered the walls long, dusty volumes came,
And dreadful gleams of interrupted flame;
On high the banners danced; a mighty train,
With lines immeasurable, hid the plain.
Oh, by the covenant, which thy voice has given,
By the blessed favor of all-bounteous Heaven,
That Heaven, which makes thee his peculiar care,
Aid our weak race, and grant our righteous prayer!
Thus mourned the chief, while Caleb slow drew nigh,
His anguish'd bosom heaving many a sigh;
His soul, in silence, mourned the hapless pair,
All-lovely Irad and his beauteous fair;
When Joshua sad the hoary sage addressed --
Great prince, this night Hareshah is thy guest,
His voice a mournful tale from Gibeon brings,
How against her walls Canaan arms her kings.
Our aid he claims; an aid by covenant due;
But ah, what griefs our hapless race pursue!
Again the Eternal arm our course withstands,
Cuts off our chiefs, and slays our hapless bands.
First Hezron slept: then virtuous Uzal fell,
And brave Shelumiel bade the world farewell,
Next lovely Irad found a hapless doom;
And now sweet Mina seeks an early tomb.
Should still new courses unadvised be tried.
Fresh wrath may kindle, and fresh ills betide.
Let then this chief in peace with thee retire,
'Till Heaven his counsels, and our course, inspire.
He spoke. Hareshah with the sage withdrew,
While the sun lingering slowly left the view;
The mourning Hero sought a slight repose,
And broken slumbers over his eyelids rose.
Now Night, in vestments robbed, of cloudy die.
With sable grandeur clothed the orient sky,
Impelled the sun, obsequious to her reign,
Down the far mountains to the western main;
With magic hand, becalmed the solemn even,
And drew day's curtain from the spangled heaven.
At once the planets sailed around the throne;
At once ten thousand worlds in splendour shone:
Behind her car, the moon's expanded eye
Rose from a cloud, and looked around the sky:
Far up the immense her train sublimely roll,
And dance, and triumph, round the lucid pole.
Faint shine the fields, beneath the shadowy ray:
Slow fades the glimmering of the west away;
To sleep the tribes retire; and not a sound
Flows through the air, or murmurs on the ground.
The Chief, arising, over the darksome green
Turned his slow steps, and viewed the splendid scene;
With wondering ga^e, surveyed the vaulted even,
The half-seen world, and all the pomp of Heaven.
Wide arched the palace of the Almighty hand,
Its walls far-bending over the sea, and land:
Round the vast roof, from ancient darkness sprung,
In living pride, immortal tapers hung:
The lamp on high an endless luster shed,
And earth's broad pavement all beneath was spread.
From distant hills, red flames began to rise,
Topp'd the talls towers, and climbed the kindling skies:
Thick streamed the transient stars* and all around
A still, mild glory robbed the twilight ground*
Now towered the north he bent his wandering way,
Each scene revolving of the busy day,
When lo! soft sounds his startled ear assail,
Soft as the whisper of the flowing gale.
Now mournful murmurs slowly-pensive rise;
Now languid harmony in silence dies:
Now nobler strains, with animating fire,
Warm the bold raptures of the living lyre.
Whither, O whither is thy beauty gone?
To what far region? to what world unknown*
No lone, drear shades of everlasting gloom.
Verg'd on the confines of the icy tomb,
No frozen climes, extend impervious bounds,
Confine thy walks, and bar thy active rounds,
Forbid thy upward flight at large to rove,
And climb the mountains of eternal love.
Far other scenes thy lovely spirit claim;
Far other mansions own thy lasting fame.
Borne on light wings, I see thy guardian come,
Unchain thy mind, and point the starry home:
With joy, he clasps thee in immortal arms,
Waves his young plumes, and smiles etherial charms;
Through fields of air, he wins his purple way,
And rosy choirs, delighted, round him play.
There, over bright realms, and pure, unchanging skies,
Suns gayly walk, and lucid morns arise;
Crowned with new flowers, the streams perpetual roll,
And living beauty blooms around the pole.
Will there, alas! the soft enchantment end?
And can no love to those fair climes ascend?
It can; it will; for there the blessed improve
Their minds in joy, and where is the joy, but love?
Can thou forget, when, called from southern bowers,
Love tuned the groves, and spring awaked the flowers,
How, loosed from slumbers by the morning ray,
Over balmy plains we bent our frequent way?
On thy fond arm, with pleasing gaze, I hung,
And heard sweet music murmur over thy tongue;
Hand locked in hand, with gentle ardour pressed,
Poured soft emotions through the heaving breast,
In magic transport heart with heart entwined,
And in sweet languors lost the melting mind.
'Twas then, thy voice, attun'd to wisdom's lay,
Showed fairer worlds, and traced the immortal way;
In virtue's pleasing paths my footsteps tried,
My sweet companion, and my skillful guide;
Through varied knowledge taught my mind to soar,
Search hidden truths, and newfound walks explore:
While still the tale, by nature learned to rove,
Slid, unperceived to scenes of happy love.
'Till weak, and lost, the faltering converse fell,
And eyes disclosed what eyes alone could tell;
In rapturous tumult bade the passions roll,
And spoke the living language of the soul.
With what fond hope, through many a blissful hour,
We gave the soul to fancy's pleasing power;
Lost in the magic of that sweet employ
To build gay scenes, and fashion future joy!
We saw mild Peace over fair Canaan rise,
And shower her pleasures from benignant skies.
On airy hills our happy mansion rose,
Built but for joy, nor room reserved for woes.
Round the calm solitude, with ceaseless song,
Soft rolled domestic ecstasy along:
Sweet as the sleep of Innocence, the day,
By raptures numbered, lightly danced away;
To love, to bliss, the union'd soul was given,
And each, too happy! asked no brighter heaven.
Yet then, even then, my trembling thoughts would rove,
And steal on hour from Irad, and from love,
Through dread futurity all-anxious roam.
And cast a mournful glance on ills to come.
Hope not, fond maid, some voice prophetic (...) --
A life, thus wasted down the unruffled tide:
Trust no gay, golden doom, from anguish free,
Nor wish the laws of Heaven reversed for thee.
Survey the peopled world; thy soul shall find
Woes, ceaseless woes, ordained for poor mankind.
Life's a long solitude, an unknown gloom,
Glos'd by the silence of the dreary tomb.
For soon, ah soon shall fleet thy pleasing dreams;
Soon close the eye, that, bright as angels, beams
Grace irresistible. To mouldering clay
Shall change the face, that smiles thy griefs away:
Soon the sweet music of that voice be over,
Hope cease to charm, and beauty bloom no more:
Strange, darksome wilds, and devious ways be trod,
Nor love, nor Irad, steal thy heart from God.
And must the hours in ceaceless anguish roll?
Must no soft sunshine cheer my clouded soul?
Spring charm around me brightest scenes, in vain?
And Youth's angelick visions wake to pain?
Oh come once more, with fond endearments come;
Burst the cold prison of the sullen tomb;
Through favorite walks, thy chosen maid attend;
Where well-known shades for thee their branches bend:
Shed the sweet poison from thy speaking eye;
And look those raptures, lifeless words deny!
Still be the tale rehearsed, that never could tire;
But, told each eve, fresh pleasure could inspire:
Still hoped those scenes, which love and fancy drew;
But, drawn a thousand times, were ever new!
Yet cease, fond maid; it is thine alone to mourn:
Yield the bright scenes, that never can return.
Thy joys are fled, thy smiling morn is over;
T^o blessed in youth, thou must be blessed no more.
The hope, that brightened, with all-pleasing ray,
S^one, but to charm, and flattered, to betray.
No more fair Irad heeds my tender strain;
Dull is the voice, that never called in vain;
Vain the cold languish of these once loved eyes;
And vain the fond desire, that bids him rise.
In life's gay scenes, their highest grace before,
Thy mind, O Youth divine! must share no more;
Alike unnotic'd, joys and tumults roll,
Nor these disturb, nor those delight, thy soul.
Again all bright shall glow the morning beam;
Again soft suns dissolve the frozen stream:
Spring call young breezes from the southern skies,
And, clothed in splendour, flowery millions rise.
In vain to thee -- No morn's indulgent ray
Warms the cold mansion of the slumbering clay.
No mild etherial gale, with tepid wing,
Shall fan thy locks, or waft approaching spring:
Unfelt, unknown, shall breathe the rich perfume,
And unhear'd music wave around thy tomb.
A cold, dumb, dead repose invests thee round;
Still as the void, ere nature formed a sound.
In thy dark region, pierced by no kind ray,
To roll the long, oblivious hours away.
In these wild walks, this solitary round,
Where the pale moon-beam lights the glimmering ground
At each sad turn, I viewed thy spirit come,
And glide, half-seen, behind a neighboring tomb:
With visionary hand, forbid my stay,
Look over the grave, and beckon me away.
But vain the wish; for still, around thy tomb;
This faithful hand shall bid the wild rose bloom;
Each lonely eve, Selima hither rove,
And pay the tribute of unaltered love;
Till, O fond, lovely youth! these eyes shall close,
Sealed in the silence of a long repose;
Beneath one turf our kindred dodies lie.
And lose, unpain'd, this melancholy sky.
With thee, well-pleased, the final pang I Will brave;
With thee Death smile, and lightsome be the grave;
Over earth's broad fields, till heaven forget to reign,
And suns benighted vanish in the main;
This dark recess the cherub then shall find,
And wake a form, angelic as thy mind.
Distressed, kind Joshua heard her moving strain,
But still walked onward over the shady plain;
Why should his face her mournful thoughts molest,
Though soft compassion warmed his feeling breast;
No comfort could he lend, nor joy impart,
While slumbering Irad owned her tender heart.
And now his footsteps slow and softly rove,
Through the black silence of the extended grove;
Alternate moon-beams feebly pierce the shade,
And over his path a glimmering horror spread;
Strange, awful objects dimly rise around,
And forms unfinished cloth the gloomy ground.
With mournful thoughts the prospect well combined,
And soothed the wanderings of a drooping mind.
Around he cast his melancholy eyes,
And pleased, beheld the solemn scenes arise;
Scenes tuned in concert with his sadden'd soul,
To grief resigned, and pity's soft control;
The gloom, the silence, gave a kind relief;
Peace sprung from trouble, and delight from grief?
His heart impassioned mourned his daughter's doom,
Her charms, her virtues, banished to the tomb.
Then hapless Irad all his woes renewed,
And copious tears afresh his cheeks bedued:
At ^ength, the tumults of his struggling breast
^^wi^h'd, unbidden accents thus expressed.
Oh, when shall Israel's countless sorrow's cease?
And war once more resign to lasting peace?
Each rising morn, more dreadful woes appear.
And each sad evening prompts a larger tear.
Why did pale terror Judah's race appal?
Why princes, chiefs, and generous thousands fall?
Ah! why did Heaven to me commit the sway,
And bid his sons this feeble arm obey?
Oh had the Power divine for me ordained
Some humble mansion, in a lonely land;
Where the trump's voice was never never heard:
Nor falchion drawn, nor savage slaughter feared!
In quiet then my life had passed away,
Blessed without pride, and without splendour gay;
In death, my soul serenely met her doom,
And my own children built my humble tomb.
At once a wild, and visionary sound,
With sudden murmurs, filled the grove around;
The strange alarm now loud and louder grew,
And through the forest bursting splendour flew;
A Form, the brightest of the morning choir,
Drew near, in all the pomp of heavenly fire;
Twelve stars of glory crowned his awful head;
His sun-bright eyes the forky lightening shed;
Serene, but dreadfully serene, he stood,
And a dire trembling seized the conscious wood.
As when a storm the dark horizon fills,
Long, solemn thunders roll over distant hills;
So, from the Vision's voice, a fearful sound
Appalled his ear, and shook the startled ground.
Chief of thy race! from heaven's eternal King,
At his command, this sacred charge I bring.
I AM THE LORD. I formed the earth, and sky,
Illum'd the sun, and hung his flames on high;
Bade worlds, in millions, star the etherial plain,
And built the secret chambers of the main.
My voice, the heaven, and heaven of heavens obey;
And Ocean, Earth, and Hell, confess my sway.
Through worlds, on worlds, in Being's mighty bounds,
That roll through space' illimitable rounds:
Where skies, over skies, unmeasured arches bend,
And stars, over stars, in endless pride ascend;
Where the sun's searching beam has never ray'd,
Nor scarce an angel's pinioned fancy strayed;
My power, my wisdom, with divine control,
Surveys, preserves, directs and moves, the whole.
All these, with all their scenes, the eternal Mind,
Ere angels sung, or heaven began, designed.
Whatever my voice ordained to being came,
Touched by the immortal, all-inspiring flame.
In all, though man, with vain, benighted eye,
Of insect ken, unnumber'd blots descry,
From hell's deep caves, to heaven's sublimest bound,
No stain, no fault, no error, can be found.
Whose thoughts shall then my boundless wisdom blame?
Whose wishes rise against my holy Name?
My spirit formed thee in the silent womb,
And wrote, with Mercy's hand, thy favorite doom;
Thy soul awaked, thy infant limbs inspired,
With truth illum'd thee, and with virtue fired;
Bade all my sons thy sceptred rule obey,
And stretched thy glory with the solar ray.
And shall thy heart my bounteous hand distrust,
And mourn that warriors mingle with the dust?
What though brave Irad from the world retired,
Though numerous bands around his steps expired;
Without a fear, without a pang, resign;
That virtuous Youth, and all those bands, were mine.
With songs the grace adore, that raised thy mind,
From the low confines of the bestial kind.
Where countless throngs plod on their base pursuits,
Above, and just above, their kindred brutes,
To that sublimest honor, man can know.
To bless my sons, and show my praise, below.
Forgive, O Heaven! forgive -- the Hero cried;
And milder thus the Vision's voice replied.
O Chief of Israel! let no rebel thought
Accuse the wonders, GOD'S right hand has wrought.
While his almighty arm thy course sustains,
Ask not what numbers crowd embattled plains.
From the broad circuit of her various lands,
He called to fight Canaan's countless bands:
He bids thee fearless tempt the martial field,
And trust the covert of his guardian shield.
For there, in virtue's cause, thy God shall arm,
And pour the vengeance of the baleful storm;
The sun stand still; the moon thy voice obey;
And the bright angel sweep thy foes away.
But now to nobler scenes thy views extend!
See long futurity in pomp ascend!
The varying doom of Israel's wayward race;
How truth exalts them, and how crimes debase;
Their arts, their arms, their towns, and towers, behold,
Fields of fair flocks, and domes inchas'd with gold!
High Heaven around them spreads his blessings far
Or proves, and scourges, with vindictive war!
There too, successive, see the wonders rise,
That guard, and bless, the Children of the skies;
Thy own bright Israel; Heaven's immortal race,
Saved by his Son, and fainted by his grace;
To Jacob's chosen seed at first confined,
Then wide, and wider, spread to all mankind!
With more than mortal ken, thy raptured soul
Shall see far distant times in vision roll;
When Abraham's sons, from earth's remotest end,
To Salem's heaven-topp'd mountains shall ascend;
When round the poles, where frozen splendors play,
In noontide realms, that bask in brighter day,
On spicy shores, where beauteous morning reigns,
Or evening lingers over her favorite plains,
From guilt, from death, reviving nations rise,
And one vast hymn of transport fills the skies.
Beyond these scenes, shall nobler wonders shine,
Climes of sweet peace, and years of joy divine,
Where truth's fair sons extend the golden wing
Through morn e'er-rising, ever changing spring;
Where unborn Beauty, round whose awful throne,
All splendors fade, and suns are dark at noon,
Smiles over broad regions ever-brightening day,
Fair nature quickening in the ecstatic ray:
The soul, pure effluence of the all-beaming Mind,
With virtue diadem'd, with truth refined,
With bliss supreme, with radiance yet unknown,
Begins, a star, and brightens to a sun;
Life, Love, and Rapture, blossom in her sight,
And Glory triumphs over the world of light.
THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK X.

ARGUMENT.
Vision of futurity. Prospect of the land of Canaan* Prosperous events after
the war is finished. Apostasy after the death of Joshua, and consequent
judgments. Troubles by Cushan-rishathaim, Hazor, Midian, Ammon, and the
Philistines. Samson, Civil War* Philistines' Kings. David's combat with
Goliath. War with Ammon, and Syria. Joab. David's glory. Jerusalem. Temple.
Dedication. Solomon. Division of the kingdom. Destruction of Israel by
Shalmaneser, and of Judah by Nebuchadnezzar. Restoration. Messiah. his Birth
Baptism, Miracles, Trial, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension* Destruction of
Jerusalem by the Romans. Preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles, and
succeeding Ministers. Prospect of America. Slavery of the eastern Continent.
Glory of the Western Millennium. Calling of the Jews. Signs which forebode the
end of the World. Resurrection, Con^lagration, General Judgment, and
consummation of all things. Prospect of heaven, and a happy immortality. Angel
departs, and Joshua returns to the camp.

THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK X.
THE Vision ceased. At once the forest fled,
At once an unknown region round them spread,
Like the still sabbath's dawning light serene,
And fair as blissful Eden's living green.
High on a hill they stood, whose cloudy brow
Looked over the illimitable world below.
In shining verdure eastern realms withdrew,
And hills and plains, immingling, filled the view:
From southern forests rose melod^ous sounds;
Tall northern mountains stretched cerulean bounds;
West, all was sea; blue skies, with peaceful reign,
Serene rolled round the interminable plain*
Then thus the Power. To thee, blessed man, it is given,
To know the thoughts of all-considering Heaven:
Scenes formed eternal in the unmeasured Mind,
In yon bright realms, for Abraham's race designed,
While the great promise stands in heaven secure,
Or earth, or seas* or skies or stars endure.
He spoke. At once a spacious land is seen,
Bright with young cornfields, and with pastures green;
Fair shine the rivers; fair the plains extend;
The tall woods wave, and towering hills ascend;
Ten thousand thousand flooks around them spread,
Sport over the lawns, and crop the verdant blade;
Blessed swains with music charm their useful toil,
The cheerful plowmen turn the sable soil;
The vine, glad offspring of the sun, aspires,
And smiles, and purples, in the indulgent fires;
The vales, with humble pride, gay coats adorn,
And pleasure dances in the beams of morn;
Spring, hand in hand with golden Autumn joined
Lives in the flowers, and wantons in the wind.
Then spacious towns exalt their stately spires,
Bend their long walls, and light unnumber'd fires;
Here all the pomp of haughty structures shines,
Youth crowds the dance, and Age in council joins;
There, built by virtue, smoking altars rise,
And clouds of incense fill the morning skies.
When thus the Hero -- Say, O Power divine!
What bright and happy scenes before me shine,
Tell, if those regions Israel's bliss display,
And flocks, and fields, and cities own their sway.
Just are thy thoughts -- the Seraph's voice returned,
While rosy beauty round his aspect burned,
In these fair climes shall Israel fix her seat,
End her long toils, and find a calm retreat,
Then all the blessings, mortals here can know,
From GOD'S good hand, in plenteous streams, shall flow.
In purest beams shall genial suns descend;
And noons, and stars, their softest radiance lend:
The gales waft health; kind flowers the plains rene^*
Morn yield her fragrance; eve her balmy dew;
With autumn's prime the wintery frost conspire:
With springs mild influence summer's scorching fire*
To nurse the land of virtue's loved recess,
And bless the nation, Heaven delights to bless.
These scenes of blissful peace shall thou enjoy,
Nor grief disturbs, nor circling foes annoy.
But when death calls thee to divine abodes,
They fly from Heaven, and seek Canaan's gods;
To stocks, to stones, with stupid reverence, bow,
Burst every tie, and perjure every vow.
Then war shall thunder from the realms around;
Then suns malignant parch the sterile ground;
The fields shall waste; the flocks to dust decay,
And fierce diseases sweep their tribes away.
Yet shall his bounty sainted guardians raise,
And shed rich blessings on their peaceful days;
Waked to new life, the land forget to mourn,
And fruitful seasons to the plains return.
Behold these scenes expanding to thy soul!
From orient realms what blackening armies roll!
See their proud Monarch, in yon glimmering car,
Leads his strong host, and points the waste of war.
Till, raised by Heaven, the youth, whose early bloom,
Gives a fair promise of his worth to come,
That second Irad, Othniel, lifts his hand,
And sweeps the heathens from his wasted land.
In awful pomp, see Hazor's bands arise,
Shade the far plains, and lower along the skies!
An unborn Jabin sways those spacious shores,
And on these climes that raging deluge pours.
The little band, thou see thy nation sends;
Lo, how the host innumerable bends!
Before Jehovah's wrath the millions sly,
Drop their weak arms, and lift a lessening cry.
B^hold, in southern skies, what clouds appear!
There Midian's sons the bloody standard rear*
(...) Chapter L. 79) Jud. 4, L. 87^ Jud. ^.
Before them, Ruin marks her ravaged way;
Fire sweeps the plains, and smoke involves the day!
Behold yon Angel, rapt on wings of light,
Flames, like a meteor, down the face of night!
His fearful hand accelerat^s their doom,
And their own weapons plunge them to the tomb.
Beyond fair Jordan, that broad, azure stream,
What moony shields, what throngs of lances, gleam!
In long, dark lines, see Jephthah's spreading host
Benight the heavens, and dusk the shady coast!
Lo, winged with fear, the ranks of Ammon yield,
Mount their bright cars, and fly the sanguine field!
From those dread scenes, now southward turn thine eyes;
Behold, what clouds of Phi^istines arise!
Ordained the terror of Canaan's climes,
The sting of guilt, the scourge of daring crimes;
Illum'd with spears, the gloomy squadrons roll,
Dust shades their path* and darkness hides the pole.
See Gaza's thousands, (...) in black array,
Spread their wide volumes on the setting day!
Behold brave Samson sweep the dreadful plain!
Their falchions flame, their spears are hurled, in vain;
Swift from his fateful arm their squadrons fly,
And shields behind them glimmer on the sky.
Now, where yon haughty pile in pomp ascends,
His strong-wrought nerves the eyel^ss hero bends;
The columns shake, the cloudy temple falls,
And dusty ruin veils the smoking walls,
See, where proud Gibeah's turrets strike the skies,
On every side embattled armies rise!
There Civil Discord calls her sons to war,
And waves her banner through the troubled air;
Against one tribe the swords of all ^nite,
Destruction hovering over the crimson fight.
Line 95) Jud. 1^. L. 101) Jud. 1^. and^* L. 107) Jud. ^5, (...) L. 117) Jud.
20.
See, like a storm, the Philistines again
Roll over yon hills, and crowd the darkening plain!
Lo Israel flees! the haughty heathens dare,
Pollute the ark; nor know the Almighty's there.
The sacred Prophet lifts his suppliant hands,
And calls down vengeance on the impious bands;
Aghast they hear tremendous thunders rise,
And from the lightenings turn their trembling eyes;
The fields are redden'd with a sanguine die,
The vanquished triumph, and the victors fly.
Thus scenes of varied life thy nation prove,
Restrain their crimes, and fix their wandering love.
At length, impatient of their Maker's hand,
Their tribes, with union'd voice; a king demand.
First chosen to the throne, of truth forlorn,
Blasting the promise of his opening morn,
Saul, impious tyrant, holds the sacred sway,
And Israel's hapless sons his rod obey.
But now the scenes a longer view demand;
Behold what wonders to thine eyes expand!
The hero gazed; at once two mountains rose,
Overspread by squadrons of embattled foes.
Proud, from the southern hill a giant strode,
Dared his pale foes, and braved the arm of GOD.
Vast were his limbs, for war and ruin made;
His towering stature cast a long, dark shade;
His eye glar'd fury, and his buckler's gleam,
Flamed, like a cloud before the setting beam.
A youth, in nature's prime, opposed his arm,
To the dire threatenings of the lowering storm:
Soft round his aspect rosy beauty smiled,
Bold but not rash, and without terror mild.
By his strong hand, like rapid lightening, flung,
Full on the giant's front a pebble sung;
Line 123) 1 Samuel 7. L, 143) 1 Samuel 17.
Like some tall oak, the mighty warrior fell,
And with shrill thunders rang his clashing steel.
At once the heathens fled; their foes pursued,
And boundless death the crimson fields bestrew'd.
Then thus the Guide -- Here David's skilful hand,
Sinks vast Goliath in the bloody sand.
Called, from the peace of sylvan shades unknown,
To rule an empire, and to mount a throne,
This beauteous youth shall stretch a prosperous sway,
And bid rude realms, and conquered kings, obey;
Where fertile shores the proud Euphrates laves,
Where yon broad ocean rolls its lucid waves,
Beyond the limits of the Syrian reign,
Or where far southward spreads the crimson main.
Behold, in dreadful pomp, from northern skies,
What gloomy clouds, what thronging squadrons rise!
Kings in the flaming van exalt their forms,
Borne in swift cars, and wrapped in dazzling arms;
Here Ammon's sons unnumber'd crowd the fields;
There Syria's millions wave their glimmering shields.
See Israel moves in glory to the fight!
See Joab, circled with a blaze of light!
His lofty port, his firm, undaunted eye,
Shoot terror round, and bid the millions fly.
Again what crowds the distant plains invade!
How the world darkens in the sable shade!
Aloft in air the dancing banners fly,
And throngs of lances tremble in the sky.
High in the front majestic David stands,
Leads on the conquest, and the fight commands,
Bids death before him sweep the dreadful plain,
And rolls his chariot over the unnumber'd slain.
Nor less shall peace adorn his righteous sway;
The proud shall tremble, and the rich obey;
With equal hand, great Justice hold the scale;
In every council Wisdom's voice prevail;
Line 171) 2 Samuel 10.
The fields grow fat, beneath the culturing hand,
And smiling plenty wanton round the land.
Then spacious towns, with wealth and pomp supplied,
Shall bend long walls and lift their spiry pride;
Over all imperial Salem's splendors rise,
The boast of earth, and emblem of the skies.
He spoke: tall mountains rear their summits high,
Crowned with fair spires, that vanish in the sky;
Upheave huge walls: imperial arches bend,
And golden tur^ets to the clouds ascend.
So, when dun night begins in heaven to rise,
A long, dark cloud surrounds the northern skies;
Forth from its spacious womb effulgent stream
Tall spires of glory, columns bright of flame*
There shine gay walls illumined towers ascend,
Wave round the immense, and over the concave bend;
Expanding, reddening, the proud pomp aspires,
And stars faint-tremble through the wondrous fires.
Thus wide, thus bright, the splendid scene expands,
Rich with the treasures of surrounding lands;
The long streets wind; the lofty domes ascend;
Fair gardens bloom, and crystal fountains bend;
From flowery millions rich perfumes arise,
Load the sweet gales, and breathe upon the skies.
There, crowned with towers, and wrapped in golden pride,
A bursting dome the wondering Chief descried,
On eastern hills its front aerial stood,
Looked over the walls, and distant regions viewed;
There glowed the beauty of the artists' minds;
There gates, there spires, there columns, he designed;
There, with strong light, etherial wisdom shone,
There blended glories mocked the noonday sun,
A bright, celestial grandeur towers displayed;
And verdant courts, expansive, round them spread.
Line 217) See 2 Chronicles. 6.7.
There called from circling realms, a gladsome train,
In gayest robes, unnumber'd, hid the plain.
Soft rose their songs; the harp's bewildering sound,
Breathed mild enchantment through the domes around,
On shining altars gifts of virtue lay,
Rich incense fumed, and smoke embrown'd the day.
High over the rest, a prince majestic stood,
And robes of splendour loosely round him flowed;
Spread were his hands; his face, to earth declined,
Spoke the calm raptures of a pious mind;
His voice, on balmy winds, like incense, driven,
Rose, sweetly fragrant, to approving heaven:
At once, as earthquakes, rumbling, rock the ground,
Slow rolled a long, deep roar the dome around;
Over the tall towers a cloud convolving spread,
Bedimm'd the skies, and wrapped the world in shade;
Fierce from its womb terrific lightenings came,
The gifts exhaling i^ the rapid flame;
The train fell prostrate; shook the bright abode,
And trembling earth confessed the present GOD.
Then thus the Guide -- This prince, to David born,
With solemn pomp shall Salem's towers adorn;
To GOD'S great name, this glorious pile shall raise,
Fair type of Heaven, and seat of lasting praise.
In his blessed reign, shall peace extend her sway;
The poor dwell safely, and the proud obey;
Israel, secure, in happy fields recline.
Pluck their own figs, and taste their plenteous wine;
The swain sole monarch of his lands shall reign,
And own the products of the grateful plain.
On fame's light wings, his glory shall be borne,
Where smiles fair eve, or blooms etherial morn;
From distant regions kings enraptured throng,
Drink sacred truth, and catch the heavenly song:
To him, her boundless wealth shall Egypt yield;
To him, Sabea open the spicy field*
In morn's fair islands, sweets celestial blow;
Wide ocean's realms with pearly splendors glow;
The loom its purple, earth its gems, unfold,
And teeming sulphur kindle into gold.
Long shall bright wisdom gild his prosperous day,
Till magic beauty charm his heart astray;
Wisdom, beyond the narrow thoughts of man,
In clouds involved, and bounded by a span;
Wisdom, that nature's mysteries shall control,
And rule the nobler kingdom of the soul.
At length, when death his spirit shall demand,
Two guilty kings shall sway Canaan's land,
Both to the fatal love of idols given,
And both rejected by an angry Heaven:
While their mad kingdoms often in fight contend,
And flames lay waste their fields, and wars their cities rend.
Then shall the Eternal's awful vengeance rise,
His wheels descend, his chariot shake the skies
Before his breath the son's of Israel fly,
Like chaff when whirlwinds sweep the autumnal sky,
To realms, whose beauty endless frosts deform,
To heavens that thunder with eternal storm:
Where over yon fiery cliffs, that bound the skies,
Dejected suns with feeble influence rise,
At distance hovering round the unblessed shore,
Where glimmering ice forbids the waves to roar.
Yet still, while Judah owns his awful sway,
And pious kings their sacred homage pay,
Safe in the covert of his guardian hand,
Shall happy subjects share a peaceful land;
Till roused to wrath by insolence of crimes,
He rolls deep horror over Canaan's climes.
On that dread morn, shall Salem hear from far
The trump's shrill clamor, and the sounding car;
Hosts trained to blood her shining seats surround,
And all her glories totter to the ground.
Adieu! adieu! thou darling of the skies;
Thy towers begin to shake; thy flames begin to rise.
Where once the palace raptured eyes descried,
And the tall temple reared its splendid pride,
Round mouldering walls the nightly wolf shall howl;
Sad ruins murmur to the wailing owl;
In domes, once golden, creeping moss be found;
The long, rank weed overspread the garden's bound;
The wild Idumean cast a mournful eye
On the brown towers, and pass in silence by.
Nor let deep sorrow pain thy pitying eyes;
Lo fairer scenes in quick succession rise!
Soon shall the temple crown the sacred hill,
Bright domes ascend, and fields around them smile;
Thy nation gather; great Messiah shine,
And earth be honored with a King divine.
From Edom's realms, what mighty form ascends!
How the vale blossoms! how the mountain bends!
How shine his limbs, in heaven's immortal pride!
How beams his vesture, in the rainbow died!
It Is he! it is he! who saves a world undone;
The Prince of glory! GOD'S eternal Son!
Over conscious hills he wins his beauteous way;
The plains are transport, and all nature gay.
O sons of men! -- the indulgent Savior cries --
My raptured voice invites yon to the skies.
No more to Jacob's narrow race confined,
A bliss unmeasured flows for all mankind;
The life, the youth, of climes forever blessed;
Increasing glory, and seraphic rest.
Say, what the gain in pleasure's paths to stray,
Where poison blossoms, and where serpents play.
Ambition's lofty steep with pain to climb,
Where guilt, and anguish, swell with every crime;
Line ^2^) Isaiah 63.
To waste, in weary toils, man's little doom,
For treasures, ravished by the neighboring tomb.
Should earth's broad realms beneath your scepter roll,
Can worlds exchanged redeem the deathless soul?
Rise then, oh rise, from sin's oblivious sleep!
Lo, wide beneath yon gapes the unfathomed deep!
Explore, with me, the undeceiving road,
That blooms with virtue, and that leads to GOD.
What though dire pain, and grief, and sad dismay,
And all earth's fury hedge the arduous way;
Those griefs, those pains, my feet before yon brave,
The world's fell hatred, and the gloomy grave;
I feel superior wisdom's peace refined,
And the fair morning of a guiltless mind;
The toils of faith, rewarding as they rise;
Befriending seraphs, and complacent Skies.
And O the end! the bright, immortal end!
Heaven's gates unbar, and angel hosts attend.
Each hour more sweet, for yon her rivers roll;
A sky, still brightening, arches round her pole;
Fair, and more fair, her sunny mansions glow;
Pure, and more pure, her airs etherial blow;
Her host, in growing youth, serenely shines;
Her glory quickens, and her world refines.
In that fair world, to e'er-beginning joy,
Each hour increasing, tinged with no alloy,
Rest from each toil, relief from every care,
Conquest of death, and triumph over despair,
To your own peers, your lasting home, ascend,
To bliss' fair fountain, virtue's faithful friend,
Those peers heaven's sons, that home the bright abode,
That fount an ocean, and that friend a GOD.
To these fair realms to lift the contrite mind,
To give blessed faith, and purchase peace refined,
To man's lost soul the stamp of heaven recall,
And build again the ruins of the fall,
From GOD'S high throne he comes to every woe,
The world his dungeon, and mankind his foe,
Heaven's wrath for thankless wretches dares assume,
Ascends the cross, and tries the darksome tomb.
Lo these dread scenes expanding to thine eye!
Behold yon cloudy pomp invest the sky!
What hosts of angels wave their flamy wings!
The world is silent -- hark, what music rings! --
All hail, ye happy swains! this sacred morn,
Of David's race, the promised Savior's born;
In Bethlehem's inn, behold the parent maid,
Her heavenly offspring in a manger laid!
See, see, in yon blue track, his star ascend!
Adore ye angels! heaven in homage bend!
From earth one cloud of mingling incense rise!
Peace to the world, and glory to the skies!
Before the harbinger behold him stand,
And take the sacred sprinkling from his hand;
On wings of flame the etherial dove descend,
And the glad train with reverent homage bend!
Far round the immense approving thunders roll,
And GOD's own son beloved refounds from pole to pole.
See, at his touch, the fainting form respires;
The pale-eyed leper glows with purple fires;
Light as the heart, the exulting cripple springs,
And the dumb suppliant newborn praises sings;
Unusual sounds the cleaving ear surprise,
And light, and prospect, charm expanding eyes;
The dungeon bursts; the prisoner leaps to day,
And life recalled reanimates the clay!
At his commands, what throngs of demons flee,
To yon far gulf, that blackens over the sea!
Lo^in the skirt of yonder fading storm,
Obscurely sailing, many a dreadful form!
Line ^7^) Luke 2. L. 385) Mat. ^.
From its deep womb, what sullen murmurs rise!
And what pale lightenings feebly sweep the skies!
But O! what love the hardened soul can gain!
Fair truth compels, Messiah charms, in vain.
Untaught, unmoved, by hate and fury driven,
His nation rise against the heir of heaven,
Before a heathen's bar tumultuous hale;
Nor worth can move, nor innocence avail.
Behold the milder glories round him shine!
What peace serene! what constancy divine!
How silently sublime! how meekly great!
How virtue's splendour shades the glare of state!
By friends denied, by poor vile worms contemned,
Judged without law, and without guilt condemned,
While men, while demons, in fond triumph rise,
The Prince of life, the Lord of angels, dies.
At once dire earthquakes heave the shuddering ground,
Rend the hard rocks; the mountains quake around;
Far over the world blank midnight casts her shade,
And trembling rise the nations of the dead:
Pained, from the scene the conscious sun retires,
And nature's voice proclaims -- A God expires.
But not the earth his sacred form confines;
The bands dissolve; the grave its trust resigns;
His fair, transforming limbs new life inspires;
Heaven's youth informs, and Godlike beauty fires;
From the dark tomb he wings his lucid way,
Ascends the sky, and glads the climes of day.
As thy bold arm, to Israel's chosen band,
Thy foes extinguished, gives the promised land;
Called by thy name, shall he to realms of gloom
Drive vanquished Death, and triumph over the tomb,
To that blessed land, the true Canaan, rise,
And guide his chosen children to the skies.
Then over his foes shall fearful vengeance break;
Heaven shine in arms; earth's listening regions quake;
The fond, vain triumph unknown woes destroy,
And clouds of ruin blast the transient joy.
Behold, in western skies, the storm ascend,
Its terrors blacken, and its flames extend!
There hide the whirlwinds, soon ordained to roll;
There sleep fierce thunders, soon to rock the pole.
But first dread signs the guilty world alarm;
A sanguine horror shades the sun's bright form;
In fields of air, unreal hosts contend;
Shrill arms resound, and cars the concave rend:
From hell's black shores the Pestilence aspires,
Roams the wide earth, and breathes her baleful fires*
Whole regions wither in her sickening flight,
And hosts, and nations, perish in a night:
Far round the shuddering sky pale meteors glare,
And raging Discord sounds the trump of war.
Then countless millions seize the bloody shield,
And Death's black ensign glooms the fading field.
Lo, Zion's domes what grimly hosts enclose!
See sun-bright eagles lead her gathering foes!
High over her walls, what threatening engines rise!
And hark, what clamours murmuring mount the skies;
With clouds, pursuing clouds, the terrors grow;
More fierce the blaze, more dark the invading woe.
But why should dismal scenes distress thy sight,
Or grief unnerve thee for the impending fight?
Meantime, from land to land with speed conveyed,
Messiah's sons his truth and blessings spread.
On countless realms, to guilt and darkness given,
Aliens from (...), and reprobate of Heaven,
The sacred Spirit sheds his healing power,
And skies indulgent heavenly bounty shower.
Low at his name the raptured nations bend;
By him perfumed, unnumber'd prayers ascend;
Line 441) Mat. 24. L. 455) Taking of Jerusalem by the Roman^. L. 465)
Preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles. etc.
To heaven his name from earth's great household flies,
And one vast cloud of incense cheers the skies.
From Salem's favored hills, the bliss shall stray,
Glad every land, and stretch to every sea;
But chief far onward speed its western flight,
And bless the regions of descending light.
Far over yon azure main thy view extend,
Where seas, and skies, in blue confusion blend,
Lo, there a mighty realm, by heaven de^ign'd
The last retreat for poor, oppressed mankind!
Formed with that pomp, which marks the hand divine,
And clothes yon vault, where worlds unnumber'd shine,
Here spacious plains in solemn grandeur spread;
Here cloudy forests cast eternal shade:
Rich valleys wind; the sky tall mountains brave,
And inland seas for commerce spread the wave;
With nobler floods, the sea-like rivers roll,
And fairer luster purples round the pole.
Here, warmed by happy suns, gay mines unfold
The useful iron, and the lasting gold;
Pure, changing gems in silence learn to glow,
And mock the splendors of the covenant bow:
On countless hills, by savage footsteps trod,
That smile to see the future harvest nod,
In glad succession, plants unnumber'd bloom,
And flowers unnumber'd breathe a rich perfume;
Hence life once more a length of days shall claim,
And health, reviving, light her purple flame.
Far from all realms this world imperial lies;
Seas roll between, and threatening storms arise;
Alike unmoved beyond Ambition's pale,
And the bold pinions of the venturous sail:
Till circling years the destined period bring,
And a new Moses lists the daring wing,
Line 479) Vision of America.
Through trackless seas, an unknown flight explores,
And hails a new Canaan's promised shores.
On yon far strand, behold that little train
Ascending, venturous, over the unmeasured main.
No dangers fright; no ills the course delay;
It Is virtue prompts, and GOD directs the way.
Speed, speed, ye sons of truth! let Heaven befriend,
Let angels waft you, and let peace attend!
O smile thou sky serene! ye storms retire!
And airs of Eden every sail inspire!
Swift over the main, behold the canvas fly,
And fade, and fade, beneath the farthest sky;
See verdant fields the changing waste unfold;
See sudden harvests dress the plains in gold:
In lofty walls the moving rocks ascend.
And dancing woods to spires and temples bend!
Meantime, expanding over earth's distant ends,
Lo, Slavery's gloom in sable pomp descends;
F^r round each eastern clime her volumes roll,
And pour, deep-shading, to the sadden'd pole.
How the world droops beneath the fearful blast;
The plains all withered, and the skies overcast!
From realm to realm extends the general groan;
The fainting body stupifies to stone;
Benumbed, and fixed, the palsied soul expires,
Blank'd all its views, and quenched its living fires;
In clouds of boundless shade, the scenes decay;
Land after land departs, and nature fades away.
In that dread hour, beneath auspicious skies,
To nobler bliss yon western world shall rise.
Unlike all former realms, by war that s^ood,
And saw the guilty throne ascend in blood,
Here union'd Choice shall form a rule divine;
Here countless lands in one great system join;
Line. 500] Settlement of North America, by the English, for the enjoyment of
Religion. L. 525) Slavery of the eastern Continent. L. 535) Freedom and glory
of the North American States.
The sway of Law unbroke, unrivaled grow,
And bid her blessings every land overflow.
In fertile plains, behold the tree ascend,
Fair leaves unfold, and spreading branches bend!
The fierce, invading storm secure they brave,
And the strong influence of the creeping wave,
In heavenly gales with endless verdure rise,
Wave over broad fields, and fade in friendly skies.
There safe from driving rains, and battering hail,
And the keen fury of the wintry gale,
Fresh spring the plants; the flowery millions bloom,
All either gladdening with a choice perfume;
Their hastening pinions birds unnumber'd spread,
And dance, and wanton, in the aerial shade.
Here Empire's last, and brightest throne shall rise;
And Peace, and Right, and Freedom, greet the skies:
To morn's far realms her ships commercing sail,
Or lift their canvas to the evening gale;
In wisdom's walks, her sons ambitious soar,
Tread starry fields, and untried scenes explore.
And hark what strange, what solemn-breathing strain
Swells, wildly murmuring, over the far, far main!
Down time's long, lessening vale, the notes decay,
And, lost in distant ages, roll away.
When earth commenced, six morns of labor rose,
Ere the calm Sabbath shed her soft repose.
Thus shall the world's great week direct its way,
And thousand circli^^ suns complete the day.
Past were two day^ (...) beamed the law divine;
Two days must roll, (...) great Messiah shine;
Two changeful days, the Gospel's light shall rise;
Then sacred quiet hush the stormy skies.
Over orient regions suns of toil shall roll,
Faint luster dawn, and clouds obscure the pole:
Line 565) The Jews have an ancient tradition of this nature.
But over yon favorite world, the Sabbath's morn,
Shall pour unbounded day, and with clear splendour burn.
Hence, over all lands shall sacred influence spread,
Warm frozen climes, and cheer the death-like shade;
To nature's bounds, reviving Freedom reign,
And Truth, and Virtue, light the world again.
No more in arms shall battling nations rise;
Nor war's hoarse thunders heave the earth and skies;
No hungry vulture, from the rock's tall brow,
Eye the red field, and slaughtering host, below;
No famine waste; no tender infant fear;
The meek-eyed virgin drop no painful tear;
Soft to the lyre the trumpet sink refined,
And peace' mild music still the stormy mind:
The savage, nursed in blood, with wondering eye,
Sees all the horrors of the desert fly:
Dread war, once rapturous, now his soul affrights;
Sweet peace allures, and angel love delights;
His melting thoughts with softer passion glow;
His tears s^eal gently over the plaint of woe;
To virtuous toils his feet instinctive turn;
Or seek the temple in the smiles of morn;
Each stormy purpose truth's mild rays serene,
And spring celestial clothes the waste within.
See, round the lonely wild, with glad surprise,
Strange verdure blooms, and flowery wonders rise!
Hark how the sounds of gushing waters roll!
What new Arabias breathe upon the soul!
On russet plains returning Sharon blows;
Her fragrance charms; her living beauty glows;
Each mount a Lebanon in pomp ascends,
And, topp'd with cloudy pride, the cedar bends;
To meads, to sports, with lambs the wolf retires,
Soothed his wild rage, and quenched his gloomy fires,
Line 577) Beginning of the millennium. See Isaiah and the oth^^ prophets.
The viper fierce, the hissing^asp, grow mild,
Refuse their prey, and wanton with the child:
New hymns the plumy tribes inraptur'd raise,
And howling forests harmonize to praise.
Shine soft, O sun! ye skies around them smile!
Your showers propitious balmy heavens distill!
In every waste what cheerful domes arise!
What golden temples meet the bending skies;
To yon bright world what clouds of incense roll;
How Virtue's songs breathe sweet from pole to pole!
Through earth's wide realms let solemn silence flow!
Be hushed thou main! ye winds forget to blow!
JEHOVAH speaks -- Beneath the farthest skies,
My trump shall sound, my sacred standard rise;
From morn to eve the lucid banner shine,
And saints, ecstatic, hail the illustrious sign.
Waked from the slumbers of the world unknown,
S^e ^^pt^r'd Sion mount the starry throne,
(...) fair gates, her thronging sons behold,
Dressed in white garments, and adorned with gold!
Arise, O child of fostering heaven, arise;
Queen of the world, an^ favorite of the skies;
In sunny robe^, with living splendour, shine;
Be all thy vestments as thyself divine!
Seize the loud harp, arouse the breathing string;
Exalt thine eyes, and hymns of transport sing;
Behold thy ruined walls again ascend;
Thy towers shoot up; thy spacious arches bend;
Thy gardens brighten; streams reviving roll,
And gales of paradise intrance the soul.
Where long, long howled the solitary blast,
Over the brown mountain, and the dreary waste;
Where famished wolves proclaimed their nightly roam,
And raging lions found a bloody home;
Line 619) Calling of the Jews.
Again glad suns command thy towers to burn,
And over thy splendors bursts the raptured morn;
In vales of fragrance hymns of angels ring:
The mountains leap: the conscious forests sing;
(...) thy fair realms the bloom of Eden given
^ranscends the morn, and rivals opening heaven.
Lo, from the west, and east, and south, and north,
(...) countless millions, Gentile throngs break forth!
their garlands bloom; their golden offerings blaze;
their harps instinctive tremble to thy praise.
(...) thee, what prayers from gathering lands ascend!
that suppliant nations at thine altars bend!
With what soft music sounds the etherial song!
What love, what ecstacy, attunes the tongue!
How gay the heavens! how fair the earth serene!
How joy illumes, how incense charms the scene!
Lo, in each face primaeval beauty glows!
In every vein primaeval vigor flows;
In every bosom brightens peace refined,
And endless sunshine lights the unclouded mind:
Without one terror, shuts the willing eye
And the soul wafts in slumber to the sky.
See mighty Justice lifts his awful reign!
Behold new Joshuas sway thy realms again!
Again the Prophet lights the earthly gloom;
Heaven's gates disclose, and climes beyond the tomb;
To (...) glad angels speed their beauteous flight,
And call their fellows to the domes of light!
In eastern climes, where suns begin to roll.
Or where clear splendors gild the sparkling pole,
Or where, illum'd by nature's fairest ray,
Smile the blessed regions of descending day,
Unnumber'd ships, like mist the morn exhales.
Stretch their dim canvas to the rushing gales.
Behold, ascending, cloud-like, in the skies,
How their sails whiten! how their masts arise!
The world all moves! the far-extended main
Is lost beneath the immeasurable train!
Here earth impatient all her treasures yields,
Fruits of gay mines, and sweets of spicy fields;
Fair robes of silken splendour mock the morn,
And sun-bright gems with changing luster burn.
Exult, O earth! ye heavens with joy survey
Her charms, her glories, hold the lingering day!
Lo, wrapped in sparkling gold, thy wide walls burn;
Thy stones to pearls, thy gates to diamonds, turn,
Thy domes to palaces, thy seats to thrones,
To queens thy daughters, and to kings thy sons.
Awake, awake, ye tenants of the tomb!
Burst your cold chains, and hail your destined home!
Lo, the night fades; the sky begins to burn,
And ruddy splendour opes the living morn!
See tombs, instinctive, break the sleepy charm,
And gales divine the dust imprisoned warm;
From finished s^umbers changing patriarchs rise;
Life crowns their heads, and transport fires their eyes;
Dressed in the youth of heaven, again are joined
The form angelic and the fainted mind.
From bliss to bliss the circling hours shall flow;
With my own smiles the pure expansion glow;
Bright as the moon, the stars invest the pole;
Bright as the sun, the moon sublimely roll;
Unm^asur'd glories round the sun arise,
And every morn light nations to the skies.
Long, long shall these fair scenes the bosom charm,
And light, and love, re^ining nature warm;
Till earth slow-mouldering hear the great decree,
And time's last waves approach the unfathomed sea.
There over wild regions, round the distant pole,
shall war's tremendou^ voice begin to roll,
Line ^^^] Signs which forbode the end of the world. See Mat. ^4, and (...). 10.
From hell's dark caverns Discord fierce ascend,
Resound her trump, and startled nature rend;
All heaven re-echo to the deep alarms,
And maddening nations swiftly rush to arms.
See, high in air, her banner, wide unfurled,
Streams in black terror over the trembling world;
From pole to pole the rage of combat flies,
And realms against realms with ardent vengeance rise!
To scenes of slaughtering Fight the millions pour;
Loud thunders roll, and flashing swords devour;
On deluged plains unnumber'd corses lie,
And shouts, and groans, immingled, cleave the sky.
To Cities then she steers her dusky way;
The turrets shake, the walls in smoke decay:
Over the tall domes, and spires in gold arrayed,
Where Pomp sat throned, and Joy and Friendship played,
Fierce drives the nimble flame; the whirlwinds throng,
Howl through the walls, and drive the storm along.
Now to the Fields she wings her rapid force,
The world involving in her wasting course;
Before her car, a fiery tempest flies;
Behind, long hosts interminably rise;
From her pale face the etherial orbs retire;
Deep heaves the ground; the blackening groves expire;
Horror, and wild dismay, the earth appall,
And one unbounded ruin buries all.
Mid these dire scenes, more awful scenes shall rise;
Sad nations quake, and trembling seize the skies.
From the dark tomb shall fearful lights ascend;
And sullen sounds the sleeping mansion rend;
Pale ghosts with terror break the dreamer's charm,
And death-like cries the listening world alarm.
Then midnight pangs shall toss the cleaving plains;
^ell Famine wanton over unburied trains;
From crumbling mountains baleful flames aspire;
Realms sink in floods, and towns dissolve in fire;
In every blast, the spotted plague be driven,
(...) meteors blaze athwart the heaven.
Clouds of dark blood shall blot the sun's broad light,
Spread round the immense, and shroud the world in night,
With pale, and dreadful ray, the cold moon gleam;
The dim, lone stars diffuse an anguish'd beam*
Storms rock the skies; afflicted ocean roar,
And sanguine billows die the shuddering shore:
And round earth thunder, from the almighty throne.
The voice irrevocable -- IT IS DONE.
Roused on the fearful morn, shall nature hear
The trump's deep terrors rend the troubled air;
From realm to realm the sound tremendous roll,
Cleave the broad main, and shake the astonished pole;
The slumbering bones the Archangel's call inspire;
Rocks sink in dust, and earth be wrapped in fire;
From realms far distant orbs unnumber'd come,
Sail through immensity, and learn their doom:
And all yon changeless stars, that, throned on high,
Reign in immortal luster round the sky,
In solemn silence shroud their living light.
And leave the world to undistinguished night.
Hark, what dread sounds, descending from the pole,
Wave following wave, in swelling thunders roll!
How the tombs cleave! What awful forms arise!
What crowding nations pain the failing eyes!
From land to land behold the mountains rend;
From shore to shore the final flames ascend,
Round the dark poles with boundless terror reign,
With bend immeasurable sweep the main,
From morn's far kingdoms stretch to realms of even,
And climb, and climb, with solemn roar to heaven.
What smoky ruins wrap the lessening ground!
What firey sheets sail through the vaulted round!
Line 759) Resurrection and Conflagration. 787] Last Judgment.
Poured in one mass, the lands, and seas, decay;
Enrolled, the heavens, dissolving, fleet away;
The moon departs; the sun's last beams expire,
And nature's buried in the boundless fire.
Lo, from the radiance of the blessed abode,
Messiah comes, in all the pomp of GOD!
Borne on swift winds, a storm before him flies;
Stars crown his head, and rainbows round him rise;
Beneath his feet, a sun's broad terrors burn,
And cleaving darkness opes a dreadful morn:
Through boundless space careering flames are driven;
Truth's sacred hosts descend, and all the thrones of heaven.
See crowding millions, called from earth's far ends,
See hell's dark world, with fearful gloom, ascends,
In throngs incomprehensible! Around
Worlds after worlds, from nature's farthest bound,
Called by the Archangel's voice, from either pole,
Self-mov'd, with all created nations, roll.
From this great train, his eyes the just divide,
Price of his life, and being's fairest pride;
Robbed by his mighty hand, the starry throngs
From harps of transport call exstatic songs.
Hail, heirs of endless peace! ordained to rove
Round the pure climes of everlasting love.
For yon the sun first led the lucid morn;
The world was fashioned, and Messiah born;
For yon high heaven with fond impatience waits,
Pours her fair streams, and opes her golden gates;
Each hour, with purer glory, gayly shines,
Her courts enlarges, and her air refines.
But O unhappy race! to woes consigned,
Lured by fond pleasure, and to wisdom blind.
What new Messiah shall the spirit save,
Stay the pent flames, and shut the eternal grave?
Where sleeps the music of his voice divine?
Where hides the face, that could so sweetly shine?
Now hear that slighted voice to thunder turn!
See that mild face with flames of vengeance burn!
High over your heads the storm of ruin roars,
And, round the immense no friend your fate deplores.
Lo, there to endless woe in throngs are driven,
What once were angels, and bright stars of heaven!
The world's gay pride! the king with splendour crowned!
The chief resistless, and the sage renowned!
Down, down, the milli^^s sink; where yon broad main
Heaves her dark wave^, and spreads the seats of pain:
Where long, black clouds, emblaz'd with awful fire,
Pour sullen round their heads, and in dread gloom retire.
Then, tumult's hideous din forever over,
All foes subdued, and doomed to rise no more,
Sin forced from each fair clime to final flight,
And hell's dark prison locked in endless night;
To heaven's extremes diviner peace shall roll,
And spread through countless worlds, beyond each distant pole.
Crowned with glad triumph, from the toils of war,
On angel's wings, shall sail Messiah's car;
To the great Sire his conquering hand restore
The etherial ensigns of unmeasured power;
Present his sons, before the palace bright,
And seek the bosom of unborrow'd light.
Then scenes, in heaven before unknown, shall rise,
And a new era bless the angelic skies;
Through boundless tracts, a nobler kingdom shine,
Nor Seraphs' minds conceive the pomp divine.
All realms, all worlds above, combined in one;
The heaven of heavens the bright, eternal throne;
The subjects saints; the period endless spring;
The realm immensity, and GOD the king.
As fixed, unchanged, yon central world of fire
Leads on sublime the planetary choir,
Line 831) Consummation of all things.
Lights all the living lamps, and round the sky,
In midnight splendour calls the moon to fly;
Creates their smiles, instructs their orbs to roll,
Fair eye of nature, and the world's great soul:
So, in the beams of clear perfections shrin'd,
Shall his great Source, the Uncreated Mind,
Through all the Morning Stars that round him glow,
Rove in his smiles, and at his altar bow,
Through countless trains, where worlds unnumber'd rise,
And clothed in starry pomp superior skies,
Pure rays of endless peace indulgent shine,
And warm immensity with love divine.
Love's mighty chain shall boundless beings bind,
Join world to world, and mind unite with mind;
Over the great household heaven's eternal pride,
From age to age, the Almighty Sire preside;
Around his awful throne, with searching eyes,
See fairer sons, and priests, and kings, arise;
Bid his own essence in their hearts revive,
His beauty brighten, and his glory live:
From harps etherial living raptures fall,
Heaven fill the immense, and GOD BE ALL IN ALL.
In glory wafted down the lucid pole,
See Salem's walls their solemn scenes unroll!
Less beauteous charms the lovely spouse array,
When beams of rapture light the bridal day.
Behold, new skies serenely round her glow;
Pure fragrance breathes, and purple splendors flow:
In pomp ascends the ever-rising morn,
And starry rainbows round her chariot burn!
There, from the distant wave, no suns arise;
No moon's pale radiance gleams in evening skies;
Round the broad region, with unfading ray,
JEHOVAH smiles immeasurable day:
Line 875) Prospect of heaven, and a happy immortality.
With living luster, fruits celestial glow,
And streams of life in endless beauty flow.
In robes of angels, see the chosen shine;
Waft on the floods, or walk in light divine;
Or taste the changing tree, whose fruit supplies
The youth of heaven, and beauty of the skies!
There, dressed in bloom, and young in rosy years,
The immortal Father of mankind appears:
In clear effulgence, Israel's Prophet shines,
And no dark veil his eager wish confines:
With smiles of joy serene, the Friend of GOD
Counts his glad sons, and opes the blessed abode.
To these fair realms thy footsteps shall ascend:
Here crowns await thee, and bright robes attend;
At nature's call, thy guardian seraph come,
And guide his chosen to the eternal home;
Before the sacred throne, thy thoughts appear,
Thy virtuous toils, thy truth, and love, sincere:
His witnessed favorite, GOD with smiles approve,
And join to nations of immortal love.
O blissful hour! when, freed from bonds of clay,
Thy path commences to the climes of day;
When from the sun thy wing begins to rise
Through the broad regions of unmeasured skies,
When time's dark years behind thy flight shall roll,
And all eternity invade thy soul.
In that blessed hour, the sons of light shall come,
And shout thee welcome to thy destined home;
With heightening beauty bloom each angel mind,
Glow with pure joy, and yearn with love refined;
In strains divine, impassioned seraphs tell
How with dire treason heavenly nations fell;
What deeds renowned have graced the fair abode;
Truth that endured, and zeal that raised to GOD;
How round the expansion worlds unnumber'd sprung,
And hosts etherial sky-born praises sung;
The peace, the charms, to vernal Eden given,
Conversing angels, and approving Heaven.
In that blessed hour, shall saints of ancient days,
Lights of mankind, and heirs of deathless praise,
Disclose how Adam's sons the world overspread,
Borne to far isles, and over wide seas conveyed;
How the lone ark the seeds of nations bore,
And boundless ocean tossed without a shore;
Embattled hosts the patriarch's faith o'ercame,
Nor votive Isaac quenched the living flame;
Through the long devious desert Israel roved;
The angel wrestled, and the brother loved.
Rapt in thy blessed arrival, there shall glow
The faithful partners of thine every woe;
Their hopes, their fears, their toils, with thee run over,
Pains far retired, and griefs that haunt no more;
His long-lov'd friend unspotted Hezron join,
Add song to song, and mingle bliss with thine;
Irad, divinest flower! to meet thee rise,
And cast rich fragrance round delighted skies.
With this great concourse lost in joys serene,
No tongue can utter, and no fancy feign,
Dissolved in friendship, chained to friends, divine,
Whose thoughts, whose converse, every power refine,
Thy unknown ages swift shall glide away,
Lost in the immense of never-ending day.
Through heaven's expanded field thy feet shall rove,
The all-beauteous region of ecstatic love;
Her gates of pearl, her towers of gems, behold,
Her streets, her mansions, of pellucid gold.
Where each fair gate cherubic watchmen guard,
And GOD, approving, showers the vast reward.
There shall thou feel, when, freed from sin's alloy,
Souls lift their pinions to the climes of joy,
Around all heaven what speechless transports roll,
Blend smile with smile, and mingle soul with soul;
There hail, ecstatic, to the bright abode.
The crowns, the trophies, of Messiah's blood.
There GOD'S own hand shall lift the curtain high,
And all earth's wonders open to thine eye:
In time's mysterious reign, thy soul purs^e
Power ever glorious, wisdom ever new;
See boundless good, Creation's single end,
And GOD his own, and being's, faithful friend;
In all, the present GOD refulgent shine,
And boundless glory fill the work divine.
Fed with perennial springs of bliss refined,
Divine effusions of the All-lovely Mind,
With endless ardour shall thy spirit glow,
And love immense from heaven's great fountain flow;
Unbounded grace fill unconfined desire,
Warm thy rapt bosom, and thy songs inspire.
Each hour, thy spreading thoughts shall swift improve;
Each hour increase the transports of thy love;
With morning beauty, Youth around thee shine,
Implant new senses, and the old refine;
From height to height thy rising wishes grow,
And, at their birth, the full enjoyment flow;
No care, no want, the expanding bliss destroy,
But every thought, and sense, and wish, be joy.
From these blessed scenes thy flight shall often descend,
And, with thy kindred angels, man attend.
What sweet complacence shall thy bosom warm,
To spread fair truth, and every woe to charm;
Guard the lone cot, where faith delights to dwell;
Or wake pure fervors in the secret cell;
Or watch that house, where strong devotions rise;
And prayers as incense cheer the morning skies;
Where sons to saints, to angels daughters, grow,
And peace, and virtue, build a heaven below.
When fear alarms, shall thou that fear allay;
When grief distresses, smile the pangs away;
When pain torments, the pious eyelids close,
Make soft the bed, and breathe serene repose;
Guide the departing soul to yonder skies,
And teach the young immortal how to rise.
Through sco^ching sands shall thou the wanderer bring,
Waft balmy gales, and point the cooling spring;
Or lure declining feet from flowery ways,
Seal the charmed ear, and turn the fatal gaze;
Or with rude whirlwinds the rough main deform;
Or roll the thunders of the mountain storm;
Or on the sanguine plain sublimely stand,
Direct the triumph, and the ^light command;
Or over some realm in glorious pomp preside,
To saints a guardian, and to kings a guide.
Nor shall one world thy bounded view confine;
But round all being stretch thy flight divine,
To worlds dispersed over worlds, ambitious rise,
The golden planets of sublimer skies.
Far over thy little earth, to man's weak eye,
Encircling roll the glories of the sky.
Yet know, blessed prince though thus apparent all,
The moon moves singly round this darksome ball,
The earth, with those fair fires of wandering light,
That shed soft luster over the darksome night,
All worlds alike, with countless nations crowned,
In circling course, the sun's bright orb surround.
Still their glad faces to his splendour turn.
Imbibe his beams, and meet the grateful morn.
This mighty scene thy mind with awe inspires,
With beauty raptures, and with wonder fires.
But O thou man beloved! yon vault survey,
Where stars in millions blind the midnight ray;
In space' broad fields so far the pomp retires,
Yon sapphire concave scarce their twinkling fires:
Hence vainly deemed the gems of inborn light,
Ordained to tremble through the gloom of night:
In near approach, those stars, with constant rays,
Shoot round the expansion, noon's excessive blaze,
Confine the empire of surrounding night,
And reign, and glory, in immortal light.
For know, blessed favorite, suns are those fair flames;
Worlds round them roll, and day perpetual beams:
Those worlds unnumber'd circling moons adorn,
And with long splendors comets mid them burn.
As in the world of minds, with golden chain,
Attractive Love extends her blissful reign,
In one pure realm all sainted beings joins,
GOD with his sons, his sons with GOD combines:
The bond to all of pure perfection given,
The life, the beauty, peace, and joy of heaven:
So this stupendous frame, by him alone
Who calls their names, supported, numbered, known,
These countless systems in one system joined,
Their size, their distance, with nice art designed,
A great, attracting power, on all impressed,
Connects, moves, governs, and forbids to rest.
By this great power, impelling and impelled,
All worlds move on through space' unmeasured field.
Around their planets moons refulgent stray;
Around their suns those planets trace their way;
Around your central heaven all systems roll;
And one great circling motion rules the whole.
O scene divine, on those bright towers to stand,
And mark the wonders of the Eternal hand;
To see through space unnumber'd systems driven,
Worlds round their suns, and suns around the heaven;
To see one ordinance worlds and suns obey;
Their order, peace, and fair, harmonious way;
Their solemn silence: varying pomp divine;
Their fair proportions, and their endless shine!
Some nearer rolling in celestial light;
Some distant glimmering towered the bordering night;
'Till far removed from thought the regions lie,
Where angels never winged the lonely, verging sky,
On the clear glass as smiles the beauteous form,
And youth's fair light, and eyes of glory, charm;
As lucid streams, with face serene, unfold
Spring's gayest prime, and flowers that bloom in gold;
As boundless ocean's smooth, resplendent plain
Rebeams the skies, and all their wondrous train,
No part, no wave, but feels the sun's broad ray,
And glows, reflective, with surrounding day:
So round the immense, on fair creation's breast,
In endless pomp ^he GODHEAD shines impressed;
His love, his be^uty, over all nature burns;
Each sun unfolds it, and each world returns;
Each day, each hour, the glory bright improves.
And GOD, with ceaseless smile, the immortal image loves.
Winged with pure flame through space' unmeasured rounds,
Thy soul shall visit being's farthest bounds;
When orbs begin, instruct their mass to roll;
For changing seasons fix a steady pole;
Teach eve to purple, golden morn to rise,
And light new suns in solitary skies.
Upborne from world to world, shall thou behold
How ever-varying wonders GOD unfold;
In each new realm, with growing bliss pursue
Scenes unimagin'd, nations ever new;
See some through highborn virtues swiftly soar,
Some humbler duties, humbler thoughts explore;
To every race, new thoughts new senses bring;
On every plain, new vegetations spring;
Over virtue's sons eternal morning bloom;
Over guilt's vile throngs ascend eternal gloom;
Over mingled nations mingling seasons roll,
And peace, and tumult, wrap the changing pole.
To endless years, thy mind, inspired, shall rise
Through knowledge, love, and beauty, of the skies;
To heights angelic, archangelic, soar,
'Till man's faint language paint the heights no more*
When borne to glory, winged to slights supreme,
Thy soul shall reach creation's first extreme,
Beyond all thought assume her last abode,
And seek the bosom of the involving GOD.
The Vision ceased. At once the scenes decayed,
His bright form vanished and his glories fled:
Swift to the camp the exulting Chief returned,
While the glad day star in the orient burned.
THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN: BOOK XI.

ARGUMENT.
Morning* Hareshah returns to Gibeon. Army assembles. Speech of Caleb. Hanniel.
Joshua's advice to him; his reply. Joshua's prayer. Cloud rolls before the army
toward Gibeon. Prospect of the Heathen host beyond the city. Speech of Joshua
on that occasion. Israelites descend from the mountain. Jabin prepares for
battle, and arranges the heathen army on the bank of a small river. Gibeonites
ascend the walls to view the battle. Aradon marches his troops out to meet
Joshua, who gives the command of them to Almiran. Arrangement of the
combatants. Joshua by a stratagem draws the Heathens from their advantageous
post. General engagement. Joshua's exploits. He kills Medan and Talmon. Zedeck
rallies the heathens; but is forced down the bank, and killed. Egon. Joshua,
seeing Hazor strongly posted on the bank, moves down the river, and rescues
Almiran, kills Piram, and routs Jarmuth. Japhia. Exploits of Zimri. He kills
Hoham, and puts Hebron into confusion. Jabin rallies them, and kills Hanniel.
Asher retires. Joshua leaves his division to engage Hazor; and rallies Asher.
Combat between him and Jabin. Heathens routed. Storm of Hail. Israelites return
to their camp and are met by their wives and children singing praise to the
Creator* Conclusion.

THE CONQUEST OF CANAAN. BOOK XI.
NOW rose in heaven the great, the final day,
Where fates of chiefs, and kings, and kingdoms lay
Morn dressed in golden pride the cliffs on high,
Streamed over the groves, and brightened round the sky:
No cloud, no mist, obscured the blue serene;
And peace, and silence, hushed the solemn scene.
To Caleb's tent alert the Hero strode,
And roused Hareshah to the field of blood. --
With active haste to Gibeon's prince repair;
To range his thousands be his instant care:
Ere the glad sun climb half the etherial main,
Shall Heaven's broad standard tremble on the plain. --
Far over the western field, with keen delight,
He winged his course, and vanished from the sight.
And now once more the clarion's dreadful sound
Inspires to arms, and shakes the banner'd ground:
To arms the martial thousands raptured spring;
Their songs resound, their clashing bucklers ring:
Rolled on the winds, imperial ensigns play,
And waved their splendors to the bursting day.
Now joined in marshalled ranks the generous train,
And gloomy columns darkened over the plain;
When, robbed in white, their hoary fathers came,
Great in past fields, and heirs of deathless fame.
One was their voice, and from their reverend eyes,
The bold heroic flame began to rise;
The soul stood struggling in the heaving breast,
And every limb their vigorous thoughts expressed.
When Caleb thus -- The great concluding day
Now calls to arms, and Heaven directs the way:
What though unnumber'd hosts against us rise,
And with proud madness brave insulted Skies;
Shall cumbrous throngs the meanest arm dismay?
Or one base thought distain the glorious day?
Think how bold Abraham swept the midnight plain,
While realms opposed, and millions fought, in vain;
How two brave patriarchs, in one friendly gloom,
Sank Shechem's towers and opened a nation's tomb;
Think how these fires for yon unbroken toiled,
Dared the rough main, and proved the hideous wild;
Made spiry towns, and haughty kings a prey,
And forced over countless lands resistless way.
See your fond partners in sad grief arrayed,
Behold your children claim parental aid!
Your hands their freedom and their fate suspend;
Your swords must conquer, or your race must end.
Nor let these narrow scenes your thoughts confine;
Claim nobler views and pass the selfish line.
Ages unborn from yon shall trace their doom,
Heaven's future Seers, and heroes yet to come;
If slaves, or men, this day your hands decide,
The scorn of nations, or the world's great pride:
Empire and bondage in your bosoms lie;
It Is yours to triumph, or it is ours to die.
He spoke, and silent to the all-bounteous Skies
Stretched wide his hands, and raised his kindling eyes:
Each glowing visage flashed disdain around
And hoarse applauses shook the neighboring ground.
Bright from the lucid main, the sun's broad eye
Looked in imperial splendour from the sky;
With war's gay pomp then shone the embattled plains;
In proud battalions rose the martial trains;
A broken radiance burst from trembling shields,
And haughty heroes stalked along the fields.
Bold Hanniel there in shining armor stood,
And hoped a deathless name in scenes of blood*
He saw the host to final combat rise,
The champions nations, and a realm the prize.
Now wealth allured; the rival now alarmed;
Strong pride impelled, and splendid conquest charmed;
His wounds, his pains, in quick oblivion gone,
The wish of glory prompts the warrior on;
Pleased, his fond fancy flies from silent shame
To plains of triumph, and to wreaths of fame.
Him Joshua viewed with pity in his breast,
And kindly thus the haughty chief addressed --
If, when dread war resounds her hoarse alarm,
Health flush the cheek, and vigor brace the arm,
To fight, the warrior virtue fame command,
And knaves alone refuse the needed hand.
But thou, brave Hanniel, seek'st the field in vain,
Pale with lost blood, and weak with ceaseless pain*
Unstrung to fight, and impotent to ^ly,
Useless, alive; nor glorious, should thou die.
In fields of frequent strife thy garlands bloom*
Let not their verdure wither on thy tomb:
No feeble aid such numerous honors claim,
Nor can base envy crop the growing fame.
He spoke, impatient Hanniel quick returned,
And keen resentment in his visage burned --
While yon bright orb rolls on the mighty doom
Of millions born, and millions yet to come,
What chief, what man, who boasts a reasoning mind,
Will hide in shame, or sleep in tents confined?
Let these, if Jacob's race such culprits knows,
Shirnk from great scenes, and die in vile repose,
^
^
Where clarions roar my (...)
Glue to the fight, and ask no str^ng^h (...)
Unbroke by wounds, my voice shall now inspire
The coward's languor, and the warrior's fire;
This shield, or these frail limbs, well pleased, arrest
The lance, that flies to wound a worthier breast.
But Hanniel's glory why should Joshua fear?
Do rival names alarm thy tender ear?
On yon broad plain unnumber'd stars arise,
Move in gay ranks, and triumph round the skies;
Each lends his beam to swell the pomp divine,
Nor grieves that neighboring spangles brighter shine.
How beauteous thus in Honor's Angel-race,
When some blessed era numerous heroes grace,
Mean self disdained, if virtuous all engage
To fill with light the constellated age.
Some shining deed should this right hand atchieve,
Unstained, unrivaled, Joshua's name would live;
Then wish no more my days consumed in shame;
Nor grudge the glory, generous actions claim.
The Leader heard, and wished that Heaven had joined
A heart more honest with so bright a mind:
Through his great bosom thrilled a sudden pain,
Where sweet compassion mixed with brave disdain.
Sighing he said -- How blind is reason's eye,
When Heaven ordains o'er-weening man to die!
Now through the host he cast a piercing view,
And every rank, and every station, knew;
Then, while mute silence hushed the adoring bands,
From a tall rock, he reared his suppliant hands. --
O thou, whose throne, uprais'd beyond all height,
Glows in the effulgence of unutter'd light,
Over earth, over hell, over heaven, extends thy sway;
Angels, Archangels, Thrones, and Powers obey;
All scenes, all worlds, confess thy hand divine,
And seas, and skies, and stars, and suns, are thine.
At thy command, to glory nations rise;
At thy command, each guilty kingdom dies;
At thy command, awakes the trumpet's roar:
Death walks the plain, and earth is drenched in gore:
Hushed by thy sovereign nod, the tempests cease;
Peace is thy choice, and all the world is peace.
This day, O Power supreme! against the skies,
Sheathed in dread arms, unnumber'd thousands rise.
As raging flames the shaggy mountains burn,
The groves to dust, and fields to deserts turn;
So let thy vengeance sweep the embattled plain,
And teach proud monarchs GOD'S eternal reign.
From endless years thy all-encircling mind
To Abraham's race this beauteous land assigned:
The land, where Truth shall fix her lasting seat;
Where sky-born Virtue seeks a calm retreat;
Where blessed Redemption opes her living morn;
Where heaven commences, and where GOD is born.
For this thy voice the sacred promise gave;
For this thy thunders cleft the Egyptian wave;
Rich manna shower'd; with streams the desert smiled,
And the whole heaven descended on the wild.
Still, O unchanging Mind! thy bounty shower;
Draw thy red sword, and stretch thine arm of power.
To gain these realms, the crown of long desire,
Let Heaven protect us, and let Heaven inspire!
He spoke: a rushing voice began to roar,
Like caverns, echoing on the sea-beat shore;
Deep rang the hollow sound: and over the train,
The cloud stupendous sailed along the plain;
Broad flames, in fierce effusion, round it played,
Scorched the green fields, and brightened all the shade:
Towered western hills the fearful gloom retired,
And all the splendour in one flash expired.
Loud rose the trump; and ranged in dread array,
Behind the cloud the squadrons traced their way;
The burnished helm, blue mail, and upright spear,
Gleam'd over the plain, and starr'd the kindled air:
High strode the Leader in the glorious van,
And round his arms an awful glory ran:
For GOD enrob'd him with a pomp divine,
And bade an angel in his countenance shine.
Thus, when no cloud obscures the autumnal even,
And night's dark hand unveils the vault of heaven,
Crowned with pure beams, her sons in beauty rise,
And glow, and sparkle, over unmeasured skies;
The moon, bright regent, leads the immortal train,
And walks in pride imperial round the plain.
Now climbed the bands the mountain's towering height,
And over the subject region cast their sight;
There glister'd Gibeon's domes in trembling fires,
And all the grandeur of a thousand spires.
Beyond her walls, a far-extended plain
Spread, like the surface of the steeping main:
A mighty host there left the bounded eye,
And lost its distant terrors in the sky.
Full in the effulgence of the morn's broad beam,
Stretched the tremendous front, a ridge of flame,
Of length immeasurable. Either wide
Waved with a thousand nations' banner'd pride;
Tossed in gay triumph, lucid ensigns shone,
And cast their various splendour on the sun:
Swift round the region dim-seen chariots rolled;
The far steeds bounded wrapped in twinkling gold*
With spears and helms adorned of countless trains,
Rose the full pomp of constellated plains;
And proud with wanton beams, the sun-bright shields
Joined like unnumber'd moons, and dazzled all the fields*
Unmoved, great Joshua round him cast his eyes.
And saw the interminable legions rise:
Then thus, while Israel hushed in silence stood,
Ranged in just ranks, and faced the field of blood.
Behold, on yon bright plain, embodied stands
The gathered force of all Canaan's lands!
Gathered by Heaven's right hand, and sad despa^^,
To crown our arms, and sink in one dread war!
Hail my brave sons, with me, the immortal day,
That opes to blissful peace the glorious way,
The hour, long numbered in impatient skies,
The morn, ordained with every pomp to rise,
By angels watched, by Heaven's dread signs led on,
Sinai's fierce flames, and Jordan's walls of stone.
Each boundless hope let yon fair field inspire;
Each warrior kindle with a leader's fire:
The spoils of kingdoms each rapt eye behold;
Ensigns of fame, and shields of moony gold;
The herds, that wanton round a thousand rills;
The flocks, that whiten on a thousand hills;
The corn, all verdant over unmeasured plains;
The world, where spring with smiling plenty reigns;
Where olives swell; where beauteous figs refine;
And warm, and purpling, glows the clustered vine.
This day ordains them ours: this mighty day
Through realms unknown shall stretch our potent sway;
Far as the hills, where suns begin to rise;
Far as the seas, that limit evening skies;
Till fading years unloose the sleeping grave,
And time's last current joins the eternal wave.
There too, my sons, shall boundless glory rise,
And yon bright field of conquest fill the skies.
Through Israel's future tribes the tale shall ring;
The sage record it, and the prophet sing;
Our deeds, our honors, wake the slumbering lyre;
Warm the saint's praise, and wake the hero's fire;
^ous'd by the theme, new arts of virtue grow;
New chiefs break forth, and rival wonders flow;
Truth's happy sons rehearse in raptured strains,
Far through all climes, and ages, Gibeon's plains;
To morn's etherial host new bliss be given,
And human triumphs tune the harps of heaven.
For know, when darkness last involved the skies,
I saw the promised land in vision rise.
I saw sweet peace exalted joys unfold;
Fair towers ascend, and temples beam in gold;
Kings, sprung from Jacob's lineage, mount the throne,
And stretch their sway to years and realms unknown;
Art raise her scepter; wisdom's light revive,
And angel Virtue bid our glory live.
I saw Messiah bright from heaven descend,
And spread his sway to earth's remotest end;
Deep Gentile darkness yield to light refined;
And truth, and virtue, flow to all mankind.
I saw the world, where Powers and Seraphs bright
Shine in pure robes, and rove in endless light;
Where, in new youth, the patriarchs, from their thrones
Hail a long starry train of heavenly sons;
Where Abraham's steps his native skies sustain,
And Moses raptured meets his GOD again.
On you, my sons, these mighty scenes suspend;
From you shall Israel's fame and bliss descend;
From you shall princes, heroes, prophets spring;
From you be born the heaven-appointed king;
On this great day his earthly kingdom stand,
Reach through all times, and flow to every land;
To bliss, in distant ages, nations rise,
The world ennoble, and expand the skies:
Rush then to glory; GOD'S tremendous arm
Moves in the flaming front, and guides us to the storm.
He spoke: a shout convulsed the mountain's brow,
And burst sonorous over the world below:
Each warrior on the plain in fancy stood,
Drove back whole hosts, and ruled the scenes of blood;
Each on his falchion cast a frequent eye,
And thought it bliss, in Israel's cause to die.
As sullen clouds, when blasts in silence rest,
Hang black and heavy on the mountain's breast;
Slow sink the volumes down its hoary side,
Shroud all the cliffs, and roll in gloomy pride:
At once the winds arise; and sounding rain
Pours with impetuous fury over the plain:
So the dark hosts descend in deep array,
And over the champaign drive their dreadful way.
From the far plains, great Jabin's eye beheld
The squadrons, thickening on the distant field.
For when from Joshua's arm his host retired,
Stung by disgrace, with fierce resentment fired,
Some future fight his angry thoughts designed,
To glut the vengeance of his haughty mind.
To Gibeon's fields he steers his sullen course,
Where circling kings combined their gathered force;
Chiefs rushed to conquest from a thousand lands,
Whirled all their cars, and led their countless bands.
To guide their strength against their dreaded foes
All with one voice the mighty hero chose.
He, pleased once more to rule the dreadful plain,
Surveyed the terrors of the unnumber'd train;
Surveyed a host, beyond his wishes great,
And asked the gods to give no happier fate.
In splendid arms confessed to dreadful view,
To final fight, to final fame, he drew;
Full on his shield, with various forms enrolled,
OR DEATH, OR CONQUEST -- blazed in words of gold.
In fields far west, a torrent, with rough waves,
The rocky shore with endless fury laves.
Here, over the stream high banks majestic hung,
And with sad murmurs hollow caverns rung;
There, for the squadrons, rushing to the affray,
Smooth, sloping shores prepared an easy way.
High on the western margin of the flood,
A wall of fire, Canaan's millions stood.
Here Jabin's will ordained his host to stay,
Shields joined with shields, and wedged in firm array.
For well he knew, when Israel's rushing force
Up the rough bank should urge their toilsome course,
Their broken ranks would fall an easy prey,
And fame, and triumph, close the important day.
Now Israel's host, slow-moving over the plain,
Successive rolled, as waves disturb the main;
In every face a fixed, calm bravery shined;
And not a hero cast a look behind.
High on her ramparts Gibeon's children rose,
Surveyed the fields, and eyed the impending foes.
Here in fond arms, the tender Mother bare
The babe, sweet offspring of her anxious care,
Hung over its infant charms, and joy'd to trace
The sire's loved image in its blooming face:
Then on the combat turned a boding view,
Wrung her white hands, and shed the glistening dew.
Here the gay Child, with pleased, and wondering eye,
Caught the broad standard, streaming in the sky;
On the red armor cast a raptured gaze,
And raised his artless hands, and marked the splendid blaze.
Here, bathed in tears, and whelmed with timorous care,
In woe more lovely, mourned the melting Fair*
Over Gibeon's host their eyes incessant roved,
And each, mid thousands, traced the youth she loved:
Fond hope, ere eve gave champions to his steel,
And at her feet his shining garlands fell.
Then fear presents him weltering on the plain,
Soft, healing, female aid implored in vain;
Closed were those eyes, that beamed etherial fire,
Glowed with young joy, or languish'd sweet desire,
Dumb was the voice, that every wish could move,
And cold the form, that waked unutter'd love.
Here hoary Age in newborn pleasure stood,
And war's dread glories fired his languid blood;
Long-buried years rushed forward to the view;
What hosts they battled, and what chiefs they slew:
Each on his brethren gazed with glad surprise,
And the great soul stood kindling in their eyes.
From northern gates her dark battalions poured,
And many a hero fierce to combat tower'd;
His warlike thousands wise Aradon led,
The white locks trembling over his ancient head.
Hail, mighty Chief! -- the hoary prince began --
Favorite of GOD, and virtuous friend of man!
Blessed be thy steps, that bring this kind relief
To feeble age, and solitary grief.
In fields of conflict once rejoiced I stood,
With death familiar, and with scenes of blood.
But now sad age my head has whitened over;
This palsied arm must wield the sword no more.
To mourn, to weep is all my future doom,
Drawn near to death, and bending over the tomb*
These bands thy voice obey; in danger's field
Their manly bosoms never knew to yield:
Nor will their feet, long tried in honor's race,
Now learn to flee, and first commence disgrace.
But, fixed to death, their king, their land to save,
All force will hazard, and all terrors brave.
When round the host I turn my weeping eyes,
And gaze, and gaze, my soul, with anguish, cries
Where, where is Elam? Oh, may no sad doom
Compel thee to a son's untimely tomb!
A happier life, a brighter lot be thine;
Taste all the rapturing joys that once were mine.
From childless age may Heaven his chosen save,
Nor bring thy hoary hairs in sorrow to the grave!
Great prince! the Chief, with cheering voice, replied --
Thy nation's father, and thy country's pride!
Not singly thou the pangs of grief have known;
I mourn a daughter, as thou weep'st a son.
From hearts too fond, Heaven called the pair away
To fields of bliss, and climes of lasting day.
May every virtue in thy breast refine,
Till those fair climes, and all that bliss be thine.
But now retire, where yon bright chariot stands;
Let youth and vigor lead thy warlike bands,
For see^ to fight Canaan's millions rise!
And ^ark, what clamors rend the boundless skies!
The king obeyed. In arms, the ardent throng,
Behind Almiran, darkly rushed along;
Almiran* Gibeon's noblest* bravest son,
Led the bold heroes, and like lightning shone.
In three vast squadrons stood the heathens strength,
And rose a mighty front of dreadful length.
Over ^^rthern banks, where chariots hoarsely rung,
(...) clouds of thunder, haughty Hebron hung:
There too fierce Eglon rushed with dreadful roar,
Like the long murmurs of the sounding shore.
Nor feebler legions fill the southern plain;
There Lachish, Jarmuth there, the fight sustain;
To the dire center numerous nations throng,
And Jabin guides the storm, and swiftly flames along.
With piercing eyes the Chief his foes descried,
And bade his host in three vast squares divide.
Against Lachish Gibeon rolls in proud array;
Against Hebron Asher bends a dreadful way:
A fires pursue a comet's sanguine form,
Behind great Joshua drives the central storm.
Now over the plain, as ocean pours his tide,
Their streaming ensigns reared in purple pride,
Far north, and southward stretched the chosen train,
And crossed in gloomy pomp the dreadful plain.
Near, and more near, the undaunted warriors drew;
For well the Chief, by sure experience knew
That nations, taught in sudden fight to rise,
To war by stealth, and triumph by surprise,
To wiles, vainglorious, fall an easy prey,
(...), thronged in tumult wild, are swept away.
Thence, near the foe he bade the squadrons move,
Tempt with keen taunts, and with proud threatenings prove,
That chiefs, and men, with childish rage overcome,
Might quit the shore, and haste to certain doom.
Now near the stream the sacred thousands stood,
Their breasts all panting for the scenes of blood.
At once, as some black storm begins to rise,
A cloud of arrows filled the western skies;
The long, ascending gloom all heaven overspread,
And the fields darkened with a transient shade.
Then stones on stones tempestuous either poured:
And darts on darts in quick succession shower'd:
Now here, now there, expiring warriors fell,
And shrill beneath them rung the clashing steel.
At once, as moved by fear, the Chief withdrew,
And bade his host the distant walls pursue.
With joy, the heathens eyed their backward way,
Raised a long shout, and sprang to seize the prey.
Swift rushed the exulting thousands down the shore;
For ranks behind, urged on the ranks before;
Loud ring the chariots, swift the coursers bound,
And a deep thunder waves along the ground.
Around, great Jabin cast a mournful view,
And saw his foes retreat, his friends pursue,
His laws contemned, that bade the thousands stay,
Till over the torrent Israel urged their way;
Kenn'd the deep snare, by Joshua wisely laid,
And to himself with sighs thus fiercely said. --
I see, proud chief, I see thy prosperous wiles;
On me fate frowns; on thee propitious smiles*
But not alone I prove the general doom;
Ten thousand ghosts shall meet me at the tomb:
Avenged, and happy to the shades I Will go,
To bid thy princes quake in realms below.
Thus spoke the king, and deemed his ruin nigh,
A fearful vengeance reddening in his eye;
Strong, fell despair inflamed his eager look;
His bands gazed trembling, and his princes shook.
Meantime with smiles the sacred Chief beheld
His foes rush headlong over the embattled field:
At once his piercing voice restrained the flight,
Wheeled his long ranks, and marshalled to the fight.
At once the trump's tremendous blast ascends
The plains all shudder, and the concave rends;
Loud as the storm's ten thousand thunders rise,
A shout unmeasured rocks the lands and skies;
Again high heaven is gloom'd with stony showers;
Again all either darts unnumber'd pours;
With deep convulsion roars the closing war;
Fierce bounds the steed; sonorous rolls the car;
With one broad ruin heaves the earth amain,
And Night, and Death, and Horror, shroud the plain.
So pours a storm on Greenland's frozen shore;
The hoarse winds rage; the maddening billows roar;
When boundless darkness wraps the realms on high,
And flaming meteors stream across the sky:
Huge isles of raging ice, together driven,
With bursting thunder rend air, sea, and heaven:
Rocks rise over rocks; over mountains mountains roll,
And the world trembles to the distant pole.
Thus over the field the dreadful tumult grows;
Alike impetuous, foes encounter foes;
Where Asher's sons proud Hebron's host engage;
Or where bold Gibeon pours her torrent rage;
Or where, around the Chief, immingled rise
Triumphant clamours, and expiring cries.
Long roared the tumult of the dubious fight,
And no base coward wished inglorious flight:
All fierce to combat rushed the undaunted train;
Nor these the palm would lose, nor those could gain;
Till clothed in terror, Joshua's dreadful arm
Began the triumph, and led on the storm.
Two chiefs, whose silver arms confessed their sway,
Raised their broad buklers in his fateful way.
By their fair wives a common fire they claimed;
And Medan this, and Talmon that, was named*
Of royal race, from Salem's wall they came,
Their deeds just budding in the field of fame.
Cleft through the side brave Medan gasping fell;
And Talmon trembling fled the lifted steel.
By his own friends a javelin swiftly hurled
Plunged his freed spirit to the nether world;
Far round the field a shout of joy ascends,
And groans re-murmur from his sadden'd friends.
Then swift the Hero wheeled his flaming sword;
Like mountain streams his host behind him poured;
Loud roared the thunders of the dreadful plain,
Rocked the tall groves, and filled the etherial main:
Increasing horror rent the world around,
And steeds, and cars, and warriors mingled on the ground.
Now near the stream approached the sounding war,
When fierce to combat rolled a splendid car;
There giant Zedeck rose in dreadful view;
Two furious steeds the mighty monarch drew;
With wild impetuous rage, they foamed along,
And, pale before them, fled the parting throng.
From Joshua's course he saw his bands retire;
His reddening aspect flashed a gloomy fire;
With huge, hoarse voice the furious hero cried,
While the plains murmured, and the groves replied,
Whatever wretch from this bright combat flies,
By the just gods, the impious dastard dies.
Nor hope to 'scape the keen, avenging blade
In the still cot, or in the lonely shade.
Soon shall this sword, with victory crowned, return;
And wrath, and vengeance, all your dwellings burn;
Your bodies, limb from limb, this arm shall tear,
Nor sons, nor wives, nor fires, nor infants, spare;
But bid the hungry hawks your race devour,
And call grim wolves to feast in floods of gore.
He spoke; astonished, some more nimbly flew;
And some to conflict with fresh ardour drew:
Despair once more the growing flight repelled,
And gave new horrors to the gloomy field.
Meantime on Joshua drove the sounding car,
And burst impetuous through the thickest war,
Rough, heavy, dreadful, by the giant thrown
Flew the vast fragment of a craggy stone;
Scarce 'scap'd the wary Chief, with sudden bound,
While the broad ruin plowed the crumbling ground.
A javelin then the monarch's hand impelled,
That sung, and trembled, against the Hero's shield;
Swift over his head a second hissing flies,
And a pierced warrior groans, and falls, and dies.
At once great Joshua raised his reeking sword,
And with deep wounds the maddening coursers gored;
Through cleaving ranks the coursers backward flew,
And swift from fight the helpless monarch drew.
To the high shore, impendent over the flood,
They rushed, as whirlwinds sweep the rending wood;
To turn they tried, with short and sudden wheel;
But tried in vain; the sounding chariot fell.
Prone down the lofty bank the steeds pursued,
Where sharp, and ragged rocks beneath were strewn;
All shrill the giant's striking mail resounds:
With clattering crash, the cracking car rebounds;
White over his lifeless head the waters roar --
Lost in the stream, and doomed to rise no more. --
As, when the south's fierce blasts the main deform,
And ^oll the pealful onset of the storm;
Hung are the heavens with night; the world around*
Deep-murmuring, trembles to the solemn sound;
Full on dread Longa's wild-resounding shore
Hills, waved over hills, ascend, and burst, and roar:
Safe in his cot, the hoary sailor hears,
Or drops, for fancied wrecks, unbidden tears.
A boundless shout, from Israel's raptured train,
Rent the broad skies, and shook the dreadful plain.
For now, their champion, trust, and glory lost,
From Joshua's vengeance flew sad Salem's host;
Before him naught availed the shields, and spears,
But chiefs, and foaming steeds, and rattling cars,
Ranks urging ranks, squadrons over squadrons borne,
Down the bank plunged; the bank behind them torn,
Sunk with a rushing sound: great Joshua's arm
Uplifted, imminent impelled the storm.
Alert, he bounded on the yielding sand,
And scattered ruin from his red right hand.
The white waves foamed around his midway side,
As fierce he thundered through the rushing tide.
Two blooming youths, he dashed against the rock,
Where Zedeck's chariot felt the fatal shock;
Their gushing blood ran purple through the wave,
And thousands with them found a watery grave.
There, mid vile throngs, to untimely fate a prey,
Young, generous Egon breathed his soul away.
Him Salem's nymphs resounded through the vales,
Or sung melodious, to responsive gales.
He, from the mountain wilds, and cliffs sublime,
Untrod, uncultur'd, from the first of time,
Drove the fierce beasts, by arms and arts compelled,
To seek their safety in the lowland field.
By flames unclos'd, by hounds and swains pursued,
They fled each fastness of the impervious wood;
Ambush'd, in vales beneath the savage prey
Rushed on the spear, and yell'd their lives away.
Then howling wilds the traveller ceased to appall;
Then night spread harmless round the unguarded stall
His flocks, the rising swain with joy surveyed,
And slaughtered lambs defiled no more the glade.
Egon, each pipe, each voice of music sung;
And Egon's glory courts and caverns rung:
But passed was all his fame; by Joshua's hand
Plunged in the stream, and choked with surging sand,
While from the bank the warriors leaped amain,
Crushed, drowned, he mingled with the numerous slain.
On the steep, western bank all Hazor stood:
A cloud of fire, high-towering over the flood:
Their darts unnumber'd Israel's host invade,
And many an eye is closed in death's dark shade.
Swift down the shore a rock with fury fell,
And crushed two warriors, wrapped in shining steel:
Near Joshua's steps the craggy ruin poured;
The Hero sprang; the foaming torrent roared.
Then stones on stones, with sounding tempest driven,
Filled the wide concave of the troubled heaven:
Beneath their shields the prudent warriors stood;
All either rang and foamed the reddening flood;
'Till mighty Joshua, breathing wide dismay,
Swift down the raging torrent drove his way.
Where southward waves, expanding ceased to roar,
The stream was bounded by a sloping shore.
Hither the hero bent his awful course;
His host behind him poured their mighty force;
Pierce up the shore he rushed; a dreadful band
Thronged round their chief, and darkened all the strand*
Here brave Almi^an, like a sweeping fire,
Urged his dread path, and bade his soes expire.
Tall in the gloomy van* the hero sped,
And Lachish pale before him fell or ^led:
Such fiery terrors round his visage glowed;
Such streams of slaughter from his falchion flowed.
'Till, generous youth, an arrow found thy side,
And down thy armor gushed the living tid^.
Thy sire had grasped his long-neglected shield,
And followed, trembling, to the deathful field:
There on thy deeds he cast an anxious view;
There touched with transport, felt his youth renew;
Then saw thee falling, pale, deprived of breath,
Plunged on the foe, and sunk in whelming death.
The youth, great Joshua caught in friendly arms,
His shield averting war's impendent harms;
Chafed by his hand, again he opened his eyes;
His lips respir'd; his bloom began to rise.
Then Gibeon's sons the mighty Leader fired,
And sorrow prompted, and revenge inspired.
Now dressed in golden pride, to crimson war,
Tall, beauteous Piram drove his shining car.
Born in the stillness of a court serene,
Where peace, and pleasure led the jocund scene,
He loathed dire fight, to gentler thoughts inclined;
And love, and music, charmed his feeling mind.
Soft pity touched his heart; and often a tear
He dropped, and mourned the human doom severe;
The unnumber'd ills of wasting pride would rue,
And wish that kings the sweets of friendship knew.
Yet, not of servile kind, his thoughts had soared,
In brighter days, and Art's fair realms explored.
Such was his soul, as grace from heaven refined
Can warm, and ripen, to an angel's mind.
To combat now the prince reluctant rode,
When full before him Israel's Leader stood.
Pleased, he beheld the graceful form ascend,
And wished the gods had made the Chief his friend.
But vain his wishes; by the Hero thrown,
Full on his forehead bursts a sounding stone,
He fell; his coursers backward rushed amain
And snatched the monarch over the cloudy plain.
His hapless fall pale Jarmuth's sons beheld*
Grief froze their hearts, and fear their nerves congealed
The Chief pursues; their trembling bands retire;
Deep groans ascend, and troops on troops expire*
Wide rolls the dust; the skies are snatched from sight,
And death hangs dreadful over the growing fight*
There, throned in state, and dressed in burnished steel,
Lachish' fair prince, Japhia, hapless fell.
He bade soft songs awake the trembling lyre,
With notes of magic, and with words of fire;
Such songs, as Moses, uninspir'd, might sing;
Like him, a bard, a hero, and a king.
But far beyond the pride of pomp, and power,
He loved the realms of nature to explore;
With lingering gaze, Edenian spring surveyed;
Morn's fairy splendors, night's gay curtain'd shade;
The high hoar cliff; the grove's benighting gloom;
The wild rose, widowed, over the mouldering tomb;
The heaven-embosom'd sun; the rainbow's die,
Where lucid forms disport to fancy's eye.
When roused to war, and deeds of deathless name,
Faint shone to him the charms of martial fame:
But fired to ecstacy* his soul beheld
The stormy grandeur of the troubled field:
The morn, that trembles over the steel-bright plains;
The whirlwind car, winged steed, and clashing trains.
Such scenes the warrior sung. The swains around
Hung on the enchantment of the wildering sound:
Soft over the lyre the voice of music passed,
Wild as the woodland warblings of the waste*
Each savage softened, as the numbers rose,
Forsook his falchion, and forgot his foes.
As dread before him glowed the Hero's face,
His angel pomp, and heaven-descended grace;
He stopped; he gazed; and with fond fancy warm,
Glued to the solemn glories of his form;
Swift through his bosom drove the deadly spear,
And all his beauteous dreams dissolved in air.
Meantime far north the sons of Asher poured,
And fierce to combat chiefs and heroes tow^r'd:
There, like a whirlwind, rapid Zimri flew,
And, like a tempest, countless ^ands pursue:
Clouds after clouds behind him darkly roll,
And shouts of glory heave the murmuring pole*
As when two seas, by winds together hurled,
With bursting fury shake the solid world;
Waves pil'd over waves, the watery mountains rise,
And foam, and roar, and rage, against the skies:
So joined the combat; ranks, over ranks impelled,
Swelled the hoarse tumult of the hideous field;
Black drifts of dust becloud the gloomy ground;
Hoarse groans ascend, and clashing arms resound.
And now, where Zimri broke the embodied war,
Imperious Hoham drove his sounding car;
Like flames, his rapid courses rushed along,
Forced a red path, and crushed the thickening throng:
His hissing lances shower'd destruction round,
And streaming bodies strewn the crimson ground.
With joy, bold Zimri kenn'd the prince afar
And winged his javelin through the flashing air;
Deep in his throat was lodged the avenging steel;
With groans, the monarch panting, struggling, fell:
The sword indignant gash'd his cleaving side,
Freed the pale ghost, and poured the vital tide.
With shouts of triumph swelled the etherial main,
And new convulsions shook the stormy plain.
The cars rushed backward; foaming coursers bound*
The shrill swords clash, and hollow groans resound.
'Twixt the long banks remurmuring clamors roar*
And eyes unnumber'd wish the farthest shore.
As, swelled with rains, the autumnal stream ascends,
Foams over the rocks, and all the mountain rends,
Heaved deep, with groans the uprooted forest yields,
And huge, unwieldy oaks, plunge cumbrous to the fields;
So furious Asher, with resistless sway,
On Hebron bursting broke a dreadful way;
Swift over the floods the warriors eager fly,
And steeds, and men, on earth immingled lie.
On these dire scenes great Jabin cast his view,
And saw his friends retire, his foes pursue,
Then, while the storm of war brave Zedeck bore,
He whirled his chariot down the western shore.
As, stained with blood, a meteor's midnight beam
Cleaves the dun clouds, and trails a length of flame;
At once, with dreadful burst, its terrors fly,
And a deep thunder rocks the shuddering sky:
(...)* throned tremendous in his sun-bright car,
Rushed the impetuous Hero to the war;
Loud to their ears his voice terrific came,
And his fierce eyeballs flashed a withering flame --
Rouse, rouse to fight, to triumph bend your way;
Nor yield these slaves the wished immortal day.
Shall Hebron's sons, that never knew to fly,
Now turn inglorious, and like dastards die?
Let all your ancient deeds each soul inspire,
And each bold warrior emulate his fire.
This hour propitious brings the glorious doom,
And sweeps these wretches to the coward's tomb.
He spoke, and furious, with resistless force
Burst on his foes and stopped their eager course:
All Hebron round him swift to conflict turned,
New life informed them, and new bravery burned;
Squadrons on squadrons wedged their deep array,
And darker horrors gloom'd the dreadful day.
Him Hanniel saw; for here in fiercest fight
With joy he mingled, and disdained base flight.
No griding anguish now his limb distressed;
No thought, but glory, triumphed in his breast*
Chiefs to his arm had given the parting breath,
And vulgar warriors stained his sword with death.
Alive, impetuous, burned the martial flame,
And every hope beat high for endless fame.
On Jabin's car the undaunted warrior ^lew:
The car, like whirlwinds near him swiftly drew.
This the blessed hour the hero deemed to gain
The garland, wished so long, but wished in vain.
The Chief of foes his raptured eye surveyed,
The destined victim of his conquering blade.
No fear disturbed, lest combat's fickle doom
Should change the lot, and open another's tomb:
He smiled, from Joshua sure the palm to win,
And felt fresh honors round his temples twine.
At once, by Jabin's hand like lightening driven,
A spear flew nimbly through the dusty heaven;
Deep in his forehead sunk the unerring steel:
Without a groan the haughty warrior fell:
No soul more restless ever from earth retired,
Nor pride more boundless ever in dust expired.
As, when bold youths, the mount's dim summit gained,
Upheave the huge, hoar crag, with toilsome hand;
From point to point the unwieldy ruin tossed,
Smokes down the steep, and grinds the cliffs to dust;
High bounding, sinking headlong, seeks the plain,
Cleaves the torn ground, and plows the foaming main:
Far plunge the crashing pines; the wild rocks roar,
Hurled with tumultuous fury to the shore;
Wide-rolling dust the neighboring concave fills,
And a long* swelling roar runs murmuring round the hills.
So down the bank, tremendous Jabin's car
Urged the pale throng, and drove the sounding war:
His foes plunged headlong in the crimson wave,
And chiefs, and warriors, found a liquid grave.
While thus in dreadful fight the hosts engaged,
The tumults thickened, and the clamours raged;
From Joshua's terrors Hazor's sons withdrew,
And distant from the shore their front renew.
With hideous strength, their ridgy lines ascend;
Red flame the shields; swords tremble; spears protend:
Pleased, the Chief views; too generous not to know,
And own, with praise, the merit of a foe.
From a tall rock he cast his flashing eyes,
And saw the varied scenes of combat rise.
While every foe bold Gibeon fiercely drove;
The tribes of Zimri backward slowly move:
Towered the high walls ascending volumes roll,
And clouds on clouds successive wrap the pole.
Greatly serene, he viewed the threatening doom,
Nor veiled his visage with a transient gloom;
But bade his chiefs, their bands for fight arrayed,
Lead on the war, and Hazor's host invade.
Then, where the fields displayed an easy course,
Along the shore he winged his rapid force;
Swift as a tempest down the bank he flies,
Cuts the red stream, and lifts tremendous cries --
Heavens! what dishonor pains this bleeding eye?
See, lost to shame, my friends, my heroes fly!
Turn, turn to triumph; swift to glory turn;
With generous shame let every bosom burn!
Shall your brave sires, that never knew to flee,
With pangs your flight, and tarnish'd honor, see;
And wish high Heaven had lent a milder doom,
And swept them childless to an earlier tomb?
Shall Dan, shall Asher, names of long renown,
Now lose the splendors of a deathless crown!
Forbid it Heaven! now wipe the hateful stain;
One bold exertion wins the immortal plain.
He spoke: at once, unfurled in glorious pride,
The sacred standard cast the view aside;
There Dan's bright eagle, high in pomp displayed,
Stretched his long wings, and reared his golden head;
Of gold his form in lucid triumph turned,
And streamy lightnings round him fiercely burned.
At once all Asher furious rushed to fight,
Each ardent warrior spurned inglorious flight.
With wider ruin heave the trembling fields;
Cars burst; cries roar* groans murmur; sound the shields.
As in some forest two red flames aspire,
And whelm huge pines in floods of surging fire,
Then swift through falling groves together driven
Roll over the mountain tops, and kindle heaven:
So, fierce and dreadful, front to front opposed,
Mid clouds of dust, the thundering squadrons closed:
Earth shakes; air rends; the trembling skies resound,
And night, and sad dismay, invade the embattled ground.
For war undaunted Hebron fiercely burned,
Nor even in Joshua's path to flight were turned.
Full on his sword they rushed, and bravely sell;
New bands with transport faced the slaughtering steel.
Incessant cries over all the combat rung;
Incessant spears through darkened either sung;
Swift flew the courser; swift the raging car:
Hoarse rose the tumult of the maddening war:
Less loud through forests winds impetuous roll,
The huge pines sink, and tempest rends the pole:
Less loud against Zembla mountain billows roar,
When the storm thunders on the frozen shore.
For Hebron's thousands Jabin's voice inspired,
And Joshua's deeds the sons of Israel fired.
Now where the Chief terrific swept the field,
And, clothed in terror, ranks on ranks repelled*
Whilst a red deluge over his footsteps spread,
And countless torrents spouted from the dead;
Swift to his path a chief of Asher ran,
Wild with dismay, and quivering thus began --
Wing, wing, thou best of men, thy friendly path --
Oh save the hero, or avenge his death! --
Now Zimri dies; from yon ascending ground,
I saw fierce Jabin point the fatal wound --
He spoke; at once, from all the Heathen train,
A voice of thunder heaved the affrighted plain:
Loud as hoarse whirlwinds torrent flames inspire,
When up the mountains rolls tempestuous fire;
Loud as the Almighty's voice, through either driven,
Pales the wide world, and shakes the walls of heaven;
Long shouts tremendous from the fields arise,
Burst over the hosts, and rend the clouded skies.
Through Israel's thousands thrills a dire alarm,
When thus great Joshua nerves each fainting arm --
Urge, my brave warriors, urge the glorious strife;
Wheel your red swords, and save the leader's life --
Shall Zimri die, whilst each astonished stands,
Nor sees these falchions useless in our hands?
Alive the fainting hero meets my sight;
And yet maintains the solitary sight --
He spoke, and furious wheeled his dreadful sword;
Back rolled the heathens; streams of slaughter poured:
Behind him Asher's host in deep array
Thronged darkening; clouds and death involved their way*
The bounding steeds bedewed their hoofs in blood,
And chiefs and monarchs swelled the purple flood.
Now, where bold Zimri braved the deathful ground,
O'erhung with foes, and pierced with many a wound,
Whilst laboring, panting, heaved his frequent breath,
And over his helmet flashed descending death;
Great Joshua, flaming, drove the embattled train;
Their lances flew, their falchions raged in vain.
Dire as a peal of thunder sweeps the skies,
He rushed, and Death sat frowning in his eyes:
For now brave Zimri scarce sustained the strife;
Sunk on one knee, and wished to sell his life.
Through the thick tumults of the broken war
Impetuous Jabin winged his rapid car;
With ruddy beams his lance uplifted shone;
His waving buckler mocked the sanguine sun;
'Twixt the bold chiefs, undaunted at the storm,
Sublime great Joshua reared his mighty form.
Now front to front the frowning heroes stood;
Their eyes red flames; their faces dropped with blood;
Their swords the lightning; two broad moons, their shields
Shot a fierce glory through the dreadful fields.
Then Jabin's heart, though formed of stubborn steel,
First shook with terror, and first learned to feel.
But roused by keen disdain, and vengeful ire,
Quick from his eye balls blazed infernal fire;
To earth, impatient, from the car he sprang;
His breast beat high; his rattling armor rang;
To die resolved, but as a king to die,
Like sudden thunder rose his bursting cry --
From this right hand receive, thou base-born slave,
A death too noble, but a dastard's grave;
Torn by the dogs, thy carcass here shall lie,
Or glut the fowls, that sweep the avenging sky.
The Chief disdained return. The Heathen's steel
Full on his helm with rapid fury fell,
Glanced by his sword, it clave the bloody ground;
Else had the Hero known no future wound.
Then with swift wheel, through Jabin's yielding side
Rushed his keen blade, and poured the sable tide;
Aghast, their monarch's fall his host beheld,
And sullen groans rung murmuring round the field.
Like Heaven's dread thunder Joshua raised his voice;
Hosts backward rolled, earth trembled at the noise --
On Gibeon's turrets stand thou still, O Sun!
Look down, thou Moon, on dreary Ajalon!
Fixed in high heaven the awful splendors stood,
And flamed tremendous on the field of blood;
From each dread orb ensanguin'd streams aspire,
The skies all mantling in fierce-waving fire;
Amazed, Canaan's realms the pomp descried;
The world grew pale; the hearts of nations died:
The bounding Hero seized the shining car,
Snatched the long reins, and shouted to the war:
Behind, fierce Asher swift to vengeance flew;
All dropped their spears, and all their falchions drew;
A sudden blaze gleam'd round the dusty gloom,
And plunged ten thousand warriors to the tomb.
For now, over all the fight, the heathens yield,
And Israel triumphs round the dreadful field.
High in the van, sublime great Joshua rode,
Winged the dire flight, and swelled the tide of blood;
Aghast, they see the lightning of his eyes,
And hear the thunders of his voice arise.
The plains are tumult all, convulsed affright,
Fierce ruin, wild amaze, and raging flight;
The Chariots stream; the steeds all eager bound,
Stretch over the plains, and sweep the rising ground;
Over rocks, over floods the thousands headlong fly,
And swords, and spears, and shields, behind them lie;
No stop, nor backward look, nor listening ear,
From plains to forests pants the full career;
Behind, the Hero wings his rapid way,
And dust and darkness shroud the beams of day.
So, borne in clouds of fire, an Angel's form
On impious Sodom drove the dreadful storm.
From heaven, in dreadful pomp, the Vision came;
Far, far behind him, streamed the angry flame;
The dark-red thunder, from his right hand hurled,
Upheav'd the sky, and fired the rocking world;
High over the storm, on wings of light, he rode,
And sailed, in lucid triumph, to the approving GOD.
Long rushed the victors over the sanguine field,
And scarce were Gibeon's loftiest spires beheld;
When up the west dark clouds began to rise,
Sailed over the hills, and lengthened round the skies.
A ridge of solding fire their summits shone;
But fearful blackness all beneath was thrown.
Swift round the sun the spreading gloom was hurled,
And night, and solitude, amazed the world.
At once the voice of deep-resounding gales
Rung slow, and solemn, in the distant vales;
Then through the groves, and over the extended plain,
With stormy rage the rapid whirlwinds ran:
Red over the glimmering hills, with pomp divine,
The lightning's flaming path began to shine;
Far round the immense unusual thunders driven,
Proclaimed the onset of approaching Heaven;
Astonished Nature owned the strange alarm,
And the world trembled at the impendent storm.
Over the dark fields aghast Canaan streamed;
Thick in their course the scattered bucklers gleam'd:
Behind them, Joshua urged the furious car,
And tenfo^d horrors hovered round the war.
But when the Chief the spreading storm surveyed,
And traced almighty arms in heaven displayed;
With piercing voice, he gave the great command --
Stand still, ye chosen sons, admiring stand!
Behold, what awful scenes in heaven arise!
Adore the power that brightens in the skies!
Now GOD's tremendous arm asserts his laws;
Now bids his thunder aid the righteous cause;
Unfolds how Virtue saves her chosen bands,
And points the vengeance doomed for guilty lands.
Behold, what flames shoot forth! what gloom ascends!
How nature trembles! how the concave rends!
How the clouds darken! see, in yonder sky,
Their opening skirts proclaim the Almighty nigh!
He spoke, and from the north a rushing sound
Rolled through the heavens, and shook the embattled ground:
At once a rapid path of dreadful flame
Burst from the skies, and poured a sanguine stream:
Throned on a dark red cloud, an Angel's form
Sailed awfully sublime, above the storm.
Half veiled in mist, his countenance, like a sun,
Inflamed the clouds, and through all either shone;
Long robes of crimson light behind him flowed;
His wings were flames; his locks were died in blood:
Ten thousand fiery shapes were round him driven,
And all the dazzling pomp of opening heaven.
Now, save Canaan's cries, that feebly rung,
Round the dark plain a horrid silence hung.
Stretched in dire terror over her quivering band,
The etherial Vision waved his sun-bright hand;
At once from opening skies red flames were hurled,
And thunders, rolled on thunders, rocked the world,
In one broad deluge sunk the avenging hail,
And, filled with tempest, roared the hoary vale;
The headlong whirlwinds boundless nature blend;
The streams rush backward; tottering mountains bend;
Down the tall steep their bursting summits roll,
And cliffs on cliffs, hoarse-crashing, rend the pole:
Far round the earth a wild drear horror reigns;
The high heavens heave, and sink the gloomy plains:
One sea of lightnings all the region fills:
Long waves of fire ride surging over the hills;
The nodding forests plunge in flame around,
And with huge caverns gapes the shuddering ground.
Swifter than rapid winds Canaan driven,
Refuse the conflict of embattled Heaven.
But the dire hail in vain the victims fly,
And death unbounded shook from all the sky;
The thunder's dark career; the Seraph's arm,
Fierce vengeance blazing down the immense of storm*
From falling groves to burning plains they flew;
Hail roars around, and angry blasts pursue;
From shaking heavens almighty arms are hurled,
And all the gloomy concave bursts upon the world.
No day like this the guilty earth had known;
Not Egypt's storm with equal terror shone*
No day like this over eastern hills shall rise,
Till Gabriel's trump inrolls the sinking skies.
For Heaven's dread stores, reserved for death, and war,
Fierce hail, and lightning, filled the rending air.
In vain the host attempted still to fly;
They fell, they rose again; but rose to die.
Mid thousand corses, there, beneath his shield,
Stalked a lone trembler through the sounding field:
Here, scattered wretches roam'd along the plain,
And sheltering bucklers hid their heads in vain.
On every si^e resistless foes engaged;
The lightning's livid blast around them raged;
While the shrill torrents of the avenging hail
Rushed on the pinions of the sweeping gale.
Rare, and more rare, were seen the sinking host,
'Till, whelmed beneath the deluge, all were lost.
Thus, when black midnight's terrors earth deform,
From the tall Andes bursts a blazing storm;
From steep to steep the ridgy flames aspire,
Bend over wide realms, and wrap the heavens in fire;
All nature trembles; tottering mountains rend;
Down the cliffs thunder; showers of fire descend;
Huge hills of ice, dissolved, and wastes of snow
Plunge in one deluge on the world below;
Over half Peru the floods tempestuous sweep,
And rocks, and groves, and towns, roll mingled to the deep.
The form began to move; the clouds gave way,
Their skirts all brightening with the crimson ray;
Far south, on wings of fire, the Angel flew,
And his clear splendors lessening left the view,
Down the broad regions of the midday skies,
Where glittering domes were seen, and scarcely seen to rise*
Through the long day, Canaan's widows stood,
And looked, all-anxious, toward the plain of blood;
Looked for the host, with victory's garlands crowned,
Enriched with spoils, and with fair fame renowned.
Their hands, to glad their friends with choice repast,
Culled every sweet, and wines of daintiest taste;
Often as a dusty cloud the whirlwinds reared,
In distant fields they thought their lords appeared:
Then, with new terrors, gazed, and gazed again,
'Till night, and sorrow darkened every plain.
The storm retired; the ensigns gave command,
And round their Leader thronged the conquering band.
Here sparkling eyes with joy and triumph burned;
Here pity silent from the slaughter turned;
Here for fallen friends the tear was seen to flow,
And sighs often spoke unutterable woe:
While Joshua's thoughts mount upward to the skies,
And fear, and wonder, in his bosom rise.
The stream, the walls they passed serenely slow,
Climbed the tall hills, and sought the plain below;
There crowned with flowers, their wives and children came
And songs rose grateful to the Eternal Name --
Blessed be the Power divine -- rejoiced they sung, --
The green vales echoed, and the forest rung --
Blessed be the hand, that clave the conscious sea,
And, robbed in thunder, swept our foes away!
Let endless blessings round our nation rise,
Cheer all our lives, and want us to the skies!
Thus strains of rapture charmed the listening gales,
While the low sunbeam glimmer'd on the vales:
To rest the camp retired: ten-thousand fires
Through the calm silence raised their bending spires:
The bright moon rose; winds cooled the cheerful even,
And wide magnificence enkindled heaven.
THE END.
ERRATA.
B. 1, l. 332 read vesture glow 337 l^st to shame 433 where pity 451 airy
vision 644 wing explore 725 bonds combined 845 this flood B. 2, l. 249 act
adorned 286 Mocked etc 290 Nor fair 387 knowledge stood B. 3, l. 114 Smiled on
116 joys as 119 glad skies 130 Where 131 Where 147 Fixed 175 gifts 203 sink a
prey 337 were those 357 lonely wild-rose 540 Cr^ak 585 Thrice 771 criers
proclaim 805 Oran's host 826 rent the 906 beauty's endless B. 4, l. 45 and slow
209 For round he cast B. 5, l. 39 inborn light 70 prospect chained 134 Where
151 each half-form'd 180 happy home 434 In sports 544 Down gushed 675 virtue's
course 678 inglorious days 738 cautious B. 6, l. 27 impervious 186 clothe the
675 fierce winds 743 wondrous B. 7, l. 135 gleam enrob'd 176 wide dismay 252
swept the 257 darkening 273 rush 276 read And bade 306 Dash 312 vanish 539
Before his 679 deep concussion B. 8, l. 150 whose shield 262 surrounding night
648 Blaze over 764 dusty sky 945 rejoi^'d 946 a mild 962 the lovely B. 9, l. 48
revive 67 those frowns 79 For 197 her hand 364 fears 411 breasts 503 her throne
524 tall lowers 655 Over thy 656 Slow roll 659 view thy 669 bodies 673 heavens
703 sorrows B. 10, l. 23 f^ocks 29 gay ^^ts 41 these regions 51 kind showers 58
disturb 161 wide realms 221 mind 281 sons 399 c^mmand 503 Alike removed 711
Then over 857 clear perfection 1026 blend the 1086 fix the B. 11, l. 20 wave
their 238 and light 239 acts of 248 towns ascend 293 steered 501 walls 697
^^embled
PAGE 30, Note at the bottom* religious power.


