Mr. Gardiner's ORATION.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED JULY 4, 1785, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF BOSTON, IN CELEBRATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY JOHN GARDENER, ESQUIRE.

-- "Proud aspiring thoughts but ill beseem
" Weak mortals: for oppression, when it springs,
" Puts forth the blade of vengeance, and its fruit
" Yield a ripe harvest of repentant woe.
" Behold this vengeance, and remember Greece
" Remember Athens: henceforth let not pride,
" Her present state disdaining, strive to grasp
" Another's, and her treasured happiness
" Shed on the ground: such insolent attempts
" Awake the vengeance of offended JOVE.
AESCHYLLUS' Tragedy of THE PERSIANS, translated by POTTER. -- -- "Determined,
hold
" Your INDEPENDENCE; for That once destroyed,
" Unfounded, FREEDOM is a morning dream,
" That flits aerial from the spreading eye."
THOMSON'S Liberty, part v. BOSTON, PRINTED BY PETER EDES, STATE-STREET.

1785

At a meeting of the freeholders and other inhabitants of the town of BOSTON,
duly qualified and legally warned, in public town-meeting, assembled at
Faneuil-Hall, on Monday the fourth day of July, A. D. 1785, 10 of clock
forenoon, and by adjournment held at the Chapel Church in the afternoon of the
same day:

ON a motion, voted, That the gentlemen the Selectmen be, and they hereby are,
appointed a committee to wait on JOHN GARDENER, Esquire. and, in the name of the
town, to thank him for the learned and elegant Oration this day delivered by
him, at the request of the town, upon the anniversary of the Independence of
the United States of America, in which, according to the institution of the
town, he considered the feelings, manners, and principles which led to that
great national event; and to request of him a copy thereof for the press.

Attest, WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN,
I GRATEFULLY receive this testimony of attention from the free citizens of the
place of my nativity, whose wishes it will ever be my peculiar happiness to
gratify with every thing in my power; I therefore readily give a copy of the
Oration I delivered yesterday at the Chapel Church, for publication; hoping
that the good intentions and sincerity of the author will atone for the
imperfections of the work.

J. GARDENER.
July 5, 1785.
TO THE FIRST CITIZEN IN THE WORLD, THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS GEORGE WASHINGTON,
ESQUIRE. LATE COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THE FORCES OF THE FREE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA, THIS ORATION, WITH THE MOST AFFECTIONATE RESPECT, IS DEDICATED BY HIS
MOST OBLIGED FELLOW-CITIZEN,

THE AUTHOR.

AN ORATION.
"HAIL! INDEPENDENCE, hail! HEAVEN'S next best gift
To that of life and an immortal soul!
The life of life! that to the banquet high
And sober meal gives taste; to the bowed roof
Fair-dream'd repose, and to the cottage charms.
Of public freedom, hail, thou noblest source!
Whose streams, from every quarter confluent, form
OUR better Nile, that nurses human life.
By ^ills from THEE deduced, irriguous, fed,
The private fields look gay, with nature's wealth
Abundant flow, and bloom with each delight
That Nature craves. Their happy masters there,
The ONLY FREEMEN, walk their pleasing round:
Sweet-featur'd Peace attending; fearless Truth;
Firm Resolution; Goodness blessing all
That can rejoice; Contentment surest friend;
And, still fresh stores from Nature's book derived,
Philosophy, companion ever new.
These cheer the rural, and sustain or fire,
When into action called, the busy hours,"
The address to INDEPENDENCE, in the above lines, and with which the author
opened his Oration, is a little altered from Thompson's beautiful poem entitled
LIBERTY, part v.


AMERICANS, FATHERS, FELLOW-CITIZENS!
FROM an opinion, perhaps too favorably conceived, too partially entertained,
by the free citizens of the place of his nativity, is the PUBLIC SPEAKER of
this day, the anniversary of the INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
called upon to address you from this place and The following is the vote of the
town: -- "At a legal meeting of the freeholders and other inhabitants of the
town of Boston at Faneuil-Hall, on the fifth day of July, A. D. 1784. On a
motion, VOTED, that the gentlemen the Selectmen, be, and hereby are appointed a
Committee to apply to some learned and able gentleman to deliver AN ORATION on
the 4th of July, 1785, that day being the anniversary of the INDEPENDENCE of
the United States of America, wherein the Orator is to consider the feelings,
manners, and principles which led to this great national event; as well as the
important and happy effects, whether general or domestic, which have already
and will forever continue, to flow from that auspicious epoch."
to consider the feelings, manners, and principles which led to that great
national event, which we now commemorate; as well as the important and happy
effects, whether general or domestic, which have already flowed, and will
forever flow from that auspicious epoch.

WHEN he reflects that he is called upon to discuss subjects so extensive, --
so affecting, so endearing to his country, -- so important, so interesting to
the world of mankind at large; and that before an audience so numerous, so
respectable, so illustrious as the present, he finds himself not a little
agitated with fear; he experiences an awe most unusual; and he trembles lest he
disgrace the cause he most wishes to honor: but when he recollects, however,
that, upon this occasion, he is to address an assembly of FREE AMERICANS, whose
distinguished liberal characteristick is to be ever more ready to applaud than
to condemn, his fears must insensibly subside, and decent confidence will
reassume her accustomed seat.

WHOEVER will peruse, with attention, the faithful page of history, will find
the same causes invariably producing the same effects.

PUBLIC VIRTUE, or a strong sense of our interest in the preservation and
prosperity of the government of which we are members, piety toward GOD,
fortitude, justice, temperance, frugality, and industry, have ever led to
empire and political grandeur; while, on the other hand, LUXURY, that most
baneful and destructive disease of the body politic, has ever proved, and
ever will prove, fatal to PUBLIC VIRTUE, ever blast the fairest constitution,
and finally pull down in ruins the strongest empire.

NEITHER the great despotick government, nor the small free republic, can
withstand its baleful effects.

See Montague's rise and fall of the ancient Republics.
WHENEVER it seizes on the vitals of a State the people become selfish,
avaritious, factious, dissipated, rapacious, and effeminate, and all law and
discipline, civil as well as military, become neglected and contemned.

AN army of poor, hardy Persians, under CYRUS, invaded and destroyed the
once-potent empire of Assyria, then enervated and debased by this worst of all
political diseases. In progress of time, the opulent and wide-extended empire
of Persia became infected with the same most baleful distemper, and rapidly
fell before the arms of the hardy Macedonian Greeks, commanded by ALEXANDER THE
GREAT.

THE same fatal disease, in the lapse of time, spread over the Macedonian
empire and contaminated its vitals, when, becoming incapable of effectual
resistance, that empire fell a prey to the arms of the then all-conquering
freeborn sons of ROME.

ROME, in her youth and See appendix, No. 1.
manhood, the seat of piety, the purest patriotism, simplicity of manners,
justice, honor, temperance, frugality, and splendid poverty, in her old age
was seized with the same political disease, and, at last, fell a victim to the
most infamous, degrading venality and political depravity that ever destroyed a
once great and free people. When, after the conquest of Antiochus the Great,
luxury was introduced at ROME, the manners of the people soon began to feel its
pernicious effects; but when CARTHAGE, her dreaded rival, sunk under the weight
of her all-conquering arms, and ceased to exist, an irresistible torrent of
corruption overwhelmed the mistress of the world, and prepared her the ready
victim of her own corrupt citizens.

ALL veneration for religion, oaths, justice, modesty, and decency, became
annihilated; the love of their country, which had enabled the ROMANS to
accomplish so many splendid achievements, was now no more: money, which alone
could enable them to satisfy their insatiable, artificial wants, became the
sole object of their pursuit: See appendix, No. 2.
poverty, which in the virtuous ages of the Republic, had been so truly
honorable, was then become reproachful and contemptible; the rich employed
their wealth to acquire power, and their power, when acquired, in every species
of violence and oppression.

IN her last stage of political depravity all the honors and offices of the
State where openly sat up to Omnia venalia, omnia exeunt in lucio, SAL.
sale; and finally, when the ambitious parricide, JULIUS CAESAR, appeared, the
PUBLIC LIBERTY and the whole empire became the object of purchase, and the
degenerate sons of ROME suffered themselves and every thing to become the
property of one of their fellow-citizens.

THE introduction and progress of freedom have generally attended the
introduction and progress of letters and science. In despotick governments the
people are mostly illiterate, rude, and uncivilized; but in States where CIVIL
LIBERTY has been cherished, the human mind has generally proceeded in
improvement, -- learning and knowledge have prevailed, and the arts and
sciences have flourished.

IN the justly celebrated city of ancient ATHENS, as well as in the other free
cities and States of GREECE, where nothing existed to depress or contract its
elastick force, the human mind expanded freely, reached the sublimest heights
of elevation, and by the most vigorous, the most noble, exertions, produced
whatever can do honor to the heart, the head, the hand of man. There, under
the invigorating shade of PUBLIC LIBERTY, that other TREE OF LIFE, were
brought forth those exquisite works of labor, of art, of learning, and of
invention, which for ages charmed the astonished world; even the history of
some of which continue to delight the more enlightened of all civilized
countries at this very day; while the inimitable surviving works of their
Orators, Poets, and Philosophers, afford infinite satisfaction, entertainment,
and instruction to the modern world. By her conquest of Greece ROME acquired a
knowledge of, and a taste for, the more liberal arts and sciences; nor was it
long after her conquest of the polished and enlightened people of that country
before she transplanted into Italy most of the noble inventions and
improvements of her new subjects. In both countries the arts and sciences
continued afterward to flourish, and in ROME progressively to aspire to true
attick beauty and excellence, until that memorable era in which the mistress
of the world, by the unbounded luxury, Corrumpere et corrumpi soeculum vocatur.
TAC.
venality, and profligacy of her degenerated sons became unworthy longer to
enjoy that FREEDOM which is ever the companion of piety, love of our country,
frugality, justice, and temperance. At or about that period the improvements of
the human mind seem nearly to have reached their meridian altitude. It was not
long, however, that they remained even stationary; for immediately after the
reign of the deceitful, treacherous, ungrateful, vindictive Octavianus, the
second despot Caesar of the fallen Republic, the arts and sciences began to
decline their languid heads.

THE horrible despotism of many of the succeeding Emperors coincided to
extinguish the glorious flame of emulation, to depress and debase the free
spirits of the human race, and to cast a deep gloom upon every thing liberal,
great, and noble. THE PUBLIC having become the property of one man alone, no
other thought the same, or any thing tending to its glory or exaltation, worthy
of his notice or deserving of his attention. The spirits of men were then
broken by the wildest misrule, and universal dejection and despondency must
have prevailed among all of finer feeling, understanding, and taste. During the
reigns of some of the despotick usurpers, if we can credit the Tacitus.
Prince of Historians, "most hideous were the ravages of cruelty at ROME: for
there it was treasonable to be noble; capital to be rich; criminal to have
sustained honors, criminal to have declined them; and the reward of worth and
virtue was quick and inevitable destruction: There the baneful villainies of the
informers were not more shocking than their mighty and distinguishing rewards"
(for on them were bestowed the most honorable and lucrative offices of the
Empire) while "in every station, exerting all their terrors and pursuing their
hate, they controuled and confounded all things; slaves were suborned to accuse
their masters, freedmen their patrons, and such as had no enemies were betrayed
and undone by their friends Atrocius in u^ be saevitum, Nobilitas, opes, omissi
gestique honores pro crimine, et ob virtutes certissim^m exitium. Nec minus
praemia delatorum invisa quam scelera: cum alii sacerdotia et consulatus ut
sp^lia adepti, procurationes alii et interiorem potentiam, agerent cuncta odio
et terrore. Corrupti in dominos servi, in patronos liberti: et quibus deerat
inimi^us, per amicos oppros^i. TAC. HIST. lib. 1.
." A more masterly, though a more melancholy, picture of an arbitrary,
despotick government is not, perhaps, to be produced in any other history or to
be met with in any other author whatever: a picture, the features of which we
cannot too often contemplate, and from which we may learn to admire, to love,
to be enthusiastically attached to that mild form of equal government which we
now so happily enjoy, and for which, under the Almighty Disposer of all things,
we are more immediately indebted to that most fortunate event, the anniversary
of which we this day celebrate, and which every true American ought ever
gratefully to commemorate.

IN such a state of things; in such a scene of anarchy, fury, violence, and
murder, as we find the unhappy Romans then so fatally experienced, where could
the human mind fly for rest, where find repose, where procure shelter, from the
black threatening storms of rapine, death, and desolation which were
continually bursting in upon every side? In times of such universal public
distress, in times so degrading to the human species, the instinctive faculty
of self-preservation must have occupied every thought, must have engrossed the
whole attention: no time then could have been spared for, could have been
devoted to, study and calm reflection; no time could have been indulged in the
pursuit of valuable knowledge or of any laudable attainment. In the reigns of
Titus, Nerva, Trajan, and the two Antonines, indeed, the gloom dispelled, and
nature once more began to look gay and to rejoice, and with the reviving spirit
of Rara temporum felicitate, ubi sentire quae velis, et quae sentias dicere
licet. TAC. HIST. lib. 1.
public liberty, PLINY, the younger, and TACITUS, who were most intimate
friends, flourished in the bright days of NERVA and TRAJAN.
eloquence, and the arts and sciences began to lift up their dejected heads.
But, alas! these days of sunshine were short and fleeting. A tumultuous,
unbridled, military government soon succeeded, when every thing appeared as
dark, or, if possible, more dark and gloomy than before. Life was as insecure,
and agriculture, manufactures, and commerce, finding no patrons, no protection,
dwindled away, decayed, and sunk into universal neglect.

INFAMOUS as the British Nabob-makers in the East, -- the military despots made
and unmade Emperors, and in one instance, the Praetorian guards compelled the
Roman people to submit to a state of degradation which sunk them to the level
of the vilest slaves, and even to the level of the brute creation. The ROMANS
had formerly sold themselves: this miserable privilege was now denied to them.
The military villains of the Sea appendix, No. 3.
Praetorian bands openly sat up the ROMAN EMPIRE at public auction, and struck
off the same to Didius Julianus, a rich, voluptuous, worthless citizen, as the
highest bidder; and thus openly disposed of themselves and the whole Roman
world at a public sale.

EARLY in the fourth century of the Christian Era, in the reign of the
contemptible Emperor Honorius, an innumerable multitude of barbarians from the
savage wilds of the north of Europe The GOTHS under ALARIC, their King, and the
Vandals, the Suevi, the Burgundi and the Alani under RADAGAISUS: and afterward
the HUNS under the subtle, daring, terror-striking Attila.
, like a vast flood of waters, broke in upon and overran the immense, unwieldy
empire of ROME. Ignorant of letters, they were incapable of any considerable
degree of knowledge or reflection, and of course were strangers to all useful
science and to the liberal arts. Dark thick clouds of Gothic night soon
obscured the fair face of science, and enveloped every trace of the polite
arts, and the European world sunk gradually into ignorance, stupidity, and
superstition; nor did a ray of pure literary light gleam forth again in the
lapse of some hundred years.

ABOUT that memorable period when William the bastard, Duke of Normandy,
invaded and See appendix, No. 4.
conquered England, by the death of HAROLD and the defeat of the English at the
battle of Hastings, gleams of scientifick light began to beam through the
Gothic cloud and to illuminate the European world. By that conquest, the
vanquished nation were put into a situation of receiving the rudiments of
science and of cultivation, and of emerging from their former barbarous and
rude state of manners. Gradual and flow, however, was the progress of human
knowledge and improvement, even in the other parts of the European world until
the fourteenth century, when the great designs of that benevolent Being who
rules over all, began to ripen into birth. In this remarkable century,
literature suddenly diffused itself through most parts of See appendix, No. 5.
Europe, gunpowder, the art of printing, and the mariner's compass were
invented, LUTHER appeared in Germany, and a reformation in religion took place;
and, at last, toward the close of that century, He set sail from Cadiz the
second day of August, 1492, a little before sunset, and after a passage of
thirty-three days he landed upon one of the Bahama islands, to which he gave
the name of St. Salvador. In 1498 he discovered the Continent, near the immense
river Orinoco, See appendix, No. 6.
CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS discovered the great southern, and SEBASTIAN CABOT the
great northern continent, of this new world, AMERICA. -- For times of greater
freedom however, of nobler improvement, and of more perfect knowledge was
reserved the particular discovery of this happy land, the place of our nativity.

THE cruel civil wars that preceeded the voyage and discovery of Cabot had
deluged ENGLAND in blood, and had rendered her people ferocious and savage;
nothing truly noble, truly great and praiseworthy was then to be found in that
distracted country. Degrading to humanity and to reason was the direful
contest! a people, by nature intended to be free and happy, are there seen
tearing out one another's entrails, without remorse employing the sword, and
alternately exercising See appendix, No. 7.
the axe and the halter upon each other, in the worst of all causes, -- in the
cause of tyranny: not, like the freeborn sons of ATHENS and of SPARTA,
gloriously braving death in the cause of freedom and of their country See
appendix, No. 8.
; but contending, with malice and rancour implacable, to set a despot of the
one house or of the other family upon the disputed throne. Had the calm, mild
voice of unerring REASON been duly heared, the poor, ignorant, deluded people
would have receded from the disgraceful contention convinced that to them, the
consequence of the brutal conflict, slavery, was the same, whether a tyrant of
the House of York or of Lancaster prevailed. But, alas! their minds were then
debased by slavery See appendix, No. 9.
; their understandings were clouded with ignorance, bigotry, and error.
Villenage, that bitterest fruit of feudal policy, was then still in full force
in ENGLAND: freedom was then unknown in that unhappy kingdom. KING and subject,
LORD and vassal, RELIGIOUS CLERGY and profane laity were then the principal
distinctions of men. By tenure the Lord was bound to attend the KING in his
wars for a certain number of days, For forty days.
and, in like manner, by a similar law of bondage, was the wretched vassal
compellable to follow and serve his LORD in those wars.

UPON the 22d day of August, in the year 1485, the Earl of Richmond, afterward
known by the name of KING HENRY THE VII. fought at Bosworth Field, and by the
defeat and slaughter of the merciless tyrant and bloody usurper See appendix,
No. 10.
RICHARD the III. cleared his way to a throne, to which he had no perfect,
legal title; in a few months after he married the Princess ELIZABETH, the
heiress of the House of York, eldest daughter of the deceased King, EDWARD the
IV. and thereby forever closed the bloody contest between the Sea appendix, No.
11.
red and the white rose. From this marriage proceeded a Princess, by the name
of Margaret, who in 1502 intermarried with James, King of Scotland, in right of
whom, after a lapse of an hundred and eighteen years, succeeded to the crown of
ENGLAND one of the most pedantick, ridiculous, contemptible, See appendix, No.
11.
infamous tyrants that ever abused, that ever disgraced a throne.

IN the reign of HENRY the VII. commerce began to lift her head in England, the
arts and sciences to bud, and manufactures to be encouraged; a revolution in
the manners of the people began to take place and paved the way for a
revolution in the system of government; the Commons, who had been generally in
a state of ignorance and dependence upon their feodal Lords, began to be
enlightened by science, and the whole kingdom to entertain a more just opinion
of the dignity and rights of mankind. But it was not till the reign of the
famous Queen ELIZABETH, who mounted the throne in 1558, that commerce was known
to flourish, learning to grow into general esteem, and the Protestant religion
to be really established in that kingdom. Bright and, in general, happy was the
distinguished long reign of that See appendix, No. 12.
affable and popular Queen, who, by her vigorous exertions in the cause of
LIBERTY enabled the oppressed States of Belgia to throw off the intolerable
yoke of the bigoted tyrant, PHILIP the II. of Spain, and fully to establish
then independence. The introduction and progress of freedom attended the
introduction and progress of science, of arts, manufactures, and commerce, and
the fair tree of LIBERTY now first began to blossom in ENGLAND; Virginia was
discovered by Sir Walter Raleigh and was attempted to be settled, and the land
we now dwell in was found out by Gosnold. No Sovereign ever held the scepter in
ENGLAND who appears to have gained such an universal ascendency over the
affections of the people as ELIZABETH, nor any of their Monarchs so sincerely
and affectionately to have loved that people.

UPON her decease succeeded JAMES the VI. of Scotland, son of Mary Queen of
Scots, by Lord Darnley, her husband, as generally asserted, though, as some
suppose, by the Italian fiddler See appendix, No. 13.
David Rizzio. Dismal and humiliating to the English was the contrast between
their late affable, magnanimous, native-born Queen and this ungracious, timid,
despicable pedant from the north: violent were the animosities of some of the
great men and Nobles of the English nation toward this conjurer of a King and
those swarms of his countrymen which he transplanted into his new dominion,
suddenly elevated to places of power and profit, and to titles of the highest
honor and distinction. The vain disposition of the pedantick Monarch, who
imagined himself possessed of inexhaustible learning and of never-failing
judgment, prevailed upon him to join the impious, sycophantick See appendix,
No. 14.
lordlings of the church, and from a Judge to turn a personal, loquacious, and
furious advocate against the Dissenters, then denominated Puritans, of whom
were our enlightened, manly ancestors. After having argued as an advocate, and
as a Judge determined, against those men who knew that the liturgy of the
church of England was little more than mere translation of the old Popish
mass book, and that too many of the forms and foppish ceremonies of the Roman
church was retained in the church of their native country, JAMES issued two
proclamations, the one commanding Jesuits and Popish Priests to leave the
kingdom; in which, however, he intimated that he would have a regard to tender
consciences; the other enjoining the Puritans to a strict conformity to the
established church, and in which he gave them no hope of any, the least
indulgence. Weak as was this contemptible Monarch, he had so much sense,
however, as to know that prelacy in a monarchical government is ever an useful
engine, a strong prop, of its maker and master, the King; nor was he so
destitute of reflection as to forget that the Bishops were daily complimenting
him with unlimited power, while the Dissenters opposed his king-craft,
nonsensical tenets of passive obedience and non-resistance, with the doctrines
of law and the indubitable right of liberty of conscience in matters between
GOD and their own souls. The intolerant zeal of a tyrannical Archbishop
Bancroft, who succeeded the adulating, priestly, sycophant Whitgift. See
appendix, No. 15.
high priest, supported by arbitrary principles of an impolitick King, soon
produced a severe prosecution of the Puritans, and many families, among whom
were the first of our pious ancestors, were compelled to fly from their
friends, their relations, and their native land, and to seek for liberty and
rest in foreign countries. The first church of our ancestors with their
venerable pastor took refuge in Holland where, finding the manners of the
people more licentious than they thought consistent with true piety, after a
few years residence, they first formed the resolution of seeking an asylum from
royal and prelatick tyranny in the wilds of this new world. Having a firm
reliance upon the goodness and mercy of their GOD, they embarked for Hudson's
River, committed themselves to the raging element of the sea, and resolutely
determined to live or to die FREEMEN. Their manners, formed by letters and a
religious education, and exercised in the schools of affliction and oppression,
were pious, simple, frugal, decent, patient, resolute. HE who neither slumbers
nor sleeps, -- HE who directs all things in the heavens and in the earth,
covered them with HIS almighty wings, and in his wisdom decreed that this then
dreary wilderness should receive the determined fugitives. -- Strong to labor
and patient of fatigue, the dark, thick woods of the ancient forest fell before
them, and the country around them soon began to blossom like the garden of
Eden. Conscious of the grateful duties they owed to their Common Parent and
Benefactor, they soon regulated the public offices and ceremonies of religion,
and, sensible that the manners of a free people depend greatly upon knowledge
and public instruction, they wisely instituted public free schools for the
education of youth in every part of their settlement, the benefits of which we
all feel the effects of even at this very memorable day. Thus began the
settlement of this country, not by fellow subjects sent out under the
authority, patronage and protection of the parent-state, but by an oppressed, a
persecuted sect of christians, who had been compelled to fly their native
country and seek for shelter and protection, first in foreign States, and
afterward in the wilds of this then uncultivated land.

ENGLAND, for THE KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN did not then exist, had no hand in
the settlement, contributed nothing toward its expenses, and was so far, as a
nation, from protecting the then infant settlements of NORTH AMERICA, that,
jealous of our growing strength, by Royal proclamation See appendix, No. 16,
, numbers who were eager to enjoy the natural rights of man, with all their
numerous families, were then prohibited from leaving that Kingdom; and in the
subsequent reign of the priest-led, uxorious, dissembling, execrable tyrant
CHALES the I. many, intending to embark for this Commonwealth, were stopped by
the prerogative writ of ne exeat regno. By the vigor of their own free minds,
and by the unremitting diligence of their own labourious hands, was this our
native country entered upon, subdued, and possessed by our resolute, pious, and
free ancestors, who, sick of the tyranny of Kings, Priests, and Nobles here
flew for rest; and much dissatisfied with the cruel, unjust, English-Gothick
law of descent, determined to interweave some of the juster laws of the Jewish
Republic with the fairer parts of the Common Law of England, and thereby form
a system of jurisprudence, better adapted to promote EQUALITY, and a more
equitable distribution of property among the fellow-citizens of the same free
State See appendix, No. 17.
.

IT does not appear that we received any assistance from ENGLAND in our bloody
wars with the Savages, that she afforded us any protection or troubled herself
much about us until the reign of the prodigal, profligate, royal idol CHARLES
the II. Then the country had so increased in people and in commerce that it
attracted the rapacious eyes of the ministerial harpies, who soon discovered an
anxious inclination to quarter their hungry minions upon, and to draw a revenue
from, the descendants of those very persons whom the tyranny and bigotry of
English Kings and of English Bishops had driven from their native country and
cruelly compelled to seek an asylum in the then uncultivated wilderness of
America.

THE infamous Edward Randolph came over from ENGLAND in the year 1676; but
because the independent FREEMEN of this country, conscious of their own
dignity, received him not with all that humble submission with which slaves
receive their haughty master, he immediately conceived, and ever after
retained, a most inveterate hatred to the people and to the government of this
Commonwealth, wrote to his abandoned Sovereign, his Ministers and Bishops, made
several voyages to ENGLAND and back again; like many of his more modern
brethren, most grossly misrepresented the actions of our manly ancestors and of
their Government in church and state; wrote and talked, and worked, and
wriggled himself into places of profit and trust; associated with a few
unprincipled traitors who then disgraced this their native country; nor ever
ceased his vile, malicious labors until he had overturned the then mild, equal
government of MASSACHUSETTS See appendix, No. 18.
; and in the stead thereof procured and arbitrary tyranny to be here
established. His iniquitons, base triumphs, however, lasted not long; for, in
less than three full years, the false accuser and his despot friend, the royal
Governor, Sir Edmond Andross, by the stern hand of unrelenting justice, were
hurled headlong from their new seats of lawless power and avarice.

THE sacred fire of liberty was smothered for a while nor showed abroad its
chearing light, but still it was not quite extinct: in former days it had been
carefully preserved, and highly cherished by our virtuous ancestors, and it had
been seen to flame most bright before the leyes of their well instructed
descendants. The annihilation of their chartered rights by the tyrant JAMES the
II. the last male Monarch of the detested house of Stuart that disgraces the
annals of English history, the restrictions of their trade, the restraint of
the public press, and the oppressions, exactions, and insolence of the new
exotic Governor, of the unprincipled Randolph, and of the other royal
minions, rouzed the people into action and kindled up the dying sparks of
PUBLIC LIBERTY, which soon burst forth with irresistible violence and withered
all those enemies of FREEDOM and of MASSACHUSETTS.

UPON the 18th day of April, 1689, the inhabitants of this country suddenly
rushed to arms, under the conduct of the gallant young See appendix, No. 19.
NELSON marched to the citadel, and there compelled the tyrant, Andross, to
surrender up the fort and government at discretion, together with Randolph and
all the traitors who had fled there for protection.

A REVOLUTION, unknown to them, had two months before taken place in England,
and the Prince and Princess of Orange, with the approbation of the nation, had
stepped into the vacant throne of the vagrant tyrant JAMES the II See appendix,
No. 20.
.

THE new King and Queen granted us a new See appendix, No. 21.
charter, our country again flourished and increased, the manners of our
forefathers were preserved, and the rising generation imbibed and cherished the
same independent spirit of freedom which had so conspicuously distinguished
their virtuous ancestors, the public seminaries of learning were protected and
encouraged, and the whole body of the people were instructed in letters and in
the rudiments of useful knowledge.

THE same causes still produce the same effects, -- and the manners and
principles of our people, formed by the same modes of education, thank GOD!
even at this day, are nearly similar to those of their great forefathers.

IN no part of the habitable globe is learning and true useful knowledge so
universally disseminated as in our native country. Who has seen a native adult
that cannot write? who known a native of the age of puberty that cannot read
the bible? In what other land do the common country people who bring their
produce to the daily markets, so readily calculated, and by a memoritor
arithmetic so duly ascertain the various prices of the numerous commodities
they vend? Where are the people who so universally interest themselves in all
public political matters as our fellow-citizens at large, and our hardy
yeomanry in particular? Who are better acquainted with the various, daily
transactions of the earth than the whole body of this people? Who debate more
freely? Who, in general, conclude more justly? -- and to whom are we indebted
for these invaluable advantages, for the distinguishing characteristick of a
knowing and enlightened people? Under GOD, we certainly derive all these
benefits from the piety, wisdom, and prudence of our renowned forefathers, who,
sensible that the manners and principles of a people depend upon education,
took care, by the establishment of public schools, to instruct every one in
the knowledge of letters, religion, and civil liberty.

FROM the time of the new charter nothing happened among us so material as to
merit our particular attention at present. In the succeeding reign of Queen
ANN, the last of the Stuart name that filled the English throne, an event,
however, of the greatest importance to US and to the ENGLISH took place. In the
fifth year of the reign of that Queen a statute passed for the It took place on
the first of May, 1707.
union of the two kingdoms of ENGLAND and SCOTLAND; by the fourth article of
which, it is declared that "ALL the subjects of the united kingdom shall have
full freedom of trade and navigation to any port within the united kingdom, and
the dominions thereto belonging; and that there should be a communication of
all other rights which belonged to the subjects of either kingdom."

BY this article our tender, nursing mother, as she has been most falsely and
impudently called, without consulting our legislative bodies, or asking the
consent of any one individual of our countrymen, assumed upon herself to
convey, as stock in trade, one full undivided moiety of all the persons and all
the estates and property of the FREEMEN of AMERICA to an alien who will prove
an harsh, cruel, and unrelenting stepmother. Then, too much blinded with
foolish affection for that country whose oppressions had forced our stern,
free-minded progenitors into these remote regions of the world, -- into an
howling and a savage wilderness, -- like children, not yet attained to the
years of reason and discretion, who inconsiderately suppose their parent ever
in the right, our predecessors sat quiet under the arbitrary disposition, nor
once murmured aloud at the unnatural, and to us iniquitous, transaction.

OUR new parent, GREAT BRITAIN, then made our By the second article of the act
of union, the succession to the monarchy is to be to the Princess Sophia,
Electoress and Duchess Dowager of Hanover, in default of issue of the then
Queen Anne.
Kings, appointed our Governors, and kindly sent many of her needy sons to
live upon the fruits of our toil, to reap where neither she nor they had sown,
and to fill the various offices which she had generously created here, for her
and their own emolument. Every twentieth cousin of an ale-house-keeper who had
a right of voting in the election of a member of Parliament was cooked up into
a gentleman, and sent out here, commissioned to insult the hand that gave him
daily bread. Although greatly displeased with these injurious proceedings we
submitted to the harsh hand of our unfeeling, selfish stepmother, nor once
remonstrated against these her unjust, her cruel usurpations.

GREAT BRITAIN involved herself in a war with Spain and France, and, considered
as a part of her property, we became entangled with her enemies, with whom we
had no reasonable cause of dispute. Out of revenge to her, those enemies
annoyed our trade, and, from the then formidable harbor of Louisbourg, the
French threatened annihilation to our fishery.

IN that critical, and by us unsought for, situation, OUR COUNTRY flew to arms,
and with a small determined host of hardy men, unexperienced in the more
regular rules of war and of modern attack, in less than three months, compelled
the veteran soldiers of France to surrender their once supported impregnable
fortress to the resolute, persevering yeomanry of New England See appendix, No.
22.
.

IN the conquest of Cape-Breton, the undaunted, bold, enterprising spirit of
our stern forefathers appeared eminently displayed in their intrepid sons:
AMERICA rejoiced, MASSACHUSETTS gloried in her children, and the European world
stood astonished at the unexpected, great event.

OUR good and tender-nursing stepmother soon discovered her paternal regard
for her darling offspring, and shortly after that conquest, without
condescending even to ask or solicit our consent, restored to her enemy the
well-known DURKIRK of NORTH AMERICA. It may be asked, by what right did
GREAT BRITAIN so arbitrarily dispose of the conquest of our arms? By the same
right which she afterward so openly avowed, so arrogantly ENACTED, that "SHE
had a right to bind AMERICA in all cases whatever See appendix, No. 23.
." A right by which all our lives, our liberties, and our properties were
asserted to be at her lawless disposal, at her merciless domination; by which
she could transfer or sell every person in AMERICA and all their estates to the
Sultan of the East, the Emperor of Morocco, or to any other despot of the
Asiatick, or of the European, world.

SUPPOSING that MASSACHUSETTS was a colony originally sent out, supported and
protected by GREAT BRITAIN, which I do not, I cannot, admit; yet it by no means
follows that she could legally or honestly exercise, the right she had assumed
over us. "Colonies" say the Thucid.
Corcyrean Ambassadors to the Athenians, " are not sent out to be the SLAVES,
but to be the EQUALS of those that remain behind;" and Flaminius the Roman
Pro-consul of Greece, in the Senate of Rome, after his return from his
government, tells the Ambassadors of King Antiochus that " colonies were not
sent into AEolis and Ionia to be held in slavery by Kings but to spread that
ancient nation over the world Live.
. How different were the notions and declarations of those illustrious
ancients, in regard to colonies, from those entertained and ENACTED by our late
ungracious stepmother!

EARLY in the reign of GEORGE the II. the British Parliament passed an act "
for the more speedy recovery of debts in his Majesty's plantations in America,"
whereby a new species of evidence, unknown to the common law of ENGLAND, was
introduced here, and an ex part affidavit or deposition of any hired or
perjured villain was made to bind the property and the person of every American
on this side the Atlantic, while none other than the viva voce testimony of
the witness himself present in the open court of law in ENGLAND, could be
admitted to establish any fact or demand against a native or even a foreign
resident in that country See appendix, No. 24.
. Our manufactures were soon injuriously restricted, the free use of the common
element, water, was prohibited to us, and the working up our own raw materials
also in some cases was denied to us: injuries and oppressions great and
grievous, but, when compared with the intolerable badges of slavery enacted in
the succeeding tyrannical reign, light and trifling.

IN 1756, another war was declared by GREAT BRITAIN against FRANCE, excited by
a number of clamourous, interested British merchants, who had been accumulating
enormous fortunes from the tobacco trade, the fur trade, and the trade of the
southern colonies, as they were then denominated.

AMERICA joined hand in hand with her harsh stepmother, and, assisted by the
superior abilities of one great The late Earl of Chatham, then Mr. PIT.
statesman, enabled her to carry her flag triumphant throughout the four
quarters of the globe. Before this war closed, the good old King died, full of
years and full of glory, when the bright days of Britain began to darken, and
were soon to be obscured with clouds, and storms, and tempests which were to
shake her Empire to the center.

A YOUNG, proud Monarch, of puny genius and of pigmy talents, with an unfeeling
heart and an unrelenting obstinacy, succeeded GEORGE the II. who now determined
to raise his minion of the detestable House of Stuart, to the first offices of
the State, and permit him to ride over the heads and disgrace the persons of
the ablest Counselors and of the noblest families in ENGLAND. Every true whig
and friend to the revolution of 1688 was soon marked out, and devoted as a
public enemy, almost every officer of government in ENGLAND was changed in the
space of a few months, and in less than three years a venal Parliament was
bribed, most openly, to sanctify a shameful peace.

LIKE all his family, an enemy to PUBLIC LIBERTY, the tyrant minion turned his
baleful thoughts toward this fair land of native freedom, resolved to blast the
fruits of all our great-forefather's care. It is true indeed that the
indignation of the English ever long compelled the wretch to quit his public
station, to fly from open day, and skulk behind the throne.

THERE sheltered and protected from the storms of patriots and of injured
FREEMEN he provoked his royal pupil, and all his base, mean tools of power to
plunder us by act of Parliament, and boldly to assert that we were not entitled
to any sort of right but what our selfish step-dame might be pleased to give
us. Finding that you called aloud for law and justice, and insisted on the
rights of free Americans, by Four governments, in the American islands and on
this Continent, were disposed of to four Scotsmen, on one and the same day, on
of whom was afterward the famous Commissioner Johnson. How pleasing must it be
to the whole realm of England to view her two Scotch Chief Justices, the Earl
of Mansfield (the liberty-loving Murray) and Lord Louthborough (the whiggish
Sawney Wedderburne) who was so free with the black-ball and brush, at the
COCKPIT, in defending the hypocritick traitor, the parricidious Tons
Hutchinson, and in bedaubing the truly excellent Doctor Franklin.
Governors of his own choice and of his own country, and by a standing army he
determined to subjugate AMERICA to a most lawless domination.

THE dire effects of the standing army quartered in this town you all but too
well remember!

THE night of the fifth of March, 1770, is a night much to be remembered! -- It
was a night of horror and of the blackness of darkness! The innocent, unarmed
inhabitants of this peaceful though muchinjured town then fell victims to the
brutal violence of the mercenary slaves of GEORGE the III. -- To every species
of insult, at last was added this infernal outrage. Methinks, I realize the
terrors of that night! -- I see your streets contaminated with murder and with
blood! methinks, I hear the confused noise of small-arms, rage, and tumult! I
see the base, savage-ruffian drive the remorseless steel through the warm
brain-pan of the lovely, hapless youth -- the fallen, dying Maverick! methinks
I hear the quick, shrill shrieks of matrons and of maids, while "groans the sad
earth, resounds the rattling sky."

BUT, lo! appears the matchless, dauntless patriot, ADAMS, the stern,
determined father of our glorious revolution, surrounded by a noble band of
brave compatriots of this insulted town.

HUSHED is the spreading tumult! -- Instant they form a firm, long line of
march. -- In sullen silence, as they pass the British guards, "deliberate
valor breathes in every soul" and thoughts of deep revenge fire every manly
breast. To the solemn temple of their GOD the slow procession moves -- and
there, -- " In full convene the city Senate sat,
" Our FATHER'S spirit ruled the firm debate From Mr. Allen's poem lately
published with the volume of Boston Orations. It is hoped that this gentleman
will soon publish his poem entitled Bunker's Hill, which will do as much honor
to his country as to himself, and convince the British that true classical
English poetry is not the produce of their own little island only.
."
It Is there resolved that "every British troop shall instantly retire." None
dares to disobey: -- the appalled military cutthroats fly the town, and peace
and order once again resume their ancient seats.

NEW modes of extortion are soon again devised in BRITAIN, and a more numerous
military force is sent from thence to awe you into submission.

THE pure flame of liberty, left brightly burning by our first forefathers, now
kindles up anew. Close to the muzzles of the cannon of their men-of-war, the
devoted tea is thrown into the ocean, and the insolent tyrants and traitors of
the newfangled Board of Customs fly for safety and hide their miscreant heads
among the British troops. GREAT BRITAIN shuts your port, -- deprives you of
that common See appendix, No. 25.
element which the kind Parent of the Universe made for all, and vainly tries
to desolate the seat of public virtue; and still to irritate you more,
destroys, like JAMES the II. of the tyrant Stuart's race, each chartered right.

YOUR feelings now are all alive: and you, ye virtuous sons of freedom,
BOWDOIN, HANCOCK, ADAMS! -- See appendix, No. 26.
HANCOCK, ADAMS, BOWDOIN! -- illustrious names! for ever-honoured, ever-dear!
withdraw from the polluted town, and meet your new-formed Senate in the fields.

SOON the willing freemen train to arms, resolved to save their country, or
perish in the great attempt The minute-men.
.

AT last the flames of open war burst forth. The mercenary troops in darkness
march for CONCORD, and unprovoked discharge their murdering arms upon our
unoffending countrymen. Rage and revenge then fired each firm, undaunted
breast. Our hardy yeomen rush to fight; and, though but poorly armed, they
drive the foe. "Percy, and Douglass" the supposed "confident against the world
in arms Shakespeare. A personification of England and Scotland;
" are soon compelled to fly, and hide their vanquished heads within this town.

FROM every part the sons of freedom quit the plough, and, with their rusty
swords and long-unpolished guns, march eager to surround the vaunting, though
late vanquished, foe.

BUT soon the deadly contest wears a darker face. -- From their beleaguered
garrison the Britons now pour forth, to drive our raw militia from their
slender lines near Bunker's gently rising hill See appendix, No. 27.
. Now, now, ye virtuous sons of great forefathers, forget not whence ye sprung!
shine forth! -- in native valor shine! -- remember, and avenge your
slaughtered brethren!

BUT see! -- In all the dazzling pomp of military parade the embattled foe
draws near! their silken banners wave resplendent to the sun! their burnished
arms gleam dreadful through the field! from sea, -- from land, their furious
cannons roar, discharging iron thunderbolts; while bursting bombs in deadly
shivers fly around the slender, threatened lines: and thick, dark clouds of
volumned smoke and vast, broad sheets of rushing flame and sparkling fires,
from close adjoining, desolated Charlestown, rise. -- Amid this solemn,
dreadful scene, with more than Spartan valor steeled, intrepid still our
vengeful yeomen stand! they mock at fear and are not affrighted, neither turn
they their BACKS FROM THE SWORD Job.
.

Now, almost hand to hand, the foes, too confident, display their dreadful
front; "full of deliberate valor bent on daring battle." -- At once five
hundred fiery messengers of death, from freedom's sons sure aimed, fly thick
amid the bold assailants. In heaps on heaps the regulated (...) now fall! The
proud invaders stop: -- they pause. -- Again like rattling rail, but barbed
with fire, the deadly bullets fly. -- The Britons break, -- and slow retire.
Shame, rage, and fell revenge recall their foiled, their shattered troops. --
Again they form, -- they march deliberate, resolved to storm the lines. --
Another, and another storm of vengeful fire bursts on them: -- again, they feel
the leaden, fiery death: -- they bleed, they drop; -- again they break; -- they
fly. -- Once more their bold, intrepid chiefs recall their galled, disordered
troops, and make one desperate effort more. -- Again the battle bleeds; nor do
fair freedom's sons give way till their whole stock of ammunition's quite
expended.

REGARDLESS of his precious life, disdaining shameful flight, the illustrious
See appendix, No. 28.
WARREN falls, his country's hero and his country's pride! -- What though
within these hallowed walls his mouldering relics lie, without a sculptured
stone to mark the spot, yet shall his fame be known, his memory live, to latest
ages!

See the Oration of PERICLES at the funeral of the Athenians who fell in
battle. THUCYD,
To pay superior honors to those who have devoted their lives in fighting for
their country is a debt of justice. The eloquence of a MORTON, within this
sacred temple, has been exerted in this noble cause, and he has commemorated,
in manly strains of eloquence, the exalted character, and the glorious death of
the heroic WARREN; but as the whole earth is the sepulcher of illustrious men,
WARREN'S fame, HIS glorious actions are deposited in universal remembrance, far
superior to marble monuments, local inscriptions, or funeral eulogiums.

THE daring intrepidity of such young troops though so poorly armed, so meanly
clothed, and the dreadful, desolating slaughter experienced from them in the
late battle induced the haughty sons of Britain to think more favorably of
those whom they had hitherto been taught to despise as timid dastards in the
field of war.

See appendix, No. 29.
ADAMS and HANCOCK are soon after this singled out and proscribed by name. --
Illustrious friends of liberty, rejoice! -- distinguished patriots, hail! --
whenever, in future times, the faithful page of history shall unfold, your
names shall shine resplendent as the planets, while every generous mind will
shrink abhorrent from the spiteful, impotent proscriber.

AND now, to wound your feelings to the very quick, the barbarous despoilers
seize your sacred temples See appendix, No. 30.
; religion is profaned. -- The sacred fane where often your pious fathers met to
worship the kind GOD of their salvation is polluted; -- where trod, in holy
reverence, the pious feet of the devout christian, now resounds the rattling
hoofs of training horses and the sharp, keen lash of torturing whips; where
grateful hymns and loud hosannas had often ascended to the immortal King, now,
from her hellish trump, PROPHANITY poured forth her horrid oaths, and vile
obscenity re-echoed all around. The public faith of treaty, is basely violated
by See appendix, No. 31.
GAGE, and your fellowcitizens are oppressed, insulted, plundered, imprisoned.

THUS, my fellow-citizens! were your feelings tortured, and your rights invaded
and retrenched beyond a coward-sufferance See appendix, No. 32.
.

THANK GOD! "the smiling dawn of happy day presents a prospect clear The
beginning of a song in the oratorio of Judas Maccabeus.
." Seeing our besieging troops possessed of the heights of Dorchester, and
dreading the just vengeance of a people driven mad by oppression, the brutal
sons of violence for ever quit the town; -- they leave our shares and fly for
Halifax.

NOT many months after this flight, the enemy covered the seas with his At the
time of the battle of Long Island there were seven hundred sail of transports
with twenty-eight sail of British men-of-war lying at anchor a little below the
city of New York.
fleets, and transported a vast army of native and of foreign mercenaries to
desolate our country.

ONE knows not which most to execrate, -- the base, unfeeling despot of Hesse,
who sold his wretched people, or the blind, vindictive, obstinate, despotick
dealer in human flesh who purchased those military slaves for the truly
laudable purpose of butchering his subjects, and of irradicating from AMERICA
every trace of PUBLIC LIBERTY.

BUT the great, the important day is come; let the world of man rejoice!
Congress declare, and their illustrious President, the late proscribed HANCOCK,
our beloved townsman, proclaims, that "we abjure the British tyrant, and that
AMERICA is sovereign, free, and independent!"

O GLORIOUS act of noblest freeborn souls; which soon will give peace,
liberty, and safety to our much-injured country, and here will open a secure
asylum for all the oppressed of every nation under heaven!

TIME will not permit me now to particularize all the brilliant actions, all
the great events of the war, nor to attempt the splendid characters of all your
heroes, statesmen, patriots.

THE incredible long difficult march of your army through the eastern part of
this State, and through the before-untrodden wilderness into Canada; the
masterly retreat of your army, conducted by our beloved Chief, from Long Island
without the loss of a man, though attempted within musket shot of the superior
army of the enemy furnished with two hundred pieces of brass artillery; the
defeat and capture of the Hessians at Trenton and at Princeton, at a time so
critical; the defeat and entire capture of the two British armies, at Saratoga
and York-Town, with the infernal cruelties and savage See appendix, No. 33.
murders which so long disgraced the British arms and nation will prove proper
subjects, hereafter, for the pens of the Historian and the Poet.

THE memories and the fall of the excellent MONTGOMERY and of the gallant
MERCER will be had in everlasting remembrance by every friend to LIBERTY and of
AMERICA: nor will the names of LINCOLN, See appendix, No. 34.
KNOX, STEUBEN, GATES, and GREEN be ever obliterated from the brightest rolls
of fame. While, like the sun, will shine to latest time the great, the mighty
WASHINGTON; in whom we view the Scholar, Statesman, Hero, Patriot, Philosopher,
and Christian; who by the most admirable policy disbanded his brave, unpaid,
virtuous army, and induced them readily to return again into the body of their
fellow-citizens; after which, with the magnanimity of CINCINNATUS, our beloved
GENERAL retired from his exalted public station to the calm, happier, though
less splendid scenes of private, rural life: To do full justice to whose
glorious name
" Would burst the cheeks and rend the trump of fame."


How often must we turn the volumes of history before we can meet with even one
good, one amiable, benevolent crowned head, the friend of freedom, and the
friend of man. How then must we be charmed to view our great, our good,
magnanimous Ally of FRANCE, in whom shines forth each splendid virtue which can
grace a crown! Brave, liberal, just, humane; the tender, kind, indulgent father
of a gallant, generous, lively, polished people, and the firmest friend of our
UNITED STATES. Long may he reign! -- long may he live! an honor to the Royal
Race, the ornament of Europe, and still a public blessing to mankind.

AMONG his Nobles none shine with more resplendent luster than our late-adopted
fellow-citizen, the brave, the truly amiable MARQUIS LE FAYETTE, who in the
cause of PUBLIC FREEDOM and our deep-injured country drew his manly sword,
left all the delicacies of his native land, his beauteous confort, and his
darling offspring, to combat and to conquer in the dread fields of death, by
the great side of our illustrious Chief.

THE Britons being vanquished in AMERICA, the peace took place, and our late
abjured King was forced most solemnly to acknowledge us sovereign, free, and
independent.

WE soon began to enjoy the blessings of a free, unrestrained trade, the whole
European world seemed anxious to enter into our ports and to court our
friendship, while "every man sat down under his own vine and his own fig tree
and there was none to make him afraid."

BUT elated with success and blinded by prosperity, we too soon began to relax
in our manners, and to adopt the luxury, the follies, the fashions of that
nation which so lately we had every reason to detest See appendix, No. 36.
, and madly to enter into a boundless import of her manufactures in preferrence
to those of our allies and friends.

DISSIPATION and extravagance immediately pervaded all orders of our people,
and so ridiculous was the triumph of folly among us that even our country-girls
in their market-carts, and upon their panniered horses, rode through our
streets with their heads deformed with the plumes of the ostrich, and the
feathers of other exotic birds See appendix, No. 37.
.

SUCH a sudden depravity, such a rapid degeneracy of our manners has plunged
us deep in debt and difficulty, stripped us of our cash, and brought us into
great contempt. Above three millions of dollars have been exported since the
peace from this State alone to GREATBRITAIN; and what have we to show for such
an enormous sum of money? It is good for us, perhaps, to have been in trouble.
The kind GOD of our fathers, who brings good out of evil, has suffered us,
for the better, perhaps, to be so early infected with this mad rage of folly
and extravagance. Poverty must soon compel us to reflect, and, I hope and trust
to amend. If we do not, we already know the consequence, -- inevitable and
certain political destruction. No Empire or State has yet been found so strong
as to bear up against the deadly streams of universal luxury: we, therefore,
can have no reason to suppose that the youth of our constitution is so very
vigorous as to throw off the effects of that disease which has long since
tumbled into dust the greatest Empires, the most powerful States of the
universe See appendix, No. 38.
. Let us then, my fellow-citizens! determine, from this day, individually, to
amend, to retrench every unnecessary, every useless expense, and save our
country! Let us recur to the principles and to the plain, frugal manners of our
pious ancestors. AMERICANS! approve yourselves men of wisdom, as you have
convinced the whole world that you are men of valor. Let me entreat, let me
conjure you, my countrymen! by your religion; as you love your liberty, your
wives, and your posterity, to shake off immediately this pernicious, this
unmanly, this destructive vice, so unworthy of yourselves, the dignity of your
country, and the glory of your great forefathers! Let the great and the
opulent, from this auspicious day set the bright examples of true frugality and
of decent economy. Let our legislature enact See appendix, No. 38.
sumptuary laws to check the progress of our present evils. Ye honored Fathers
of our land! your country has invested you with fullest powers to save the
State, and you must answer to GOD and to that country for a faithful discharge
of the important, sacred trust committed to you. If the thoughtless and
voluptuous, heedless of themselves, their families and country, will still
persist in their pernicious course of luxury and dissipation, make their
follies contributory to the necessities of the State. Let every article of
needless dress, and show, and vain expense be taxed -- and highly taxed; from
thence derive a fund, if no other can be found, to pay that debt which honor,
justice, and humanity must blush to find unpaid. Discharge the debt which
gratitude must hide her modest, decent head to see so scandalously, so long
neglected. Pay, pay your brave, your late invincible, disinterested, patriotick
army! The necessity of FREEMEN and of honest MEN now presses hard upon us. The
disgrace of past misconduct and of dishonor to a freeman is the most urgent
necessity Demosthenes.
. How infamous does that man appear in the impartial eyes of ALL who, having it
in his power, refuses or wilfully neglects to pay his lawful debts? who but
would contemn the base, dishonorable wretch, that wished to cheat his honest,
bona fide creditor? if this be so, how can we show our hardened faces to our
noble, virtuous, manly sons, who freely left their all to combat death, and
wounds, and every comfort of domestic life, to save us and our threatened
country? this debt, my fathers! then discharge the first.

BANISH luxury; invest your great amphyctionick Council See appendix, No. 40.
, your CONGRESS, with full, but specified powers to regulate your trade, and
all the important, great concerns of your young, rising Empire, and ALL, yes,
ALL will yet be well. Our commerce, numbers, manufactures, arts, and glory then
will soon increase, and our late stepmother, who now so haughtily contemns us,
again shall dread our power. If we make a right use of our natural advantages
we soon must be a truly great and happy people. When we consider the vastness
of our country, the variety of her soil and climate, the immense extent of her
seacoast, and of the inland navigation by the lakes and rivers, we find a
world within ourselves, sufficient to produce whatever can contribute to the
necessities and even the superfluities of life. Every article of commerce and
almost every article of luxury, now imported from abroad, may be produced in
one part or another of this our great, our wide extended Empire. These, among
many other, then are some of those blessings which must for ever flow, if we
are wise and prudent, from this auspicious epoch, which we celebrate this day.

AND now, my brethen! let us for ever cherish that heartfelt affection, that
enthusiastic love of our country which should continually warm the hearts of
FREE CITIZENS, and which enabled those celebrated sons of ancient Greece to
work such wonders for their native land.

LET us cherish all that is great, and just, and liberal; and banish, for ever
banish from our hearts See appendix, No. 41,
ENVY, that passion of the low, uncultivated mind, nor grieve because our
neighbor's richer, or more splendid than ourselves.

LET us cheerfully open our arms to the industrious, and to the oppressed, of
every nation, tongue, and kindred, nor deny to any what THE LORD OF ALL has
made, has given for UNIVERSAL GOOD. AS HE has given peace, liberty, and safety
to US, let us extend the same to ALL.

BUT, in particular, let US cherish the great duties of piety and See appendix,
No. 42.
religion, convinced that every good and perfect blessing we enjoy is the free
gift of that great King who reigns above.

CONVINCED, that with HIS own right hand and holy arm HE has gotten us the
victory; Let the sweet incense of grateful adoration rise in every heart; and
let the lips of every of us pronounce, Not unto us, O Lord! not unto us, but
unto thy great name be glory. The GOD of hosts, even the GOD of our Fathers
raised up for us, our great and magnanimous ALLY, and HE also raised up for us,
from among our brethren, such glorious heroes, patriots, statesmen! these were
all instruments in HIS paternal hand for bringing on, and perfecting, that
great event, the anniversary of which we now commemorate. Wherefore let every
of us say, -- Blessed be the name of GOD for ever and ever; for wisdom and
might are HIS, and HE changes the times and the seasons; HE removes Kings and
sits up Kings; HE gives wisdom to the wise and knowledge to them that know
understanding Dan. ii. 20, 21.
. THE MOST HIGH rules in the kingdom of men, end gives it to whomsoever HE
will Dan. iv. 17.
.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
After the word nativity in the third line of the Oration, add of the learning
and abilities of the man. In page 16, for Robert Earl of, read Henry Stuart
Lord.

Page 21, for in our native country, read this, our native country, and in the
same page for memoritor, read memoriter. In page 23, for supported impregnable
fortress, read supposed impregnable fortress.

All other errors of the press or author, it is hoped will be overlooked.

APPENDIX.
No. 1.
IT is the observation of Pluturch, that the ROMANS, in the virtuous ages of
their Republic, had such respect to religion, that they made all their affairs
to depend solely on the will of the Gods; that even in their greatest
prosperities they never suffered the least contempt or neglect of the ancient
(...) and ceremonies, perfectly convinced that their uniform submission to the
Gods contributed much more to the stability and prosperity of their State than
all the successes of their arms. The instances of the noblest patriotism among
them are almost innumerable. Caius Mucius Scaevola, the Decii, and Quintus
Curtius are, among others, most astonishing; and during the first five hundred
years of ROME, we often meet with characters of the most shining and exalted
virtue.

No. 2.
How noble does the Roman Ambassador, Fabricius, appear in his celebrated
conferrence with King Pyrrhus, where he tells the King that the information he
had received relative to his poverty was true; tells him that an house of mean
appearance and a small spot of ground from which, by his own labor, he
supported himself, was his whole estate: at the same time, he informs Pyrrhus,
that his poverty renders him by no means less considerable in his country, nor
in the least degree unhappy; that fortune supplies him with whatever nature
actually requires, and that if he was without superfluities, he was without any
desire for them; that with superfluities it was true he should be in a better
situation to assist the needy, the only advantage for which the rich are to be
envied; that small however, as were his possessions he could nevertheless
contribute somewhat toward the support of the State and the assistance of his
friends. As to honors, he tells the King that, poor as he was, his country
placed him upon a level with the wealthiest of her citizens: that ROME
acknowledged no qualifications for great employments but virtue and ability.
FRABRICIUS then enumerates the great offices to which, notwithstanding his
poverty he was eligible, and then goes on to inform the King, that his poverty
did not affect his consequence in the Senate; that his countrymen honored him
for that very poverty which Pyrrhus considered as disgraceful, etc. and when
the great Quinctius Cincinnatus was called to the Dictatorship, the deputies
from the Senate found him following the plough at his little sabine farm.

No. 3.
THE Praetorian bands were a body of guards, amounting to near fifteen thousand
men, distinguished by double pay, and by privileges superior to the soldiers
of the legions. They owed their institution to that crafty tyrant Augustus, who
stationed only three cohorts (about fifteen hundred) of these guards in the
capital, during his reign; but the dark, unrelenting monster Tiberius
afterward assembled the whole corpse at Rome, and there fixed them in a
permanent camp, well fortified and advantageously situated. After the murder of
the cruel, dissolute Emperor Commodus, by his favorite concubine Marcia, on
the 31st of December, A. D. 192, the virtuous Pertinax was elected and
acknowledged Emperor, to whom the Praetorian bands took the oath of allegiance;
after which, and before the expiration of eighty-seven days, some hundreds of
these lawless ruffians, at noonday, marched toward the Imperial Palace, where
there companions upon guard immediately threw open the gates and joined them in
the assassination of their excellent Prince, whose head, after dispatching him
with many wounds, they cut off, fixed upon a lance, and carried in triumph to
their camp. Incredible as it may appear, even in these moments of horror,
Sulpicianus, the father-in-law of the murdered Pertinax, then in their camp,
was so dead to decency, humanity, and all sense of public virtue that he began
to treat with these flagitious, military cutthroats for the vacant throne;
when the more avaritious of the Praetorians, apprehensive that, in a private
contract they should not obtain the highest price for so valuable a commodity,
ran out upon the ramparts; and, with a loud voice, proclaimed that the Roman
world was to be disposed of, to the best bidder, by public auction. Julianus
outbid Sulpicianus; the former promising to each soldier six thousand two
hundred and fifty drachms (about two hundred and sixty-six pounds lawful money)
while the other offered only five thousand drachms (a little better than two
hundred and thirteen pounds lawful money.) To Julianus they then immediately
threw open the gates of their camp, declared him Emperor, took the oath of
allegiance to him, placed him in the center of their ranks, surrounded him on
every side with their shields, and proceeded with him through the deserted
streets of Rome in close order of battle to the Senate, who dared not to
resist, but pretended great satisfaction at the happy revolution, and
acknowledged him Emperor.

See GIBBSONS' s Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.

No. 4.
IT is obvious to observe how the word CONQUEROR affects the English, and what
pains some of their writers have taken to show, that William I. ought not to be
considered as an absolute conqueror of the nation, but rather as the conqueror
of King Harold, with whom he disputed the title to the crown of that kingdom,
Among these is the learned and ingenious Sir MARTYN WRIGHT; from whose very
excellent Introduction to (...) Law of Venures I shall here makes a
considerable extract, and that principally because that valuable treatise is, I
believe, in the hands of very few on this side the Atlantic. Page. 61 of that
work it is said," Though it is true that the possessions of the Normans were of
a sudden very great, and that they received most of them from the hands of
William I. yet it does not follow, that the King took all the lands of England
out of the hands of their several owners, claiming them as the spoils of war,
or as parcel of a conquered country but on the contrary it appears pretty (...)
from the history of those times, that the King either had, or pretended title
to the crown, and that his title, whether real or pretended, was established by
the defeat of Harold, which amounted to an unquestionable judgment in his
favor. He did not therefore treat his oppposers as enemies, but as traitors,
agreeably to the known laws of the kingdom, which subjected traitors not only
to loss of life, but of all their possessions; so that this King, thus
intitling himself to the lands of all such as had, or did afterward oppose
him, might well reward his followers in the manner he did, and that this must
have been the case appears from the nature of the pleas held and determined at
Pinenden, and Sharnburn, and by every other evidence of the time of this King,
and of his immediate successors.

"As William I. did not claim, or possess himself of he lands of England as the
spoils of conquest, so neither did he tyrannically and arbitrarily subject them
to a feudal dependence; but as the feudal law was at that time the prevailing
law in Europe, and "was then, says Sir Henry Spelman, conceived to be the most
absolute law for supporting the royal estate, preserving union, confirming
peace, and suppressing incen diaries and rebellions." William I. who had always
governed by this policy, might probably recommend it to our ancestors, as the
most obvious and ready way to put them upon a foot with their neighbors, and
to secure the nation against any future attempts from them, and might probably
propose laws agreeable thereto, as such quae ad utilitatem Anglorum, and ad
(...) Pacem tuendam Efficacissimae videbantur; and it can be no wonder that
such of our ancestors, as then composed the Commune Concilium of the nation,
under the sense they then were of the strength and progress of this policy,
should consent to it, establishment, and readily concur in a law effectually
penned for that purpose: we find accordingly, among the laws of William I. a
law enacting the feudal law itself, not co nomine, but in effect; inasmuch as
it requires from all persons the same engagements to, and introduces the same
dependence upon the King as supreme Lord of all the lands in England, as were
supposed to be due to a supreme Lord by the feudal law: so that it clearly
enacts the foundation at least of all the deductions and glosses, that are now
treated as part of that law. The law I mean is the LII. law of William I. which
runs thus, STATUIMUS UT OMNES LIBERI HOMINES FOEDE^EET SACRAMENTO AFFIRMENT,
QUOD INTRA ET EXTRA UNIVERSUM REGNUM BRITANNIAE VAILIELMO ^UO DOMINIO FIDELES
ESSE VOLUNT, TERRAS ET HONORES ILLIUS FIDELITATE UNIQUE SERVARE CUM E^, ET
CONTEA INIMICOS ET ALIENIGENAS DEFENDERE.

"THE (...) of the law are absolutely (...) and proper to establish (...)
policy with all its consequence (...) require that all (...) should expressly
engage and (...), that they would become (...) as such be (...) William as then
Lord, in respect of the dominion upon the then known feudal notion residing in
a (...).

"2dly. THAT they would, in consequence of their becoming his vassals or
tenants, every where faithfully maintain and defend his their Lord's (...) and
(...), as well as person, and give him all possible aid and assistance against
his enemies, whether foreign or domestic.

"THE manner of penning this law, is not less observable than the terms of it,
for though it begins, as many other laws of this King, with the word Statuimus
in the first person plural, according to the present style and Language of
Kings, without express mention of the commune concilium; yet we cannot possibly
doubt its concurrence: because the King himself, being as it seems but one of
more, is mentioned in the body of the law itself as a third person spoken of,
and as such plainly distinguished from the many speaking in the beginning or
enacting part of the law, viz. Statuimus ut omnes affirment Quod WILLIELMO
DOMINO SUO Fideles esse volunt, terres et Honores ILLIUS ubique servare cum EO."

CAMDEN, who is quoted by Wright, asserts that the English were dispossessed of
their hereditory estates by William I. and the lands and farms divided among
his soldiers, but with this reserve, that they should do homage to him and his
successors; and the Lord Verutam, also quoted by Wright, asserts that the
conqueror got by right of conquest all the land of the realm into his hands in
demesne, taking from every man all estate, tenure, property, and liberty of the
same except religious and church lands, and the lands of Kent. But now let us
hear Sir William Blackstone's opinion of the conquest by William the Bastard.

"THE nation at this period seems to have groaned under as absolute a slavery,
as was in the power of a warlike, an ambitious, and a politic prince to
create. The consciences of men were enslaved by four ecclesiasties, devoted to
a foreign power, and unconnected with the civil state under which they lived:
who now imported from Rome for the first time the whole farrago of
superstitious novelties, which had been engendered by the blindness and
corruption of the times, between the first mission of Augustine the monk, and
the Norman conquest; such as transubstantiation, purgatory, communion in one
kind, and the worship of saints and images; not forgetting the universal
supremacy and dogmatical infallibility of the holy see. The laws too, as well
as the prayers, were administered in an unknown tongue. The ancient trial by
jury gave way to the impious decision by battle. The forest laws totally
restrained all rural pleasures and many recreations. And in cities and towns
the case was no better; all company being obliged to disperse, and fire and
candle to be extinguished, by eight at night, at the sound of the melancholy
curfeu. The ultimate property of all lands, and a considerable share out of the
present profits, were vested in the King, or by him granted out to his Norman
favorites; who, by a gradual progression of slavery, were absolute vassals to
the crown, and as absolute tyrants to the commons. Unheard of forfeitures,
talliages, aids and fines, were arbitrarily extracted from the pillaged
landholders, in pursuance of the new system of tenure. And, to crown all, as a
consequence of the tenure by knight service, the King had always ready at his
command an army of sixty thousand knights or milites: who were bound upon pain
of confiscating their estates, to attend him in time of invation, or to quell
any domestic insurrection. Trade, or foreign merchandise, such as it then was,
was carried on by the Jews and Lombards; and the very name of an English fleet,
which King Edgar had rendered so formidable, was utterly unknown to Europe: the
nation consisting wholly of the clergy, who were also the lawyers; the barons,
or great lords of the land; the knights or soldiery, who were the subordinate
landholders; and the burghers, or inferior tradesmen, who from their
insignificancy happily retained, in their socage and burgage tenure, some
points of their ancient freedom. All the rest were villains or bondmen."

BLACK. COM. vol. 4. p. 411, 412.

"ANOTHER violent alteration of the English constitution consisted in the
depopulation of whole countries, for the purposes of the King's royal
diversion; and subjecting both them and all the ancient forests of the kingdom,
to the unreasonable severities of forest laws imported from the continent,
whereby the slaughter of a beast was made almost as penal as the death of a
man." It was a fixed maxim in this reign, according to Mr. Hume, as well as in
some subsequent, that no native of the island should be advanced to any dignity
ecclesiastical, civil or military; that not contented with those large forests,
which the former Kings possessed in all parts of England; he resolved to make a
new forest near Winchester, the usual place of his residence: and for that
purpose, he laid waste the country in Hampshire for an extent of thirty miles,
expelled the inhabitants from their houses, seized their property, even
demolished churches and convents, and made the sufferers no compensation for
the injury. At the same time he enacted new laws, by which he prohibited all
his subjects from hunting in any of his forests, and rendered the penalties
much more severe than ever had been inflicted for such offenses. The killer of
a deer or boar, or even of a hare, was punished with the delinquent's eyes; and
that at a time, when the killing of a man would be atoned for by paying a
moderate fine or composition. And the same author asserts that the conqueror
divided all the lands of England, with very few exceptions, except the royal
demesnes, into baronies, and that he conferred these, with the reservation of
stated services and payments, on the most considerable of his adventurers. It
appears (...) from Hume, that the heart of William the Conqueror was hardened
against all compassion toward the people; and he scrupled no measure, however
violent or severe, which seemed requisite to support his plan of tyrannical
administration. Sensible of the restless disposition of the Northumbrians, he
determined to incapacitate them ever after from giving him disturbance, and he
issued orders for laying entirely waste that fertile country, which, for the
extent of sixty miles, lies between the Humber and the Tees. The houses were
reduced to ashes by the merciless Normans, the cattle seized and driven away,
the instruments of husbandry destroyed; and the inhabitants compelled either to
seek for a subsistence in the southern parts of Scotland, or if they lingered
in England, from a reluctance to abandon their ancient habitations, they
perished miserably in the woods from cold and hunger. The lives of an hundred
thousand persons are computed to have been sacrificed to this stroke of
barbarous policy." After all this let English pride continue to assert that
their nation was not ever actually conquered by William the Bastard.

No. 5.
"IT was by accident only, that King Henry VII. had not a considerable hand in
those great naval discoveries, by which the present age was so much
distinguished. Columbus, after meeting many repulses from the courts of
Portugal and Spain, sent his brother Bertholomew into England, in order to
explain his projects to Henry, and crave his protection for the execution of
them. Henry invited him to England; but his brother, in returning to Spain,
being taken by pirates, was detained in his voyage; and Columbus, meanwhile,
having obtained the countenance of Isabella, was supplied with a small fleet,
and happily executed his enterprise. Henry was not discouraged by this
disappointment: he fitted out Sebastian Cabot, a Venetian, dwelling in Bristol;
and sent him westwards in 1498 in search of new countries. Cabot discovered the
main land of America toward the sixtieth degree of northern latitude: he
sailed southwards along the coast, and discovered Newfoundland, and other
countries: but returned to England, without making any conquest or settlement.
Elliot and other merchants in Bristol made a like attempt in 1502 The King
expended fourteen thousand pounds in building one ship called the Great (...).
This was, properly speaking, the first ship in the English navy. Before this
period, when the prince wanted a fleet, he had no other expedient but hiring
ships from the merchants."

"BUT though this improvement of navigation, and the discovery of both the
Indies, was the most memorable incident that happened during this or any other
period, it was not the only great event by which the age was distinguished. In
1453, Constantinople was taken by the Turks; and the Greeks, among whom some
remains of learning were still preserved, being scattered by these barbarians,
took shelter in Italy, and imported, together with their admirable language, a
tincture of their science and their refined taste in poetry and eloquence.
About the same time, the purity of the Latin tongue was revived, the study of
antiquity became fashionable, and the esteem for literature gradually
propagated itself throughout every nation of Europe. The art of printing,
invented about that time, facilitated extremely the progress of all these
improvements: the invention of gunpowder changed the whole art of war: mighty
innovations were soon after made in religion, such as not only affected those
states that embraced them, but even those that adhered to the ancient faith and
worship: and thus a general revolution was made in human affairs throughout
this part of the world; and men gradually attained that situation, with regard
to commerce, arts, and sciences, government, police, and cultivation, in which
they have ever since persevered."

HUME' s Hist. vol. 3. p. 427, 428. Octav. printed in 1767.

No. 6.
COLUMBUS made four voyages to America; the first in 1492, the second in 1493,
the third in 1497, according (...) authors, but according to others in 1498: it
was in this third voyage that he discovered the continent -- of which great
discovery, Doctor Robertson gives the following beautiful account: -- "On the
first of August (1498) the man stationed in the round top surprised them with
the joyful cry of land. They stood toward it and discovered a considerable
island, which the admiral called (...), a name it still retains. It lies on the
north coast of Guiana, near the mouth of the Orinoco. This river, though only
of the third or fourth magnitude in the New World, far surpasses any of the
streams of our hemisphere. It (...) body of water, and rushes into it with such
impetuous force, that when (...) an uncommon height, their collision occasions
a swell and agitation of the (...) formidable. In this conflict, the
irresistible torrent of the river so (...) many leagues with its flood.
Columbus, before he could perceive the danger, was entangled among those
adverse currents, and tempestuous waves; and it was with the utmost difficulty,
that he escaped through a narrow straight; which appeared so tremendous, that
he called it La Boca del Drago. As soon as the consternation which this
occasioned permitted him to reflect upon the nature of an appearance so
extraordinary, he discerned in it a source of comfort and hope. He justly
concluded, that such a vast body of water, as this river contained, could not
be supplied by any island, but must flow through a country of immense extent,
and of consequence, that he was now arrived at that continent, which it had
long been the object of his wishes to discover. Nor was he mistaken; for it
amply answered his expectations." Columbus made his fourth and last voyage in
1502, just one hundred years before Gosnold discovered this country.

No. 7.
WE meet with this preamble to a law enacted at the very beginning of the reign
of Richard II. says Mr. Hume; "Whereas diverse persons of small garrison of land
or other possessions do make great retinue of people, as well of esquires as of
others, in many parts of the realm, giving to them hats and other livery of one
suit by year, taking again toward them the value of the same livery or percale
the double value, by such covenant and assurance, that every of them shall
maintain other in all quarrels, be they reasonable or unreasonable, to the
great mischief and oppression of the people, etc. This preamble contains a true
picture of the state of the kingdom. The laws had been so feebly executed, even
during the long, active, and vigilant reign of Edward III. that no subject
could trust to their protection. Men openly associated themselves, under the
patronage of some great man, for their mutual defense. They had public badges
by which their confederacy was distinguished. They supported each other in all
quarrels, iniquities, extortions, murders, robberies, and other crimes. Their
chieftain was more their sovereign than the King himself; and their own band
was more connected with them than their country. Hence the perpetual
turbulence, disorders, factions, and civil wars of those times: hence the small
regard paid to a character or the opinion of the public: hence the large
discretionary prerogatives of the crown, and the danger which might have ensued
from the too great limitation of them. If the King had possessed no arbitrary
powers, while all the nobles assumed and exercised them, there must have ensued
an absolute anarchy in the state." "The scaffold, as well as the field,
streamed incessantly with the noblest blood of England, spilt in the quarrel
between the two contending families whose animosity was now become implacable."

HUME' s Hist, vol. 3.

No. 8.
DARIUS the Persian, having determined to subdue Greece, sent two Ambassadors
into that country to demand earth and water from every state. Such as preferred
their safety to their liberty submitted; but the noble Republics of Athens and
of Sparta, who had known and happily experienced the sweets of freedom,
disdained to acknowledge any tyrant. Instead of offering up earth and water, as
demanded, in token of their submission, they threw one of the Heralds into a
well, and the other into a ditch, desiring them to take earth and water from
thence; thus adding to insult, mockery. DARIUS appointed Datis and Artaphernes
his Generals, and sent them away, to invade Greece, with a fleet of six hundred
ships and an army of one hundred and twenty thousand men; with instructions to
give up Athens and the little city of Eretria to be plundered; to burn all the
houses and temples of those cities, and to lead away all their inhabitants into
slavery. To oppose this prodigious armament, after even arming their slaves,
the whole Athenian force did not exceed ten thousand men; but every man was a
soldier and preferred the safety, freedom and glory of his country to his life.
At the famous battle of MARATHON, only ten miles from their city, under
Militates and nine other subordinate Generals, two of whom were the very
celebrated Aristides and (...), did this small army with an almost irresistible
fury rush in upon the Persians, who at the first onset considered them rather
as madmen than as soldiers, and after a fierce and obstinate resistance, broke
through the ranks and entirely defeated the Barbarick army, pursuing them to
their ships, of which they took seven, and burned several others, and driving
multitudes of the enemy into the sea. Memorable was the death of Cyndaeyrus,
brother of AEchyllus the poet, who, as the Persians were attempting to push off
one of their vessels from the shore, laid hold of the prow with his right hand,
which the Persians on board immediately lopped off; he then seized it with his
left hand, which they also cut off; at last, in a rage, he seized it with his
teeth, and held on till he expired covered with wounds. An Athenian soldier, by
the name of Eucles, immediately after the battle, though covered with blood and
wounds, quitted the field, and can to carry the glorious news of the victory to
his fellow-citizens. He had just strength enough to reach Athens, where he
threw himself into the door of the first house he came to, and uttering these
words, " Rejoice! we triumph!" instantly expired. DARIUS, irritated and
outrageously incensed at the disgraceful defeat in the plains of Marathon,
issued orders throughout his extensive dominions for fresh preparations,
determined to take signal vengeance on Greece; but a revolt in Egypt, and
dissension among his sons retarded his operations until death put an end to his
projects.

HIS son, XERXES the great, who inherited all the animosity of his father
against the GREEKS, succeeded Darius, and invaded Greece, with the greatest
army that ever took the field.

"Whose rear lay hid in night, while rising dawn
Roused the broad front and called the battle on."
Young. THE whole army, according to Goldsmith, might be said to amount to two
millions and an half, which with the women, slaves, and suttlers, always
accompanying a Persian army, might make the whole above five millions of souls.
To withstand this incredible host; the whole combined force of Greece did not
then exceed eleven thousand two hundred men.

AT the narrow pass called the Streights of Thermopylae LEONIDAS, with only six
thousand men, withstood the innumerable host of Xerxes for two days; and when,
by means of the deserter Epialtes, a Trachinian, a secret path was found that
led through the defiles of the mountains, through which the King sent twenty
thousand men to fall upon the determined, desperate forlorn hope of the Greeks
in the rear, yet did LEONIDAS refuse to fly. As soon as he was apprised of his
situation, he dismissed all his troops but his Spartans, amounting to three
hundred men, and about seven hundred Thespians and Thebans. With this regiment,
as they might be called, did he, in the dead of the night, break into the
Persian camp, devoting himself and his whole corpse to a glorious death, hoping
however to surprise the King and astonish the whole host of barbarians with the
intrepidity and resolution of that enemy which they had come so far to contend
with -- dreadful was the slaughter made that night by the Greeks, the smallness
of whose numbers was not discovered but by the dawning light of the morning;
when they were surrounded by the Persians, who, fearing to fight hand to hand,
flung their javelins at them from every quarter and at last overwhelmned this
desperate little band, tired and fatigued with the slaughter of their enemies.
By the hands of this little body, of only a thousand, it is said that Xerxes
lost that night twenty thousand men! LEONIDAS fell early in the night; and his
Spartans so defended his body that they piled a mountain of the slain upon him.
Xerxes, having afterward demolished and burned Athens, which had been deserted
by its citizens, soon met with a total defeat, in a great naval engagement in
the narrow seas at Salamis, from the Greeks commanded by Themistocles, the
Athenian General. Astonished at this overthrow and fearing lest the Greeks
should break down the immense bridge which he had built over the Hellespont,
and thereby cut off the retreat of his army, he retired with the main body of
his army, and the remains of his fleet, leaving three hundred thousand of his
troops behind him under Mardonius, his General, who were afterward totally
overthrown at the famous battle of Platea; where Mardonius was killed. Above an
hundred thousand of the vanquished were shortly after cut to pieces in their
camp by the Greeks, who, determining to rid their country of those invaders,
refused to give quarter to any. Miserable was the fate of that part of the army
led off by Xerxes. After having expended all their provisions, they were
compelled to live upon herbs and to eat even the leaves and bark of trees.
Broken down and dispirited with disgrace, fatigue, and famine, the pestilence
at last overtook them; they fell down by the way, and many were destroyed by
vultures and by beasts of prey. The remains of the Persian fleet was afterward
totally destroyed by the Greeks at MYCALE.

{oil} For the sake of the younger part of the community, and of those who are
of that class which are called the unlearned, has the author been so full in
this and in many other of the notes in this appendix.

No. 9.
PERSONAL SLAVERY, according to Mr. Hume, was more general in England than in
any other country in Europe. The mutinous peasants under Wat Tyler, Jack Straw,
etc. amounting to an hundred thousand men, among other things, demanded of King
RICHARD the II. the abolition of slavery, and a fixed rent on lands instead of
services due by villenage, to which the King complied; although (...) after, in
the same year, 1381, the low people were reduced to the same slavish condition
as before.

See HUME' s Hist. v. 3.

No. 10.
RICHARD the III. caused his two young nephews to be murdered in the Tower:
Edward the V. and his brother the Duke of York, were smothered, when asleep in
their beds, in the Tower of London by the assassins, Slater, Dighton and
Forest, while Sir James Tyrrel, whom the usurper had commissioned with this
tragical business, stood outside of the door of the bedchamber.

No. 11.
James Stuart, commonly called James the I. immediately upon hearing of the
death of the Queen, and of his being proclaimed King in England, began his
journey from Edinburgh for LONDON. Great was the concourse of people who were
every where brought together by idleness, curiosity, or interest to see their
new sovereign. His fears were immediately affected, and he published a
proclamation forbidding such a tumltuous resort. His ignorance of the law of
England and the high idea he had conceived of his present power betrayed him
into the absurd violence of hanging a thief without trial, upon his arrival at
Newark.

MRS. MACAULAY mentions his exposing his pedantry to all Europe in his
publications. Among other of his contemptible, pedantick, ridiculous
compositions and publications is the following dedication, which is transcribed
from his works: --

"To the honor of Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ The Eternal Son of the
Eternal Father, The onley Theanthropos Mediator and Reconciler of Mankind, In
Sign of Thankfulness, His most humble, and most obliged Servant, James By the
Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, Does Dedicate and Consecrate This his Declaration."

He also published a treatise concerning witches which he entitled Demonology.
In the second year of his reign he gave the royal assent to "An act against
conjuration, witchcraft, and dealing with evil and wicked spirits." By this act
the penalty for practicing conjuration or invocation, whereby any person is
killed or lamed, declaring, by witchcraft, where any thing is hidden, procuring
unlawful love, etc. is, for the second offense, felony. In a dispute with the
House of Commons relative to a matter of privilege, in the case of Sir Francis
Goodwin, he tells them that they derived all matters of privilege from him, and
by his grant. He afterward sent them a message, "that he commanded them as an
absolute King to confer with the Judges" who in those days had given their
opinion against the Commons. The House complied with the insolent command, but
the ridiculous tyrant, who was present at the conferrence, had little cause for
triumph. The Commons produced such a multitude of precedents to justify their
right to judge of returns, that the royal conjurer compromised the matter with
them, and, in his own way and language, acknowledged their right. He told them
that "he granted it royally as King James sweetly and kindly out of his good
nature. In one of his speeches to his Parliament he says, "Kings are in the
word of God itself called Gods, as being his vicegerents on earth; and so
adorned and furnished with some sparkles of divinity." All history however
shows that out of a million of these Gods there is scarcely one that is not of
the infernal kind. From history Kings in general appear nothing more than
scourges of the human race, (...) better than splendid robbers and royal
butchers.

IN another speech, this ridiculous creature tells the Parliament, "that as to
dispute what GOD may do is blasphemy, so is it sedition in a subject to dispute
what a King may do in the height of his power." Having considered a few of the
follies and pedantick absurdities of this monarch, we will now take a view of
the darker and more infamous parts of his character. He was the first crowned
head in England that ever was adulated with the impious title of Sacred
Majesty: and it was James the I. assisted by the spiritual gentry, the Bishops,
who attempted to ram down the throats of the people the monstrous doctrines of
divine, indefeasible right, passive obedience, non-resistance, etc. That he was
scandalously fond of Somerset and afterward of Buckingham, even Mr. Hume, the
apologist for the House of Stuart, does not deny; for he confesses that James
loved the former with so profuse a passion and unlimited an affection, as left
no room for any rival or competitor; and he admits that Lord Hay was apprized
of the King's passion for youth and beauty and exterior appearance; and yet Mr.
Hume says that the passion of James seems not to have contained in it any thing
criminal or flagitious. And, in his character of this strange creature, he
says, that James never discovered any tendency, even the smallest, toward a
passion for any mistress. Robert Garr, an handsome Scots youth was made known
to the King through Lord Hay, when, by means of an unruly horse, he got his leg
broken: The King ordered him into his own palace and to be attended constantly
by his own physicians; and he often visited him during his confinement. On his
recovery, James made him a knight and a gentleman of the bedchamber, and in a
short time afterward he was made Treasurer of Scotland, Viscount Rochester, a
Privy Counselor, a Knight of the Garter, and at last Earl of Somerset. In a
few years the courtiers contrived to bring another handsome youth, George
Villiers, afterward created Duke of Buckingham, to supplant Somerset in the
King's affections. Somerset and his wife, the infamous lady Essex, having
procured Sir Thomas Overbury to be basely and most inhumanly poisoned in the
Tower of London, the King was informed of the fatal secret; whereupon she
affected more than usual attention to Somerset, with whom he retired to
Theobalds, having commanded Lord Chief Justice Coke, and Sir Francis Bacon, the
Attorney General to take upon themselves the prosecution; telling my Lord Chief
Justice Coke that Somerset and his wife had made him a pimp, to carry on their
bawdry and murder; and therefore commanded him to examine the affair with
strict scrutiny, and to spare no man whatsoever; adding, "GOD's curse be upon
you and yours if you spare any of them, and God's curse be upon me and mine,
if I pardon any of them." Lord Chief Justice Coke issued his warrant against
Somerset to apprehend him for the murder of Overbury, whom in the most base,
treacherous, and cowardly manner he had caused to be poisoned in meats, tarts,
jellies and even in salt, all sent to him by Somerset as from his best friend.
James Franklin, one concerned, confessed that one Mrs. Turner came to him from
the Countess of Somerset, and wished him from her to get the strongest poisons
he could for Sir Thomas Overbury; that accordingly he bought seven, viz. aqua
sortis, white arsenick, mercury, powder of diamonds, lapis costitus, great
spiders, and cantharides. All these not destroying him, one Weston was
employed, who mixed Rasalgar in his broth, gave corrosive sublimate of mercury
and white arsenick to be mixed up in the tarts and jellies sent to him, and
last administered a glister to Sir Thomas, poisoned with corrosive sublimate,
which carried him off. On the 5th of May, 1613, Somerset, then Lord Viscount
Rochester, sent a letter to Sir Thomas, in which was a white powder, desiring
Sir Thomas to take it, informing him that it would make him more sick; but that
he need not be afraid as he would make it a means of his delivery, and for the
recovery of his health. The poor, unsuspecting man, never dreaming of such
treachery, but conceiving it a friendly potion, took the powder, which proved
to be white arsenick "whereupon his sickness grew more violent and vehement,
and his languishment increased." See State Trials vol. 1. p. 327, 346, 347. The
Lord Chief Justice's warrant was actually served upon Carr Earl of Somerset,
while James, who according to Mrs. Macaulay, had an unseemly way of lolling on
his favourite's neck, was indulging himself in that posture. Somerset exclaimed
against the outrage, arresting him in the King's presence; but James could not
be prevailed on to remit it; and feigning an entire ignorance of the affair;
cried, "nay, man, if Coke sends for me I must go;" then, after the most
affectionate farewell, as soon as Somerset was carried off, he exclaimed "Go,
and the deel go with thee, for I will near see thy face more." See Mrs.
Macaulay's Hist. vol. 1. p. 89. Sir Jarvis Elwes, Lieutenant of the Tower, Mrs.
Turner, Richard Weston, and James Franklin, were all severally tried, on
separate indictments, for the poisoning and murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, were
all found guilty, were all executed, and in their last moments confessed the
fact. Somerset's Countess plead guilty; himself, after a fair trial, was found
guilty, and sentence of death passed upon them; but James, notwithstanding his
solemn execration, pardoned them, and they enjoyed a pension of four thousand
pounds sterling per annum.

THE Countess of Somerset had been married while she was a child to Robert, the
young Earl of Essex. (...). Mrs. Macauley's Hist. vol. 1. p. 85. After the
marriage, but before cosummation, he went abroad on his travels. Upon his
return home, he pressed for the possession of his privileges: she, attached to
the glittering fortune of her paramour, Somerset (then Lord Viscount Rochester)
refused; not without hope, by means of such conduct, to regain her freedom. "A
process was commenced by the Countess against her husband for insufficiency.
James, who condescended to be a party in all the intrigues of his favorites,
interested himself so warmly in the affair, that a divorce was obtained on this
plea, though Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury, had declared very strongly
against it. The divorce was followed by the marriage of lady Frances and the
Viscount; and kept with such ostentation by the court, that the city of London
complimented them with an invitation to dinner. The bridegroom was made on this
occasion Earl of Somerset." "SIR THOMAS OVERBURY, a man of some abilities, who
had devoted his talents to the fortune of Somerset, had been the friend, the
adviser, and the manager of all his business, depending on the freedom and
sacredness of such a connection, exclaimed strongly to him against the folly
and infamy of the match, Somerset had the weakness to tell his mistress;
Overbury, from that hour, was doomed to destruction, and, on the first trivial
pretense which offered, flung into prison. In this state, rage and despair drew
from him some indiscreet threatenings, which alarmed the fears of Somerset. He
was conscious that Overbury was a formidable enemy, from the nature of the
secrets he had been entrusted with. Self-preservation concurred with
resentment; the murder of Overbury was determined and perpetrated."

MACAULAY' s Hist. v. 1. p. 86, 87.

SOMERSET persuaded the King to appoint Overbury Ambassador for Russia, and
then persuaded Overbury to refuse to go, though he was no way averse to the
employ. In those dark days of tyranny this was deemed a contempt of majesty,
for which Overbury was committed close prisoner in the Tower. Somerset made him
believe that his appointment was owing to his enemies who wanted to remove him
out of the kingdom, and thereby prevent his further rise, and assured him that
if he would refuse the employ he should soon be released from the Tower and
restored to favor. Unsuspicious of any treachery the credulous Overbury gave
full and ready credence to the base, perfidious, inhuman Somerset. He was
committed to the Tower for a contempt of the King's majesty. Immediately the
Lieutenant and other officers of the Tower were charged, and Sir Jarvis Elwes,
the tool of Somerset, was appointed the Lieutenant. All the victuals, wines,
etc. for the prisoner's use, were sent from Somerset's house to the
unsuspecting man; but the soup, the tarts, the jellies, and even the very salt
was poisoned.

See State Trials, vol. 1. p. 325, 326.

HENRY, Prince of Wales, dying suddenly, was supposed to have been carried off
by poison, with the privity and approbation of his father and of Somerset, that
father's pathick, and that Overbury was one of the instruments made use of on
that occasion. HENRY was adored by the populace, and had drawn all the younger
and more splendid of the nobility into his train. See the tragical History of
the Stuarts. When Somerset was about to be tried for the truly infamous murder
of Overbury, Sir Anthony Weldon relates; that Sir George More came to tell him
he must prepare for his trial on the morrow; Somerset refused to appear, and
said, " the King durst not bring him to trial." On More's informing the King of
these expressions, he burst into tears, and entreated him to use his utmost
skill to soothe the prisoner, by whatever means, into temper and submission.
See the notes in Macanlay's Hist. vol. 1. p. 91. Lord Chief Justice Coke, in
his charge to the grand jury, touching Overbury's murder, observed that
"poisoning was a vice of foreign growth; that it was but lately that their
tables in England were made snares unto them: and he added, "I wish that sweet
babe Prince Henry may have had fair play for his life!". For these and other
expressions made use of by the Lord Chief Justice, at the trial of Overbury's
murderers relative to the death of Henry, Prince of Wales, he was shortly after
removed from his post. See the tragical Hist. of the Stuarts and State Trials,
vol. 1. p. 347. the note at the conclusion of the arraignment of Sir Thomas
Monson, Knight. for the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, 4 th December, 1615. Sir
Thomas Monson was not tried, but after his arraignment was remanded. Sir
Anthony Weldon tells the following story on the subject of this remand: -- The
King being at the game of maw, said, "To morrow comes Tom Monson to his trial."
"Yea, said the King's card-holder; where if he does not play his master-prize,
your Majesty shall never trust me." This so run in the King's mind, continues
the author, as the next game he said he was sleepy, and would play out that set
next night. The gentleman departed to his lodging; but was no sooner gone but
the King sent for him; what communication they had I know not (yet it may be
can more easily guess than any other) but it is most certain, next under GOD,
that gentleman saved his life; for the King sent a post presently to London, to
let the Chief Justice know he would see Monson's examination and confession, to
see if it were worthy to touch his life for so small a matter. Monson was too
wise to set any thing but fair in his confession; what he would have stabbed
with, should have been ( (...)) at his arraignment. Weldon, p. 10 p, and seq.
See MACAULAY' s Hist, in the notes, vol. 1. p. 92, 93.

JAMES having got rid of Somerset, now indulged his abominable passion
uncontrouled, for the handsome, young Villiers, by him created Duke of
Buckingham, who, in his letters, addresses this compound of royalty, folly, and
villainy with the familiar titles of "dear dad and gossip," and, as appears in
the notes of Mrs. Macaulay's History, vol. 1. p. 256, wrote the following
curious letter to his King -- "Were it not that you might think me an
incroacher upon your goodness, I should make a proposition for you to stay ten
days at Theobalds, by which doing you might have the company of your sweet son,
without whom we should neither play at cards, goffe, not sit up for does at
Huntingdon; whereas, if you stay at Theobalds but these ten days, you might
have to wait on you not only a found son, but a servant within and without as
clean as a shilling. But if these reasons were not, I pray your sowship how can
you spend those ten days better in any other place." MSS. in Brit. Mus. fol.
7987, n. 106.

THE reader is referred to letters published by Sir David Dalrymple, 1762, p.
26, for another of the same sort, but much more grossly familiar."

AFTER this, what credit can we give to Mr. Hume's assertion that the passion
of James seems not to have contained in it any thing criminal or flagitious?

No. 12.
THE people used to salute their Queen with shouting aloud, "GOD save Queen
Elizabeth!" to which she always returned, "GOD save you, my good people."

To prove the assertion as to the revolution in the manners of the English,
etc. I shall here quote two passages from Sir William Blackstone's
Commentaries, vol. 4. p. 426, 427.

"THE great revolutions that had happened, in manners and in property, had
paved the way, by imperceptible yet sure degrees, for as great a revolution in
government: yet, while that revolution was effecting, the crown became more
arbitrary than ever, by the progress of those very means which afterward
reduced its power. It is obvious to every observer, that, till the close of the
Lancastrien civil wars, the property and the power of the nation were chiefly
divided between the King, the nobility, and the clergy. The commons were
generally in a state of great ignorance; their personal wealth, before the
extension of trade, was comparatively small; and the nature of their landed
property was such, as kept them in continual dependence upon their feudal lord,
being usually some powerful baron, some opulent abbey, or sometimes the King
himself. Though a notion of general liberty had strongly pervaded and animated
the whole constitution, yet the particular liberty, the natural equality, and
personal independence of individuals, were little regarded or thought of; nay
even to assert them was treated as the height of sedition and rebellion.

"BUT when learning, by the invention of printing and the progress of religious
reformation, began to be universally disseminated; when trade and navigation
were suddenly carried to an amazing extent, by the use of the compass and the
consequent discovery of the Indies; the minds of men, thus enlightened by
science and enlarged by observation and travel, began to entertain a more just
opinion of the dignity and rights of mankind. An inundation of wealth flowed in
upon the merchants, and middling rank; while the two great estates of the
kingdom, which formerly had (...) the prerogative, the nobility and clergy,
were greatly impoverished and weakened. The Popish (...), detected in their
frauds and abuses, exposed to the resentment of the populace, and stripped of
their lands and revenues, stood trembling for their very existence. The nobles,
enervated by the refinements of luxury, (which knowledge, foreign travel, and
the progress of the politer arts, are too apt to introduce with themselves) and
fired with disdain at being rivalled in magnificence by the opulent citizens,
fell into enormous expenses: to gratify which they were permitted, by the
policy of the times, to dissipate their overgrown estates, and alienate their
ancient patrimonies."

No. 13.
DAVID RIZZIO, according to Buchanan, was born at Turin in Savoy; the son of a
poor man who got a poor subsistence by teaching the first grounds of music. He
followed into Scotland Morettius, the Ambassador of the Duke of Savoy: being
left by the Ambassador, he applied to the Queen's musicians to be admitted into
their society, upon trial, where he performed so well that he was retained as
one of her majesty's band. He soon grew into great favor, and was consulted
upon matters of State, and was soon flattered and courted by the Nobility who
even attended his levee with great adulation. He applied to Henry Stuart Lord
Darnley, son of the Earl of Lenox, who was to marry the Queen and whom Rizzio
induced to believe that he was the means of the Queen's fixing her eye upon him
for her husband. According to Buchanan, the Queen's marriage with HENRY, and
his private recourse to her was now much talked of, as well as the too great
familiarity between her and David Rizzio, who procured the marriage between
Mary and Lord Darnley to be hastened; though the Scots were not for it, and the
English were very much against it. The marriage took place on the 29th July,
1565, and gave great offense not only to the Nobility but also to the Commons.
Rizzio's power and authority with the Queen increased daily, and she soon
discovered evident symptoms of disgust toward her husband, who, left he might
interrupt her private pleasures, was obliged to go away into the country in a
very cold, severe season. Rizzio was then admitted to sit at her table in a
small room, and sometimes she would even eat with him at his lodgings. The
sumptuousness of his furniture, his apparel, and the number and quality of his
horses far surpassed those of the poor, despised, insulted, rejected, ^^minal
King. Buchanan, an excellent scholar, a native of Scotland, and the tutor or
preceptor of Mary's only son, James the I. of England, is the author that
justifies me in these assertions. Suspicions of a disagreeable nature, upon his
return to Edinburgh, were infused into the ears and breast of the uxorious,
young King, who, being informed one day, that Rizzio was gone into the Queen's
bedchamber, was determined to see with his own eyes and to judge for himself.
He therefore made for that bedchamber; but coming to a door of which he
himself had the key, he found it bolted on the inside; an incident he had never
before experienced. He knocked, but no answer was returned. Enraged at this
insult upon his honor, he now turned his thoughts to vengeance. Having
communicated to some of his domestics his determination to cut off this base,
insolent reptile, they approved of the measure. Elizabeth, Queen of England,
having sent a very long, obliging letter to the Queen, Mary, one day, began to
read the same to many of her Nobles who were present, when this impudent, low
fellow, Rizzio, stood up and ordered her to "read no more, she had read enough,
she should stop." None present dared to reprove him for such his outrageous
insolence; as they were well acquainted with his imperious temper, and were but
too sensible that he had several times rebuked even the Queen herself with more
severity than her husband had ever presumed to exercise toward her. Shortly
after, when the Queen one night was at supper, in a small room with the
Countess of Argyll and Rizzio, the Earl of Morton and a great number of his
friends at the same time walking in an outer chamber, the King went out of his
own chamber, by a private way, up to the room where the Queen, Rizzio, and the
Countess were at supper, followed by Lord Ruthven armed, and four or five more.
The Queen, upon their entering the room, was surprised, especially to see the
ghastly figure of Ruthven, who had just risen from a long and dangerous
sickness, in armor, and asked "what was the matter?" Ruthven commanded Rizzio
to "rise, and come out; for the place he sat in was not fit for him." The Queen
immediately rose and interposed her body to protect Rizzio. The King took her
in his arms and bade her not be afraid, that they meant her no harm, but added
that the death of that villian was resolved on. He was hau'ed into the next
room, and from thence into the outer chamber, where he was dispatched with many
wounds; which, however was contrary to what had been first intended, which was
to have hanged him up in public. This is according to Buchanan's account. Mr.
Hume mentions other circumstances attending the assassination of Rizzio. He
says that " Rizzio, aware of his danger, ran behind his mistress, and seizing
her by the waist, called aloud to her for protection; while she interposed in
his behalf, with cries, and menaces, and entreaties. That the impatient
assassins, regardless of her efforts, rushed upon their prey, and by
overturning every thing which stood in their way, increased the horror and
confusion of the scene; that Douglass, seizing Henry's dagger, stuck it into
the body of Rizzio, who, screaming with fear and agony, was torn from Mary by
the other conspirators, and pushed into the antichamber, where he was
dispatched with fifty-six wounds." Mary had promoted Rizzio to the office of
Secretary; and, according to Buchanan, had intended to have raised him up to
the degree of the Nobles. She soon found another paramour in the profligate
Earl of Bothwell, whom she raised to the highest power, and after having
scandalized herself with him in the most infamous manner, she caused poison to
be administered to her husband, who was retiring to his father at Glasgow,
being incapable any longer to submit to the contempt and indignities Mary
continually exercised toward him. The poison not effectually destroying him,
it was rumoured that he intended to fly the kingdom and go to France, which
induced this cruel, wicked woman first of all to write to him letters full of
love and tenderness, then to visit him at Glasgow where she caressed him with
every show of affection; persuaded him to be carried back to Edinburgh in a
litter; that as the palace was too noisy for a sick person, and that he should
reside in a solitary house within the city, where she caused her bed to be put
into a chamber below his. In the evening of the night of her husband's murder,
which we shall shortly relate, she came to him with a large retinue, spent
several hours with him, often kissed him, pretended every tender mark of the
purest conjugal love toward him, and, in token of her affection, gave him a
ring before she departed. -- Under pretense of attending the marriage of one of
her servants she returned to her palace, and there, according to the tragical
history of the Stuarts, had a ball. Bothwell soon after went disguised to the
house where the poor, young, sick King lay, and by means of the key of the
bedchamber which had been given to him by the Queen, he with his associates
softly entered the room where the unhappy Henry lay asleep. -- They immediately
seized him by the throat and strangled him, as they did one of his servants who
lay near him; then they carried their bodies into an adjacent garden; and then
set fire to a large quantity of gunpowder, lodged for that purpose, which blew
the house to pieces. After this, she procured Bothwell to get divorced from his
wife and to marry her, against the universal sense of her kingdom. Vengeance at
last overtook her; she was obliged to fly into England, where she was
afterward tried, condemned, and beheaded for a conspiracy against Queen
ELIZABETH. Such, from History, appears to have been Mary Stuart Queen of Scots,
the mother of King James the I. of England; such was the stock from whence have
sprung the succeeding Monarchs of Great Britain: and yet Mary and her son
James, were, according to the nonsensical, bigot-cant of the times; the LORD'S
ANOINTED, though to the eye of a Republican, from their abominable actions,
they will seem justly to merit the title of THE DEVIL'S ANOINTED. The
sycophantick bishops and courtly adulators of JAMES the I. used to call him the
Solomon of the age; the Spanish Ambassador observed that might be true, for "he
certainly was the son of David."

No. 14.
THE Puritans presented a petition to James the I. signed, among others, by
seven hundred and fifty clergymen, praying a reformation of sundry of the
articles of the established church. It was on the hearing of this petition that
James, from Judge, turned advocate. The hearing was at Hampton Court, and among
other extraordinary flashes of reasonable argument, he told them that
presbetery agreed as well with monarchy as God with the Devil; that he would
not have Tom, Dick and Will meet to censure him and his council." After he had
answered, in his way, the objections urged by the presbyterian ministers, he
added "If this be all your party has to say, I will make them conform
themselves, or else I will harrie them out of the land, or else do worse; only
hang them, that is all." Great were the triumphs of the courtiers and
high-churchmen on this occasion; and infamous, if not blasphemous, was the
adulation of some of them. The Lord Chanceller Egerton cried out, that "he had
often heard that the royalty and the priesthood were united, but that he never
saw it until now." But what was that to the holy man, the most Right Reverend
Father in God, his Grace Archbishop Whitgift? He said, "he verily believed that
the King spoke by the Spirit of God!" -- What spirit was in the mouth of this
infamous Prelate at that moment? Even Charity herself cannot hesitate to say
there was a lying spirit in his mouth.

No. 15.
"BANCROFT had succeeded Whitgift in his archbishopric. He was so zealous a
persecutor of the Puritans, that many families were obliged to leave their
country for foreign abodes."

"RICHARD BANCROFT, the great persecutor of the Puritans, carried his violence
such a length, that the number of families which had determined to seek refuge
in The country was then distinguished into South Virginia and North Virginia.
Virginia, were numerous enough to cause a jealousy of their power in that
colony, and were detained in England by a proclamation.

MACAULAY's HIST. (...).

No. 16.
THE ABBE RAYNAN, in his History of the BRITISH SETTLEMENTS IN NORTH AMERICA,
says,

In this fatal crisis, most of the Puritans were divided between submission and
opposition. Those who would neither stoop to yield, nor take the pains to
resist; turned their views toward North America, to seek for that civil and
religious liberty which their ungrateful country denied them. The enemies of
their peace attempted to shut this retreat against these devout fugitives, who
wanted to worship God in their own way in a desert land. Eight ships that lay
at anchor in the Thames ready to sail, were stopped; and Cromwell is said to
have been detained there by that very king whom he afterward brought to the
scaffold. Enthusiasm, however, stronger than the rage of persecution,
surmounted every obstacle; and that region of America was soon filled with
Presbyterians. The comfort they enjoyed in their retreat, gradually induced all
those of their party to follow them, who were not attrocious enough to take
delight in those dreadful catastrophes which soon after made England a scene of
blood and horror. Many were afterward induced to remove thither in more
peaceable times, with a view to advance their fortunes. In a word, all Europe
contributed greatly to increase their population. Thousands of unhappy men,
oppressed by the tyranny or intolerant spirit of their sovereign, took refuge
in that hemisphere."

No. 17.
IN ENGLAND, the eldest son succeeds to the whole of the real estate, or lands
held by his father in FEE, so that it is by no means uncommon there to see the
eldest son possessed of a great, perhaps an enormous estate, and all the other
children, though equally deserving, in mean, and sometimes in very indigent
circumstances. It most commonly happens however, that between persons of
considerable fortune who are about to intermarry, a settlement of the estate is
made, in which care is taken to encumber or charge the estate with a certain
sum for the younger children of the intended marriage. -- This sum is seldom
more than equivalent to two or three years nett proceeds, or clear income of
the estate: of course, if there are a numerous family of younger children,
there will be extreme inequality between each of such children and the elder
brother. Doctor Price in his "OBSERVATIONS on the IMPORTANCE of the AMERICAN
REVOLUTION, and the means of making it a benefit to the world;" under the
section of an unequal distribution of property observes, that "the tendency of
this," (the right of primogeniture) "to produce an improper inequality, is very
obvious. This disposition to raise a name, by accumulating property in one
branch of a family, is a vanity no less unjust and cruel, than dangerous to the
interests of civil liberty; and no wise state will encourage it" Many a vain
fool and many an unnatural parent in England, as well as in other countries
where real estate are devisable by will, having an unfettered property, leave
the bulk, and sometimes the whole of their estate to the eldest son, or to a
favorite child, without regard to humanity or the laws of equity and natural
justice. The law of inheritance introduced here by our republican ancestors,
was not the law of descent and of inheritance, for ages, established in the
monarchical country they had left. After the Romans had been obliged to leave
their province of Britain in order to support their tottering empire, the Scots
and Picts invaded and ravaged the country, and drove the into the woods and
mountains. Vain was their application to AEtius the Roman General: even their
letter, inscribed the groans of the Britons, could not prevail upon him to send
a detachment to their assistance, while the dreadful Attila was in the empire.
The Scots and Picts paying them a second visit, as disagreeable as the first,
by the advice of Vortigern, the chief of their Princes, they sent into Germany
and invited over the Saxons, who were a branch of the ancient Visigoths, to
defend them; assigning to them the beautiful and fertile isle of Thanet in
Kent, for their residence. The strangers soon dispossessed the Britons of the
very country they had been invited over to defend against the Barbarians of the
north, driving such as escaped the sword, into the mountains of Wales. The Era
of the Saxons first coming into England according to some authors, was in the
year of Christ 124; though Mr. Hume fixes it 24 years later. -- The Northern
conquering nations, of which the Saxons were a branch, brought with them their
feudal or military policy which they established in the countries they subdued.
This military policy "was devised as the most likely (...) to secure their new
acquists, and were large districts or parcels of land given or allotted by the
conquering General, to the superior officers of his army, and by them dealt
out in less parcels to the inferior officers, and most deserving soldiers:
these allotments or portions of victory naturally engaged such as accepted them
to defend them; and as a part could not be preserved independent of the whole,
(...) as well as receivers, were mutually and equally concerned to defend the
whole; but as (...) be done in a tumultuary way, order, and to that end a
military subordination was necessary, and therefore such receiver was supposed,
in consequence of his acceptance of any portion, to oblige himself as long as
he held it, to attend to, and enter into measures for the security and defense
of the whole, when (...) he required by his benefactor or immediate superior,
and was likewise supposed to be (...) as his commander or leader, for his
attendance, and a faithful discharge of his duty (...) or superior was
likewise subordinate to, and under the command of his benefactor or (...), and
so upwards to the prince or chief himself. Thus a proper military subordination
was naturally and rationally enough inferred and established; and an army of
Feudataries were, as so many stipendiaries, always on foot, ready to muster and
engage in the defense of their country: so that the feudal returns of fealty,
or mutual fidelity, and aid were not originally ex pacto, but seem to have been
politic, or rather natural, consequences drawn from the apparent necessity,
these warlike people were under, of maintaining their ground with the same
spirit, and by the same means they had got it. But as the Princes of Europe
were every day more and more alarmed by the progress of the northern standard,
many of them went into this or a like policy, as the strongest intrenchment;
and in imitation of it, they, reserving the dominium or propriety of the lands
they gave, parcelled out some of their own possessions or territories under an
express fealty, engaging their beneficiaries or feudatories, to make them like
returns of fidelity and aid, as followed from the design and nature of an
original feud, from whence the feudal obligations probably began to be
considered as renders, or services of render: calculated for the benefit of the
proprietary, who was, in respect of the dominium or propriety remaining in him,
from henceforth called dominus.

THE feudal policy having obtained thus far, the few countries that had not [as
above] gone into it confederated themselves prince and people, as lord and
feudatary, to stand by and assist each other in cases of common danger and
concern: in consequence whereof, and of the fealty expressed or implied in such
confederacy, every man's possession was considered as a FEUD or stipend, and
became as such a pledge or security for the due observance of his fealty; so
that the feudal policy thus hinted, and thus advanced, was now become the
military policy of the western parts of the world; and military aid or service
(as now called) was understood to be the real or fictitious terms of all
propriety or possession in Europe."

WRIGHT'S TENURES, p. 7, 8. 9, 10, 11. 12, 13.

IT is difficult, according to Wright, to determine precisely the time when
FEUDS or tenures were first brought into England; lord Coke, the Judges of
Ireland, in the case of tenures, Mr. Seldom, Nathaniel Bacon, and others are of
opinion that tenures, were not brought into England by the Conqueror, but that
they were common among the Saxons: and he cites Saltern de antiquis Britan.
Legibus, and Sir William Temple, who agrees that the feudal laws were all
brought into Europe by the ancient Goths, and by them settled in all the
provinces of the Roman Empire which they conquered, and among the rest by the
Saxons in England, etc.

FEUDS, being a military policy, neither women nor priests were originally
permitted to, or could become tenants or feudataries, because the stipulation
of holding or enjoying the FEUD, was upon condition of performing a service
purely military, of defending in person, and by arms, the land or FEUD whenever
it should be attacked; and this the delicacy and imbecility of the fair sex,
and the religious profession of the priesthood forebade. And that females in
particular, could not enjoy or hold a proper FEUD is clear from many authors,
and particularly from Wright, who, in his tenures, folio 178, says, "As to the
preference of males it must be remembered, that females could not by the feudal
law succeed to a proper FEUD; because they were unequal to the duties or
services, for the sake of which it was chiefly created. And if it be farther
observed, that it is ex pacto, or by the custom of particular countries, that
they are even at this day admitted to succeed to any; it cannot seem strange,
that the feudal preference given to males should prevail with us: because as
feud, fee, and tenure, are synonimies, and import but one and the same policy,
such preference is plainly agreeable to the nature of tenures and highly
reasonable." It is highly probable that all proper FEUDS might originally, upon
the death of the father, descend to all the sons equally, as gavelkind lands in
the county of Kent in England, do at this day, because the greater the number
of the feudataries, the more likely was the FEUD to be defended and preserved.
That the tenure of gavelkind is of feudal original, I think, there can be no
doubt, as well because of the males inheriting before, or in exclusion of, the
females, as its having been the general tenture of the kingdom of England at
the Conquest: and that so it was, is fully established by Lord Chief Justice
Holt, who (...) delivering the opinion of the Court in the case of Clement
versus Scudamore says, "That it appears (though Coke be of a contrary opinion)
that all the lands in England before the Conquest, and for some time after,
were generally gavelkind." And he refers to Lamb. Saxon Law 167, etc. "But soon
after the Conquest (adds that great, learned, and honest Chief Justice) for the
better strength and support of the crown, knight service tenure was introduced,
and the course of descent altered, and the whole made descendible to the eldest
son, to the intent that their tenants in knight service who by their tenure
were to wait on the King in his wars, might do it with more dignity and
grandeur: so, in this instance the ancient Saxon law was then altered." -- See
6 th Modern Reports, fol. 120. Lord Chief Justice Holt seems to give the true
reason why the course of descent was altered in England by the Conqueror, viz.
That the pride of the King might be indulged by being attended in his wars by
tenants capable of sustaining and displaying dignity and grandeur. The English
lawyers give also another, and which is a very plausible reason, why the eldest
son ought to have enjoyed the FEUD or whole estate. The eldest son (say they)
was soonest able to do the duties of the feud, and was compellable to do those
duties; as he was obliged to do the duties and to bear the burden of the feud,
it seems but reasonable that he should enjoy the benefits, the perquisites of
the feud. I acknowledge that there seems to be some semblance of reason in
this: but for what reason is the right and privileges of primogeniture still
continued and now in force in England, seeing that all feudal tenure and
military services have been so long abolished; that the common law declares
that cessante causa cessat effectus, and cessante rations lagis cessat etiam
ipsa lex? The only reasons that can be given, I should suppose, are, that it
was the usage of their forefathers; that it is very proper in a monarchical
government, and that even an unfeeling fool has a right to dispose of his own
as he sees fit, and of sacrificing nature to vanity, if he thinks proper so to
do.

OUR manly ancestors knew that equality was equity; and their principles were
truly republican; but believing the Mosaical law to be of Divine institution,
they thought themselves obliged in conscience to make some distinction between
the eldest son and all the other children: they therefore assigned to the
eldest son a double portion of all his father's estate, real and personal, in
conformity to the 17th verse of the 21st of Deutronomy. In the abstract of the
code of laws prepared for the Commonwealth of the Massachusetts Bay, printed in
London in 1655, and republished in the 3d vol. of Hutchinson's Hist. p. 161,
etc. chap. iv. sect. v. "inheritances are to descend naturally to the next of
the kin, according to the law of nature delivered by GOD;" and cites Numb;
27. 7. to 11.

VI. "If a man have more sons then one, then a double portion to be assigned
and bequeathed to the eldest son, according to the law of GOD," etc.

FEARING that the explicit enacting of these laws might give umbrage to the
monarchical kingdom of England, which then claimed a jurisdiction over them, in
the GENERAL LAWS of the Massachusett's colony, revised and published by order
of the GENERAL COURT in October, 1658, they wisely omitted to specify these
particulars. They begin their law-book as follows:

" FORASMUCH as the free fruition of such liberties, immunities, privileges,
as humanity, civility, and christianity call for, as due to every man in his
place and proportion, without impeachment and infringement, has ever been, and
ever will be, the tranquillity and stability of churches and commonwealth, and
the denial or deprival thereof, the disturbance, if not ruin of both.

"IT is therefore ordered by this Court and the authority thereof, That no man's
life shall be taken away, no man's honor or good name shall be stained, no man's
person shall be arrested, restrained, banished, dismembered, nor any ways
punished; no man shall be deprived of his wife or children, no man's goods or
estate shall be taken away from him, nor any ways indamaged, under color of
law, or countenance of authority, unless it be by virtue or equity of some
express law of the country warranting the same, established by a General Court,
and sufficiently published; or in case of the defect of a law, in any
particular case, by the word of GOD. And in capital cases, or in cases
concerning dismembring or banishment, according to that word, to be judged by
the General Court." Where, by the word of GOD, they clearly designated the
Mosaical law. And, in fact; the law of inheritance and of descent in this
country has ever been to all the children, in equal distributive parts, except
the eldest son, who has always received his double portion. The father also
inherits the son here, which is not the case in England; for there he is
excluded from succeeding to his son's inheritance. The reason of this exclusion
is purely feudal as appears from Wright's tenures, fol. 180 to 186.

No. 18.
RANDOLPH came from England to Massachusetts, with a letter from King Charles
the II. "to the Governor and Magistrates of the town of Boston," for so was the
letter directed; and with copies of petitions and complaints from, Mason and
Gorges, about the extent of their patent line: and he had directions from the
lords of trade to enquire into the state of the colony: in other words, to act
as a spy. For all the particulars of this inimical genius, we refer the reader
to Hutchinson's History of Massuchusetts Bay. In his letter to King Charles the
II. among other things, he complains, that the Governor and all the Council
but three continued covered while the king's letter was reading, whereas he had
pulled-off his hat as soon as the letter was begun to be read, and his example
was followed by the three only. He mentions in this letter, that one day, when
he was paying a visit to the Governor, be observed to the Governor, that he
had taken notice, since his arrival in Boston, of several ships haring came in
from Spain, France, the Streights, Canaries, and other parts of Europe,
contrary to his Majesty's laws of trade, etc. "That the Governor freely
declared to him that the laws made by his Majesty and his Parliament, obliges
them in nothing but what consists with the interest of that colony." In the
same letter he mentions a discourse between himself and Josiah Winslow, Esquire.
Governor of New Plymouth, wherein, according to Randolph, Governor Winslow
expressed his great dislike of the "magistrates of Boston to your Majesty's
royal person, and your subjects under their government," etc. "That during my
stay at Boston I made acquaintance with several of the chief inhabitants and
some of the magistrates and did particularly inform myself of the humor,
disposition and affections of the people, and found the principal inhabitants,
some whereof are the chief officers of the militia, and the generality of the
people, complaining of the arbitrary government and oppression of their
magistrates and do hope your Majesty will be pleased to free them from this
bondage by establishing your own royal authority among them and govern them
according to your Majesty's laws. And many of the better sort did entreat me
to represent this their condition to your Majesty, not daring publicly to
express their desires or complaint by petition, because of the severity and
arbitrary proceedings of their rulers, and that many of them have been
sufferers for petitioning formerly." After this he returned to England, and in
1678 came back again with a commission as Inspector and to make seizures, and
bring informations for breaches of trade. He went back again the next winter to
renew his complaints, and returned in 1681, with a commission as Collector, and
Surveyor, and Searcher of the customs in New England. In April, 1681, he had
the insolence to set up a protest on the Exchange in Boston, against the acts
of the Court. He afterward brought to Boston the King's letter of the 21st of
October, 1681, complaining "that the Collector had not been able to execute his
office to any effect." It was therefore required, "that fit persons be sent
over, without delay, to answer these complaints, with power to submit to such
regulations of government as his Majesty should think ^it." Very pretty indeed!
Agents were accordingly sent to England; but Randolph followed them. The
Governor had desired him to do nothing to the prejudice of the colony. He
promised "that if they would make a full submission to his Majesty, he would
endeavor to procure his Majesty's royal pardon, and the continuance of their
privileges, so far as that they should have liberty of conscience and the free
exercise of their religion, and that no money should be raised without the
consent of the people." What impudence, what insolence in this low fellow!

HE exhibited to the Lords of the Privy Council articles of high misdemeanor
against a faction in the General Court, sitting 15th February, 1681. After this
Randolph had the audacity to return, and brought with him the death-warrant of
the government, a quo warranto, in 1683. The charter was vacated the following
year by judgment being entered up for the King, and the country in a manner
deprived of all government until 1686, when the Rose frigate, in the month of
May arrived from England with a commission to Joseph Dudley as President, and
to diverse others of the Council to take upon them the administration. On the
19th day of December, 1686, Sir Edmund Andross arrived at Nantasket, in a fifty
gun ship, commissioned by James the II. Governor of New England, and he
appointed among other vultures, the incendiary Randolph, to be of his Council;
whom he also appointed licenser of the press. Sir, Edmund, against the wills of
the proprietors, made use of a meeting house to perform the service of the
church of England in; and he threatened to shut up that meeting house, and to
punish any man who gave two pence toward the support of a nonconformist
minister, if he was refused the use of that meetinghouse. Randolph had the
insolence to reprove and threaten the Governor of Plymouth for exacting taxes
from the Quakers for the support of the ministry in that Colony. Several
congregations had agreed to set apart days of thanksgiving on account of
James's proclamation for a general religious toleration. The tyrannical
Governor forbade them. He told them they should meet at their peril, and that
he would send soldiers to guard their meeting houses; swearing upon the
Evangelists (libro tacto) a thing never known here, and not in practice ever
after, and which was then introduced by the Governor and his associates, and
such as refused so to take an oath in that mode were fined and imprisoned. The
fees of office were multiplied and were also extortionate. Randolph was made
Secretary, and he farmed his office to West, who extorted larger fees than even
Randolph had exacted of West, of whom he once complained, when he was his
deputy, that he ran away with a hundred pounds a year of his dues. The charter
being vacated, the people were told that they had now no right to their lands
and that they must petition and take out patents for their estates. The like
has since been practiced in other parts of the British dominions. Enormous
fees were demanded for these patents by their pacious Governor and his
associates; and with four or five of his Council Sir Edmund Andross laid what
taxes he pleased. Petitions were presented to the King and his Ministers
against these proceedings, and for liberty to have an House of Representatives,
but as little regard was paid by James II. and his Ministry to those petitions,
as by George III. and his Ministry, to the petitions preferred a few years
since by Congress and by several of the Legislative Bodies of the late
Colonies. In a letter to the Bishop of London, Randolph advises the fining
sufficiently of Danford and Richard's (two of the faction as he calls them) by
the King, "and well if they escape so, they can go to work for more." He
presses the Bishop "to send over able and sober Ministers, that we (himself and
his brethren of the church of England) will contribute largely to their
maintenance, but one thing will mainly help when no marriages hereafter shall
be allowed lawful but such as are made by the ministers of the church of
England. In a letter to the Earl of Clarendon he says, "His Majesty's quo
warranto against their charter and sending for Tho. Danforth, Sam. Nowell, a
late factious preacher and now a magistrate, and Da^. Fisher and Elisha Coke,
deputies, to attend and answer the articles of high misdemeanures I have now
exhibited against them." etc. "will make the whole faction tremble." Again, in
the same letter, "I humbly beseech your Lordship that I may have consideration
for all my losses and money laid out in prosecuting seizures here in 1680."
Again, "My Lord I have but one thing to remind your Lordship, that nothing
their agents can say or do in England can be any ground for his Majesty to
depend upon." And in the same letter, "Their forces are very inconsiderable,
more for show than service. I will engage with five hundred of his Majesty's
guards to drive them out of the country." Forgetting what he had said in his
answer to several heads of inquiry concerning the state of New England in 1676;
wherein he set forth, to the fourth quere proposed by the Lords of the
Committee of Council for Trade and Plantation, "that they have no standing
army, but their trained bands are twelve troops of horse and six thousand foot;
each troop consisting of sixty horse besides officers, are all well mounted and
completely armed with back, breast, headpiece, buffe coat, sword, carbine, and
pistols, each troop distinguished by their coats. The foot also are very well
furnished with swords, muskets, and bandaliers." "Their late wars have hardened
their infantry, made them good firemen, and taught them the ready use of their
arms;" and also admits that their whole force is equal to forty thousand men.
Yet this incendiary, who wished to desolate Massachusetts, could drive them out
of their country; that is, could with the greatest case drive the whole forty
thousand men, among whom were these six thousand seven hundred and twenty good
firemen, completely armed, and who knew the ready use of their arms, out of
this country with only five hundred of his Majesty's guards. This naturally
brings to our recollection the assertion of the vain boaster who a few years
since made the Commons of Britain believe that he could go through America with
five thousand British troops. Attempts have been made with bodies of British
troops much more numerous, who have delivered up themselves and their arms to
these despised Americans. In a letter to the Archbishop of Canterbury Randolph
mentions it having being said in the Privy Council by some noble Lords in their
(our country's) favor "that provided they might have liberty of conscience in
matters of religion, they would voluntarily submit to have one of their
meeting-housen to be disposed of by the President and Council for the use and
exercise of the religion according to the church of England," and that this was
said, in answer to a motion, made by the Archbishop, that one of their
meeting houses in Boston should be ordered to be set apart for that purpose."
And in the same letter he "humbly represents to HIS GRACE, that the three
meeting houses in Boston might pay twenty shillings a week apiece, out of their
contribution toward the defraying our church charges; the same being less per
annum than each of their ministers receive." I shall quote no more of his
letters but refer the reader to the appendix in the 3d vol. of Hutch. Hist.
where, if he loves New England, or regards the natural rights of men, he will
find his breast swell with indignant resentment against this middling, selfish,
base, tyrannical wretch.

No. 19.
MR. John Nelson, a young gentleman of Boston; he was of a good family, and a
near relation to Sir Thomas Temple.

HUTCH. HIST.

No. 20.
THE Proclamation of William and Mary, Prince and Princess of Orange, King and
Queen of England, etc. is dated 15th February, 1688, as appears from
Parliamentary Debates, vol. 11. p. 264, 265.

No. 21.
THE new charter, of King William and Queen Mary, bears date the 7th day of
October, in the third year of their reign.

No. 22.
THE armament sailed from Nantasket Road, in the bay of Boston, on the 24th of
March, 1745; and the island of Cape-Broton with its before-supposed unpregnable
fortress of Louisbourgh surrendered on the 17th day of June following. The army
consisted of three thousand two hundred and fifty men, exclusive of commission
officers, from Massachusetts; of five hundred and sixteen, including officers,
from Connecticut; and three hundred and four from New Hampshire; three hundred
from Rhode Island did not arrive until after the place had surrendered. Our man
knew nothing of regular approaches, they took the advantage of the night, and
when they heard Mr. Bastide (an engineer in the British service) propose
zigzags and epaulements they made merry with the terms and went on void of art,
in their own natural way.

HUTCH. Hist.

N. B. In what may relate to New England, Hutchinson is followed substantially,
though, perhaps, not every where in the same form of words.

No. 23.
BY the Declaratory Act, as it has been called, the Parliament of
Great Britain enact "That the Colonies and Plantations in America have been,
are, and of right ought to be, subordinate unto, and dependant upon the
Imperial Crown and Parliament of Great Britain; and that the King's Majesty, by
and with the advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons of Great Britain, in Parliament assembled, had, has, and of right
ought to have, full power and authority to make laws and statutes of sufficient
force and validity to bind the colonies and people of America, subjects of the
Crown of Great Britain, "in all cases whatsoever."

No. 24.
THE act of the British Parliament -- For the more easy recovery of debts in
his Majesty's plantations and colonies in America passed in the year 1732, the
V. Geo. the II. By this statute it is enacted that after the 29th day of
September in that year, "in any action or suit then depending or thereafter to
be brought in any court of law or equity in any of the said plantations, for or
relating to any debt or account, wherein any person residing in Great Britain
shall be a party, it shall and may be lawful to and for the plaintiff or
defendant, and also to and for any witness to be examined or made use of in
such action or suit, to verify or prove any matter or thing by affidavit in
writing, upon oath, unless Quakers, and then upon solemn affirmation before the
Mayor or Chief Magistrate of any city, borough, etc. in Great Britain, where or
near to which the deponent or affirmant shall reside and certified and
transmitted under the common seal of such city, etc. shall be allowed to be of
the same force and effect, as if the deponent or affirmant had appeared and
sworn or affirmed the matters contained in such affidavit or affirmation viva
voce in open court, etc."

IT is true there is a clause in this act for the punishment of persons who
should be guilty of perjury in such affidavits or affirmation. But what benefit
could accrue to an American from that clause? How could he convict the party of
perjury? He could not do it without carrying his witnesses to Great Britain,
there indicting the criminal, and there producing his witnesses face to face,
in open court. It may be a question whether the late revolution has not worked
an annihilation of that act of Parliament here. It is a matter worthy the
attention of every legislature of the UNITED STATES whether all evidence so
take ought not to be admissible in all our courts until Great Britain shall
enact a law of reciprocity, and admit in all her courts, at home and abroad,
similar evidence taken here, as equal to the viva voce testimony of witnesses
attending in open court

No. 25.
BY the Boston port-bill nothing was to be water-borne within the harbor. It
is better known among us, perhaps, by the name of the starvation-act than by
any other name.

No. 26.
HIS Excellency James Bowdoin, Esquire. our present worthy Governor, was at one
time President of the Provincial Congress at Cambridge, and was also President
of the Convention for forming our present most admirable Constitution; Mr.
Hancock was President of the first Provincial Congress, he was President of
(...) second national Congress; and he signed the glorious Declaration of
Independence, has been elected Governor of this Commonwealth from the time of
our present happy Constitution to the last year, when his health compelled him
to resign. -- At present, he is one of the Representatives for the town of
Boston, and was lately chosen one of the Delegates in Congress from this State.
Mr. Samual Adams or the honorable Samuel Adams, Esquire. is known by character,
throughout the world. He was in the Provincial Congress and in the great
national Congress, and he generated the Declaration of Independence. He has
been President of the Senate ever since the new Constitution until the present
year, when he resigned, and took a seat in the Privy Council of this State.

No. 27.
THE battle was really fought on Breed's Hill, which is much lower than
Bunker's Hill; and indeed the rising of the ground is so gentle that you
scarcely can perceive it. One would have thought from the account published,
ten years ago in the London Gazette, that it had been an high, steep mountain,
and that the intrenchments were amazingly strong. A rail sense ran across the
field; -- the new troops pulled up another rail sense, and fixed that parallel
to the first sense, at about two feet distance, and filled up the vacancy
between with new-mown hay which was making in the field. This was the
tremendous breastwork. The redoubt in which Doctor, or rather General, Warren
was killed, was behind, at a little distance from the breast-work, and was not
finished. About five hundred Americans was the number actually engaged, and
they killed and wounded near fifteen hundred of the enemy. I have had it from
British officers, who were present, that they never saw so severe a fire while
it continued. The Yankies had no proper muskets, their pieces were not of the
same bore and not one in twenty had a bayonet. There were several farmers there
who had never before seen or heard a cannon fired, and this can be proved by
incontestable evidence, if necessary. -- Though many had leather shoe-strings
and wore leather aprons, yet they were all good marksmen, and could hit their
bird even upon the wing.

IT is astonishing that our raw militia should so resolutely stand the terrible
cannonade and bombardment of the Britons, from the Somerset of 64 guns, their
frigates the Lively and the Glasgow, from their gunboats in Mistick river and
Charles's river, and from their battery of heavy cannon and bomb-battery on
Copse Hill. There appears to have been a capital mistake or error committed on
both sides. It now seems to have been a piece of madness in our men to have
crossed the peninsula in order to take possession of a place where there was no
water, and where they might be surrounded and have their retreat completely cut
off; and on the other side we cannot account for the conduct of the British in
attacking, as they did, when they might have completely secured the peninsula,
and compelled every man in twenty-four hours to have surrendered without firing
a shot; as they had neither water nor provisions. -- But it was to be
otherwise: -- and we now see, and acknowledge with gratitude, the overruling
providence of that gracious Being who humbles the proud, and turueth into
foolishness the wisdom of the wise.

No. 28.
GENERAL Warren being a free-mason, was reared after the flight of the British
to Halifax, by the brotherhood, and was brought to Boston, and re-interred
there, in the Chapel Church, then called the King's Chapel, when Brother MORTON
pronounced his funeral oration.

No. 29.
SEE General Gage's curious proclamation, excepting from his general pardon
those wicked rebels, SAMUEL ADAMS and JOHN HANCOCK.

No. 30.
THAT beautiful, elegant, new meeting house in Brattle Square was made use of
as a barrack by the British, the Old-North meeting house was pulled down and
used for firewood, and that noble, spacious building the Old-South
meeting house, by General Burgoyne, was turned into an hypodrome or
riding-school, although, as it is asserted, a carpenter of the town offered to
erect as large or a larger building for that purpose, without expense to the
British government, if the General would spare that meeting house. The General
perhaps had a particular dislike to that meeting house, as the annual Oration
on the massacre of the Fifth of March, 1770, had been regularly delivered
there, and the town-meeting was adjourned to that meeting house when it was
resolved that all the British troops should quit the town. It was curious
enough to transport a regiment of horse from Britain, and then to be under the
necessity of sending upwards of three thousand miles for their provisions,
America not furnishing oats or hay to these strangers; and this might fret the
General. He might be vexed also at the borrish Yankies who would not permit him
to exercise his horses out of the town. Whatever might be his provocations, it
is however with regret that truth obliges us to condemn a gentleman of General
Burgoyne's knowledge and learning in this scandalous and barbarous transaction,
and in so wantonly burning the deserted town of Charlestown. The fact is
undeniable that there was not one American militia man in that town at the time
it was sat on fire, by a carcass thrown from Copse-Hill (where General Burgoyne
commanded) upon the meeting house of that wantonly-destroyed, ancient town.
Every one of the inhabitants but one had quitted the town early in the morning,
when they found the men of war began to fire upon Breed's-Hill, and he, a poor
idiot, who, as an object of charity resided in the Almshouse, was the only
person left in the town when the meeting house was sat on fire, and the whole
place then nearly destroyed. It might have been sport and a fine sight to the
British General, but it was ruin and an heart-beaking appearance to the
numereous, helpless proprietors and inhabitants, many of whom then lost their
all. About twenty houses only escaped the flames that day, and those were set
on fire and destroyed by the humane Britons on the next day, Sunday. When
Titus, the Roman General, besieged Jerusalem he, though an Heathen (as Josephus
tells us) repeatedly and earnestly entreated the Jews to let him save their
temple; but they refused to hear; they first sat fire themselves to the
galleries of their temple, and most obstinately persisted to resist every
effort of Titus, until the Romans were at last compelled to destroy that
glorious building. Even the barbarous Goths, under their King Alaric, when they
sacked Rome, A. D. 410, showed a regard to humanity and religion; they
respected the churches as holy and inviolable sanctuaries; and they received
with reverential awe the consecrated plate and ornaments. If the Britons wished
to irritate and exasperate the New England men, there was no method so
effectual for that purpose as that of destroying and polluting their places of
public worship.

No. 31.
DURING the siege of Boston General Gage entered into treaty with the
inhabitants of the town, and agreed that if they would deliver up their arms to
him they might go out with their goods and effects. He received the arms and
then refused to comply with the terms, availing himself of the pitiful evasions
and contemptible little, lawcraft of a since fugitive conspirator.

No. 32.
THE insults which many of the inhabitants received from the officers and
soldiers of the British army, and from many of the Tories who have now the
modesty to show their fronts among those very people, cannot be very readily
forgot. Among the rest, that polished and most amiable, upright patriot and
clergyman, the late most worthy Dr. COOPER, was insulted in the open street by
a British officer. The death of this divine orator was universally lamented.

" Quis desiderio sit pudor, aut modus
Tam chari capitis? Praecipe lugubres
Cantus Melpomene; cui liquidam pater
Vocem cum cithara dedit.
Ergo Quintilium perpetuus sopor
Urget? Cui pudor, and justitiae soror
Incorrupta fi^es, nudaque veritas,
Quando ullum invenient parem?
Multis ille bonis slebilis occidit."
HOR. No. 33.
THE British nation will not believe that near 10,000 Americans were destroyed
in their infernal prisonship, the Jersey, at New York, that the surgeon of the
prison-ship at Rhode Island was paid half a guinea ahead for those who were
buried, and that of course he pocketted as many half guineas as he could, nor
will they credit the murder of Beelar's light horse, in cool blood; although
they do believe that the Savages killed Miss Mc Crea. These Savages, I think
General Burgoyne says, in his pompous proclamation, he had under his command,
and threatens to let them loose.

No. 34.
GENERAL LINCOLN, from a country gentleman, in the late war became an excellent
officer, of the greatest suavity of manners, of most intrepid courage and
unshaken patriotism. General KNOX, from a very reputable bookseller in Boston,
turned out as great an artillery officer as appeared in any army or nation
engaged in America during the war, and is now the Secretary at War of the
United States. To General STUBEN, America is greatly indebted for instructing
her officers and soldiers; the Baron was an Aid to the King of Prussia, and is
perfectly well skilled in tacticks. General GATES is well known as the
Conqueror of Burgoyne; and as to General GREEN, he is acknowledged to be one
of the first officers on the Continent; like King William the Third, he was
more to be dreaded after a defeat than before a battle.

No. 36.
ALTHOUGH the nation, which have totally changed their manners within the last
thirty years, is detested in America; yet truth must acknowledge that there are
many most excellent individuals in Great Britain; justice must (...) they have
among them many characters truly great, illustrious, and exalted, which do
honor to human nature; who are warm friends and bold assertors of the
unalienable rights of mankind, and who are entitled to our veneration and
regard.

No. 37.
IN a drizzling, rainy day, the last fall, three country girls rode through the
town, one in a green-cart with vegetables, having a plume of feathers nodding
over her head; another, dressed in a like ridiculous, absurd manner, was riding
(...) horse with provisions to sell in her panniers; and the third, upon her
pannied horse, had her head di^uised by a garland of foreign, artificial
flowers.

No. 38.
"FOR as luxury is contagion from its very nature, it will gradually descend
from the highest to the lowest ranks, till it has ultimatel infected a whole
people. The evils arising from luxury have not been pecular to this or that
nation, by equally fatal to all wherever it was admitted. Political philosophy
lays this down as a fundamental and i^^ontestable maxim, that all the most
flourishing States (...) their ruin, sooner or later, to the effects of luxy;
and all history, from the origin of mankind, confirms this truth, by the
evidence of facts, to the higst degree of demonstration."

MONTAGE' s Reflections on the rise and fall of the ancient Republics, chap. 5.

No. 39.
"AT Rome, besides the general stitutions, the Censors prevailed on the
magistrates to enact several particular laws to preserve the srugali of women.
This was the design of the Fannian, Licinian, and Oppian laws. We may in (...),
see (...) great ferment the Senate was in, when women insisted upon the
revolution of the Oppian lay. The abrogation of this law is fixed upon by
Valerius Maximus as the period from whence we may late the lxury of the Romans."

MONTESQ. Spirits of Laws. vol. 1. chap. xiv.

A VERY considerable revenue might be raised by taxing luxurious dress: for
instance, the use of silks, gauzes, etc. If the owner if: coach, orchariot is
made to pay sour or five pounds a year to the State, for the liberty of
indulging (...), ought not every wearer of a silk gown, silk cloak, silk
stockings, gauzes, feathers, etc. to pa^ inproportio? the wearers of gold and
silver lace, excepting officers, soldiers, and sailors, might well (...) to pay
something for the liberty of appearing singular. Our wise forefathers had two
laws, then made in 651, the other in 1662, to restrain excess in apparel;
whereby "persons wearing ribbons, or great boots (leather being so scarce a
commodity in this country) lace, points, etc. silk hoods, or scarfes the
Selectmen shall have power to assess such persons so offending in any of the
particulars abovementioned in the country rates, at two hundred pound estates."
Massachusetts Colony Laws, fol. 5, 6. "The poorer a State is, the more it is
ruined by its relative luxury; and consequently the more occasion it has for
relative sumptuary laws." -- Montesq. Spirit of laws, vol. 1. chap. 5. The
luxury of superstition, as far as relates to mourning, is again beginning to
spread among us. Thank GOD I it is chiefly among the Tories and the despisers
of a republican government that we see the ^able garb of external sorrow now
reassumed. Would it be amiss to tax their insolence; to lay a smart tax upon
all mourning but the scarf or crape round the arm and black ribbons?
Montesquieu, vol. 2. chap. 7. treating of the luxury of superstition says, "nor
is it proper for religion to encourage expensive funerals. What is more
natural, than to take away difference of fortune in a circumstance, and in the
very moment, which equal all fortunes?"

No. 40.
THE Court or Great Council of the Amphistyons was instituted by Amphistyon the
third King of Athens, and consisted of deputies or delegates from twelve States
of Greece; each of which sent two deputies. According to Archbishop Potter they
held their court or assembly at Trer^^^pyla; but according to the writers of
the Universal History it was held at Delphos. Goldsmith says, that this
Council was the chief bond of union with Greece, and was appointed to be held
twice a year at (...) to deliberate for the public good. All offenses against
religion, all instances of impiety and profanation, all contests between the
Greecian States and cities came under the particular cognizance of the
Amphictyons, who had a right to determine, to impose fines, and even to levy
forces, and to make waragainst those who offered to rebel against their
sovereign authority.

See GOLDSMITH' s Greecian Hist. vol. 1. jol. 10, 11.

No. 41.
No persons have suffered more from this base passion, envy, than our ^^e
excellent army. An honest, rough, awkward tradesman or farmer who went into the
army, returns from the same, a well-dressed gentleman, of easy carriage and of
address far superior to his old neighbors and acquaintances; and this has
excited in the minds of the more base and contracted this little (...) passion,
which has operated strongly to keep them out of their just dues.

No. 42.
ALTHOUGH I am sorry to differ in opinion with any gentleman who I regard, yet
I must say I shall ever continue to think that the strict observation of the
Sabbath, in (...) country, has had, and ever will have, a very great influence
upon the manners of the people; the greater part of whom have no other day for
reading and for gaining instruction. The Sabbath was or^^^ned to be a day of
rest for man and beast, and also of religious duties and exercises for the
former Our forefathers kept it strictly; our own immediate parents observed it
religiously; from the fir settlement of the country to this day, the
Legislature of this Commonwealth has enacted that it (...) be observed
attentively. Surely no gentleman of sense and reflection would wish to insult
the (...) of an infinite majority of the community; no good citizen would
wilfully attempt to trample up the laws of his country. Those laws say, the
Sabbath shall not be spent in public riot and dissipa^^, but decently and in
public worship. Therefore, no gentleman that reflects one moment on these
^^ings, would wish to show the example of turning it into a day of frolicking
and idle diversion; and no forgner tht is informed that it is against the laws
of that country which protect him in his life, liberty, an property will
attempt to violate that day.

ERATUM.
Page fourth, paragraph third, line first, For sixteen thousand men, rd six
thousand men.


