AN ADDRESS TO THOSE PERSONS AT ELIZABETH-TOWN, AND NEWARK, AND IN THEIR
VICINITY, IN THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY, WHO HAVE LATELY BEEN SERIOUSLY IMPRESSED
WITH A DESIRE TO OBTAIN SALVATION.

TO WHICH IS ANNEXED, A PRAYER, ADAPTED TO A PERSON IN A STATE OF PENITENCE.

BY THE REVEREND UZAL OGDEN.

I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: For it is the Power of God to
Salvation, to every one that believes; to the Jew first, and also to the
Greek. --

ROMANS i. 16. He that continues to the End shall be saved. --

MATT. x. 22. NEW YORK: PRINTED BY J. M'LEAN, AND CO. M,DCC,LXXXV.

An ADDRESS, etc.
THOUGH Christianity was designed to be productive of the most happy effects on
mankind, even to restore them to the divine Favor, and to qualify them for the
enjoyments of the divine Presence, -- how few are there of its professors, who
appear, by their practice, to advert to the nature and end of this dispensation
of mercy.

How many who are openly regardless of its precepts of virtue, and pride
themselves in their unrighteousness.

Of those whose external demeanor is not so reprehensible, and who pay some
attention to the outward duties of religion, is it not to be feared there are
vast numbers who are strangers to its spirit; who entertain unjust ideas
concerning it; who flatter themselves they are the heirs of redemption, when
their sins are unabsolved; their hearts unrenewed, and, consequently, they are
the objects of divine displeasure?

And, it is presumed, you are now sensible, that until very lately, even
yourselves were of the number of those who are nominal professors only of the
gospel, and, therefore, in that "broad way of iniquity that leads to
destruction!"

But, happily, through divine goodness, it is hoped, that you now have more
perfect conceptions of Christianity and of your state through sin! -- That you
are now convinced of its nature and demerits! -- That you now, from principle,
detest it; wish to be delivered from its penalty; to be liberated from its
power; to possess holiness of heart, and the favor of heaven!

YOU are, however, involved in distress. You weep for sin, without comfort! You
seek the divine favor; but do not obtain it! You are athirst for the waters of
life; but cannot approach them! And, perhaps, some of you are tempted to
conclude, that never was any sorrow equal to that with which you are afflicted!

BUT suffer not yourselves to despair of deliverance from your state of woe!
And permit me to endeavor to minister consolation to you, and to offer some
advice suitable to your situation.

STRANGE, indeed, would it be, if, on perceiving the perfidy, vileness and
ingratitude of sin; and the miseries to which it exposes you, -- even to
eternal death, you should not be most sensibly moved!

Is it reasonable to imagine that the HEART itself can be broken by contrition
and not be pained? -- Does not our Lord assure us, we must "mourn" for our
offenses, before we shall be " comforted" with a sense of the Almighty's
affection? And that we must feel the burden of iniquity, previous to our being
delivered from its pressure?

But have you not every reason to hope you may be freed from the guilt of sin
and its effects?

On account of your transgressions you are exposed to the curse of the divine
law: and of yourselves you are unable to appease heavenly justice. You perceive
the "wages of sin is death:" Romans vi. 23.^
and that, therefore, should "God be extreme to mark what you have done amiss,"
Psalm. cxxx. 3.
you must sink beneath the weight of divine vengeance!

But has not the Father of mercies evinced, he "delights not in your death;
but would rather you should turn from your wickedness and live?" Ezekiel. xxxiii.
11.


Did he not "so love the world as to give his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life?" John iii. 16.


As Christ, for you, has answered the demands of the divine law; -- as for
you, "he was despised and rejected of men; became a man of sorrow and
acquainted with grief; was stricken, smitten of God and afflicted;" as he was
"wounded for your transgressions, bruised for your iniquities," that "by his
stripes you may be healed;" Isa. liii.
the Almighty, therefore, without any impeachment of his justice can pardon
your disobedience, and indulge you with his favor.

And, in divine compassion, are you not invited to repair to God for the
enjoyment of his love?

Is it not written, that "he who covers his sins shall not prosper; but that
he who confesses and forsakes them, through faith in the merits of Christ,
"shall find mercy?" Prove. xxviii. 13.


Are you not thus addressed by the Prophet Isaiah?

"Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters; and he that has no
money, come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and
without price!" Isa. lv. 1.


"Seek ye the Lord while he may be found; call ye upon him while he is near.
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for
he will abundantly pardon!" Ib. lv. 6, 7.


"Return," says the Almighty, by the Prophet Jeremiah, "ye backsliding
children, and I will heal your backslidings!" Jer. iii. 22.


Does not the son of God himself, with arms of mercy, wide extended, thus deign
to solicit your attention?

"Come unto me, all ye who labor and are heavy laden and I will give you
rest!" Matt. xi. 2^.


"He that comes to me," he also says, for the blessings of the gospel, "I will
in no wise cast out!" John vi. 37.


"Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If any man hears my voice, and opens
the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me!" Rev.
iii. 20.


"And the Spirit and the Bride say come! And let him that hears say come! And
let him that is athirst come! And whosoever will, let him take of the water of
life freely!" Rev. xxii. 17.


BUT you are convinced that the scepter of divine mercy is extended to you;
that "Christ has become a propitiation, not only for your sins, but also for
those of the whole world;" 1 John ii. 2.
you, however, perceive yourselves unable properly to regard that "faithful
saying* so worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners!" 1 Timothy i. 15.


You feel the anguish of guilt; but can obtain no tranquillity of mind!

You believe the gospel to be a dispensation from heaven, but cannot so believe
in Christ, as, with humble confidence, to rely on the efficacy of his blood, to
cleanse you from sin!

Your souls are agitated, too, by discordant passions; you cannot reduce your
breasts to seriousness, nor obtain that holy disposition of spirit, required by
christianity!

Could you in rea^^^^ expect it should be otherwise, than that you should be
thus affected?

Can it be supposed the Prince of darkness should relinquish possession of you,
without a contest?

To be "turned from darkness to light; from the power of Satan unto God!" Acts
xxvi. 18.


How great must be this change in the human heart?

And how many have there been who, while this change was in its accomplishment,
have for days, weeks, months, or, perhaps, even years, endure great
perturbation of mind, and depression of spirit?

But there have been great numbers who have not been thus distressed, before
they enjoyed the consolations of the gospel; and many have no sooner sorrowed
for sin, but they have rejoiced in the manifestations of the divine love
toward them.

There is a great diversity in penitents with respect to their apprehensions of
the nature of evil; the distress they experience by reason of their sins, and
the degrees of satisfaction, peace and joy they are favored with.

No one person's experience, therefore, in these particulars, can justly be
regarded as a standard to which others must be equal, before they can be
esteemed Christians, indeed.

And as it cannot rationally be doubted but some, through unhappiness of
conduct, unnecessarily endure anguish of heart, before they obtain consolation,
through Christ; to such, the ensuing counsel is offered as not being, it is
conceived, unworthy of their serious attention.

FIRST: Do not, in any sort, indulge the idea, that you will not be blessed with
a sense of the divine favor.

How many consoling expressions are there in the sacred writings adapted to
your state; and particularly, these which follow?

"A broken and contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise!" Psalm. li. 17.


"They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy! He that goes forth and weepeth,
bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his
sheaves with him!" Ib. cxxvi. 5, 6.


"Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God! Speak ye comfortably to
Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her
iniquities are pardoned!" Isai. xl. 1, 2.


"O Zion, that bring good tidings, get thee up into the high mountain! O
Jerusalem, that bring good tidings, lift up thy voice with strength: Lift it
up, be not afraid! Say unto the cities of Judah, behold your God! Behold the
Lord God will come with a strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him! Behold
his reward is with him, and his work before him! He shall feed his flock like a
shepherd! He shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom,
and shall gently lead those that are with young! Isai. xxxix. 9, 10, 11.
"

"Fear thou not, for I am with thee! Be not dismayed, for I am thy God! I will
strengthen thee; yea I will uphold thee with the right hand of my
righteousness! Behold, all they that were incensed against thee, shall be
ashamed and confounded! they shall be as nothing; and they that strive with
thee shall perish!" Ib. xli. 10, 11.


"For I the Lord God will hold thy right hand, saying unto thee, fear not, I
will keep thee! Fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel! I will help
thee, says the Lord, and thy Redeemer, the holy one of Israel!" Ib. xli. 13,
14.


"A bruised reed shall he," that is Christ, "not break; and the smoking flax
shall he not quench, until he send forth judgment unto victory!" Matt. xii. 20.


"And I will bring the blind by a way that they know not; I will lead them in
paths that they have not known! I will make darkness light before them, and
crooked things straight! These things will I do unto them, and not forsake
them!" Isai. xlii. 16.


"When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and through the
rivers, they shall not overflow thee! When thou walk through the fire, thou
shall not be burnt* neither shall the flame kindle upon thee! For I am the Lord
thy God, the holy one of Israel thy Savior!" Ib. xliii. 2, 3.


"I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and
will not remember thy sins! Put me in remembrance! Let us plead together!
Declare thou, that thou may be justified!" Ib xliii. 25, 26.


"O Israel, thou shall not be forgotten of me! I have blotted out as a thick
cloud thy transgressions! Return unto me, for I have redeemed thee!" Ib. xliv.
21, 22.


"Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth!" Ib. xlv. 22.


"Surely, shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength! Even to
him shall men come, and all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed!"
Isai. xlv. 24.


"Sing, O heavens, and be joyful O earth, and break forth into singing, O
mountains! For the Lord has comforted his people, and will have mercy on the
afflicted! But Zion said, the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten
me! Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion
on the son of her womb? Yea, she may forget, yet I will not forget thee!" Ib.
xlix. 13, 14, 15.


"Who is among you that fears the Lord; that obeys the voice of his
servant; that walks in darkness and has no light? Let him trust in the name
of the Lord, and stay upon his God!" Ib. l. 10.


"Thus says the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is
holy, I dwell in the high and holy place; and with him also, that is of a
contrite and humble spirit; to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive
the heart of the contrite ones!" Ib. lvii. 15.


"The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to
preach good tidings unto the meek; he has sent me to bind up the broken
hearted; to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to
them that are bound: To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day
of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn: To appoint unto them that
mourn in Zion; to give unto them beauty for ashes; the oil of joy for mourning;
the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, that they might be called
trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified!"
Isai. lxi. 1, 2, 3.


"And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer, and while
they are yet speaking, I will hear!" Ib. lxv. 24.


"Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no physician there? Why then is not the
health of the daughter of my people recovered!" Jer. viii. 22.


"Blessed are they that mourn; for they shall be comforted!" Matt. v. 4.


"Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they
shall be filled!" Ib. v. 6.


"I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me!" Phil. iv. 13.


"Submit yourselves to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you! Draw
nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you!" Jam. iv. 7, 8.


"God will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able to bear; but
with the temptation will make a way to escape!" 1 Cor. x. 13.


"Jesus, by the grace of God, tasted death, for every man." Heb. ii. 9.


"This is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior; who will have
all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. For there is
one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Jesus Christ, who gave
himself a ransom for all." 1 Timothy ii. 4, 5, 6.


To name no other passages of sacred writ, which afford consolation to
penitents, permit it to be asked, if persons guilty of crimes of the first
magnitude, upon their repentance and faith in Christ, have not been received
into the arms of divine compassion?

Wherefore then should you despair of obtaining divine mercy; seeing "Christ is
able to save to the uttermost, even ALL who come to God through him?" Heb. vii.
25.


SECONDLY: Read frequently, with seriousness and attention, the "holy
scriptures, which are able to make you wise unto salvation, through faith which
is in Christ Jesus." 11 Tim. iii. 15.


Would you not esteem it a great privilege, could you have (...) and the
Prophets; Christ and his Apostles personally, to administer to you instruction,
and exhortation; counsel and consolation?

But, in the sacred writings, do they not address you, and on every necessary
subject?

Duly prize the favor of thus conversing with them* and daily commit to
memory, some of their expressions, adapted to your situation.

Such conduct will cause your minds to be enriched with divine truths, which
may be your "meditation all the day*" Psalm. cxix. 27.
and enable you successfully to repel the assaults of the foes to your
redemption.

Our Lord opposed the temptations of Satan, by quotations from the inspired
writings: Matt. iv.
And "the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God," is esteemed by Saint
Paul, a principal part of the Christian's armor, in his conflict with the
powers of darkness. Ephesians. vi. 17.


It may be of utility to read the scriptures, in order, and to note with a pen,
such texts as are suited to your state; which, at any time, you may turn to
with ease, to make the subjects of your reflections.

THIRDLY: Frequently approach the Almighty by devotion, through the merits and
mediation of the Son of his affection; who has obtained for you this
privilege, and in mercy promised, that "whatsoever you shall ask in his name,
believing, you shall receive." John. xiv. 13, 14. Matt. 21.22.


How often and explicitly, is the duty of prayer enjoined on you by divine
authority?

Are you not exhorted to "watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation;"
Ib. xxvi. 41.
-- to "pray always and not to faint;" Luke xviii. 1.
-- to "pray without ceasing?" 1 Thessalonians. v. 17.
-- And is it not declared that "God will be enquired of by you for all
spiritual blessings?" Ezekiel. xxxvi. 37.


The advantages of prayer are many and great; particularly, by the due
performance of this duty, your penitence for sin, faith in Christ, and love to
God, will be increased; you will have clearer apprehensions of divine truths;
your affections will be spiritualized, and you will be enabled to rise superior
to those temptations by which you may be assaulted.

It has been remarked, that those persons who have been distinguished for
piety, have also been distinguished for their attention to devotion; the
practice of which is absolutely necessary to your proficiency in grace.

With the pious Daniel, therefore, three times each day, in humble posture,
address the throne of divine mercy. Dan. vi. 10.
And most frequently, by ejaculatory petitions, wherever you may be, or in what
employment soever engaged* make known your requests to God, or express your
gratitude for the divine favors you have received. Such conduct will have a
happy tendency to preserve in you the spirit of devotion, and to cause you to
"pray without ceasing."

Let your prayers be offered up to the divine Majesty with becoming faith,
humility and sincerity; and also with an humble confidence, that he "will not
upbraid" you, for involuntary imperfections in the discharge of this service;
but that he will "liberally give" James i. 5.
such things as shall be for your advantage, and "regard the prayer of the
destitute!" Psalm. cii. 17.


FOURTHLY: When you shall obtain consolation, through Christ, commemorate his
death and passion, in the manner he has prescribed.

The Jewish passover was instituted to be a memorial of the divine goodness, in
preserving the people of Israel from destruction, when the angel of the Lord,
smote, with death, "all the first born in the land of Egypt." Exodus xii.


This ordinance was typical of our deliverance from eternal death, "through the
sprinkling of the blood of Christ," 1 Pet. i. 2.
and was honored by him until he ordained, in its place, a new Paschal Supper,
on the evening immediately preceding his passion.

At that period, "he took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave unto
his Apostles, saying, This is my body which is given for you! This do in
remembrance of me! Likewise also the cup, after supper, saying, This cup is the
New Testament in my blood, which I shed for you!" Luke xxii. 19, 20.


It was intended, by our celebration of this sacrament, that with sensations of
gratitude, we should "show forth our Lord's death, until his coming again." 1
Cor. xi. 26.


As this service is explicitly enjoined on us, -- "This do in remembrance of
me;" -- as it is in itself most reasonable, and is attended with great
advantages to ourselves; to neglect it therefore, is to sin, not only against
God, but also against our own souls!

FIFTHLY: Embrace each opportunity of hearing the divine word preached.

Should the preacher, at any time, happen to be of a denomination different
from that by which you are distinguished, hear him without prejudice, and with
a desire to receive edification from what he may deliver.

Remember that truth is truth, by whomsoever it is spoken; and that the
preaching of no person whatever should be regarded by you, any farther than it
is agreeable to the sacred oracles.

Some persons, that they may receive the greatest advantage from the sermons
they hear, make a practice of reducing their texts, and also the substance of
the discourses, to writing; and it must be granted that such conduct may be
particularly beneficial, and render sermons more permanently useful.

SIXTHLY: Avoid bigotry and a spirit of religious disputation The former is
reproachful to Christianity, and is often productive of bad consequences: and
the latter, it is conceived, is attended with many more evil, than good
effects. It is frequently subversive of the spirit of the gospel, and
occasions, in men, wrath, hatred, pride, and other sinful passions. In the
first age of the gospel, when its professors were seriously concerned to obtain
salvation, they possessed the greatest affection for each other; they being, we
are informed, "of one heart, and of one mind."

But when the professors of Christianity began to be destitute of its spirit,
they divided into sects and parties; entertained hatred and prejudice against
one another, merely by reason they disagreed in religious sentiments; and often
for a particular so immaterial as this, deprived each other of many earthly
blessings, and even of life itself! And, perhaps, with much greater zeal, than
they executed justice on persons guilty of the most flagrant acts of wickedness!

The sacred writings give no countenance to religious prejudice, enmity,
animosity and contention, but the reverse. "Judge not," says our Lord, "that ye
be not judged." Matt. vii. 1.

Before the Apostles had received the gift of the Holy Ghost, and,
consequently, while unacquainted with the spirit of the gospel, they "saw one
casting out devils in the name of Christ," and took upon them to "forbid him;
because he followed not with them." But their conduct, in this instance, was
disapproved of by their divine Master. Mark ix. 38.

"Him that is weak in the says," says Saint Paul, "receive ye," (in
affection) "but not to doubtful disputation."

He adds: "Who art thou that judge another man's servant? To his own master
he stands or falls." -- "Why do thou judge thy brother? Or why do thou
set at naught thy brother? For we shall all stand before the judgment seat of
Christ." "Every one of us shall give an account of himself to God. Let us not,
therefore, judge one another any more." Romans xiv.

Happy would it be, if Christians in general, were as solicitous to excel in
piety, as apparently they are, in orthodoxy of faith! -- Is it not to be
feared, there are many that are heretical in their practice, who pride
themselves in the truth of their principles?

Uncharitable it would be, not to admit there are some, of every denomination
of Christians, who obtain salvation. And if CHRIST himself receives into his
kingdom, those who differ from us in religious opinion and mode of worship, why
should not WE receive such into the arms of affection?

If, in a short period, one heaven, will receive all the saints on earth,
wherefore should they not endeavor to be as affectionate to each other here,
as they will be hereafter?

And can Christians, with equal modesty and certainty, so (...) regard any
thing to be the test of error, or (...), as a life of impiety?




Should you, however, wish to obtain information, respecting any controverted
point of Theology, will it not be wisdom in you, to examine the Scriptures with
diligence and impartiality? And if you shall need human assistance to determine
your judgment in the matter, will it not be judicious in you to read the best
authors, on each side of the controversy?

By such proceedings you may obtain a knowledge of the truth, and without being
offended, or giving offense to any.

But it should be considered by you, that, probably at the hour of death, a
very few particulars only will demand your attention; namely, whether you are
reconciled to God, through Christ, and qualified for celestial enjoyments?

SEVENTHLY: Frequently assemble together, as many of you at a place as shall be
convenient, for the purpose of social worship, and spiritual edification: this
practice has been of utility to many, and cannot, with reason, be objected
against.

And avail yourselves, as much as possible, of the holy instruction and
discourse of such professors of Christianity, as are experienced in grace.
Disclose your troubles to them; they will, it is imagined, rejoice to do you
every good office in their power, and, through divine favor, they may render
you very essential service.

EIGHTHLY: Be extremely careful that you do not suppress the motions of the
divine spirit; 1 Thessalonians. v. 19.
but, with servency, pray for its sacred influences: and to this you are
excited by our Savior himself. "If ye;" says he, "being evil know how to give
good gifts unto your children; how much more shall your heavenly Father give
the holy Spirit to them that ask him?" Luke xi. 13.


However some persons, who profess to believe the gospel, but are strangers to
its spirit, may deny the influences of the Holy Ghost, on the human mind, most
true it is, that the divine Spirit, in us, is the author of every good thought;
J^^. i. 17.
is productive, within our breasts, of "love, joy and peace;" Gal. v. 22.
and "witnesses with our spirit, that we are the children of God:" Romans vii.
16.
And it is also most true, that the "sons of God are led by the divine Spirit;"
(...) viii. 1^.
that "if we have not the spirit of Christ, we are none of his;" Ib. v^. 9.
and that "except we are born of the Spirit, we cannot enter into the kingdom
of God." John iii. 5.


NINTHLY: Should you be reproached for your laudable efforts to "turn from the
wickedness which you have committed," and to become Christians, indeed, this is
no more than what many others, in every age of the church, have experienced.

Let not the ill language, nor opprobious epithets, of the unrighteous, render
you unhappy; but rather occasion you to "rejoice and be exceeding glad;"
because "great will be your reward in heaven," if "men shall speak evil against
you falsely for the sake of Christ." (...) ^. 10, 11.12.


When you reflect how many there have been who have suffered the loss of every
worldly good, and even life itself, for their christian virtue, how grateful
should you be, if you shall endure only the language of reproach for doing your
duty?

Let it be considered, that the unjust revilings of persons of vice, is your
honor and not disgrace! That such should be regarded by you as objects of
pity, rather than of your displeasure! And that, very probably, they would be
far from censuring you for acts of impiety!

TENTHLY: Should you meet with opposition in the path of virtue, from those who
should be the most forward to countenance and assist you therein, bear this
cross of affliction with patience and fortitude. Let mildness of deportment be
yours; but suffer not yourselves to be irreligious, and to disregard the offers
of salvation, through complaisance or respect to men, nor for any earthly
considerations! "What would it profit you, should you gain the whole world, and
lose your own souls?" Ib. xi. ^6.


ELEVENTHLY: Meditate often, and with seriousness, upon spiritual subjects;
particularly, on the love of God, manifested to the world, through Christ; also
on death and judgment; the miseries of the infernal regions and the joys of
heaven.

And avoid every practice, that shall tend to banish thoughts of piety from
your breast, especially conversation of folly or levity. This has often been
injurious to the spirit of religion.

Our Lord declares, "that every idle word that man shall speak, they shall give
account thereof in the day of judgment." Matt. xii. 36.


"If a man," says Saint James, "seems to be religious, and bridleth not his
tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain." Jam. i. 26.


"Let your communication, therefore, be yea, yea; nay, nay: for whatsoever is
more than these comes of evil." Matt. v. 37.


Make a proper use of speech. Affirm or deny, with plainness, according to the
nature of the subject; and be ever mindful, that your conversation should be
such as is worthy of rational beings, and professors of Christianity.

With the Psalmist, frequently "commune with your own hearts and be still."
Psalm. iv. 4.


With him also, "set a watch before the door of your mouth;" Ib. cxli. 3.
"take heed to your ways that you offend not with your tongue;" Ib. xxxix. 1.
and let your "lips drop as the honey comb," Cant. iv. 11.
and your "words be even as choice silver." Prove. x. 20.


TWELFTHLY: Give not the least countenance to iniquity; but flee from "the
appearance of evil!" 1 Thessalonians. v. 22.


Encompassed you may be by temptations; and numerous are the enemies you have
to combat with; but be not intimidated, neither by their numbers, nor power;
for you may be "more than conquerors, through the assistance of Christ! Romans v.
37.
"

As you profess to be enquiring, "What you shall do to be saved?" You are
regarded with attention by angels and men, who wait to observe the issue of
your conduct, whether salvation, or the reverse, shall be your portion?

While persons of virtue would weep to behold the instability of your
resolutions of goodness, it is probable, that some of vice, would rejoice to
observe your professions of religion to "vanish as the morning cloud or early
dew."

For the honor of Christianity; for the comfort and satisfaction of persons of
piety; and for your present and future honor and happiness, be excited, with
invincible fortitude and resolution, to persevere in the ways of holiness!

Attend, with seriousness, to the ensuing expressings of the merciful Savior!

"No man, having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the
kingdom of God!" Luke ix. 62.


"Remember Lot's wife!" Ib. xvii. 32.


"When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places,
seeking rest, and sindeth none. Then he says, I will return into my house from
whence I came out: And, when he is come, he finds it empty, swept, and
garnished. Then goes he, and takes with himself seven other spirits, more
wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: And the last state of
that man is worse than the first!" Matt. xii. 43.44, 45.


LASTLY: Content not yourselves with a partial reformation! An almost
Christian, is no Christian! Say not "peace, peace to yourselves, when there is
no peace!" Mistake not a part, for the whole of religion!

Remember, that your repentance for sin, must be unfeigned; -- that your faith
in Christ must be active; must "work by love;" occasion you, sincerely and
universally, from affection, to revere all the divine commands; -- and that you
must be accepted of God through Christ; "not having your own righteousness,
which is of the law, but that which is through faith in him!" Phil. iii. 9.


Remember, that "unless you are born again you cannot see the kingdom of God;"
John iii. 3.
that "you must put off, concerning your former conversation, the old man,
which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; that you must be renewed in
the spirit of your minds, and put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness!" Ephesians. iv. 22, 23, 24.


And also remember, that "you cannot acceptably serve two masters, God and
Mammon;" Matt. vi. 24.
that "Christ will be the author of eternal salvation, only to those who obey
him;" Heb. v. 6.
and that he who commits sin is of the devil!" 1 John iii. 8.


Indulge, therefore, no hopes of salvation, but such as are rational, and
conformable to the general tenor of the sacred writings!

Should you finally err in this particular, the error must be fatal,
irretrievable, and unhappy beyond conception!

TO CONCLUDE.
WHEN the prodigal son "came to himself," and formed the resolution to return
to his father, -- did the venerable parent hasten, nay run to meet the
dissolute youth? -- Did he give him the most sensible testimony of his
reconciliation and love? Did he receive him even with transports of joy? Luke
xv.


In like manner, may the Father of mercies receive you into the arms of his
affection!

May he deliver you from the terrors of guilt, and speak peace to your troubled
minds!

May your hearts be renovated, sanctified, through the operations of the divine
Spirit!

May you adorn your holy profession by lives of piety; and at last obtain the
"end of your says, the salvation of your immortal souls!" 1 Pet. i. 12.


THOSE of you, who are so happy as to enjoy the divine favor; who experience
that "peace of God which passes understanding," Phil. iv. 7.
permit the following particulars to be suggested for your observation.

FIRST: Let gratitude of heart be yours for what the God of compassion has
done for you. Enquire, "what you shall render him for all his benefits" Psalm.
cxvi. 12.
you have received?

And how you shall improve that talent of grace he has entrusted you with, to
the advancement of his glory and the advantage of your fellow creatures?

SECONDLY: See that at all times and places, you "walk circumspectly;" not as
persons of folly but of wisdom. Ephesians. v. 15.


Let the "same mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus." Phil. ii. 5.
Set his example of holiness, innocence and usefulness continually before you,
and, in all things, regard it as much as possible.

Convince the world, by your conduct, that Christianity is more than a name;
and that, among other particulars, it was designed to render mankind just in
their dealings; industrious in their avocations; benevolent, humble and modest
in their dispositions; and also, sober, temperate, and chaste in their actions.

THIRDLY: Suffer not yourselves to be elatted by pride.

What excellencies do you possess that you did not receive? Jam. i. 17.
How hateful is spiritual pride in the estimation of the Almighty? 1 Pet. v. 5.
And how would it degrade you, even in the eyes of mankind?

FOURTHLY: Ever be on your guard against the assaults of evil, and the
artifices of the adversary of souls.

"Let him that thinks he stands," says Saint Paul, "take heed lest he
shall fall:" 1 Cor. x. 12.
and by him you are exhorted to "work out your salvation with fear and
trembling." Phil. ii. 12.


FIFTHLY: Always retain a sense of your own imbecility, or weakness, to
practice virtue: (...)

And Saint Paul mentions, "there was given him a thorn in the flesh, the
messenger of Satan to buffet him; lest he should be exalted above measure." 2
Cor. xii. 7.


He adds: "For this thing he besought the Lord thrice, that it might depart
from him." And that the Lord said unto him; "my grace is sufficient for thee;
for my strength is made perfect (manifested more illustriously) in (this thy)
weakness."

EIGHTHLY: Being yourselves "converted," it is not doubted, but, with
cheerfulness, you will, agreeable to the injunction of the divine Savior,
endeavor to "strengthen your brethren." Luke xxii. 32.


And that, to the utmost of your power, according to your several capacities,
you will, in a proper manner, be most anxious to advance the divine glory and
the salvation of mankind.

You will consider the value of immortal souls; what it has cost to redeem
them; that "being yourselves bought with a price, you are not your own;" and,
therefore, in every respect, and in the highest degree, you should "glorify God
in your souls and bodies which are his." 1 Cor. vi. 19, 20.


LASTLY: "He that overcomes," says the Almighty, "shall inherit all things*
and I will be his God, and he shall be my son." Rev. xxi. 7.


How forcible, therefore, are your excitements, to "be steadfast; unmovable,
and always to abound in the work of the Lord?" 1 Cor. xv. 58.


How soon may your conflict with sin and Satan cease, and you be invested with
the "palm of victory and crown of glory which fade not away!" 1 Pet. v. 4.


How soon, indeed, may you exchange the blessings of grace, for the happiness
of glory; become citizens of that city which "has everlasting foundations,
whose builder and maker is God;" Heb. xi. 10.
-- associate with angels of purity; be blessed with the enjoyment of the divine
presence, and participate of those "rivers of pleasure, which are at God's
right hand for evermore!" Psalm. xvi. 11. -- A young Man who resided lately,
near Elizabeth-Town, departed this Life but a short time after he had been
solicitous to obtain Salvation. He left the World with rational Hopes of
Redemption, through Christ, and possessed of great Peace and Satisfaction of
Mind. -- And thus it is, that sometimes we no sooner enter on the Christian
Race, but we gain the Prize of immortal Glory!


What scenes of bliss? What ineffable glories, and exstatic joys await you?

Keep them ever in your view! -- Let them console you, if in affliction! --
Support you in the hour of temptation! -- Cause you to be detached, in
affection, from all earthly objects; and to regard yourselves "as strangers and
pilgrims here, who have no continuing city, but who seek one which is to come!"
Heb. xi. 13, 14.


MAY every grace and virtue in you, be increased and established!

May you be most sedulous to promote the interest of religion!

And may you always have your "lamps trimmed," that at what time soever, you
shall hear the cry, -- "Behold the Bridegroom comes!" -- You may be prepared
to "go forth to meet him!" Matt. xxv. 6.


Will they still be a reproach to Christianity, and be resolved on their
everlasting destruction?

For the momentary, and unsatisfactory enjoyments of sin, still will they
consent to relinquish endless and inconceivable bliss?

For the disgrace of vice, are they yet willing to be deprived of the honors
and rewards of virtue?

Have they no regard for their felicity? Or are they superior to pain?

How will they support the horrors of a deathbed of guilt; the terrors of the
day of the Lord; the miseries of the worm that dies not, and the anguish of
the flames which never will be quenched? Mark ix. 44.


How do the spirits of darkness rejoice in the impiety of these persons? And
how will demons triumph in the condemnation of such practitioners of vice; such
professors of virtue?

BUT, with deliberation, can they prefer death to life; misery to happiness;
the infernal prison, to the kingdom of heaven?

Does not a ray of divine light penetrate their souls of darkness?

Do not the scales of sin fall from their eyes?

Are they not astonished at their past folly and stupidity?

And are they not now inquiring for the ways of salvation?

HAPPY truth! Against them the door of divine mercy is not yet closed!

Yet, through the blood of Christ, they may be cleansed from sin, however deep
its stains!

Yet, through the power of the Holy Ghost, their souls may be purified, however
contaminated by vice!

Yet, through the riches of heavenly grace, they may be delivered from eternal
woe, and attain redemption!

DIVINE privilege! How unspeakable is its importance? May it be duly improved!

Will God Almighty, of his infinite goodness, be graciously pleased to grant
it, for Christ's sake!

Newark, May 14, 1785.
POSTSCRIPT.
ABOUT three years since, the Author of the preceding Address, preached a
Sermon, in Kingwood, in the State of New Jersey, on the subject of
Regeneration, which discourse was then printed.

Several persons, on whom, through divine goodness, it made serious and happy
impressions, requested the Author to compose a prayer, adapted to their
situation, and to annex it to the sermon.

This request was complied with; and that form of devotion is now reprinted,
for the advantage of such persons of penitence as may read this pamphlet, and
have occasion of assistance in their addresses to the Almighty.

THE PRAYER.
O THOU that art my Creator, preserver and benefactor! Against thee, O God!
against thee have I sinned! With shame and sorrow, I acknowledge and deplore my
manifold transgressions, which render me most unworthy of thy favor, and
justly expose me to thy indignation and wrath!

But O thou who art a God of pity; that delightest not in the death of a
sinner, but would rather he should turn from his wickedness and live, look
down, I humbly beseech thee; in condescensive goodness look down from thy
throne of mercy, and behold me in compassion! Pardon, I entreat thee, my
iniquities, through the merits of thy beloved Son! Through the purity of his
blood, may I be cleansed from sinful defilement! Give peace to my troubled
mind, and let me become an object of thy affection!

Deliver me, O Lord! I pray thee, not only from the punishment due to sin, but
also from its power and dominion! Let it no longer reign in my mortal body! No
longer may I be in bondage to the Prince of Darkness! No longer may I even
incline transgress thy holy law! Through the power of thy grace, may all evil
be mortified and subdued in me! Through the efficacy of thy spirit, may my soul
be regenerated; be renewed, and transformed into thy likeness! May my mind be
duly illuminated with the light of divine truth! May my affections be supremely
fixed on thee, O God! who art most worthy of all love! And henceforth, may my
life be entirely conformable to thy righteous will!

Though numerous foes may assault me in the path of salvation, yet, O Lord God
of strength! through thy aid, may they be vanquished! May I be enabled to
triumph over all opposition in the practice of religion; to go on from one
degree of holiness to another, and, at length, arrive to the fullness of
christian perfection!

Ever be pleased to indulge me, O Lord, I beseech thee! with the light of thy
countenance! At all times may I be favored with the consolations and joys of
thy holy spirit! And may I be preserved from every thing that shall be either
offensive to thee; reproachful to christianity, or injurious to myself!
Particularly, from spiritual pride; from an uncharitable disposition, and a
presumptuous confidence in my own ability to conflict with sin and Satan! As
without thy assistance, O God! I cannot do any thing that is good, will thou,
in mercy, incline and enable me successfully to approach thee in all thy holy
ways, that from thee I may receive a supply of grace for all my spiritual
wants! And prepare, O Lord! with ardour I implore thee; prepare my heart, in
due season, to draw near, in an acceptable manner, to that holy sacrament,
appointed by the merciful and divine Jesus, to be expressive of his death,
until he shall come again! In mercy grant, that the emblems of his holy
passion, may be received by me with the profoundest reverence; and with the
most fervent gratitude, love and praise! That at this sacred banquet, each
grace and virtue in me may be nourished, established, and confirmed! And that a
proper sense of the sufferings of thy beloved Son, for the atonement of human
guilt, may occasion me properly to perceive the demerits of sin, and cause me
to flee it with the utmost detestation and abhorrence!

O Father of mercies, the God of love and of grace! What shall be rendered unto
thee for thy inconceivably rich and unmerited clemency, manifested to sinful
men, through the Son of thy affection! How shall I sufficiently admire, adore,
and praise thee, that I enjoy the glorious light of the gospel! That
notwithstanding all my sins, thou have so long waited to be gracious to me! And
that thou have now inclined my soul to make my peace with thee, and to weep for
my offenses! O that my repentance may be such as shall need not to be repented
of! That my faith in Christ may increase in strength! And that I may be thine,
for ever thine!

Lord, humbly do I commit myself unto thee! To thee do I offer myself a
sacrifice, both soul and body, which is my reasonable service! O that thou
would deign to accept of the unworthy offering! That thy arm of omnipotence
may ever be extended for my safety! That, through thy goodness, I may escape
the temptations of the world, the flesh and the devil, and at last enter into
thy heavenly kingdom!

Grant it, O Lord! thou who hear the petitions of humble suppliants; grant
it with humility and fervency I pray, for the sake of the merits and mediation
of the divine, compassionate Jesus; to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, three
Persons, but one God, be ascribed all honor and glory, adoration and praise,
now, henceforth, and for ever! Amen!


