ARBUSTRUM AMERICANUM: THE AMERICAN GROVE, OR, AN ALPHABETICAL CATALOGUE OF
FOREST TREES AND SHRUBS, NATIVES OF THE AMERICAN UNITED STATES, ARRANGED
ACCORDING TO THE LINNAEAN SYSTEM.

CONTAINING, The particular distinguishing Characters of each GENUS, with
plain, simple and familiar Descriptions of the Manner of Growth, Appearance,
etc. of their several SPECIES and VARIETIES.

ALSO, SOME HINTS OF THEIR USES IN MEDICINE, DIES, AND DOMESTIC ECONOMY.

COMPILED FROM ACTUAL KNOWLEDGE AND OBSERVATION, AND THE ASSISTANCE OF
BOTANICAL AUTHORS, BY HUMPHRY MARSHALL.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN MARKET-STREET, BETWEEN SECOND
AND THIRD-STREETS.

M.DCC.LXXXV.

TO BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, ESQUIRE, PRESIDENT,

Vice-Presidents
JOHN EWING, D. D. WILLIAM WHITE, D. D. and SAMUEL VAUGHAN, Esquire,
AND TO THE OTHER MEMBERS OF THE AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, THIS
ALPHABETICAL CATALOGUE OF THE FOREST TREES AND SHRUBS, NATIVES of the AMERICAN
UNITED STATES, IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED

BY THE AUTHOR.

INTRODUCTION.
WHEN we take a survey of Mankind in general, and of the several requisites by
which life is rendered comfortable and desirable, the productions of the
Vegetable Kingdom are amongst the foremost; as affording the principal
necessaries, conveniences, and luxuries of life.

It is in this view, that the Science of Botany, or that branch of natural
History which teaches the right knowledge of Vegetables, and their application
to the most beneficial uses, is an object which not only merits the attention
and encouragement of every patriotic and liberal mind, but undoubtedly deserves
a place amongst the first of useful pursuits. That it is an object highly
deserving the attention of Mankind in general, cannot be denied; but in a
particular manner of the inhabitants of this Commonwealth, the author wishes to
make appear more obvious.

Those who are conversant in trade well know the continual enormous expense we
are at in purchasing foreign Teas, Drugs, Dye-stuffs, etc. The diminution of
this, ought to be the care and concern of every friend to his Country's
welfare. And we presume it will appear evident, that the most eligible and
obvious means of obtaining this desirable object, will be by a proper attention
and application to Horticulture and Botany. In this view, the following
considerations more particularly present themselves.

I. The introduction and cultivation of foreign useful and valuable plants. Our
extent of territory, our diversity of Climate, of Soil, and of Stuation, leaves
not a doubt but that we might introduce and cultivate to advantage, many of the
same articles, whose importation at this time, is to us, a considerable
expense. The Thea viridis and bohea, the true green and bohea Tea plant,
formerly accounted different species, but now known to be the same, and one of
the greatest drainers of our wealth; may be procured either from its native
place of growth, or from Europe where it has become pretty common; and we have
every reason to believe, from its being the spontaneous produce of the same
parallel of latitude, and from other considerations respecting its natural
history, that it might thrive well in our Southern States. In this same view
the Vine, the Almond Tree, Fig Tree, Liquorice, Madder and Rhubarb, deservedly
require our attention. Many other See Transactions of the American
Philosophical Society, Vol. I. Page 155.
foreign useful plants might be enumerated, and the advantages that may be
derived to this Commonwealth from their introduction, increase and culture,
must appear sufficiently obvious.

II. The discovering the qualities and uses of our own native Vegetable
productions, and applying them to the most useful purposes. Our extent of
luxuriant unexplored territory, is an object which here in a particular manner
occurs replete with promising advantages. Our being able to discover a plant of
equal general usage with the Potatoe, Tobacco, or Ginseng; or good substitutes
for Tea, Coffee and Peruvian Bark; would be advantages surpassing all adequate
estimation.

It is true, we may gain by tedious experience, or stumble by chance upon many
useful discoveries respecting the uses and medicinal virtues of plants, but it
is from our observations and researches founded upon, and directed by, a
knowledge of Botany, that we can alone hope for certain success. From the
writings of the celebrated LINNAEUS this general rule is sufficiently
established; that plants of the same habit and appearance, and those which
agree in the disposition of their flowers and fruit, have likewise similar
virtues and properties. From this observation we deduce an obvious inference;
that the more general knowledge we obtain of the characters and appearance of
plants, the more likely we shall be also to increase our knowledge of their
virtues, qualities and uses.

This subject has been much urged and long dwelt upon from a conviction of its
importance and promising advantages: the author, influenced by these
considerations, and from a belief that it might contribute in some degree to
render a knowledge of this subject more familiar and easy, has been induced to
draw up this Alphabetical Catalogue of the Forest Trees and Shrubs, natives of
the American United States, as mentioned by the best authors, or since
discovered by ingenious travelers. In this Catalogue are contained their
Linnaean Generic and trivial names, (or new formed ones where these have been
wanting) together with their most common and approved English ones; the
particular distinguishing characters of each Genus; a plain and familiar
description of the appearance, manner of growth, etc. of their several species
and varieties; and also, some hints of their native soil and situation, uses in
Medicine, as Dies and in domestic economy.

As terms peculiar to the science frequently and unavoidably occur, it was
judged necessary, in order to render the work more useful and complete, to
prefix a general explanation of the Linnaean system of arrangement, as also of
the useful and unavoidable scientific terms; for this and other purposes the
author has availed himself from the best writers, of what has been judged most
applicable and conducive to his design. The whole forming an useful Vademecum
Botanicum, or Botanical Companion.

In this my Countrymen are presented at one view with a concise description of
their own native Forest Trees and Shrubs, as far as hitherto discovered. And
those whose fancy may lead to this delightful science, may by a little
application, from hence be enabled scientifically to examine and arrange, not
only those of the shrubby, but the several and various species of the
herbaceous class. The foreigner, curious in American collections, will be
hereby better enabled to make a selection suitable to his own particular fancy.
If he wishes to cultivate timber for oeconomical purposes, he is here informed
of our valuable Forest Trees: if for adorning his plantation or garden of our
different ornamental flowering shrubs.

The author would have been happy, could he have given also a descriptive
Catalogue of our native herbaceous plants. At present, circumstances oblige him
to confine himself to Forest Trees and Shrubs; however he has such a work in
contemplation should this meet with the encouragement of the public.

He is well aware that many improvements might have been made, with regard to
the form and manner of description, as well as by the addition of Synonyms,
Notes of reference, etc. but, upon reflecting that the generality of his
Readers would have been more embarrassed and confused than profited thereby, he
was determined to use the most plain and familiar method and language, in order
to render the work as generally useful as possible; this being the chief end
and design of the undertaking.

A View of the Twenty-four Classes of the SEXUAL SYSTEM of LINNAEUS, with their
Names and Characters; also the Number and Explanation of Orders contained in
each.
Number of the Classes. Their Names and Characters. Number of Orders in each.
Their Names, expressive of the Number of Female Parts of Styles. Number. 1.
MONANDRIA. One fertile stamen, i. e. having the Antherae. 2 1. Monogynia, 2.
Digynia,
1 2
2. DIANDRIA. Two fruitful Stamina or male parts. 3 1. Monogynia, 2. Digynia,
3. Trigynia,
1 2 3
3. TRIANDRIA. Three TRIANDRIA. 3 1. Monogynia, 2. Digynia, 3. Trigynia,
1 2 3
4. TETRANDRIA. Four TETRANDRIA, all of equal length, by which it is
distinguished from the fourteenth class. 3 1. Monogynia, 2. Digynia, 3.
Tetragynia,
1 2 4
5. PENTANDRIA. Five PENTANDRIA. 3 1. Monogynia, 2. Digynia, 3. Triginia, 4.
Tetragynia, 5. Pentagynia, 6. Polygynia,
1 2 3 4 5 many
6. HEXANDRIA. Six HEXANDRIA, all of equal length, by which this is
distinguished from the sixteenth class. 5 1. Monogynia, 2. Digynia, 3.
Trigynia, 4. Tetragynia, 4 5. Polygynia,
1 2 3 4 many
7. HEPTANDRIA. Seven HEPTANDRIA. 4 1. Monogynia, 2. Digynia, 3. Tetragynia, 4.
Heptagynia,
1 2 4 7
8. OCTANDRIA. Eight OCTANDRIA. 4 1. Monogynia, 2. Digynia, 3. Trigynia, 4.
Tetragynia,
1 2 3 4
9. ENNEANDRIA. Nine ENNEANDRIA. 3 1. Monogynia, 2. Trigynia, 3. Hexagynia,
1 2 6
10. DECANDRIA. Ten DECANDRIA. 5 1. Monogynia, 2. Digynia, 3. Trigynia, 4.
Pentagynia, 5. Decagynia,
1 2 3 5 10
11. DODECANDRIA. From eleven to nineteen Stamina, inclusive. 6 1. Monogynia,
2. Digynia, 3. Trigynia 4. Pentagynia, 5. Octagynia, 6. Dodecagynia,
1 2 3 5 8 12
12. ICOSANDRIA. Twenty stamina and upwards (sometimes fewer) affixed to the
inner side of the Corolla or calyx and not to the receptacle; the corolla is
fastened to the inner side of the calyx, which is concave and of one leaf. 5 1.
Monogynia, 2. Digynia, 3. Trigynia, 4. Pentagynia, 5. Polygynia,
1 2 3 5 many
13. POLYANDRIA. From fifteen to one thousand stamina, which are fastened to
the receptacle. It differs from the Icosandria in the calyx and the insertion
of the Stamina and Corolla. 7 1. Monogynia, 2. Digynia, 3. Trigynia, 4.
Tetragynia, 5. Pentagynia, 6. Hexagynia, 7. Polygynia,
1 2 3 4 5 6 many
14. DIDYNAMIA. Four Stamina: the two next to one another shorter than the
other two; one style and an uneven Corolla. 2 Their Names expressive of the
disposition of their Seeds. 1. Gymnospermia -- Seeds naked in the calyx. Their
Names expressive of the disposition of their Seeds. 2. Angiospermia -- Seeds
covered in a seed-vessel.
15. TETRADYNAMIA. Six Stamina, tapering and erect: the two opposite as long as
the calyx, the other four a little longer; four even petals. 2 Their Names
expressive of the disposition of their Seeds. 1. Siliculosa -- Seeds in small
short pods. Their Names expressive of the disposition of their Seeds. 2.
Siliquosa -- Seeds in long slender pods.
16. MONADELPHIA. A Perianthium, Permanent, often double; five petals. The
filaments all joined in one parcel below, but not above; the external shortest.
5 1. Pentandria, 2. Decandria, 3. Endecandria, 4. Dodecandria, 5. Polyandria,
5 10 11 12 many
17. DIADELPHIA. The filaments all joined below in two parcels, one simple the
other nine-cleft. A perianthium of one leaf, bellshaped and falling-off. The
Corolla always butter-fly-shaped and uneven. 3 1. Hexandria, 2. Octandria, 3.
Decandria,
6 8 10
18. POLYADELPHIA. The filaments united below into three or more distinct
parcels. 3 1. Pentandria, 2. Icosandria, 3. Polyandria,
5 20 many
19. SYNGENESIA. The Stamina joined by their Anthera (rarely by their
filaments) in form of a cylinder. 6 1. Polygamia Aequalis -- Equal Polygamy.
The florets all hermaphrodite. 2. Polygamia Superflua -- Superfluous Polygamy.
The florets in the center hermaphrodite, those in the circumference female. 3.
Polygamia Frustanca -- Ineffectual Polygamy. The florets in the center
hermaphrodite, those in the circumference barren. 4. Polygamia Necessaria --
Necessary Polygamy. The hermaphrodite florets in the center barren, but the
female in the circumference fruitful. 5. Polygamia Segregata -- Separate
Polygamy. The florets separated by partial flower-cups within a common calyx.
6. Monogamia, Single marriages, containing simple flowers whose Antherae are
united.
20. GYNANDRIA. The Stamina or male parts attached to, and growing upon the
female or Pistillum. 7 1. Diandria, 2. Triandria, 3. Tetrandria, 4. Pentandria,
5. Hexandria, 6. Decandria, 7. Polyandria,
2 3 4 5 6 10 many
21. MONOECIA. Male and female flowers in distinct cups on the same plant. 11
1. Monandria, 2. Diandria, 3. Triandria, 4. Tetrandria, 5. Pentandria, 6.
Hexandria, 7. Heptandria, 8. Polyandria, 9. Monadelphia, Filaments united. 10.
Syngenesia, Antherae united. 11. Gynandria, Stamina growing out of the
pistillum.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 many
22. DIOECIA. Male and female flowers on different plants of the same Species.
14 1. Monandria, 2. Diandria, 3. Triandria, 4. Tetrandria, 5. Pentandria, 6.
Hexandria, 7. Octandria, 8. Enncandria, 9. Decandria, 10. Dodecandria, 11.
Polyandria, 12. Monadelphia, Filaments united. 13. Diadelphia, Antherae united.
14. Syngenesia, Stamina growing out of the Pistillum.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 10 12 many
23. POLYGAMIA. Male, female and hermaphrodite flowers distinct in the same
Species, and sometimes on the same plant. 3 1. Monoecia, one house, or male and
female flowers on the same plant. 2. Dioecia, two houses, or male and female
flowers on separate plants. 3. Trioecia, three houses, or male, female and
hermaphrodite, growing on three distinct plants of the same Genus.
24. CRYPTOGAMIA. The fructification either wholly escapes out notice, or the
flowers are hid within the fruit. 4 1. Filices. Ferns. 2. Musci. Mosses. 3.
Algae. Fucus, or Sea-weed, 4. Fungi, Muthroons.


Note, Palmae, the Palms have, in late works, been added by way of appendix,
and constitutes the 25th class; but as these are not natives of these States,
and their fructification but imperfectly known, they are omitted.

From the preceding View it appears, that the Names and Characters of the
Twenty-four Classes, are each founded on either the Number, Insertion,
Equality, Connection, Situation, or Absence of the STAMINA or MALE SEXUAL
ORGANS.

On Number only, are founded the first eleven Classes, from Monandria to
Dodecandria.

On Number and Insertion, Icosandria and Polyandria.

On Number and Equality, Didynamia and Tetradynamia.

On Connection, Monadelphia, Diadelphia, Polyadelphia, and Syngenesia.

On Insertion only, Gynandria.

On Situation, Monoecia, Dioecia and Polygamia.

On Absence, Cryptogamia.

An Explanation of the different parts of Fructification.
FRUCTIFICATION is a temporary part of vegetables, appointed for the purpose of
generation, terminating the old vegetable and beginning the new. The parts of
fructification are the seven following, viz.

1. The Calyx, flower-cup, or empalement. 2. The Corolla, petals, or painted
leaves of the flower. 3. The Stamina, threads, or chives. 4. The Pistilum, or
pointal. 5. The Pericarpium, or Seed-vessel. 6. The Seeds. 7. The Receptacle,
or base on which all the other parts of the fructification are connected.
I. The calyx (which is the termination of the outer bark of the plant,
presenting itself in the fructification, in this form) comprehends the seven
following species, viz. the perianthium, the involucrum, the amentum, the
spadix, the gluma, the calyptra, and volva, of each of which in their order.

1. The perianthium, the flower-cup or empalement properly so called, is the
most common species of calyx, and situated close to the fructification. If it
encloses the stamina and germen, it is called the perianthium of the
fructification. If it encloses the Stamina and not the germen, it is the
perianthium of the flower. If it includes the germem, and not the stamina, it
is the perianthium of the fruit.

2. The involucrum or cover is situated at the bottom of an umbel, at some
distance from the flower. It is called an universal involucrum or cover, if it
is situated at the bottom of an universal umbel; and a partial involucrum or
cover, if at the foot of a partial umbel.

3. The amentum or katkin is that sort of calyx, which consists of a great
number of chaffy scales proceeding from a common receptacle or slender thread,
as in hazel, alder, etc.

4. The spatha or sheath is a sort of calyx which bursts lengthways, and puts
forth a stalk supporting the flowers; as in narcissus, snow-drop, arum, indian
turnep etc.

5. The gluma or chaffy husk, is that sort of calyx peculiar to grasses,
composed of thin scales or valves, which are often terminated by an arista, a
beard, or awn.

6. The calyptra a veil or hood, is a sort of calyx peculiar to mosses, placed
over their antherae, and resembling a monk's cowl, or rather an extinguisher.

7. The volva is a sort of calyx peculiar to the fungi or mushroom tribe,
involving or enclosing their fructification. It is membranaceous and torn quite
round.

II. The corolla, literally a wreath or garland, (serving together with the
calyx as covers to the parts they enclose) is the termination of the inner bark
of the plant presenting itself in this form, and consists of the petalum and
nectarium.

1. The petalum or petal is the corrollaceous covering of the flower. If the
flower is monopetalous, i. e. consists of one petal, the lower hollow part of
such a corolla is called tubus, the tube, and the upper part which spreads
wider is called limbus, the limb or border. And from its different figure it is
called either,

Bell-shaped, without any tube below,

Funnel-shaped or conical, with a tube,

Saucer or salver-shaped, with a tube,

Wheel shaped, without any tube below; or

Gaping, lipped or masked.

If the corrolla be polypetalous, i. e. consists of many petals, the lower part
of each petal is called, the unguls, or claw.

And the upper part which is wider, is called the lamina, or thin plate.

Again this upper part or lamina, is either

Cross-shaped, of four equal spreading petals; or

Butter-fly-shaped, irregular and of four petals; the upper one of which is
called the standard; the two side ones wings; and the under one the keel.

2. The nectarium is that part of the corolla which contains the honey; having
a wonderful variety both as to shape and situation, and is sometimes united
with the petals, and sometimes separate from them.

III. The stamina are those parts of a flower appropriated to the preparation
of the pollen, or fecundating dust, and consist of the filamentum, the anthera,
and the pollen.

1. The filamentum, the filament or thread serves to elevate the antherae, and
connect it to the flower.

2. The anthera, or summit of the stamen, is that part which contains the
pollen or fecundating dust, and discharges it when ripe.

3. The pollen, or impregnating dust, is that fine powder contained within the
antherae, or tops of the stamina, and dispersed when ripe, upon the female
organ, for impregnating the same.

IV. The pistillum, pointal, or female organ, adheres to the fruit, and is that
part appropriated for the reception of the pollen, spoken of above. It consists
of the germen, the stylus, and the stigma.

1. The germen, or seed-bud, is the base or lower part of the pistillum,
containing the rudiments of the unripe fruit, or seed, in the flowering state
of the plant,

2. The stylus, or style, is that part of the pistillum which stands upon the
germen, and elevates the stigma or summit.

3. The stigma, the summit, or top of the style, is that part which receives
the fertilizing dust of the antherae, and transmits its effluvia, through the
style into the middle of the germen, or seed-bud.

V. The pericarpium, or seed vessel, is that part which contains the seeds, and
discharges them when ripe. It comprehends the eight following species, viz. the
capsula, the siliqua, the legumen, the conceptaculum or folliculus, the drupa,
the pomum, the bacca, and the strobilus; of each of which in their order.

1. The capsula, a capsule or little casket, is a dry hollow seedvessel, that
splits or opens in some determinate manner. Capsules, when opened or split, are
divided outwardly into one or more pieces, called valvulae, or valves, the
parts which divide the capsules internally into cells are called dissepimenta,
or partitions. And the substances which connect the partitions to the seeds,
are called columellae, or littlepillars. The empty spaces for containing the
seeds, are called loculamenta, or cells.

2. The siliqua, or pod is a seed-vessel with two valves, having the seeds
fixed along the joining or edge of both valves.

3. The legumen, or cod, is a seed-vessel with two valves, having the seeds
fixed along the edge of one of the valves only.

4. The conceptaculum, a receiver; or folliculus, a little bag, is a
seed-vessel with one valve, splitting length-ways from top to bottom, and has
no seam for fastening the seeds within it.

5. The drupa, drupe, or stone fruit, is a pulpy seed-vessel, which has no
valve, or external opening, and contains within it a stone or nut.

6. The pomum, or apple, is a pulpy seed-vessel, which has no valve or external
opening, and contains within it a capsule.

7. The bacca, or berry, is a pulpy seed-vessel, which has no valve, and
contains seeds which are naked, or have no other covering than the pulp.

8. The strobilus, or cone, is a seed-vessel composed of woody scales, laid
over one another like tiles; it opens only at top, the scales being fixed below
to the center of the cone.

VI. Semen, the seed, is a deciduous part of the plant, containing the
rudiments of a new vegetable, and fertilized by the sprinkling of the male
dust. Under this head are comprehended the seed properly so called, the nut and
propago.

The nut is a seed covered with a hard bony skin.

Propago, the seed of the mosses, which has no tunic or covering.

VII. The receptaculum, or receptacle, the seventh and last part of the
fructification on which the other six are connected, comprehends the
receptaculum proprium, the receptaculum commune, and the spadix.

1. The receptaculum proprium, or proper receptacle, which belongs to the parts
of a single fructification only. It is called the receptacle either of the
fructification, when it is common to both flower and fruit; of the flower, when
the parts of the flower only are fastened to it without the germen; of the
fruit when it is a base for the fruit, and at a distance from the receptacle of
the flower; or of the seeds, when it is a base to which the seeds are fixed
within the pericarpium or seed-vessel.

2. The receptaculum commune, or common receptacle, is that which connects
several florets together; as in compound flowers; and is either paleaceum
chaffy, i. e. with thin membranaceous chaffy plates rising between the ^^orets,
or nudum naked, without chaffy plates.

3. The spadix is the receptacle of the palms, and is always branched. It is
also used to signify the flower stalk of every plant, which was originally
contained within a spatha or sheath; but in this last case it is often simple.

Explanation of the Modes of Flowering.
The peduncle or foot-stalk of the flower is a partial trunk, bearing the
fructification only, but not the leaves.

When branched or divided, each of the divisions is called pedicellus, or a
little flower-stalk.

Flower-stalks are distinguished from the place of the plant where they grow,
into,

1. The radical flower-stalk, when they proceed immediately from the root.

2. The cauline flower-stalk, which proceeds from the stem.

3. The branch peduncle, which proceeds from the branches.

4. The axillary, or bosom flower-stalk, which comes out between the leaf and
stem, or between the branch and stem.

5. The terminal flower-stalk, which comes from the extremity of the branch or
stem.

6. The Solitary peduncle, when there is only one in the same place.

7. The Scattered peduncles, when a great many grow together without any order.

Flower-stalks are also distinguished from the different modes in which flowers
are borne and connected on them, into the uniflorous, biflorous, triflorous, or
multiflorous peduncle, that is, which bear one, two, three, or many flowers.

Flowers are also collected or borne in the ten following modes.

1. The fasciculus, a bunch or bundle, when peduncles are erect, parallel,
placed close to one another, and all of the same height, as in sweet-william.

2. The capitulum, a little head, where many flowers are collected into a head,
at the extremity of a peduncle, as in globe amaronthus.

3. The spike, where the flowers sit close without footstalk, and are placed
along a common flower-stalk. A spike is called secunda, single ranked, when all
the flowers are turned to one side; or dislicha, double ranked, when the
flowers look to both sides, or stand two ways.

4. The corymbus, where the lesser flower-stalks of unequal lengths are
produced along the common peduncle on all sides, and rise to the same height,
so as to form a flat or even surface at top, as in spiraea opulifolia.

5. The panicle where the fructifications are dispersed upon footstalk
variously subdivided, as in oats, etc. a panicle is said to be diffuse when the
partial footstalk diverge, and the fructifications hang loose; or straight
and narrow; when the footstalk approach near to one another.

6. The thyrsus is a panicle contracted into an oval or eggshaped-form,
somewhat resembling the cone of a pine; as in lilac, horse chestnut, etc.

7. The racemus or cluster, consists of a common peduncle, having short lateral
branches, all nearly of equal length proceeding from it; as in the vine,
currants etc. It is called racemus secundus, or a one ranked cluster when all
the footstalk incline to one side; as in the sorrel-tree and most of our
andromedas.

8. The verticillus, or whorl, where the flowers are produced in rings at each
joint of the stem, with very short footstalks; as in mint, horehound, etc.

9. The umbella or umbel, where a number of small flowerstalks rise from the
same center to an equal height and form an even surface at top. It is called a
simple umbel, when the flower-stalks are simple or undivided; and a compound
umbel, or sometimes an universal umbel, when all the footstalk are subdivided
into smaller umbels, commonly called partial umbels

10. The cyma, or irregular umbel, where the footstalk rise from a common
center, and to an equal height, as in the umbel; but the secondary or partial
footstalk are irregularly dispersed, without order as in elder, viburnum etc.

The Reader is requested to observe that the names of the Species, under which
the words, Bartram's Catalogue immediately occur, are not found in Linnaeus's
Species Plantarum, but are taken from a Sheet Catalogue published by John and
William Bartram, Botanists in Kingsessing; containing the names of Forest Trees
and Shrubs, growing in, or near their Garden.
A CATALOGUE OF TREES AND SHRUBS.
ACER. THE MAPLE TREE.
Class 23, Order 1. Polyandria Monoecia.
IT has Hermaphrodite and Male flowers upon the same tree.

In the Hermaphrodite,

The Empalement is of one leaf, five cleft, acute, colored, plain and entire
at the base, and permanent.

The Corolla consists of five petals, which are ovate, broader outward, obtuse,
scarce larger than the calyx, and spreading.

The Filaments are eight, awl-shaped and short. The Antherae simple.

The Germen is compressed and sunk in the Receptacle, which is large, unequal
and perforated. The Style is thread-form, increasing in length. The Stigmas
two, sharp-pointed, slender, and reflexed.

The Seed-vessels are two capsules joined at the base, roundish, compressed,
and each terminating in a large membranaceous wing.

The Seeds are solitary and roundish.

The Male are the same in all parts except wanting the germen and style.

Obs. The Ash-leaved Maple has male and female flowers on separate trees.

The Species with us are,

1. ACER pennsylvanicum -- Pennsylvanian Dwarf Mountain Maple.
This grows naturally upon the mountains in the back parts of Pennsylvania. The
stems are slender, rising to the height of six or eight feet, and sending off
several opposite branches. The leaves are threepointed, pretty much sawed on
their edges, and placed opposite upon pretty long footstalks. The flowers
terminate the stalks in a pretty long erect racemus or bunch; they are small,
of an herbaceous color, and in part succeeded by small conjoined winged seeds.

2. ACER glaucum. The Silver-leaved Maple.
This tree grows frequently to the height of fifty or sixty feet, with many
spreading branches. The leaves are five-lobed, somewhat toothed, or deeply and
irregularly sawed on their edges: they are of a lucid green on the upper side
and a bright silver color on their under. The flowers are produced in little
umbels at the foot of the leaves; they are of a deep red color, and are
succeeded by large winged seeds, which fall off early in the summer. This is
perhaps the Acer rubrum of Linnaeus.

3. ACER Negundo. The Ash-leaved Maple.
This tree is dioecious, or having male and female flowers upon different
trees; it is but of middling growth, rising perhaps to the height of twenty or
thirty feet. The leaves something resemble those of the Ash, but are generally
trifoliate or quinquefoliate, or consisting of three or five lobes; which are
oval, somewhat pointed, and a little notched toward their extremities. The
flowers of the male are produced upon pendulous bundles of very long fine
threads or footstalks, each having a small flower-cup at its extremity,
containing five or more stamina. The female produces flowers at the extremity
of the small branches, in long loose bunches; they have long footstalks, with a
small deciduous empalement; containing a compressed germen, with scarce any
style, but two reflexed stigmas.

4. ACER canadense. American striped Maple.
This is but of middling growth. The bark, especially of the young shoots, is
beautifully variegated or striped. The leaves are divided into three very sharp
pointed lobes, and very finely sawed on their edges. The flowers are produced
in solitary bunches, with shortish footstalks; having pretty large petals and
empalements, containing generally eight stamina or filaments; and in
hermaphrodite flowers two reflexed stigmas. The flowers and seeds are of a
greenish yellow color.

5. ACER rubrum. The Scarlet flowering Maple.
This grows to a pretty large size in a rich soil. The leaves are three and
sometimes nearly five lobed, and sawed on their edges. The flowers are produced
in little umbels closely surrounding the small branches, and are of a scarlet
color. The footstalks of the hermaphrodite flowers, shoot out to a
considerable length; they are of a scarlet color, each sustaining two joined
winged seeds, somewhat of the same color. There is a variety of this with
yellowish flowers and seeds, which is, I believe, the most common kind in
Pennsylvania.

6. ACER saccharum. The Sugar Maple.
This grows to a large tree of two feet or more in diameter, and fifty or sixty
feet high. The leaves something resemble the Silver-leaved Maple, but are not
so large, nor deeply lobed; or of so fine a silver color. It flowers in manner
of the Scarlet Maple, but the flowers are of an herbaceous color; and produces
large joined winged seeds. The back inhabitants make a pretty good sugar, and
in considerable quantity, of the sap of this and the Silver-leaved Maple; and
though these have generally been preferred, yet all our Maples yield a sap
which affords a pretty good sugar.

AESCULUS.
THE HORSE-CHESNUT-TREE.
Class 7. Order 1. Heptandria Monogynia.
The Empalement is of one leaf, tubulous, small and fivetoothed.

The Corolla consists of five petals, roundish, waved with a plaited margin,
plane, spreading, unequally colored, and inserted by narrow claws into the
calyx.

The Filaments are seven (sometimes eight) awl-shaped, the length of the
corolla, and declined. The Antherae rising.

The Germen is roundish, ending in an awl-shaped Style. The Stigma sharp
pointed.

The Seed-vessel a capsule, coriaceous, roundish, three-cell'd and three valv'd.

The Seeds or nuts two, somewhat globose, often but one arriving to perfection.

1. AESCULUS octandra. New river Horse Chestnut.
This often becomes a tree of pretty large size. The branches are smooth and of
a greyish color. The leaves are palmated, or composed of five pretty large
lobes joined at their base, having a pretty long common footstalk: they are
somewhat wedge shape, or narrower toward the base than the point, veined with
oblique parallel veins, and sawed on their edges. The flowers are produced in a
loose thyrsus, at the extremity of the branches, of a pale yellowish color;
and are succeeded by fruit near the size of the eastern Horse-Chesnut.

2. AESCULUS Pavia. Scarlet flowering HorseChesnut.
This is but of humble growth, seldom rising to more than ten or twelve feet
high; sending out several branches, with leaves and flowers much like the
former, except the flowers being of a bright red color: they stand upon short
naked footstalks, branching from the common stem, generally five or six
together in each thyrsus. They are tubulous at bottom but spread open at top,
where the petals are irregular in size and length, having something the
appearance of a lip flower; they have seven or eight stamina the length of the
petals. When the flower fades the Germen swells to a pear shaped fruit, with a
thick russet colored covering, containing sometimes one or two nuts.

AMORPHA.
BASTARD-INDIGO.
Class 17. Order 3. Diadelphia Decandria.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, tubulous, cylindrical and top-shaped: at the
mouth erect, five-toothed, and obtuse: the two superior teeth largest;
permanent.

The Corolla is a single petal, inverse egg-shape, concave, scarce larger than
the calyx, erect, inserted in the calyx between the two largest upper teeth,
and placed on the upper side.

The Filaments are ten, very slightly joined at the base, erect, unequal in
length, and longer than the corolla. The Antherae are simple.

The Germen is roundish. The Style awl-shaped and the length of the Stamina.
The Stigma is simple.

The Seed-vessel a Legumen or Pod, moon-shaped, reflexed, larger than the
calyx, compressed, the top most reflexed, of one cell, and tubercled.

The Seeds are two, of an oblong kidney form.

Obs. This is singularly distinguishable from all the Papilionaceous tribe, in
having only the vexillum or standard, and wanting the wings and keel.

There appears to be but one Species of this Genus, viz.

AMORPHA fruticosa. Shrubby Bastard Indigo.
This grows naturally in Carolina, where it rises with many irregular stems, to
the height of ten or twelve feet, with very long winged leaves, in shape like
those of the common Acacia. At the extremity of the same year's shoots, the
flowers are produced in long slender spikes, which are very small and of a deep
purple color. The flowers are succeeded by moon-shaped, reflexed, compressed
pods, each containing two kidney-shaped seeds.

ANDROMEDA. ANDROMEDA
Class 10. Order 1. Decandria Monogynia.
The Empalement is five-parted, acute, very small, colored, and permanent.

The Corolla consists of one petal, bell-shaped and five-cleft: the divisions
reflexed.

The Filaments are ten, awl-shaped, longer than and scarcely affixed to the
corolla. The Antherae are two horned and nodding.

The Germen is roundish. The Style cylindrical, longer than the Stamina and
permanent. The Stigma is obtuse.

The Seed-vessel a capsule, roundish, pentagonal, five-celled, five valved, and
gaping at the angles.

The Seeds are many, roundish and shining.

Obs. The Corolla in some is ovate, in others perfectly bellshaped.

The Species are, native with us,

1. ANDROMEDA arborea. The Sorrel Tree.
It grows naturally in Virginia, to about ten or twelve feet high. The flowers
grow in long naked bunches, coming out from the sides of the branches, of an
herbaceous color, ranged on one side of the common foot-stalk: they are oval,
pitcher-shaped, and nodding; and are succeeded by small capsules.

2. ANDROMEDA calyculata. Ever-green Dwarf Andromeda.
This is a low shrub, growing on mossy land. The leaves are shaped something
like those of the Box tree, and are of the same consistence, having many small
punctures on them. The flowers grow in short racemi or bunches from the
extremity of the branches, they are white and of a cylindrical pitcher-shape.

3. ANDROMEDA Paniculata. Panicled Andromeda.
This shrub grows in boggy wet ground, rising from two or three to six or seven
feet high, sending out several branches which are clothed with oblong leaves, a
little notched and placed alternately. The flowers grow in long loose panicled
racemi or bunches, at the extremity of the branches; they are pitcher-shaped,
and succeeded by small round seed-vessels, having five cells, filled with small
round seeds. There is a variety of this of low growth, differing in having
shorter panicled bunches of flowers, and these coming out at the divisions, as
well as at the extremities of the branches.

4. ANDROMEDA racemosa. Pennsylvanian Red-bud Andromeda.
This grows in low clayed lands, to the height of five or six feet. The leaves
are oblong and serrated. The flowers are produced in a one sided racemus at the
extremity of the branches, and resemble the other kinds. The long bunch of
flower buds are of a beautiful red color in the spring, and thereby make a
good appearance.

5. ANDROMEDA mariana. Maryland, or broadleaved Andromeda.
Is a shrub of low growth, having but a small stem, which is generally
retroflected or bent from side to side. The leaves are egg-shaped, entire,
broad, and of pretty thick consistence. The Seed-vessels are larger than the
other kinds, gaping at their tops.

6. ANDROMEDA nitida. Ever-green Shiningleaved Andromeda, or Carolinian
Red-buds.
(Bartram's Catalogue.)
This shrub grows naturally in Carolina and Florida, and may justly be ranked
among the most beautiful flowering.

The leaves are perennial, near three inches in length and one in breadth, of a
hard and firm texture, lance-shape, of a deep shining, or glossy green color
on both sides, placed by pretty long footstalks alternately upon each side of
the branches, but inclining to the upper side, and standing nearly erect. The
flowers are produced along the under side of the branches, in long one rowed
racemi or bunches, which as they arrive to their full growth change to a damask
rose color. The under parts of the bunches somewhat resemble the cells of a
honeycomb, diffusing an agreeable fragrance, and affording a delicious harvest
to the honey-bee.

7. ANDROMEDA plumata. Plumed Andromeda, or Carolinian Iron-wood Tree.
(Bartram's Catalogue.)
This is also a southern beautiful species of Andromeda; rising to the height
of fifteen or twenty feet, and sending off toward the top, many spreading and
nearly horizontal branches.

The leaves are small, lance-shaped, and of a deep glossy green, but changing
in Autumn before they fall off, to yellow, red, purple, etc. giving the trees a
beautiful appearance, even in their decline. The flowers are produced at the
extremity of the branches, in one-rowed racemes or bunches, they are very small
and perfectly white, somewhat, resembling a plume of delicate white feathers.
This and the last mentioned, grow naturally by the sides of ponds, and swamps,
in Carolina and Florida.

ANNONA.
PAPAW TREE, or CUSTARD APPLE.
Class 13. Order 7. Polyandria Polygynia.
THE Empalement is three leaved and small: the leaves heartshaped, concave, and
sharp-pointed.

The Corolla is composed of six petals, heart-shaped and sessile or squat: the
three alternate interior less.

The Filaments scarce any. The Antherae are very numerous, fitting upon the
sides of the Germen.

The Germen is somewhat round, sitting upon a roundish receptacle. The Styles
none. The Stigmas obtuse.

The Seed-vessel a very large berry or fruit, of an oval or oblong shape,
covered with a smooth rind, and of one cell.

The Seeds are several, hard, shining, oblong, oval, (compressed in some
species) and placed in a circle.

The Species with us are,

1. ANNONA glabra. Carolinian Smooth-barked Annona.
The bark is smooth, the leaves broad, oval, but narrowed toward the base. The
fruit is large, yellow and somewhat conical. This grows naturally in Carolina.

2. ANNONA triloba. Pennsylvanian Triplefruited Papaw.
This grows common in rich bottoms and by river sides, in Pennsylvania. It
rises to the height of ten, twelve, and sometimes twenty feet, with but few
branches, garnished with pretty long large leaves, narrowed toward the base and
smooth on their edges. The flowers are solitary, and of a dark purple color;
they have short footstalks, which with the flower-cup is covered with short
brown hairs or down. The fruit is often found growing two or three together,
which loon falls off, becomes very mellow and turns of a yellow color.

ARALIA.
THE ANGELICA TREE.
Class 5. Order 5. Pentandria Pentagyina.
AN Involucrum, which is very small, to the little globular umbels.

The Empalement is five-toothed, very small, and above.

The Corolla consists of five petals, which are ovate, acute, sessile and
reflexed.

The Filaments are five, awl-shaped, and the length of the corolla. The
Antherae are roundish.

The Germen is roundish and beneath. The Styles five, very short, and
permanent. The Stigmas simple.

The Seed-vessel a berry, roundish, striated, crowned and fivecelled.

The Seeds are solitary, hard, and oblong.

The Species with us are,

ARALIA spinosa. Virginian Angelica Tree.
This rises with a thick woody stem to the height of ten or twelve feet,
dividing into several branches, which are garnished with ramose divaricated
leaves, placed alternately. The flowers are produced in large, loose, compound
umbels, at the extremity of the branches: they are of an herbaceous color, and
are succeeded by roundish berries of a purplish color when ripe. The stem,
branches, and footstalks of the leaves are armed with short strong spines.

ARBUTUS.
THE STRAWBERRY TREE, OR BEAR-BERRY.
Class 10. Order 1. Decandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is five parted, obtuse, very small and permanent.

The Corolla is one petalled, ovate, planish at the base; the border is five
cleft: the divisions obtuse, revolute and small.

The Filaments are ten, awl-bellied, very slender at the base, half the length
of the corolla, and affixed by the margin to its base. The Antherae are
slightly two cleft and nodding.

The Germen is somewhat globose, sitting upon a receptacle marked with ten
points. The Style is cylindrical and the length of the corolla. The Stigma is
thickish and obtuse.

The Seed-vessel is a berry, roundish and five celled.

The Seeds are small and bony.

The Species with us are,

ARBUTUS Uva ursi. The Bear-berry.
This grows naturally in the Jerseys. It is a low trailing shrub, dividing into
many branches, closely set with smooth, thick, entire leaves, of an oval form.
The flowers are produced in small bunches, near the ends of the branches, and
are succeeded by red berries. This has been used with great success in many
calculous complaints.

ARISTOLOCHIA.
BIRTHWORT.
Class 20. Order 5. Gynandria Hexagynia.
THE Empalement is wanting.

The Corolla is of one petal, tubulous and irregular: the base bellied,
somewhat globular and protuberant: the tube oblong, six cornered cylindrical:
the border dilated and extended beneath in a long tongue.

The Filaments are wanting. The Antherae are six adjoined under the Stigmas,
and four celled.

The Germen is oblong beneath and angled. The Style scarce any. The Stigma
somewhat globular, six parted, and concave.

The Seed-vessel is a capsule, which is large, hexagonal and six celled.

The Seeds are many, depressed and incumbent.

Obs. The Seed-vessel varies in figure; in some species it is roundish, in
others oblong.

The Species growing shrubby, with us, is one, viz.

ARISTOLOCHIA frutescens. Pennsylvanian Shrubby Birthwort.
This grows naturally near Pittsburg, in a rich soil and shaded situation;
rising with shrubby cylindrical stems, which twine round any neighboring
support, and reach sometimes to the height of thirty feet or more, sending off
many long twining branches. The leaves are large, entire, and heartshaped, of
eight inches or more in length, and as much in breadth, standing upon thick
strong footstalks. The flowers come out singly, or sometimes two together upon
pretty long footstalk, which are either terminal, or arise beneath the
divisions of the branches, each having a bractea or floral leaf embracing it
near its base; they consist of a long tube which is very crooked and bellied
toward the base, but narrower toward the extremity, and furnished with a
border which at first appears three lobed and triangular (in fo^^ of a cocked
hat,) but after becomes spreading, plain and roundish, and together with the
interior extremity of the tube, is finely variegated with spots or streaks. The
Capsules or Seed-vessels are cylindrical six-sided, of three or four inches in
length and near one in diameter, opening with six fissures, and having six
cells, filled with heart-shaped compressed seeds, with a false one between
each. This from its twining stems and large leaves affords a fine shady
covering for an arbor.

The roots have an aromatic penetrating savor, and are supposed to be equal in
medical virtues to the small Virginian Snake-root.

ASCYRUM.
ST. PETER'S WORT.
Class 18. Order 3. Polyadelphia Polyandria.
THE Empalement is of four leaves; the exterior opposite are very small and
linear; the interior heart-shaped, plane, large, and erect, and all permanent.

The Corolla is of four petals, ovate; the exterior opposite largest, the
interior less.

The Filaments are numerous, bristly, slightly joined at the base into four
parts. The Antherae are roundish.

The Germen is oblong. The Style scarce any. The Stigma simple.

The Seed-vessel a Capsule, oblong, sharp pointed, and enclosed by the larger
leaves of the empalement.

The Seeds are numerous, small and roundish.

The Species are,

1. ASCYRUM Hypericoides. St. Peter's Wort.
This is a small shrubby plant, growing naturally in low moist ground, and
rising with a few slender stems to the height of about eighteen inches, having
small opposite branches, which are somewhat flatted. The leaves are small,
oblong, somewhat wedge-shape, placed opposite, and sitting close. The flowers
are sparingly produced at the tops of the stalks, and have somewhat the
appearance of those of St. John's wort.

2. ASCYRUM villosum. Villose St. Peter's wort.
This rises to the height of about three feet, with erect stalks. The leaves
are oblong and hairy. The flowers are produced at the tops of the stalks,
resembling those of St. John's wort, but have only four petals.

AZALEA.
UPRIGHT HONEY-SUCKLE.
Class 5. Order 1. Pentandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is five parted, erect, acute, small, colored and permanent.

The Corolla is monopetalous, bell-shaped, and half five-cleft: the side
divisions inflexed.

The Filaments are five, filiform, free, unequal in length, and inserted in the
receptacle. The Antherae are simple.

The Germen is roundish. The Style filiform, the length of the corolla and
permanent. The Stigma is obtuse.

The Seed-vessel is a Capsule, roundish, five cell'd, and five valv'd.

The Seeds are several, roundish.

Obs. The figure of the petal in some Species is funnel form, in others
bell-shaped; the stamina in some are also very long and declined.

The Species with us, are,

1. AZALEA nudiflora. Red-flowered Azalea.
This grows most common upon a moist, clayey, gravelly soil, rising from two or
three, to five or six feet in height. The leaves are produced in clusters at
the extremity of the branches; they are oblong, inverse, egg-shaped, and a
little hairy upon their edges and midribs underneath. The flowers are produced
early in the spring before the leaves are expanded, in heads or clusters at the
ends of the stalks and chief branches, of a red color, and hairy, with very
long red stamina. There is great variety in the color of the flowers, from red
to almost white.

2. AZALEA viscosa. White sweet Azalea.
This grows naturally in rich rocky places, near streams of water; rising to
the height of five or six feet. The leaves are much smaller and of a paler
green color than those of the red flowered, otherwise resembling them. The
flowers are produced after the leaves are fully expanded, (about harvest time;)
they are white, hairy and clammy, and have the fragrance of the honey-suckle.

3. AZALEA viscosa palustris. Swamp Azalea.
This is a variety of the white kind, growing naturally in wet low ground. It
is of lower growth, with leaves rough and clammy at their first appearance. The
flowers are white, but not so sweet as the former. There is also some other
varieties differing somewhat in the disposition or appearance of their flowers,
etc.

BACCHARIS.
PLOWMAN'S SPIKENARD.
Class 19. Order 2. Syngenesia Polygamia Superslua.
THE Common Calyx is cylindrical, and imbricated: the Scales linear and acute.

The Compound Corolla, is equal with Florets Hermaphrodite and Female mixed.

The Proper of the hermaphrodite is funnel-form and five cleft. -- of the
female scarce manifest, or almost none.

The Filaments of the hermaphrodite are five, capillary and very small. The
Antherae cylindrical and tubulous.

The Germen of the hermaphrodite is ovate. The Style filiform and the length of
the flower. The Stigma is bifid or two cleft.

Of the female very like the hermaphrodite.

The Seed-vessel none, but the calyx changed.

The Seeds of the hermaphrodite and female much alike, solitary, very short,
and oblong. The Pappus simple.

The Receptacle is naked.

The Species are,

BACCHARIS halimifolia. Virginian Groundsel Tree.
It rises to the height of six or eight feet, sending out many erect branches,
garnished with leaves which are somewhat ovate, and a little toothed above,
continuing green most of the year. The flowers are produced at the extremity of
the branches, and are of a yellowish white color.

BERBERIS.
The BARBERRY-BUSH.
Class 6. Order 1. Hexandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is six leaved and spreading; the leaves ovate, narrower at the
base, concave, the alternate less, colored, and deciduous.

The Corolla is of six petals, which are roundish, concave, some what
spreading, and scarce larger than the calyx.

A Nectarium of two corpusles, roundish, colored and affixed to the base of
each petal.

The Filaments are six, erect, compressed and obtuse. Two Antherae are joined
to the top of each filament.

The Germen is cylindrical and the length of the stamina. The Style is wanting.
The Stigma is orbiculate, broader than the germen; and surrounded by an acute
margin.

The Seed-vessel is a berry, which is cylindrical, obtuse and of one cell.

The Seeds are two, oblong, cylindrical and obtuse.

The Species are,

BERBERRIS canadiensis. The Canadian Barberry.
This grows naturally in Canada, and somewhat resembles the European Barberry,
except the leaves being much shorter and broader, and the fruit, when ripe, of
a black color. There is also a kind of Barberry growing upon New-River in
Virginia, bearing red berries, of which I have seen one small plant.

BETULA.
The BIRCH-TREE.
Class 21. Order 4. Monoecia Tetrandria.
THE Male flowers are disposed in a cylindrical Katkin.

The Calyx, is a common Katkin, imbricated on all sides, loose and cylindrical;
composed of triflorous Scales, to each of which, two very minute scales are
placed at the sides.

The Compound Corolla consists of three florets, equal, and affixed to the disk
of each scale of the Katkin.

The Proper is monopetalous, four-parted, spreading, and small: the divisions
obtuse and egg-shaped.

The Filaments are four, very small. The Antherae are twin.

The Female flowers are disposed in Katkins on the same plant.

The Calyx is a common Katkin, imbricated: with three scales every where
opposed, affixed to the rachis, heart shaped with a point, biflorous, a little
divided by a pointed body in the bosom toward the top, concave, and short.

The Corolla none manifest.

The Germen proper, is ovate, very small. The Styles are two, bristly, and the
length of the scales. The Stigmas simple.

The Seed-vessel none. The Katkin embracing the seeds of two florets under each
scale.

The Seeds are solitary and ovate.

The Species with us are,

1. BETULA nigra. Black, or Sweet-Birch.
This becomes a large tree, often rising to the height of fifty or sixty feet,
and sending off many branches. The leaves are egg-shaped and doubly or
irregularly serrated, the small serratures are close, the larger more remote;
their footstalks are villose. The small branches are also covered with down.
The natives often make their canoes of the bark of this tree.

2. BETULA lenta. Red Birch.
This grows to a pretty large size, spreading into many slender pliable
branches. The leaves are smooth, heart-shaped, oblong, sharp-pointed, and
finely and slightly sawed on their edges.

3. BETULA papyrifera. White Paper Birch.
This is a variety of the last, growing to a middling size and pretty much
resembling it, except in having a very white smooth bark.

4. BETULA populifolia. Aspen-leaved Birch.
This is also a variety of the second, and grows naturally in the Jerseys, and
other eastern states, becoming a pretty tall tree, and covered with a white
bark. The leaves are somewhat triangular, like those of the Aspen tree, but
terminating in a long acute point; they are doubly serrated, standing upon long
slender footstalks, and are put in motion by the slightest breeze of wind.

5. BETULA humilis. Dwarf Birch.
This is also a variety of the second kind, of a low and dwarfish growth.

BETULA-ALNUS.
The ALDER TREE.
THE Characters are the same of the Betula, except the Seed-vessel being a
roundish cone.

The Species are,

1. BETULA-ALNUS glauca. Silver-leaved Alder.
This grows naturally in low marshy ground, and frequently rises to the height
of ten or twelve feet.

2. BETULA-ALNUS maritima. Seaside Alder.
This grows to the height of the former. The leaves are long and narrow. The
Katkins are generally in bloom in August, at which time the female cone or
seed-vessel sets, but don't grow to perfection till the next summer.

3. BETULA-ALNUS rubra. Common Alder.
This grows very common in most parts of Pennsylvania. The leaves are broader
than the other kinds, and rough or wrinkled. This flowers in the spring, and
perfects its seeds in the fall.

BIGNONIA.
The TRUMPET FLOWER.
Class 14. Order 1. Didynamia Angiospermia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, erect, cup-form, and five-cleft.

The Corolla is monopetalous, and bell-shaped. The tube very small and the
length of the calyx. The chaps very long, bellied underneath, and of an oblong
bell-shape. The border is five parted; the two superior divisions reflexed; the
inferior spreading.

The Filaments are four, awl-shaped and shorter than the corolla, of which two
are longer than the rest. The Antherae are reflexed, oblong, and as if doubled.

The Germen is oblong. The Style thread-form, of the situation and shape of the
stamina. The Stigma is headed.

The Seed-vessel is a filiqua or pod, of two cells and two valves.

The Seeds are pretty many, imbricated, compressed, and having a membranaceous
wing.

Obs. The Catalpa delights in only two perfect stamina, and three imperfect
rudiments, with a pentaphyllous calyx.

The Species are,

1. BIGNONIA Catalpa. The Catalpa-Tree.
This rises to the height of twelve or fifteen feet, with a strong stem,
dividing into several branches, which are garnished with large heart-shaped
leaves, placed opposite at each joint. The flowers are produced in large
branching panicles, at the ends of the branches; of a dirty white color, with
a few purple spots, and faint stripes of yellow on the inside; and waved on
their edges; they are succeeded by very long slender pods, filled with flat
winged seeds, lying over each other like the scales of a fish.

2. BIGNONIA crucigera. Cross-vine.
This rises with slender trailing stalks, which must be supported, so require
the assistance of a wall, and a good aspect; being impatient of much cold. The
branches are clothed with oblong leaves remaining green all the year. The
flowers are produced at the wings of the leaves, shaped much like those of the
Fox-glove; and are of a yellow color.

3. BIGNONIA radicans. Climing TrumpetFlower.
This Kind, when old, has large rough stems, which send out many trailing
branches, putting out roots at their joints, thereby attaching themselves to
any neighboring support, and rising sometimes to the height of forty or fifty
feet. The branches are garnished with winged leaves placed opposite, which are
generally composed of four pair of small leaves, terminated by an odd one. The
flowers are produced at the ends of the shoots of the same year, in large
bunches; they have long swelling tubes, shaped somewhat like a trumpet, and are
of an orange color, inclining to red; and succeeded by large pods full of
winged seeds.

4. BIGNONIA sempervirens. Ever-green Bignonia, or Yellow Jasmine.
This kind resembles the second so much as to require no further description.

CALLICARPA.
CALLICARPA.
Class 4. Order 1. Tetrandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, bell-shaped: at the mouth four-parted and erect.

The Corolla is of one petal, tubulous: The border four-cleft, obtuse and
spreading.

The Filaments are four, thread-form, twice the length of the corolla. The
Antherae ovate and incumbent.

The Germen is roundish. The Style thread form, thicker above. The Stigma
thickish and obtuse.

The Seed-vessel is a berry, globose and smooth.

The Seeds are four, small, callous, oval, compressed, some what unequal on one
side, but a little hallowed as if eaten on the other.

There is but one Species of this Genus, viz.

CALLICARPA americana. Carolinian Shrubby Cailicarpa.
This shrub rises from three to five feet high, with but slender stems, sending
out many branches from the sides, which are wooly or downy when young,
garnished with oval, spear-shaped leaves, placed opposite on pretty long
footstalks. The flowers come out in whorls round the stalks, sitting very
close; they are small and tubulous, cut into four obtuse segments at the top,
which expand and are of a deep purple color; these are succeeded by soft
succulent berries, which are of a deep purple color when full ripe, each
enclosing four hard seeds. This is a native of Carolina and will not endure
much cold.

CALYCANTHUS.
CAROLINIAN ALLSPICE.
Class 12. Order 5. Icosandria Polygynia.
THE Calyx is of one leaf, thickened, squarrose, somewhat top-shaped,
truncated, almost closed above; and permanent.

The Corolla is composed of many leaves, which are oblong, colored, of thick
and fleshy consistence, longer than the calyx, somewhat spreading, but chiefly
lightly incurved their whole length; inserted in the truncated margin of the
calyx, disposed in several series or rows circularly, of unequal length and
deciduous.

The Filaments are many, short awl-shaped and inserted in the top of the calyx;
the exterior of which, have oblong furrowed Antherae adjoined to their apex;
the interior barren and closing the calyx.

The Germen are many, oblong, villose, and hid within the calyx.

The Styles many, joined in a medullary column and protruding in the center of
the barren filaments, which serve for its defense.

The Seed-vessel none but the calyx, thickened, much enlarged, berry'd, and
somewhat inverse egg-shaped.

The Seeds are many, oval, somewhat villose, and surrounded longitudinally with
a future.

We have but one Species of this Genus, viz.

CALYCANTHUS floridus. Carolinian Allspice.
This delightful sweet-scented shrub, grows naturally in Carolina, and rises
from four to six or eight feet high, sending out many small branches, which are
placed opposite and garnished with oval entire leaves; which are likewise
opposite. The flowers are produced singly, at the extremities of the same
year's shoots; they are of a sullen or dark purple color, and when somewhat
expanded, diffuse to a considerable distance, a very agreeable scent, scarcely
distinguishable from that of ripe strawberries. It flowers in May, and by
succession till almost harvest. The flowers are succeeded by large, somewhat
oval, rough, swelling capsules, of two inches or more in length, and one in
diameter, containing many oval brown seeds.

CARPINUS.
The HORNBEAM-TREE.
Class 21. Order 8. Monoecia Polyandria.
THE Male Flowers are disposed in a cylindrical Katkin.

The Calyx is a common Katkin loosely imbricated on all sides; composed of
scales which are uniflorous, ovate, concave, acute, and ciliated.

The Corolla is none.

The Filaments are for the most part ten, very small. The Antherae are twin,
compressed, villose at the apex, and two valved.

The Female Flowers are disposed in a long Katkin, on the same plant.

The Calyx is a common Katkin loosely imbricated, consisting of Scales which
are lance-shaped, villose, reflexed at the apex, and one flowered.

The Corolla is cup-form, of one leaf, six cleft, with two divisions larger.

The Germen are two, very short, each having two Styles, which are long,
capillary and colored. The Stigmas are simple.

The Seed-vessel none. The Katkin being enlarged and containing a seed at the
base of each scale.

The Seed is a nut, ovate and angled.

Obs. The Seeds of the Carpinus Betulus are contained within the base of the
concave calycine scale: but of the Ostrya within the inflated scale.

The Species are, with us,

1. CARPINUS Betulus virginiana. American Hornbeam.
This grows common by most of our river and creek sides, rising with a strong,
woody, somewhat angular stem, to the height of ten or fifteen feet; spreading
into many branches, with oval, pointed leaves, sawed on their edges. The
flowers are produced at the ends of the young shoots, in loose, leaffy katkins,
and are succeeded by small, hard, angular seeds.

2. CARPINUS Ostrya. The Hop-Hornbeam.
This tree often grows larger and more upright than the former, the wood is
tougher, the branches sewer and more erect. The leaves somewhat resemble those
of the Elm. The male Katkins are produced at the extremity of the branches,
they are set the preceding fall, and remain all winter. The female flowers are
produced in inflated chaffy katkins, much resembling a hop, from whence it
acquired its name. There is a variety of this called the Virginian flowering
Hop-Hornbeam, which I have not seen.

CASSINE.
CASSINE, or SOUTH SEA TEA-TREE.
Class 5. Order 3. Pentandria Trigynia.
THE Empalement is five-parted, beneath, very small, obtuse, and permanent.

The Corolla is five-parted and spreading; the divisions are somewhat ovate,
obtuse, and large than the calyx.

The Filaments are five, awl-shaped and spreading. The Anthere are simple.

The Germen is above and conical. The Style none. The Stigmas three, reflexed
and obtuse.

The Seed-vessel is a berry, roundish, three-cell'd and umbilicated with the
Stigmas.

The Seeds are solitary and somewhat ovate.

The Species are,

CASSINE Paragua. Ever-green Cassine, Yapon, or South Sea Tea-tree.
This grows naturally in Carolina and some parts of Virginia, but chiefly near
the sea; and rises to the height of ten or twelve feet, sending out branches
from the ground upward, garnished with Ever-green spear-shaped leaves, placed
alternately: they are of a deep green color, of a thick consistence and a
little notched on their edges. The flowers are produced in close whorls, round
the branches, at the footstalks of the leaves; they are white, and are
succeeded by red berries, with three cells, each containing a single seed.

CEANOTHUS.
The NEW JERSEY TEA-TREE.
Class 5. Order 1. Pentandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, top-shaped: the border is five-parted, acute,
and incurved; and permanent.

The Corolla is composed of five petals, equal, roundish, hooksacked,
compressed, very obtuse, spreading, less than the calyx, with claws the length
of the petal, rising from the incisions of the calyx.

The Filaments are five, awl-shaped, erect, opposite to the petals, and longer
than the corolla. The Antherae are roundish.

The Germen is three cornered. The Style is cylindrical, half three-cleft, and
the length of the Stamina. The Stigma obtuse.

The Seed-vessel is a berry, which is dry, three fruited, threecell'd, obtuse,
and set with tubercles.

The Seeds are solitary and ovate.

The Species with us, but one, viz.

CEANOTHUS americanus. American Ceanothus, or New Jersey Tea-tree.
This is a low shrub, growing common in most parts of North America; seldom
rising above four or five feet high, and sending out branches on every side
from the ground upward, which are garnished with oval, pointed leaves, having
three longitudinal veins, running from the foot-stalk to the point, diverging
from each other in the middle; they are placed opposite, and are of a light
green color. The flowers are produced at the extremity of the shoots, in a
close kind of Thyrsus; they are of a white color and when in bloom make a fine
appearance. A decoction of the roots of this shrub is esteemed a certain cure,
not only in slight Gonorrhaea's, which it stops in two or three days, without
any bad consequences; but also in the most inveterate Venereal complaints. The
leaves are dried and used by some as a substitute for Bohea Tea, from which it
acquired its name.

CELASTRUS.
The STAFF-TREE.
Class 5. Order 1. Pentandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, half-five cleft, plane, and very small: the
divisions are obtuse and unequal.

The Corolla has five petals, ovate, spreading, sessile, equal and reflexed at
their margins.

The Filaments are five, awl-shaped and the length of the corolla. The Antherae
are very small.

The Germen is very small, immersed in the receptacle, which is large, plane,
and marked with ten streaks. The Style is awlshaped and shorter than the
stamina. The Stigma is obtuse, and three-cleft.

The Seed-vessel is a Capsule, colored, ovate, obtusely three cornered,
gibbous, three cell'd, and three valv'd.

The Seeds are few, ovate, colored, smooth, and half covered with an Arillus,
four parted at the mouth, unequal and colored.

The Species but one, with us, viz.

CELASTRUS Scandens. American Climing Staff-tree.
This grows naturally in many parts of NorthAmerica, rising with a twining
woody stem to the height of ten or fifteen feet when supported, sending out
many slender flexible branches, clothed with oblong pointed leaves, a little
sawed on their edges. The flowers come out from the sides of the branches in
loose bunches; they are of an herbaceous color, and are succeeded by roundish
threecornered capsules, of a pale, or yellowish red color when ripe; which
spread open in three parts, disclosing their seeds after the manner of the
Spindle Tree. The seeds are hard, oval and covered with a thin red pulp. It
makes a very fine appearance when covered with ripe fruit.

CELTIS.
The NETTLE-TREE.
Class 23. Order 1. Polygamia Monoecia.
THE Hermaprodite flowers are solitary and superior.

The Empalement is one-leafed, and five-parted; the divisions ovate, spreading
and withering.

The Corolla is wanting.

The Filaments are five, very short, bid by the Antherae, but after the
discharge of the farina, longer. The Antherae are oblong, thickish,
quadrangular, and four-furrowed.

The Germen is ovate, sharp-pointed, and the length of calyx. The Styles are
two, spreading, variously inflexed, awl-shaped, very long, and downy on all
sides. The Stigmas are simple.

The Seed-vessel is a drupe, roundish and of one cell.

The Seed is a nut, which is roundish.

The Male flowers are in the same plant, and inferior.

The Empalement is six-parted, otherwise as the Hermaphrodite.

The Corolla is wanting.

The Filaments are as in the Hermaphrodite.

The Species with us, but one, viz.

CELTIS occidentalis. American Yellow-fruited Nettle-tree.
This grows naturally in many parts of NorthAmerica. It delights in a rich,
moist soil, in which it becomes a large tree, rising with a straight stem, the
bark of which, in young trees, is sometimes smooth and of a dark color, but as
they advance becomes rougher and of a lighter color. The branches are set
thick on every side, and garnished with oblique oval leaves, ending in points
and sawed on their edges. The flowers come out opposite to the leaves, upon
pretty long footstalks; they are small and make but little appearance, and are
succeeded by round, hard berries, about the size of a small pea, of a yellow
color and sweet taste when ripe. The juice of the fruit is said to be
astringent and to give ease in violent Dysenteries.

CEPHALANTHUS.
The BUTTON-TREE.
Class 4. Order 1. Tetrandria Monogynia.
THE Common Empalement is none, but a globose receptacle, collecting many
florets into a little head.

The Proper Empalement is one leaved, funnel-form and angular; the border
four-cleft.

The Universal Corolla is equal. The Proper of one petal, funnelform and acute.

The Filaments are four, inserted in the corolla, and shorter than the border.
The Antherae are globose.

The Germen is beneath. The Style longer than the corolla. The Stigma globose.

The Seedvessel none.

The Seeds are solitary, long, lessened at the base, pyramidal and wooly.

The Common Receptacle is round and villose.

The Species but one, viz.

CEPHALANTHUS occidentalis. Button-tree.
This shrub grows pretty common by creek sides and ponds, rising to the height
of six or eight feet; growing very crooked, and sending out several branches,
which grow opposite. The leaves are also placed opposite and often, upon young
shoots, by three's; they are near three inches long and one and a quarter
broad, having a strong vein running longitudinally through them, they are of a
light green and their footstalks change to a reddish color next the branches.
The branches are terminated with globular heads, composed of many small
flowers, of a whitish color.

CERCIS.
The JUDAS TREE.
Class 10. Order 1. Decandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, very short, bell-shaped, gibbous beneath, and
melliferous: the mouth is five toothed, erect and obtuse.

The Corolla is ten petal'd, inserted in the calyx, and counterfeiting a
papilionaceous corolla.

The Wings, are two petals, bent back, and affixed by long claws.

The Standard, one petal, roundish, clawed, under and shorter than the wings.

The Keel, two petals, joining in a heart-shaped figure, including the parts of
fructification and affixed by claws.

The Nectarium, a gland, style form, under the germen.

The Filaments are ten, distinct, awl-shaped, declined, of which four are
longer; and covered. The Antherae are oblong, incumbent, and arising.

The Germen is linear-lanced and pedicel'd. The Style is of the length and
situation of the stamina. The Stigma is obtuse and arising.

The Seed-vessel is a legumen or pod, which is oblong, acute, oblique pointed,
and of one cell.

The Seeds are several, roundish and joined to the superior future.

The Species with us, but one, viz.

CERCIS canadensis. Red-bud, or Judas Tree.
This grows naturally in several parts of NorthAmerica, rising to the height of
ten or fifteen feet, with a pretty strong trunk covered with a darkish colored
bark; dividing upwards into several irregular branches, furnished with
heart-shaped leaves, smooth upon their upper surface and edges, but a little
downy underneath, having pretty long footstalks. The flowers come out upon the
branches upon all sides, many arising from the same point, with short
footstalks; they are of a fine red color and coming out before the leaves,
make a beautiful appearance. There is said to be a variety of this in Carolina,
with small flowers.

CHIONANTHUS.
The SNOW-DROP, or FRINGE TREE.
Class 2. Order 1. Diandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, four-parted, erect, sharp pointed and permanent.

The Corolla is one petal'd and funnel-form. The tube is very short, spreading,
and the length of the caylx. The border with four divisions, which are linear,
erect, acute, oblique, and very long.

The Filaments are two, very short, awl-shaped and inserted in the tube. The
Antherae are heart-shaped, and erect.

The Germen is ovate. The Style simple and the length of the calyx. The Stigma
is obtuse and three-cleft.

The Seed-vessel is a drupe, roundish or oval and of one cell.

The Seed a striated (...).

Obs. The number of stamina is often three or four.

We have but one Species in America, viz.

CHIONANTHUS virginica. Virginian Snow-drop Tree.
This shrub grows naturally in several places in North America, in a moist
soil; rising to the height of fifteen or twenty feet, spreading into many
branches, covered with a light colored bark. The leaves are large, oblong and
entire, placed nearly opposite. The flowers are produced toward the extremity
of the shoots of the former year, upon short, leaffy, common footstalks; at the
bosom of the leaves of which, the proper footstalks come out, and are divided
for the most part into three parts, but often more; each sustaining one small
flower, with four very long, narrow, white petals; which, when fully grown,
make a beautiful appearance: these are succeeded by oval berries, of a livid
blackish color when ripe, each containing one hard, oblong, pointed seed. The
bark of the root of this shrub, bruised and applied to fresh wounds, is
accounted by the natives a specific, in healing them without suppuration.

CLETHRA.
CLETHRA.
Class 10. Order 1. Decandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, five-parted; the leaves are ovate, concave,
erect and permanent.

The Corolla consists of five petals, oblong, broader without, a little
spreading, and longer than the calyx.

The Filaments are ten, awl-shaped, and the length of the corolla. The Antherae
oblong-erect, gaping at the apex.

The Germen is roundish. The Style is thread-form, erect, permanent, and
increasing. The Stigma is three-cleft.

The Seed-vessel is a capsule, roundish, covered with the calyx, three-cell'd
and three-valv'd.

The Seeds are many and angled.

There is but one Species of this Genus, viz.

CLETHRA alnifolia. Alder leaved Clethra.
This shrub grows common in Maryland, Virginia, and Carolina, in moist ground
and by rivulets; rising to the height of six or eight feet, dividing into many
branches, clothed with wedge-shape, oval, veined leaves, sawed on their edges,
resembling those of the Alder but longer; which are placed alternately. The
flowers are produced at the extremity of the branches, in long close bunches;
they are of a white color, and when in full bloom make a very fine appearance.

CORNUS.
The CORNEL, or DOGBERRY-TREE.
Class 4. Order 1. Tetrandria Monogynia.
THE Calyx consists of an Involucrum of four leaves, many flowered: the leaves
ovate, colored, and deciduous; the opposite interior somewhat longer and
narrower.

An Empalement, very small, four-toothed, above and deciduous.

The Corolla consists of four petals, oblong, acute, plane, and smaller than
the Involucrum.

The Filaments are four, awl-shaped, erect, and longer than the corolla. The
Antherae are roundish and incumbent.

The Germen is roundish and beneath. The Style filiform and the length of the
corolla. The Stigma is obtuse.

The Seed-vessel is a drupe, or stone-fruit, roundish and umbilicated.

The Seed, a nut, heart-shaped, or oblong, and two cell'd.

Obs. The Involucrum is wanting in most of our Species.

The Species are, with us,

1. CORNUS alterna. Alternate branched, or Female Virginian Dogwood.
This grows to the height of twelve or fifteen feet, dividing upwards into many
branches, which are covered with bark of a striated or streaked appearance. The
small branches are placed alternate, bending at each division. The leaves are
entire, oval, sharp-pointed, and much veined. The flowers are produced in
clusters at the extremity of the branches, and are succeeded by roundish
berries of a dark purple color when ripe. The small branches being alternate,
afford a distinguishing mark for this species.

2. CORNUS candidissima. Swamp American Dogwood.
This shrub grows to the height of six or eight feet, mostly in moist or swampy
places; and is covered with a whitish bark. The branches are placed opposite,
and also the leaves, which are lance-shaped and pointed, and of a whitish
color. The flowers are produced at the extremity of the branches, in clusters,
and are succeeded by whitish succulent berries.

3. CURNUS florida. Male Virginian Dogwood.
This rises with a strong stem to the height of twelve or fifteen feet,
dividing into many spreading branches, which are sometimes placed opposite, but
often by four's, arising from opposite points and regularly disposed. The
leaves are oval, pointed, veined and entire. The flowers are produced at the
extremity of the small branches, in clusters; having a common involucrum of
four large white leaves, which are generally end-bitten and a little colored
at their extremities, and one opposite pair, rather longer and narrower than
the other. The flowers within are succeeded by oblong, red berries. This
flowers in May and is deservedly ranked amongst the beautiful flowering shrubs.
The bark of this kind has been used with some success as a substitute for the
Peruvian Bark. And to its top, regular disposed shoots, our spinsters are often
indebted for their distaffs.

4. CORNUS sanguinea. American Red-rod Cornus.
This grows in a moist soil, to the height of eight or ten feet, generally many
stems arising from the same root. The bark of the young shoots is very smooth,
and of a beautiful dark red color. The branches are placed opposite, and also
the leaves, which much resemble the first and third kinds above described. The
flowers are produced in clusters at the ends of the branches, of a whitish
color; and are succeeded by succulent berries of a bluish color when ripe.

CORYLUS.
The HAZEL, or NUT-TREE.
Class 21, Order 8. Monoecia Polyandria.
THE Male flowers are disposed in a long Katkin.

The Calyx, a common Katkin, imbricated on all sides, and cylindrical;
consisting of Scales, which are uniflorous, narrowed at the base, at the apex
broader, more obtuse, inflexed and three-cleft: the middle divisions of equal
length, but twice the width of and covering the rest.

The Corolla is wanting.

The Filaments are eight, very short, joined to the interior side of the
calycine scale. The Antherae are oblong-ovate, shorter than the calyx, and
erect.

The Female flowers are remote from the Male in the same plant, sitting close
and included in a bud.

The Empalement is of two leaves, coriaceous, torn at the margin, erect, and
the length of the fruit; at the time of florescence, scarce manifest for its
smallness.

The Corolla none.

The Germen is roundish and very small. The Styles two, bristly, colored, and
much longer than the calyx. The Stigmas are simple.

The Seed-vessel none.

The Seed, a nut somewhat ovate, shaved at the base, somewhat compressed and
pointed at the apex.

The Species with us are,

1. CORYLUS americana. American Hazelnut.
This grows very common in a rich, loose, moist soil; spreading far by its
roots, and rising at first with a simple, erect stem; which, as it grows old,
is divided into a few irregular branches, clothed with oval, pointed leaves,
sawed on their edges. The Male katkins are produced at the ends of the
branches, and the Female parts a little beneath them, often many together, at
other times singly; and are succeeded by seed-vessels, roundish at the base,
but lengthened out into a leassy, fringed expansion, parted at the extremity;
each containing one nut.

2. CORYLUS cornuta. Dwarf Filbert, or Cuckold-nut.
This kind much resembles the other, except in size, seldom growing above three
or four feet high; and also in having its nuts single upon the branches, and
their husks or seed-vessels smaller and lengthened out into a point or horn,
and closely embracing its nuts.

CRATAEGUS.
The WILD SERVICE-TREE.
Class 12. Order 2. Icosandria Digynia.
THE Empalement is one leaved, concave-spreading, five-toothed and permanent.

The Corolla is of five petals, roundish, concave, fitting close and inserted
in the calyx.

The Filaments are twenty, awl-shaped, and inserted in the calyx.

The Antherae are roundish.

The Germen is beneath. The Styles are two, thread-form, and erect. The Stigmas
are headed.

The Seed-vessel is a berry, fleshy, roundish, and umbilicated.

The Seeds are two, longish, distinct and cartilaginous.

Botanical writers enumerate several Species of this Genus, native of these
states; but I believe, upon more strict examination, they will chiefly be found
to belong, with more propriety, to the Mespilus. See Mespilus.

CUPRESSUS.
The CYPRESS TREE.
Class 21. Order 9. Monoecia Monodelphia.
The Male flowers are collected in an ovate Katkin.

The Calyx, a common ovate Katkin, compounded with sparsed flowers, consisting
of Scales which are uniflorous, roundish, sharp-pointed on the fore part,
targetted, opposite and in number about twenty.

The Corolla none.

The Filaments are wanting; but four Antherae are joined, in their stead, to
each scale of the Katkin.

The Female flowers are collected in a roundish cone, on the same plant.

The Calyx, a common cone, which is compounded of from eight to ten florets,
consisting of Scales, which are uniflorous, opposite, ovate, unequal beneath and
gaping.

The Corolla none.

The Germen is scarce observable. In the place, perhaps, of Styles, there are
numerous dots within each calycine scale, which are truncated, and concave at
the apex.

The Seed-vessel, none but the globose cone, which is shut, but gaping with
orbiculate, angled, and targetted scales.

The Seed is a nut, which is angled, sharp-pointed, and small.

The Species with us, are,

1. CUPRESSUS disticha. Virginian deciduous Cypress-Tree.
This grows naturally in swampy, low ground; and becomes a lofty tree, of
seventy or eighty feet in height, and three or four feet in diameter; dividing,
toward the top, into many branches, clothed with small linear leaves, coming
out upon all sides, yet inclining to but two sides of the small branches; and
falling off in the autumn. The cones, of this kind, are roundish and near an
inch in diameter. The timber is valuable for many uses, affording great
quantities of boards, shingles, etc.

2. CUPRESSUS Thyoides. Maryland Blue-berried Cypress.
This, by some means, has obtained the name of a dwarf, yet it becomes a large
tree, nearly equal in height and diameter to the former. The branches are
covered with small ever-green leaves, much resembling those of the Arbor Vitae.
The cones are about the size of Juniper Berries, a little angular and having
many cells. The timber of this is softer than the other kind and applied to
more general use, being durable and not liable to be eaten by worms; it affords
excellent planks, etc. for ship building; also posts, rails, boards, shingles,
etc. etc. and to it our dairy women are indebted for tubs, pails, churns, etc.

DIOSPYROS.
The DATE PLUM, or PERSIMMON TREE.
Class 23. Order 2. Polygamia Dioecia.
THE Hermaphrodite female.

The Empalement is composed of one leaf, four-cleft, large, obtuse and
permanent.

The Corolla, of one petal, pitcher-shape, larger, and four-cleft; the
divisions acute and spreading.

The Filaments are eight, bristly, short and lightly inserted in the
receptacle. The Antherae are oblong and effoete.

The Germen is roundish. The Style one, half four-cleft, permanent and longer
than the stamina. The Stigmas are obtuse and two-cleft.

The Seed-vessel is a berry, which is globous, large, eight-cell'd, and sitting
on the large spreading calyx.

The Seeds are solitary, roundish, compressed, and very hard.

The Male in distinct plants.

The Empalement consists of one leaf, four-cleft, acute, erect, and small.

The Corolla of one petal, pitcher-shape, coriaceous, four-cornered and four
cleft: the divisions are roundish and revolute.

The Filaments are eight, very short and inserted in the receptacle. The
Antherae are double, long, and acute; the interior shortest.

The (...), is the rudiment of a germen.

The Species with us, but one, viz.

DIOSPYROS virginiana. Virginian Persimmon Tree.
This grows naturally in moist clayey ground, in Pennsylvania and Maryland, as
well as Virginia; rising to the height of twenty feet or more, sending out many
shortish branches, garnished with entire, oblong, pointed leaves; the flowers
are produced upon the small branches, making but little appearance, and are
succeeded by large, globular or oblong fruit, which when fully ripe has a sweet
agreeable taste. A full grown tree will often yield two bushels or more of
fruit, which upon distillation will afford as many gallons of Spirits, allowed
to be equal in taste and flavor to West India Rum. Our countrymen have not
enough attended to this, but in some places they brew of them a very good Beer.
There appears to be varieties of this, some with early ripe large fruit, others
with smaller and late ripe.

DIRCA.
LEATHER WOOD.
Class 8. Order 1. Octandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is wanting.

The Corolla is one petal'd and clubb'd. The tube is more bellied above. The
border none, the margin unequal.

The Filaments are eight, capillary, inserted in the middle of the tube, and
longer than the corolla. The Antherae are roundish and erect.

The Germen is ovate, with an oblique top. The Style is threadform, longer than
the stamina and curved at the top. The Stigma is simple.

The Seed-vessel is a berry of one cell.

The Seed is one.

There is but one Species of this Genus, viz.

DIRCA palustris. Virginian Marsh Leatherwood.
This is a low shrub, growing in moist shady places, seldom rising more than
three or four feet high, spreading into a head, with many small and very
flexible branches, covered with a light colored bark, and clothed with oval
smooth leaves, of a pale green color. The flowers are produced at the extreme
ends of the former year's shoots; they are of an herbaceous color and make but
little appearance, but are succeeded by oval berries, changing somewhat
yellowish when ripe.

EPICAEA.
TRAILING ARBUTUS.
Class 10. Order 1. Decandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is double, approximated, and permanent.

The exterior consists of three leaves, which are ovate-lanced, and sharp
pointed; the exterior largest.

The interior is five parted and erect; a little longer than the exterior: the
leaf-lets are lanced and sharp pointed.

The Corolla is composed of one pitcher-form petal. The tube is cylindrical,
rather longer than the calyx, and hairy within. The border is spreading and
five-parted, with ovate-oblong lobes.

The Filaments are ten, thread-form, the length of the tube and affixed to the
base of the corolla. The Antherae are oblong and acute.

The Germen is globose and villous. The Style is thread-form, and the length of
the stamina. The Stigma is obtuse and somewhat five-cleft.

The Seed-vessel is a capsule, somewhat roundish, depressed, five sided, five
cell'd, and five valv'd.

The Seeds are many and roundish. The receptable large and five-parted.

There is but one Species of this Genus, viz.

EPIGAEA repens. Trailing Arbutus.
This grows naturally upon northern hills, or mountains, with trailing shrubby
stalks, putting out roots at their joints. The leaves are oblong, rough and
waved on their edges. The flowers are produced at the ends of the branches, in
loose panicles, and are of a white color, mixed with red, dividing at the top
into five parts, and spreading open in form of a star.

EUONYMUS.
The SPINDLE TREE.
Class 5. Order 1. Pentandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is composed of one leaf, five-parted, and plane: the divisions
are roundish and concave.

The Corolla consists of five petals, ovate, plane, spreading and longer than
the calyx.

The Filaments are five, awl-shaped, erect, shorter than the corolla, and
placed on the germen as a receptacle. The Antherae are twin.

The Germen is sharp pointed. The Style is short and simple. The Stigma is
obtuse.

The Seed-vessel is a capsule, succulent, colored, pentagonal, with five
angles, five cells and five valves.

The Seeds are solitary, ovate and covered with a berry'd Arillus.

Obs. In some species one fifth part of the fructification is taken away.

The Species with us, are,

1. EUONYMUS carolinensis. Carolinian Spindle Tree.
This shrub grows to the height of eight or ten feet, dividing into many
opposite branches, the young shoots are somewhat quadrangular and marked
longitudinally, with green stripes. The leaves are placed opposite, and are
oval, sharp pointed, and finely and slightly sawed on their edges, of a deep
green color. The footstalks of the flowers come out from the bosom of the
leaves of the young shoots, and are generally divided into three parts toward
their extremities, the middle division sustaining one, and the two side ones,
each three flowers; having four deep purple colored petals, expanding in form
of a cross, and four stamina; these are succeeded by angular furrowed seed
vessels, of a beautiful pale red color when ripe, making a fine appearance
after the leaves are fallen off.

2. EUONYMUS latifolius. Broad-leaved Spindle Tree.
This shrub very much resembles the former, except the leaves being broader and
longer, and of a paler green color, turning reddish before they fall off. The
seed-vessels are rather larger and rounder at the corners or angles, and of
somewhat paler color, as are also the flowers.

3. EUONYMUS sempervirens. Ever-green Spindle Tree.
This is of smaller growth than either of the former, seldom rising above six
or seven feet, and dividing into many opposite branches, toward the top, which
are of a greener color, and more angular than the other kinds, and garnished
with narrower leaves, of a closer texture. The flowers are produced in manner
of the former, except each footstalk sustaining generally but three flowers,
having five petals, which are of a paler color, and rounder than either of the
former; and are succeeded by roundish capsules closely set with small
protuberances, turning of a fine red color when ripe, and opening into four or
five parts, disclosing its seeds hanging by fine white threads. This makes a
very beautiful appearance in autumn when its fruit are ripe; and from their red
appearance obtained the name of the Burning Bush. The young plants retain their
leaves all winter. All the species grow naturally in moist, shaded places.

FAGUS.
The BEECH-TREE.
Class 21. Order 8. Monoecia Polyandria.
THE Male flowers are affixed to an Amentaceous receptacle.

The Calyx is an Empalement of one leaf, bell-shaped, and five-cleft.

The Corolla none.

The Filaments are many (about twelve) the length of the calyx, and bristly.
The Antherae are oblong.

The Female flowers are contained in buds upon the same plant.

The Calyx, an Empalement of one leaf, four-toothed, erect and acute.

The Corolla none.

The Germen is covered by the calyx. The Styles are three, awlshaped. The
Stigmas are simple and reflexed.

The Seed vessel is a capsule (formerly the calyx) which is roundish, large,
set round with soft spines; with one cell and four valves.

The Seeds are two nuts, which are ovate, triangular, three valved and
sharp-pointed.

Obs. The Male flowers of the Beech are disposed in a globular form; those of
the Chestnut in a cylindrical.

We have but one Species of this Genus, besides the Chestnut and Chinquopin,
which are somewhat improperly joined with it, viz.

FAGUS Sylvatica atro-punicea. American Beech Tree.
This grows naturally in low, bottom grounds, by river sides, rising sometimes
to the height of forty or fifty feet, and to fifteen or eighteen inches in
diameter, generally sending out many long branches, garnished with very thin,
oval, spear-shaped leaves, sawed on their edges, and remaining late upon the
branches. The nuts are eaten by swine. The wood is hard and close grained, and
used for making lasts, joiner's tools, etc.

FAGUS-CASTANEA.
The CHESTNUT TREE.
THE Characters are nearly the same of the Beech, except the Male flowers being
disposed in cylindrical katkins. The Styles more in number and bristly. The
Capsules much larger, round, and set very thick with long prickly Spines;
containing from one to four or five, but generally two or three nuts, filled
with sweet kernel.

The Species of Chestnut, with us, are,

1. FAGUS-CASTANEA dentata. American Chestnut Tree.
This often becomes a large tree, growing to the height of sixty or eighty
feet, and to four or five feet in diameter, sending out but few branches,
garnished with long spear-shaped leaves, toothed or notched on their edges. The
timber is used much for rails, splitting free and out-lasting most of our Oaks.
The kernel of the nuts are dried and used by some as a substitute for Coffee.
The wood is also burnt into coals for the use of blacksmiths, etc. but not much
esteemed for common fuel.

2. FAGUS-CASTANEA pumila. Dwarf Chestnut Tree, or Chinquepin.
This seldom rises above eight, ten, or twelve feet, otherwise much resembling
the Chestnut in the appearance of its branches and leaves. Its fruit capsules
are small, and generally contain but one conical shaped nut. It grows naturally
in a light gravelly soil.

FOTHERGILLA.
FOTHERGILLA.
Class 13. Order 2. Polyandria Digynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, hairy, and five-toothed at the margin.

The Corolla is wanting.

The Filaments from sixteen to eighteen, inserted in the calyx, long, incurved
and lessened toward the base. The Antherae are minute.

The Germen is oblong and villose, ending in two acute Styles.

The Seed-vessel is a capsule, oblong, of two cells and covered by the calyx.

The Seeds are single and oblong.

The Species with us,

FOTHERGILLA Gardeni. Carolinian Fothergilla.
This small, but beautiful flowering shrub grows naturally in Carolina, on the
borders of savannahs, or near ponds of water; spreading much by its roots. The
stalks are slender, rising to the height of two or three feet, generally
several from one root, with small, alternate, divaricated branches. The leaves
are oval, somewhat toothed toward the apex, and placed alternate. The flowers
are produced in spikes terminating the stalks; they are sessile, and each
furnished with a bractea or floral leaf, which is ovate, rough externally,
longer than the empalement and sitting close at their base; they are produced
early in the spring and being thick set, make a beautiful appearance with their
long, snowy white stamina. The fruit or seed-vessel very much resembles that of
the Hamamalis or Witch Hazel, but is much smaller.

This, in some late Catalogues, has been called Youngsonia, in honor of
William Young, Botanist, of Pennsylvania; but by Dr. Linnaeus, Fothergilla in
honor of the late Dr. Fothergill of London. It was first sent to Europe, from
Carolina, by John Bartram, to his friend P. Collinson, by the title of Gardenia.

FRANKLINIA.
FRANKLINIA.
Class 16. Order 5. Monadelphia Polyandria.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, five-cleft; the divisions roundish.

The Corolla consists of five petals, large, spreading, roundish, narrowed
toward the claw, and joined at the base.

The Filaments are numerous, awl-shaped, joined beneath in a cylinder, and
inserted in the corolla. The Antherae are twin.

The Germen is roundish, lightly furrowed. The Style cylindrical and longer
than the stamina. The Stigma obtuse and rayed.

The Seed-vessel, a roundish nut with five cells.

The Seeds are wedge-form, and several in each cell.

The Species one, viz.

FRANKLINIA alatamaha. Franklinia.
(Bartram's Catalogue.)
This beautiful flowering, tree-like shrub, rises with an erect trunk to the
height of about twenty feet; dividing into branches, alternately disposed. The
leaves are oblong, narrowed toward the base, sawed on their edges, placed
alternately, and sitting close to the branches. The flowers are produced
toward the extremity of the branches, sitting close at the bosom of the
leaves; they are often five inches in diameter when fully expanded; composed of
five large, roundish, spreading petals, ornamented in the center with a tuft or
crown of gold colored stamina; and possessed with the fragrance of a China
Orange. This newly discovered, rare, and elegant flowering shrub, was first
observed by John Bartram when on botanical researches, on the Alatamaha river
in Georgia, Anno 1760; but was not brought into Pennsylvania till about fifteen
years after, when his son William Bartram, employed in the like pursuits,
revisited the place where it had been before observed, and had the pleasing
prospect of beholding it in its native soil, possessed with all its floral
charms; and bearing ripe seeds at the same time; some of which he collected and
brought home, and raised several plants therefrom, which in four years time
flowered, and in one year after perfected ripe seeds.

It seems nearly allied to the Gordonia, to which it has, in some late
Catalogues, been joined; but William Bartram, who first introduced it,
believing it to be a new Genus, has chosen to honor it with the name of that
patron of sciences, and truly great and distinguished character, Dr. Benjamin
Franklin. The trivial name is added from the river, where alone it has been
observed to grow naturally. It delights in a loose, sandy and moist soil.

FRAXINUS.
The ASII-TREE.
Class 23. Order 2. Polygamia Dioecia.

THE Flowers are Hermaphrodite and Female on different trees.

The Hermaphrodite:

The Calyx none; or an Empalement of one leaf, four-parted, erect, acute, and
small.

The Corolla none; or of four petals, linear, long, acute, and erect.

The Filaments are two, erect and shorter than the corolla. The Antherae are
erect, oblong, and four surrowed.

The Germen is ovate and compressed. The Style cylindrical and erect. The
Stigma thickish and two cleft.

The Seed-vessel none besides the crust of the seed.

The Seed is lanced, compressed-membranaceous and of one cell.

The Female are the same in every part except wanting the stamina.

The Species are,

1. FRAXINUS americana. Carolinian or Red Ash.
This grows to the height of twenty or thirty feet, dividing into several
branches, the small ones of which are generally opposite; the leaves are
composed of three or four pair of lobes, terminated by an odd one, which are
egg-shaped and pointed, their upper surface of a light green color, their
under covered with short white downy hairs. The seeds are broad and of a light
color.

2. FRAXINUS alba. American White Ash.
This tree grows sometimes to the height of forty or fifty feet, and to
eighteen inches or more in diameter. It grows much after the manner of the
former, only the leaves are broader, and the seeds narrower. The timber of this
is used much by Wheelwrights, Chaise-makers, etc. for making shafts, rimming of
wheels, etc.

3. FRAXINUS Nigra. Black Ash.
This kind grows in moist places, rising to the height of thirty feet or more,
covered with a rough, lightish colored bark, and sending out but few branches.
The leaves are chiefly produced at the ends of the branches, and are generally
composed of four pair of lobes, and an odd one, which are shaped like those of
the other kinds, but are smaller and finely sawed on their edges. The seeds or
keys are broad and flat, and of equal width their whole length.

4. FRAXINUS pennsylvanica. Pennsylvanian Sharp-keyed Ash.
This kind often grows to the height of thirty feet or more, and is generally
thick set with branches toward the top, having leaves much resembling the
White Ash. The seeds grow in large panicles, thick set upon the sides of the
branches, near their extremities: they are longer and narrower than any of the
other kinds, almost terminating in a point at their base. This also affords a
valuable wood, which is used for the same purposes as that of the White Ash.

The inside bark and keys of Ash, are accounted good to promote urine.

GAULTHERIA.
GAULTHERIA, or MOUNTAIN TEA.
Class 10. Order 1. Decandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is double, approximate and permanent.

The exterior two leaved and shorter: the leaves semiovate, concave and obtuse.

The interior one leaved, five-cleft and bell-shaped: the fegments semi-ovate.

The Corolla is monopetalous, ovate and half five cleft: the border small and
revolute.

A Nectarium of ten corpuscules, which are awl-shaped, erect, very short, and
surrounding the germen within the stamina.

The Filaments are ten, awl-shaped, incurved, shorter than the corolla, and
inserted in the receptacle. The Antherae are two borned: the horns bifid.

The Germen is roundish and depressed. The Style cylindrical and the length of
the corolla. The Stigma is obtuse.

The Seed-vessel is a capsule, roundish, obtuse five-sided, depresed, five
cell'd, and five valv'd; covered on all sides by the interior empalement, and
becoming a roundish colored berry, pervious at the apex.

The Seeds are many, somewhat ovate, angled and bony.

There is but one Species of this Genus, viz.

GAULTHERIA procumbens. Canadian Gaultheria, or Mountain Tea.
This is a very small shrubby plant, with slender stems, seldom rising above
five or six inches in height; having, at their tops, four or five oval
ever-green leaves, which are marked with a few small points or serratures upon
their edges. The flowers come out from the bosom of the leaves, of a white
color, and are succeeded by small berries of a red color when ripe. The
leaves have been used as a substitute for Bohea Tea, whence the name of
Mountain Tea.

GLEDITSIA.
TRIPLE-THORNED ACACIA, or HONEY LOCUST.
Class 23. Order 2. Polygamia Dioecia.
THE Flowers are Male and Hermaphrodite upon the same plant, and Female upon a
different plant.

The Male are in a long, compact, cylindrical katkin.

The Calyx; a proper empalement of four leaves; the leaves spreading, small and
acute.

The Corolla consists of three petals, roundish, sessile, spreading, and cup
form.

A Nectarium, top-shaped, to whose borders the remaining parts of
fructification grow.

The Filaments are six, thread-form, and the length of the corolla. The
Antherae are incumbent, oblong, compressed and twin.

The Hermaphrodite are in the same katkin with the male flowers, and for the
most part terminal.

The Calyx, an empalement, four leaved, as in the male.

The Corolla, four petals, as in the male.

The Nectarium as in the male.

The Stamina as in the male.

The Pistillum, Seed-vessel, and Seeds as in the female.

The Female Flowers are in a loose katkin, in a different plant.

The Calyx; a proper empalement, as in the male, but five leaved.

The Corolla, five petals, which are long, acute, and somewhat spreading.

The Nectaria are two, very short, like the filaments.

The Germen is broad, compressed, and longer than the corolla.

The Style is short and reflexed. The Stigma is thick and the length of the
style, to which it is adjoined, growing hairy above.

The Seed-vessel is a legumen or pod, very large, broad, and much compressed,
with many transverse partitions: with isthmuses filled with pulp.

The Seeds are solitary, roundish, hard and shining.

The Species with, us are,

1. GLEDITSIA spinosa. Triple-thorned Acacia, or Honey Locust.
This tree grows naturally in a rich soil, rising to the height of thirty or
forty feet, dividing into many branches, which, together with the trunk, are
armed with long pithy spines of five or six inches in length, sending off
laternal ones, some of which are nearly the same length, and generally triple
thorned. The branches are garnished with winged leaves, composed of ten, or
more pair of small lobes, sitting close to the midrib, of a lucid green color.
The flowers come out from the sides of the young branches in form of katkins,
of an herbaceous color, and are succeeded by crooked, compressed pods, from
nine or ten to sixteen or eighteen inches in length, and about an inch and a
half or two inches in breadth, of which near one half is filled with a sweet
pulp, the other containing many seeds in separate cells. The pods, from the
sweetness of their pulp, are used to brew in beer.

2. GLEDITSIA aquatica. Water Acacia.
This sort grows naturally in Carolina, and has much the appearance of the
first, but has fewer spines, which are very short. The leaves are also smaller
and the pods oval, containing but one seed.

GLYCINE.
PERENNIAL KIDNEY BEAN.
Class 17. Order 3. Diadelphia Decandria.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, compressed and two lipped: the upper lip
emarginate and obtuse: the lower, longer, acute, and three-cleft; the middle
division longest.

The Corolla papilionaceous, or butterfly shaped.

The Standard inverse heart-shaped, the sides deflexed, the back gibbous, the
apex emarginate, straight and bent from the keel.

The Wings oblong, ovate toward the top, small and bent downwards.

The Keel linear, hooked, broader and obtuse toward the point, and bent
upwards, pressing against the standard.

The Filaments are diadelphous, or one single, and nine conjoined; a little
dividing at the top, and revolute. The Antherae are simple.

The Germen is oblong. The Style cylindrical, bending back in a spire. The
Stigma obtuse.

The Seed-vessel an oblong legumen or pod.

The Seeds kidney form.

Obs. Glycine frutescens has legumens or pods of two cells.

The shrubby Species with us, is one, viz.

GLYCINE frutescens. Carolinian Shrubby Kidney Bean.
This grows naturally in Carolina, rising with twining shrubby stems, when
supported, to the height of ten or fifteen feet. The leaves are winged, and
composed of about five pair of small, oval, pointed pinnae or lobes, smooth and
of a pale green on their upper surface, but lighter underneath, having their
edges a little reflexed and hairy. The flowers terminate the branches in a
close, erect racemus or bunch; they are of a purplish blue color, and are
succeeded by long cylindrical pods of two cells, shaped like those of the
scarlet Kidney Bean.

GUILANDINA.
The BONDUC, or NICKAR TREE.
Class 10. Order 1. Decandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is one leaved, bell-shape: the border five parted, equal, and
spreading.

The Corolla consists of five petals, lanced, concave, squat, equal, somewhat
larger than the calyx and inserted in its chaps.

The Filaments are ten, awl-shaped, erect, inserted in, and shorter than the
calyx: the alternate less. The Antherae are obtuse and incumbent.

The Germen is oblong. The Style is thread-form and the length of the stamina.
The Stigma is simple.

The Seed-vessel is a legumen or pod, which is rhomboid, unequal on the upper
future, bellied-compressed, of one cell, distinct, with transverse partitions.

The Seeds are bony, globose-compressed, and solitary between the partitions.

Obs. A Species of this genus is dioecious.

The Species with us,

GUILANDINA dioica. Canadian dioiceous Bonduc, or Nickar Tree.
This tree is said to rise, with an erect stem, to the height of thirty feet or
more, dividing into many branches, covered with a bluish ash-colored, smooth
bark, garnished with large winged leaves, the lobes of which are ranged
alternately, and are oval shaped, very smooth and entire. I have lately
received several seeds from Kentucky, supposed to be of this tree, where it is
said to grow plenty, and is called the Coffee or Mahogany tree.

HALESIA.
HALESIA, or SILVER-BELL TREE.
Class 10. Order 1. Decandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is one leaved, very small, above, four-toothed, and permanent.

The Corolla is of one petal, bell'd and bellied: with the mouth four-lobed,
obtuse and spreading.

The Filaments are twelve (rarely sixteen) awl-shaped, erect and somewhat
shorter than the corolla. The Antherae are oblong, obtuse and erect.

The Germen is oblong and beneath. The Style is thread-form and longer than the
corolla. The Stigma is simple.

The Seed-vessel is a nut which is barked, oblong, narrow toward each end,
four cornered with membranaceous angles, and two cell'd.

The Seeds are solitary.

The Species are,

1. HALESIA diptera. Two-winged fruited Halesia.
This grows naturally in Carolina, to the height of twelve or fifteen feet. The
bark is beautifully variegated or streaked, much like the striped Maple. The
leaves are large and egg-shaped, having smooth footstalks. The fruit is
sharp-pointed, having two opposite, large wings, and two very small.

2. HALESIA tetraptera. Four-winged fruited Halesia.
This likewise grows in Carolina, and has much the appearance of the former,
except the leaves are much smaller, a little sawed on their edges and downy
underneath, with glandular footstalks. The flowers are produced upon the small
branches, sometimes singly, but often three or four together, upon pretty long
footstalks; they are bell-shaped and pendulous, of a white color, and are
succeeded by sharp-pointed fruit, having four wings.

HAMAMELIS.
WITCH HAZEL.
Class 4. Order 2. Tetrandria Digynia.
THE Calyx consists of an Involucrum, three-leaved, and three flowered: the two
interior leaves are roundish, less, and obtuse; the third outer one is larger
and lance-shaped.

A double Empalement: the exterior two leaved, less and roundish; the interior
four leaved and erect; the leaves oblong, obtuse, and equal.

The Corolla has four petals, which are linear, equal, very long, obtuse, and
reflexed.

And a Nectarium, of four leaf-lets, truncated, and adjoined to the corolla.

The Filaments are four, linear, and shorter than the calyx. The Antherae two
horned and reflexed.

The Germen is ovate and villose, ending in two Styles, the length of the
Stamina. The Stigmas are headed.

The Seed-vessel none.

The Seed, a nut which is ovate, half covered with the calyx, obtuse and
furrowed on each side at the apex with small horizontal two horned horns; with
two cells and two valves.

We have but one Species of this Genus, viz.

HAMAMELIS virginiana. Virginian Witch Hazel.
This shrub grows naturally in many parts of North America. It has spreading
roots, generally sending up several stalks or stems to the height of eight or
ten feet, dividing into several branches, furnished with oval leaves
irregularly notched on their edges, and smooth on their upper sides, but downy
underneath. The footstalks of the flowers come out singly upon the small
branches, each generally supporting three flowers, of an herbaceous color, and
making but little appearance, but remarkable for being in bloom late in the
fall after the leaves drop off.

HEDERA.
IVY.
Class 5. Order 1. Pentandria Monogynia.
THE Calyx consists of an Involucrum of a simple umbel, very small and many
toothed.

And an Empalement very small, five toothed and surrounding the germen.

The Corolla has five petals, oblong and spreading, with incurved tops.

The Filaments are five, awl-shaped, erect and the length of the corolla. The
Antherae are bifid at the base, and incumbent.

The Germen is top shaped, surrounded by the receptacle. The Style, is simple
and very short. The Stigma is simple.

The Seed-vessel is a globose berry of one cell.

The Seeds are five, large, on one side gibbous, on the other angled.

We have but one Species Native of America, viz.

HEDERA quinquefolia. American Ivy, or Virginian Creeper.
This has a climing stem, attaching itself to any neighboring support, and
rising often to the height of thirty, forty or fifty feet, sending off
branches, furnished with leaves composed of five lobes joined at their base,
which are egg-shaped and sawed on their edges, having a pretty long common
footstalk. This has been used to plant against walls and houses to cover them,
but the leaves falling off in winter, the plants make but a poor appearance at
that time.

HIPPOPHAL.
SEA BUCK-THORN, or SALLOW-THORN.
Class 22. Order 4. Dioecia Tetrandria.
THE flowers are Male and Female on different plants.

The Male.

The Empalement is one leaved, biparted, bivalve, entire at the bottom: the
divisions are roundish, obtuse, concave and erect, meeting with their tops, but
gaping at their sides.

The Corolla is wanting.

The Filaments are four, very short. The Antherae are oblong, angled, and
almost the length of the calyx.

The Female.

The Empalement is one leaved, oblong ovate, tubulous, clubbed, with a two
cleft mouth, and deciduous.

The Corolla none.

The Germen is roundish, and small. The Style is simple and very short. The
Stigma thickish, oblong, erect, and double the length of the calyx.

The Seed-vessel is a globose berry of one cell.

The Seed one, roundish.

There is but one Species, with us, viz.

HIPPOPHAE canadiensis. Canadian Sea-Buck-Thorn.
This rises with shrubby stalks to the height of eight or ten feet, sending out
many irregular branches, having a brown bark, silvered over, and garnished with
very narrow spear-shaped leaves, of a dark green on their upper side, but hoary
underneath, and reflexed on their edges like the Rosemary. The flowers come out
from the sides of the young branches, sitting very close; the male growing in
small clusters, but the female coming out singly; these open in July and make
but little appearance; they are succeeded by roundish berries, which ripen in
autumn, and are said to be purgative.

HYDRANGEA.
HYDRANGEA.
Class 10. Order 2. Decandria Digynia.
THE Empalement is one leaved, five toothed, permanent, and small.

The Corolla consists of five petals, equal, roundish, and larger than the
calyx.

The Filaments are ten, longer than the corolla, the alternate of which are
longer. The Antherae are roundish and twin.

The Germen is roundish and beneath. The Styles are two, short, and distant.
The Stigmas are obtuse and permanent.

The Seed-vessel is a capsule, roundish, twin, two beaked with the double
style, angled with many nerves, crowned with the calyx, two cell'd, with a
transverse partition, and gaping with a passage between the horns.

The Seeds are numerous, angled, sharp pointed, and very small.

There is but one Species of this Genus, viz.

HYDRANGEA frutescens. Virginian Shrubby Hydrangea.
This has a spreading woody root, from which are produced, generally several
soft, pithy, ligneous stalks, rising to the height of about three feet,
garnished at each joint with two oblong, heart-shaped, pointed leaves, sawed on
their edges, and having many veins. The flowers are produced in form of a
corymbus, at the tops of the stalks, they are of a white color, and are
succeeded by small capsules.

HYPERICUM.
St. JOHN's WORT.
Class 18. Order 3. Polyadelphia Polyandria.
THE Empalement is five parted: the divisions are somewhat ovate, unequal, and
permanent.

The Corolla has five petals, oblong-ovate, obtuse, spreading, and marked
according to the motion of the sun.

The Filaments are numerous, capillary, joined at the base into five or three
parts or bodies. The Antherae are small.

The Germen is roundish. The Styles are three (sometimes one, two, and five)
simple, distant, and the length of the stamina.

The Stigmas are simple.

The Seed-vessel is a roundish capsule; with cells according to the number of
the Styles.

The Seeds are many and oblong.

The Species growing shrubby, with us,

HYPERICUM kalmianum. Virginian Shrubby Hypericum.
This grows naturally in low wet places, rising with shrubby stalks to the
height of three or four feet, with opposite angular branches. The leaves are
smooth and shaped like those of Rosemary or Lavender. The flowers terminate the
branches in small divided clusters of three or seven flowers; they have each
five very slender styles, and are succeeded by oval, pointed capsules, filled
with small seeds.

ILEX.
The HOLLY-TREE.
Class 4. Order 3. Tetrandria Tetragynia.
THE Empalement is four toothed, very small and permanent.

The Corolla consists of one petal, four-parted and plane: the divisions are
roundish, concave, spreading, pretty large, and cohering by claws.

The Filaments are four, awl-shaped, and shorter than the corolla. The Antherae
are small.

The Germen is roundish. The Style none. The Stigmas are four and obtuse.

The Seed vessel is a berry, roundish and four cell'd.

The Seeds are solitary, bony, oblong, obtuse, gibbous on one side and angled
on the other.

Obs. The flowers are in some species male upon one plant, and female and
hermaphrodite upon a different plant.

The Species with us, are,

1. ILEX Aquifolium. American Common Holly.
This grows in Maryland, New Jersey, etc. generally in moist ground, rising to
the height of fifteen or twenty feet, with an erect stem, covered with a
greyish colored smooth bark, and furnished with pretty many branches, which
are garnished with thick, hard, ever-green leaves, waved on their edges and
indented, each point terminating in a stiff prickly spine. The flowers are
produced upon pretty long footstalks, often three parted from the sides of the
branches, of a white color, having often five or six stamina, and the corolla
divided into as many parts, and are succeeded by roundish berries, which when
full ripe are red. Of the bark of common Holly is made Birdlime, which is
better than that made of Milletoe.

2. ILEX Cassine. Dahoon, or Carolinian Holly.
This grows naturally in Carolina, rising with an upright branching stem to the
height of eighteen or twenty feet. The bark of the stem is of a brown color,
but that of the branches and young shoots green and smooth. The leaves are
spear-shaped, above four inches long and one and a quarter broad toward the
base, of a light green color and thick consistence, with their upper parts
sawed on the edges, each serrature ending in a small sharp spine. The flowers
come out in thick clusters from the sides of the branches, they are white and
like those of the common Holly, but smaller, and are succeeded by small
roundish red berries.

3. ILEX canadensis. Canadian, or Hedgehog Holly.
The leaves of this kind are not so long as those of the Common Holly, but are
armed with stronger spines standing closer together, their upper surfaces are
also set very close with short prickles, from whence it obtained the name of
Hedgehog Holly. It grows naturally in Canada. There are said to be two
varieties of this with variegated leaves, one of which is yellow, the other
white.

ITEA.
ITEA.
Class 5. Order 1. Pentandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is one leaved, five cleft, erect, sharp pointed, very small,
and permanent: the divisions are acute and colored.

The Corolla has five petals, lance-shaped, long and inserted in the calyx.

The Filaments are five, awl-shaped, erect, the length of the corolla, and
inserted into the calyx. The Antherae are roundish and incumbent.

The Germen is ovate. The Style is cylindrical, permanent, and the length of
the Stamina. The Stigma is obtuse.

The Seed-vessel is a capsule ovate, much longer than the calyx, pointed with
the style, with one cell and two valves, of two joined together, gaping at the
top.

The Seeds are numerous, very small, oblong, and shining.

There is but one Species of this Genus, viz.

ITEA virginica. Virginian Itea.
This shrub grows naturally in Maryland, Virginia, etc. near streams of water,
or in moist places; rising to the height of eight or ten feet, and dividing
into several branches, which are garnished with spear shaped leaves, placed
alternately, slightly sawed on their edges, and of a light green color. The
flowers are produced at the extremity of the same year's shoots, in erect
spikes of three or four inches in length; they are white, and make a fine
appearance when in bloom, which is a little before harvest time.

JUGLANS.
The WALNUT-TREE.
Class 21. Order 8. Monoecia Polyandria.
THE Male and Female Flowers are separate upon the same tree.

The Male, are disposed in an oblong katkin.

The Calyx is a common katkin, on all sides imbricate-sparsed, and cylindrical;
consisting of scales which are uniflorous, singly affixed in the exterior
center to each corolla, and turned outward.

The Corolla is six-parted, elliptic, equal, and plane: the divisions are
somewhat erect and concave, pedicell'd and inserted in the interior center of
the corolla, and rachis.

The Filaments are many, (eighteen) very short. The Antherae are erect, sharp
pointed, and the length of the calyx.

The Female are without a katkin, two or three together, and sitting close, in
the same plant.

The Empalement is four cleft, erect, very short, crowning the germen, and
vanishing.

The Corolla is four parted, acute, erect, and a little larger than the calyx.

The Germen is oval, large, and beneath. The Styles are two, very short. The
Stigmas are very large, clubbed, reflexed, and torn above.

The Seed-vessel is a drupe, or capsule, dry, oval, large and one cell'd.

The Seed is a nut very large, roundish, netted with furrows, and half four
cell'd. The Kernel is four lobed and variously furrowed.

The Species ( or chiefly Varieties according to Weston) with us, are,

1. JUGLANS nigra. Round black Virginian Walnut.
This tree often rises to the height of fifty or sixty feet, and to three feet
or more in diameter, covered with a dark furrowed bark, and dividing into many
branches, furnished with winged leaves, composed of ten or twelve pair of
lobes, and an odd one; these are smooth, oblong, sharp pointed and sawed on
their edges; and upon being bruised emit a strong aromatic flavor, as does
also the external covering of the fruit. The fruit are round, their covering
pretty smooth, and softish when fully ripe. The nuts themselves are hard,
netted and furrowed, containing sweet oily Kernel.

2. JUGLANS nigra oblonga. Black oblong fruited Walnut.
This tree resembles the former so as scarcely to be distinguished from it,
except by its fruit, which is oblong or oval; the shells or coverings are
rougher, harder, and of a deeper green color. The timber of both sorts is much
used by Joiners, etc. in making tables, drawers, book and clock-cases, etc.
Coffins are also generally made of it. The bark, and outer coverings of the
nuts, are used in dying wool, cloth, etc.

There are perhaps some other varieties of these.

3. JUGLANS oblonga alba. Butter-nut, or White Walnut.
This often grows to the height of twenty or thirty feet and to eighteen inches
or more in diameter, with a smooth light colored bark. The branches are
garnished with leaves composed generally of eight or nine pair of lobes and an
odd one, which are villose, oblong egg-shaped, sharp pointed, slightly
serrated, and larger than those of the other kinds. The fruit, when ripe, is
villous and covered with a viscid clammy substance, by which it almost sticks
to the fingers when handled. It is long and somewhat pointed at the ends, and
freed of its hull, or covering, is very rough and deeply furrowed, containing a
soft, oily, sweet kernel. An extract of the bark of this tree affords a mild
and safe cathartic. The bark and shells of the nuts dye a good brown color,
scarcely ever fading.

4. JUGLANS alba acuminata. Long, sharp-fruited Hickery Tree.
This tree grows to the height of forty or fifty feet, and to eighteen inches
or two feet in diameter. The leaves are generally composed of three or four
pair of lobes and an odd one. The nuts with their covers are about two inches
in length and above one in diameter. The covers, or hulls, generally open into
four parts, disclosing their nuts, which are white, hard and thick shell'd,
having seams opposite the divisions of their hulls. The kernel is small and not
very sweet.

5. JUGLANS alba minima. White, or Pig-nut Hickery.
This generally grows pretty large, sometimes to the height of eighty feet or
more, and above two feet in diameter. The bark of young trees is smooth, but
when older becomes rough and furrowed. The leaves are generally composed of
five pair of lobes and an odd one, which are mostly narrower than those of many
other kinds. The fruit is small and roundish, and covered with a very thin husk
or covering, opening in divisions. The shell of the nut is also very thin, and
easily cracked with the teeth; the kernel plump and full but very bitter. The
timber of this is not much esteemed.

6. JUGLANS alba odorata. Balsam Hickery.
This tree grows as large as the Pig-nut Hickery, and much like it in
appearance. The nuts are small, round, and thin shell'd, the kernel sweet. The
branches are slender and flexible. There is, I think, a variety of this, with a
rougher furrowed bark, bearing broader leaves and larger nuts, having thicker
outer covers, as well as inward shells, with the kernel generally small and
shrivelled. The timber of both kinds is hard and tough, and used for axle-trees
of carriages, etc. mill coggs and rounds, and also for handles, etc. for most
implements of husbandry.

7. JUGLANS alba ovata. Shell-barked Hickery.
This tree delights in a rich moist soil, generally growing by creeks and
rivers, often to the height of seventy or eighty feet, and above two feet in
diameter. The bark is rough and shelly or scaly. The leaves are generally
composed of two pair of lobes and an odd one, they are narrowed toward the
base, oval, and pointed at the extremity, and sawed on their edges. The fruit
is roundish, but rather slatted and indented at the ends. The outer cover very
thick and dividing into four parts, disclosing its nut, which is not very thick
shell'd, containing sweet kernel, preferable to the other kinds. There are
several varieties of this in America, some with nuts as large as our common
Walnuts.

8. JUGLANS pecan. The Pecan, or Illinois Hickery.
This tree is said to grow plenty in the neighborhood of the Illinois river,
and other parts to the westward. The young plants raised from these nuts, much
resemble our young Pig nut Hickerys. The nuts are small and thin shelled.

JUNIPERUS.
The JUNIPER TREE.
Class 22. Order 12. Dioecia Monodelphia.
THE Flowers are Male and Female on different plants.

The Male.

The Calyx is a conical katkin, consisting of a common rachis or string, to
which three flowers are placed in triple opposition, the katkin terminating
with the tenth: each flower has for its base a Scale which is broad, short,
incumbent and affixed to the column by a little footstalk.

The Corolla none.

The Filaments (in the terminal floret) are three, awl-shaped, and joined
beneath in one body; (in the lateral florets scarce manifest.) The Antherae are
three, distinct in the terminal. floret, but in the lateral joined to the
scales.

The Female.

The Empalement is three parted, very small, adjoining to the germen, and
permanent.

The Corolla has three petals, permanent, rigid and acute.

The Germen is beneath. The Styles are three, simple. The Stigmas are simple.

The Seed-vessel is a berry, fleshy, roundish, the under part marked with three
obsolete opposite tubercles, grown from the calyx, the top umbilicated with
three small teeth (formerly petals.)

The Seeds are three, small, oblong, and bony, unequal on one side, and angled
on the other.

The Species, with us, are,

1. JUNIPERUS virginiana. Red Cedar-Tree.
This tree often grows to the height of fifteen or twenty feet, sending off
many diverging branches, covered with leaves something like the Juniper, but
much smaller, shorter, and lying closer to the branches. The berries are
smaller than those of the Juniper, and covered with a whitish substance, easily
rubbing off.

2. JUNIPERUS caroliniana. Red Carolinian Cedar.
This tree much resembles the former in size and shape, but the under leaves
have somewhat the appearance of Juniper, the upper, of Cypress or Savin. There
are said to be other varieties, but their difference in appearance is scarcely
observable. The timber affords very good durable posts for fencing. etc.

KALMIA.
KALMIA, or AMERICAN LAUREL.
Class 10. Order 1. Decandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is five parted, small, and permanent: the segments are somewhat
ovate, and acute.

The Corolla is of one petal, pitcher-funnel form. The tube is cylindrical and
longer than the calyx. The border with a plane disk, and erect half five cleft
circumference; there are ten small nectariferous horns, prominent without, and
placed round the corolla from where the border is raised.

The Filaments are ten, awl-shaped, somewhat spreading, a little shorter than
the corolla, and inserted into its base. The Antherae are simple.

The Germen is roundish. The Style is thread form, longer than the corolla, and
declined. The Stigma is obtuse.

The Seed-vessel is roundish, depressed, five cell'd and five valv'd.

The Seeds are numerous.

The Species are,

1. KALMIA angustifolia. Narrow leaved Kalmia.
This kind delights in moist or swampy places, and rises to the height of two
feet or more. The leaves are of a light green color, and sometimes grow to the
size of an inch and a half in length and half an inch in breadth, of an oval
shape, and entire. The flowers come out in clusters on every side of the
stalks, toward their extremities, and are of a beautiful red color. This has
been called Glaucous leaved Kalmia.

2. KALMIA latifolia. Broad leaved Kalmia.
This beautiful flowering shrub rises often to the height of six or eight feet
and sometimes to ten or twelve, covered with a lightish colored rough bark,
and generally growing crooked. The leaves are of a dark green color, thick
consistence, lance-shaped and entire, in general about three inches in length
and one in breadth. The flowers are produced in clusters at the ends of the
branches and are variegated with red when first opening, but change to a whiter
color when expanded. There are very few flowering shrubs comparable to this
when in bloom. The leaves are noxious to oxen and sheep, yet the deer eat them
with impunity.

LAURUS.
The BAY TREE.
Class 9. Order 1. Enneandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is wanting.

The Corolla has six petals, ovate, sharp pointed, concave and erect: the
alternate exterior.

And a Nectarium, consisting of three tubercles, sharp pointed, colored, and
ending in two bristles, standing round the germen.

The Filaments are nine, shorter than the corolla, compressed, obtuse and
threefold in each order. The Antherae are adjoined on each side to the margin
of the filaments.

There are two roundish small Glands affixed by very short footstalks, to each
filament of the inward order, near the base.

The Germen is somewhat ovate. The Style is simple, equal and the length of the
stamina. The Stigma is obtuse and oblique.

The Seed-vessel is a drupe, oval, sharp pointed, and one cell'd, contained in
the calyx.

The Seed is a nut of a sharp pointed egg-shape, with a kernel of the same form.

Obs. The flowers are sometimes male and female upon different trees.

The Species, with us, are,

1. LAURUS Benzoin. The Benjamin-Tree, or Spice-Wood.
This shrub grows naturally in moist places, and rises often to the height of
eight or ten feet, dividing into several branches. The leaves are annual, oval
shaped and entire. The flowers are produced from the sides of the branches upon
short footstalks, often dividing and sustaining from one, to four or five
flowers, of a greenish yellow color; which are succeeded by oval, oblong
berries, of a red color when ripe, but changing to black. The bark, berries,
etc. have a strong aromatic smell, much like that of Benzoin, and indeed, by
some, is allowed to be the tree, from whence it is produced.

2. LAURUS Borbonia. Red-stalked Carolinian Bay Tree.
This grows naturally in Carolina, and rises with a straight trunk to a
considerable height, especially near the seacoast. The leaves are sharp
pointed and much longer than those of the European Bay; a little wooly
underneath, veined transversely, and somewhat reflexed on their edges. The male
trees produce their flowers in long bunches from the wings of the leaves; the
female, in loose bunches, standing upon long red footstalks, and are succeeded
by blue berries sitting in red cups.

The wood is of a very fine grain, proper for cabinet making and other
ornamental furniture. It also dies a beautiful black color.

3. LAURUS geniculata. Carolinian Spice Wood Tree.
This kind so much resembles the Benzoin as to require no further description,
except in having berries not of so red a color.

4. LAURUS Sassafras. The Sassafras-Tree.
This tree rises sometimes to the height of twenty or thirty feet, and to
twelve or fifteen inches in diameter, but is commonly of much lower growth. The
bark of the young shoots is smooth and green, but of the old trunks rough,
furrowed and of a lightish color. It is divided toward the top into many
branches, generally crooked, furnished with leaves different in form and size,
some being oval and entire, others two or three lobed and of five of six inches
in length, and nearly as much in width; of a light green color and placed
alternately upon pretty long footstalks. The flowers are produced at the
extremity of the former year's shoots upon long panicled footstalks, and are
generally male and female upon different trees. The female are succeeded by
oblong, oval berries, of a bluish color when ripe, sitting in red cups, having
red footstalks. The roots and wood have been long used as a sudorific, but the
bark of the root is (...) much the strongest, yielding a considerable quantity
of hot, aromatic oil; and when powdered and joined with other febrifuges, has
been given with success in intermittents, etc. Also used as a tea, is said to
promote obstructed menses; but has been blamed for occasioning the headache.

LEDUM.
MARSH CISTUS, or WILD ROSEMARY.
Class 10. Order 1. Decandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, very small, and five-toothed.

The Corolla consists of five petals, ovate, concave, and spreading.

The Filaments are ten, thread-form, spreading and the length of the corolla.
The Antherae are oblong.

The Germen is roundish. The Style thread-form and the length of the stamina.
The Stigma is obtuse.

The Seed-vessel is a capsule, roundish, five-cell'd and gaping in five parts
at the top.

The Seeds are numerous, oblong, narrow, acute each way and very slender.

The Species with us, but one, viz.

LEDUM thymifolium. Thyme leaved Marsh Cistus.
This grows naturally in the Jerseys, in low, moist places. It is a small
ever-green shrub, scarcely rising above eighteen inches or two feet in height
and divided into several branches. The leaves are very small, entire, of an
oblong oval shape, and thick consistence, placed close, alternately, and thick
upon the branches. The flowers terminate the stalks in short leaffy bunches,
coming out singly at the bosom of the leaves upon pretty long footstalks; they
are small and white but make a fine appearance when in bloom. This has
generally been called Thyme-leaved Kalmia.

LIQUIDAMBAR.
LIQUIDAMBAR, or SWEET GUM-TREE.
Class 21, Order 8. Monoecia Polyandria.
THE Male Flowers are numerous in a conical, long, loose katkin.

The Calyx is a common Involucrum of four leaves; which are ovate, concave, and
falling; the alternate shorter.

The Corolla none.

The Filaments are numerous, and very short, in a body, plane on one side and
unequal on the other. The Antherae are erect, twin, four furrowed, and two
cell'd.

The Female flowers are collected in a globe at the base of the male spikes.

The Calyx is an Involucrum as in the male, but double.

The Proper Empalement is bell-shape, angled, warty, and many joined together.

The Corolla none.

The Germen is oblong and adjoined to the empalement. The Styles are two,
awl-shaped. The Stigmas joined to these are the length of the style, recurved
and downy.

The Seed-vessel consists of as many capsules as empalements, which are ovate,
oblong, sharp pointed, with one cell and two valves at top; joined in a
ligneous globe.

The Seeds are few, (one or two) oblong, pointed and shining; mixed with many
branny corpuscles.

The Species with us, are,

1. LIQUIDAMBAR Styraciflua. Maple-leaved Liquidambar-Tree, or Sweet Gum.
This tree grows naturally in low clayey ground, rising with a straight trunk
to the height of forty feet or more, sending off many branches, forming a
pyramidal head. The leaves are angular, somewhat resembling those of Maple,
having five and often seven, pointed, serrated, spreading lobes; and are of a
dark green color. They have a strong, sweet, glutinous substance, exuding
through their pores in warm weather, rendering them clammy to the touch. The
flowers are produced early in the spring, and are succeeded by globular
seed-vessels, composed of many capsules joined at the base, but terminating in
long softish spines or points, and containing each one or two oblong
compressed, winged seeds, with a great number of furfuraceous particles.

2. LIQUIDAMBAR asplenifolia. Spleen-wort-leaved Gale, or Shrubby Sweet Fern.
This is a small shrub, growing naturally upon dry slaty ridges, and seldom
rising above three feet high, dividing into several branches, furnished with
many oblong leaves, alternately situated, resembling those of Spleen Wort; of a
dark green color, hairy underneath and sitting close to the stalks. The male
katkins are produced lying close to the small branches near their ends. The
female flowers are in small heads a little beneath them, becoming small burs,
generally containing two or more oblong smooth seeds. An infusion of the leaves
has been used as an astringent in Diarrhaeas, etc.

LIRIODENDRUM.
The TULIP-TREE.
Class 13. Order 7. Polyandria Polygynia.
THE Calyx consists of a proper Involucrum of two leaves; which are triangular,
plane and deciduous.

And an Empalement of three leaves; oblong, concave, spreading, petal-form, and
deciduous.

The Corolla has six (often more) petals, bell'd: the petals are spatuled,
oblong, obtuse and variegated.

The Filaments are numerous, shorter than the corolla, linear, and inserted in
the receptacle. The Antherae are linear, and adjoined longitudinally to the
sides of the filaments.

The Germen are numerous, placed in a cone. The Style none. The Stigmas globose.

The Seed-vessel none. The seeds are imbricated in a cone like body.

The Seeds are numerous, ending in a lanced scale; near the base of the scale,
sending off from the interior side, an acute angle, compressed at the base and
acute, by which they are joined to the spindle-shaped receptacle.

The Species with us, are,

LIRIODENDRUM Tulipifera. Virginian Tulip-Tree.
This often grows to the size of a large tree, of seventy or eighty feet in
height and above four feet in diameter. The bark of young trees is smooth, but
as they grow old it becomes furrowed, their lower branches also falling off.
The young trees send off many branches, almost from the ground upward,
garnished with broad smooth leaves, heartshaped at the base, but end-bitten, or
cut, at the extremity, having two or three pointed lobes, on each side the
midrib; of a dark green color on the upper side, but lighter and veined
underneath; with pretty long footstalks. The flowers are produced at the
extremity of the branches in form of a Tulip, composed of six or seven petals,
or sometimes more, greenish colored toward the tops, but marked transversely
with red, toward the claws; which are glandular and honey-bearing. The young
trees make a beautiful appearance, especially when in flower. We have two kinds
of Tulip trees, viz. Yellow and White, their difference easily distinguishable
by the wood or timber, but perhaps not otherwise. The Yellow is soft and
brittle, and much used for boards, heels for shoes, etc. also turned into
bowls, trenchers, etc. The white is heavy, tough, and hard, and likewise sawed
into joists, boards, etc. for building. The bark of the root is used as an
ingredient in bitters, etc.

LONICERA.
HONEYSUCKLE, or WOODBINE.
Class 5. Order 1. Pentandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is five parted, above and small.

The Corolla is of one petal and tubulous. The tube oblong and gibbose. The
border five-parted; the divisions revolute, and one deeper separated than the
rest.

The Filaments are five, awl-shaped and nearly the length of the corolla. The
Antherae are oblong.

The Germen is roundish and beneath. The Style is thread-form and the length of
the corolla. The Stigma is obtuse-headed.

The Seed-vessel is a berry, umbilicated and two cell'd.

The Seeds are roundish and compressed.

The Species, with us, (according to Linnaeus's arrangement) are divided as
follows, into

Honeysuckles with a trailing stalk.

1. LONICERA caroliniana. Carolinian scarlet Trumpet-flowered Honeysuckle.
This is a variety of the following, only differing in having smaller leaves
and flowers.

2. LONICERA virginiana. Virginian scarlet Honeysuckle.
This has a shrubby trailing stalk, which requires support, and appears much
like the common Honeysuckle, but the shoots are weaker. The inferior leaves are
inverse egg-shaped, of a deep green color on their upper sides, but whitish
underneath, sitting close to the branches; but those near the ends of the
branches, are joined, forming sometimes a large somewhat quadrangular leaf, but
mostly a smaller concave oval one. The flowers are produced in whorls upon a
long naked stalk terminating the branches, having long scarlet tubes with short
borders. The lower leaves in warm situations are evergreen.

3. LONICERA sempervirens. Ever-green Honeysuckle.
This is said to grow in Virginia, with strong branches, covered with a purple
bark, and garnished with lucid green leaves, continuing their verdure all the
year. The flowers are produced in manner of the former, of a bright red on
their outsides and yellow within, and continuing in succession from June till
autumn.

Dwarf Cherries with biflorous footstalks.

4. LONICERA canadensis. Canadian dwarf-cherry Honeysuckle.
(Bartram's Catalogue.)
This is a native of Canada, rising with an erect shrubby stalk to the height
of about five feet. The leaves are oval shaped, entire, of a very thin texture
and lucid green color. The flowers terminate the branches, sitting two upon
each footstalk, of a pale yellow color, streaked with purple, and appearing
pretty early in the spring.

With an erect stalk, and multiflorous footstalks.

5. LONICERA Diervilla. Yellow flowering Diervilla.
This has slender shrubby stalks, seldom rising above two feet and a half
high, and generally leaning; furnished with somewhat heart-shaped, oblong,
sharp-pointed leaves, slightly sawed on their edges, placed opposite, and
sitting close to the stalks. The flowers are produced at the extremity and
sometimes from the sides of the branches, generally two or three together, upon
short footstalks; they are of a cream color, the inferior segment of the
flower somewhat larger and yellower than the others; they are succeeded by
oblong capsules, containing small seeds. This grows most natural upon
mountains, and spreads much by its creeping roots.

6. LONICERA marylandica. Maryland scarlet Lonicera.
This, it is said, grows in Maryland with an upright stalk, furnished with
ovate, oblong, sharppointed leaves, which are distinct and fit close to the
stalks. The flowers are produced in erect spikes of a scarlet color.

7. LONICERA Symphoricarpos. Indian Currants, or St. Peter's Wort.
This has a shrubby stalk, which rises from four to five feet high and spreads
into many slender branches, garnished with oval entire leaves, somewhat hairy
and placed opposite upon short footstallks. The flowers are small and of an
herbaceous color, and are produced upon short, common peduncles, or
footstalks, which are placed opposite a conderable distance along, and
terminating the branches; upon which they are set very close in whorls, or
rather in two opposite rows. A few of these are succeeded by reddish,
depressed, hollow and spongy berries; ripening very late, and each generally
containing two small round compressed seeds. This often sends off a few weak
trailing branches lying upon the ground and taking root, by which it may be
easily propagated.

MAGNOLIA.
The LAUREL-LEAVED TULIP-TREE.
Class 13. Order 7. Polyandria Polygynia.
THE Empalement is three leaved: the leaves ovate, concave, petal form and
deciduous.

The Corolla has nine petals, oblong, concave, obtuse, and narrower at the base.

The Filaments are numerous, short, sharp pointed, and compressed; inserted
beneath the germen in the common receptacle of the styles. The Antherae are
linear and adjoined on each side to the margin of the filaments.

The Germen are numerous, ovate-oblong, covering the clubbed receptacle. The
Styles are recurved, contorted and very short. The Stigmas are from one end of
the style to the other, and villose.

The Seed-vessel is an ovate cone, covered with capsules, which are compressed,
roundish, scarce imbricated, crowded, acute, one cell'd, two valv'd, sessile,
gaping outward and permanent.

The Seeds are solitary, roundish, berried and hanging by a thread from the
bosom of each scale of the cone.

The Species are,

1. MAGNOLIA acuminata. Long leaved Mountain Magnolia, or Cucumber Tree.
This tree grows sometimes to the height of thirty or forty feet, and to
eighteen inches or more in diameter; dividing into several branches toward the
top, garnished with large, oblong, sharp-pointed leaves. The flowers come out
early in the spring and are composed of twelve large bluish colored petals.
The seed-vessels are about three inches long, somewhat resembling a small
Cucumber; from whence the inhabitants where it grows natural, call it the
Cucumber-tree.

2. MAGNOLIA glauca. Small Magnolia, or Swamp Sassafras.
This grows naturally in low, moist, or swampy ground, often to the height of
fifteen or twenty feet; covered with a whitish smooth bark, and dividing into
several branches; furnished with entire, oblong, oval leaves, of a dark green
on their upper surface, but whitish and a little hairy underneath. The flowers
are produced at the ends of the branches, composed of six concave, white
petals, of an agreeable smell; and are succeeded by oval, or somewhat conical
seed-vessels, of an inch or more in length and three fourths of an inch in
diameter; composed of many capsules, which open and discharge their seeds when
ripe, hanging by slender white threads, of a red color, and near the size of a
small bean. The seeds and bark have been used with some success in the cure of
Rheumatism, etc.

3. MAGNOLIA grandiflora. Ever-green Laurel-leaved Tulip-Tree.
This grows naturally in Florida and South Carolina, sometimes to the height of
eighty feet or more, with a straight trunk of two feet or more in diameter;
having a regular head. The leaves are evergreen, of a thick consistence, pretty
large, oblong, pointed, and entire: of a lucid green on the upper side, and
sometimes of a russet, or buff color on the under. The flowers are produced at
the ends of the branches; they are very large, and composed of eight or ten
oblong white petals, narrowed toward the base, but broad, rounded, and a
little waved at their extremities. They are succeeded by oblong, conical
seed-vessels, disclosing their seeds after the manner of the other species.
This is allowed to be one of the most beautiful ever-green trees yet known, but
is impatient of cold.

4. MAGNOLIA tripetala. The Umbrella Tree.
This grows pretty frequent in Carolina, and some parts of Pennsylvania;
usually to the height of sixteen or twenty feet, with a slender trunk, covered
with a smooth bark, and dividing into several branches. The leaves are very
large and entire, often from twelve to fifteen inches or more in length, and
five or six in width, narrowing to a point at each extremity, placed at the
ends of the branches in a circular manner, somewhat resembling an umbrella;
from whence it obtained its name. The flowers are composed of ten, or eleven,
large, oblong, white petals, the exterior ones hanging down; and are succeeded
by oblong, conical seed-vessels, between three and four inches in length, and
about one and a half in diameter, growing reddish and disclosing their seeds,
when ripe, after the same manner of the others. There are said to be two other
species in the southern states.

MENISPERMUM.
MOONSEED.
Class 22. Order 10. Dioecia Decandria.
THE Flowers are Male and Female upon separate plants.

The Male.

The Empalement is two leaved: the leaves are linear and short.

The Corolla has four exterior petals, which are ovate, spreading and equal.
And eight interior lesser ones, ovate and concave.

The Filaments are sixteen (or more) cylindrical and rather longer than the
corolla. The Antherae are terminal, very short, and obtuse four lobed.

The Female, on a different plant.

The Empalement as in the Male.

The Corolla as the Male.

The Filaments eight, like the male. The Antherae are pellucid, and barren.

The Germen are two, ovate, incurved, winking and pedicell'd.

The Styles are solitary, very short and recurved. The Stigmas are bifid and
obtuse.

The Seed-vessels are two berries, roundish-kidney form and one cell'd.

The Seeds are solitary, large, and kidney form, or somewhat orbicular and
compressed.

Obs. The Canadian has an Empalement and Corolla of six leaves, also six
stamina and three styles.

The Species with us, are,

1. MENISPERMUM canadense. Canadian Moonseed.
This has a thick, ligneous root, sending up many twining stalks, twisting
themselves round the neighboring trees for support, becoming woody, and rising
to the height of ten or fifteen feet. These are furnished with large, smooth,
roundish, angled leaves, having pretty long footstalks placed on their under
sides, making a hollow, or appearance of a navel on the upper side. The flowers
come out in loose bunches from the sides of the stalks; they are small, of an
herbaceous color, and composed of six oblong petals, six short stamina, and
three styles arising from as many germen; which become three channelled
berries, each containing one somewhat circular compressed seed.

2. MENISPERMUM carolinum. Carolinian Moonseed.
This is much smaller and weaker than the other, scarcely becoming shrubby. The
leaves are smaller, entire, heart-shaped, and villous underneath.

3. MENISPERMUM virginicum. Virginian Moonseed.
This much resembles the Canadian kind, the leaves are target-form,
heart-shaped and lobed.

MESPILUS.
The MEDLAR-TREE.
Class 12. Order 4. Icosandria Pentagynia.
THE Empalement is one leaved, concave-spreading, five toothed, and permanent.

The Corolla has five petals, roundish, concave, and inserted in the calyx.

The Filaments are twenty, awl-shaped and inserted in the calyx.

The Antherae are simple.

The Germen is beneath. The Styles are five, (often less) simple and erect. The
Stigmas are headed.

The Seed-vessel is a berry, globose, umbilicated, and covered with the calyx,
but somewhat perforated at the apex.

The Seeds are five, bony and gibbons.

The Species, with us, are,

Armed with Thorns

1. MESPILUS coccinea. Cockspur-Hawthorn.
This rises generally to the height of ten or twelve feet, with a pretty strong
stem, dividing into several branches, which are armed with strong thorns, bent
downwards like a cock's spur. The leaves are somewhat oval, but spreading into
angles, sawed on their edges, and smooth. The flowers come out at the
extremities and sides of the branches in umbels; they are pretty large and are
succeeded by fruit nearly as large as a small cherry and of a fine red color
when ripe.

There is a variety of this without thorns, with leaves deeper sawed on their
edges, and not so deeply veined, otherwise of the same growth and appearance.

2. MESPILUS Crus galli. Pear leaved Thorn.
This rises with a strong stem to the height of fifteen or twenty feet, sending
off many long (and often nearly horizontal) branches, armed with long, sharp
thorns. The leaves are of an oblong, oval shape, or often narrowed toward the
base, sawed on their edges, smooth, and of a deep, shining green color, and
thick consistence. The flowers come out late, and are produced in small
clusters at the ends of the branches. The fruit are of a middling size and of a
dark or dirty reddish color.

Obs. The flowers have frequently but one style.

3. MESPILUS cuneiformis. Wedge leaved Mespilus.
This grows often to the height of twenty feet or more, with a strong stem of
five or six inches in diameter, covered with a dark rough bark, dividing into
many branches, and armed with long sharp thorns. The leaves are smooth, wedge,
or inverseegg-shaped, and pointed; slightly and somewhat doubly serrated
toward their extremities, of a shining green color on their upper surface and
veined with oblique parallel veins. The flowers are produced in small clusters
at the ends of the branches and are succeeded by middle sized reddish fruit.

4. MESPILUS Azarolus major. Great Azarole, or Hawthorn.
This kind frequently rises to the height of twelve or fifteen feet, with a
strong stem covered with a lightish rough bark, dividing into many branches,
and armed with many long thorns. The leaves are larger than those of the other
kinds, somewhat eggshaped, but toothed or angled, sawed on their edges, and
much veined. The flowers are produced in umbels at the extremity of the
branches and are succeeded by large fruit, of a dark red color.

5. MESPILUS Azarolus minor. Smaller Azarole, or Hawthorn.
This has much the appearance of the last, but is smaller in growth, leaves and
fruit.

6. MESPILUS Oxyacantha aurea. Yellow berried Hawthorn.
This rises to the height of six or eight feet, dividing into several branches
and armed with sharp thorns. The leaves are somewhat egg-shaped, but acutely
toothed and sawed on their edges. The flowers are produced as in the other
kinds and are succeeded by middling sized fruit, of a greenish yellow color
when ripe.

7. MESPILUS apiifolia. Virginian Parsley leaved Mespilus.
This is generally of low growth, rising perhaps to the height of five or six
feet, and armed with a few sharp thorns. The leaves are small, shining and much
cut or divided on their edges. The fruit are small and red colored.

Without Thorns.

8. MESPILUS nivea. Early ripe, Esculent fruited Medlar, or wild Service.
This rises frequently to the height of fifteen or twenty feet, dividing into
several branches, which are without thorns, and covered with a smooth, whitish,
spotted bark. The leaves are of an oblong oval; pointed, slightly and acutely
serrated, hairy and whitish at their first appearance, but becoming smooth and
of a dark green, especially upon their upper sides. The flowers are produced
from the sides of the small branches in loose bunches or panicles, of a snowy
white color, and are succeeded by fruit near the size of a Goose-berry, which
are soft, succulent, sweet tasted, and purplish colored when ripe. The flowers
of this come out before the leaves are expanded, perfectly white, and thick set
upon the branches, making a fine appearance. The fruit is ripe in June, pretty
large and of an agreeable taste. There is a variety of this of smaller growth,
but of the same appearance.

9. MESPILUS prunifolia. Plumb leaved Medlar.
This grows naturally in moist places rising with slender stems to the height
of six or eight feet, dividing into but few branches and without thorns. The
leaves are inverse egg-shaped, pointed, slightly serrated, of a dark green on
their upper surface, but lighter and downy underneath. The flowers are produced
at the extremity of the branches in clusters, and are succeeded by small fruit
of a dark purplish color when ripe.

There is a variety of this, generally rising but to the height of two or three
feet. The fruit are somewhat larger and of the same color, but otherwise much
resembling the other.

10. MESPILUS canadensis. Dwarf red fruited Medlar.
This rises to the height of four or five feet, with slender smooth stems, much
resembling the last described, except in having fruit of a red color when
ripe. There is also a variety of this of smaller growth, which produces fruit
of a beautiful red color.

Obs. The characters of the Crataegus and Mespilus differ so immaterially that,
I should suppose, they might be reduced to one Genus, with much greater
propriety than the Beech and Chestnut. They are Genera in which much confusion
prevails amongst Botanical writers, some classing most of the Species under the
Crataegus, others the same Species under the Mespilus; neither is it easy to
determine to which they, with most propriety, belong. I have frequently
observed in some Species from one to three styles, in others from three to
five, but not having observed any to be constant with two, agreeably to the
character of the Crataegus, have ranged none under that Genus. We have, native
of these states, several Species of Mespilus, and a great number of Varieties,
which, until better discriminated and ascertained, can never be described with
any degree of accuracy.

MITCHELLA.
MITCHELLA.
Class 4. Order 1. Tetrandria Monogynia.
THE Flowers are twin, or two sitting upon the same bud; and each having an
Empalement, four parted, erect, permanent and above.

A Corolla of one petal, funnel form. The tube cylindrical; the border
four-parted, spreading and hairy within.

And four Filaments, thread-form, erect, and within the bosom of the corolla.
With Antherae oblong, and acute.

The Germen is twin, orbiculate, common to both, and beneath.

The Styles are one in each flower, thread-form and the length of the corolla.
The Stigmas are four, oblong.

The Seed-vessel is a berry, two parted and globose.

The Seeds are four, compressed and callous.

There is but one Species of this Genus, viz.

MITCHELLA repens. Creeping evergreen Mitchella.
This is a small plant, growing upon mossy, northern, shaded banks, with
slender shrubby stalks, lying close to the ground, and putting out roots at the
joints. The leaves are ever-green, of a thick consistence, obtusely egg-shaped,
and entire; they are placed opposite and thick upon the branches, with short
footstalks, and are often marked longitudinally with a whitish vein. The
flowers are produced at the bosom of the leaves, they are double, or two
arising from one bud, of a white color, and are succeeded by small roundish
red berries.

MORUS.
The MULBERRY-TREE.
Class 21. Order 4. Monoecia Tetrandria.
THE Male Flowers are disposed in Katkins.

The Empalement is four parted; the leaves ovate and concave.

The Corolla none.

The Filaments are four, awl-shaped, erect, longer than the calyx, and one
within each leaf of the flower cup. The Antherae are simple.

The Female Flowers are collected, either in the same, or a different plant
from the male.

The Empalement is four leaved: the leaves are roundish, obtuse, permanent; the
two opposite exterior incumbent.

The Corolla none.

The Germen is heart-shaped. The Styles are two, awl-shaped, long, reflexed,
and rough. The Stigmas are simple.

The Seed-vessel none. The Empalements becoming fleshy succulent berries,
jointly forming an oblong rough fruit.

The Seeds, one in each berry, ovate acute.

We have but one Species, native with us, viz.

MORUS rubra. Large-leaved Virginian Mulberry Tree.
This grows common in many parts of NorthAmerica, to the height of twenty or
thirty feet, and with a trunk from twelve to eighteen inches or more in
diameter; dividing into many branches, which are garnished with large, rough,
heart-shaped, oblong, pointed leaves; sawed on their edges, and sometimes with
others largely and deeply divided into two, three, or more pointed lobes. The
leaves of male trees are generally largest. The fruit is large, of a dark
purplish color when ripe, very succulent and of an agreeable taste. The timber
affords very durable posts, for fencing, etc. As our Mulberry has been found,
upon trial, to answer well for the purpose of raising silk worms, and growing
spontaneously and plentifully in many parts of these states; it is presumed,
many of our countrymen might profitably apply their attention to the culture of
silk.

MYRICA.
CANDLEBERRY MYRTLE.
Class 22. Order 5. Dioecia Tetrandria.
THE Flowers are Male and Female on different plants.

The Male.

The Calyx is a Katkin ovate-oblong, loose, imbricated on all sides, and
consisting of Scales, which are one flowered, moon-shape, obtusely pointed, and
concave.

The Corolla none.

The Filaments are four, (rarely six) thread-form, short, and erect. The
Antherae are large and twin, with two-cleft lobes.

The Female.

The Calyx and Corolla as in the male.

The Germen is somewhat ovate. The Styles are two, threadform and longer than
the calyx. The Stigmas are simple.

The Seed-vessel is a berry, of one cell.

The Seed is one.

Obs. The Gale has four stamina: the Berry compressed at the apex, and three
lobed: the cerifera has six stamina: the berry succulent and roundish.

The Species with us, are,

1. MYRICA cerifera. Candleberry Myrtle.
This grows naturally upon low boggy lands, rising with many strong shrubby
stalks, to the height of six or eight feet: sending out several branches, which
are furnished with stiff spear-shaped leaves, a little sawed toward their
extremities, of a yellowish lucid green on their upper sides but paler
underneath, having very short footstalks, and of a grateful odor when bruised.
The katkins come out on different plants from the berries, and are about an
inch long, standing erect. The female flowers come out on the sides of the
branches in long bunches, and are succeeded by small roundish berries, covered
with a mealy substance, and affording a kind of green wax, which is sometimes
used in making candles.

2. MYRICA cerifera humilis. Dwarf Candleberry Myrtle.
This is a variety of the former kind, differing from it in being of a lower
growth, the branches not so strong, and covered with a greyish bark. The leaves
are also shorter and broader, and more sawed on their edges. The berries afford
a wax like the others.

3. MYRICA Gale. American Bog Gale.
This also grows naturally in bogs and swamps, rising with shrubby stalks to
the height of two or three feet, garnished with lance-shaped leaves, smooth and
a little sawed toward their points. The berries are dry, compressed at the
apex and three lobed.

NYSSA.
The TUPELO-TREE.
Class 23. Order 1. Polygamia Dioecia.
THE Flowers are Male and Hermaphrodite, (in some Species Male and Female) upon
different plants.

The Male.

The Empalement is five-parted and spreading, with a plane bottom.

The Corolla none.

The Filaments are ten, awl-shaped and shorter than the calyx.

The Antherae are twin and the length of the filaments.

The Hermaphrodite.

The Empalement as in the male, sitting upon the germen.

The Corolla none.

The Filaments are five, awl-shaped, and erect. The Antherae are simple.

The Germen is ovate and beneath. The Style is awl-shaped, incurved, and longer
than the stamina. The Stigma is acute.

The Seed-vessel is a drupe, ovate and one cell'd.

The Seed is a nut, oval, acute, hollowed with longitudinal furrows, angled,
and irregular.

Obs. The Nyssa sylvatica is Male and Female on different trees.

The Species are,

1. NYSSA aquatica. Virginian Water TupeloTree.
This grows naturally in wet swamps, or near large rivers, in Carolina and
Florida; rising with a strong upright trunk to the height of eighty or an
hundred feet, dividing into many branches toward the top. The leaves are
pretty large, of an oval, spear-shaped form, generally entire, but sometimes
somewhat toothed, and covered underneath with a whitish down: they are joined
to long, slender footstalks, and affixed to the branches in somewhat of a
verticillate order, presenting a beautiful varied foliage. The berries are near
the size and shape of small olives, and are preserved in like manner by the
French inhabitants upon the Mississippi, where it greatly abounds, and is
called the Olive tree. The timber is white and soft when unseasoned, but light
and compact when dry, which renders it very proper for making trays, bowls, etc.

2. NYSSA Ogeche. The Ogeche Lime Tree.
(Bartram's Catalogue.)
This is a tree of great singularity and beauty; growing naturally in water, in
the southern states, and rising to the height of about thirty feet. The leaves
are oblong, of a deep shining green on their upper sides, and lightly hoary
underneath. The flowers are male and female upon different trees, and are
produced upon divided, or many flowered footstalks. The fruit is nearly oval,
of a deep red color, of the size of a Damascene Plumb, and of an agreeable
acid taste; from which it is called the Limetree. Perhaps this is the
multiflora of Weston.

3. NYSSA sylvatica. Upland Tupelo-Tree, or Sour Gum.
This grows naturally in Pennsylvania and perhaps elsewhere, rising with a
strong upright trunk to the height of thirty or forty feet, and sometimes of
near two feet in diameter; sending off many horizontal, and often depending
branches; garnished with oval, or rather inverse egg-shaped leaves, a little
pointed, entire, of a dark green and shining upper surface, but lighter and a
little hairy underneath: those of male trees are often narrower and sometimes
lanceshaped. The flowers are produced upon pretty long common footstalks,
arising from the base of the young shoots, and dividing irregularly into
several parts, generally from six to ten; each supporting a small flower,
having an empalement of six or seven linear, unequal leaves, and from six to
eight awlshaped spreading stamina, supporting short four lobed Antherae. The
female trees have fewer flowers produced upon much longer, simple, cylindrical
footstalks, thickened at the extremity, and supporting generally three flowers,
sitting close and having a small involucrum. They are composed of five small
oval leaves, and in the center an awl-shaped incurved style, arising from the
oblong germen, which is beneath, and becomes an oval oblong berry, of a dark
purplish color when ripe. The timber of this tree is close grained and curled
so as not to be split or parted; and therefore much used for hubs of wheels for
wagons, carriages, etc.

OLEA.
The OLIVE TREE.
Class 2. Order 1. Diandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, tubular, and small: the border four-toothed,
erect and deciduous.

The Corolla is one petal'd, funnel-form. The tube cylindrical, the length of
the empalement. The border four-parted and plain: the divisions semi-ovate.

The Filaments two, opposite, awl-shaped and short. The Antherae erect.

The Germen is roundish. The Style simple, very short. The Stigmas two-cleft,
thickened, the divisions end-nicked.

The Seed-vessel a drupe, somewhat ovate, smooth, and one cell'd.

The Seed ovate-oblong, and wrinkled,

The Species with us,

OLEA americana. American Olive Tree.
This grows naturally in Carolina and Florida, and is a beautiful ever-green
tree. The leaves are nearly ovate, or somewhat oblong, perennial, of a shining,
full green, on their upper surface, and of a solid consistence. The fruit or
berries are nearly oval, of the size of a sparrow's egg, of a beautiful bluish
purple, and covered with a nebula or gloom.

PHILADELPHUS.
SYRINGA, or MOCK-ORANGE.
Class 12. Order 1. Icosandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is one leaved, four parted, sharp pointed, and permanent.

The Corolla has four petals, roundish, plane, large and spreading.

The Filaments are twenty, awl-shaped and the length of the calyx. The Antherae
are erect and four furrowed.

The Germen is beneath. The Style is thread form and fourparted. The Stigmas
are simple.

The Seed-vessel is a capsule, oval, sharp-pointed, part surrounded by the
calyx, with four cells, and four valves.

The Seeds are numerous, oblong and small.

We have, with us, but one Species, viz.

PHILADELPHUS inodorus. Carolinian Scentless Syringa.
This is said to grow naturally in Carolina; rising with a shrubby stalk to the
height of twelve or fifteen feet, sending out opposite branches, furnished with
smooth, entire leaves, shaped like those of the Pear tree, but standing
opposite upon pretty long footstalks. The flowers are pretty large and have
large empalements of four acute-pointed leaves, and four white, oval, spreading
petals, and a great number of stamina with yellow summits. This is impatient of
much cold.

PINUS.
The PINE TREE.
Class 21. Order 9. Monoecia Polyandria.
THE Male Flowers are disposed in Racemi or bunches.

The Calyx none but the scales of the bud, gaping.

The Corolla none.

The Filaments are numerous and joined beneath in an erect column, divided at
top. The Antherae are erect.

The Female Flowers are in the same plant.

The Calyx is a common, somewhat ovate cone, consisting of Scales, which are
two flowered, oblong, imbricated, rigid, and permanent.

The Corolla none.

The Germen is very small. The Style is awl-shaped. The Stigma simple.

The Seed-vessel none, but the scales of the cone.

The Seed is a nut, increased with a membranaceous wing, which is larger than
the seed, but smaller than the scale of the cone, oblong, straight on one side
and gibbous on the other.

The Species, with us, are,

1. PINUS echinata. Three leaved prickly-cone^ Bastard Pine.
This grows naturally in Virginia. The leaves are long and narrow, sometimes
three, at other times but two in each sheath. The cones are long and slender,
their scales terminating in sharp points.

2. PINUS palustris. Longest three leaved Marsh Pine.
This grows naturally in South Carolina, and is of a middling growth. The
leaves are produced by threes in a sheath and are often ten or twelve inches in
length. The cones are long and large, opening and dropping their seeds in the
fall. It is accounted equal to any for yielding tar, etc.

3. PINUS rigida. Common three leaved Virginian Pine.
This grows common in many places throughout these states, rising often to the
height of sixty or seventy feet, with a large erect trunk, dividing into
branches toward the top, and furnished with pretty long leaves growing by
threes in a sheath. The cones are often produced in clusters round the
branches, they are about three inches long and have rigid scales. There are
whole Forests of many hundred acres of these trees in some back parts of the
country, of which great quantities of Boards are sawed and floated down some of
our long rivers.

4. PINUS Strobus. New England, or White Pine.
This is allowed to out top in growth most of our other trees, rising with a
large erect trunk, to the height of an hundred feet or more, covered with a
smooth bark and sending off many long branches. The leaves are long and
slender, growing by fives in a sheath, and set thick on the branches. The cones
are often six or seven inches in length, and generally besmeared with
turpentine, with which these trees much abound. The cones generally open about
the first of September, soon after which the seeds drop out. This also grows in
great plenty toward the heads of some of our rivers, from whence great
quantities are rasred down, affording excellent masts, yards, spars, etc. etc.
for ship building.

5. PINUS Taeda. Virginian Swamp, or Frankincence Pine.
This grows to a pretty large size, the leaves are very long and narrow and are
produced by threes in a sheath. The cones are pretty long and large. This is
useful for boards, and for producing turpentine and tar, as are the other kinds.

6. PINUS virginiana. Two-leaved Virginian, or Jersey Pine.
This is generally of but low growth, but divided into many branches. The
leaves are broader and shorter than the other kinds, and of a deeper green
color; they are produced by twos in each sheath. The cones are small, each
scale terminating with a prickly point. This is called, in some places, Spruce
Pine.

PINUS-ABIES.
The FIR TREE.
1. PINUS-ABIES Balsamea. Balm of Gilead Fir Tree.
This tree grows to the height of thirty or forty feet, sending off many
branches, which are thick set chiefly upon two sides, with stiff linear leaves,
resembling those of the Yew. The surface of the trunk is almost covered with
small bladders, or risings in the cuticle of the bark, which are filled with a
clear balsam or turpentine. The cones are pretty large, and fall to pieces in
the autumn.

2. PINUS-ABIES canadensis. Newfoundland Spruce.
There are said to be three varieties of this, distinguished by the color of
their cones, into white, red and black; some of which, sometimes become pretty
large trees. The leaves are stiff and linear, and slightly channelled on both
sides, smaller than those of the Balm of Gilead, and set equally upon all sides
of the branches. The trees make a very good appearance, and of these the famous
Sprucebeer is brewed.

3. PINUS-ABIES americana. Hemlock Spruce Fir Tree.
This rises up with but a slender trunk, sometimes to a great height, and is
generally thick set with somewhat horizontal branches. The leaves are shaped
much like those of the Yew and are ranged upon two sides of the branches, so
appearing flat, like those of the European Silver Firs, but are of a pale green
on both sides. The cones are very small, loose, and of an oval oblong form. The
bark is said to be good for tanning leather; and with it, our natives dye their
splints for baskets of a red color.

PINUS-LARIX.
The LARCH-TREE.
1. PINUS-LARIX rubra. Red American LarchTree.
This shoots up to a considerable height with a slender erect trunk, sending
off many slender branches. The leaves are pretty long, linear and soft, coming
out in fasciculi, or small bundles spreading like a painter's brush, and are
set pretty thick round the branches. They are of a light green color and
deciduous. The cones are of a fine red color at their first appearance; they
are small, perhaps three-fourths of an inch long, and half an inch thick, the
scales smooth, opening early in the fall and dropping their seeds, which are
very small and winged.

2. PINUS-LARIX alba. White American Larch-Tree.
This a variety of the other, differing very little, except in the cones, being
of a greenish white color.

3. PINUS-LARIX nigra. Black American Larch-Tree.
This is also a variety differing in having dark colored cones.

PLATANUS.
The PLANE-TREE.
Class 21. Order 8. Monoecia Polyandria.
THE Flowers are Male and Female upon the same plant.

The Male Flowers are disposed in a globose katkin.

The Calyx consists of some very small segments.

The Corolla is scarce manifest.

The Filaments are oblong, thicker above, and colored. The Antherae are four
(...), moving round the filaments to the inferior side.

The Female Flowers are disposed in a globe.

The Calyx consists of many small scales.

The Corolla of many petals, concave, oblong and clubbed.

The Germen are many, disposed in a globe and ending in awl-shaped Styles, with
recurved Stigmas.

The Seed-vessel none. But a globose receptacle.

The Seeds are oblong, angular and clubbed, crowned by the permanent style, and
with a capillary pappus adhering at the base.

Obs. I am in doubt with regard to the petals.

We have, with us, but one Species, viz.

PLATANUS occidentalis. American Plane-Tree, or Large Button Wood.
This grows common by creeks and river sides in many parts of America. It is of
quick growth, and often becomes a large tree of sixty or seventy feet in height
and above three feet in diameter, sending off but few long, diverging branches,
which together with the upper part of the trunk, are generally covered with a
smoothish bark, annually, or often renewed, and falling off in thin plates or
scales. The leaves are broad, and cut into angles, or lobed; having several
acute indentures on their borders, of a light green on their upper side, but
paler, and a little wooly underneath; with long footstalks, and placed
alternately. The flowers are produced in round pendulous balls, of near an inch
in diameter, upon very long footstalks. This is sometimes sawed into boards,
and has been much used of late by our card-makers, for card-boards or backs.

POPULUS.
The POPLAR-TREE.
Class 22. Order 7. Dioecia Octandria.
THE Flowers are Male and Female on different Plants.

The Male.

The Calyx is a common katkin, oblong, loosely imbricated, and cylindrical;
composed of Scales which are one flowered, oblong, and plane, with the margin
torn.

The Corolla none, but

A Nectarium of one leaf, top shaped and tubulous beneath, but oblique and
terminating in an oval border above.

The Filaments are eight, very short. The Antherae are fourcornered and large.

The Female.

The katkin, Scales, and Nectaria, are like the Male.

The Germen is ovate-sharp pointed. The Style is scarce manifest. The Stigma is
four cleft.

The Seed-vessels are ovate capsules, two cell'd and two valv'd: the valves
reflexed.

The Seeds are numerous and ovate, with a volatile capillary pappus.

The Species, with us, are,

1. POPULUS deltoide. White Poplar, or Cotton Tree of Carolina.
(Bartram's Catalogue.)
This becomes a tall tree, with a large erect trunk, covered with a white,
smoothish bark, resembling that of the Aspen tree. The leaves are large,
generally nearly triangular, toothed or indented with sharp and deep
serratures, of a shining full green on their upper surface, but somewhat
lighter or hoary underneath; standing upon long slender footstalks, and
generally restless or in motion. The timber is white, firm, and elastic,
principally used for fence rails. It grows naturally upon rich low lands, on
the banks of large rivers in Carolina and Florida.

2. POPULUS heterophylla. Virginian PoplarTree.
This becomes a pretty large tree, the branches of which are nerved, appearing
as if quadrangular. The leaves are large and variously shaped, some roundish,
others heart-form, slightly sawed on their edges and downy at their first
appearance.

3. POPULUS nigra. Black Poplar.
This is not of very large growth, but covered with a darkish rough bark. The
leaves are somewhat triangular, pretty long pointed, slightly and obtusely
sawed on their edges, standing upon pretty long footstalks, smooth and of a
bright green on their upper surface, but lighter and a little downy underneath.

4. POPULUS tremula. American Aspen-Tree.
This grows frequently to the height of about thirty feet, covered with a
smooth whitish bark. The leaves are small, smooth on both sides, of a dark
green color above, but lighter underneath; roundish, and a little pointed, or
forming nearly an equilateral spherical triangle; slighty crenated, a little
waved on their edges, and trimmed with a very narrow hairy border. Their
footstalks are pretty long, roundish at the base, but compressed on their sides
toward the base of the leaves. The katkins are large appearing early in the
spring.

5. POPULUS balsamifera. Balsam, or TacamahacTree.
This is a tree of but middling growth, covered with a light brown bark. The
leaves are large, somewhat heart-shaped, lightly toothed, or crenated on their
edges, of a dark green on their upper surface but lighter underneath. The buds
abound with a glutinous resin, which is the tacamahacca of the shops.

6. POPULUS balsamifera lanceolata. Lance-leaved Balsam Tree.
This is a variety of the last kind, of a small and very slow growth. The
leaves are spear-shape, of a bright green above, but whitish and variegated
with brownish veins beneath, with a few, scarce observable, serratures on their
edges, and joined to short, channelled, and often somewhat reddish footstalks.

POTENTILLA.
SHRUB CINQUEFOIL.
Class 12. Order 5. Icosandria Polygynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, planish, and half five cleft: the alternate
divisions are less and reflexed.

The Corolla has five petals, roundish, spreading, and inserted by claws in the
calyx.

The Filaments are twenty, awl-shaped, shorter than the corolla, and inserted
in the calyx. The Antherae are elongate-moonshaped.

The Germen are numerous, very small and collected in a little head. The Styles
are thread-form, the length of the stamina, and inserted in the sides of the
germen. The Stigmas are obtuse.

The Seed-vessel none, but a common receptacle, which is roundish, juiceless,
very small, permanent, covered with seeds and included in the calyx.

The Seeds are numerous and sharp pointed.

We have but one Species, viz.

POTENTILLA fruticosa americana. American Shrubby Cinquefoil.
This is a small shrub, seldom rising above two feet high, and spreading into
many branches. The leaves are small and thick set upon the branches, they are
winged, and composed, generally, of five small, oblong hairy lobes, reflexed on
their edges and standing together. The flowers are produced pretty thick on the
branches, of a yellow color, and are succeeded by small heads of pointed seeds.

PRINOS.
The WINTER-BERRY.
Class 6. Order 1. Hexandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is one leaved, plane, half-six-cleft, very small, and permanent.

The Corolla has one petal, wheel-shaped. The tube none. The border is six
parted and plane: the divisions ovate.

The Filaments are six, awl-shaped, erect and shorter than the corolla. The
Antherae are oblong and obtuse.

The Germen is ovate, ending in a Style shorter than the stamina, with an
obtuse Stigma.

The Seed-vessel is a roundish berry, with six cells; and far larger than the
calyx.

The Seeds are solitary, bony, obtuse, unequal on one side and angled on the
other.

Obs. Sometimes a sixth part of the number is excluded.

There are two Species of this Shrub, viz.

1. PRINOS glaber. Evergreen Winter-Berry.
This grows in several parts of North America, rising up with slender shrubby
stalks, to the height of six or eight feet, dividing into branches, which are
garnished with small, evergreen, oblong, smooth leaves, of a thick consistence,
with a few slight serratures toward their points, and placed alternate, upon
shortish footstalks. The flowers are produced from the bosom of the leaves upon
short footstalks; and are succeeded by small roundish berries, of a black
color when ripe.

2. PRINOS verticillatus. Virginian WinterBerry.
This grows naturally in moist places, by streams of water; generally sending
up several slender stalks to the height of eight or ten feet, dividing into a
few branches toward the top. The leaves are lanceshaped, sharp pointed, and
acutely sawed on their edges; having short slender footstalks, and placed
alternately. The flowers come out at the bosom of the leaves in small Corymbi
or Clusters; of an herbaceous color. They are succeeded by roundish berries of
a red color when ripe, and remaining long on the branches, almost surrounding
them in places and somewhat resembling a whorl.

Note, The inner bark of this shrub is very good to make poultices of for
ripening tumors.

PRUNUS.
The PLUMB-TREE.
Class 12. Order 1. Icosandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is one leaved, bell-shaped, five cleft, and deciduous; the
divisions are obtuse and concave.

The Corolla has five petals, roundish, concave, large, spreading, and inserted
by claws in the calyx.

The Filaments are from twenty to thirty, awl-shaped, near the length of the
corolla, and inserted in the calyx. The Antherae are twin and short.

The Germen is roundish. The Style is thread-form and the length of the
stamina. The Stigma is orbiculate.

The Seed-vessel is a roundish drupe.

The Seed is a nut, roundish and compressed.

The Species, with us, are,

1. PRUNUS americana. Large Yellow Sweet Plumb.
This generally rises to the height of twelve or fifteen feet, spreading into
many stiff branches. The leaves are oblong, oval, acute pointed, sharply sawed
on their edges and much veined. The flowers generally come out very thick round
the branches, often upon thick short spurs; and are succeeded by large oval
fruit, with a sweet succulent pulp. We have a great variety of these, growing
naturally in a good, moist soil, with reddish and yellowish fruit, but
differing much in size, taste, and consistence.

2. PRUNUS angustifolia. Chicasaw Plumb.
This is scarcely of so large a growth as the former, but rising with a stiff
shrubby stalk, dividing into many branches, which are garnished with smooth
lance-shaped leaves, much smaller and narrower than the first kind; a little
waved on their edges, marked with very fine, slight, colored serratures, and
of an equal, shining green color, on both sides. The blossoms generally come
out very thick, and are succeeded by oval, or often somewhat egg-shaped fruit,
with a very thin skin, and soft sweet pulp. There are varieties of this with
yellow and crimson colored fruit. These being natives of the southern states,
are somewhat impatient of much cold.

3. PRUNUS mississippi. Crimson Plumb.
This grows naturally upon the Mississippi, and is of larger size than most of
the other kinds. The fruit are crimson colored, and somewhat acid.

4. PRUNUS maritima. Sea side Plumb.
This grows naturally toward the sea coast, rising to the height of eight or
ten feet, often leaning, and spreading into many branches. The leaves are
oblong, rather smaller and not so pointed as those of the common plumb; smooth
and of a shining green on the upper side, but something lighter underneath, and
slightly sawed on the edges. This is generally well filled with flowers, a few
of which are succeeded by small, roundish fruit.

5. PRUNUS declinata. Dwarf Plumb.
This is of a small dwarfish growth, seldom rising above four or five feet
high, but frequently bearing fruit at the height of two or three; which is
small, and almost black when ripe.

To this Genus also belongs

CERASUS.
The CHERRY-TREE.
Of which our Species are,

1. PRUNUS-CERASUS virginiana. Virginian BirdCherry-Tree.
This grows naturally in a rich moist soil, often to the height of forty feet
or more, with a trunk of eighteen or twenty inches in diameter, generally
retaining its thickness a considerable height, and branching out toward the
top. The leaves are lance-shaped, or long, narrow, pointed, and sawed on their
edges. The flowers are produced in bunches, generally pretty thick set on the
branches; they are of a white color, and are succeeded by small fruit, of a
purplish color when ripe, and of a disagreeable, bitter taste, but greedily
devoured by the birds.

The timber is of a reddish streaked color, capable of receiving a fine
polish; and is frequently sawed into boards, and used by joiners,
cabinent-makers, etc. for many purposes.

2. PRUNUS-CERASUS canadensis. Canadian, or Dwarf Bird-Cherry-Tree.
This is a small kind, growing to the height of six or eight feet, and dividing
into branches, which are furnished with broader and shorter leaves, somewhat
resembling those of the Apple, or Crab-tree, but smaller. The flowers are
produced in a racemus, or bunch, composed of more footstalks than the Virginian
kind; and are succeeded by fruit of near the same color and size, not of so
bitter a taste, but greatly corrugating the mouth and throat, so as to obtain
the name of Choak-Cherry.

3. PRUNUS-CERASUS montana. Mountain Bird-Cherry-Tree.
This grows naturally upon the mountains in the back parts of Pennsylvania;
rising up with a slender stem to the height of twelve or fifteen feet, and
dividing into a few very slender branches, furnished with leaves resembling the
first, or Virginian kind. The fruit is likewise produced in the same manner,
but is smaller, of a red color, and an extremely acid taste.

And also to the Genus Prunus, belongs,

LAURO-CERASUS.
The LAUREL-TREE.
Of which we have but one Species. viz.

PRUNUS-LAURO-CERASUS serratifolia. Carolinian Evergreen Bay Tree.
This is a beautiful evergreen shrub, but of small growth; spreading with
lateral branches, on every side and covered with a brown bark. The leaves are
spear-shaped, above two inches long and three quarters of an inch or more in
breadth, with a few sharp serratures on their edges, standing alternately on
very short footstalks, of a thick consistence, and shining green color,
continuing their verdure all the year. The flowers are generally very numerous,
perfectly white, and are succeeded by roundish fruit of the size of a middling
cherry, of a black color when ripe. This is a native of South Carolina, and
other southern States.

PTELEA. PTELEA.
Class 4. Order 1. Tetrandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is five-parted, acute, and small.

The Corolla has four petals, ovate-lanced, plane, spreading, larger than the
calyx, and coriaceous.

The Filaments are four, awl-shaped. The Antherae are roundish.

The Germen is orbiculate and compressed. The Style is short.

The Stigmas are two, a little obtuse.

The Seed-vessel is a roundish, perpendicular membrane, in the center two
cell'd.

The Seed is one, obtuse, and lessened at the base.

Obs. The Petals and stamina, also the divisions of the calyx, have often one
added to their number.

We have, with us, but one Species, viz.

PTELEA trifoliata. Carolinian Shrub-Trefoil.
This rises with an upright woody stem, to the height of ten or twelve feet,
dividing into many branches, covered with a smooth greyish bark. The leaves are
trifoliate, or composed of three oval, spear-shaped lobes, of a bright green on
their upper side, but paler underneath, and inserted together at the end of a
pretty long footstalk. The flowers terminate the branches in a kind of umbel,
or large branching heads, of a whitish herbaceous color; and are succeeded by
roundish flat, bordered capsules, somewhat resembling those of the Elm, each
containing two seeds.

PYROLA.
WINTER-GREEN.
Class 10. Order 1. Decandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is five-parted, small, and permanent.

The Corolla is composed of five petals, which are roundish, concave, and
spreading.

The Filaments are ten, awl-shaped, shorter than the corolla.

The Antherae are nodding, large, and two-horned upward.

The Pistillum has a roundish, angular Germen; a filiform, permanent Style,
longer than the stamina; and a thickish Stigma.

The Pericarpium, or Seed-vessel, is a roundish, depressed, pentagonal Capsule,
with five cells, gaping at the angles.

The Seeds are numerous and chassy.

Obs. The Stamina and style differ sometimes in situation.

The Species, with us, are,

1. PYROLA maculata. Spotted Pyrola.
This is a small plant, seldom rising above four or five inches high, with
slender ligneous stalks. The leaves are ever-green, oblong and pointed, of a
thick consistence, with a few sharp serratures on their edges; smooth and of a
dark green on their upper sides, but marked with a broad, branching,
longitudinal vein or streak, of a whitish or paler color; and somewhat reddish
underneath. There are generally three or four of these placed at the top of the
stem somewhat horizontally, and sometimes smaller ones beneath, set by threes.
The flowers are likewise produced at the top upon a pretty long, (nodding at
first, but afterward erect) divided footstalk, often sustaining two or three
white flowers, which are succeeded by roundish, depressed capsules, filled with
small seeds.

2. PYROLA rotundifolia. Round leaved Pyrola.
This is of smaller growth than the former, having about three or four roundish
leaves, rising from the root, with pretty long three sided footstalks,
channelled above. These often become pretty large and a little waved on their
edges, they are of a light green, and scarcely perennial. The flowers are
produced upon a radical triangular footstalk, of four or five inches in length,
in form of a racemus or bunch, supporting five or six white flowers, which are
succeeded by small, round, depressed capsules.

3. PYROLA umbellata. Umbellated Pyrola.
This grows commonly to the height of five or six inches, generally set pretty
thick with leaves, which are wedge-shaped or narrowest toward the base,
smooth, of a shining green, and sharply sawed on their edges. The flowers
terminate the stalks on a pretty long divided footstalk, in a kind of little
umbel, which is nodding at first but becomes erect, supporting five or six
round, pentagonal, depressed capsules, filled with small seeds.

A decoction or infusion of this, has been used with considerable success as a
substitute for the Peruvian bark. The roots are said to give ease in the tooth
ach. This kind is called by the Indians Phipsesawa.

PYRUS.
The PEAR TREE.
Class 12. Order 4. Icosandria Pentagynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, concave, half five-cleft, and permanent; the
segments spreading.

The Corolla has five roundish, concave, large petals, inserted in the
empalement.

The Filaments are twenty, awl-shaped, shorter than the corolla, and inserted
in the empalement. The Antherae simple.

The Germen is beneath. The Styles five, thread-form, the length of the
stamina. The Stigmas simple.

The Seed-vessel a pome, roundish, umbilicated and fleshy, with five
membranaceous cells.

The Seeds a few, oblong, obtuse, sharpened at the base, unequal on one side and
plane on the other.

To this Genus belongs

MALUS.
The APPLE TREE.
Of which we have one Species, viz.

PYRUS-MALUS coronaria. Virginian Sweet-scented Crab-Tree.
This often grows to the height of twelve or fifteen feet, dividing into many
stiff branches, set pretty thick with short stiff spurs. The leaves are
somewhat like those of the Apple Tree, but often toothed, or largely and
irregularly sawed on their edges. The flowers generally come out thick upon the
branches, upon pretty long dividing footstalks; they are pretty large, of a
beautiful blush color, and fragrant odor at their first appearance. The fruit
is small, hard, roundish, umbilicated, and extremely acid. It is frequently
used for conserves, etc. There is said to be a variety of this in Carolina with
evergreen leaves, though I have never seen it.

QUERCUS.
The OAK-TREE.
Class 21. Order 8. Monoecia Polyandria.
THE Male Flowers are disposed in a loose katkin.

The Empalement is of one leaf, four or five-parted; the divisions are acute
and often bifid.

They have no Corolla.

The Filaments are several, very short. The Antherae large and double.

The Female are in close buds, on the same plant with the Male.

The Perianthium is of one leaf, coriaceous, hemispherical, rough, and entire,
scarce manifest in the flower.

There is no Corolla.

The Germen is egg-shaped and small. The Style simple, fivecleft and longer
than the empalement. The Stigmas are simple and permanent.

There is no Seed-vessel, but an oval, columnar, smooth nut, shaved at the base
and affixed in the short calyx.

The Species and Varieties with us, are many, which, I think, may be divided in
the following manner, into

Quercus alba. White Oak.

1. QUERCUS alba. Common American White Oak.
This grows very common, and with age arrives to the size of a large tree of
seventy or eighty feet in height, and of three, four, five, or more feet in
diameter; dividing into many large branches, and covered with a whitish scaly
bark. The leaves are narrowed toward the base, but spreading and deeply
sinuated obliquely, toward the ends; the sinuses obtuse, the angles, or
productions unequal in length, entire and obtuse. They are of a glaucous, or
light green underneath and have very short footstalks. The acorns are middling
sized, sitting in small shallow cups. There are some varieties of this,
differing in the hardness and toughness of the timber, and somewhat in their
acorns or fruit. It affords a hard, tough, useful and valuable timber, which is
hewed into beams, etc. for frame buildings; sawed into plank, etc. for ship
building; and applied to various other useful purposes. Our swine are often
wholly fatted upon the several kinds of acorns, but for these and Chestnut Oak
they seek most diligently.

2. QUERCUS alba minor. Barren White Oak.
This grows generally upon poor, barren, or waste land, rising perhaps to the
height of thirty or forty feet, covered with scaly greyish bark. The leaves are
somewhat rough, but of a shining green above, somewhat paler underneath; they
are sinuated deeply, most obtusely, and irregularly; the lobes or productions.
(if I may be allowed the expression) are obtuse, often somewhat angular, and
very irregular. The acorns are small and striped. The timber is accounted very
durable for posts, to set in the earth; otherwise not much esteemed unless for
fuel.

3. QUERCUS alba palustris. Swamp White Oak.
This becomes a pretty large spreading tree, of two or three feet in diameter
and of proportionable height. The bark is often rougher or more furrowed than
the other kinds, and greyish colored. The leaves are somewhat wedge-shaped or
narrowed toward the base, and toothed on their edges and extremities. The
acorns are larger and rounder than those of the common White Oak, and have
larger and thicker cups, supported often by pairs upon a long, strong footstalk.

Quercus nigra. Black Oak.
4. QUERCUS nigra. Common Pennsylvanian Black Oak.
This grows to the height of sixty or seventy feet, and to three or four feet
in diameter, with large spreading branches. The leaves are large, spreading,
and somewhat woolly; their footstalks longer than those of the White Oak. They
are irregularly and sometimes pretty deeply sinuated, the angles or productions
unequal, generally obtuse, yet with their veins extending in a bristly point.
The acorns are roundish and not large, sitting in thick scaly cups. There is, I
think, a variety of this of much smaller growth, with larger leaves and
different somewhat in the fruit. Our common Black Oak is used much (where Cedar
is scarce) for making shingles, and also for rails, etc.

5. QUERCUS nigra digituta. Finger-leaved Black Oak.
This grows naturally in low lands, rising to the height of thirty or forty
feet, with a trunk of considerable thickness, covered with a rough blackish
bark. The leaves are sinuated, or divided toward their extremities into two or
three pretty long, somewhat finger-shaped lobes, of unequal length, with others
shorter, sometimes at the sides; all of which end in a bristly point. The
acorns are small, but the cups pretty large.

6. QUERCUS nigra trifida. Maryland Black Oak.
This grows naturally in Maryland, and other low lands, with a trunk of
eighteen inches or two feet in diameter, and thirty or forty feet in height.
The leaves are wedge-shaped, or narrowed toward the base, and three-pointed,
with bristly terminations. The acorns and cups resemble the last mentioned.

7. QUERCUS nigra integrifolia. Entire-leaved Black Oak.
This grows about the size of the other low-land Black Oak, and is of the same
appearance, except the leaves being somewhat inverse egg-shaped, and often a
little notched or indented on each side toward the extremity.

8. QUERCUS nigra pumila. Dwarf Black Oak.
This grows naturally upon poor barren ridges, rising to the height of five or
six feet, with a crooked, branching stem. The leaves are about three pointed,
much resembling those of the Maryland Black Oak. The acorns are small, and
stand in small shallow cups. This, I believe, is of little use or beauty.

Quercus rubra. Red Oak.
9. QUERCUS rubra maxima. Largest Red Oak.
This often becomes a large tree, of the height of seventy or eighty feet and
of four, five, or sometimes six feet in diameter; retaining its thickness to a
considerable height, and without lateral branches, but spreading at the top.
The leaves are large, obtusely and but lightly sinuated, the angles acute, each
often terminating with several acute, bristly points. The acorns are large and
somewhat conical, sitting in broad shallow cups. The timber is used for staves,
shingles, rails, etc.

10. QUERCUS rubra ramosislima. Water Red Oak.
This grows most naturally by creek sides, or in low wet places, rising to the
height of a pretty large tree; generally thick set with slender lateral
branches, and covered with somewhat smooth, greyish colored bark. The leaves
are small, obtusely and deeply sinuated, pretty uniformly, almost to the
midrib; the angles or lobes are narrow, acute, and unequal, each terminating
with several bristly points. The acorns and cups are small. This is generally
known by the name of Water or Low Land Spanish Oak. The buts of these trees are
often used for rimming of carriage wheels, etc.

11. QUERCUS rubra montana. Upland Red Oak.
This grows naturally upon higher and (...) land than the others, often
attaining to fifty or sixty feet in height. The bark is somewhat rough and
lightish colored. The leaves are deeply and obtusely sinuated, somewhat
regularly; the angles somewhat bitrifid, or ending in several acute, bristly
points; their footstalks are pretty long. The acorns and cups are middling
sized. The timber is generally worm eaten, or rotten at heart, therefore of
little esteem. It is likewise commonly known by the name of Spanish Oak; and, I
think, has some varieties differing in the size of their fruit and leaves.

12. QUERCUS rubra nana. Dwarf Barren Oak.
This grows naturally upon dry barren ridges, and is found from five to ten
feet high, generally growing very crooked. The leaves are smaller, but somewhat
resemble those last described. The acorns and cups are small, the acorns red at
the base and striped when taken first from their cups. It is called barren from
its place of growth, but is generally almost covered with fruit, sitting very
close on all sides of the branches.

Quercus Phellos. Willow-leaved Oak.

13. QUERCUS Phellos angustifolia. Narrow Willow-leaved Oak.
This grows naturally in low lands, and to the height of fifty or sixty feet,
with a trunk of considerable size. The leaves are entire, smooth, oblong, and
lance-shaped, of about three inches in length and half and inch in breadth, and
have very short footstalks. The acorns and cups are small. The timber is found
and good.

14. QUERCUS Phellos latifolia. Broad Willow-leaved Oak.
This tree very much resembles the other in every respect, except in having
leaves of about double the width; and broader but perhaps shorter cups and
acorns.

15. QUERCUS Phellos sempervirens. Evergreen Willow-leaved Oak.
This grows naturally in Carolina, becoming a pretty large tree, of the height
of forty feet or more. The leaves are perennial, entire, somewhat oval,
spear-shaped, of a dark green color and thick consistence. The acorns are
small, oblong, sitting in short cups, and containing a very sweet kernel. The
timber is hard, tough and coarse grained.

Quercus Prinus. Chesnut-leaved Oak.

16. QUERCUS Prinus. Chesnut-leaved Oak.
This grows naturally upon a light gravelly soil, frequently to forty feet or
more in height, and above two feet in diameter; covered with a furrowed,
lightish colored bark. The leaves are somewhat oval and uniformly crenated on
their edges, or rather sometimes obtusely toothed. The acorns are smooth and
large, greenish colored and sitting in shallow spreading cups. The timber
somewhat approaches toward that of Chestnut in appearance, but affords very
good fuel, rails, etc.

17. QUERCUS Prinus humilis. Dwarf Chestnut or Chinquepin Oak.
This generally rises with several shrubby, spreading stalks, to the height of
two or three feet. The leaves are somewhat wedge-shaped and toothed, or
slightly and obliquely sinuated. The acorns and cups pretty much resemble those
of the large kind, but are considerably smaller.

It may not be improper here to make some remarks with respect to cutting, or
felling of timber. Long experience, I think, has sufficiently ascertained,
that timber cut down in the spring of the year, when full of sap, and the
leaves fully expanded; and also in the third or last quarter of the moon's age;
is much more durable than when cut at any other time. Timber when full of sap
and vigor, in all probability, contains also more oily particles, which, in
proportion as they abound, are known to add to its durability. With regard to
the influence of the moon, it may probably be accounted a superstitious or
whimsical fancy, but that it materially affects timber is a fact well known to
those who strip, or; peel bark for the use of tanners; and when accounted for
in one case, may probably throw some light upon the other. But further, it is
also a fact well known, that timber, whose bark has been sufficiently separated
and peeled round at the but, in order for deading, as it is termed; if done in
the decrease of the moon, retains its greenness often a considerable time; but
if in the increase, withers in a much shorter time. From hence, I think, we may
conclude, that the sap or juice of trees, has a kind of monthly circulation, or
revolution; ascending in the moon's decrease, but descending in the increase.
However, be this as it may, the falling of timber in the different phasis of
the moon, is considently asserted, from experience, to materially affect its
durability.

RHODODENDRUM.
DWARF ROSE-BAY.
Class 10. Order 1. Decandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, five parted and permanent.

The Corolla of one leaf, wheel-funnelled: the border spreading: the divisions
rounded.

The Filaments ten, thread-form, almost the length of the corolla, and
declined. The Antherae oval.

The Germen five cornered, retuse. The Style thread-form, the length of the
corolla. The Stigma obtuse.

The Seed-vessel ovate, angled, five cell'd.

The Seeds numerous and small.

We have, with us, but one Species, viz.

RHODODENDRUM maximum. Pennsylvanian Mountain Laurel.
This grows to the height of about six or eight feet, often with several stems
from the same root. The leaves are oblong and entire, generally about four or
five inches in length and one and a half or near two in breadth: of a thick
consistence, and shining dark green on the upper side but lighter underneath,
continuing their verdure all the year. The flowers are pretty large and of a
pale rose color, studded with spots of a deeper red, having their tubes a
little bent. They are produced at the extremity of the former year's shoots, in
roundish clusters, making a beautiful appearance. This is much and deservedly
esteemed as a very beautiful, evergreen, flowering shrub.

RHUS.
SUMACH.
Class 5. Order 3. Pentandria. Trigynia.
THE Empalement is five-parted, beneath, erect, and permanent.

The Corolla of five petals, ovate and a little spreading.

The Filaments are five, very short. The Antherae small, shorter than the
corolla.

The Germen above, roundish, and the size of the corolla. The Styles scarce
any. The Stigmas three, hearted, small.

The Seed vessel a berry, roundish, and of one cell.

The Seed one, roundish, bony.

Obs. The Toxicodendron has smooth, striated berries^ the kernel compressed and
furrowed.

The Vernix is male and female upon different plants.

The Glabrum (and perhaps some others) is female and hermaphrodite on different
plants.

The Species with us, are,

1. RHUS Copallinum. Lentiscus-leaved Sumach.
This grows to the height of six, eight, or sometimes ten feet, dividing into
slender branches, and covered with speckled bark. The leaves are winged, and
composed of four or five pair of narrow, entire lobes, terminated by an odd
one; joined to a common footstalk; with decurrent, leaffy expansions between
each pair of lobes. The flowers are produced in loose, compound panicles, of an
herbaceous color, and are succeeded by reddish seeds, sprinkled with a greyish
pounce. This grows naturally in a flaty, gravelly soil. The berries are very
acid. There are some varieties of this, much resembling it but of smaller
growth, and with redder berries.

2. RHUS glabrum. Smooth Pennsylvanian Sumach.
This grows naturally in several of the northern States, rising to the height
of six or eight feet, dividing in a few thick, pithy and somewhat angled
branches; covered with a smooth bark. The leaves are large and winged, composed
of eight, nine, or ten pair of lobes, and an odd one; oblong, pointed and sawed
on their edges; of a pretty deep green on their upper sides, but much lighter
underneath and changing reddish in autumn. The flowers are hermaphrodite and
female on separate plants, and are produced in large, erect, compounded
panicles, or thyrsi, terminating the branches; of an herbaceous color; the
hermaphrodite of which are largest and barren, but the female are succeeded by
seeds with a red meally covering, of an acid taste.

RHUS glabrum carolinense. Carolinian Scarlet-flowering Sumach.
This is a variety of the last described, but differing in having scarlet
flowers.

RHUS glabrum canadense. Canadian Red-flowering Sumach.
This is also a variety of the same, growing naturally in Canada, with red
flowers.

3. RHUS typhinum. Stag's-horn Sumach.
This grows naturally in Virginia and Pennsylvania, often rising to the height
of twelve or fifteen feet, with a trunk of six or eight inches in diameter;
dividing at the top into several branches; which, when young, are covered with
a soft, velvet-like down, resembling that of a young stag's horn, both in
color and texture. The leaves are composed of six or seven pair of oblong
lobes, terminated by an odd one, ending in acute points, and together with the
midrib, a little hairy underneath. The flowers are produced in a close, erect
panicle or thyrsus, terminating the branches; they are of an herbaceous color
and are succeeded by seeds enclosed in a purple, woolly, succulent covering;
making a fine appearance in the autumn.

4. RHUS canadense. Canadian trifoliate Sumach.
This grows naturally in Canada, and perhaps the northern parts of
Pennsylvania. The stems are slender, rising to the height of six or eight feet,
and covered with a brown bark. The leaves are composed of three lobes, somewhat
egg-shaped and joined to a common footstalk. The flowers are male and female on
different plants.

To this Genus is also added,
TOXICODENDRON.
The POISON-TREE.
Of which we have,

1. RHUS-TOXICODENDRON Vernix. Varnish-Tree, or Poison Ash.
This rises with a pretty strong, erect stem, to the height of twelve or
fourteen feet; dividing toward the top into several branches. The leaves are
winged, and composed of three or four pair of lobes, terminated by an odd one;
which are for the most part oval, spear-shaped, smooth, and of a lucid green on
their upper side, but paler and a little hairy underneath; their footstalks
changing of a purple color in autumn. The male and female flowers are produced
upon different trees, and are disposed in loose panicles, coming out from the
bosom of the leaves; of an herbaceous color. The female are succeeded by
small, roundish seeds, of a lightish color when ripe. This is allowed to be
the same with the true Varnish-tree of Japan; where it is collected in great
quantities, by making incisions in the trees and placing vessels underneath to
receive the milky juice, which hardens and becomes the true varnish; much used
in various kinds of curious workmanship. This, in all probability, might be
collected here equal in quality with that of Japan and to considerable
advantage. This tree ought to be handled with caution, as it is very poisonous
to many people.

2. RHUS-TOXICODENDRON toxicodendrum. Poison-Oak.
This has a low, shrubby stalk, seldom rising above three or four feet. The
leaves are trifoliate, with pretty long footstalks, the lobes are entire,
smooth and somewhat heart-shaped. The flowers come out from the sides of the
stalks, in loose panicles of an herbaceous color; small, and not always
hermaphrodite. They are succeeded by roundish, channelled, smooth berries, of a
yellowish gray color when ripe.

3. RHUS-TOXICODENDRON radicans. Poison-Vine.
This rises with many shrubby climing stems, attaching themselves to every
neighboring support; and often rising to the height of twenty or thirty feet,
with a stem of two or three inches in diameter; sending off many branches. The
leaves are trifoliate, and have pretty long footstalks; the lobes are somewhat
oval and pointed, often somewhat toothed. The flowers are produced in short
panicles from the sides of the branches, and are succeeded by roundish berries,
of a brownish color when ripe.

RIBES.
The CURRANT-BUSH.
Class 5. Order 1. Pentandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, part five-cleft and bellied: the divisions
oblong, concave, colored, reflexed and permanent.

The Corolla is of five petals, small, obtuse and erect, adjoined to the margin
of the empalement.

The Filaments are five, awl-shaped, erect and inserted in the calyx. The
Antherae are incumbent, compressed, and gaping at the margin.

The Germen roundish and beneath. The Style bifid. The Stigmas obtuse.

The Seed-vessela berry, globous, umbilicated and of one cell, with two
receptacles, lateral, opposite and longitudinal.

The Seeds many, roundish, and somewhat compressed.

The Species, with us, are,

Ribesia inermia. Current-Trees.

1. RIBES nigrum pennsylvanicum. Pennsylvanian Black Currants.
This grows to the height of the common cultivated Current, but the stalks are
generally more slender and covered with a darkish, smooth bark. The leaves have
the same resemblance but are smaller. The flowers grow in loose bunches, and
are succeeded by oblong, black fruit when ripe.

Grossulariae aculeatae. Goose-berries.

2. RIBES oxycanthoides. Mountain Wild Gooseberry.
These grow to the size of the common Goose berry, but have smaller stems and
hot branching so much; but near the earth are often prickly on all sides. The
leaves are smaller but have the same appearance. The fruit is also much smaller
but of an agreeable taste when ripe. This either by a little culture becomes
smooth, otherwise we have a different kind, not more prickly than the common.

3. RIBES cynosbati. Prickly fruited Wild Goose-berry.
This grows naturally in Canada and the upper parts of Pennsylvania; and much
resembles the other, except in having its fruit covered on all sides with
softish prickles.

ROBINIA.
ROBINIA, or FALSE-ACACIA
Class 17. Order 3. Diadelphia Decandria.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, small, bell-shaped, and four-toothed; the three
inferior slender; the superior fourth of double the width, and slightly
emarginated; all equal in length.

The Corolla Butterfly-shaped.

The Standard roundish, large, spreading and obtuse.

The Wings oblong, ovate, free: with very short, obtuse appendages.

The Keel almost semi-orbiculate, compressed, obtuse, and the length of the
wings.

The Stamina are Filaments in two sets, or bodies; (one simple, the other
nine-cleft) rising above. The Antherae roundish.

The Germen cylindrical, oblong. The Style thread-form, bent upward. The Stigma
villous before at the apex of the style.

The Seed-vessel large, compressed, gibbous, and long.

The Seeds few, kidney-form.

The Species with us, are,

1. ROBINIA Pseud-Acacia. White flowering Robinia, or Locust-Tree.
This grows naturally in several of these States; rising to the height of forty
or fifty feet, with a trunk of eighteen or twenty inches in diameter, dividing
into many branches which are armed with short, strong spines. The bark is
darkish colored and rough. The leaves are winged and generally composed of
eight or ten pair of small, oval lobes, terminated by an odd one; entire, of a
bright green and sitting close to the midrib. The flowers are produced from the
sides of the branches in long pendulous bunches, each having a separate
footstalk; they are white, of a butterfly shape and sweet smelling; and are
succeeded by compressed pods, of three or four inches in length and half an
inch in width, containing several hard, kidney-shaped seeds. The timber is very
durable, and used for posts to set in the earth, and other purposes; therefore,
the propagation of it might be well worthy of attention. Its natural place of
growth is in a rich moist soil.

2. ROBINIA rosea. Rose colored Robinia.
This spreads much from its running roots, sending up weak branching stalks, to
the height of six or eight feet, but often flowering much smaller. The whole
plant, with the footstalks of the leaves and flowers, are closely armed with
soft, purplish spines. The leaves are winged and composed of five or six pair
of oval, concave lobes, terminated by an odd one, with their midribs protruding
in short bristly points. The flowers are larger than those of the other kind
and of a Peach blossom color, with their stamina distinctly in two bodies;
whereas those of the other are frequently all joined at the base. This is a
beautiful flowering shrub, sometimes flowering twice or more in a season, but
seldom producing seeds. There are several other varieties differing somewhat in
their pods or color of their flowers.

ROSA.
The ROSE-BUSH.
Class 12. Order 5. Icosandria Polygynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf. The tube bellied; narrowed at the neck; the
border spreading, five parted and globous: the divisions long, narrow and
pointed.

The Corolla is composed of five petals, heart-shaped, the length of the
empalement, and inserted in its neck.

The Stamina are very many, capillary, very short, and inserted in the neck of
the empalement. The Stigmas obtuse.

The Seed-vessel is fleshy, top-shaped, colored, and of one cell.

The Seeds numerous, oblong, hairy, and joined within on all sides of the
Seed-vessel.

The Species, native with us, are,

1. ROSA carolinensis. Wild Virginian Rose.
This rises with several stalks to the height of five or six feet, somewhat
prickly, as are also the footstalks of the leaves and flowers. The leaves are
composed of four or five pair of lobes terminated with an odd one, which are
somewhat spear-shaped and sawed on their edges. The flowers are single of a red
color and late coming.

2. ROSA palustris. Swamp Pennsylvanian Rose.
This grows generally in swamps; rising to the height of four or five feet,
with erect, and very prickly stems, branching out at top in a regular head. The
leaves are composed of three pair of lobes, terminated by an odd one, of an
oblong, oval shape and slightly serrated, joined to a common footstalk with a
few spines underneath. The flowers are single and of a damask color; the hips
or seed-vessels are of a dark red, roundish, depressed, prickly or bristly, and
very clammy to the touch.

3. ROSA humilis. Dwarf Pennsylvanian Rose.
This rises with several slender stems to the height of two or three feet;
covered with a brownish green bark, and armed with a few sharp spines. The
leaves are composed of three or four pair of lobes, and an odd one, of an
oblong egg-shape and sharply sawed on their edges. The leaves of the flower cup
have often linear, leaffy elongations. The flowers are single and of a pale
reddish color.

4. ROSA Pennsylvanica plena. Double Pennsylvanian Rose.
This very much resembles the last described in growth and appearance, except
in having a double flower.

RUBUS.
The RASPBERRY BUSH and BRAMBLE.
Class 12. Order 5. Icosandria Polygynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, five-parted: the divisions oblong, spreading
and permanent.

The Corolla is of five petals, roundish, somewhat spreading, of the length of
the Empalement and inserted into it.

The Filaments are numerous, shorter than the petals, and inserted in the
Empalement. The Antherae are roundish and compressed.

The Germen are numerous. The Styles small, capillary, and arising from the
sides of the germen. The Stigmas simple and permanent.

The Seed-vessel a compound berry: the acini roundish, collected in a unequal
head, concave beneath; and each with one cell.

The Seeds solitary and oblong; their receptacle conical.

The Species, with us, are,

1. RUBUS fruticosus. Common Blackberry Bush.
This rises generally (with several stalks from the same root) to the height of
four or five feet, but sometimes to eight or ten: which are somewhat angled,
and pretty thick set with sharp prickles. The leaves are composed of three
lobes, the side ones of which are often divided; mostly egg-shaped, pointed,
acutely and unequally sawed on their edges, a little hairy underneath, and
joined to a pretty long prickly footstalk, the middle one extending some little
distance from the others. This is generally well furnished with flowers, which
often stand upon panicled, or divided footstalks, and are succeeded by black
fruit when ripe.

2. RUBUS hispidus. American Dewberry Bush.
This is much smaller than the other, having several slender weak stems, which
often trail on the ground to a considerable distance. The leaves very much
resemble those of the Blackberry, but are generally smaller. The fruit is also
smaller, rounder and blacker; and supported upon long, simple, prickly
footstalks.

3. RUBUS canadensis. Smooth stalked Canadian Bramble.
This is said to grow in Canada with purplish stalks without prickles. The
leaves are fingered; composed of ten, five, and three lobes, which are very
slender, lance-shaped, and sharply serrated.

4. RUBUS occidentalis. American Raspberry.
This rises with a round prickly stalk, of seven or eight feet in length, which
often descends again to the earth in a semi-circular manner, sometimes taking
root. The stalks are covered with a thin bluish scum or mist, and furnished
with trifoliate leaves. The lobes are somewhat heart, or egg-shaped; cut and
sawed on their edges, whitish and downy underneath, the lateral ones sometimes
divided, the common footstalk pretty long, and the middle or terminal lobe a
little subtended. The flowers are produced at the extremity of the branches in
a kind of racemus or bunch, and are succeeded by small fruit of a reddish black
color when ripe; the acini of which are joined, parting entire from the
conical receptacle.

5. RUBUS odoratus. Virginian Rose-flowering Raspberry.
This rises with upright woody stalks, without prickles, to the height of three
or four feet, covered with a brown scaly bark. The leaves are single, large,
palmated or divided into five or more pointed lobes, sharply sawed on their
edges, a little hairy, and joined to pretty long, hairy footstalks. The flowers
are produced in a kind of panicle at the extremity of the branches, of a
curdled reddish color; resembling a small single Rose, both in their petals;
and divisions of their flower cups which are villous, and terminate in leaffy
elongations. This grows naturally on rocky mountains in Pennsylvania and
Virginia, and makes an agreeable appearance by a long succession of rose-shaped
flowers.

SALIX.
The WILLOW-TREE.
Class 22. Order 2. Dioecia Diandria.
THE Male Flowers are disposed in a common, oblong, imbricated katkin, with an
involucrum formed of the bud.

The Scales are one-flowered, oblong, plain, and spreading.

It has no petals; but a very small, cylindrical, truncated, honey-bearing
Gland, or Nectarium, in the center of the flower.

The Filaments are two, straight, and thread form. The Antherae are twin, and
four-cell'd.

The Female have a katkin and scales as the male.

The Petals none.

The Germen ovate, and lessened into a Style scarce distinct, somewhat longer
than the Scales of the flower-cup. The Stigmas two, bisid and erect.

The Seed-vessel a capsule, ovate-awl-shaped, of one cell and two valves: the
valves revolute.

The Seeds are numerous, ovate, very small, and crowned with a simple hairy
Pappus.

The Species, native with us, are,

With smooth serrated leaves.

1. SALIX nigra. Rough American Willow.
This rises often with a leaning or crooked trunk to the height of about twenty
feet, covered with a dark colored, rough bark. The leaves are smooth and of
equal color on both sides; narrow, lanceshaped, and very slightly serrated.
The Katkins are long and slender.

** With serrated villose leaves.

2. SALIX sericea. Ozier, or Silky leaved Willow.
This rises generally to the height of eight or ten feet, with many shrubby
stalks, covered with pretty smooth, dark, greenish bark. The leaves are shorter
and somewhat broader than the other kind, lanceshaped, silky underneath, and
very slightly serrated on the edges.

*** With entire villose leaves.

3. SALIX humilis. Dwarf Willow.
This seldom rises above three or four feet, with greenish, somewhat downy
stalks. The leaves are larger than the other kinds, entire, oblong, somewhat
oval, and glaucous or whitish underneath. There are some varieties of larger
growth, belonging either to this or the last mentioned kind.

SAMBUCUS.
The ELDER-TREE.
Class 5. Order 3. Pentandria Trigynia.
THE Empalement is one leaf, above, very small, five-parted, and permanent.

The Corolla is of one petals, concave wheel-shaped, part fivecleft, obtuse,
the divisions reflexed.

The Filaments five, awl-shaped, the length of the corolla. The Antherae
roundish.

The Germen beneath, ovate, obtuse. The Style none, but in its place a bellied
Gland. The Stigmas three, obtuse.

The Seed-vessel a roundish berry of one cell.

The Seeds three, angular on one side and unequal on the other.

The Species, with us, are,

1. SAMBUCUS nigra. American Black-berried Elder.
This rises generally to the height of six or eight feet, with a stem sometimes
of two or three inches in diameter. The leaves are generally composed of three
pair of lobes and an odd one, which are somewhat oval, pointed, sharply sawed
on their edges, a little hairy on both sides, light colored underneath and
joined to pretty large, channelled footstalks, placed opposite. The flowers are
produced at the extremities of the same year's shoots in a kind of umbel, of
five principal parts, again divided: they are white and are succeeded by
berries which are blackish when ripe. An infusion of the inner bark is
purgative. From the berries may be prepared a spirit, a wine, and an oil, which
promote urine, perspiration and sweat.

2. SAMBUCUS canadensis. Canadian Red-berried Elder.
This grows naturally upon Mountain sides, or moist, rich, shaded places, in
the back parts of Pennsylvania. It has much the appearance of the other kind,
but produces red berries, which are ripe the latter end of June, at the time
the other is in flower.

SMILAX.
ROUGH BINDWEED, or GREEN BRIAR.
Class 22. Order 6. Dioecia Hexandria.
THE Male have Empalements of six leaves, of a spreading bell-shape; the leaves
are oblong, joined at the base, spreading and reflexed at the apex.

The Corolla none.

The Filaments are six, simple. The Antherae oblong.

The Female have Empalements as the male, deciduous.

The Corolla none.

The Germen ovate. The Styles three, very small. The Stigmas oblong, reflexed,
downy.

The Seed-vessel a globose berry, of three cells.

The Seeds two, globose.

The Species, with us, are,

With a square prickly stem.

1. SMILAX Sarsaparilla. Ivy leaved rough Bindweed, or Sarsaparilla.
This grows naturally in Virginia and to the southward, rising up with prickly,
angular stalks. The leaves are without prickles, oval shaped, pointed, and
three nerved.

2. SMILAX virginiana. Lanceolate-leaved rough Bindweed.
The stalks of this are slender, angular and prickly. The leaves are without
spines, spear-shaped and pointed; their bases not eared.

With a round prickly stem.
3. SMILAX rotundifolia. Canadian round leaved Smilax.
The stalks of this are round and winding, with a few straight spines. The
leaves are heart-shaped, without spines, five-nerved, having short footstalks
with two slender claspers.

4. SMILAX laurifolia. Bay leaved rough Bind-weed.
This has a round stalk, armed with prickles or spines. The leaves are of an
oval lance-shape, without spines, and of thicker consistence than those of the
other species. The flowers are small and whitish, the berries black when ripe.

5. SMILAX tamnoides. Bryony leaved rough Bindweed.
The stems of this are armed with prickles and round; climing upon the
neighboring trees for support. The leaves are without spines, of an oblong
heart-shape and five nerved. The berries are black.

6. SMILAX caduca. Three-nerved-leaved rough Bindweed.
This rises with round, naked, winding stalks, armed with many straight, black
pointed spines and covered with a green bark. The leaves are ovate, pointed,
three nerved and annual. The berries black.

With a square smooth stem.

7. SMILAX bona nox. Carolinian prickly leaved Smilax.
The stalks of this are angular and without spines. The leaves are broad, and
ciliated or set upon the margin with spines. There is also a variety with
narrow rough leaves, cared at the base and angular.

With a smooth round stem.

8. SMILAX lanceolata. Red berried Virginian Smilax.
The stalks of this are smooth and round. The leaves are without spines and
lance-shaped. The berries red colored.

9. SMILAX Pseudo China. Bastard China.
This has smooth round stalks. The leaves are without spines, those on the
stalks heart-shaped, but on the branches lance-shaped. The berries are black
and supported on very long footstalks.

SORBUS.
The SERVICE TREE, QUICKBEAM, or MOUNTAIN ASH.
Class 12. Order 3. Icosandria Trigynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, concave-spreading, five-parted and permanent.

The Corolla is of five petals, roundish, concave and inserted in the
Empalement.

The Filaments twenty, awl-shaped, and inserted in the Empalement. The Antherae
roundish.

The Germen beneath. The Styles three, thread-form, and erect. The Stigmas
headed.

The Seed-vessel a berry, soft, globose, and umbilicated.

The Seeds three, somewhat oblong, distinct, and cartilaginous.

The Species, with us, but one, viz.

SORBUS americana. American Service Tree.
This grows naturally upon the mountains toward Canada; rising to the height
of about fifteen or eighteen feet, with an erect stem dividing into several
branches. The leaves are winged, composed of eight or nine pair of lobes,
terminated by an odd one; which are narrow and sawed on their edges. The
flowers are produced at the extremity of the branches in form of an umbel, and
are succeeded by roundish berries of a red color when ripe.

SPIRAEA.
SPIRAEA.
Class 12. Order 4. Icosandria Pentagynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, half five-clesft, and plane at the base: the
divisions acute; permanent.

The Corolla of five petals, oblong-rounded, and inserted in the calyx.

The Filaments above twenty, thread-form, shorter than the corolla, and
inserted in the calyx. The Antherae roundish.

The Germen five or more. The Styles as many, thread-form, and the length of
the Stamina. The Stigmas headed.

The Seed-vessels capsules, oblong, sharp-pointed, compressed and two valved.

The Seeds few, sharp-pointed and small.

Obs. S. opulisolia has three Styles.

The Species, with us, are,

1. SPIRAEA hypericifolia. Canadian Spiraea, or Hypericum-srutex.
This rises generally to the height of four or five feet, dividing into many
slender branches, and covered with a dark brown bark. The leaves are oblong,
entire, and smooth, resembling those of St. John's-wort, and placed opposite.
The flowers are yellow, and disposed in small umbels, sitting close to the
stalks, each having a long, slender footstalk; and are succeeded by oblong,
pointed capsules, filled with small seeds. This makes a very good appearance
when in flower.

2. SPIRAEA opulifolia. Guelder Rose-leaved Spiraea, or Nine-Bark.
This rises with many shrubby branching stalks, covered with a brown scaly
bark, to the height of five or six feet. The leaves are somewhat three parted,
the two side divisions or lobes small, obtuse and near the base; the middle one
large and pointed; they are also slightly crenated and sawed on their edges.
The flowers are produced at the extremity of the branches, in form of a
corymbus or cluster: they are white with some spots of pale red, and are
succeeded by clusters of greenish, inflated capsules.

SPIRAEA caroliniana. Carolinian Guelder Rose-leaved Spiraea.
This is a variety of the former, and resembles it much in growth and
appearance.

3. SPIRAEA tomentosa. Scarlet flowered Philadelphian Spiraea.
This grows naturally in Pennsylvania; rising with slender, branching stalks to
the height of three or four feet, having a purple bark, covered with a gray
meally down. The leaves are small, spearshaped, unequally sawed on their edges,
of a bright green on their upper sides, but downy and veined underneath. The
flowers terminate the branches in form of a racemus or bunch; they are small
and of a beautiful red color.

4. SPIRAEA tomentosa alba. White flowered Philadelphian Spiraea.
This is a variety of the former; rising with slender stalks to the height of
four or five feet. The leaves are small and of thin texture, of an oblong oval,
or somewhat wedge shape, slightly and sharply sawed on their edges, and a
little downy on both sides. The flowers are produced in manner of the former,
of a beautiful white, making a pretty appearance. This is called Indian Pipe
Shank, from the pithy stems being used by the natives for that purpose.

STAPHYLAEA.
BLADDER-NUT-TREE.
Class 5. Order 3. Pentandria Trigynia.
THE Empalement is five-parted, concave, roundish, colored, and almost the
size of the corolla.

The Corolla is five petal'd, oblong, erect, and like the calyx.

The Nectarium concave and pitcher-shape in the bottom of the flower.

The Stamina are five oblong, erect, and the length of the calyx. The Antherae
simple.

The Germen thickish, three-parted. The Styles three, simple and a little
longer than the stamina. The Stigmas obtuse and contiguous.

The Seed-vessel three Capsules, inflated, flaccid, joined by longitudinal
futures; and with pointed tops gaping inwardly.

The Seeds are few, hard, and roundish, joined to the interior futures.

The Species, with us, but one, viz.

STAPHYLAEA trifoliata. Three-leaved Bladder-nut-Tree.
This rises generally to the height of eight or ten feet, dividing into many
branches, placed opposite. The bark of the stem and old branches are of a
greyish color, but of the young shoots of a light green. The leaves are
trifoliate, the middle lobe having a footstalk; the lobes are oval,
lance-shaped, slightly and sharply sawed on their edges, and joined to pretty
long common footstalks, placed opposite. The flowers are produced upon pretty
long, panicled footstalks; they are white and are succeeded by pretty large,
three-sided bladders or capsules, enclosing a few roundish, hard seeds.

STEWARTIA.
STEWARTIA
Class 16. Order 5. Monadelphia Polyandria.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, five parted and spreading; the divisions ovate,
concave, and permanent.

The corolla consists of five petals, inverse-ovate, spreading, equal and large.

The Filaments are numerous, filiform, shorter than the corolla, joined in a
cylinder below, and to the petals at the base. The Antherae are roundish and
incumbent.

The Germen roundish and hairy. The Stylesiliform, the length of the Stamina.
The Stigma five cleft.

The Seed-vessel a juiceless pome, five lobed, and five cell'd.

The Seeds are solitary, ovate and compressed.

The Species but one, viz.

STEWARTIA Malacodendron. Virginian Stewartia.
This grows naturally in Virginia; rising with strong stems to the height of
ten or twelve feet, and covered with a brown bark. The leaves are oval and
somewhat spear-shaped, most slightly serrated and villose underneath. The
flowers are large and white, produced singly, and sitting close upon the small
branches. The seed-vessels are dry, somewhat conical, ligneous capsules, having
five sharp angles, and five cells, each containing one oblong smooth seed. This
makes a beautiful appearance when well filled with its large white flowers.

STYRAX.
The STORAX-TREE.
Class 11. Order 1. Dodecandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, cylindrical, erect, short and five-toothed.

The Corolla is of one petal, funnel-form. The tube is short, cylindrical, and
the length of the calyx. The border fiveparted, large and spreading: the
divisions lance-shaped and obtuse.

The Filaments are erect, placed in a circle, more than twelve, scarce joined
at the base, awl-shaped and inserted in the corolla. The Anthreae are oblong
and straight.

The Germen beneath. The Style simple, the length of the stamina. The Stigma
lopped.

The Seed-vessel a drupe, roundish and of one cell.

The Seeds two nuts, roundish, pointed, unequal on one side and plane on the
other.

The Species, with us, but one, viz.

STYRAX americana. Carolinian Storax-Tree.
This grows naturally in Carolina; rising with a pretty strong stem to the
height of ten or twelve feet, covered with a smooth brownish bark, and dividing
into many slender branches. The leaves are pretty large, oval shaped, a little
pointed, scarce observably toothed, of a deep green, and a little downy on the
upper surface, but lighter and much more downy underneath; having short
footstalks, which together with the young shoots, are also woolly or downy. The
flowers are produced upon the small branches, in a kind of racemus or bunch;
supporting a few scattered flowers, which are white, pendulous, and have each
ten stamina and somewhat the fragrance of an Orange flower. They are succeeded
by roundish seed-vessels, each containing two roundish, pointed nuts or seeds.

TAXUS.
The YEW-TREE.
Class 22. Order 12. Dioecia Monadelphia.
THE Male Flowers have no Empalements, but a bud of four leaves somewhat like
one.

They have no Corolla.

The Filaments are numerous, joined beneath in a column, and longer than the
bud. The Antherae are depressed, obtuse at the margin, eight-cleft, gaping on
every side at the base (and having cast their sarina) plane, targetted, and
remarkable for their eight-cleft margin.

The Female Empalements are as in the Male.

They have no Corolla.

The Germen is ovate and pointed. The Style none. The Stigma obtuse.

The Seed-vessel is formed of the lengthened receptacle, into a globose,
succulent, colored covering or berry, open at top.

The Seed one, oblong-ovate, the apex protruding out of the berry.

We have, native but one Species, viz.

TAXUS canadensis. Canadian Yew-Tree.
This shrub is of low growth, but divided into many branches spreading on every
side. The leaves are narrow, stiff, linear, pointed, and evergreen; thick set
upon all sides of the branches, but inclining upwards. The flowers come out
thick upon the sides of the branches and are succeeded by oval, red succulent
berries, open at top, and enclosing an oval brown seed. This is a beautiful
evergreen shrub, capable of being formed into any shape.

THUYA.
ARBOR VITAE, or TREE OF LIFE.
Class 21. Order 9. Monoecia Monodelphia.
THE Male Flowers are disposed in oval katkins, and are placed upon a common
footstalk in triple opposition: each one having for its base.

A Scale somewhat ovate, concave and obtuse.

No Corolla, but

Four Filaments in each flower, scarce manifest, and as many Antherae, adjoined
to the base of the scaly cup.

The Female flowers are upon the same plant, in somewhat ovate, Cones, composed
of opposite Scales, which are two flowered, ovate and unequal.

No Corolla.

The Germen is very small. The Style awl-shaped. The Stigma simple.

The Seed-vessel a Cone, oblong-ovate, obtuse, and gaping longitudinally: the
Scales are oblong, nearly equal, unequal outwardly and obtuse.

The Seeds are oblong, begirt longitudinally with a membranaceous, end-bitten
wing.

The Species, with us, but one, viz.

THUYA occidentalis. American Arbor Vitae.
This grows naturally in Canada, and other northern parts of America; rising to
the height of thirty or forty feet, with a pretty strong stem, sending off many
branches, which are produced irregularly and stand almost horizontally. The
bark of young trees is of a dark brown and smooth, but afterward becomes
cracked and less smooth. The young branches are flat, and covered with very
small leaves, lying over each other like scales of fish. The cones are small
and loose, containing but few oblong, winged seeds.

THUYA variegata. Striped leaved Arbor Vitae.
This is a variety of the first, differing in having striped or variegated
leaves.

THUYA odorata. American Sweet-scented Arbor Vitae.
This is also a variety of the same, agreeing with it in growth and appearance;
but differing in its leaves or small branches, being of an agreeable, or sweet
scent, when bruised.

TILIA.
The LIME, or LINDEN-TREE.
Class 13. Order 6. Polyandria Hexagynia.
THE Empalement is five parted, concave, colored, almost the length of the
corolla, and deciduous.

The Corolla is of five petals, oblong, obtuse and notched at the end.

The Filaments are many, (thirty and upwards) awl-shaped, and the length of the
corolla. The Antherae are simple.

The Germen roundish. The Style siliform, the length of the stamina. The Stigma
obtusely five-sided.

The Seed-vessel a Capsule, coriaceous, globose, five-cell'd, fivevalved, and
gaping at the base.

The Seed solitary and roundish.

Obs. The Capsule appears to have but one cell and one seed, the other four
being abortive.

The American Tilia has five Scales placed round the bud and joined to the
claws of the corolla.

The Species with us, are,

1. TILIA americana. Americana black Lime, or Linden-Tree.
This often becomes a tree of a large size, covered with a dark brown bark, and
dividing into many branches. The leaves are large, heart-shaped, pointed, and
sawed on their edges, of a deep green on their upper sides, but paler and a
little hairy underneath; and standing on long footstalks. The flowers are
produced upon the small branches, and are remarkable for having an oblong
bractea or floral leaf upon each footstalk; they are of an herbaceous color,
having narrow petals furnished with nectaries at the base. The capsules are
round, a little hairy hairy and about the size of a small pea, having each one
roundish seed.

2. TILIA caroliniana. Carolinian oblique-leaved Lime-Tree.
This is of smaller growth than the former, rising commonly to the height of
about forty feet, with a trunk of eighteen inches or more in diameter: covered
with a lightish and somewhat surrowed bark, and sending off many branches. The
leaves are smaller and smoother than those of the other kind, somewhat
heart-shaped, ending in long points, unequal at the base, or larger on one side
of the midrib than the other, and slightly sawed on their edges. The bunches of
flowers stand upon long slender footstalks, furnished with floral leaves. The
flowers are small, and have narrow, pointed petals, furnished with nectaries or
scales at the base; they diffuse a fragrant odor, and are continually haunted
by bees during their continuance. An infusion of the flowers of Lime-tree has
been used with success in an Epilepsy. The timber is too soft for any strong
purposes, therefore, cheisly used by turners, carvers, etc. also, by architects
in framing, models of buildings, etc.

TILLANDSIA.
TILLANDSIA.
Class 6. Order 1. Hexandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, three-parted, oblong and permanent: the
divisions oblong-lanced, and sharppointed.

The Corolla tubulous and of one petal. The tube long and bellied. The border
three-cleft, obtuse, erect and small.

The Filaments are six, as long as the tube of the corolla. The Antherae acute,
and incumbent in the neck of the corolla.

The Germen is oblong, and pointed on every side. The Style siliform, and the
length of the stamina. The Stigma threecleft and obtuse.

The Seed-vessel a Capsule, which is long, obtusely three-sided, pointed with
about one cell and three valves.

The Seeds are many, joined to a very long, capillary pappus or down.

The Species, with us, but are, viz.

TILLANDSIA usneoides. Carolinian Tillandsia.
This is a parasite plant; or growing upon the branches of trees and hanging
down with very slender, rough, branching threads or stalks, in manner of moss.
The leaves are whitish and hoary.

ULMUS.
The ELM-TREE.
Class 5. Order 2. Pentrandria Digynia.
THE Empalement is of one leaf, top-shaped, and wrinkled.

The border five parted, erect, colored within, and permanent.

The Corolla none.

The Filaments five, awl-shaped, and twice the length of the calyx. The
Antherae four-surrowed, erect and short.

The Germen orbicular and erect. The Styles two, shorter than the stamina and
reflexed. The Stigmas downy.

The Seed-vessel a drupe, oval compressed, membranaceous and juiceless.

The Seed one, roundish and lightly compressed.

The Species, with us, are.

1. ULMUS americana. American rough leaved Elm-Tree.
This rises to the height of about thirty feet, with a pretty strong trunk;
dividing into many branches, and covered with a lightish colored rough bark.
The leaves are oblong, oval and sharp-pointed, somewhat unequally sawed on
their edges, unequal at the base, very rough on their upper surface and hairy
underneath. The flowers are produced thick upon the branches, upon short,
collected footstalks; and are succeeded by oval, compressed, membranaceous
seed-vessels, with entire margins; containing each one oval, compressed seed.

2. ULMUS mollifolia. American soft-leaved Elm.
This grows to the same size, or perhaps larger than the first kind. The leaves
are of an oblong oval, sharp-pointed, unequal at the base, doubly serrated on
their edges and hairy underneath: but smooth on the upper surface, of thinner
texture and softer than those of the first kind. The seed-vessels are also
considerably smaller, end nicked or cleft, and ciliated or fringed on the
margin.

VACCINIUM.
WHORTLE-BERRY.
Class 8. Order 1. Octandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is very small, above, and permanent.

The Corolla is of one petal, bell-shaped, and four-cleft: the divisions
turning back.

The Filaments are eight, simple. The Antherae two-horned, furnished on the
back with two spreading awns, and gaping at the tops.

The Germen is beneath. The Styles simple, longer than the stamina. The Stigma
obtuse.

The Seed-vessel a berry, globose, umbilicated and four cell'd.

The Seeds solitary and small.

Obs. The number of stamina are ten, in many of the species.

The Species, with us, are,

* With annual deciduous leaves.

1. VACCINIUM arborcum. Winter, or Tree Whertle-Berry.
This grows naturally in Carolina; rising to the height of ten or fifteen feet,
with a pretty strong stem, dividing toward the top into many branches. The
fruit is small, ripening late in autumn.

2. VACCINIUM album. Pennsylvanian White Whertle-berry.
This is a small shrub, rising to the height of about two feet. The leaves are
entire, egg-shaped and downy underneath. The flowers are produced at the ends
of the branches, standing two or three together upon very short, naked
footstalks. The fruit is small and whitish.

3. VACCINIUM corymbosum. Cluster-flowered Vaccinium.
This grows naturally in swampy or moist places, rising to the height of five
or six feet. The leaves are entire, oblong, oval, and somewhat downy
underneath. The flowers are produced in clusters or rather one rowed, short,
roundish bunches; set pretty close on the small branches. The fruit is of a
dark purplish color when ripe, and of an agreeable acid taste.

There are some varieties, I think, of this growing upon higher ground, and of
much smaller growth; the leaves of some of which are most slightly and sharply
serrated.

4. VACCINIUM frondosum. Leasy Vaccinium, or Indian Gooseberry.
This grows naturally upon Whortle-berry ground; rising to the height of three
or four feet, generally with a leaning, crooked, branching stem. The leaves are
entire and of an oval lance shape. The flowers are produced in frondose racemi
or bunches, set with small oblong leaves, at the bosom of which the flowers
come out, upon pretty long, simple, slender footstalks; they are somewhat
bell-shaped, the antherae are very long, two horned: the horns two cleft. The
fruit or berries are oval, and of the size of a small Gooseberry; reddish
colored, soft, succulent, and of a disagreeable taste.

5. VACCINIUM ligustrinum. Privet-leaved Whortle-berry.
This rises to the height of about two or three feet, dividing into small
branches. The leaves are small and oblong. The flowers are produced in short
racemi, or bunches, which come out alternately, and thick upon the branches;
and are naked, or without floral leaves. The berries are round, black and of an
agreeable taste.

6. VACCINIUM stamineum. Long-lcaved Vaccinium.
This is also of small growth. The leaves are oblong and very entire. The
flowers come out at the bosom of the leaves, upon solitary, slender footstalks,
each supporting one flower, which is of a spreading bell-shape and five cleft
at the border.

** With evergreen leaves.

7. VACCINIUM hispidulum. Marsh Vaccinium, or Cranberry.
This grows naturally in mossy swamps, with slender, creeping stalks, covered
with bristly scales. The leaves are oval, or somewhat oblong and shining. The
fruit or berries are large and reddish colored; and of a bitterish acid taste.

8. VACCINIUM pennsylvanicum. Myrtle leaved Vaccinium, or Cranberry.
The leaves of this are oval and sharp pointed. The flowers are white and
nodding, produced from the bosom of the leaves. The berries are red and small.

VIRBURNUM.
PLIANT MEALLY, or WAY-FARING-TREE.
Class 5. Order 3. Pentandria Trigynia.
THE Empalement is four toothed, above, very small and permanent.

The Corolla is of one petal, bell-shaped, half five-cleft; the divisions
obtuse and reflexed.

The Filaments are five, awl-shaped and the length of the corolla. The Antherae
roundish.

The Germen beneath, roundish. The Style none, but in its place a top-shaped
Gland. The Stigmas three.

The Seed-vessel, a somewhat oval, compressed berry, of one cell.

The Seed one, hard, and of the same form.

The Species, with us, are,

1. VIBURNUM acerifolium. Maple-leaved Viburnum.
This rises generally to the height of four or five feet, with an erect,
slender stem, sending off a few opposite branches. The leaves are somewhat
three lobed, toothed, or pretty largely sawed on their edges; a little hairy
underneath, and joined to round footstalks, placed opposite. The flowers
terminate the stalks and branches in cymae (about seven parted) or kind of
umbels; they are white and are succeeded by somewhat oval, compressed, black
berries when ripe.

2. VIBURNUM dentatum. Toothed-leaved Viburnum, or Arrow Wood.
This grows naturally in moist places, rising up with several straight stems,
to the height of ten or twelve feet, sending off several slender, opposite
branches. The leaves are roundish or oval, pointed, and toothed on their edges,
much veined and placed opposite, upon round, downy footstalks. The flowers are
produced at the tops of the stalks and branches, in cymae or kind of umbels,
about seven parted, in manner of those of the Elder but much smaller; they are
white and are succeeded by dark bluish colored, oblong berries. The young
shoots of this tree are generally used by the natives for arrows; whence it is
known by the name of Arrow-wood.

3. VIBURNUM prunifolium. Black Haw.
This I take to be our common, small black Haw; which rises with a stiff stem
to the height of about ten or fifteen feet, dividing into many branches, which
are generally set pretty thick with short, strong, horizontal spurs or short
branches, standing opposite. The bark of the trunk or stem is dark and rough,
but of the young branches smooth. The leaves are of an oblong oval, smooth,
finely and slightly serrated, and placed opposite upon channelled footstalks.
The flowers terminate the branches in four parted cymae they are white and make
a pretty good appearance. The berries are oblong, oval, compressed and black
when ripe.

4. VIBURNUM nudum. Tinus leaved, or Swamp Viburnum.
This grows naturally in moist or swampy places, rising to the height of ten or
twelve feet. The bark is smooth and of the young shoots purplish. The leaves
are oval, lance-shaped, of a thick consistence and lucid green color: often
slightly serrated, and standing opposite. The flowers are produced in manner of
the other kinds and are succeeded by berries of nearly the same size and shape,
changing black when ripe.

5. VIBURNUM Lentago. Canadian Viburnum.
This rises to the height of about ten or twelve feet, covered with a brown
bark, and divided into many branches, which, when young, are covered with a
smooth purplish bark. The leaves are smooth, oval, slightly sawed on their
edges, and stand generally opposite upon short slender footstalks. The flowers
are produced in manner of the other kinds and are succeeded by berries of the
same shape, and black when ripe.

6. VIBURNUM alnifolium. Alder-leaved Viburnum.
This grows naturally in Carolina and other parts of America; rising with a
shrubby stalk to the height of eight or ten feet, covered with a smooth
purplish bark, and divided into several branches. The leaves are heart-shaped,
oval, sharp-pointed, deeply sawed on their edges, strongly veined, and placed
opposite upon long slender footstalks. The flowers are collected in large cymes
or umbels at the ends of the branches, those ranged on the border are male, but
the center is filled with hermaphrodite flowers, which are succeeded by pretty
large, oval berries, red colored when ripe.

7. VIBURNUM triloba. Mountain Viburnum.
This grows naturally upon montains in the interior parts of Pennsylvania;
rising with slender stems to the height of eight or ten feet. The leaves are
somewhat like those of the Guelder Rose or Snow-ball tree; they are narrow at
the base, but spreading and divided into three sharp-pointed lobes, the middle
one largest, longest, and sometimes slightly toothed. The flowers are produced
in form of the others, and are succeeded by berries of the same shape, of a
pretty large size and red color when ripe.

VISCUM.
MISSELTOE.
Class 22. Order 4. Dioecia Tetrandria.
THE Male Flowers have their Empalements, five-parted; the leaves oval and
equal.

They have no petals.

The Filaments or rather Antherae are four, oblong and pointed, joined to the
leaves of the calyx.

* The Female have Emaplements, four leaved: the leaves oval, small, fitting
close, deciduous and placed upon the germen.

They have no petals.

The Germen are oblong, three-sided, their margins crowned, obsolete,
four-cleft, and beneath. The Styles none. The Stigmas obtuse.

The Seed-vessels berries, which are globose, smooth, and of one cell.

The Seeds single, somewhat heart-shaped, compressed and fleshy.

The Species, with us, are,

1. VISCUM rubrum. Red berried Misseltoe.
This grows upon the branches of trees and is not found growing in the earth as
other plants. It rises with slender woody stalks, several inches in height,
spreading and forming a tuft or bush. The leaves are lance-shaped and obtuse.
The flowers are produced in spikes from the sides of the stalks, and those of
the female are succeeded by roundish red berries, containing each one
heart-shaped, compressed seed, surrounded by a tough viscid substance.

2. VISCUM purpureum. Purple-berried Misseltoe.
This also rises up from the branches of trees like the other. The leaves are
inverse-egg-shaped, or oval and narrowed toward the base. The flowers come out
in racemi or bunches from the sides of the stalks; the female of which are
succeeded by berries of a purple color when ripe.

There is a variety of this with yellow leaves, resembling those of the box;
the berries are also produced in bunches and are of a snowy white when ripe.

Misseltoe is most frequently found growing upon the Nyssa Sylvatica or Sour
Gum, in the middle States, but to the southward upon oaks. It is propagated by
birds seeding upon the berries, the seeds of which, sometimes by their
glutinosity adhere to the outside of their beaks, and are thus transported to
neighboring trees, and being wiped off upon their branches, stick fast, and
germinate, producing new plants. From the berries of Misseltoe, Birdlime was
formerly made; but for this purpose those of the common Holly are said to be
better. This plant has been much recommended for the cure of Epilepfies.

VITIS.
The VINE.
Class 5. Order 1. Pentandria Monogynia.
THE Empalement is five toothed and very small.

The Petals are five, rude, small, and falling off.

The Filaments are five, awl-shaped, a little spreading, and falling off. The
Antherae are simple.

The Germen ovate. The Style none. The Stigma obtuse headed.

The Seed-vessel a berry, roundish, large, and of one cell.

The Seeds are five, hard, end-bitten at one end, and contracted at the other.

The Species, with us, are.

1. VITIS arborea. Carolinian Vine, or Pepper-Tree.
This grows naturally in Carolina, rising with slender, ligneous, climbing
stalks, and fastening themselves by tendrils to any neighboring support. The
leaves are branching and winged, composed generally of two side branches of
five leaves each, two or three leaves, and terminating with three; which are
small and somewhat toothed. The flowers are produced in loose clusters from the
wings of the stalks; they are small and white, and are succeeded by small
berries of a purplish color when ripe.

2. VITIS vinifera americana. American Grape Vine.
There are many varieties of this, which generally rise up with strong stems,
climbing by tendrils or claspers upon neighboring trees for support, often to
the height of thirty or forty feet, and of two, three or four inches in
diameter; covered with a dark, rough, loose bark. The leaves are generally
heart-shaped and somewhat three lobed; sawed on their edges, and downy or hairy
underneath. The grapes are produced in bunches, in form of the European kinds,
generally between the size of a Current and Gooseberry: darkish colored, or
with a light bluish cast, and for the most part of an acid agreeable taste.

3. VITIS vulpina. Fox-Grape Vine.
This in manner of growth has much the appearance of the other kinds. The
leaves are generally larger, and smooth, but whitish underneath. The fruit or
grapes are about the size of a common cherry and have a strong scent, a little
approaching to that of a Fox, whence the name of Fox-grape. There are also
varieties of this, some with whitish or reddish fruit which is generally most
esteemed, and others with black, of which are our largest grapes.

4. VITIS Labrusca. Wild American Vine.
The stems of this have the appearance of our other kinds. The leaves are
generally less and of a thinner texture. The berries or grapes are produced in
loose bunches; they are small, and are of several kinds, some reddish, others
of a shining black, and some of a bluish color; all of an acerb disagreeable
taste.

5. VITIS laciniosa. Canadian Parsley-leaved Vine.
The stalks and branches of this resemble the others. The leaves are cut into
many slender segments, somewhat in manner of a Parsley-leaf. The grapes are
round and white, and are produced in loose bunches; they are late ripe and not
very well flavoured.

XANTHOXYLUM.
The TOOTHACHE TREE.
Class 22. Order 5. Dioecia Pentandria.
* THE Male Flowers have Empalements four-parted; the leaves oval, erect and
colored.

They have no Petals.

The Filaments in each are generally five, awl-shaped, erect and longer than
the calyx. The Antherae are twin, roundish and furrowed.

* The Female have Empalements as the male.

They have no Petals.

The Germen in each are generally five, often less, with short footstalks, oval
and ending in as many awl-shaped Styles.

The Stigmas are obtuse.

The Seed-vessels are Capsules, of the same number with the germen, oblong, of
one cell and two valves.

The Seeds are single, roundish and smooth.

The Species, with us,

XANTHOXYLUM fraxinifolium. Ash-leaved Toothache Tree.
This grows naturally in Pennsylvania and Maryland; rising with a pretty strong
stem to the height of ten or twelve feet; and dividing in many branches, which
are covered with a purplish bark, and armed at each bud with two strong, sharp
spines. The leaves are composed of four or five pair of lobes, terminated by an
odd one; which are entire and of an oblong egg-shape, placed opposite and
sitting close to the common footstalk, which is also set with a few spines
underneath. The flowers are produced along the branches, upon short collected
footstalks; and those of the female are each succeeded, for the most part, with
five distinct, oval capsules, joined by short footstalks to the common
receptacle, and spreading above; each containing one roundish, smooth seed.

There is said to be another Species, or perhaps Variety, of this in South
Carolina, differing in having the lobes of their leaves lance-shaped, sawed on
their edges and having footstalks. The bark and capsules are of a hot acrid
taste, and are used for easing the toothache, from whence it obtained the name
of Toothache Tree: a tincture of them are also much commended for the cure of
the Rheumatism.

XANTHORHIZA.
SHRUB YELLOW ROOT.
Class 5. Order 6. Pentandria Polygynia.
THE Empalement none.

The Corolla is of five petals, lance-shaped, pointed and spreading.

The Nectarium crowning the corolla, of five small leaves, somewhat two-lobed:
the lobes very small, roundish, or rather runcinate, and inserted by slender
claws in the common receptacle, alternating with the petals.

The Filaments five, short and thread-form. The Antherae roundish.

The Germen several, most frequently from seven to eleven, small and ending in
as many awl-shaped, short, incurved Styles. The Stigmas acute.

The Seed-vessels as many Capsules: which are small, somewhat oval, compressed,
oblique pointed, of one cell and two valves, joined at their base to the common
receptacle, and spreading above.

The Seeds are single in each cell, small, somewhat ovate and lightly
compressed.

Obs. The petals are sometimes six in number. The number of Stamina are also
sometimes increased.

The Species but one, viz.

XANTHORHIZA simplicissima. Shurb Yellow Root.
This is a small shrub, growing naturally in Carolina. The roots are slender
and cylindrical, but sending off side shoots by which it spreads much; the wood
of which, together with that of the stems, are of a bright yellow color. The
stems are slender, rising to the height of two feet or more, generally simple,
or without branches, and covered with a lightish brown bark. The leaves are
compound, consisting of two pair of opposite lobes, terminated by an odd one;
the lobes are much and deeply cut or cleft on their edges, (somewhat in form of
Garden Lovage) and joined to very long, common footstalks, coming out from the
tops of the stems. The flowers are produced at the top of the former year's
growth, in a compound or panicled racemus; having their partial footstalks
generally three flowered; they are small and purplish colored, and are
succeeded by little heads of small, compressed capsules, each enclosing one
small seed. The flowers on the partial or small footstalks, are not produced at
once, those that are middle-most or terminal come out first and are
hermaphrodite, and generally barren; those on the sides come out later, but one
of which is generally fruitful; from whence, I had supposed, some of the
flowers were female, and to the contrary of which I am not yet fully convinced.

This shrub, from the yellowness of its roots and stems, it is highly probable,
might be employed to good purpose in dying clothes, etc. It has hitherto been
undescribed by Botanical writers, though named in some late Catalogues in
honor of M. Marbois; but having imposed the former name, before I had heard of
this, have chose to retain it as being expressive of its qualities and
appearance.

ADVERTISEMENT.
BOXES of SEEDS, and growing PLANTS, of the FOREST TREES, FLOWERING SHRUBS,
etc. of the American United States; are made up in the best manner and at a
reasonable rate by the Author. All Orders in this line, directed for Humphry
Marshall, of Chester County, Pennsylvania; to the Care of Dr. THOMAS PARK, in
Philadelphia, will be carefully and punctually attended to.

INDEX of LATIN GENERIC NAMES.
ACER. AEsculus. Amorpha. Andromeda. Annona. Aralia. Arbutus. Aristolochia.
Ascyrum. Azalea. Baccharis. Berberris. Betula. Betula-Alnus. Bignonia.
Callicarpa. Calycanthus. Carpinus. Cassine. Ceanothus. Celastrus. Celtis.
Cephalanthus. Cercis. Chionanthus. Clethra. Cornus. Corylus. Cupressus.
Diospyros. Dirca. Epigaea. Euonymus. Fagus. Fagus-Castanea. Fothergilla.
Franklinia. Fraxinus. Gaultheria. Gleditsia. Glycine. Guilandina. Halesia.
Hamamelis. Hedera. Hippophae. Hydrangea. Hypericum. Ilex. Itea. Juglans.
Juniperus. Kalmia. Laurus. Ledum. Liquidambar. Liriodendrum. Lonicera.
Magnolia. Menispermum. Mespilus. Mitchella. Morus. Myrica. Nyssa. Olea.
Philadelphus. Pinus. Pinus-Abies. Pinus-Larix. Platanus. Populus. Potentilla.
Prinos. Prunus. Prunus-Cerasus. Prunus-Lauro-Cerasus. Ptelea. Pyrola.
Pyrus-Malus. Quercus. Rhododendrum. Rhus. Rhus-Toxicodendron. Ribes. Robinia.
Rosa. Rubus. Salix. Sambucus. Smilax. Sorbus. Spiraea. Staphylaea. Stewartia.
Styrax. Taxus. Thuya. Tilia. Tillandsia. Ulmus. Vaccinium. Viburnum. Viscum.
Vitis. Xanthoxylum. Xanthorhiza.
INDEX of ENGLISH NAMES.
A
ACACIA, false, 133 Acacia, three-thorned, 53 Alder, 19 Allspice, Carolinian,
23 Angelica Tree, 10 Apple, Custard, 9 Arbor Vitae, 151 Arbutus, Trailing, 42
Arrow Wood, 160 Ash, 50 Ash, Mountain, 144 Ash, Poison, 130 Asp, or Aspen Tree,
107 Azarole, 88 B
Balm of Gilead Fir, 102 Balsam Tree, 107 Barberry, 17 Bay, 72 Bay, Dwarf Rose,
126 Bay, Sweet flowering, 83 Bean Tree, Kidney, 54 Bear-berries, 11 Beech, 45
Bell Tree, Silver, 57 Benjamin Tree, 73 Berry, Winter, 109 Bilberry, 156
Bindweed, Rough, 142 Birch 18 Bird Cherry, 112 Birthwort, 12 Black-berry. 137
Bladder-Nut, 147 Bondue, 56 Briar, 136 Briar, Green, 142 Buck-Thorn, Sea, 60
Burning Bush, 44 Button Tree, or Wood, 30 Button Wood, Large 105 C
Candleberries, 94 Catalpa, 21 Cedar, Red 70 Cedar, White 39 Cherry Wild, or
Bird, 112 Cherry, Dwarf, 81 Chestnut, 46 Chestnut, Horse 4 Chinquepin, 47
Cinquesoil, 108 Cistus, Marsh 75 Coffee, Kentucky, 56 Cornel Tree, 34 Cotton
Tree, Carolinian 106 Crab Tree, 118 Cranberries, 159 Creeper, Virginian 59
Cross Vine, 21 Cucumber Tree, 83 Currants, 131 Custard Apple, 9 Cypress. 38 D
Date Plumb, 40 Dewberry Bush, 137 Dogberry, 34 Dog Wood, 35 E
Elder, 140 Elm, 155 Euonymus, Climing, 28 F
Fern, Sweet, 77 Fir, 102 Fox Grape, 165 Fringe Tree, 32 G
Gale, Bog, 95 Gale, Spleenwort-leaved, 77 Gilead, Balm of 102 Gooseberry, 132
Gooseberry, Indian 158 Grape, 165 Groundsel Tree, 16 Gum, Sour 97 Gum, Sweet 76
H
Hawthorn, or Haw, 87 Haw, Black 160 Hazel, 36 Hazel, Witch 58 Hemlock Spruce,
103 Hep-Tree, 135 Hickery, 68 Holly, 63 Honey Locust, 53 Honey-suckle, 79
Honey-suckle, Upright 14 Horn-beam, 24 Horse Chestnut, 4 I
Jasmine, Yellow, 22 Jersey Tea, 27 Indian Arrow Wood, 160 Indian Pipe-Shank,
147 Ink-Berry, 109 Indigo, Bastard 5 Johnsonia, 22 Iron Wood, Carolinian 9
Judas Tree, 31 Ivy, 59 K
Kidney Bean Tree, 54 L
Laurel, American 71 Laurel, Mountain 127 Leather Wood 41 Lime, or Linden Tree,
153 Lime, Ogeche, 97 Locust Tree, 133 Locust Tree, Honey 53 M
Maple, 1 Meally Tree, Pliant 159 Medlar, 87 Misseltoe, 162 Mock Orange, 99
Moon-seed, 85 Moss-berries, 159 Mountain Tea, 52 Mulberry Tree, 93 Myrtle,
Candleberry, 94 N
Nettle Tree, 29 Nickar Tree, 56 Nine-Bark, 146 Nut, Bladder 147 Nut, Hazel 36 O
Oak, 118 Oak, Poison 131 Olive, 98 Orange, Mock 99 P
Papaw Tree, 9 Paragua Tea, 26 Pavia, 5 Pepper-Tree, 164 Persimmon Tree, 40
Pig-nut, 68 Pipe Tree, 100 Pipe-shank, Indian 147 Plane Tree, 104 Pliant Meally
Tree, 159 Plowman's Spikenard, 16 Plumb Tree, 110 Plumb, Indian Date 40 Poison
Ash, 130 Poison Sumach, 130 Poison Oak, 131 Poison Vine, 131 Poplar, 105
Poplar, (commonly so called) 78 Q
Quickbeam, 144 R
Respberry, 136 Red-bud, 31 Red-buds, 8 Red-Rod, 36 Red-Root, 27 Rose, 135 Rose
Bay, Dwarf 126 Rosemary, Wild 175 S
Saint John's-Wort, 62 Saint Peter's-Wort, 13 Sassasras, 74 Sassasras, Swamp 83
Service Tree, 144 Service Tree, Wild, 38-90 Snow-drop Tree, 32 Sorrel-Tree, 7
Sour Gum, 97 Spice Wood, 73 Spindle Tree, 43 Staff Tree, 28 Stag's-horn-Tree,
129 Storax Tree, 149 Storax, Liquid 77 Sugar Tree. 4 Sumach, 127 Sweet Gum, 76 T
Tacamahac Tree, 107 Tea, New Jersey 27 Tea, Mountain, 52 Tea, South Sea 26
Thorn, Black 160 Thorn, White 88 Toothache Tree, 166 Tresoil, Shrub 114 Tree of
Life, 151 Trumpet flower, 20 Tulip Tree, 78 Tulip Tree, Laurel-leaved 82 Tupelo
Tree, 95 U
Umbrella-Tree, 84 V
Vine, 164 Vine, Climing five-leaved 59 Vine, Poison 131 W
Walnut, 65 Wayfaring Tree, 159 Whortle Berry, 156 Willow Tree, 139 Winter
Green, 115 Witch Hazel, 58 Y
Yellow Root, 167 Yew, 150 Yapon, 26


