A GRAMMATICAL INSTITUTE OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE; COMPRISING, An easy, concise
and systematic method of EDUCATION; Designed for the Use of Schools in AMERICA.
IN THREE PARTS.

PART III. CONTAINING The necessary Rules of reading and speaking, and a
Variety of Essays Dialogues, and declamatory Pieces, moral, political and
entertaining; divided into Lessons, for the Use of Children.

BY NOAH WEBSTER, Jun. Esquire.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY BARLOW and BABCOCK FOR THE AUTHOR, M,DCC,LXXXV. With the
Privilege of Copy-Right.

PREFACE.
THE design of this Third Part of the Grammatical Institute of the English
Language, is to furnish common English Schools with a variety of exercises for
reading and speaking, at a small expense. Colleges and Academies are already
supplied with many excellent collections for this purpose; among which, the Art
of Speaking, Enfield's Speaker, Enfield's Exercises, the Preceptor, the Young
Gentleman and Lady's Monitor, are used with great reputation. But these are too
large and expensive for the body of the people to purchase, who cannot afford a
school for their children but a few months in a year. The want of some small
books of this kind, has confined most of our schools to the use of the Bible,
the size of which and the smallness of the type, has occasioned distinct
portions of it, particularly the Psalms and the New Testament, to be printed
separately on a larger type. But to the common and sole use of the Bible or any
part of it in schools, there are two capital objections.

In the first place, the style is so uniform and so different from that of the
present age, that children, who are confined to it, never acquire a complete
knowledge of words, and of the modern manne, of writing, to read other books
with tolerable propriety.

In the second place, it has often been observed by men of piety, that such a
common use of the Bible, is a kind of prostitution of divine truth to secular
purposes -- that children are insensibly led, by a habit of familiarity, to
consider that sacred work, or at lest to treat it as a book of no more
importance than any human persormance; and that, being accustomed in early life
to repeat it often, and many times with the utmost reluctance, they imbibe a
disgust for it, which their subsequent conviction of its importance, is seldom
able to conquer. If therefore the Bible were read two or three times in a week,
with that seriousness it deserves, and its precepts explained by the
instructor, merely with a view to impress, upon young minds, moral and
religious truths, there is no doubt but such a use would have a more permanent
effect upon the principles and conduct of posterity, and the awful solemnities
of inspiration would escape profanation, from the levity and wickedness of
schoolboys. I subit it these ideas to the feelings of every person. For my
part I freely own that I have often shuddered at the sight of thoughtless boys,
laughing while they mention the name of Jehovah, and repeating the invitations
of divine mercy and the denunciations of infinite wrath, with the same
indifference as they would rehearse an unimportant paragraph of a news paper.


In the following work, I have endeavored to make such a collection of essays
as should form the morals as well as improve the knowledge of youth.

Of the pieces here selected, some are borrowed from British writers of
eminence -- some are fugitive American publications -- some are taken from the
manuscripts of my friends -- and a few are my own composition. Whenever I have
been indebted to English books I have invariably given credit to the author or
compiler.

It is found by experience that Dialogues, as bearing a near resemblance to the
common talk of children, are the best calculated to prevent or break ill habits
of reading, and to teach them an easy unaffected pronunciation. This will
account for the number admitted into this collection.

In the choice of pieces, I have not been inattentive to the political
interests of America. Several of those masterly addresses of Congress, written
at the commencement of the late revolution, contain such noble, just and
independent sentiments of liberty and patriotism, that I cannot help wishing to
transfuse them into the breasts of the rising generation.

This part completes the system I had proposed to publish for the use of
schools. To refine and establish our language, to facilitate the acquisition of
grammatical knowledge, and diffuse the principles of virtue and patriotism, is
the task I have labored to perform; and whether the success should equal my
wishes or not, I shall still have the satisfaction of reflecting that I have
made a laudable effort to advance the happiness of my country.

Hartford, January, 1785.
RULES FOR READING AND SPEAKING.
RULE I. Let your articulation be clear and distinct.
A GOOD articulation consists in giving every letter and syllable, its proper
proportion of sound.

Let each syllable and the letters which compose it, be pronounced with a clear
voice, without whining, drawling, lisping, stammering, mumbling in the throat
or speaking through the nose. Avoid equally a dull, drawling habit and too much
rapidity of pronunciation; for each of these faults destroys a distinct
articulation.

RULE II. Observe the stops and make the proper pauses, but make no pause where
the sense requires none.
The characters we use as stops are extremely arbitrary and do not-always mark
a suspension of the voice. On the contrary, they are often employed to separate
the several members of a period, and show the grammatical construction. Nor
when they are designed to mark pauses, do they always determine the length of
those pauses; for this depends much on the sense and the nature of the subject.
A semicolon, for example, requires a longer pause in a grave discourse, than in
a lively and spirited declamation. However, as children are incapable of nice
distinctions, it may be best to adopt at first some general rule with respect
to the pauses, See (...) of the (...), where the propertion of the (...), colon
and (...), is fixed at one, two, four, six.
and teach them to pay the same attention to these characters as they do to the
words. They should be cautioned likewise against pausing in the midst of a
member of a sentence, where the sense requires the words to be closely
connected in pronunciation.

RULE III. Pay the strictest attention to accent, emphasis and cadence.
Let the accented syllables be pronounced with a proper stress of voice; the
unaccented, with little stress of voice, but distinctly.

The important words of a sentence, which I call naturally emphatical, have a
claim to a considerable force of voice; but particles, such as, of, to, as,
and, etc. require no force of utterance, unless they happen to be emphatical,
which is rarely the case. No person can read or speak well, unless he
understands what he reads; and the sense will always determine what words are
emphatical. It is a matter of the highest consequence therefore, that a speaker
should clearly comprehend the meaning of what he delivers, that he may know
where to lay the emphasis. This may be illustrated by a single example. This
short question, Will you ride to town to day? is capable of four different
meanings, and consequently quently of four different answers, according to the
placing of the emphasis. If the emphasis is laid upon you, the question is,
whether you will ride to town or another person. If the emphasis is laid on
ride, the question is, whether you will ride or go on foot. If the emphasis is
laid on town, the question is, whether you will ride to town or to another
place. If the emphasis is laid on to day, the question is, whether you will
ride to day or some other day. Thus the whole meaning of a phrase often depends
on the emphasis; and it is absolutely necessary that it should be laid on the
proper words.

Cadence is a falling of the voice in pronouncing the closing syllable of a
period We may observe (...) good speakers always pronounce upon a (...); for
although they (...) the voice according to the various ideas they express, yet
the^ (...) the same pitch of voice. Accent and empha^^s require'no elevation of
voice, but a more forcible expression on the same key. (...) last syllable only
of the (...); which syllable i^ a actually pronounced with a lower tone of
voice; but when words of several (...) ^s close a period, all the syllables but
the last, are pronounced on ^he same key as the rest of the sentence.
. This ought not to be uniform; but different at the close of different
sentences.

But in interrogative sentences, the sense often requires the closing word or
syllable to be pronounced with an elevated voice. This, however, is only when
the last word is emphatical; as in this question, "Betravest thou the son of
man with a kiss?" Here the subject of enquiry is, whether the common token of
love and benevolence is prostituted to the purpose of treachery; the force of
the question depends on the last word, which is therefore to be pronounced with
an elevation of voice. But in this question, "Where is boasting then?" the
emphatical word is boasting, which of course requires an elevation of voice.

The most natural pitch of voice is that in which we speak in ordinary
conversation. Whenever the voice is raised above this key, pronunciation is
difficult and fatiguing. There is a difference between a loud and a high voice.
A person may speak much louder than he does in ordinary discourse, without any
elevation of voice; and he may be heard distinctly, upon the same key, either
in a private room or in a large Assembly.

RULE IV. Let the sentiments you express be accompanied with proper tones,
looks and gestures.
By tones I mean the various modulations of voice by which we naturally express
the emotions and passions. By looks I mean the expression of the emotions and
passions in the countenance.

Gestures are the various motions of the hands or body which correspond to the
several sentiments and passions which the speaker designs to express.

All these should be perfectly natural. They should be the same which we use in
common conversation. A speaker should endeavor to feel what he speaks; for the
perfection of reading and speaking is, to pronounce the words as if the
sentiments were our own.

If a person is rehearsing the words of an angry man, he should assume the same
furious look, his eyes should slash with rage, his gestures should be violent,
and his utterance rapid and vehement. But if he utters the sentiments of
benevolence and kindness, his countenance should put on a smile, his eyelids
should be drawn nearer together than usual, and his voice should be soft and
inviting: An example of the first we have in these words, "Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels." An
example of the latter, in the following, -- "Come, Ye blessed of my father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world." And
the person, who pronounces these two sentences with the same voice, looks and
gestures, must be a total stranger to the rules of reading and oratory.

It is impossible to describe with words all the various passions that affect
us; they can be learned only from observing persons under the operations of
them.

All good speaking must arise from feeling; and when we would utter with
propriety the words of another person, we should endeavor as much as possible
to put ourselves in his place and make his sentiments our own. If a reader or
speaker is not interested in what he says, his pronunciation will certainly be
without animation, probably without propriety.

Let this fundamental rule, therefore, be impressed upon the learner's mind;
That whatever he reads or speaks should be pronounced just as though the
sentiments were his own.

SELECT SENTENCES, FROM VARIOUS AUTHORS.
CHAP. I.
TO be very active in laudable pursuits, is the distinguishing characteristic
of a man of merit.

There is an heroic innocence, as well as an heroic courage.

There is a mean in all things. Even virtue itself has its stated limits; which
not being strictly observed, it ceases to be virtue.

It is wiser to prevent a quarrel beforehand, than to revenge it afterward.

It is much better to reprove, than to be angry secretly.

No revenge is more heroic, than that which torments envy, by doing good.

The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and it is his glory to pass over
a transgression.

Money, like manure, does no good till it is spread. There is no real use of
riches, except in the distribution; the rest is all conceit.

A wise man will desire no more than what he may get justly, use soberly,
distribute cheerfully, and live upon contentedly.

A contented mind, and a good conscience, will make a man happy in all
conditions. He knows not how to fear, who dares to die.

There is but one way of fortifying the soul against all gloomy presages and
terrors of mind; and that is, by securing to ourselves the friendship and
protection of that Being who disposes of events, and governs futurity.

Philosophy is then only valuable, when it serves for the law of life, and not
for the ostentation of science.

CHAP. II.
WITHOUT a friend the world is but a wilderness.

A man may have a thousand intimate acquaintances, and not a friend among them
all. If you have one friend, think yourself happy.

When once you profess yourself a friend, endeavor to be always such. He can
never have any true friends, that will be often changing them.

Prosperity gains friends, and adversity tries them.

Nothing more engages the affections of men, than a handsome address, and
graceful conversation.

Complaisance renders a superior amiable, an equal agreeable, and an inferior
acceptable.

Excess of ceremony shows want of breeding. That civility is best, which
excludes all superfluous formality.

Ingratitude is a crime so shameful, that the man was never yet found, who
would acknowledge himself guilty of it.

Truth is born with us; and we must do violence to nature, to shake off our
veracity.

There cannot be a greater treachery, than first to raise a confidence, and
then deceive it.

By others' faults, wise men correct their own.

No man has a thorough taste of prosperity, to whom adversity never happened.

When our vices leave us, we flatter ourselves that we leave them.

It is as great a point of wisdom to hide ignorance, as to discover knowledge.

Pitch upon that course of life which is the most excellent; and habit will
render it the most delightful.

CHAP. III.
CUSTOM is the plague of wise men, and the idol of fools.

As to be perfectly just, is an attribute of the divine nature; to be ^o to the
utmost of our abilities, is the glory of man.

No man was ever (...) down with the injuries of fortune, unless he had before
suffered himself to be deceived by her favors.

Anger may glance into the breast of a wise man, but rests only in the bosom of
fools.

None more impatiently suffer injuries, than those that are most forward in
doing them.

By taking revenge, a man is but even with his enemy; but in passing it over,
he is superior.

To err is human; to forgive, divine.

A more glorious victory cannot be gained over another man, than this, that
when the injury began on his part, the kindness should begin on ours.

The prodigal robs his heir, the miser robs himself.

We should take a prudent care for the future, but so as to enjoy the present.
It is no part of wisdom, to be miserable today, because we may happen to be so
tomorrow.

To mourn without measure is folly; not to mourn at all, insensibility.

Some would be thought to do great things, who are but tools and instruments;
like the fool who fancied he played upon the organ, when he only drew the
bellows.

Though a man may become learned by another's learning, he never can be wise
but by his own wisdom.

He who wants good sense is unhappy in having learning; for he has thereby more
ways of exposing himself.

It is ungenerous to give a man occasion to blush at his own (...) in one
thing, who perhaps may excel us in many*

No object is more ^^^^ing to the eye, than the sight of a man whom you have
obliged; nor any music so agreeable to the ear, as the voice of one that owns
you for his benefactor.

The coin that is most current amongst mankind is flattery; the only benefit of
which is, that by hearing what we are not, we may be instructed what we ought
to be.

The character of the person who commends you, is to be considered before you
set a value on his esteem. The wise man applauds him whom he thinks most
virtuous, the rest of the world, him who is most wealthy.

The temperate man's pleasures are durable, because they are regular; and all
his life is calm and serene, because it is innocent.

A good man will love himself too well to lose, and his neighbor too well to
win, an estate by gaming. The love of gaming will corrupt the best principles
(...) the world.

CHAP. IV.
AN angry man who suppresses his passions, thinks worse than he speaks; and an
angry man that will chide, speaks worse than he thinks.

A good word is an easy obligation; but not to speak ill requires only our
silence, which costs us nothing.

It is to affectation the world owes its whole race of coxcombs. Nature in her
whole drama never drew such a part; she has sometimes made a fool, but a
coxcomb is always of his own making.

It is the infirmity of little minds to be taken with every appearance, and
dazzled with every thing that sparkles; but great minds have but little
admiration, because few things appear new to them.

It happens to men of learning, as to ears of corn; they shoot up, and raise
their heads high, while they are empty; but when full, and swelled with grain,
they begin to flag and droop.

He that is truly polite, knows how to contradict with respect, and to please
without adulation; and is equally remote from an insipid complaisance, and a
low ^amiliarity.

The failings of good men are commonly more published in the world than their
good deeds; and one fault of a deserving man, shall meet with more reproaches,
than all his virtues, praise: such is the force of ill will, and ill nature.

It is harder to avoid censure, than to gain applause; for this may be done by
one great or wise action in an age; but to escape censure, a man must pass his
whole life without saying or doing one ill or foolish thing.

When Darius offered Alexander ten thousand talents to divide Asia equally with
him, he answered, the earth cannot bear two suns, nor Asia, two kings.
Parmenio, a friend of Alexander's, hearing the great offers Darius had made,
said, were I Alexander, I would accept them. So would I, replied Alexander,
were I Parmenio.

Nobility is to be considered only as an imaginary distinction, unless
accompanied with the practice of those generous virtues by which it ought to be
obtained. Titles of honor conferred upon such as have no personal me^^, are at
best but the royal stamp set upon base metal.

Though an honorable title may be conveyed to posterity, yet the ennobling
qualities which are the soul of greatness are a sort of incommunicable
perfections, and cannot be transferred. If a man could bequeath his virtues by
will, and fettle his sense and learning upon his heirs, as certainly as he can
his lands, a noble descent would then indeed be a valuable privilege.

Truth is always consistent with itself, and needs nothing to help it out. It
is always near at hand, and sits upon our lips, and is ready to drop out before
we are aware: whereas a lie is troublesome, and sets a man's invention upon the
rack; and one trick needs a great many more to make it good.

The pleasure which affects the human mind with the most lively and
transporting touches, is the sense that we act in the eye of infinite wisdom,
power, and goodness, that will crown our virtuous endeavors here with
happiness hereafter, large as our desires, and lasting as our immortal souls;
without this, the highest state of l^^e is insipid, and with it, the lowest is
a paradise.

CHAP. V.
HONORABLE age is not that which stands in length of time, nor which is
measured by number of years; but wisdom is the gray hair unto man, and
unspotted life is old age.

Wickedness, condemned by her own witness, is very timorous, and being pressed
with conscience, always forecasteth evil things: for fear is nothing else, but
a betraying of the succors which reason offers.

A wise man will fear in every thing. He that contemns small things shall
fall by little and little.

A rich man beginning to fall is held up of his friends; but a poor man being
down is thrust away by his friends; when a rich man is fallen he has many
helpers; he speaks things not to be spoken, and yet men justify him; the poor
man slipped and they rebuked him; he spoke wisely, and could have no place. When
a rich man speaks, every man holds his tongue, and look, what he says they
extol it to the clouds; but if a poor man speak, they say, what fellow is this?

Many have fallen by the edge of the sword, but not so many as have fallen by
the tongue. Well is he that is defended from it, and has not passed through
the venom thereof; who has not drawn the yoke thereof, nor been bound in her
bonds; for the yoke thereof is a yoke of ir^^, and the bands thereof are bands
of brass; ^^e death thereof is an evil death.

My son, blemish not thy good deeds, neither use uncomfortable words, when thou
give any thing. Shall not the dew assuage the heat? so is a word better than
a gift. Lo, is not a word better than a gift? but both are with a gracious man.

Blame not, before thou have examined the tru^^^ understand first, and then
rebuke.

If thou would get a friend, prove him first and be not hasty to credit him;
for some men are friends for their own occasions, and will not abide in the day
of thy trouble.

Forsake not an old friend, for the new is not compareable to him: a new friend
is as new wine; when it is old thou shall drink it with pleasure.

A friend cannot be known in prosperity; and an enemy cannot be hidden in
adversity.

Admonish thy friend; it may be he has not done it; and if he has, that he do
it no more. Admonish thy friend; it may be he has not said it, or if he has,
that he speak it not again. Admonish a friend; for many times it is a slander;
and believe not every tale. There is one that slippeth in his speech, but not
from his heart; and who is he that has not offended with his tongue?

Whosoever discovers secrets loses his credit, and shall never find a friend to
his mind.

Honor thy father with thy whole heart, and forget not the sorrows of thy
mother: how can thou recompense them the things they have done for thee?

There is nothing so much worth as a mind well instructed.

The lips of talkers will be telling such things as pertain not unto them; but
the words of such as have understanding are weighed in the balance. The art of
fools is in their mouth, but the tongue of the wise is in their heart.

To labor, and to be contented with that a man has, is a sweet life.

Be not confident in a plain way.

Be in peace with many; nevertheless have but one counselor of a thousand.

Let reason go before every enterprise, and counsel before every action.

CHAP. VI.
THE latter part of a wise man's life is taken up in curing the follies,
prejudices, and false opinions he had contracted in the former.

Censure is the tax a man pays to the public for being eminent.

Very few men, properly speaking, live at present, but are providing to live
another time.

Party is the madness of many, for the gain of a few.

To endeavor to work upon the vulgar with fine sense, is like attempting to
hew blocks of marble with a razor.

Superstition is the spleen of the soul.

He who tells a lie is not sensible how great a task he undertakes; for he must
be forced to invent twenty more to maintain that one.

Some people will never learn any thing, for this ^^ason, because they
understand every thing too soon.

There is nothing wanted to make all rational and disinterested people in the
world of one religion, but that they should talk together every day.

Men are grateful, in the same degree that they are resentful.

Young men are subtle arguers; the cloak of honor covers all their faults, as
that of passion all their follies.

Economy is no disgrace; it is better living on a little, than out-living a
great deal.

Next to the satisfaction I receive in the prosperity of an honest man, I am
best pleased with the confusion of a rascal.

What is often termed shyness, is nothing more than refined sense, and an
indifference to common observations.

Every person insensibly fixes upon some degree of refinement in his discourse,
some measure of thought which he thinks worth exhibiting. It is wise to fix
this pretty high, although it occasions one to talk the less.

To endeavor all one's days to fortify our minds with learning and philosophy,
is to spend so much in armor, that one has nothing left to defend.

Deference often shrinks and withers as much upon the approach of intimacy, as
the sensitive plant does upon the touch of one's finger.

Men are sometimes accused of pride, merely because their accusers would be
proud themseves if they were in their places.

People (...) quently use this expression, I am incl^^ed to think so and so,
not considering that they are speaking the most literal of all truths.

Modesty makes large amends for the pain it gives the persons who labor under
it, by the prejudice it affords every worthy person in their favor*

The difference there is betwixt honor and honesty seems to be chiefly in the
motive. The honest man does that from duty, which the man of honor does for
the sake of character.

A liar begins with making falsehood appear like truth, and ends with making
truth itself appear like falsehood.

Virtue should be considered as a part of taste; and we should as much avoid
deceit, or sinister meanings in discourse, as we would puns, bad language, or
false grammar.

The higher character a person supports, the more he should regard his minutest
actions.

CHAP. VII.
DEFERENCE is the most complicate, the most indirect, and the most elegant of
all compliments.

He that lies in bed all a summer's morning, loses the pleasure of the day: he
that gives up his youth to indolence, undergoes a loss of the same kind.

Shining characters are not always the most agreeable ones. The mild radiance
of an emerald, is by no means less pleasing than the glare of the ruby.

To be at once a rake, and to glory in the character, discovers at the same
time a bad disposition, and a bad taste.

How is it possible to expect that mankind will take advice, when they will not
so much as take warning.

Although men are accused for not knowing their own weakness, yet perhaps as
few know their own strength. It is in men as in soils, where sometimes there is
a vein of gold which the owner knows not of.

Fine sense and exalted sense are not half so valuable as common sense. There
are forty men of wit for one man of sense; and he that will carry nothing about
him but gold, will be every day at a loss for want of ready change.

Learning is like mercury, one of the most powerful and excellent things in the
world in skilful hands; in unskilful, most mischievous.

A man should never be ashamed to own he has been in the wrong; which is but
saying, in other words, that he is wiser today than he was yesterday,

Wherever I find a great deal of gratitude in a poor man, I take it sor granted
there would be as much generosity if he were a rich man.

Flowers of rhetoric in sermons or serious discourses, are like the blue and
red flowers in corn, pleasing to those who come only for amusement, but
prejudicial to him who would reap the profit.

It often happens that those are the best people, whose characters have been
most injured by slanderers; as we usually find that to be the sweetest fruit,
which the birds have been pecking at.

The eye of a critic is often like a microscope, made so very fine and nice,
that it discovers the atoms, grains, and minutest articles, without ever
comprehending the whole, comparing the parts, or seeing all at once the harmony.

Men's zeal for religion is much of the same kind as that which they show for a
football: whenever it is contested for, every one is ready to venture their
lives and limbs in the dispute; but when that is once at an end, it is no more
thought on, but sleeps in oblivion, buried in rubbish, which no one thinks it
worth his pains to rake into, much less to remove.

Honor is but a fictious kind of honesty; a mean, but a necessary substitute
for it, in societies which have none: it is a sort of paper-credit, with which
men are obliged to trade, who are deficient in the sterling cash of true
morality and religion.

Persons of great delicacy should know the certainty of the following truth:
there are abundance of cases which occasion suspense, in which whatever they
determine they will repent of their determination; and this through a
propensity of human nature to fancy happiness in those schemes which it does
not pursue.

The chief advantage that ancient writers can boast over modern ones seems
owing to simplicity. Every noble truth and sentiment was expressed by the
former in a natural manner, in word and phrase simple, perspicuous, and
incapable of improvement. What then remained for late writers, but affectation,
witticism, and conceit?

CHAP. VIII.
WHAT a piece of work is man! how noble in reason! how infinite in faculti^^^
in form and moving, how express and admireable! in action how like an angel! in
apprehension how like a God!

If to do, were as easy as to know what were good to do, chapels had been
churches, and poor men's cottages, princes' palaces. He is a good divine that
follows his own instructions: I can easier teach twenty what were good to be
done, than to be one of the twenty to follow my own teaching,

Men's evil manners live in brass; their virtues we write in water.

The web of our life is of a mingled yarn, good and ill together; our virtues
would be proud, if our faults whipped them not; and our crimes would despair,
if they were not cherished by our virtues.

The sense of death is most in apprehension;
And the poor beetle that we tread upon,
In corporal sufferance feels a pang as great,
As when a giant dies.
How far the little candle throws his beam^!
So shines a good deed in a naughty world.
-- Love all, trust a few,
Do wrong to none: be able for thine enemy
Rather in power than in use; keep thy friend
Under thy own life's key: be checked for silence,
But never task'd for speech.
The cloud capt towers, the gorgeous palaces,
The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
Yea, all which it inherits, shall dissolve;
And, like the baseless fabric of a vision,
Leave not a wreck behind! we are such stuff
As dreams are made on, and our little life
Is rounded with a sleep.
Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well, us
When our deep plots do fail; and that should teach
There Is a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-how them how we will.
The Poet's eye in a fine frenzy rolling,
Does glance from heaven to earth, from earth to
And as imagination bodies forth heaven^
The form of things unknown, the Poet's pen
Turns them to shape, and gives to airy nothing,
A local habitation and a name.
Heaven does with us, as we with torches do,
Not light them for themselves: for if our virtues
Did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike touched,
As i^ we had them not. Spirits are not finely
But to fine issues: nor nature ever lends
The smallest scruple of her excellence,
But, like a thrifty goddess, she determines
Herself the glory of a creditor,
Both thanks and use.
What stronger breast plate than a heart untainted?
Thrice is he armed that has his quarrel just;
And he but naked (though locked up in steel)
Whose conscience with injustice is corrupted.
CHAP. IX.
OH, world, thy slippery turns! Friends now fast sworn,
Whose double bosoms seem to wear one heart,
Whose hours, whose bed, whose meal and exercise,
Are still together; who twine (as 'twere) in love
Inseparable; shall within this hour,
On a dissension of a doit, break out
To bitterest enmity. So fellest foes,
Whose passions and whose plots have broke their sleep
To take the one the other, by some chance,
Some trick not worth an egg, shall grow dear friends
And interjoin their issues.
-- So it falls out,
That what we have we prize not to the worth,
While we enjoy it; but being lacked and lost,
Why then we wreak the value; then we find
The virtue that possession would not show us
Whilst it was ours.
Cowards die many times before their deaths;
The valiant never taste of death but once.
Of all the wonders that I yet have heard,
It seems to me most strange that men should fear;
Seeing that death, a necessary end,
Will come, when it will come.
There is some soul of goodness in things evil,
Would men observingly distill it out,
For our bad neighbor makes us early stirters:
Which is both healthful, and good husbandry,
Besides, they are our outward consciences,
And preachers to us all; admonishing,
That we should dress us fairly for our end.
O momentary grace of mortal men,
Which we more hunt for than the grace of God!
Who builds his hope in the air of men's fair looks,
Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast,
Ready with every nod to tumble down
Into the fatal bowels of the deep.
-- Who shall go about
To cozen fortune, and be honorable
Without the stamp of merit? Let none presume
To wear an u^deserved dignity.
O that estates, degrees, and offices,
Were not derived corruptly; that clear honor
Were purchased by the merit of the wearer!
How many then should cover that stand bare!
How many be commanded, that command!
Oh, who can hold a fire in his hand,
By thinking on the frosty Caucasus?
Or cloy the hungry odge of appetite,
By bare imagination of a feast?
Or wallow naked in December snow,
By thinking on fantastic summers's heat?
Oh, no! the apprehension of the good,
Gives but the greater feeling to the worse;
Fell sorrow's tooth does never rankle more,
Than when it bites but lanceth not the sore.
-- It Is slander;
Whose edge is sharper than a sword; whose tongue
Outvenoms all the worms of Nile; whose breath
Rides on the posting winds, and does belie
All corners of the world. Kings, queens, and states,
Maids, matrons, nay the secrets of the grave,
This viperous slander enters.
There is a tide in the affairs of men,
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Is bound in shallows, and in miseries.
Tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow,
Cr^eps in this petty space from day to day,
To the last syllable of recorded time,
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
The way to dusky death. Out, out, brief candle!
Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player,
That stru^s and frets his hour upon the stage,
And then is heard no more! It is a tale
Told by an id^ot, full of found and fury,
Signifying nothing.
He that would pase the latter part of his life, with honor and decency, must,
when is young consider that he shall one day be old, and remember, when he is
old, that he has once been young.

An old age, unsupported with matter for discour^e and meditation, is much to
be dreaded. No state can be more destitute than that of him, who, when the
delights of sense forsake him, has no pleasures of the mind.

Such is the conditon of life that something is always wanted, to happiness. In
youth we have warm hopes, which are soon blasted by rashness and negligence,
and great designs, which are defeated by inexperience. In age we have knowledge
and prudence, without spirit to exert, or motives to prompt them. We are able
to plan schemes and regulate measures, but have not time remaining to bring
them to completion.

A varice is always poor, but poor by her own fault.

The maxim which Periander of Corinth, one of the seven sages of Greece, left
as a memorial of his knowledge and benevolence, was, "Be master of your anger."
He considered anger as the great disturber of human life; the chief enemy both
of public happiness and private tranquillity, and thought he could not lay on
posterity a stronger obligation to reverence his memory, than by leaving them a
falutary caution against this outrageous passion.

Pride is undoubtedly the origin of anger; but pride, like every other passion,
if it breaks loose from reason, counteracts its own purposes. A passionate man,
upon the review of his day, will have very few gratifications to offer to his
pride, when he has considered how his outrages were caused; why they were
borne, and in what they are likely to end at last.

Whilst an author is yet living, we estimate his powers by the worst
performance. When he is dead, we rate them by his best.

It requires but little acquaintance with the heart, to know that woman's first
wish is to be handsome; and that consequently the readiest method of obtaining
her kindness is to praise her beauty.

The universal axiom in which all complaisance is included, and from which flow
all the formalities which custom has established in civilized nations, is, --
"That no man should give any preference to himself," -- a rule so comprehensive
and certain, that perhaps it is not easy for the mind to imagine an incivility
without supposing it to be broken.

Charity would lose its name were it influenced by so mean a motive as human
praise.

That charity is best of which the consequences are most extensive.

Those who raise envy will easily in^ur censure. Cheats can seldom stand long
against laughter. What cannot be repaired is not to be regretted. The state of
the mind oppressed with a sudden calamity is like that of the fabulous
inhabitants of the new created earth. who, when the first night came on,
supposed that day would never return.

There is a kind of anxious cleanliness, which is always the characteristic of
a slattern; it is the superfluous scrupulosity of guilt, dreading discovery and
shunning suspicion. -- It is the violence of an effort against habit, which
being impelled by external motives, cannot stop at the middle point.

The foundation of content must spring up in a man's own mind; and he who has
so little knowledge of human nature as to seek happiness by changing any thing
but his own disposition, will waste his life in fruitless efforts, and multiply
the griefs which he purposes to remove.

No rank in life precludes the efficacy of a welltimed compliment. When Queen
Elizabeth asked an Ambassador how he liked her ladies, he replied, "It was hard
to judge of stars in the presence of the sun."

The crime which has been once committed, is committed again with less
reluctance.

The great disturbers of our happiness in this world, are our desires, our
griefs, and our fears; and to all these the consideration of mortality is a
certai^ and adequate remedy. "Think (says Epictetus) frequently on poverty,
banishment, and death, and thou will never indulge violent desires, or give up
thy heart to mean sentiments."

It is remarkable that death increases our veneration for the good, and
extenuates our hatred of the bad.

To neglect at any time preparation for death, is to sleep on our post at a
siege; but to omit it in old age, is to sleep at an attack.

To die is the fate of man; but to die (...) lingering anguish, is generally
his folly.

To rejoice in tortures is the privilege of martyrs -- to meet death with
intrepidity is the right only of innocence (if in any human being innocence can
be found); but of him whose life is shortened by his crimes, the last duties
are humility and self-abasement.

Death is no more than every being must suffer, though the dread of it is
peculiar to man.

He that too much refines his delicacy, will always endanger his quiet.

The certainty that life cannot be long, and the probability that it will be
much shorter than nature allows, ought to awaken every man to the active
prosecution of whatever he is desirous to perform. It is true, that no
diligence can ascertain success; death may intercept the swiftest career, but
he who is cut off in the execution of an honest undertaking, has at left the
honor of falling in his rank and has fought the battle, though he missed the
victory.

Timorous thoughts, and cartious disquisitions, are the dull attendants of
delay.

Deceit and falsehood, whatever conveniences they may for a time promise or
produce, are, in the sum of life, obstacles to happiness. Those who profit by
the cheat distrust the deceiver, and the act by which kindness was sought puts
an end to confidence.

When we act according to our duty, we commit the event to him by whose laws
our actions are governed, and who will suffer none to be finally punished for
obedience. But when in prospect of some good, whether natural or moral, we
break the rules prescribed to us, we withdraw from the direction of superior
wisdom, and take all consequences upon ourselves.

Employmont is the great instrument of intellectual dominion. The mind cannot
retire from its enemy into total vacancy, or turn aside from one object, but by
passing to another.

The gloomy and the resentful are always found among those who have nothing to
do, or who do nothing. We must be busy about good, or evil, and he, to whom the
present offers nothing, will often be looking backward on the past Extended
empire, like expanded gold, exchanges solid strength for feeble splendour.

To raise esteem, we must benefit others; to procure love, we must please them.

He that is loudly praised, will be clamorously censured. He that rises hastily
into fame, will be in danger of sinking suddenly into oblivion.

A father above the common rate of men has commonly a son below it.

All fear is in itself painful; and when it conduces not to safety, is painful
without use.

Fear is implanted in us as a preservative from evil: but its duty, like that
of other passions, is not to overbear reason, but to assist it; nor should it
be suffered to tyrannize in the imagination, to raise phantoms of horror, or
beset life with supernumerary distresses.

Without frugality none can be rich, and with it, very few would be poor.

Though in every age there are some, who, by bold adventures or by favorable
accidents, rise suddenly into riches; the bulk of mankind must owe their
affluence to small and gradual profits, below which their expense must be
resolutely reduced.

A man's voluntary expenses should not exceed his income.

Let no man anticipate uncertain profits.

Let no man squander against his inclination.

In all political regulations, good cannot be complete, it can only be
predominant.

No government could subsist for a day, if single errors could justify
defection.

Government is necessary to man; and when obedience is not compelled, there is
no government.

No man, whose appetites are his masters, can perform the duties of his nature
with strictness and regularity. He that would be superior to external
influences, must first become superior to his own passions.

All skill ought to be exerted for universal good. Every man has owed much to
others, and ought to pay the kindness that he has received.

We are long before we are convinced that happiness is never to be found; and
each believes it possessed by others, to keep alive the hope of obtaining it
for himself.

The happiness of the generality of people is nothing if it is not known, and
very little if it is not envied.

CHAP. X.
THE highest panegyric that domestic virtue can receive, is the praise of
servants; for however vanity or insolence may look down with contempt on the
suffrage of men undignified by wealth, and unenlightened by education, it very
seldom happens that they commend or blame without justice.

Our powers owe much of their energy to our hopes.

Such is the power of health, that without its cooperation, every other
comfort is torpid and lifeless, as the power of vegetation without the sun.
Good Humor may be defined; a habit of being pleased; a constant and perennial
softness of manners, easiness of approach, and suavity of disposition, like
that which every one perceives in himself, when the first transports of new
felicity have subsided, and his thoughts are only kept in motion by a slow
succession of soft impulses.

As briars have sweetness with their prickles, so are troubles often
recompensed with joy.

Those that have done nothing in life, are not qualified to judge of those that
have done little.

Few things are impossible to industry and skill. Many things difficult to
design, prove easy to performance.

He that shall walk with vigor three hours in a day, will pass, in seven
years, a space equal to the circumference of the globe.

It is in vain to put wealth within the reach of him who will not stretch out
his hand to take it.

There are said to be pleasures in madness, known only to madmen. There are
certainly miseries in idleness, which the idler can only conceive.

Integrity without knowledge is weak, and generally useless; and knowledge
without integrity is dangerous and dreadful.

The man who feels himself ignorant, should at le^t be modest.

In things difficult there is danger from ignorance; in things easy, from
confidence.

Those who, in consequence of superior capacities and seize, disregard
the common maxims of life, ought to be reminded, that nothing will supply the
want of prudence; and that negligence and irregularity, long continued, will
make knowledge useless, wit ridiculous, and genius contemptible.

Whatever be the motive of insult, it is always best to overlook it; for folly
scarcely can deserve resentment, and malice is punished by neglect.

Man is not weak; knowledge is more than equivalent to force.

Life is not to be counted by the ignorance of infancy, or the imbecility of
age. We are long before we are able to think, and we soon cease from the power
of acting.

Life may be lengthened by care, though death cannot ultimately be deseated.

The great art of life is to play for much, and stake little.

He that embarks in the voyage of life, will always wish to advance rather by
the impulse of the wind, than the strokes of the oar; and many founder in their
passage, while they lie waiting for the gale.

In the different degrees of life, there will be often found much meanness
among the great, and much greatness amongst the mean.

It is not by comparing line with line, that the merit of great works is to be
estimated; but by their general effects and ultimate result.

It is not hard to love those from whom nothing can be feared.

There is not, perhaps, one of the liberal arts which may not be completely
learned in he English language. It is observed, that a corrupt society has many
laws.

A zeal, which is often thought and called liberty, sometimes disguises from
the world, and not rarely from the mind which it possesses, an envious desire
of plundering wealth, or degrading greatness; and of which the immediate
tendency is innovation and anarchy, or imperious ^agerness to subvert and
confound, with very little care what shall be established.

As a man only inebriated by vapors, soon recovers in the open air, a nation
discontented to madness, without any adequate cause, will return to its wits
and allegiance, when a little pause has cooled it to reflection.

Marriage has many pains, but celibacy has no pleasures.

The infelicities of marriage are not to be urged against its institution, as
the miseries of life would prove equally, that life cannot be the gift of
heaven.

It will be generally found, that those who marry late are best pleased with
their children; and those who marry early, with their partners.

We should not despise the malice of the weakest. We should remember, that
venom supplies the want of strength; and that the lion may perish by the
puncture of an asp.

An infall^ble characteristic of meanness is cruclty.

No mercantile man, or mercantile nation, has any friendship but for money; and
alliances between them w^ll last no longer than their common safety, or common
profit is endangered; no longer than they have an enemy who threatens to take
from each, more than either can steal from the other.

The misery of man proceeds not from any single crush of overwhelming evil, but
from small vexations continually repeated.

Merriment is always the effect of a sudden impression; the jest which is
expected is already destroyed.

To improve the golden moment of opportunity, and catch the good that is within
our reach, is the great art of life. Many wants are suffered which might have
once been supplied, and much time is lost in regretting the time which had been
lost before.

Pleasure is very seldom found where it is ^ought; our brightest blazes of
gladness are commonly kindled by unexpected sparks. The flowers which scatter
their odours from time to time in the paths of life, grow up without culture
from seeds scattered by chance.

The great source of pleasure is variety. Uniformity must tire at last, though
it be uniformity of excellence. We love to expect, and when expectation is
disappointed, or gratified we want to be again expecting.

Compositions, merely pretty, have the fate of other pretty things, and are
quitted in time for something useful. They are flowers fragrant and fair, but
of short duration; or they are blossoms only to be valued as they foretell
fruits.

It is the great privilege of poverty to be happy unenvied, to be healthful
without physic, and secure without a guard. To obtain from the bounty of nature
what the great and wealthy are compelled to procure by the help of artists, and
the attendants of slatterers and spies.

Nature makes us poor, only when we want ne^^ssaries, but custom gives the name
of poverty to the want of superfluities.

To be idle and to be poor have always been reproaches and therefore every man
endeavors, with his utmost care, to hide his poverty from others, and his
idleness from himself.

He that changes his party by his humor, is not more virtuous, than he that
changes it by his interest. He loves himself rather than truth.

Faction seldom leaves a man honest, however it may find him.

Praise is so pleasing to the ear of man, that it is the original motive of
almost all our actions.

That praise is worth nothing of which the price is known.

The real satisfaction which praise can afford, is when what is repeated aloud,
agrees with the whispers of conscience, by showing us that we have not
endeavored to deserve well in vain.

To be at once in any great degree loved and praised is truly rare.

Pride is a vice, which pride itself inclines every man to find in others, and
to overlook in himself.

Pride is seldom delicate, it will please itself with very mean advantages; and
envy feels not its own happiness, but when it may be compared with the misery
of others.

Moderation in prosperity, is a virtue very difficult to mortals.

Small things make mean men proud.

CHAP. XI.
THERE is a kind of men who may be classed under the name of bustlers, whose
business keeps them in perpetual motion, yet whose motion always eludes their
business; who are always to do what they never do; who cannot stand still
because they are wanted in another place, and who are wanted in many places
because they can stay in none.

No people can be great who have ceased to be virtuous.

The usual fortune of complaint, is to excite contempt more than pity.

To hear complaints with patience, even when complaints are vain, is one of the
duties of friendship: and though it must be allowed, that he suffers most like
a hero who hides his grief in silence, yet it cannot be denied, that he who
complains, acts like a man -- like a social being, who looks for help from his
fellow creatures.

Differences are never so effectually laid asleep, as by some common calamity.
An enemy unites all to whom he threatens danger.

He that never was acquainted with adversity, (says Seneca) has seen the world
but on one side, and is ignorant of half the scenes of nature: As no man can
enjoy happiness without thinking that he enjoys it, the experience of calamity
is necessary to a just sense of better fortune; for the good of our present
state is merely comparative; and the evil which every man feels will be
sufficient to disturb and harrass him, if he does not know how much he escapes.
The luster of diamonds is in vigorated by the interposition of darker bodies;
the lights of a picture are created by the shades.

Conveniences are never missed, where they were never enjoyed.

It is generally the fate of a double dealer, to lose his power, and keep his
enemies.

Disguise can gratify no longer than it deceives.

Diligence is never wholly lost.

Dullness and deformity are not culpable in themselves, but may be very justly
reproached when they pretend to the honor of wit, or the influence of beauty.

What are our views of all worldly things, when a sharp or tedious sickness has
set death before our eyes, and the last hour seems to be approaching? The
extensive influence of greatness, the glitter of wealth, the praises of
admirers, and the attendance of supplicants, have all appeared vain and empty
things.

We then find the absurdity of stretching out our arms incessantly to grasp
that which we cannot keep, and wearing out our lives in endeavors to add new
turrets to the fabric of ambition, when the foundation itself is shaking, and
the ground on which it stands is mouldering away.

Death, says Seneca, falls heavy upon him, who too much known to others, and
too little to himself.

He cannot be properly chosen for a friend, whose kindness is exhaled by its
own warmth, or frozen by the first blast of slander; he cannot be a useful
counselor, who will hear no opinion but his own; he will not much invite
confidence, whose principal maxim is to suspect; nor can the candor and
frankness of that man be much esteemed, who spreads his arms to human kind, and
makes every man without distinction a denizen of his bosom.

One of the Golden Precepts of pythagor^s directs us -- "That a friend should
not be hated for little faults."

Among the pleasing incidents of life may be numbered the unexepected renewals
of old acquaintances.

Many seeming faults are to be imputed to the nature of the undertaking, rather
than the negligence of the performer.

As with folly no man is willing to confess himself very intimately acquainted,
therefore its pains and pleasures are kept secret.

SWIFT, SHAKESPEARE, JOHNSON, etc. CHAP. XII. AGATHOCLES and CALISTA.
CALISTA was young and beautiful, endowed with a great sha^e of wit and solid
sense. Agathocles, whose age very little exceeded here is, was well made, brave
and prudent. He had the good fortune to be introduced to Calista's: where his
looks, wandering indifferently over a numerous circle, soon distinguished and
fixed upon her.

But recovering from the short extacy occasioned by the first sight, he
immediately reproached himself, as being guilty of rudeness to the rest of the
company; a fault which he had endeavored to correct, by looking round on other
objects. Vain attempts! they were attracted by a powerful charm, and turned
again toward Calista. He blushed as well as she, while a sweet emotion, till
then unselt, produced a kind of fluttering in his heart, and confusion in his
countenance.

They both became at the same time, more timid, and more curious. He was
pleased with gazing at Calista; which he could not do without trembling: whilst
Calista, secretly satisfied with this flattering preference, cast her eyes on
him by stealth. They were both under an apprehension, but especially Calista,
of being caught by the other in the fact; and yet caught they were almost every
moment.

The hour of separation came, which to them appeared too sudden: melancholy
were the reflections they made on the rapidity of of time. Imagination,
however, did not permit, them to be entirely absent from each other: for the
image of Calista was deeply engraved on the mind of Agathocles: and his
features were as strongly impressed on that of Calista. They both appeared less
cheerful, the rest of the day. A lively sentiment, which they did not well
comprehend themselves, entirely employed their minds, in spite of every attempt
to divert themselves.

Two days passed without seeing one another again: and, though this interval of
time had been filled up either by business or recreations; yet they both,
notwithstanding, experienced a weariness and dissatisfaction in their minds,
for which they could no way account. But the moment, which brought them
together again, explained it to them: the perfect contentment they felt in each
other's company, made them sensible of the real source of their melancholy.

Agathocles took more courage that day: he addressed Calista in a most obliging
manner, and had the happiness to converse with her for the first time. As yet
he had seen only her outward charms; but now he discovered the beauty of her
mind, the integrity of her heart, the dignity of her sentiments, and the
delicacy of her wit; but what charmed him the most, was the opinion he
conceived that she did not judge him unworthy of her esteem.

From this time he made her frequent visits, in every one of which he
discovered some new perfection in the fair Calista. This is the characteristic
of true merit; it gains by being exposed to the eye of a judicious person. A
man of sense will soon dislike a coquette, a fool, or a giddy woman: but if he
falls in love with a woman of merit, time, far from weakening, will only
strengthen and augment his passion.

The fixed inclination of Agathocles convinced him now that what he felt for
Calista, was love, and that of the most tender nature. This he knew; but
Calista did not as yet know it, or at lest had not learnt it from his lips.
Love is timorous and diffident. A bold suitor is not the real lover of the lady
whom he addresses: he seeks for nothing but pleasure. Agathocles at last
resolved to open his heart to Calista; but he did not do it in the affected
language of a romantic passion. "Lovely Calista, said he ingenuously, it is not
mere esteem that binds me to you, but a most passionate and tender love. I feel
that I cannot live without you: can you without violence to your inclinations,
consent to make me happy? I may love you without offense; it is a tribute due to
your merit: but may I flatter myself with the hopes of some small return?"

A coquette would have affected to be displeased at such a declaration. But
Calista not only listened to her lover without interrupting him, but answered
him without ill nature, and gave him leave to hope. Nor did she put his
constancy to a tedious trial: the happiness for which he sighed was no longer
delayed than was necessary to prepare the ceremony. The marriage settlements
were easily regulated betwixt the parties: for interest was out of the
question: the chief article consisted in the mutual exchange of hearts; which
was already fulfilled.

What will be the lot of this new-married couple? The happiest, I may venture
to foretell, that mortals can enjoy upon earth. No pleasures are compareable to
those that affect the heart; and there are none, as I have observed before,
that affect it with such exquisite delight, as loving and being beloved. To
this tender union we can never apply the words of Democratus, that the pleasure
of love is but a short epilepsy. He meant, without doubt, that mere sensual
pleasure, which has so little in it of the nature of love, that a man may enjoy
it without loving, and love without ever enjoying it.

They will be constant in their love. This I dare also to predict; and I know
the reason. Their affection is not founded on the dazzling charms of beauty:
they are both the friends of virtue; they love each other on this account; they
will, therefore, continue to love, as long as they are virtuous; and their
union itself is a pledge of their perseverance: for nothing so much fecures our
continuance in the paths of virtue, as to have perpetually before our eyes the
example of a person whom we love.

Nothing is capable to disturb their happiness, but those disasters and
misfortunes, from which their love cannot shelter them. But, supposing such a
reverse of fortune, would not their fate in this regard be common with that of
the rest of mankind? Those who have never tasted the pleasures of love, are not
exempt from the like casualties; and the lover is, at lest, a gainer in regard
to those pleasures, which constitute no small part of the happiness of life.

Besides, even love itself will greatly diminish the sense of their
misfortunes. For love has the peculiar property of alleviating the sufferings
of two fond hearts, and of rendering their pleasures more exquisite. By this
communication of distress, they seem to divide its weight: and, on the
contrary, by participation their satisfaction is doubled. As a squadron of
horse is with greater difficulty broke through by the enemy, in proportion to its
closeness: so the happy pair resists the attacks of adversity with so much the
more strength and success, as they are more closely united.

ANON. CHAP. XIII. Story of LA ROCHE.
MIRROR, NO. 42, 43, 44. MORE than forty years ago, an English philosopher,
whose works have since been read and admired by all Europe, resided at a little
town in France. Some disappointments in his native country had first driven him
abroad, and he was afterward induced to remain there, from having found, in his
retreat, where the connections even of nation and language were avoided, a
perfect seclusion and retirement, highly favorable to the developement of
abstract subjects, in which he excelled all the writers of his time.

2. Perhaps in the structure of such a mind, the finer and more delicate
sensibilities are seldom known to have place, or, if originally implanted
there, are in a great measure extinguished by the exertions of intense study
and profound investigations. Hence the idea of philosophy and unfeelingness
being united, has become proverbial, and in common language, the former word is
often used to express the latter. Our philosopher has been censured by some, as
deficient in warmth and feeling; but the mildness of his manners has been
allowed by all* and it is certain that if he was not easily melted (...)
compassion, it was, at lest, not difficult to awaken his benevolence.

3. One morning. while he ^at busied in those speculations which afterward
astonished the world, an old female domestic, who served him for a housekeeper,
brought him word, that an elderly gentleman and his daughter had arrived at the
village, the preceding evening, on their way to some distant country, and that
the father had been suddenly siezed in the night with a dangerous disorder,
which the people of the inn, where they lodged, feared would prove mortal: That
she had been sent for, as having some knowledge of medicine, the village
surgeon being then absent; and that it was truly piteous to see the good old
man, who seemed not so much affected by his own distress, as by that which it
caused to his daughter.

4. Her master laid aside the volume in his hand, and broke off the chain of
ideas it had inspired. His nightgown was exchanged for a coat and he followed
his gouvernan^e to the ^ick man's apartment. It was the best in the little inn
where they lay, but a pal^ry one notwithstanding. Our philosopher was obliged
to stoop as he entered it. It was floored with earth, and above were the (...)
not plastered, and hung with cobwebs.

5. On a shock-bed, at one end, lay the old man whom he came to visit; at the
foot of it sat his daughter. She was dressed in a clean white bed-gown; her
dark locks hung loosely over it as she bent forward, watching the languid looks
of her father. The philosopher and his housekeeper had stood some moments in
the room without the young lady's being sensible of their entering it.

6. Mademoiselle! said the old woman at last, in a soft tone. She turned, and
showed one of the finest faces in the world. It was touched not spoiled with
sorrow; and when she perceived a stranger, whom the old woman now introduced to
her, a blush at first, and then the gentle ceremonial of native politeness,
which the affliction of the time tempered, but did not extinguish, crossed it
for a moment and changed its expression. It was sweetness all, however, and our
philosopher felt it strongly.

7. It was not a time for words; he offered his services in a few sincere ones.
"Monsieur lies miserably ill here," said the gouvernante; "If he could possibly
be moved any where." "If he could be moved to our house," said her master. He
had a spare bed for a friend, and there was a great room unoccupied next to the
gouvernante's. It was contrived accordingly.

8. The scruples of the stranger, who could look scruples, though he could not
speak them, were overcome, and the bashful reluctance of his daughter gave way
to her belief of its use to her father. The sick man was wrapped in blankets and
carried across the street to the English gentleman's. The old woman helped the
daughter to nurse him there. The surgeon, who arrived soon after, prescribed a
little and nature did much for him; in a week he was able to thank his
benefactor.

9. By that time his host had learned the name and character of his guest. He
was a protestant and clergyman of Switzerland, called La Roche, a widower, who
had lately buried his wife, after a long and lingering illness, for which
traveling had been prescribed; and was now returning home, after an
ineffectual journey, with his only child, the daughter we have mentioned.

10. He was a devout man, as became his profession. He possessed devotion in
all its warmth, but with none of its asperity; I mean that asperity which men,
who are called devout, sometimes indulge. The philosopher, though he felt no
devotion, never quarrelled with it in others. His gouvernante joined the old
man and his daughter, in the prayers and thanksgivings which they put up on his
recovery; for she too was a heretic, in the phrase of the village.

11. The philosopher walked out with his long staff and his dog, and left them
to their prayers and thanksgivings. "My master," said the old woman, "alas! he
is not a christian; but he is the best of unbelievers." -- Not a christian!
exclaimed Mademoiselle La Roche, "yet he saved my father! Heaven bless him for
it; I would he were a christian."

12. "There is a pride in human knowledge, my child," said her father, "which
often blinds men to the sublime truths of revelation; hence there are opposers
of christianity amongmen of virtuous lives, as well as among those of
dissipated and licentious characters, Nay, sometimes I have known the latter
more easily converted to the true faith than the former, because the fume of
passion is more easily dissipated than the mist of false theory and delusive
speculation." "But this philosopher" said his daughter, "alas! my father, he
shall be a christian before he dies."

13. She was interrupted by the arrival of their landlord -- He took her hand
with an air of kindness -- She drew it away from him in silence; threw down her
eyes to the ground and left the room. "I have been thanking God," said the good
La Roche, "for my recovery." "That is right," replied his landlord. "I should
not wish," continued the old man, hesitatingly, "to think-otherwise; did I not
look up with gratitude to that Being, I should barely be satisfied with my
recovery, as a continuation of life which, it may be, is not a real good. Alas!
I may live to wish I had died, that you had left me to die, Sir, instead of
kindly relieving me (he clasped the philosopher's hand); but when I look on
this renovated being as the gift of the Almighty, I feel a far different
sentiment -- my heart dilates with gratitude and love to him; it is prepared
for doing his will, not as a duty, but as a pleasure, and regards every breach
of it, not with disapprobation, but with horror."

14. "You say right, my dear Sir," replied the Philosopher; "but you are not
yet re-established enough to talk much -- you must take care of your health,
and neither study nor preach for some time. I have been thinking over a scheme
that struck me to day, when you mentioned your intended departure. I was never
is Switzerland; I have a great mind to accompany your daughter and you into
that country. I will help to take care of you by the road; for, as I was your
first physician, I hold myself responsible for your cure."

15. La Roche's eyes glistened at the proposal; his daughter was called and
told of it. She was equally pleased with her father; for they really loved
their landlord -- not perhaps the less for his infidelity; at lest that
circumstance mixed a sort of pity with their regard for him -- their souls were
not of a mould for harsher feelings -- hatred never dwelt with them.

16. They traveled by short stages; for the philosopher was as good as his
word, in taking care that the old man should not be fatigued. The party had
time to be well acquainted with one another, and their friendship was increased
by acquaintance. La Roche found a degree of simplicity and gentleness in his
companion, which is not always annexed to the character of a learned or a wise
man.

17. His daughter, who was prepared to be afraid of him, was equally
undeceived. She found in him nothing of that self-importance which superior
parts, or great cultivation of them is apt to confer. He talked of every thing
but philosophy and religion; he seemed to enjoy every pleasure and amusement of
ordinary life, and to be interested in the most common topics of discourse;
when his knowledge or learning at any time appeared, it was delivered with the
utmost plainness and without the lest show of dogma*tism.

18. On his part, he was charmed with the society of the good clergyman and his
lovely daughter. He found in the^ the guileless manner of the earliest times,
with the culture and accomplishments of the most refined ones. Every better
feeling, warm and vivid; every ungentle one, repressed or overcome. He was not
addicted ^o love; but he felt himself happy, in being the friend of
Mademoiselle La Roche, and sometimes envied her father the possession of such a
child.

19. After a journey of eleven days, they arrived at the dwelling of La Roche.
It was situated in one of those valleys in the canton of Berne, where nature
seems to repose in quiet, and has enclosed ^her retreat with mountains
inaccessible. A strea^ that spent its fury in the hills above, ran in ^^ont of
the house, and a broken water-fall was seen through the woods that covered its
sides; below, it circled round a tufted plain, and formed a little lake in
front of a village, at the end of which appeared the spire of La Roche's
church, rising above a clump of beeches.

20. The philosopher enjoyed the beauty of the scene; but to his companions it
recalled the memory of a wife and parent they had lost. The old man's sorrow
was silent; his daughter sobb'd and wept. Her father took her hand, kissed it
twice, pressed it to his bosom, threw up his eyes to heaven; and having wiped
off a tear that was just about to drop from each, began to point out to his
guest some of the most striking objects which the prospect afforded. The
philosopher interpreted all this; and he could but slightly censure the creed
from which it arose.

21. They had not been long arrived, when a number of La Roche's parishioners,
who had heard of his return, came to the house to see and welcome him. The
honest folks were awkward, but sincere, in their professions of friendship.
They made some attempts at condolence; it was too delicate for their handling;
but La Roche took it in good part. "It had pleased God;" said he and they saw
he had settled the matter with himself. Philosohpy could not have done so much
with a thousand words.

22. It was now evening, and the good peasants were about to depart, when a
clock was heard to strike seven, and the hour was followed by a particular
chime. The country folks, who came to welcome their pastor, turned their looks
toward him at the sound; he explained their meaning to his guest. "That is the
signal," said he, "for our evening exercise; this is one of the nights of the
nights of the week in which some (...) parishioners are wont to join in it; a
little rustic saloon serves for the chapel of our family, and such of the good
people as are with us; if you choose rather to walk out, I will furnish you
with an attendant; or here are a few old books which may afford you some
entertainment within.

23. "By no means," answered the philosopher; "I will attend Mademoiselle at
her devotions." "She is our organist," said La Roche; "our neighborhood is the
country of musical mechanism, and I have a small organ, fitted up for the
purpose of assisting our singing." "'It Is an additional inducement," replied the
other, and they walked into the room together.

24. At the end stood the organ mentioned by La Roche; before it was a curtain,
which his daughter drew aside, and placing herself on a seat within, and
drawing the curtain close, so as to save her the awkwardness of an exhibition,
began a voluntary, solemn and beautiful in the highest degree. The philosopher
was no musician, but he was not altogether insensible to music; this fastened
on his mind more strongly, from its beauty being unexpected.

25. The solemn prelude introduced a hymn, in which such of the audience as
could sing immediately joined; the words were mostly taken from holy writ; it
spoke the praises of God and his care of good men. Something was said of the
death of the just; of such as die in the Lord. The organ was touched with a
hand, less firm; -- it paused; -- it ceased; -- and the sobbing of Mademoiselle
was heard in its stead.

26. Her father gave a sign for stopping the psalmody, and rose to prayer. He
was discomposed at first and his voice faltered as he spoke; but his heart was
in his words, and its warmth overcame his embarrassment. He addressed a Being
whom he loved, and he spoke for those he loved. His parishioners catched the
ardour of the good old man; even the philosopher felt himself moved, and
forgot, for a moment, to think why he should not.

27. La Roche's religion was that of sentiment, not theory, and his guest was
averse from disputation; their discourse did not therefore lead to questions
concerning the belief of either; yet would the old man sometimes speak of his,
from the feelings of a heart impressed with its force and wishing to spread the
pleasure he enjoyed in it. The ideas of his God, and his Savior were so
congenial to his mind, that every emotion of it naturally awakened them. A
philosopher might have called him an enthusiast; but if he possessed the
fervor of enthusiasts, he was guiltless of their bigotry. "Our Father who art
in heaven!" might the good old man say -- for he felt it -- and all mankind
were his brethren.

28. "You regret, my friend," said he to the philosopher, "when my daughter and
I talk of the exquisite pleasure derived from music; you regret your want of
musical powers and musical feelings; it is a department of soul, you say, which
nature has almost denied you, which, from the effects you see it have on
others, you are sure must be highly delightful. Why should not the same thing
be said of religion? Trust me, I feel it in the same way, an energy, an
inspiration, which I would not lose for all the blessings of sense, or
enjoyments of the world; yet so far from lessening my relish of the pleasures
of life, that I feel it heightens them all."

29. "The thought of receiving it from God, adds the blessing of sentiment to
that of ^ensation in every good thing which I possess; and when calamities
overtake me, and I have had my share, it confers such a dignity on my
affliction, and so lifts me above the world. Man, I know is but a worm, yet
methinks I am then allied to God!" It would have been inhuman in our
philosopher to cloud, even with a doubt, the sunshine of his belief.

30. His discourse, indeed, was very remote from (...) disquisition or
religious controversy. (...) I ever knew, his ordinary conversation was the
lest tinctured with pedantry, or liable to dissertation. With La Roche and his
daughter, it was perfectly familiar.

31. The country round them, the manners of the village, (...) comparison of
both with those of England, (...) on the works of favorite authors, on the
sentiments they conveyed and the passions they excited, with many other topics
in which there was an equality, or alternate advantage, among the speakers,
were the subjects they talked on.

32. Their hours too of riding and walking were many, in which the philosopher,
as a stranger, was shown the remarkable scenes and curiosities of the country.
They would sometimes make little expeditions to contemplate, in different
attitudes, those astonishing mountains, the cliffs of which, covered with
eternal snows, and sometimes shooting into fantastic shapes, form the
termination of most of the Swiss prospects.

33. Our philosopher asked many questions, as to their natural history and
productions. La Roche observed the sublimity of the ideas which the view of
their stupendous summits, inaccessible to mortal foot, was calculated to
inspire, which, said he, naturally leads the mind to that Being by whom their
foundations were laid, -- "They are not seen in Flanders!" said Mademoiselle
with a sigh. "That is an odd remark," said the philosopher, smiling. -- She
blushed and he enquired no farther. The philosopher was a resident in Flanders
and a skeptic. This reproof of his infidelity is inimitably delicate. In short
this whole story (...) a beautiful satire on deism, bigotry and metaphysical
theology, while it paints unaffected virtue, benevolence and piety in the most
engaging colors.


34. It was with regret he left a society in which he found himself so happy;
but (...) settled with La Roche and his daughter a plan of correspondence: and
they took his promise, that, if ever he came within fifty leagues of their
dwelling, he would travel those fifty leagues to visit them.

35. About three years after, our philosopher was on a visit at Geneva; the
(...) he made to La Roche and his daughter, on his former visit, was recalled
to his mind, by the view of that range of mountains, on a part of which they
had often looked together. There was a reproach too, conveyed along with the
recollection, for his having failed to write to either of them for several
months past. The truth was, that indolence was the habit most natural to him,
from which he was not easily roused by the claims of correspondence, either of
his friends or his enemies; when the latter drew their pens in controversy,
they were often answered as well as the former.

36. While he was hesitating about a visit to La Roche, which he wished to
make, but found the effort rather too much for him, he received a letter from
the old man, which had been forwarded to him from Paris, where he had then
fixed his residence. It contained a gentle complaint of the Philosopher's want
of punctuality, but an assurance of continued gratitude for his former good
offices, and, as a friend whom the writer considered interested in his family,
it informed him of the approaching nuptials of Mademoiselle La Roche, with a
young man, a relation of her own and formerly a pupil of her father's, of the
most noble dispositions and respectable character.

37. Attached from their earliest years, they had been separated by his joining
one of the subsidiary regiments of the Canton, then in the service of a foreign
power. In this situation, he had distinguished himself as much for courage and
military skill, as for the other endowments which he had cultivated at home.
The term of his service was now expired and they expected him to return in a
few weeks, when the old man hoped, as he expressed it in his letter, to join
their hands and see them happy before he died.

38. Our philosopher felt himself interested in this event; but he was not,
perhaps, altogether so happy in the tidings of Mademoiselle La Roche's
marriage, as her father supposed him. Not that he ever was a lover of the Lady;
but he thought her one of the most amiable women he had seen, and there was
something in the idea of her being another's for ever, that struck him, he knew
not why, like a disappointment. After some little speculation on the matter,
however, he could look on it as a thing fitting, if not quite agreeable, and
determined on his visit to see his old friend and his daughter happy.

39. On the last day of his journey, different accidents had retarded his
progress; he was benighted before he reached the quarter in which La Roche
resided. His guide however, was well acquainted with the road and he found
himself in view of the lake, which I have before described, in the
neighborhood of La Roche's dwelling. A light gleamed on the water, that seemed
to proceed from the house; it moved slowly along as he proceeded up the side of
the lake and at last he saw it glimmering through the trees and stop at some
distance from the place where he then was.

40. He supposed it some piece of bridal merriment, and pushed on his horse
that he might be a spectator of the scene; but he was a good deal shocked, on
approaching the spot, to find it proceeded from the torch of a person clothed
in the dress of an attendant on a funeral, and accompanied by several others,
who like him, seemed to have been employed in the rites of sepulture.

41. On the philosopher's making enquiry who was the person they had been
burying? one of them, with an accent more mournful than is common to their
profession, answered, "Then you knew not Mademoiselle, Sir! you never beheld a
lovlier." La Roche!" exclaimed he in reply" -- "Alas it was she indeed!" The
appearance of grief and surprise which his countenance assumed, attracted the
notice of the peasant with whom he talked.

42. He came up close to the philosopher -- "I preceive, Sir, you were
acquainted with Mademoiselle La Roche." "Acquainted with her: Good God! when --
how -- where did she die? Where is her father." "She died, Sir, of heartbreak,
I believe; the young gentleman to whom she was soon to be married, was killed,
in a duel by a French Officer, his intimate companion, and to whom, before
their quarrel, he had often done the greatest favors*"

43. "Her worthy father bears her death, as he has often told us a Christian
should; he is even so composed as to be now in his pulpit, ready to deliver a
few exhortations to his parishioners, as is his custom with us on such
occasions. Follow me, Sir, and you shall hear him." He followed the man without
answering.

44. The Church was dimly lighted, except near the pulpit, where the venerable
La Roche was seated. His people were now lifting up their voices to that being
whom their pastor had taught them ever to bless and revere. La Roche sat, his
figure bending gently forward, his eyes half-closed lifted up in silent
devotion. A lamp placed near him, threw its light strongly on his head and
marked the shadowy lines of his age across the paleness of his brow, thinly
covered with gray hairs.

45. The music ceased, -- La Roche sat for a moment and nature wrung a few
tears from him. His people were loud in their grief. The philosopher was not
less affected then they. La Roche arose. "Father of mercies" I said he,
"forgive these tears; assist thy servant to lift up his soul to thee; to lift
to thee the souls of thy people! My friends! it is good so to do; at all
seasons it is good; but in the days of our distress, what a privilege it is!
Well ^aith the sacred book, "Trust in the Lord; at all times trust in the
Lord." When every other support fails us, when the fountains of worldly comfort
are dried up, let us then seek those living waters which flow from the throne
of God. It is only from the belief of the goodness and wisdom of a supreme
Being that our calamities can be borne in the manner which becomes a man."

46. "Human wisdom is here of little use; for in proportion as it bestows
comfort, it represses feeling, without which we may cease to be hurt by
calamity, but we shall also cease to enjoy happiness. I will not bid you be
insensible, my friends! I cannot, I cannot, if I would (his tears flowed
afresh) I feel too much myself, and I am not ashamed of my feelings; but
therefore, may I the more willingly be heard; therefore have I prayed God to
give me strength to speak to you; to direct you to him, not with empty words,
but with these tears; not from speculation, but from experience, -- that while
you see me suffer, you may know also my consolation."

47. "You behold the mourner of his only child, the last earthly stay and
blessing of his declining years! Such a child too! it becomes not me to speak
of her virtues; yet it is but grateful to mention them, because they were
exerted toward myself. Not many days ago you saw her young, beautiful,
virtuous, and happy; ye who are parents will judge of my felicity then, you
will judge of my afflictions now. But I look toward him who struck me; I see
the hand of a father amidst the chastenings of my God."

48. "Oh! could I make you feel what it is to pour out the heart, when it is
pressed down with many sorrows, to pour i^ out with confidence to him, in whose
hands are life and death, on whose power awaits all that the first enjoys, and
in contemplation of whom disappears all that the last can inflict! For we are
not as those who die without hope; we know that our redeemer lives, -- that we
shall live with him, with our friends his servants, in that blessed land where
sorrow is unknown, and happiness as endless as it is perfect."

49. "Go then, mourn not for me; I have not lost my child: but a little while
and we shall meet again, never to be separated. But ye are also my children:
Would ye that I should not grieve without comfort? So live as she lived; that
when your death shall come, it may be the death of the righteous, and your
latter end like his."

50. Such was the exortation of La Roche; his audience answered it with tears.
The good old man had dried up his at the altar of the Lord; his countenance had
lost its sadness and assumed the glow of faith and hope. The philosopher
followed him into his house. The inspir^tion of the pulpit was past; the
scenes, they had last met in, rushed again on his mind; La Roche threw his arms
around his neck and watered it with his tears. The other was equally affected;
they went together in silence into the parlour, where the evening service was
wont to be performed.

51. The curtains of the organ were open; La Roche started back at the sight.
-- "Oh my friend," said he and his tears burst forth again. The philosopher had
now recollected himself; he stepped forward and drew the curtain close -- the old
man wiped off his tears and taking his friend by the hand, "You see my
weakness," and he, "(...) the weakness of humanity; but my comfort is not
therefore lost." "I heard you," said the other, "in the pulpit; I rejoice that
such consolation is yours." It is my friend," said he, "and I trust I shall
ever hold it fast; if there are any who doubt our faith, let them think of what
importance religion is to calamity and forbear to weaken its force; if they
cannot restore our happiness let them not take away the solace of our
affliction."

52. The philosopher's heart was smitten: and I have heard him, long after,
confess, that these were moments when the remembrance overcame him even to
weakness; when, amidst all the pleasures of philosophical discovery, and the
pride of literary fame, he called to his mind the venerable figure of the good
La Roche and wished that he had never doubted.

CHAP. XIV. Story of Sir EDWARD and LOUISA.
MIRROR, No.108, 109. IF we examine impartially that estimate of pleasure,
which the higher ranks of society (...) to form, we shall probably be surprised
to find how little there is in it, either of natural feeling or real
satisfaction. Many a fashionable voluptuary, who has not totally blunted his
taste or his judgment, will own, in the intervals of recollection, how often
he has suffered from the insipidity or the pain of his enjoyments; and that, if
it were not for the fear of being laughed at, it would sometimes be worth
while, even on the score of pleasure, to be virtuous.

2. Sir Edward, to whom I had the pleasure of being introduced at Florence, was
a character much beyond that which distinguishes the generality of English
travelers of fortune.

His story was known to some of his countrymen who then resided in Italy; from
one of whom, who could now and then talk of something besides pictures and
operas, I had a particular recital of it.

3. He had been abroad at an early period of life, soon after the death of his
father had left him master of a very large estate, which he had the good
fortune to inherit, and all the inclination natural to youth to enjoy. Though
always sumptuous, however, and sometimes profuse, he was observed never to be
ridiculous in his expenses; and though he was now and then talked of as a man
of pleasure and dissipation, he always left behind him more instances of
beneficence, than of irregularity.

4. For that respect and esteem in which his character, amidst all his little
errors, was generally held, he was supposed a good deal indebted to the society
of a gentleman who had been his companion at the university, and now attended
him rather as a friend than a tutor. This gentleman was unfortunately seized at
Marseilles with a lingering disorder, for which he was under the necessity of
taking a sea-voyage, leaving Sir Edward to prosecute the remaining part of his
intended tour alone.

5. Descending into one of their valleys of Piedmont, where notwithstanding the
ruggedness of the road, Sir Edward, with a prejudice natural to his country,
preferred the conveyance of an English hunter to that of an Italian mule, his
horse unluckily made of false step and fell with his rider to the ground, from
which Sir Edward was lifted by his servants with scarce any signs of life. They
conveyed him on a litter to the nearest house, which happened to be the
dwelling of a peasant rather above the common rank, before whose door some of
his neighbors were assembled at a scene of rural merriment, when the train of
Sir Edward brought up their master in the condition I have described.

6. The compassion, natural to his situation, was excited in all; but the owner
of the mansion, whose name was Venoni, was particularly moved with it. He
applied himself immediately to the care of the stranger, and with the
assistance of his daughter, who had left the dance she was engaged in, with
great marks of agitation, soon restored Sir Edward to sense and life.

7. Venoni possessed some little skill in surgery and his daughter produced a
book of receipts in medicine. Sir Edward, after being blooded, was put to bed
and tended with every possible care by his host and his family. A considerable
degree of fever was the consequence of his accident; but after some days it
abated: and in little more than a week, he was able to join in the society of
Venoni and his daughter.

8. He could not help expressing some surprise at the appearance of refinement
in the conversation of the latter, much beyond what her situation seemed likely
to confer. Her father accounted for it. She had received her education in the
house of a Lady, who happened to pass through the valley, and to take shelter
in Venoni's cottage (for his house was but a better sort of cottage) the night
after her birth.

9. "When her mother died," said he, "the Signora, whose name, at her desire,
we had given the child, took her home to her own house; there she was taught
many things of which there is no need here; yet she is not so proud of her
learning as to wish to leave her father in his old age; and I hope soon to have
her settled near me ^or life."

10. But Sir Edward had now an opportunity of knowing Louisa better than from
the description of her father. Music and painting, in both which arts she was a
tolerable proficient, Sir Edward had studied with success. Louisa felt a sort
of pleasure from her drawings, which they had never given her before, when they
were praised by Sir Edward; and the family concerts of Venoni were very
different from what they had formerly been, when once his guest was so far
recovered as to be able to join in them. The flute of Venoni excelled all the
other music of the valley; his daughter's lute was much beyond it; Sir Edward's
violin was finer than either.

11. But his conversation with Louisa -- It was that of a superior order of
beings! science, taste, sentiment! it was long since Louisa had heard these
sounds; amidst the ignorance of the valley, it was luxury to hear them; from
Sir Edward, who was one of the most engaging figures I ever saw, they were
doubly delightful. In his countenance there was always an expression animated
and interesting; his sickness had overcome somewhat of the first, but greatly
added to the power of the latter.

12. Louisa's was no less captivating and Sir Edward had not beheld it so long
without emotion. During his illness, he thought this emotion but gratitude, and
when it first grew warmer, he checked it, from the thought of her situation and
of the debt he owed her. But the struggle was too ineffectual to overcome, and
of consequence increased, his passion.

13. There was but one way in which the pride of Sir Edward allowed of its
being gratified. He sometimes thought of this as base and unworthy; but he was
the fool of words which he had often despised, the slave of manners which he
had often condemned. He at last compromised matters with himself; he resolved,
it he could, to think no more of Louisa: at any rate, to think no more of the
ties of gratitude or the restraints of virtue.

14. Louisa, who trusted to both, now communicated to Sir E dward an important
secret. It was at the close of a piece of music, which they had been playing in
the absence of her father. She took up her lute and touched a little wild
melancholy air, which she had composed to the memory of her mother. "That,"
said she, "nobody ever heard except my father; I play it sometimes when I am
alone and in low spirits. I know not how I came to think of it now; yet I have
some reason to be sad."

15. Sir Edward pressed to know the cause; after some hesitation she told it
all. Her father had fixed on the son of a neighbor, rich in possessions, but
rude in manners, for her husband. Against this match she had always protested
as strongly, as a sense of duty and the mildness of her nature would allow; but
Venoni was obstinately bent on the match, and she was wretched from the
thoughts of it. "To marry where one cannot love, -- to marry such a man, Sir
Edward!" It was an opportunity beyond his power of resistance. Sir Edward
pressed her hand; said it would be profanation to think of such a marriage;
praised her beauty, extolled her virtues; and concluded by swearing that he
adored her.

16. She heard him with unsuspecting pleasure, which her blushes could ill
conceal. Sir Edward improved the favorable moment; talked of the ardency of
his passion, the insignificancy of ceremonies and forms, the inefficacy of
legal engagements, the eternal duration of those dictated by love; and in fine,
urged her going off with him, to crown both their days with happiness. Louisa
started at the proposal. She would have reproached him, but her heart was not
made for it; she could only weep.

17. They were interrupted by the arrival of her father with his intended
son-in-law. He was just such a man as Louisa had represented him, coarse,
vulgar and ignorant. But Venoni, though much above their neighbor in every thing
but riches, looked on him as poorer men often look on the wealthy, and
discovered none of his imperfections. He took his daughter aside, told her he
had brought her future husband, and that he intended they should be married in
a week at farthest.

18. Next morning Louisa was indisposed, and kept her chamber. Sir Edward was
now perfectly recovered. He was engaged to go out with Venoni; but before his
departure, he took up his violin and touched a few plaintive notes on it. They
were heard by Louisa.

19. In the evening she wandered forth to indulge her sorrows alone. She had
reached a sequestered spot, where some poplars formed a thicket, on the banks
of a little stream that watered the valley. A nightingale was perched on one of
them and had already begun its accustomed song. Louisa sat down on a withered
stump, leaning her cheek upon her hand.

20. After a little while, the bird was scared from its perch, and flitted from
the thicket. Louisa rose from the ground and burst into tears! She turned, and
beheld Sir Edward. His countenance had much of its former langour; and when he
took her hand, he cast on the earth a melancholy look and seemed unable to
speak his feelings.

21. "Are you not well Sir Edward?" said Louisa, with a voice faint and broken.
"I am ill indeed" said he, "but my illness is of the mind. Louisa cannot cure
me of that. I am wretched; but I deserve to be so. I have broken every law of
hospitality and every obligation of gratitude. I have dared to wish for
happiness and to speak what I wished, though it wounded the heart of my dearest
benefactor -- but (...) will make a severe expiation."

22. "This moment I leave you, Louisa! I go to be wretched; but you may be
happy; happy in your duty to a father, happy, it may be, in the arms of a
husband, whom the possession of such a wise may teach refinement and
sensibility. I go to my native country, to hurry through scenes of irksome
business or tasteless amusements; that I may, if possible, procure a sort of
half-oblivion of that happiness which I left behind, a listless endurance of
that life which I once dreamed might be made delightful with Louisa."

23. Tears* were the only answer she could give. Sir Edward's servants
appeared, with a carriage, ready for his departure. He took from his pocket two
pictures; one he had drawn of Louisa, he fastened it round his neck, and
kissing it with rapture, hid it in his bosom. The other he held out in a
hesitating manner. "This," said he, "if Louisa will accept of it, may sometimes
put her in mind of him who once offended, who can never cease to adore her. She
may look on it perhaps after the original is no more; when this heart shall
have forgot to love and ceased to be wretched."

24. Louisa was at last overcome. Her face was first pale as death; then
suddenly, it was crossed with a crimson blush. "Oh! Sir Edward!" said she,
"what -- what would you have me do!" He eagerly seized her hand and led her,
reluctant, to the carriage. They entered it and driving off with furious speed,
were soon out of sight of those hills which pastured the flocks of the
unfortunate Venoni.

25. The virtue of Louisa was vanquished; but her sense of virtue was not
overcome. Neither the vows of eternal fidelity of her seducer, nor the constant
and respectful attention, which he paid her, during a hurried, journey to
England, could allay that anguish which she suffered at the recollection of her
past, and the thoughts of her present situation. Sir Edward felt strongly the
power of her beauty and of her grief. His heart was not made for that part
which, it is probable, he thought it could have performed (...) it was still
subject to remorse, to compassion and to love.

26. These emotions perhaps, he might soon have overcome, had they been met by
vulgar violence or reproaches; but the quiet and upbraiding sorrows of Louisa
nourished those feelings of tenderness and attachment. She never mentioned her
wrongs in words; sometimes a few starting tears would speak them; and when time
had given her a little more composure, her lute discoursed melancholy music.

27. On their arrival in England, Sir Edward carried Louisa to his seat in the
country. There she was treated with all the observance of a wife; and, had she
chosen it, might have commanded more than the ordinary splendour of one. But she
would not allow the indulgence of Sir Edward to blazen with equipage, and show
that state which she wished always to hide, and, if possible, to forget. Her
books and her music were her only pleasure; if pleasure they could be called,
that served but to alleviate misery, and, to blunt, for a while, the pangs of
contrition.

28. These were deeply aggravated by the recollection of her father; a father
left in his age to feel his own misfortunes and his daughter's disgrace. Sir
Edward was too generous not to think of providing for Venoni. He meant to make
some atonement for the injury he had done him, by that cruel bounty which is
reparation only to the base, but to the honest, is insult. He had not, however,
an opportunity of accomplishing his purpose.

29. He learned that Venoni, soon after his daughter's elopement, removed from
his former place of residence, and as his neighbors had reported, had died in
one of the village of Savoy. His daughter felt this with anguish the most
poignant, and her affliction, for a while, refused consolation. Sir Edward's
whole tenderness and attention were called forth to mitigate her grief; and
after its first transports had subsided, he carried her to London in hopes that
objects new to her and commonly attractive to all, might contribute to remove
it.

30. With a man possessed of feelings like Sir Edward's, the affliction of
Louisa gave a certain respect to his attentions. He hired her a house separate
from his own, and treated her with all the delicacy of the purest attachment.
But his solicitude to comfort and amuse her was not attended with success. She
felt all the horrors of that guilt which she now considered, as not only the
ruin of herself, but the murderer of her father.

31. In London Sir Edward found his sister, who had married a man of great
fortune and high fashion. He had married her, because she was a fine woman, and
admired by fine men; she had married him, because he was the wealthiest of her
suitors. They lived, as is common to people in such a situation, necessitous
with a princely revenue, and very wretched amidst perpetual gaiety.

32. This scene was so foreign from the idea Sir Edward had formed of the
reception which his country and his friends were to afford him, that he found a
constant source of disgust in the society of his equals. In their conversation
fantastic, not refined, their ideas were frivolous and their knowledge,
shallow; and with all the pride of birth and insolence of station, their
principles were mean and their minds ignoble. In their pretended attachments,
he discovered only designs of selfishness; and their pleasures, he experienced,
were as fallacious as their friendships.

33. In the society of Louisa he found sensibility and truth; hers was the only
heart that seemed interested in his welfare: she saw the return of virtue in
Sir Edward, and felt the friendship which he showed her. Sometimes, when she
perceived him sorrowful, her lute would leave its melancholy for more lively
airs, and her countenance assumed a gaiety it was not formed to wear. But her
heart was breaking with that anguish which her generosity endeavored to
conceal from him; her frame, too delicate for the struggle of her feelings,
seemed to yield to their force; the color faded in her cheek, the luster of
her eyes grew dim.

34. Sir Edward saw these symptoms of decay with the deepest remorse. Often did
he curse those false ideas of pleasure, which had led him to consider the ruin
of an artless girl, who loved and trusted him, as an object which it was luxury
to attain. Often did he wish to blot out from his life a few guilty months, to
be again restored to an opportunity of giving happiness to that family, whose
unsuspecting kindness he had repaid with the treachery of a robber, and the
cruelty of an assassin.

35. One evening, while he sat in a little parlour with Louisa, his mind
alternately agitated and softened with this impression, a hand-organ of a
remarkable sweet tone, was heard in the street; Louisa laid aside her lute and
listened: the airs it played were those of her native country, and a few tears
which she endeavored to hide, stole from her on hearing them. Sir Edward
ordered a servant to fetch the organist into the room: he was brought in
accordingly and seated at the door of the apartment.

36. He played one or two sprightly tunes, to which Louisa had often danced in
her infancy: she gave herself up to the recollection, and her tears flowed
without control. Suddenly the musician changing the stop, introduced a little
melancholy air of a wild and plaintive kind. Louisa started from her seat and
rushed up to the stranger. -- He threw off a tattered and black patch. It was
her father! she would have sprung to embrace him; he turned aside for a few
moments and would not receive her into his arms. But nature at last overcame
his resentment; he burst into tears and pressed to his bosom his long-lost
daughter.

37. Sir Edward stood fixed in astonishment and confusion. -- "I come not to
upbraid you," said Venoni; "I am a poor, weak, old man, unable for upbraidings;
I am come but to find my child, to forgive her, and to die! When you saw us
first, Sir Edward, we were not thus. You found us virtuous and happy; we danced
and we sung, and there was not a sad heart in the valley where we dwelt. Yet we
left our dancing, our songs and our cheerfulness; you were distressed and we
pitied you."

38. "Since that day the pipe has never been heard in Venoni's fields; grief
and sickness have brought him almost to the grave; and his neighbors who loved
and pitied him, have been cheerful no more. Yet methinks though you robbed us
of happiness, you are not happy; -- else why that dejected look, which, amidst
all the grandeur around you, I saw you wear, and those tears which under all
the gaudiness of her apparel, I saw that poor deluded girl shed?"

39. "But she shall shed no more," cried Sir Edward; "you shall be happy and I
will be just. Forgive, my venerable friend, the injuries I have done you;
forgive me, my Louisa, for rating your excellence at a price so mean. I have
seen those highborn females to which my rank might have allied me; I am
ashamed of their vices and sick of their follies. Profligate in their hearts
amidst affect^^ purity, they are slaves to pleasure, without (...) sincerity of
passion and with the name of honor, are insensible to the feelings of virtue."

40. "You may Louisa! but I will not call up recollections that might render me
less worthy of your future esteem -- Continue to love your Edward; but a few
hours and you shall add the title, to the affections of a wife; let the care
and tenderness of a husband bring back its peace to your mind, and its bloom to
your cheek. We will leave for a while the wonder and envy of the fashionable
circle here. We will restore your father to his native home; under that roof I
shall once more be happy; happy without alloy, because I shall deserve my
happiness. Again shall the pipe and the dance gladden the valley, and innocence
and peace beam on the Cottage of Venoni!"

CHAP. XV. EMILIUS, or Domestic Happiness.
THE government of a family depends on such various and opposite principles,
that it is a matter of extreme delicacy. Perhaps there is no situation in life
in which it is so difficult to behave with propriety, as in the contest between
parental authority and parental love. This is undoubtedly the reason why we see
so few happy families. Few parents are both loved and respected, because most
of them are either the dupes or the tyrants of their children.

2. Some parents, either from a natural weakness of mind, or an excess of
fondness, permit and even encourage their children in a thousand little
familiarities, which render them ridiculous and by diminishing the respect
which is due to their age and station, destroy all their authority. Others,
ruled by a partial and blind affection, which can deny nothing to its object,
indulge their children in all their romantic wishes, however trifling and
foolish; however degrading to their dignity or injurious to their welfare.
Others, soured by misfortunes, or grown peevish and jealous by the loss of
youthful pleasures, and an acquaintance with the deceit and the folly of the
world, attempt to restrain the ideas and the enjoyments of youth by the rigid
maxims of age.

3. The children of the first class often offend by silly manners and a kind of
good-natured disrespect. Those of the second, are generally proud, whimsical
and vicious. Those of the third, if they are subdued, when young, by the rigor
of parental discipline, forever remain morose illiberal and unsociable; or if,
as it commonly happens, they find means to escape from restraint, they abandon
themselves to every ^species of licentiousness. To parents of these
descriptions may be added another class, whose fondness blinds their eyes to
the most glaring vices of their children; or invents such palliations as to
prevent the most salutary corrections.

4. The taste for amusements in young people is, of all others, the most
difficult to regulate by the maxims of prudence. In this article, parents are
apt to err, either by extreme indulgence on one hand or immoderate rigor on
the other. Recollecting the feelings of their youth, they give unbounded
license to the inclinations of their children; or having lost all relish for
amusements, they refuse to gratify their most moderate desires.

5. It is a maxim which universally holds true, that the best method of
guarding youth from criminal pleasures, is to indulge them freely in those that
are innocent. A person who has free access to reputeable society, will have
little inclination to frequent that which is vicious. But those, who are kept
under constant restraint, who are seldom indulged in amusements, who are
perpetually awed by the frowns of a parent, or soured by a disappointment of
their most harmless wishes, will at times break over all bounds to gratify
their taste for pleasure, and will not be anxious to discriminate between the
innocent and the criminal.

6. Nothing contributes more to keep youth within the limits of decorum, than
to have their superiors mingle in their company, at proper times, and
participate of their amusements. This condescension flatters their pride; at
the same time, that respect for age, which no familiarities can wholly efface,
naturally checks the extravagant sallies of mirth, and the indelicate
rudenesses which young people are apt to indulge in their jovial hours.

7. That awful distance at which some parents keep their children, and their
abhorrence of all juvenile diversions, which compel youth to sacrifice their
most innocent desires, or veil the gratification of them with the most anxious
secrecy, (...) direct a tendency to drive young persons into a profligate life,
as the force of vicious examples. It is impossible to give, to the age of
twenty, the feelings or the knowledge of sixty; as it would be folly to wish to
clothe a child with gray hairs, or to stamp the fading (...) autumn on the
bloom of May. Nature has given to every age some peculiar passions and
appetites; to moderate and refine these, not to stifle and destroy, is the
business of common prudence and parental care.

8. I was led into this train of reflections by an acquaintance with the family
of Emilius, which is a rare instance of domestic felicity. Parents indulgent to
their children, hospitable to their friends and universally respected; their
sons equally generous, modest and manly; Emilia, an only daughter, the pride of
her parents, possessed of every accomplishment that can honor herself, or
endear her to her friends; an easy fortune and a disposition to enjoy and
improve it to the purposes of humanity; perfect harmony in domestic life and
unaffected satisfaction in the pleasures of society: Such is the family of
Emilius.

9. Such a family is a little paradise on earth; to envy their happiness is
almost a virtue. Conjugal respect, parental tenderness, filial obedience and
brotherly kindness are so seldom united, in a family, that when I am honored
with the friendship of such, I am equally ambitious to participate their
happiness and profit by the example.

10. Emilia's situation must be peculiarly agreeable. Her parents delight to
gratify her in every amusement; and contented with this, she knows no wish
beyond the sacred bounds of honor. While, by their indulgence, she enjoys
every rational pleasure, she rewards their generous care, by a dutiful
behavior and unblemished manners.

11. By thus discharging the reciprocal duties of their respective stations,
the happiness of each is secured. The solicitude of the parent and the
obedience of the child, equally contribute to the bliss of the little society;
the one calling forth every act of tenderness, and the other displayed in ^ll
the filial virtues.

12. Few families are destined to be so happy as that of Emilius. Were I to
choose the situation where I could pass my life with most satisfaction, it
would be in this domestic circle. My house would then be the residence of
delight, unmingled with the anxieties of ambition or the regret of
disappiontment. Every act would be dictated by love and respect; every
countenance would wear the smile of complacence; and the little unavoidable
troubles, incident to the happi^^^ situation, would only serve to increase our
friendship and improve our felicity, by making room for the exercise of virtue.

CHAP. XVI. EMILIA, or the Happiness of Retirement.
AS I was conversing with Emilia, a few days past, I asked her whether she was
contented to live so remote from the resort of company. She answered in the
affirmative, and remarked further, that her situation enabled her to
distinguish between real friends and complimentary; for if she lived in a more
public place, she might be visited by crowds of people, who were civil indeed,
but had no motive for calling on them, but to spend an idle hour and gaze at
the busy multitude.

2. I was pleased with the remark, and was naturally led to consider such a
retired situation as a fortunate circumstance for a young Lady of delicacy. Not
only the happiness of a family, but the character of young women, both in a
moral and social view, depends on a choice of proper company. But this is not
all. The frequency of company, especially if it furnishes a variety of new
objects, has a pernicious effect on the dispositions of female minds.

3. Women are destined by nature to preside over domestic affairs. Whatever
parade they may make abroad, their real merit and real characters are known
only at home. The behavior of servants, the neatness of furniture, the order
of a table and the regularity of domestic business, are the decisive evidences
of female worth. Perhaps sweetness of temper does not contribute more to the
happiness of their partners and their families, than a proper attention to
these articles.

4. For this reason, whatever has a tendency to divert the mind from these
concerns and give them a turn for empty show, endless noise, and tasteless
amusements, ought to be carefully avoided by young Ladies, who wish for respect
beyond the present moment. Misses, who are perpetually surrounded with idle
company, or even live in sight of it, though they may be fortunate enough to
preserve their innocence, are still in hazard of contracting such a fondness
for dissipation and folly, as to unfit them for the superintendance of a family.

5. Such women, if they ever marry, must be unhappy themselves, or render their
families so. To indulge their former taste for pleasure, they must necessarily
neglect the duties of their station, and leave their families without a
mistress; or if they attempt to discharge those duties, it must be at the
expense of their prevailing desires -- a sacrifice that must produce at lest a
temporary disquietude in their own minds.

6. Another danger to which young women, possessed of personal charms, are
exposed in public places, is the flattery and admiration of men. The good
opinion of a fop will hardly flatter a woman of discernment; much less their
ordinary compliments which are commonly without meaning. But the heart is often
so disguised, that it is difficult at first to distinguish between a coxcomb
and man of worth; or if it is easy for an accurate observer, yet there is great
danger that vanity and inexperience will make young Ladies overlook the
distinction.

7. Few minds are effectually secured against the attacks of flattery. It is a
poison the more fatal, as it seizes human nature in its weakest part. In youth,
when the passions are in full vigor and the judgment feeble, female minds are
peculiarly liable to be corrupted by the contagious influence of pretty
civilities and affected admiration.

8. With whatever scruples they may at first listen to the praises that are
bestowed on their real or pretended charms, a constant strain of flattering
addresses, accompanied with obsequious complaisance, seldom fails of giving
them too high an opinion of themselves. They are insensibly led to believe that
they are possessed of virtues to which they are really strangers. This belief
satisfies them without attempting any further improvement, and makes them to
depend, for reputation in life, on good qualities, the fancied existence of
which begins and ends with the falsehood of customary compliments.

9. Such Ladies, before marriage, are usually vain, pert, affected and silly;
and after marriage, haughty disappointed and peevish. The most perfect beauty
must fade, and cease to command admiration; but in most instances, the nuptial
hour puts a period to that excess of flattering attention, which is the
happiness of giddy females. The longest term of admiration must be short; that
which depends solely on personal attractions, is often momentary.

10. The more flattery is bestowed upon young Ladies, the less, in general, are
they solicitous to acquire virtues which shall ensure respect when admiration
shall cease. The more they are praised in youth, the more they expect it in
advanced life, when they have less charms to command it. Thus the excessive
complaisance of admirers, which is extremely pleasing at sixteen, proves at
forty, a source of mortification and discontent.

11. I would by no means insinuate that young Ladies ought to be kept total
strangers to company and to rational professions of esteem. It is in company
only that they can acquaint themseves with mankind, acquire an easy address,
and learn numberless little decor^ms which are essential and cannot be taught
by precept. Without these, a woman will sometimes deviate from that dignity and
propriety of conduct, which, in any situation will secure the good will of her
friends, and prevent the blushes of her husband.

12. A fondness for company and amusement is blameable only when it is indulged
to excess, and permitted to absorb more important concerns. Nor is some degree
of flattery always dangerous or useless. The good opinion of mankind we are all
desirous to obtain; and to know that we possess it, often makes us ambitious to
deserve it.

No passion is given to us in vain; the best ends are sometimes effected by the
worst means; and even female vanity, properly managed, may prompt to the most
meritorious actions.

13. I should pay Emilia but a very ill compliment to ascribe her virtues to
her local situation; for no person can claim as a virtue what she has been in
no danger of losing. But there is no retirement beyond the reach of temptation,
and the whole tenor of her conduct proves that her unblemished morals and
uniform delicacy proceed from better principles than necessity or accident.

14. She is loved and flattered, but she is not vain; (...) company is
universally coveted, and yet she has no airs of haughtiness and disdain. Her
cheerfulness in company shows that she has a relish for society; her
contentment at home and attention to domestic concerns, are early specimens of
her happy disposition; and her decent unaffected abhorrence of every species of
licentious behavior, evinces, beyond suspicion, that the innocence of her
heart is equal to the charms of her person.

CHAP. XVII. Character of JULIANA.
JULIANA is one of those rare women whose personal attractions have no rivals,
but the sweetness of her temper and the delicacy of her sentiments. An elegant
person, regular features, a fine complexion, a lively expressive countenance,
an easy address, and those blushes of modesty that soften the soul of the
beholder; these are her native beauties, which render her the object of
universal admiration. But when we converse with her, and hear the melting
expressions of unaffected sensibility and virtue that flow from her tongue, her
personal charms receive new luster, and irresistibly engage the affections of
her acquaintances.

2. Sensible that the great source of all happiness, is purity of morals and an
easy conscience, Juliana pays constant and sincere attention to the duties of
religion. She abhors the infamous, but fashionable vice of deriding the sacred
institutions of religion. She considers a Lady without virtue as a monster on
earth; and every accomplishment. without morals, as polite deception. She is
neither a hypocrite nor an enthusiast; on the contrary, she mingles such
cheerfulness with the religious duties of life, that even her piety carries
with it a charm, which insensibly allures the profligate from the arms of vice.

3. Not only the general tenor of her life, but in particular her behavior at
church, evinces the reality of her religion. She esteems it not only criminal
in a high degree, but extremely unpolite, to behave with levity in a place
consecrated to the solemn purposes of devotion. She cannot believe that any
person, who is solicitous to treat all mankind with civility, can laugh in the
temple of Jehovah and treat her great benefactor with heedless neglect.

4. In polite life, the manners of Juliana are peculiarly engaging. To her
superiors, she shows the utmost defference and respect; to her equals, the most
modest complaisance and civility; while her in^^^iors of every rank, experience
her kindness and affability. By this conduct she secures the love and
friendship of all degrees. No person can despise her, for she does nothing that
is rediculous; she cannot be hated, for she does injury to none; and even the
malevolent whispers of envy are silenced by her modest deportment and generous
condescension.

5. Her conversation is lively and sentimental; free from false wit, frivolous
minuteness, and affectation of learning. Although her discourse is always under
the direction of prudence, yet it appears unstudied; for her good sense always
furnishes her with thoughts suited to the subject, and the purity of her mind
renders any caution in expressing them almost unnecessary. She will not lead
the conversation; much less can she stun the ears of company with perpetual
chat or interrupt the discourse of others. But when occasion offers, she
acquits herself with ease and grace; without the airs of pertness or the
confusion of bashfulness.

6. But if the conversation happens to turn upon the foibles of either sex,
Juliana discovers her goodness by her silence or by inventing palliations. She
detests every species of slander. She is sensible that to publish and aggravate
human errors, is not the way to correct them; and reformation, rather than
infamy, is the wish and the study of her life. Her own amiable example is the
severest of all satires upon the faults and the follies of her sex, and goes
farther in discountenancing both, than all the censures of malicious detraction.

7. Although Juliana possesses every accomplishment that can command esteem and
admiration; yet she has neither vanity nor ostentation. Her merit is easily
discovered without show and parade. She considers, that haughtiness and
contempt of others, always proceed from meanness; that true greatness is ever
accessible; and that self recommendation and blustering pretensions, are but
the glittering decorations of empty heads and trifling hearts.

8. However strong may be her desire of useful information or however lively
her curiosity, yet she restrains these passions within the bounds of prudence
and good breeding. She deems it impertinent to the highest degree, to be prying
into the concerns of other people; much more impertinent and criminal does she
deem it, to indulge an officious inquisitiveness, for the sake of gratifying
private spleen in the propagation of unfavourable truths. So exceedingly
delicate is she in her treatment of her fellow creatures, that she will not
read a paper or hear a whisper, which a person does not wish to have known,
even when she is in no danger of detection.

9. The same delicate attention to the feelings of others regulates her conduct
in company. She would not, for the price of her reputation, be found laughing
or whispering with one in the company. All nods, grimaces, fly looks and half
speeches, the cause of which is not known, are carefully avoided by her and
reprobated as the height of ill breeding and the grossest insult to the
company. Whenever this happens between two persons, the rest of the company
have a just right to consider themselves the object of their ridicule. But it
is a maxim of Juliana, that such conduct is a breach of politeness, which, no
oddities or mistakes that happen in public company, can excuse or palliate.

10. It is very common for persons, who are destitute of certain
accomplishments which they admire in other people, to endeavor to imitate
them. This is the source of affectation, a fault that infallibly exposes a
person to ridicule. But the ornaments of the heart, the dress and the manners
of Juliana, are equally easy and natural. She needs not to assume the
appearance of good qualities which she possesses in reality; nature has given
too many beauties to her person, to require the studied embellishments of
fashion; and such are the ease and gracefulness of her behavior, that any
attempt to improve them would lessen the dignity of her manners.

11. She is equally a stranger to that supercilious importance which affects to
despise the small, but necessary concerns of life; and that squeamish false
delicacy which is wounded with every trifle. She will not neglect a servant in
sickness because of the meanness of his employment; she will not abuse an
animal for her own pleasure and amusement; nor will she go into fits at the
distress of a favorite cat.

12 Her gentle soul is never disturbed with discontent, envy or resentment;
those turbulent passions which so often destroy the peace of society as well as
of individuals.

The native firmness and serenity of her mind forbid the intrusion of violent
emotions; at the same time he heart, susceptible and kind, is the soft
residence of every virtuous affection. She sustains the unavoidable shocks of
adversity, with a calmness that indicates the superiority of her soul; and with
the smile of joy or the tear of tenderness, she participates the pleasures or
the sorrows of a friend.

13. But the discretion and generosity of Juliana, are particularly
distinguished by the number and sincerity of her attachments. Her friendships
are few, but they are all founded on the principles of benevolence and
fidelity. Such confidence do her sincerity, her constancy and her faithfulness
inspire, that her friends commit to her breast, their most private concerns,
without reserve and without suspicion. It is her favorite maxim, that a
necessity of exacting promises of secrecy, is a burlesque upon every pretension
to friendship. Such is the character of the young, the amiable Juliana. If it
is possible for her to find a man who knows her worth and has a disposition and
virtues to reward it, the union of their hearts must secure that unmingled
felicity in life, which is reserved for genuine love, a passion inspired by
sensibility and improved by a perpetual intercourse of kind offices.

CHAP. XVIII. FROM THE VISION OF COLUMBUS; A Poem, not yet published.
BOOK 1. Columbus being conducted by the Angel from prison to the Mount of
Vision (which is supposed to be in Spain) the Continent of America draws into
view.
THE Seraph spoke; and now before them lay,
(The doors unbarr'd) a steep ascending way,
That through disparting shades, arose on high,
Reached over the hills and lengthened up the sky,
Oped It will be observed that I have not apos^^ophized the vowel e in such
words as oped, graced, etc. The reason is, these words are but one syllable;
for the termination ed never makes a syllable, except after t and d, as in
hated, proceeded. In such words as broken, given, e ought not to be omitted,
for the omission makes no difference in the sound, as they are usually
pronounced.

In such words as different, generous, e ought to be pronounced; for they are
words of three syllables and in all cases form a dactyl in English verse. I am
told that these alterations are taking place in the modern British publications
of verse, though I have seen none printed in this manner. They however appear to
me to be supported by incontestible rules of propriety.


a fair summit, graced with rising flowers,
Sweet odours breathing through celestial bowers;
Over proud Hispanian spires, it looks sublime,
Subjects the Alps and levels all the clime:
Led by the power, the hero gained the height,
A touch from heaven sublimed his mortal sight,
And calm beneath them flowed the western main,
Far stretched, immense, a sky-encircled plain;
No sail, no isle, no cloud invests the bound,
Nor billowy surge disturbs the unvaried round;
Till, deep in distant heavens, the sun's dim ray
Topp'd unknown cliffs and called them up to day.
Slow glimmering into sight, wide regions drew,
And rose and brightened on the expanding view;
Fair sweep the waves, the lessening ocean smiles,
And breathes the fragrance of a thousand isles;
Near and more near the long drawn coasts arise,
Bays stretch their arms and mountains lift the skies,
The lakes, unfolding, point the streams their way,
The plains, the hills their lengthening skirts display,
The vales draw forth, high walk the approaching groves,
And all the majesty of nature moves.
Description of the principal rivers from the Delaware to St. Lawrence.
Vision of Columbus, BOOK I.
NOW round the coast, where other floods invite,
He fondly turned; they filled his eager sight;
Here Delaware's waves the yielding shores invade,
And here bold Hudson oped a glassy glade;
Thy parent stream, fair Hartford, met his eye,
Far lessening upward to the northern sky,
No watery gleams through happier valleys shine,
Nor drinks the sea a lovlier wave than thine.
Patuxet wantoned round its bloomy isle,
And gay Piscataway caught his passing smile;
Swift Kenebeck, descending from on high,
Swept the tall hills and lengthened down the sky;
When, hoarse resounding through the gaping shore,
He heard cold Lawrence' dreadful surges roar;
Though softening May had waked the vernal blade,
And happier climes her fragrant garb displayed,
Yet howling winter, in this bleak domain,
Shook the wild waste and held his gloomy reign*
Still groans the flood, in frozen fetters bound,
And isles of ice his threatening front surround,
Clothed in white majesty, the foaming main
Leads up the tide and tempts the wintery chain,
Billows on billows lift the maddening brine,
And seas and clouds in battling conflict join;
The dashed wave struggling heaves in swelling sweep,
Wide crash the portals of the frozen deep,
Till, forced aloft, high bounding in the air,
Moves the blear ice and sheds a hideous glare,
The torn foundations on the surface ride,
And wrecks of winter load the downward tide.
Description of a storm on the Andes, the stupendous mountains of South America.
Vision of Columbus, BOOK 3.
HE spoke; they waited, till the ascending ray
High from the noontide, shot the faithless day;
When lo! far gathering round the eastern skies,
Solemn and slow, the dark-red vapors rise;
Full clouds, convolving on the turbed air,
Move, like an ocean, to the watery war.
The host, securely raised, no dangers harm,
They sit unclouded and o'erlook the storm;
While, far beneath, the sky borne waters ride,
Over the dark deep and up the mountain's side;
The lightning's glancing wings, in fury curled,
Bend their long, forky terrors over the world;
Torrents and broken craggs and floods of rain,
From steep to steep, roll down their force amain
In dreadful cataracts; the crashing found
Fills the wide heavens and rocks the smouldering ground.
The blasts, unburden'd, take their upward course,
And over the mountain-top resume their force:
Swift through the long, white ridges from the north,
The rapid whirlwinds lead their terrors forth;
High rolls the storm, the circling surges rise,
And wild g^rations wheel the hovering skies;
Vast hills of snow, in sweeping columns driven,
Deluge the air and cloud the face of heaven;
Floods burst their chains, the rocks forget their place,
And the firm mountain trembles to its base.
View of Cornwallis and the British army in York. Junction of the American
armies before York. Naval action between De Grass and Graves.
Vision of Columbus, BOOK 6.
AGAIN Columbus cast his anxious eye
Where the red standard waved along the sky,
And graced with spoils of many a field of blood,
The bold Cornwallis on a bulwark stood.
Over conquered provinces and towns in flame,
He marked his recent monuments of fame;
High raised in air, his hands securely hold,
With conscious pride, a sheet of cypher'd gold;
There in delusive haste, his skill had graved,
A clime subdued, a flag in triumph waved;
A middle realm, by fairer figures known,
Adorned with fruits, lay bounded for his own;
Fair up the center, flows a midland sea,
Full sails ascend and golden rivers stray;
Bright palaces arise, relieved in gold,
And gates and streets the crossing lines unfold.
Over all the mimic scene, his fingers trace
His future seat and glory of his race.
While thus the enrapture a chief his conquest viewed,
And gazing thousands round the ramparts stood,
Whom future ease and golden dreams employ,
The songs of triumph and the fea^^ of joy,
Sudden great Washington arose in view,
And union'd flags his stately steps pursue;
Blessed Gall^a's bands and fair Columbia's pride,
Bend the long march and glitter at his side.
Now on the wave the warring sleets advance,
And different ensigns over their pinions dance;
From northern shores, great Albion's flag, unfurled,
Waved proud defiance to the watery world;
While from the southern isles, a daring train,
With Gallic banners, shades the billowy main:
Here dread De Graffe, in awful splendour rode,
And there proud Graves, a rival splendour showed.
The approaching fails, as far as eye can sweep,
Look through the skies and shade the boundless deep;
As, when the winds of heaven, from each f^r pole,
Their adverse storms across the concave roll;
The fleecy vapors through the expansion run,
Veil the blue vault and tremble over the ^un,
Till the dark folding wings together drive,
And, ridged with fires and rocked with thunders,
So, bearing through the void, at first appear strive;
White clouds of canvass, floating on the air,
Then frown the approaching fronts, the sails are laid,
And the black decks extend a dreadful shade,
While rolling flames and tides of smoke arise,
And thundering cannons rock the seas and skies.
Where the long bursting fires, the cloud disclose,
Hosts heave in sight and blood the decks overflows;
There, from the strife tossed navies rise to view,
Drive back to vengeance and the toil renew;
Here, shattered barks in squadrons move afar,
Led through the smoke and struggling from the war;
While hul^^ half-seen, beneath a gaping wave
And plunging heroes fill the watery grave.
Now the dark smoky volumes rolled away,
And a long line ascended into day;
The pinions swelled, Britannia's flag arose,
And flew the vengeance of triumphing foes.
Hymn to Peace.
Vision of Columbus, BOOK 7.
HAIL, sacred Peace, who claim'st thy bright abode
Mid circling saints that grace the throne of God,
Before his arm, around the shapeless earth,
Stretched the wide heavens and gave to nature birth;
Ere morning stars his glowing chambers hung,
Or songs of gladness woke an angel's tongue;
Veiled in the brightness of the Almighty's mind,
In blessed repose thy placid form reclined;
Borne through the heavens, with his creating voice,
Thy presence bade the unfolding worlds rejoice,
Gave to seraphic harps their sounding lays,
Their joys to angels and to men their praise.
From scenes of blood, these beauteous shores that stain,
From gasping friends that press the sanguine plain,
From fields, long taught in vain thy flight to mourn,
I rise, delightful Power, and greet thy glad return.
Too long the groans of death and battle's bray
Have rung discordant through the unpleasing lay;
Let pity's tear its balmy fragrance shed,
Over heroes' wounds and patriot warriors dead:
Accept, departed shades, these grateful sighs,
Your fond attendants to the approving skies.
But now the untuneful trump shall grate no more,
Ye silver streams, no longer swell with gore;
Bear from your beauteous banks the crimsom stain,
With yon retiring navies to the main;
While other views unfolding on my eyes,
And happier themes bid bolder numbers rise.
Bring, bounteous Peace, in thy celestial throng,
Life to my soul and rapture to my song;
Give me to trace, with pure unclouded ray,
The arts and virtues that attend thy sway;
To see thy blissful charms, that here descend,
Through distant realms and endless years extend.
CHAP. XIX.
From the CONQUEST of CANAAN. A Poem, not yet published.
Selima replies to her Parents, who endeavor to dissuade her from excessive
grief, and attempts to justify herself by the excellent character of Irad.
BOOK 9.
AH sire revered! the pleading maid returns --
No common loss thy hapless daughter mourns:
Search the wide world; can all her regions boast
One youth so fair, so bright, so early lost?
How age admired him! how all Israel loved!
The world applauded! and the heavens approved!
His form was all, the brightest thoughts can frame;
His mind was all, the fondest wish can claim:
Whatever is great, or good, or soft, or fair,
Refined, or lovely, fixed its mansion there.
Even he, whose hand the sacred scepter bea^^,
Is but an Irad of maturer years.
It is, O it is! as if, in yo^ fair clime,
Some prince of angels, bright in glory's prim^,
Transcending every peer in worth supreme,
Mitred with truth, and sunn'd with virtue's bea^^;
In youth's gay morn, in beauty's endless bloom,
And life, superior to the potent tomb,
Had closed his smiles, while heaven refused to save,
And sunk hi; glories in the dreary grave.
What tears, for such a loss, would seraphs shed!
Tears, rich as their's, should mourn their rival dead.
And where, O where, shall poor Selima find
One beam of light to cheer her drooping mind?
All sad I wander round the earth and skies;
But no soft solace meets my failing eyes.
To friends I fly; those weeping friends I see
Sunk in the deep despair that buries me.
For him, O kindest, tenderest mother! rise
Thy heartfelt anguish, and thy hopeless sighs;
Thy tears, all gentle sire! resistless shed,
Approve my grief and weep the hero dead.
No cheering hope your fondest love can give,
Soothe your sad child, or make her Irad live;
Then bid me mourn; this last relief bestow,
And yield my bosom to the peace of woe.
Description of a storm of hail.
BOOK II.
LONG rushed the victors over the sanguine field,
And scarce were Gibeon's loftiest spires beheld;
When up the west dark clouds began to rise,
Sailed over the hills and lengthened round the skies;
A ridge of folding fire, their summits shone;
But fearful blackness all beneath was thrown;
Swift round the sun the spreading gloom was hurled,
And night, and solitude amazed the world.
At once the voice of deep resounding gales
Rung slow and solemn in the distant vales:
Then through the groves, and over the extended plain,
With stormy rage the rapid whirlwinds ran.
Red over the glimmering hills, with pomp divine,
The lightning's flaming path began to shine:
Far round the immense, unusual thunders driven,
Proclaimed the onset of approaching heaven:
Astonished nature owned the strange alarm,
And the world trembled at the impending storm.
Over the d^rk fields aghast Canaan streamed;
Thick in their course the scattered bucklers gleam'd:
Behind them Joshua urged the furious car,
And tenfold horrors hovered round the war.
But when the Chief the spreading storm surveyed,
And traced almighty arms in heaven display;d;
With piercing voice the gave the great command,
Stand still, ye chosen sons, admiring stand!
Behold what awful scenes in heaven arise!
Adore the Power, that brightens in the skies!
Now God's tremendous arm asserts his laws;
Now bids his thunder aid the righteous cause;
Shows man, how virtue saves her chosen bands,
And points the vengeance doomed for guilty lands.
Behold, what flames shoot forth! what gloom ascends!
How nature trembles! how the concave rends!
How the clouds darken! see in yonder sky,
Their opening skirts proclaim the Almighty nigh!
He spoke, and from the north, a rushing sound
Rolled through the heavens, and shook the embattled ground,
Throned on a dark red cloud, an angel's form
Sailed, awfully sublime, above the storm.
Half veiled in mist, his countenance, like a sun,
Inflamed the clouds, and through all either shone:
Long robes of crimson light behind him flowed;
His wings were flames; his locks were died in blood;
Ten thousand firey shapes were round him driven,
And all the dazzling pomp of opening heaven.
Now, save Canaan's cries, that feebly rung,
Round the dark plain a fearful silence hung;
Stretched in dire terror over her quivering band,
The etherial Vision waved his sun-bright hand;
At once, from opening skies, red flames were hurled,
And thunders, rolled in thunders, rocked the world;
In one broad deluge sunk the avenging hail,
And, piled with tempest roared the hoary vale;
Fierce raging whirlwinds boundless nature blend,
The streams rush back; the tottering mountains bend;
Down the tall steep their bursting summits roll,
And cliffs, on cliffs, hoarse-crashing, rend the pole.
Far round the earth, a wild, drear horror reigns;
The high heavens heave, and roar the gloomy plains;
One sea of lightning all the region fills,
And waves of fire ride surging over the hills:
The nodding forests plunge in flame around,
And with huge caverns gapes the shuddering
Swifter than rapid winds Canaan driven ground.
Refuse the conflict of embattled Heaven.
But the dire hail in vain the victims fly,
And death unbounded shook from all the sky,
The thunder's dark career, the seraph's arm,
Fierce vengeance blazing down the immense of storm.
From falling groves to burning plains they flew;
Hail roars around, and angry hosts pursue;
From shaking skies almighty arms are hurled,
And all the gloomy concave bursts upon the world.
Animated Remonstrance. Galeb, at the head of the Reubenites, etc. rallies
Judah, broken by the enemy, and recalls them to the battle.
Conquest of Canaan, Book 8.
NOW towered the fight approached the impatient throng,
And wider poured the thickening dust along,
Loud, and more loud, victorious clamours grow,
And more distinguished breathe the sounds of woe:
Pale Judah's sons a yielding fight maintain,
And many a face looks backward over the plain;
When Caleb's mighty voice, in thunder driven,
Starts all the host, and rends the clouded heaven.
What dismal scenes -- enraged the hero cries,
Convulse this heart, and pierce these bleeding eyes!
Shall Judah's race, my brethren, and my boast,
Flee, vanquished, driven before a heathen host?
Can men, can warriors own lo black a part,
The best of chiefs, your Joshua to desert?
Say, with what pangs will heaven the wretches try,
That know no honor, and that feel no tie?
On yo^ bright plain, the conquering chief behold,
Troops winged before him, cars tumultuous rolled,
With heaven's imperial sword the flight commands,
And drives fierce ruin over decreasing bands!
Say, shall the man, who fights, who bleeds for all,
See your base flight and perish in your fall?
The chief, as angels kind, as angels true,
Sinks in the doom he warded long from you.
Fly then; but know a few short furlongs past,
Yon camp, wild flames and savage herds shall waste;
Besmeared with streaming blood, your parents lie,
And dashed on stones, your gasping infants die;
Your wives, betrayed by such base culprits, feel
Abuse, more dreadful than the griding steel;
No arm, no sword the falling nation save,
But this dire evening open our common grave.
Can these dread scenes even dastards fail to arm?
Spring from the trance, and burst the sleepy charm!
Rise, rise like men; with shame, with vengeance burn;
Wipe foul disgrace, and swift to fight return!
And ye brave chiefs! that never knew to yield,
Or turn a backward foot from glory's field,
But, led by me, the van's bright honors claim,
Smile at fair death, and shrink from torturing shame,
Lift high the avenging sword, from pity free,
And cleave the wretch that basely dares to flee.
CHAP. XX. BURLESQUE.
The opening of the Town meeting.
M' Fingal. Canto 2.
THE Sun, who never stops to dine,
Two hours had passed the midway line,
And driving at his usual rate,
Lashed on his downward car of state.
And now expired the short vacation,
And dinner done in epic fashion;
While all the crew beneath the trees,
Eat pocket-pies, or bread and cheese;
Nor shall we, like old Homer care
To versify their bill of fare.
For now each party, feasted well,
Thronged in, like sheep at sound of bell,
With equal spirit took their places;
And meeting oped with three O yesses!
When first the daring Whigs to oppose,
Again the great M' Fingal rose,
Stretched magisterial arm amain,
And thus assumed the accusing strain.
"Ye Whigs attend; and hear affrighted
The crimes whereof ye stand indicted,
The sins and follies past all compass,
That prove you guilty or non compos.
I leave the verdict to your senses,
And jury of your consciences;
Which though they are neither good nor true,
Must yet convict you and your crew.
Ungrateful sons! a factious band,
That rise against your parent-land!
Ye viper'd race, that burst in strife,
The welcome womb that gave you life,
Tear with sharp fangs and forked tongue,
The indulgent bowels whence you sprung;
And scorn the debt of obligation
You justly owe the British nation,
Which since you cannot pay, your crew
Affect to swear 'twas never due.
Did not the deeds of England's Primate
First drive your fathers to this climate,
Whom jails and fines and every ill
Forced to their good against their will?
Ye owe to their obliging temper
The peopling your newfangled empire,
While every British act and cannon
Stood forth you causa sine qua non.
Did they not send you charters over
And give you lands you owned before,
Permit you all to spill your blood
And drive out heathen where you could;
On these mild terms, that conquest won,
The realm you gained should be their own?
Or when of late attacked by those,
Whom her connections made your foes,
Did they not then, distressed in war,
Send Generals to your help from far,
Whose aid you owned in terms less haughty,
And thankfully o'erpaid your quota?
Say, at what period did they grudge,
To send you Governor or Judge,
With all their missionary crew,
To teach you law and gospel too?
Brought over all felons in the nation,
To help you on in population;
Proposed their Bishops to surrender,
And made their priests a legal tender,
Who only asked, in surplice clad,
The simple tithe of all you had:
And now to keep all knaves in awe,
Have sent their troops to establish law,
And with gunpowder, fire and ball,
Reform your peeple one and all.
Yet when their insolence and pride
Have angered all the world beside,
When fear and want at once invade,
Can you refuse to give them aid;
And rather risque your heads in fight,
Then gratefully throw in your mite?
Can they for debts make satisfaction,
Should they dispose their realm by auction;
And sell off British goods and land all
To France and Spain by inch of candle?
Shall good king George, with want oppressed,
Insert his name in bankrupt list,
And shut up shop like failing merchant,
That fears the bailiffs should make search in it;
With poverty shall princes strive,
And nobles lack whereon to live?
Have they not racked their whole inventions,
To feed their brats on posts and pensions,
Made even Scotch friends with taxes groan,
And picked poor Ireland to the bone;
Yet have on hand as well deserving,
Ten thousand bastards left for starving?
And can you now with conscience clear,
Refuse them an asylum here,
Or not maintain in manner fitting
These genuine sons of mother Britain?
TO evade these crimes of blackest grain,
You prate of liberty in vain,
And strive to hide your vile designs,
With terms abstruse like school-divines.
Colonel Leslie's Expedition to Salem.
Canto 2.
YET thus though skilled in victory's toils,
They boast, not unexpert, in wiles:
For gained they not an equal same in
The arts of secrecy and scheming?
In strategems showed mighty force,
And moderniz'd the Trojan horse,
Played over again those tricks Ulyssean,
In their samed Salem-expedition?
For as the horse, the Poets tell ye,
Bore Grecian armies in his belly;
Till their full reckoning run, with joy
Their Sinon midwised them in Troy.
So in our ship was Leslie bold
Crammed with three hundred men in hold;
Equipped for enterprise and sail,
Like Jonas stowed in womb of whale:
To Marblehead in depth of night,
The cautious vessel winged her flight.
And now the Sabbath's silent day
Called all your Yankies off to pray;
Removed each prying jealous neighbor,
The scheme and vessel fell in labor;
Forth from its hollow womb poured hast'ly
The Myrmidons of Col'nel Leslie:
Not thicker over the blackened strand
The Sea Homer's battle of the frogs and mice.
frogs' detachment rushed to land,
Equipped by onset or surprise
To storm the entrenchments of the mice.
Through Salem strait, without delay,
The bold battalion took its way,
Marched over the bridge in open sight
Of several Yankies armed for fight,
Then without loss of time or men
Veer'd round for Boston back again;
And found so well their project thrive,
That every soul got back alive.
Gasconade of M' Fingal.
Canto 2.
BUT now your triumphs all are over;
For see from Britain's angry shore
With mighty hosts of valor join
Her How, her Clinton and Burgoyne;
As comets through the affrighted skies
Pour baleful ruin, as they rise;
As AEtna with infernal roar
In conflagration sweeps the shore;
Or as Abijah White, when sent
Our Marshfield friends to represent,
Himself while dread array involves,
Commissions, pistols; swords, resolves,
In awful pomp descending down,
Bore terror on the factious town:
Not with less glory and affright,
Parade these Generals forth to fight.
No more each Regular Col'nel runs
From whizzing beetles, as air-guns,
Thinks hornbugs bullets, or through fears
Muquetoes takes for Musketeers;
Nor 'scape, as though yo^^'d gained allies
From Beelzebub's whole host of flies.
No bug their warlike hearts appalls;
They better know the sound of balls.
I hear the din of battle bray,
The trump of horror marks its way;
I see afar the sack of cities,
The gallows strung with Whig-committes;
Your Moderators triced like vermin,
And gate-posts graced with heads of Chairmen;
Your Generals for wave-offerings hanging,
And ladders thronged with priests haranguing.
What pillories glad the Tories' eyes
With patriot-ears for sacrifice!
What whipping posts your chosen race
Admit successive in embrace,
While each bears off his crimes, alack!
Like Bunyan's pilgrim on his back!
Where then, when Tories scarce get clear,
Shall Whigs and Congresses appear?
What rocks and mountains shall you call
To wrap you over with their fall,
And save your heads in these sad weathers,
From fire and sword, and tar and feathers!
For lo, with British troops tar-bright,
Again our Nesbit heaves in sight!
He comes, he comes, your lines to storm,
And rigg your troops in uniform!
To meet such heroes, will ye brag,
With fury armed, and feather-bag;
Who wield their missile pitch and tar,
With engines new in British war?
Lo, where our mighty navy brings
Destruction on her canvas-wings.
While through the deeps her potent thunder
Shall sound the alarm to rob and plunder!
As Phoebus first, so Homer speaks,
When he marched out to attack the Greeks,
Against mules sent forth his arrows fatal,
And slew the auxiliaries, their cattle;
So where our ships shall stretch their keel,
What conquered oxen shall they steel!
What heroes rising from the deep
Invade your marshaled hosts of sheep!
Disperse whole troops of horse, and pressing
Make cows surrender at discretion;
Attack your hens like Alexanders,
And regiments rout of geese and ganders;
Or where united arms combine
Lead captive many a herd of swine!
Then rush in dreadful fury down
To fire on every seaport town;
Display their glory and their wits,
Fright unarmed children into fits,
And stoutly from the unequal fray,
Make many a woman run away!
QUEEN MAB.
O THEN I see Queen Mab has been with you*
She is the fancy's midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
On the forefinger of an alderman;
Drawn with a team of little atomies,
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep:
Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs;
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers;
The traces of the smallest spiders web;
The collars of the moonshine's watery beams;
Her whip of cricket's bone; the lash o^ film;
Her waggoner a small gray-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a round little worm,
Pricked from the lazy finger of a maid.
Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut,
Made by the joiner squirrel, or old grub,
Time out of mind the fairies' coach-maker.
And in this state she gallops, night by night,
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love:
On courtiers' knees, that dream on courtsies strait:
Over lawyers' fingers, who strait dream on fees:
Over ladies' lips, who strait on kisses dream;
Sometimes she gallops over a courtier's nose,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit:
And sometimes comes she in a tithe-pig tail,
Tickling the parson as he lies asleep;
Then dreams he of another benefice.
Sometimes she drives over a soldier's neck,
And then he dreams of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of healths five fathom deep; and then anon
Drums in his ears, at which he wakes;
And being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two,
And sleeps again.
SHAKESPEARE. CHAP. XXI. DIALOGUES.
Scene between CLARINDA and FRANKLY.
From the Suspicious Husband.
FRANK. I hope, Madam, you will excuse the boldness of this intrusion, since it
is owing to your own behavior that I am forced to it.


CLAR. To my behavior, Sir!


FRANK. You cannot but remember me at Bath, Madam, where I so lately had the
favor of your hand.


CLAR. I do remember, Sir, but I little expected a wrong interpretation of my
behavior from one who has so much the appearance of a gentleman.


FRANK. What I saw of your behavior was so just, it would admit of no
misrepresentation. I only feared, whatever reason you had to conceal your name
from me at Bath, you might have the same reason to do it now; and though my
happiness was so nearly concerned, I rather chose to venture thus abruptly
after you, than be impertinently inquisitive.


CLAR. Sir, there seems to be so much civility in your rudeness, that I can
easily forgive it; though I don't see how your happiness is at all concerned.


FRANK. No Madam; I believe you are the only Lady who could, with the
qualifications you are mistress of, be insensible of the power they give you
over the happiness of our sex.


CLAR. How vain should we women be, if you Gentlemen were but wise! if you did
not all of you say the same things to every woman, we should certainly be
foolish enough to believe some of you were in earnest.


FRANK. Could you have the lest sense of what I feel whilst I am speaking, you
would know me to be in earnest, and what I say to be the dictates of a heart
that admires you.


CLAR. Sir, this is carrying the matter too far.


FRANK. When I danced with you at Bath, I was charmed with your whole
behavior, and felt the same tender admiration; but my hope of seeing you
afterward, kept in my passion, till a more proper time mould offer. You cannot
therefore blame me now, if, after having lost you once, I do not suffer an
inexcuseable modesty to prevent my making use of a second opportunity.


CLAR. This behavior, Sir, is so different from the gaiety of your
conversation, then, that I am at a loss how to answer you.


FRANK. There is nothing, Madam, which could take off from the gaiety with
which your presence inspires every heart, but the fear of losing you. How can I
be otherwise than I am, when I know not but you may leave London as abruptly
(...) you did Bath.


CLAR. Sir, the business which brings me to town, will keep me here some time.


FRANK. How generous is it in you thus to case the heart that knew not how to
ask for such a favor! I fear to offend. But this house, I suppose is yours.


CLAR. You shall hear of me, if not find me here.


Scene between General SAVAGE and Miss. WALSINGHAM; in which the courtship is
carried on in such an ambiguous manner, that the General mistakes her consent
to marry his son, Capt. SAVAGE, for consent to marry himself.
School for Wives.
Miss WALL. GENERAL Savage, your most humble servant.


Genesis SAV. My dear Miss Walsingham, it is rather cruel that you should be left
at home by yourself, and yet I am greatly rejoiced to find you at present
without company.


Miss WALL. I cannot but think myself in the best company, when I have the honor
of your conversation, General.


GENESIS You flatter me too much, Madam; yet I am come to talk to you on a serious
affair; an affair of importance to me and to yourself: Have you leisure to
favor me with a short audience, if I beat a parley?


Miss WALL. Any thing of importance to you, Sir, is always sufficient to command
my leisure.

It Is as the Captain suspected -- aside.


GENESIS You tremble, my lovely girl, but don't be alarmed; for though my business
is of an important nature, I hope it will not be of a disagreeable one.


Miss WALL. And yet I am greatly agitated -- aside.


GENESIS Soldiers, Miss Walsingham, are said to be generally favored by the kind
protection of the Ladies.


Miss WALL. The Ladies are not without gratitude, Sir, to those who devote their
lives peculiarly to the service of their country.


GENESIS Generously said, Madam: Then give me leave, without any masked battery,
to ask, if the heart of an honest soldier is a prize at all worth your
acceptance.


Miss WALL. Upon my word, Sir, there is no masked battery in this question.


GENESIS I am as fond of a coup de main, Madam, in love as in war, and hate the
tedious method of sapping a town, when there is a possibility of entering it
sword in hand.


Miss WALL. Why really, Sir, a woman may as well know her own mind, when she is
first summoned by the trumpet of a lover, as when she undergoes all the
tiresome formality of a siege. You see I have caught your own mode of
conversing, General.


GENESIS And a very great compliment I consider it, Madam; But now that you have
heartily confessed an acquaintance with your own mind, answer me with that
frankness for which every body admires you so much. Have you any objections to
change the name of Walsingham?


Miss WALL. Why then frankly, General, I say, no.


GENESIS Ten thousand thanks to you for this kind declaration.


Miss WALL. I hope you wont think it a forward one.


GENESIS I Would sooner see my son run away in the day of battle -- I Would sooner think
Lord Russell was bribed by Lewis the 14th; and sooner vilify the memory of
Algernoon Sidney.


Miss WALL. How unjust it was ever to suppose the General a tyrannical father.

[aside.
GENESIS You have told me condescendingly, Miss Walsingham, that you have no
objection to change your name, I have but one question more to ask.


Miss WALL. Pray propose it, Sir.


GENESIS Would the name of Savage be disagreeable to you? Speak frankly again, my
dear girl.


Miss WALL. Why then again I frankly say, no.


GENESIS You are too good to me. Torrington thought I should meet with a repulse.
aside.


Miss WALL. Have you communicated this business to the Captain, Sir.


GENESIS No, my dear Madam, I did not think that at all necessary. I propose that
he shall be married in a few days.


Miss WALL. What whether I will or no?


GENESIS O you can have no objection?


Miss WALL. I must be consulted, however, about the day, General; but nothing in
my power shall be wanted to make him happy.


GENESIS Obliging lovliness!


Miss WALL. You may imagine, that if I had not been previously impressed in favor
of your proposal, it would not have met with my concurrence so readily.


GENESIS Then you own I had a previous friend in the garrison.


Miss WALL. I don't blush to acknowledge it Sir, when I consider the
accomplishments of the object.


GENESIS O this is too much, Madam; the principal merit of the object is his
passion for Miss Walsingham.


Miss WALL. Don't say that General, I beg of you, for I don't think there are
many women in the kingdom, who could behold him with indifference.


GENESIS Ah, you flattering, flattering angel! -- and yet, by the memory of
Marlborough, my lovely girl, it was the idea of a prepossession on your part,
which encouraged me to hope for a favorable reception.


Miss WALL. Then I must have been very indiscrete, for I labored to conceal
that prepossession as much as possible.


GENESIS You could not conceal it from me: the female heart is a field I am
thoroughly acquainted with.


Miss WALL. I doubt not your knowledge of the female heart, General; but as we
now understand one another so perfectly, you will give me leave to retire.


GENESIS One word my dear creature, and no more I shall wait on you some time to
day about the necessary settlements.


Miss WALL. You must do as you please, General, you are invincible in every
thing.


GENESIS And if you please we will keep every thing a profound secret, till the
articles are all settled and the definitive treaty ready for execution.


Miss WALL. You may be sure that delicacy will not suffer me to be communicative
on the subject, Sir.


GENESIS Then you leave every thing to my management.


Miss WALL. I cannot trust a more noble negociator.

( goes out.
GENESIS The day is my own ( sings) Britain, strike home; strike home.


Scene between General Savage, Captain Savage, Miss Walsingham and Torrington,
a Lawyer; in which the General discovers his mistake.
School for Wives.
Capt. SAV. NAY but, my dearest Miss Walsingham, the extenuation of my own
conduct to Belville made it absolutely necessary for me to discover my
engagements with you; and as happiness is now so fortunately in our reach, I
flatter myself you will be prevailed upon to forgive an error which proceeded
only from extravagance of love.


Miss WALL. To think me capable of such an action, Captain Savage! I am
terrified at the idea of a union with you; and it is better for a woman at any
time, to sacrifice an insolent lover than to accept of a suspicious husband.


CAPT. In the happiest union, my dearest creature, there must always be
something to overlook on both sides.


Miss WALL. Very civil truly.


CAPT. Pardon me, my life, for this frankness; and recollect, that if the Lover
has through misconception been unhappily guilty, he brings a husband altogether
reformed to your hands.


Miss WALL. Well, I see I must forgive you at last; so I may as well make a
merit of necessity, you provoking creature.


CAPT. And may I hope indeed for the blessing of this hand?


Miss WALL. Why, you wretch, would you have me force it upon you? I think after
what I have said, a soldier might have ventured to take it without further
ceremony.


CAPT. Angelic creature! thus I seize it as my lawful prize.


Miss WALL. Well, but now you have obtained this inestimable prize, Captain,
give me again leave to ask if you have had a certain explanation with the
General.


CAPT. How can you doubt it?


Miss WALL. And he is really impatient for our marriage?


CAPT. It Is incredible how earnest he is.


Miss WALL. What! did he tell you of his interview with me this evening, when he
brought Mr. Torrington?


CAPT. He did.


Miss WALL. O, Then I can have no doubt.


CAPT. If a shadow of doubt remains, here he comes, to remove it. Joy, my dear
Sir! joy a thousand times!


Enter Genesis Savage and Torrington. GENESIS What, my dear boy, have you carried the
day?


Miss WALL. I have been weak enough to indulge him with a victory, indeed,
General.


GENESIS Fortune favors the brave, Torrington.


TOR. I congratulate you heartily on this decree, General.


GENESIS This had nearly proved a day of disappointment, but the stars have
fortunately turned it in my favor, and now I reap the rich reward of my
victory.


CAPT. And here I take her from you, as the greatest good which heaven can ^end
me.


Miss WALL. O Captain!


GENESIS You take her as the greatest good which heaven can send you, Sirrah! I
take her as the greatest good which heaven can send me: And now what have you
to say to her?


Miss WALL. General Savage!


TOR. Here will be a fresh injunction to stop proceedings.


Miss WALL. Are we never to have done with mistakes?


GENESIS What mistakes can have happened now, sweetest? you delivered up your dear
hand to me this moment?


Miss WALL. True, Sir; but I thought you were going to bestow my dear hand upon
this dear Gentleman.


GENESIS How! that dear Gentleman!


CAPT. I am thunderstruck!


TOR. Fortune favors the brave, General, none but the brave. Laughingly.


GENESIS So the covert way is cleared at last; and you have all along imagined
that I was negociating for this fellow, when I was gravely soliciting for
myself.


Miss WALL. No other idea, Sir, ever entered my imagination.


TOR. General, noble minds should never despair. Laughingly.


GENESIS Well, my hopes are blown up to the moon at once, and I shall be the
laughing stock of the whole town.


Scene between Mrs. BELVILLE, Miss WALSINGHAM and Lady RACHEL MILDEW. -- On
duelling.
School for Wives.
Mrs. BELL. WHERE is the generosity, where [ alone.] is the sense, where is the
shame of men, to find pleasure in pursuits which they cannot remember without
the deepest horror; which they cannot follow without the meanest fraud; and
which they cannot effect, without consequences the most dreadful? The greatest
triumph which a libertine can ever experience, is too despicable to be envied;
it is at best nothing but a victory over his humanity; and if he is a husband he
must be doubly tortured on the wheel of recollection.


Enter Miss WALSINGHAM and Lady RACHEL MILDEW. Miss WALL. My dear Mrs. Belville,
I am extremely unhappy to see you so distressed.


Lady RACH. Now I am extremely glad to see her so, for if she were not greatly
distressed, it would be monstrously unnatural.


Mrs. BELL. O Matilda! my husband! my children.


Miss WALL. Don't weep, my dear! don't weep! pray be comforted, all may end
happily. Lady Rachel, beg of her not to cry so.


Lady RACH. Why, you are crying yourself Miss Walsingham. And though I think it
out of character to encourage her tears, I cannot help keeping you company.


Mrs. BELL. O, why is not some effectual method contrived to prevent this
horrible practice of duelling?


Lady RACH. I Will expose it on the stage, since the law now adays kindly leaves
the whole cognizance of it to the theater.


Miss WALL. And yet if the laws against it, were as well enforced as the laws
against destroying the game, perhaps it would be equally for the benefit of the
kingdom.


Mrs. BELL. No law will ever be effectual till the custom is rendered infamous.
Wives must shriek! mothers must agonize! orphans must be multiplied! unless
some blessed hand strip the fascinating glare from honorable murder, and
bravely expose the idol who is worshipped thus in blood. While it is
disreputeable to obey the laws, we cannot look for reformation. But if the
duellist is once banished from the presence of his sovereign; if he is for life
excluded the confidence of his country; if a mark of indelible disgrace is
stamped upon him, the sword of public justice will be the sole chastiser of
wrongs: trifle will not be punished with death, and offense really meriting
such a punishment will be reserved for the only proper avenger, the common
executioner.


Lady RACH. I could not have expressed myself better on the subject, my dear,
but till such (...) hand, as you talk of, is found, the best will fall into the
error of the times.


Miss WALL. Yes, and butcher each other like madmen, for fear their courage
should be suspected by fools.


RIVERS AND SIR HARRY. FALSE DELICACY.
SIR HAR. COLONEL, your most obedient: I am come upon the old business; for
unless I am allowed to entertain hopes of Miss Rivers, I shall be the most
miserable of all human beings.


RIV. Sir Harry, I have already told you by letter, and I now tell you
personally, I cannot listen to your proposals.


SIR HAR. No, Sir?


RIV. No, Sir, I have promised my daughter to Mr. Sidney; do you know that, Sir?


SIR HAR. I do; but what then! Engagements of this kind, you know --


RIV. So then, you do know I have promised her to Mr. Sidney?


SIR HAR. I do; but I also know that matters are not finally settled between
Mr. Sidney and you; and I moreover know, that his fortune is by no means equal
to mine, therefore --


RIV. Sir Harry, let me ask you one question before you make your consequence.


SIR HAR. A thousand if you please, Sir.


RIV. Why then, Sir, let me ask you, what you have ever observed in me or my
conduct, that you desire me so familiarly to break my word: I thought, Sir, you
considered me as a man of honor.


SIR HAR. And so I do, Sir, a man of the nicest honor.


RIV. And yet, Sir, you ask me to violate the sanctity of my word; and tell me
directly, that it is my interest to be a rascal. --


SIR HAR. I really don't understand you, Colonel: I thought when I was talking
to you, I was talking to a man who knew the world; and as you have not signed
--


RIV. Why, this is mending matters with a witness! And so you think because I
am not legally bound, I am under no necessity of keeping my word! Sir Harry,
laws were never made for men of honor; they want no bond but the rectitude of
their own sentiments, and laws are of no use but to bind the villains of
society.


SIR HAR. Well! but my dear Colonel, if you have no regard for me, show some
little regard for your daughter.


RIV. I show the greatest regard for my daughter, by giving her to a man of
honor* and I must not be insulted with any farther repetition of your
proposals.


SIR HAR. Insult you, Colonel! Is the offer of my alliance an insult? Is my
readiness to make what settlements you think proper --


RIV. Sir Harry, I should consider the offer of a kingdom an insult, if it were
to be purchased by the violation of my word: Besides, though my daughter shall
never go a beggar to the arms of her husband, I would rather see her happy than
rich; and if she has enough to provide handsomely for a young family, and
something to spare for the exigencies of a worthy friend, I shall think her as
affluent as if she were mistress of Mexico.


SIR HAR. Well, Colonel, I have done; but I believe --


RAV. Well, Sir Harry, and as our conference is done, we will, if you please,
retire to the ladies; I shall be always glad of your acquaintance, though I
cannot receive you as a son-in-law, for a union of interest I look upon as a
union of dishonor, and consider a marriage for money, at best but a legal
prostitution.


Scene between SHYLOCK and TUBAL. Shylock had sent Tubal after his daughter,
who had eloped from his house. Antonio was a merchant hated by Shylock.

Merchant of Venice.
SHY. HOW now, Tubal? what news from Genoa? have you heard any thing of my
backsliding daughter?


TUB. I often came where I heard of her, but could not find her.


SHY. Why there, there, there, a diamond gone, that cost me ten thousand ducats
at Frankfort! The curse never fell upon the nation till now! I never felt it
before! Two thousand ducats, in that and other precious jewels! I wish she lay
dead at my feet! No news of them! and I know not what spent in the search. Loss
upon loss. The thief gone with so much, and so much to find the thief; and no
satisfaction, no revenge; no ill luck stirring but what lights on my shoulders.


TUB. O yes, other men have ill luck too. Antonio, as I heard in Genoa --


SHY. ( interrupting him.) What, has he had ill luck?


TUB. Has had a ship cast away coming from Tripoli.


SHY. Thank fortune! Is it true? Is it true?


TUB. I spoke with some of the sailors that escaped from the wreck.


SHY. I thank you, good Tubal. Good news! Good news! what in Genoa, you spoke
with them.


TUB. Your daughter, as I heard in Genoa, spent twenty Ducats in one night.


SHY. You stick a dagger in me, Tubal. I never shall see my gold again. Twenty
ducats in one night? Twenty ducats? O Father Abraham!


TUB. There came several of Antonio's creditors in my company to Venice, who
say he cannot but break.


SHY. I am glad on it. I Will plague him; I Will torture him; I am glad on it.


TUB. One of them showed me ring he had of your daughter for a monkey.


SHY. Out upon her! You torture me, Tubal! It was my ruby. I would not have
given it for as many monkies as could stand together upon Realto.


TUB. Antonio is certainly undone.


SHY. Ay, ay, there is some comfortain that. Go, Tubal, engage an officer. Tell
him to be ready. I Will be revenged on Antonio. I Will wash my hands to the elbows
in his heart's blood.


Jaffier had married the daughter of Priuli, without his consent; and being
reduced to poverty, he applies to Priuli for help in his distress and receives
the following treatment.
Venice preserved.
PRI. NO more! I Will hear no more! Be gone and leave me.


JAF. Not hear me! By my sufferings but you shall. My Lord! My Lord! I am not
that abject wretch you think me. Where Is the difference that throws me so far
behind you, that I must not speak to you?


PRI. Have you not wronged me?


JAF. Could my nature ever have endured the thought of doing wrong, I need not
now have bent myself thus low, to gain a hearing from a cruel father.


PRI. I say you have wronged me in the nicest point, the honor of my house.
You cannot defend your baseness to me. When you first came home from travel, I
with open arms received you, pleased with your seeming virtues. I sought to
raise you. My house, my table, fortune, all was yours. And in return, you
treacherously strove to undo me; deceived the joy of my declining age, my only
child, and stole her from my bosom.


JAF. Is this your gratitude to him who saved your daughter's life. You know
that but for me you had been childless. I restored her to you, when sunk amidst
the waves; I hazarded my life for hers and she has richly paid me with her
generous love.


PRI. You stole her from me; like a thief you stole her; at dead of night, that
fatal hour, you chose to riffle me of all my heart held dear. But may your joy
in her prove false as mine. May the hard hand of pinching poverty oppress and
grind you; till at length you find the curse of disobedience all your fortune.
Home and be humble. Study to retrench. Discharge the lazy vermin of thy hall,
those pageants of thy folly. Reduce the glittering trappings of thy wife, to
humble weeds fit for thy narrow state. Then to some suburb cottage, both
retire; and with your starvling brats enjoy your misery. Home, home, I say.


Scene between Lord Peter, Martin and Jack. By Peter is meant the Pope; by
Martin, the (...) Church (...) Jack the Calvinists. The design of this Dialogue
is (...) the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, the arrogance of the (...) of
Persecution.

Swift's tale of a Tub.
BREAD, gentlemen, bread is the (...) of life. In bread is contained the (...)
of beef, mutton, veal, venison, partridge, plumbpudding and custard; and through
the whole is diffused a wholesome sermented liquor. Therefore he who eats bread
at the same time eats the best of food and drinks the best of liquors. Come on,
brothers, the cause is good, fall to and spare not. Here is a shoulder of
excellent mutton Pointing to a brown loaf on the Table. This conversation is
supposed to be at table where the speakers ought to sit, in order to perform to
the Life. But this may be dispensed with, as my design is to learn children
merely to read and speak.
as ever was cut with knife.

But now my hand is in, I Will help you myself. Young people are bashful. Come,
brother Martin, let me help you to this slice.

MAR. My Lord, I doubt with great submission, here is some little mistake.


PET. What, you are merry? Come then, let us hear this jest your head is so big
with.


MAR. No jest, indeed, my Lord. But unless I am very much deceived, your
Lordship was pleased a little while ago, to drop a word about mutton. and I
should be glad to see it upon the table.


PET. How! I don't comprehend you.


JACK. Why my Lord, my brother Martin, I suppose is hungry, and longs to see
the shoulder of mutton you spoke of, come to the table.


PET. Pray explain yourselves, gentlemen. Either you are both out of your wits,
or are disposed to be merry a little unseasonably. You would better keep your
jokes till after dinner.


MAR. What then, my Lord, is this brown loaf a shoulder of mutton all this
while?


PET. Pray leave of your impertinence and eat your victuals, if you please. I
am not disposed to relish your wit at present.


MAR. Well, my Lord, may I be soused over head and ears in a horse-pond, if it
seems to my eyes, my fingers, or my nose, either less or more, than a slice of
stale sixpenny brown loaf.


JACK. If ever I saw a shoulder of mutton, in my life, look so like a sixpenny
brown loaf, I am an old basket woman.


PET. Look you, Gentlemen, to convince you what a couple of blind, positive,
ignorant puppies you are, I will use but one plain argument. May you both be
eternally miserable, if you don't believe this to be a shoulder of as good
mutton as ever was sold in market.


MAR. Why truly upon more mature consideration --


JACK. Why, ay, now I have thought more of the matter, your Lordship seems to
be in the right.


PET. O now you are come to yourselves. Boy fill me a bumper of claret. Come,
brothers, here is good health to you both.


MAR. and JACK. Thank your good Lordship and shall be glad to pledge you.


PET. That you shall my boys. I am not a man to refuse any thing in reason. A
moderate glass of wine is a cordial. There Giving them a crust each.
is a bumper a piece for you. True natural juice of the grape. None of your
nasty balderdash vintner's brewing. What now observing them to state.
are you at your doubts again? Here boy. Call neighbor Dominic Saint Dominic,
the inventor of the Inquisition.
the blacksmith here. Bid him bring his tongs with him. Redhot, do you hear? I Will
teach you to doubt.


MAR. Come, Jack. This house is like to be too hot for you and me. He is quite
raving mad. Let Us get away Separation of the Protestant from the Romish Church.
as fast as we can.


JACK. A plague on his crazy head. If ever I put my nose within his door again,
may it be pinched off in good earnest.


JUBA and SYPHAX:
JUB. SYPHAX, I joy to meet you thus alone.
I have observed of late thy looks are fallen,
Overcast with gloomy cares and discontent;
Then tell me, Syphax, I conjure thee, tell me,
What are the thoughts that knit thy brow in (frowns,
And turn thy eye thus coldly on thy prince?

SYPH. It Is not my talent to conceal my (thoughts,
Or carry smiles and sunshine in my face,
When discontent sits heavy at my heart:
I have not yet so much of the Roman in me.

JUB. Why do thou cast out such ungenerous (terms
Against the lords and fovereigns of the world?
Do not thou see mankind fall down before them,
And own the force of their superior virtue?
Is there a nation in the wilds of Afric,
Amidst our barren rocks and burning sands,
That does not tremble at the Roman name?

SYPH. Gods! where is the worth that sets this (people up
Above your own Numidia's tawny sons?
Do they with tougher sinews bend the bow?
Or flies the javelin swifter to its mark,
Launched from the vigor of a Roman arm?
Who like our active African instructs
The firey steed, and trains him to his hand?
Or guides in troops the embattled elephant,
Laden with war? These, these are arts, my prince,
In which your Zama does not stoop to Rome.

JUB. These all are virtues of a meaner rank,
Perfections that are placed in bones and nerves.
A Roman soul is bent on higher views:
To civilize the rude unpolished world,
To lay it under the restraint of laws;
To make man mild, and sociable to man;
To cultivate the wild licentious savage
With wisdom, discipline, and liberal arts;
The establishments of life: virtues like these,
Make human nature shine, reform the soul,
And break our fierce barbarians into men.

SYPH. Patience, just Heavens! -- Excuse an old (man's warmth.
What are those wondrous civilizing arts,
This Roman polish and this smooth behavior,
That render man thus tractable and tame?
Are they not only to disguise our passions,
To set our looks at variance with our thoughts,
To check the starts and sallies of the soul,
And break off all its commerce with the tongue?
In short, to change us into other creatures,
Than what our nature and the gods designed us?

JUB. JUB. To strike thee dumb: turn up thy eyes to (Cato!
There may thou see to what a godlike height
The Roman virtues lift up mortal man.
While good, and just and anxious for his friends,
He Is still severely bent against himself;
Renouncing sleep, and rest, and food, and ease,
He strives with thirst and hunger, toil and heat:
And when his fortune sets before him all
The pomp and pleasure that his soul can wish,
His rigid virtue will accept of none.

SYPH. Believe me, prince, there is not an African
That traverses our vast Numidian deserts
In quest of prey, and lives upon his bow,
But better practices these boasted virtues.
Coarse are his meals, the fortune of the chase,
Amidst the running stream he slakes his thirst,
Toils all the day, and at the approach of night
On the first friendly bank he throws him down,
Or rests his head upon a rock till morn:
Then rises fresh, pursues his wonted game,
And if the following day he chance to find
A new repast, or an untasted spring,
Blesses his stars, and thinks it luxury.

JUB. Thy prejudices, Syphax, will not discern
What virtues grow from ignorance and choice,
Nor how the hero differs from the brute.
But grant that others could with equal glory
Look down on pleasures, and the baits of sense;
Where shall we find the man that bears affliction,
Great and majestic in his griefs, like Cato?
Heavens! with what strength, what steadiness of mind,
He triumphs in the midst of all his sufferings!
How does he rise against a load of woes,
And thanks the gods that threw the weight upon him!

SYPH. It Is pride, rank pride, and haughtiness of soul:
I think the Romans call it stoicism.
Had not your royal father thought so highly
Of Roman virtue, and of Cato's cause,
He had not fallen by a slave's hand inglorious:
Nor would his slaughtered army now have lain
On Afric sands, disfigured with their wounds,
To gorge the wolves and vultures of Numidia.

JUB. Why do thou call my sorrows up afresh!
My father's name brings tears into mine eyes.

SYPH. Oh, that you would profit by your father's ills!

JUB. What would thou have me do?

SYPH. Abandon Cato.

JUB. Syphax, I should be more than twide an Orphan by such a loss.

SYPH. Ay, there is the tie that binds you!
You long to call him father. Marcia's charms
Work in your heart unseen, and plead for Cato.
No wonder you are deaf to all I say.

JUB. Syphax, your zeal becomes importunate;
I Have hitherto permitted it to rave,
And talk at large; but learn to keep it in,
Least it should take more freedom than I Will give it.

JUB. Sir, your great father never used me thus.
Alas, he is dead! but can you ever forget
The tender sorrows and the pangs of nature,
The fond embraces, and repeated blessings,
Which you drew from him in your last farewell?
Still must I cherish the dear, sad remembrance,
At once to torture, and to please my soul.
The good old King at parting wrung my hand,
(His eyes brimful of tears) then sighing cried,
Pr'ythee be careful of my son! -- His grief
Swelled up so high, he could not utter more.

JUB. Alas, the story melts away my soul,
The best of fathers! how shall I discharge
The gratitude and duty which I owe him?

SYPH. By laying up his counsels in your heart.

JUB. His counsels bade me yield to thy directions:
Then, Syphax, chide me in severest terms;
Vent all thy passion, and I Will stand its shock,
Calm and unruffled as a summer's sea,
When not a breath of wind flies over its surface.

SYPH. Alas, my prince, I Will guide you to your safety!

JUB. I do believe thou would; but tell me how?

SYPH. Fly from the fate of Cesar's foes.

JUB. My father scorned to do it.

SYPH. And therefore died.

JUB. Better to die ten thousand deaths,
Than wound my honor.

SYPH. Rather say your love.

JUB. Syphax, I Have promised to preserve my temper;
Why will thou urge me to confess a flame
I long have stifled, and would fain conceal?

SYPH. Believe me, prince, though hard to conquer love,
It Is easy to divert and break its force:
Absence might cure it, or a second mistress
Light up another flame, and put out this.
The glowing dames of Zama's royal court
Have faces flushed with more exalted charms;
The sun that rolls his chariot over their heads,
Works up more fire and color in their cheeks:
Were you with these, my prince, you would soon forget
The pale, unripen'd beauties of the North.

JUB. It Is not a set of features, nor complexion,
The tincture of the skin that I admire.
Beauty soon grows familiar to the lover.
Fades in his eye, and palls upon the sense.
The virtuous Marcia towers above her sex:
True, she is fair (Oh, how divinely fair!)
But still the lovely maid improves her charms,
With inward greatness, unaffected wisdom,
And sanctity of manners. Cato's soul
Shines out in every thing she acts or speaks,
While winning mildness and attractive smiles
Dwell in her looks, and with becoming grace
Soften the rigor of her father's virtues.

SYPH. How does your tongue grow wanton in her praise! CATO.

HOTSPUR AND GLENDOWER.
GLEN. SIT, cousin, Percy; sit good cousin Hotspur;
For, by that name, as often as Lancaster
Does speak of you, his cheek looks pale and with
A rising sigh, he wishes you in heaven.

HOT. And you in hell, as often as he hears
Owen Glendower spoke of.

GLEN. I blame him not: at my nativity,
The front of heaven was full of firey shapes,
Of burning cressets: know that, at my birth,
The frame and the foundations of the earth
Shook like a coward.

HOT. So it would have done
At the same season if your mother's cat
Had kitten'd, though yourself had never been born.

GLEN. I say, the earth did shake when I was (born.

HOT. I say, the earth then was not of my mind;
If you suppose, as fearing you, it shook.

GLEN. The heavens were all on fire, the earth (did tremble,

HOT. O, then the earth shook to see the heavens on fire,
And not in fear of your nativity.
Diseased nature oftentimes breaks forth
In strange eruptions: and the teeming earth
Is with a kind of colic pinched and vexed,
By the imprisoning of unruly wind
Within her womb; which for enlargement striving,
Shakes the old beldame earth, and topples down
High towers and moss-grown steeples. At your (birth,
Our grandam earth, with this distemperature,
In passion shook.

GLEN. Cousin, of many men
I do not bear these crossings: give me leave
To tell you once again, that at my birth
The front of heaven was full of firey shapes;
The goats ran from the mountains, and the herds
Were strangely clamourous in the frighted fields:
These signs have marked me extraordinary,
And all the courses of my life do show,
I am not in the roll of common men.
Where is he living clipped in with the sea,
That chides the banks of England, Wales or Scotland,
Who calls me pupil, or has read to me?
And bring him out, that is but woman's son,
Can trace me in the tedious ways of art,
Or hold me pace in deep experiments.

HOT. I think there is no man speaks better Welsh.

GLEN. I can speak English, Lord, as well as you,
For I was trained up in the English court:
Where, being young, I framed to the harp,
Many an English ditty, lovely well,
And gave the tongue a helpful ornament;
A virtue that was never seen in you.

HOT. Marry, and I Am glad of it with all my heart;
I would rather be a kitten, and cry mew!
Than one of these same metre-ballad mongers!
I Would rather hear a brazen candlestick turned,
Or a dry wheel grate on the axle-tree,
And that would nothing ^et my teeth in edge,
Nothing so much as min^ing poetry;
It Is like the forced gate of a shuffling ^ag --

GLEN. And I can call spirits from (...) vasty ^eep.

HOT. Why, so can I, or so can any man:
But will they come when you call them?

GLEN. Why I can teach thee to command the devil;
By telling truth; Tell truth and shame the devil.
If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither,
And I Will be sworn, I Have power to shame him hence.
Oh, while you live, Tell truth and shame the devil.

SHAKESPEARE. WOLSEY AND CROMWELL.
WOL. FAREWELL, a long farewell to all my greatness!
This is the state of man: Today he puts forth
The tender leaves of hope; tomorrow blossoms,
And bears his blushing honors thick upon him;
The third day comes a frost, a killing frost,
And when he thinks, good easy man, full surely
His greatness is a-ripening, nips (...) ^hoot;
And then he falls as I do. I have ^^ntur'd,
Like little wanton boys, that swim on bladders,
These many summers in a sea of glory;
But far beyond my depth: my high-blown pride
At length broke under me; and now has left me,
Weary, and old with service, to the mercy
Of a rude stream, that must forever hide me.
Vain pomp and glory of the world, I hate you!
I feel my heart new opened. Oh how wretched
Is that poor man that hangs on prince's favors!
There is, betwixt that smile he would aspire to,
That sweet aspect of princes, and his ruin,
More pangs and fears than war or woman have;
And when he falls he falls like Lucifer,
Never to hope again.
Why, how now Cromwell?

CROM. I have no power to speak, Sir.

WOL. What, amazed
Army misfortunes? Can thy spirit wonder
A great man should decline? Nay, if you weep,
I Am fallen indeed.

CROM. How does your Grace?

WOL. Why, well;
Never so truly happy, my good Cormwell.
I know myself now, and I feel within me
A peace above all earthly dignities;
A still and quiet conscience. The King has cured me,
I humbly thank his Grace; and, from these shoulders,
These ruined pillars, (...) of pity taken
A load would sink a navy, too much honor.
O, it is a burden, Cromwell, it is a burden,
Too heavy for a man that hopes for heaven!

CROM. I Am glad your Grace has made that right use of it.

WOL. I hope I have: I Am able now, methinks,
Out of a fortitude of soul I feel,
To endure more miseries, and greater far,
Than my weak-hearted enemies dare offer.
What news abroad?

CROM. The heaviest and the worst,
Is your displeasure with the King.

WOL. God bless him!

CROM. The next is, that Sir Thomas More is chosen
Lord Chancellor in your place.

WOL. That Is some what sudden --
But he is a learned man. May he continue
Long in his highness' favor, and do justice
For truth's sake and his conscience; that his bones,
When he has run his course, and sleeps in blessings,
May have a tomb of orphans' tears wept on him!
What more!

CROM. That Cranmer is returned with welcome,
Installed Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

WOL. That Is news indeed.

CROM. Last, that the Lady Anne,
Whom the King has in secrecy long married,
This day was viewed in open as his Queen,
Going to chapel; and the voice is now
Only about her coronation.

WOL. There was the weight that pulled me down: O Cromwell.
The King has gone beyond me: all my glories
In that one woman I have lost for ever.
No sun shall ever usher forth my honors,
Or gild again the noble troops that waited
Upon my smiles. Go, get thee from me, Cromwell;
I am a poor fallen man, unworthy now
To be thy lord and master. Seek the King,
(That sun I pray may never set) I Have told him
What and how true thou art; he will advance thee:
Some little memory of me will stir him,
(I know his noble nature) not to let
Thy hopeful service perish too. Good Cromwell,
Neglect him not; make use now, and provide for thine own future safety.

CROM. O my Lord,
Must I then leave you? Must I needs forego
So good, so noble, and so true a master?
Bear witness, all that have not hearts of iron,
With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his Lord.
The King shall have my service; but my prayers
For ever, and for ever, shall be yours.

WOL. Cromwell, I did not think to shed a tear
In all my miseries, but thou have forced me,
Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman --
Let Us dry our eyes; and thus far hear me, Cromwell,
And when I am forgotten, as I shall be,
And sleep in dull cold marble, where no mention
Of me must more be heard, say then I taught thee;
Say, Wolsey, that once rode the waves of glory,
And sounded all the depths and shoals of honor,
Found thee a way, out of his wreck, to rise in;
A sure and safe one, though thy master missed it.
Mark but my full, and that which ruined me:
Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition;
By that sin fell the angels; how can man then
(Though the image of his maker) hope to win by it?
Love thyself last; cherish those hearts that wait thee!
Corruption wins not more than honesty.
Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace,
To silence envious tongues. Be just and fear not.
Let all the ends thou aim'st at, be thy Country's,
Thy God's and Truth's; then if thou fall'st, O Cromwell,
Thou fall'st a blessed martyr. Serve the King --
And pr'ythee lead me in --
There take an inventory of all I have,
To the last penny, it is the King's. My robe,
And my integrity to Heaven, is all
I dare to call mine own. O Cromwell, Cromwell,
Had I but served my God with half the zeal
I served my King, he would not in mine ago
Have left me naked to mine enemies.

CROM. Good Sir, have patience.

WOL. So I have. Farewell
The hopes of court! My hopes in heaven do dwell.

SHAKESPEARE. HAMLET AND HORATIO.
HOR. HAIL to your Lordship!

HAM. I am glad to see you well,

Horatio; -- or I do forget myself.

HOR. The same, my Lord, and your poor servant ever.

HAM. Sir, my good friend; I Will change that name with you:
And what makes you from Wittenberg, Horatio?

HOR. A truant disposition, good my Lord.

HAM. I would not hoar your enemy say so;
Nor shall you do mine eat that violence,
To make it truster of your own report
Against yourself. I know you are no truant;
But what is your affair in Elsinoor?
We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.

HOR. My Lord, I came to see your father's funeral.

HAM. I pr'ythoe do not mock me, fellow-student;
I think it was to see my mother's wedding.

HOR. Indeed, my Lord, it followed hard upon.

HAM. Thrift, thrift, Horatio; the funeral baked meats
Did coldly furnish forth them marriage tables.
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven,
Or ever I had seen that day. Horatio!
My father -- methinks I see my father.

HOR. Oh where, my Lord?

HAM. In my mind's eye, Horatio.

HOR. I saw him once, he was a goodly King

HAM. He was a man, take him for all in all,
I shall not look upon his like again.

HOR. My Lord, I think I saw him yesternight.

HAM. Saw! whom?

HOR. My Lord, the King your father.

HAM. The King my father!

HOR. Season your admiration but a while,
With an attentive ear; till I deliver,
Upon the witness of these gentlemen,
This marvel to you.

HAM. For heaven's love, let me hear.

HOR. Two nights together had these gentlemen,
Marcellus and Bernado, on their watch,
In the dead waste and middle of the night,
Been thus encountered; a figure like your father,
Armed at all points exactly, cap-a-pee,
Appears before them, and with solemn march
Goes slow and stately by them; thrice he walked tilled
By their oppressed and fear-surprised eyes,
Within his truncheon's length; whilst they (dis-
Almost to jelly with the effect of fear)
Stand dumb, and speak not to him. This to me
In dreadful secrecy impart they did,
And I with them the third night kept the watch.
Where, as they had delivered both in time,
Form of the thing, each word made true and good,
The appatition comes. I knew your father:
These hands are not more like.

HAM. But where was this?

HOR. My Lord, upon the platform where we (...)

HAM. Did you not speak to it?

HOR. My Lord I did;
But answer made it none. Yet once (...)
It lifted up its head, and did address
Itself to motion, like as it would speak,
Dit even then the morning co^k crew (...)
And at the (...) it (...) in haste away,
And vanished from our sight.

HAM. It Is very strange.

HOR. As I do live, my honored Lord, it is true,
And we did think it writ down in our duty
To let you know of it.

HAM. Indeed, indeed, Sir, but this troubles me.
Hold you the watch tonight?

HOR. We do, my Lord.

HAM. Armed, say you?

HOR. Armed my Lord.

HAM. From ^op to toe?

HOR. My Lord from head to foot.

HAM. Then (...) you not his face?

HOR. Oh, yes My Lord; he wore his beaver up.

HAM. What, looked he frowningly?

HOR. A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.

HAM. Pale, or red?

HOR. Nay, very pale.

HAM. And fixed his eyes upon you?

HOR. Most constantly.

HAM. I would I had been there!

HOR. It would have much amazed you.

HAM. Very like. Staid it long?

HOR. While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.

HAM. His beard was grifled? -- no. --

HOR. It was, as I have seen it in his life,
A fable silvered.

HAM. I Will watch tonight; perchance 'twill walk again.

HOR. I warrant you, it will.

HAM. If it assume my noble father's person,
I Will speak to it, though hell itself should gape,
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you
If you have hitherto concealed this sight,
Let it be terrible in your silence still:
And whatsoever shall befall to night,
Give it an understanding but no tongue;
I will requite your love. So fare ye well.
Upon the platform 'twixt eleven and twelve
I Will visit you.

THE QUARREL OF BRUTUS AND CASSIUS.
CAS. THAT you have wronged me does appear in this,
You have condemned and noted Lucius Pella,
For taking bribes here of the Sardians:
Wherein my letter (praying on his side,
Because I knew the man) was slighted of.

BRU. You wronged yourself to write in such a case.

CAS. In such a time as this, it is not meet
That every nice offense should bear its comment*

BRU. Yet let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself
Are much condemned to have an itching palm,
To sell and mart your offices for gold,
To undeservers.

CAS. I an itching palm?
You know, that you are Brutus that speak this,
Or, be assured, this speech were else your last.

BRU. The name of Cassius honors this (...)
And chastisement does therefore hide its (...)

CAS. Chastisement! --

BRU. Remember March, the ides of (...) remember!
Did not great Julius bleed for justice sake?
What villain touched his body, that did stab,
And not for justice? What, shall one of us,
That struck the foremost man of all this world,
But for supporting robbers; shall we now
Contaminate our fingers with base bribes?
And sell the mighty meed of our large honors
For so much trash, as may be grasped thus?
I would rather be a dog, and bay the moon,
Than such a Roman.

CAS. Brutus, bay not me,
I Will not endure (...) you forget yourself,
(...) hedge me in; I am a soldier, I,
Older in practice, ab^er than yourself
To make conditions.

BRU. Go to; you are not, Cassius.

CAS. I am.

BRU. I say, you are not.

CAS. Urge me no more, I shall forget myself --
Have mind upon your health -- tempt me no farther.

BRU. Away, slight man!

CAS. Is It possible?

BRU. Hear me, for I will speak.
Must I give way and room to your rash choler?
Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?

CAS. Must I endure all this?

BRU. All this? ay more. (...) till your proud heart break;
(...) tell your slaves how choleric you are,
And make your bondm^^ tremble. Must I budge?
Must I observe you? must I stand and crouch
Under your testy humor? Be assured,
You shall digest the venom of your spleen,
Though it do split you; for from this day forth,
I Will use you for my mirth, you for my laughter,
When you are wa^^ish.

CAS. Is it come to this?

BRU. You say, you are a better soldier;
Let it appear so; make your vaunting true,
And it shall please me well. For mine own part,
I shall be glad to learn of noble men.

CAS. You wrong me every way; -- you wrong me, Brutus:
I said, an elder soldier, not a better:
Did I say better?

BRU. If you did, I care not.

CAS. When Caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.

BRU. Peace, peace, you durst not so have tempted him.

CAS. I (...).

BRU. No.

CAS. What? durst not tempt him?

BRU. For your life you durst not.

CAS. Do not presume too much upon my (...)
I may do what I shall be sorry for.

BRU. You have done wha^y on should be sorry for.
There is no terror, Cassius in your (...)
For I am armed so strong in honesty,
That they pass by me, as the idle wind,
Which I respect not. I did send to you
For certain sums of gold, which you denied me,
For I can raise no money by vile means:
By heaven, I had rather coin my heart,
And drop my blood for drachmas, than to (...)
From the hard hand of peasants their vile (...)
By any indirection. I did send
To you for gold to pay my legions.
Which you denied me; was that done like Cassius?
Should I have answered Caius Cassius so?
When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous;
To lock such rascal counters from his friends,
Be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts,
Dash him to pieces.

CAS. I denied you not:

BRU. You did.

CAS. I did not -- he was but a fool
That brought my answer back. Brutus has rived my heart.
A friend should bear a friends infirmities,

BRU. I do not. Still you practice them on me.

CAS. You love me not.

BRU. I do not like your faults.

CAS. A friendly eye could never see such faults.

BRU. A flatterer's would not, though they do come!
Appear as huge as high Olympus.

CAS. Come, Antony, and young Octavius,
Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius,
For Cassius is a weary of the world;
Hated by one he loves; braved by his brother;
Checked by a bondsman; all his faults observed;
Set in a note-book, learned, and conn'd by rote,
To cast into my teeth. O I could weep
My spirit from mine eyes! -- There is my dagger;
And here my naked breast -- within, a heart
Dearer than Plutus' mine, richer than gold!
If that thou need'st a Roman's, take it forth.
I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart:
Strike as thou did at Caesar; for I know,
When thou did hate him worst, thou loved'st him better
Than ever thou lovd'st Cassius.

BRU. Sheathe your dagger;
Be angry when you will, it shall have (...);
Do what you will, dishonor shall be humor.
O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb,
That carries anger, as the flint bears fire;
Which much enforced, shows a hasty spark,
And straight is cold again.

CAS. Has Cassius lived
To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus,
When grief, and blood ill-temper'd vexes him^

BRU. When I spoke that, I was ill-temper'd too.

CAS. Do you confess so much? Give me your hand

BRU. And my heart too.

CAS. O Brutus!

BRU. What Is the matter?

CAS. Have you not love enough to bear with me,
When that rash humor which my mother gave me,
Makes me forgetful?

BRU. Yes, Cassius, and from henceforth
When you are over-earnest with your Brutus,
He Will think your mother chides, and leave you so.

SHAKESPEARE. An ADDRESS of Congress to the People of Great Britain, written in
September 1774.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW SUBJECTS,
WHEN a nation, led to greatness, by the hand of liberty, and possessed of all
the glory that heroism, munificence and humanity can bestow, descends to the
ungrateful task of ^orging chains for her friends and children, and ^stead of
giving support to freedom, turns ad^ocate for slavery and oppression, there is
reason ^o suspect she has either ceased to be virtuous, or ^een extremely
negligent in the appointment of ^^er rulers.

In almost every age, in repeated conflicts, and long and bloody wars, as well
civil as foreign, against many and powerful nations, against the open assaults
of enemies, and the more dangerous treachery of friends, have the inhabitants
of your island, your great and glorious ancestors, maintained their
independence and transmitted the rights of men and the blessings of liberty to
you their posterity.

Be not surprised therefore, that we, who are descended from the same common
ancestors, that we, whose forefathers participated in all the rights, the
liberties and the constitution you so justly boast, and who have carefully
conveyed the same fair inheritance to us, guarantied by the plighted faith of
government, and the most solemn compacts with British Sovereigns, should refuse
to surrender them to men, who found their claims on no principles of reason,
and who prosecute them with a design that by having our lives and property in
there power, they may with the greater facility enslave you.

2. The cause of America is now the object of universal attention: It is at
length become very serious. This unhappy country has not only been oppressed,
but abused and misrepresented; and the duty we owe to ourselves and posterity,
to your interest, and the general welfare of the British empire, leads us to
address you on this very important subject.

Know then, THAT we consider ourselves, and do insist that we are and ought to
be, as free as our fellow subjects in Britain, and that no power on earth has a
right to take our property from us without our consent.

That we claim all the benefits secured to the subject by the English
constitution, and particularly that inestimable one of trial by jury.

That we hold it essential to English liberty, that no man be condemned
unheard, or punished for supposed offenses, without having an opportunity to be
heard in his defense.

That we think the legislature of Great Britain is not authorized by the
constitution to establish a religion, fraught with sanguinary and impious
tenets, or, to erect an arbitrary form of government in any quarter of the
globe. These rights, we, as well as you, deem sacred. And yet, sacred as they
are, they have, with many others been repeatedly and flagrantly violated.

Are not the proprietors of the soil of Great Britain lords of their own
property? Can it be taken from them without their consent? Will they yield it
to the arbitrary disposal of any man, or number of men whatever? -- You know
they will not.

Why then are the proprietors of the soil of America, less lords of their
property than you are of yours? or why should they submit it to the disposal
of your parliament, or any other parliament or council in the world, not of
their election? Can the intervention of the sea that divides us, cause
disparity in rights, or can any reason be given, why English subjects who live
three thousand miles from the royal palace, should enjoy less liberty than
those who are three hundred miles distant from it?

Reason looks with indignation on such distinctions, and freemen can never
perceive their propriety. And yet however chimerical and unjust such
discriminations are, the parliament assert that they have a right to bind us in
all cases without exception, whether we consent or not; that they may take end
use our property when and in what manner they please; that we are pensioners on
their bounty for all that we possess, and can hold it no longer than they
vouchsafe to permit. Such declarations we consider as herisies in English
politics, and which can no more operate to deprive us of our property, than the
interdicts of the Pope can divest Kings of sceptres, which the laws of the land
and the voice of the people have placed in their hands.

3. At the conclusion of the late war -- a war rendered glorious by the
abilities and integrity of a minister, to whose efforts the British empire owes
its safety and its fame: -- At the conclusion of this war, which was succeeded
by an inglorious peace, formed under the auspices of a minister, of principles,
and of a family unfriendly to the protestant cause, and inimical to liberty --
We say, at this period, and under the influence of that man, a plan for
enslaving your fellow subjects in America was concerted, and has ever since
been pertinaciously carrying into execution.

Prior to this era, you were content with drawing from us the wealth produced
by our commerce. You restrained our trade in every way that could conduce to
your emolument. You exercised unbounded sovereignty over the sea. You named the
ports and nations to which alone our merchandise should be carried, and with
whom alone we should trade; and though some of these restrictions were
grievous, we nevertheless did not complain; we looked up to you as to our
parent state, to which we were bound by the strongest ties; and were happy in
being instrumental to your prosperity and your grandeur.

We call upon you yourselves, to witness our loyalty and attachment to the
common interest of the whole empire: Did we not, in the last war, add all the
strength of this vast continent to the force which repelled our common enemy?
Did we not leave our native shores, and meet disease and death, to promote the
success of the British arms in foreign climes? Did you not thank us for our
zeal, and even re-imburse us large sums of money, which, you confessed, we had
advanced beyond our proportion, and far beyond our abilities? You did.

To what causes then, are we to attribute the sudden change of treatment, and
that system of slavery which was prepared for us at the restoration of peace?

4. Before we had recovered from the distresses which ever attend war, an
attempt was made to drain this country of all its money, by the oppressive
stamp act. Paint, Glass, and other commodities, which you would not permit us
to purchase of other nations, were taxed; nay, although no wine is made in any
country, subject to the British state, you prohibited our procuring it of
foreigners, without paying a tax, imposed by your parliament, on all we
imported. These and many other impositions were laid upon us most unjustly and
unconstitutionally, for the express purpose of raising a revenue. -- In order
to silence complaint, it was, indeed, provided, that this revenue should be
expended in America for its protection and defense. -- The exactions, however,
can receive no justification from a pretended necessity of protecting and
defending us. They are lavishly squandered on court favorites, and ministerial
dependants generally avowed enemies to America, and employing themselves, by
partial representations, to traduce and embroil the colonies.

5. For the necessary support of government here, we ever were and ever shall
be ready to provide. And whenever the exigencies of the state may require it,
we shall, as we have heretofore done, cheerfully contribute our full proportion
of men and money. To enforce this unconstitutional and unjust scheme of
taxation, every fence that the wisdom of our British ancestors had carefully
erected against arbitrary power, has been violently thrown down in America, and
the inestimable right of trial by jury taken away, in cases that touch both
life and property -- It was ordained, that whenever offenses should be
committed in the colonies against particular acts imposing various duties and
restrictions upon trade, the prosecutor might bring his action for the
penalties in the Courts of Admiralty; by which means the subject lost the
advantage of being tried by an honest uninfluenced jury of the vicinage, and
was subjected to the sad necessity of being judged by a single man, a creature
of the Crown, and according to the course of a law, which exempts the
prosecutor from the trouble of proving his accusation, and obliges the
defendant either to evince his innocence or to suffer. To give this new
Judicatory the greater importance, and as, if with design to protect false
accusors, it is further provided, that the Judge's certificate of their having
been probable causes of seizure and prosecution, shall protect the prosecutor
from actions at common law, for recovery of damages.

By the course of our law, offenses committed in such of the British dominions
in which courts are established and justice duly and regularly administered,
shall be there tried by jury of the vicinage. There the offenders and the
witnesses are known, and the degree of credibility to be given to their
testimony, can be ascertained.

6. Let justice and humanity cease to be the boast of your nation! Consult your
history, examine your records of former transactions; nay, turn to the annals
of the many arbitrary states and kingdoms that sorround you, and show us a
single instance of men being condemned to suffer for imputed crimes unheard,
unquestioned, and without even the specious formality of trial; and that too by
laws made expre^ly for the purpose, and which had no existence at the time of
the fact committed. If it is difficult to reconcile these proceedings to the
genius and temper of your laws and constitution, the task will become more
arduous when we call upon our ministerial enemies to justify, not only
condemning men untried and by hearsay, but involving the innocent in one common
punishment with the guilty, and for an act of thirty or forty, to bring
poverty, distress and calamity on thirty thousand souls, and those not your
enemies, but your friends, brethren and fellow subjects.

7. It would be some consolation to us, if the catalogue of American
oppressions ended here. It gives us pain to be reduced to the necessity of
reminding you, that under the confidence reposed in the faith of government,
pledged in a royal charter from a British Sovereign, the forefathers of the
present inhabitants of Massachusetts Bay, left their former habitations, and
established that great, flourishing, and loyal colony. Without incurring or
being charged with a forfeiture of their rights, without being heard, without
being tried, without law, and without justice, by an act of Parliament, their
charter is destroyed, their liberties violated, their constitution and form of
government changed: And all this upon no better pretense, than because in one
of their towns a trespass was committed on some merchandise, said to belong to
one of the companies, and because the ministry were of opinion, that such high
political regulations were necessary to compel due subordination and obedience
to their mandates.

Nor are these the only capital grievances under which we labor. We might tell
of dissolute, weak, and wicked Governors having been fet over us: of
legislatures being suspended for asserting the rights of British subjects -- of
needy and ignorant dependants on great men, advanced to the seats of justice,
and to other places of trust and importance; of hard restrictions on commerce,
and a great variety of less evils, the recollection of which is almost lost
under the weight and pressure of greater and more poignant calamities.

8. Now mark the progression of the ministerial plan for enslaving us.

Well aware that such hardy attempts to take our property from us; to deprive
us of that valuable right of trial by jury; to seize our persons, and carry us
for trial to Great Britain; to blockade our ports; to destroy our charters, and
change our forms of government; would occasion, and had already occasioned,
great discontents in all the colonies, which might produce opposition to these
measures: An act was passed to p^^tect, indemnify and screen from punishment
such as might be guilty even of murder, in endeavoring to carry their
oppressive acts into execution: And by another act, the dominion of Canada is
to be extended, modelled, and governed, as that by being disunited from us,
detached from our interests, by civil as well as religious prejudices, that by
their numbers daily swelling with catholic emigrants from Europe, and by their
devotion to administration, so friendly to their religion, they might become
formidable to us, and on occasion be fit instruments in the hands of power, to
reduce the ancient free Protestant colonies to the same state of slavery with
themselves.

This was evidently the object of the act: -- And in this view, being extremely
dangerous to our liberty and quiet, we cannot forbear complaining of it, as
hostile to British America -- Super^^ded to these considerations, we cannot
help deploring the unhappy condition to which it has reduced the many English
settlers, who, encouraged by the royal proclamation, promising the enjoyment of
all their rights, have purchased ^^tates in that country. -- They are now the
subjects of an arbitrary government, deprived of trial by jury, and when
imprisoned cannot claim the benefit of the habeas corpus act, that great
bulwark and palladium of English liberty: -- Nor can we suppress our
astonishment, that a British parliament should ever consent to establish, in
that country, a religion that has deluged your island in blood, and dispersed
impiety, bigotry, persecution, murder and rebellion through every part of the
world.

9. This being a true state of facts, let us beseech you to consider to what
end they lead.

Admit that the ministry, by the powers of Britain, and the aid of our Roman
Catholic neighbors should be able to carry the point of taxation, and reduce
us to a state of humiliation and slavery: -- Such an enterprise would doubtless
make some addition to your national debt, which already presses down your
liberties, and fills you with pensioners and placemen. -- We presume also, that
your commerce will somewhat be diminished. However, suppose you should prove
victorious -- ^n what condition will you then be? What advantages or what
laurels will you reap from such a conquest?

May not a ministry with the same armies inslave you? -- It may be said you
will cease to pay them; -- but remember the taxes from America, the wealth, and
we may add, the men, and particularly the Roman Catholics of this vast
continent will then be in the power of your enemies -- nor will you have any
reason to expect, that after making slaves of us, many a^^ongst us shall refuse
to assist in reducing you to the same abject state.

Do not treat this as chimerical -- Know that in less than half a century, the
quit-rents reserved to the crown, from the numberless grants of this vast
continent, will pour large streams of wealth into the royal coffers, and if to
this be added the power of taxing America at pleasure, the crown will be
rendered independent on you for supplies, and will possess more treasure than
may be necessary to purchase the remains of liberty in your island -- In a
word, take care you do not fall into the pit that is preparing for us.

10. We believe there is yet much virtue, much justice, and much public spirit
in the English nation -- To that justice we now appeal. You have been told that
we are seditious, impatient of government and desirous of independency. Be
assured that these are not facts but calumnies. -- Permit us to be free as
yourselves, and we shall ever esteem an union with you to be our greatest glory
and our greatest happiness; we ever shall be ready to contribute all in our
power to the wealsare of the empire -- we shall consider your enemies as our
enemies, and your interest as our own.

But if you are determined that your ministers shall wantonly sport with the
rights of mankind, -- If neither the constitution, or the suggestions of
humanity can restrain your hands from shedding human blood in such an impious
cause, we must then tell you, that we never will submit to be hewers of wood
and drawers of water for any ministry or nation in the world.

Place us in the same situation that we were at the close of the last war, and
our former harmony will be restored.

But least the same supineness and the same inattention to our common interest,
which you have for several years shown, should continue, we think it prudent to
anticipate the consequences.

By the destruction of the trade of Boston, the ministry have endeavored to
induce submission to their measures. The like fate may befall us all, we will
endeavor therefore to live without trade, and recur for subsistence to the
sertility and bounty of our native soil, which will afford us all the
necessaries and some of the conveniences of life. -- We have suspended our
importation from Great Britain and Ireland; and in less than a year's time,
unless our grievances should be redressed, shall discontinue our exports to
those kingdoms and the West Indies.

It is with the utmost regret however, that we find ourselves compelled by the
overruling principles of self preservation, to adopt measures detrimental in
their consequences to numbers of our fellow subjects of Great Britain and
Ireland. But we hope, that the magnanimity and justice of the British nation
will furnish a Parliament of such wisdom, independence and public spirit, as
may save the violated rights of the whole empire from the devices of wicked
ministers and evil counselors, whether in or out of office, and thereby
restore that harmony, friendship and paternal affection between all the
inhabitants of his Majesty's kingdoms and territories, so ardently wished for
by every honest and true American.

ADDRESS OF CONGRESS To the INHABITANTS OF THE FROVINCE OF QUEBEC.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW SUBJECTS,
WE, the Delegates of the Colonies of New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay,
Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, the counties of Newcastle, Kent and Sussex on Delaware, Maryland,
Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina, deputed by the inhabitants of the
said colonies, to represent them in a General Congress at Philadelphia, in the
Province of Pennsylvania, to consult together on the best methods to obtain
redress of our afflicting grievances, having accordingly assembled and taken
into our most serious consideration the state of public affairs on this
continent, have thought proper to address your province, as a member therein
deeply interested.

When the fortune of war, after a gallant and glorious resistance, had
incorporated you with the body of English subjects, we rejoiced in the truly
valuable addition, both on our own and your account; expecting, as courage and
generosity are naturally united, our brave enemies would become our hearty
friends, and that the Divine Being would bless to you the dispensations of his
overruling providence, by securing to you and your latest posterity the
inestimable advantages of a free English constitution of government, which it
is the privilege of all English subjects to enjoy.

These hopes were confirmed by the King's proclamation issued in the year 1763,
plighting the public faith for your full enjoyment of those advantages.

Little did we imagine that any succeeding Ministers would so audaciously and
cruelly abuse the royal authority, as to withold from you the fruition of the
irrevocable rights to which you (...) thus justly (...).

But since we have lived to see the unexpected time, when ministers of this
flagitious temper have dared to violate the most sacred compacts and
obligations, and as you were educated under another form of government, have
artfully been kept from discovering the unspeakable worth of that form you are
now undoubtedly entitled to, we esteem it our duty, for the weighty reasons
herein after mentioned, to explain to you some of its most important branches.

2. "In every human society," says the celebrated Marquis Beccaria, "there is
an effort continually tending to confer on one part the height of power and
happiness, and to reduce the other to the extreme of weakness and misery. The
intent of good laws is to oppose this effort, and to diffuse their influence
universally and equally."

Rulers, stimulated by this pernicious "effort," and subjects, animated by the
just "intent of opposing good laws against it," have occasioned that vast
variety of events, that fill the histories of so many nations. All these
histories demonstrate the truth of this simple position, that to live by the
will of one man, or set or men, is the production of misery to all men.

On the solid foundation of this principle, Englishmen reared up the fabric of
their constitution with such a strength, as for ages to defy time, tyranny,
treachery, internal and foreign wars: and, as an illustrious author Mon^esquieu.
of your nation, hereafter mentioned, observes, "They gave the people of their
colonies the form of their own government, and this government carrying
prosperity along with it, they have grown great nations in the forests they
were sent to inhabit."

In this form the first grand right is, that of the people having a share in
their own government, by their representatives, chosen by themselves, and in
consequence of being ruled by laws which they themselves approve, not by edicts
of men over whom they have no control This is a bulwark surrounding and
defending their property, which by their honest cares and labors they have
acquired, so that no portion of it can be legally taken from them, but with
their own full and free consent, when they in their judgment deem it just and
necessary to give them for public services, and precisely direct the easiest,
cheapest, and most equal methods in which they shall be collected.

The influence of this right extends still farther. If money is wanted by
rulers, who have in any manner oppressed the people, they may retain it, until
their grievances are redressed; and thus peaceably procure relief, without
trusting to despised petitions, or disturbing the public tranquillity.

3. The next great right is that of trial by jury. This provides, that neither
life, liberty nor property can be taken from the possessor, until twelve of his
unexceptionable countrymen and peers of his vicinage, who from that
neigbourhood may reasonably be supposed to be acquainted with his character,
and the character of the witnesses, upon a fair trial, and full enquiry face to
face in open court, before us many people as choose to attend, shall pass their
sentence upon oath against him; an oath that cannot injure him, without
injuring their own reputation, and probably their interest also; as the
question may turn on points that, in some degree, concern the general welfare;
and if it does not, their verdict may form a precedent, that on a similar trial
of their own, may militate against them.

Another right relates merely to the liberty of the person. If a subject is
seized and imprisoned, though by order of Government, he may, by virtue of this
right, immediately obtain a writ, termed a Habeas Corpus, from a Judge, whose
sworn duty is to grant it, and thereupon to procure any illegal restraint to be
quickly enquired into and redressed.

A fourth right is, that by holding lands by the tenure of easy rents, and not
by rigorous and oppressive services, frequently forcing the possessors from
their families and their business, to perform what ought to be done, in all
well regulated states, by men hired for the purpose.

The last right we shall mention regards the freedom of the press. The
importance of this consists, besides the advancement of truth, science,
morality, and arts in general, in its diffusion, of liberal sentiments on the
administration of Government, its ready communication of thoughts between
subjects, and its consequential promotion of union among them, whereby
oppressive officers are shamed or intimidated into more honorable and just
modes of conducting affairs.

These are the invaluable rights, that form a considerable part of our mild
system of government; that, sending its equitable energy through all ranks and
classes of men, defends the poor from the rich, the weak from the powerful, the
industrious from the rapacious, the peaceable from the violent, the tenants
from the lords, and all from their superiors.

4. These are the rights, without which a people cannot be free and happy, and
under the protecting and encouraging influence of which, these Colonies have
hitherto so amazingly flourished and increased. These are the rights a
profligate Ministry are now striving, by force of arms, to ravish from ^s, and
which we are, with one mind, resolved never to resign but with our lives.

These are the rights you are entitled to, and ought at this moment in
perfection to exercise. And what is offered to you by the late act of
Parliament in their place? Liberty of conscience in your religion? No. God gave
it to you; and the temporal powers with which you have been and are connected,
(...) stipulated for your enjoyment of it. If laws, divine and human, could
secure it against the despotic caprices of wicked men, it was secured before.
Are the French laws in civil cases restored? It seems so. But observe the
cautious kindness of the Ministers, who pretend to be your benefactors. The
words of the statute are -- that those "laws shall be the rule, until they
shall be varied or altered by any ordinances of the Governor and Council." Is
the "certainty and lenity of the criminal law of England, and its benefits and
advantages," commended in the said statute, and said to "have been sensibly
felt by you," secured to you and your descendants! No. They too are subjected
to arbitrary "alterations" by the Governor and Council; and a power is expressly
reserved of appointing "such Courts of criminal, civil and ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, as shall be thought proper."

Such is the precarious tenure of mere will, by which you hold your lives and
religion. The crown and its Ministers are empowered, as far as they could be by
Parliament, to establish even the Inquisition itself among you. Have you an
Assembly composed of worthy men, elected by yourselves, and in whom you can
conside, to make laws for you, to watch over your welfare, and to direct in
what quantity, and in what manner, your money shall be taken from you? No. The
power of making laws for you is lodged in the Governor and Council, all of them
dependant upon, and removeable at the pleasure of a minister. Besides, another
late statute, made without your consent, has subjected you to the impositions
of Excise, the horror of all free states; they wrest your property from you by
the most odious taxes, and lay open to insolent tax-gatherers, houses the
scenes of domestic peace and comfort, and called the castles of English
subjects, in the books of their laws. And in every act for altering your
government and intended to flatter you, you are not authorized to "assess, levy
or apply any rates and taxes, but for the inferior purposes of making roads,
and erecting and repairing public buildings, or for other local conveniences,
within your respective towns and districts." Why this degrading distinction?
Ought not the property, honestly acquired by Canadians to be held as facred as
that of Englishmen? Have not Canadians sense enough to attend to any other
public affairs, than gathering stones from one place and piling them up in
another? Unhappy people! who are not only injured, but insulted. Nay more! --
With such a superlative contempt of your understanding and spirit has an
insolent Ministry presumed to think of you, our respectable fellow subjects,
according to the information we have received, as firmly to persu^^^ themselves
that your gratitude, for the injuries and insults they have recently offered to
you, will engage you to take up arms, and render yourselves the ridicule and
detestation of the world, by becoming ^ools, in their hands, to assist them in
taking that freedom from us, which they have treacherously denied to you; the
unavoidable consequence of which attempt, if successful, would be the
extinction of all hopes of you or your posterity being ever restored to
freedom: For idiotcy itself cannot believe, that, when their drudgery is
performed, they will treat you with less cruelty than they have us, who are of
the same blood with themselves.

5. What would your countryman, the immortal Montesquieu, have said to such a
plan of domination, as has been framed for you? Hear his words, with an
intenseness of thought suited to the importance of the subject. -- "In a free
state, every man, who is suppoted a free agent, ought to be concerned in his
own government: Therefore the legislative should reside in the whole body of
the people, or their representatives. -- The political liberty of the subjects
is a tranquillity of mind, arising from the opinion each person has of his
safety. In order to have this liberty, it is requisite the government be so
constituted, as that one man need not be afraid of another. When the power of
making laws, and the power of executing them, are united in the same person, or
in the same body of Magistrates, there can be no liberty; because apprehensions
may arise, least the same Monarch or Senate should enact tyrannical laws, to
execute them in a tyrannical manner."

"The power of judging should be exercised by persons taken from the body of
the people, at certain times of the year, and pursuant to a form and manner
prescribed by law. There is no liberty, if the power of judging be not
separated from the legislative and executive powers."

"Military men belong to a profession, which may be useful, but is often
dangerous. -- The enjoyment of liberty and even its support and preservation,
consists in every man^^ being allowed to speak his thoughts, and lay open his
sentiments.

Apply these decisive maxims, sanctified by the authority of a name which all
Europe reveres, to your own state. You have a Governor, it may be urged, vested
with the executive powers of administration. In him, and in your council, is
lodged the power of making laws. You have Judges, who are to decide every cause
affecting your lives, liberty or property. Here is, indeed, an appearance of
the several powers being separated and distributed into different hands, for
checks upon one another; the only effectual mode ever invented by the wit of
men, to promote their freedom and prosperity. But scorning to be i^luded by a
tinsel'd outside, and exerting the natural sagacity of Frenchmen, examine the
specious device, and you will find it, to use an expression of holy writ, "a
painted sepulcher," for burying your lives, liberty and property.

Your Judges, and your Legislative Council, as it is called, are dependant on
your Governor, and he is dependant on the servant of the Crown in Great
Britain. The legislative, executive and judging powers are all moved by the
nods of a Minister. Privileges and immunities last no longer than his smiles.
When he frowns, their feeble forms dissolve. Such a treacherous ingenuity has
been exerted in drawing up the code lately offered you, that every sentence,
beginning with a benevolent pretension, concludes with a dectructive power; and
the substance of the whole, divested of its smooth words, is -- that the crown
and its Minister shall be as absolute throughout your extended province, as the
despots of Asia or Africa. What can protect your property from taxing edicts,
and the rapacity of necessitous and cruel masters? your persons from Lettres de
Cachet, goals, dungeons, and oppressive services? your li^es and general
liberty from arbitrary and unfeeling rulers? We defy you to cast your view upon
every side, to discern a single circumstance, promising from any quarter the
faintest hope of liberty to you or posterity, but from an entire adoption into
the un^on of these Colonies.

6. What advice would the truly great man before mentioned that advocate of
freedom and humanity, give you, were he now living, and knew that we, your
numerous and powerful neighbors, animated by a just love of our in^^^ed
rights, and united by the indissoluble bands of affection and interest, called
upon you, by every obligation of regard for your selves and your children, as
we now do, to join us in our righteous contest, to make common cause with us
therein, and take a noble chance of emerging from a humiliating subjection
under governors, intendants, and military tyrants, into the firm rank and
condition of English freemen, whose custom it is, derived from their ancestors,
to make those tremble, who dare to think of making them miserable?"

Would not this be the purport of his address? "Seize the opportunity presented
to you by providence itself. You have been conquered into liberty, if you act
as you ought. This work is not of man. You are a small people, compared with
those who with open arms invite you into fellowship. A moment's reflection
should convince you which will be most for your interest and happiness, to have
all the rest of North America your unalterable friends, or your inveterate
enemies. The injuries of Boston have roused and anociated every colony from
Nova Scotia to Georgia. Your province is the only link wanting to complete the
bridge and strong chain of union. Nature has joined your country to theirs. Do
you join your political interests. For their own sakes they never will desert
you. Be assured that the happiness of a people inevitably depends on their
liberty, and their spirit to assert it. The value and extent of the advantages
tendered to you are immense. Heaven grant you may not discover them to be
blessings after they have bid you an eternal adieu."

7 We are too well acquainted with the liberty of sentiment, distinguishing
your nation, to imagine that difference of religion will prejudice you against
a hearty amity with us. You know that the transcendant nature of freedom
elevates those who unite in her cause, above all such low minded infirmities.
The Swiss Cantons furnish a memorable proof of this truth. Their union is
composed of Roman Catholic and Protestant States, living in the utmost concord
and peace with one another, and thereby enabled, ever since they bravely
vindicated their freedom, to defy and defeat every tyrant that has invaded them.

Should there be any among you, as there generally are in all societies, who
prefer the favors of ministers, and their own private interests to the welfare
of their country, the temper of such selfish persons will render them
incredibly active in opposing all public-spirited measures, from an expectation
of being well rewarded for their industry, by their superiors; but we doubt not
you will be upon your guard against such men, and not sacrifice the liberty and
happiness of the whole Canadian people and their posterity, to gratify the
avarice and ambition of individuals.

We do not ask you, by this address, to commence acts of hostility against the
government of our common Sovereign. We only invite you to consult your own
glory and welfare, and not to suffer yourselves to be inveigled or intimidated
by infamous Ministers so far, as to become the instruments of their cruelty and
despotism, but to unite with us in one social compact, formed on the generous
principles of equal liberty, and cemented by such an exchange of beneficial and
endearing offices as to render it perpetual.

EXTRACT from the AMERICAN CRISIS No. V. Addressed to Sir WILLIAM HOW, by
THOMAS PAIN, Esquire.
WHEN we take a survey of mankind, we cannot help cursing the wretch, who, to
the unavoidable misfortunes of nature shall wilfully add the calamities of war.
One would think there were evils enough in the world without studying to
increase them, and that life is sufficiently short without shaking the sand
that measures it. The histories of Alexander, and Charles of Sweden, are the
histories of human devils; a good man cannot think of their actions without
abhorrence nor of their deaths without rejoicing. To see the bounties of heaven
destroyed, the beautiful face of nature laid wastes, and the choicest works of
creation and art tumbled into ruin, would fetch a curse from the soul of piety
itself. But in this country the aggravation is lengthened by a new combination
of affecting circumstances. America was young, and compared with other
countries was virtuous. None but a Herod of uncommon malice would have made war
upon infancy and innocence; and none but a people of the most finished
fortitude dared, under those circumstances, have resisted the tyranny. The
natives, or their ancestors, had fled from the former oppressions of England
and with the industry of bees had changed a wilderness into a habitable world.
To Britain they were indebted for nothing. The country was the gift of Heaven,
and God alone is their Lord and Sovereign.

The time, Sir, will come when you, in a melancholy hour, shall reckon up your
miseries by your murders in America. Life, with you, begins to wear a clouded
aspect. The vision of pleasurable delusion is wearing away, and changing to the
barren wild of age and sorrow. The poor reflection of having served your king
will yield you no consolation in your parting moments. He will crumble to the
same undistinguished ashes with yourself, and have sins enough of his own to
answer for. It is not the farcical benedictions of a Bishop, nor the cringing
hypocrisy of a court of chaplains, nor the formality of an act of Parliament,
that can change guilt into innocence, or make the punishment one pang the less.
You may, perhaps be unwilling to be serious, but this destruction of the goods
of Providence, this havoc of the human race, and this sowing the world with
mischief, must be accounted for to him who made and governs it. To us they are
only present sufferings but to him they are deep rebellions.

FRAGMENT of an original Letter on the slavery of the Negroes; written in the
year 1776, by THOMAS DAY, Esquire (Lately published in London.)
I am extremely fearful of expressing myself obscurely upon so abstract a
subject, and must therefore, though with the hazard of prolixity, attempt to
place it in a different light. -- If you imagine any number of the human
species assembled in some particular part of the globe, without any form of
government established among them, it is evident, that these individuals may
either live together in such a manner as to produce mutual comfort and
assistance, or may be the cause of continual misery to each other. No
proposition in the mathematics can be investigated with more precision than the
methods of conduct which have these contrary tendencies. Every disposition
which inclines one man to assist another, or to avoid giving him offense, or
doing him an injury, must necessarily contribute to the common welfare; which
would be perfect, were these dispositions cultivated in the greatest possible
degree. On the contrary, every disposition which, either by fraud or violence,
tends to interrupt the personal security of individuals or deprive them of
those things which they have acquired by their industry, is detrimental to the
sum of happiness, and would, if carried to the greatest possible degree,
entirely destroy that part of the species. -- In this view of things, morality
arises from necessity, and comprehends "certain rules of conduct founded upon
the relations which beings endowed with particular faculties bear to each
other; which rules, when properly observed, produce happiness to society; but
when violated or neglected, as necessarily occasion misery, as fire or pointed
substances excite pain, when they act too forcibly upon the nerves."

I hardly think that the greatest skeptic will deny these distinctions, founded
upon facts as certain as the impression of any material substance upon our
senses. If we now proceed a little farther, we shall find that the
dispositions, which produce these different kinds of conduct, are, by the
moralists, expressed by different names, and enforced by different motives,
according to their several systems; while natural religion adds its sanctions,
and inclines us to believe that the Deity himself, who has displayed so great
an attention to the happiness and preservation of his creatures here, may
extend his benevolence to another stage of existence and compensate the evil
sometimes unmeritedly suffered below. But if we admit the evidence of revealed
religion, the scheme of human things is perfect as it is august; the clouds
which overshadowed our horizon are dissipated, and the gradual progress of
triumphant virtue, through dangers and difficulties, to eternal happiness, is
displayed and ascertained.

2. Having laid down these principles, it is easy to apply them to the
particular case in question. Slavery is the absolute dependence of one man upon
another; and is, therefore, as inconsistent with all ideas of justice as
despotism is with the rights of nature. It is a crime so monstrous against the
human species, that all those that practice it deserve to be extirpated from
the earth. It is no little, indirect attack upon the safety and happiness of
our fellow creatures, but one that boldly strikes at the foundation of all
humanity and justice. Robbers invade the property, and murderers, the life of
human beings; but he that holds another man in bondage, subjects the whole sum
of his existence to oppression, bereaves him of every hope, and is, therefore,
more detestable than a robber and assassin combined. But if no one who has
common feeling will commit the outrage, no one who has common sense will
attempt to justify it by argument; since it would involve him in the grossest
and most inextricable contradictions. He must allow that every man has, by
nature, a right to live, yet that every other man has a right to rob him of it;
that every man has an equal right to subsistence, yet that every other may
deprive him of all the means; and that while every individual is justified by
nature and the Deity, in pursuing his own happiness by all innocent methods,
every other individual is equally justified in making him miserable. In short,
it is reducing every thing to the state before described, from which right and
justice are equally excluded.

Of you, sir, who say you have several slaves, I beg leave to ask what are the
rights you claim over them? Is your power circumscribed by no bounds, and are
there particular beings who bring into the world all the rights which you
yourself can pretend to, but have so entirely lost them by being transported
into another country, as to be beyond the protection both of nature and
nature's God?

Surely, sir, unless I am deceived in you, you are a man both of honor and
humanity. You start at the idea of wanton and unprovoked barbarity. You would
not murder a slave to show your dexterity, nor maim him to prove your strength;
you would not dash an insant upon the ground to seed your dogs, even though he
were black; nor would you rip up the belly of his mother while she was suckling
him, to improve your skill in anatomy. You neither would, nor dare you commit
actions like these; you feel that you have no right to do them; or, if you
have, that every other man has an equal and superior right to destroy you like
a beast of prey. What then are your rights? I anticipate your answer: You will
feed and clothe your Negroes, you will treat them with humanity and tenderness,
and then you have a right to a moderate advantage from their labors. All this,
sir, is well; and could I conceive you had ever acted in another manner, I
should never have troubled you with this tedious letter. While your negroes
choose to stay with you upon these terms, this is a fair and equitable compact.
But what if they should choose to leave you, will you let them go? if you do,
you are a man of honor, sense, and humanity; but I fear no West-Indian.

Are there no whips, no gibbets, no punishments more dreadful than death itself
for contumacious slaves? And what is this but claiming the detestable power I
have mentioned above, that of making other beings miserable, for your interest
or amusement? Who, Sir, gave you a title to their labors, or a right to
confine them to loathsome drudgery? and if you have no right to this, what are
the punishments you pretend to inflict, but so many additional outrages? Has a
robber a claim upon your life because you withhold your property; or a ravisher
to a woman's blood, because she defends her chastity! Either then prove your
right to their labors, or acknowledge that the punishments inslicted upon
fugitive slaves are a flagitious insult upon justice, humanity and common sense.

3. Permit me, here, to examine for a moment the nature of the title by which
you claim an irredeemable property in the labors of your fellow creatures. --
A wretch, devoid of compassion and understanding, who calls himself a king of
some part of Africa, which suffers the calamity of being frequented by the
Europeans, seizes his innocent subjects or engages in an unnecessary war to
furnish himself with prisoners; these are loaded with chains, torn from all
their comforts and connections, and driven (like beasts to the slaughter house)
down to the sea shore, where the mild subjects of a Christian government and a
religious king are waiting to agree for the purchase, and to transport them to
America. They are then thrust by hundreds into an infectious hold of a ship, in
which the greatest part frequently perish by disease, while the rest are
reserved to experience the candor and humanity of American patriots -- If you
have never yet considered it, pause here for a moment, and endeavor to impress
upon your minds the feelings of a being full as sensible, and perhaps more
innocent than you or I, which is thus torn in an instant from every thing that
makes life agreeable; from country, friends and parents; from the intercourse
of mutual affection with mistress, lover or child; which, possessed of feelings
more exquisite than European hearts can conceive, is separated forever from all
it loves; that reduced to a depth of misery, which even in the midst of freedom
and affluence, would be sufficient to overwhelm the most hardened disposition,
instead of friends and comforters, and obsequions attendants, fees itself
surrounded with unrelenting persecutors and unpitying enemies; wretches who by
long intercourse with misery, are grown callous to its agonies; who answer
tears with taunts, and complaints with torture! I shudder at the horrors which
describe, and blush to be a human creature! Yet these are not the colors of
description, but a recital of facts less strong than the reality. Can any man
reflect upon these things, without unutterable ^emorse? Can he know that,
perhaps, while he is wallowing in luxury and sensuality, there are beings whose
existence he has imbittered, mothers shrieking for their children, and children
perishing for want of their mothers; wretches who are frantic with rage shame
and desperation, or pitting in all the agonies of slow and painful death, who
might have been at peace if he had never existed? Can any man know this and
hope for mercy, either from his fellow creatures or his God? After the arrival
of the surviving wretches in America, you well know in what manner they are
transferred to their conscientious master, -- how they are brought to the
market (...) weeping and in chains -- how one man (...) his fellow creatures as
he would ^o beasts, and bargain for their persons -- how all the most (...)
duties, affections, and feelings of the human heart, are violated and insulted;
and thus you dare to call yourselves the masters of wretches whom you have
acquired by fraud, and retain by violence! While I am tracing this practice,
which you and every man who has been in the islands or the southern colonies of
America, know to be true, my astonishment exceeds even my horror, to find it
possible that any one man should seriously doubt whether an equitable title to
hold human beings in bondage can be thus acquired.

With what face, Sir, can he who has never respected the rights of nature in
another, pretend to claim them in his own favor? How dare the inhabitants of
the southern colonies speak of privileges and justice? Is money of so much more
importance than life? Or have the Americans shared the dispensing power of St.
Peter's successors, to excuse their own observance of those rules which they
impose upon others? If there is an object truly ridiculous in nature, it is an
American patriot, signing resolutions of independency with the one hand, and
with the other, brandishing a whip over his affrighted slaves.

4. If men would be consistent, they must admit all the consequences of their
own principles; and you and your countrymen are reduced to the dilemma of
either acknowledging the rights of you Negroes, or of surrendering your own. --
If there be certain natural and universal rights, as the declarations of your
Congress so repeatedly affirm, I wonder how the unfortunate Africans have
in^^^rred their f^^feiture. -- Is it the antiquity, or the virtues, or the
great qualities of the English Americans, which constitutes the difference, and
entitles them to rights from which they totally exclude more than a fourth part
of the species? -- Or do you choose to make use of that argument, which the
great Montesquieu has thrown out as the severest ridicule, that they are black
and you white; that you have lank, long hair, while theirs is short and woolly?

The more attentively you consider this subject, the more clearly you will
perceive, that every plea, which can be advanced upon it, is the plea of
interest and tyranny combating humanity and truth. You cannot hide from your
self, that every title you can allege must be a title founded upon fraud or
violence, and supported by open and avowed injustice, that a man who is born
free can never forfeit his inheritance by suffering oppression; and that it is
a contradiction to urge a purchase of what no one has a right to sell? Nor does
it make any difference whether the unfortunate victims pass from one to
another, or from one to a thousand masters, any more than whether a nation be
enslaved by a first, or by hundredth tyrant. There can be no prescription
against truth and justice; and the continuance of the evil is so far from
justifying, that it is an exaggeration of the crime. What would you say to a
man in private life, who should pretend to be no thief, because he only bought
stolen goods; or that he was no villain, because he did not forge a deed
himself, but only paid another to do it, and enjoyed the estate by that
honorable security? Yet this is literally the title which the Americans plead
to the unfortunate inhabitants of Africa. You do not go to Africa to buy or
steal your Negroes; perhaps, because you are too lazy and luxurious: but you
encourage an infamous pitiless, race of men to do it for you, and
conscientiously receive the fruits of their crimes. You do not, merciful men,
reduce your fellow creatures to servitude! No, men of your independent spirits,
that have taken up arms against the government that had protected and
established them, rather than pay a tax of threepence; that have laid the axe
to the root of all human authority, and instead of drinking the bitter waters
of civil abuses and prescriptive obedience, have ascended to the living
fountains of truth, justice and nature, would never make flagitious attempts
upon the liberties and happiness of their brethren! Yes, gentlemen, men of
liberal minds like yours, acknowledge all mankind to be their equals. -- Leave
hereditary tyrants and their flatterers to make distinctions unknown to nature,
and to degrade one part of the species to brutes, while they equal the other
with gods! -- You know that this is the greatest of all corruptions, and as
such you detest it. -- What! are not all men naturally equal? And are not all
civil distinctions, when legitimate, the permission of the people, and
consequently subordinate to their power and control? Did you not carry the
rights of men into the uncultivated desert and the howling wilderness? Not of
Frenchmen, nor of Germans, nor of Englishmen, but of men; -- men, the first and
supreme distinction, who, created for freedom and happiness, transport to every
soil the inherent prerogatives of their nature.

Yes, gentlemen, as you are no longer Englishmen, I hope you will please to be
men; and, as such, admit the whole human species to a participation of your
unalienable rights. You will not, therefore, drag a trembling wretch from his
cotage and his family; you will not tear the child from the arms of his frantic
mother, that they may drag on a loathsome existence in misery and chains; you
will not make depredations upon your unoffending neighbors, and after having
spread desolation over a fertile country, reduce the innocent inhabitants to
servitude. To do this, you must be monsters, worse, I fear, than a majority of
the House of Commons and the English Ministry. -- But you are men tremblingly
alive to all the rights and feelings of the kind, and I believe some of you at
lest are Christians. Your worst actions therefore, the greatest crimes which
even your enemies can object, are only that you are the voluntary causes of
those mischiefs? -- You encourage the English pirate to violate the laws of
faith and hospitality, and stimulate him to new excesses by purchasing the
fruits of his rapine -- Your avarice is the torch of treachery and civil war,
which desolates the shores of Africa and shakes destruction on half the
majestic species of man.

THE END.

