THE ADVENTURES OF Colonel DANIEL BOON, One of the first Settlers at KENTUCKE:
CONTAINING The Wars with the Indians on the Ohio, from 1769 to 1783, and the
first Establishment and Progress of the Settlement on that River.

Written by the Colonel himself.

TO WHICH ARE ADDED A NARRATIVE OF THE CAPTIVITY, AND (...) ESCAPE OF MRS.
FRANCIS SCOTT. An Inhabitant of Washington-County Virginia; who after the
Murder of her Husband and children, by the Indians, was taken Prisoner by them;
on the 29 of June, 1785.

NORWICH: PRINTED BY JOHN TRUMBULL. M, DCC, LXXXVI.

THE ADVENTURES, OF COL. DANIEL BOON.
IT was on the first of May 1769, that I resigned my domestic happiness, and
left my family and peaceable habitation on the Yadkin River, in North Carolina,
to wander through the wilderness of America, in quest of the country of
Kentucke, in company with John Finlay, John Stuart, Joseph Molden, James Monay,
and William Cool.

On the 7th day of June, after traveling in a westtern direction, we found
ourselves an Red River, where John Finaly had formerly been trading with the
Indians, and from the top of an eminence, few with pleasure the beautiful level
of Kentucke. For some time we had experienced the most uncomfortable weather.
We now encamped, made a shelter to defend us from the inclement season, and
began to hunt and reconnoitre the country. We found abundance of wild beasts in
this vast forest. The buffaloes were more numerous than cattle on other
settlements, browzing on the leaves of the cane, or crossing the herbage on
those extensive plains, we saw hundreds in a drove, and the numbers about the
salt springs were amazing. In this forest the habitation of beasts of every
American kind, we hunted with great success until December.

On the 22d of December John Stuart and I had a pleasant Ramble; but fortune
changed the day at the close of it. We had passed through a great forest, in
which stood myriads of trees, some gay with blossoms, other rich with fruits.
Nature was here a series of wonders and a fund of delight. Here she displayed
her ingenuity and industry in a variety of flowers and fruits, beautifully
colored, elegantly shaped, and charmingly flavoured; and we were diverted with
numberless animals presenting themselves perpetually to our view. In the
decline of the day, near Kentucke river, as we ascended the brow of a small
hill, a number of Indians rushed out of a thick cane brake, and made us
prisoners. The Indians plundered us, and kept us in confinement seven days.
During this we discovered no uneasiness or desire to escape, which made them
less suspicious: but in the dead of the night, as we lay by a large fire, in a
thick cane brake, when sleep had locked up their senses, my situation not
disposing me to rest, I gently awoke my companion. We seized this favorable
opportunity and departed, directing our course toward our old camp, but found
it plundered and our people dispersed or gone home.

About this time my brother, Squire Boon, with another adventurer, who came to
explore the country shortly after us, was wandering through the forest, and
accidentally found our camp. Notwithstanding our unfortunate circumstances, and
our dangerous situation surrounded with hostile savages, our meeting
fortunately in the wilderness, gave us the most sensible satisfaction.

Soon after this my companion in captivity, John Stewart was killed by the
savages, and the man that came with my brother returned home by himself. We
were then in a dangerous helpless situation, exposed daily to perils and death,
among savages and wild beasts, not a white man in the country but ourselves.

Thus many hundred miles from our families in the howling wilderness, we did
not continue in a state of indolence, but hunted every day, and prepared a
little cottage to defend us from the winter storms. We met with no disturbance
during the winter. On the 1st of May 1770, my brother returned home by himself
for a new recruit of horses and ammunition, leaving me alone, without bread,
salt, or sugar, or even a horse or a dog, I passed a few days uncomfortably.
The idea of a beloved wife and family, and their anxiety on my account, would
have disposed me to melancholy, if I had further indulged the thought.

One day I undertook a tour through the country, when the diversity and
beauties of nature I met with in this charming season, expelled every gloomy
thought. Just at the close of the day, the gentle gales ceased; a profound calm
ensued; not a breath shook the tremulous leaf. I had gained the summit of a
commanding ridge, and looking round with astonishing delight, beheld the ample
plains and beauteous tracts below. On one hand I surveyed the famous Ohio
rolling in silent dignity, and marking the western bounds of Kentucke with
inconceivable grandeur. At a vast distance I beheld the mountains lift their
venerable brows and penetrate the clouds. All things were still. I kindled a
fire near a fountain of sweet water, and feasted on the loin of a buck, which a
few hours before I had killed. The shades of night soon overspread the
hemisphere, and the earth seem to gasp after the hovering moisture. My
excursion had fatigued my body, and amused my mind. I laid me down to sleep and
awoke not until the sun had chased away the night. I continued this tour, and
in a few days explored a considerable part of the country, each day equally
pleased as the first; after which I returned to my old camp, which had not been
disturbed in my absence I did not confine my lodgings to it, but often reposed
in thick cane brakes to avoid the savages, who I believe, often visited my
camp, but fortunately for me in my absence. No populous city with all the
varieties of commerce and stately structures, could afford such pleasure to my
mind, as the beauties of nature I found in this country.

Until the 27th of July I spent the time in an uninterrupted scene of sylvan
pleasures, when my brother to my great felicity, met me according to
appointment, at our old camp. Soon after we left the place, and proceeded to
Cumberland River, reconnoitring that part of the country, and giving names to
the different rivers.

In March 1771 I returned home to my family, being determined to bring them as
soon as possible at the risk of my life and fortune, to reside in Kentucke,
which I esteemed a second paradise.

On my return I found my family in happy circumstances. I sold my farm on the
Yadkin, and what goods we could not carry with us; and

On the 25th of September 1773, we bade farewell to our friends and proceeded on
our journey to Kentucke, in company with five more families, and forty men that
joined us in Powell's Valley, which is one hundred and fifty miles from the now
settled parts of Kentucke; but this promising beginning was soon overcast with
a cloud of adversity.

On the 10th of October the rear of our company was ^^^^ked by a number of
Indians; who killed six, and wounded one man. Of these my ^^dest son was one
that fell in the action. Though we repulsed the enemy, yet this unhappy affair
scattered our cattle, brought us into extreme difficulty, and so discouraged
the whole company, that we retreated forty miles to the settlement on the
Clench river. We had passed over two mountains Powell's and Walden's, and were
approaching Cumberland mountain, when this adverse fortune overtook us. These
mountains are in the wilderness, in passing from the old settlements in
Virginia to Kentucke, are ranged in a southwest and northeast direction, are of
great length and breadth, and not far distant from each other. Over them nature
has formed passes less difficult than might be expected from the view of such
huge piles, The aspect of these cliffs are so wild and ho^^^d, that is
impossible to behold them without terror.

Until the 6th of June 1774, I remained with my family on the Clinch, when I
and Michael S^oner were solicited by Governor Dunmore of Virginia, to conduct a
number of surveyors to the falls of the Ohio. This was a tour of 800 miles, and
look us sixty-two days.

On my return, Govornor Dunmore gave me the command of three garrisons, during
the campaign against the Shawnese.

In March 1775, at the solicitation of a number of gentlemen of North Carolina,
I attended their treaty at Wataga, with the Cherokee Indians, to purchase the
lands on the south side of Kentucke river. After this I undertook to mark out a
road in the best passage from the settlements through the wilderness to
Kentucke.

Having collected a number of enterprizing men well armed, I soon begun this
work, we proceeded until we came within fifteen miles of where Boonsborough now
stands, where the Indians attacked us, and killed two and wounded two more.

This was the 2d of March 1775. Three days after they attacked us again, we had
two killed and three wounded. After this we proceeded on to Kentucke river
without opposition.

On the first of April we began to erect the sort of Boonsborough, at a salt
lick 60 yards from the river on the south side.

On the 4th they killed one of our men.

On the 14th of June having finished the fort, I returned to my family on the
Clinch. Soon after I removed my family to this fort; we arrived safe; my wife
and daughter being the first white women that stood on the banks of Kentucke
river.

December the 24th. the Indians killed one man and wounded another, seeming
determined to persecute us for erecting this fort.

July 14th 1776. Two of Colonel Calaway's daughters, and one of mine, were
taken prisoners near the fort. I immediately pursued the Indians, with only
eight men.

On the 16th I overtook them, killed two of them* and recovered the girls.

The Indians had divided themselves into several parties and attacked on the
same day all our settlements and forts, doing a great deal of mischief. The
husbandmen were shot down in the field, and most of the cattle were destroyed.
They continued their hostilities until

The 15th of April 1777, when a party of 100 of them attacked Boonsborough, and
killed one man, and wounded four.

July 4th they attacked it again with 250 men, and killed us one, and wounded
two. They remained 48 hours, during which we killed seven of them. All the
settlements were attacked at the same time.

July 19th. Colonel Logan's fort was besieged by 200 Indians; they did much
mischief; there were only fifteen men in the fort; they killed two and wounded
one of them. Indians loss unknown.

July 25. Twenty five men came from Carolina. About

August 20th, Colonel Bowman arrived with 100 men from Virginia. Now we began
to strengthen and had skirmishes with the Indians almost every day.

The savages now learned the superiority of the LONG KNIFE, as they call the
Virginians; being out-generaled in almost every battle. Our affairs began to
wear a new aspect; the enemy did not now venture open war, but practiced secret
mischief.

January 1, 1778. I went with thirty men to the Blue Licks on Licking River, to
make salt for the different garrisons.

February 7th. Hunting by myself to procure meat for the company, I met a party
of 102 Indians, and two Frenchmen marching against Boonsborough. They pursued
and took me; and the next day I capitulated for my men, knowing they could not
escape. They were 27 in number, three having gone home with salt. The Indians
according to the capitulation used us generously. They carried us to Old
Chelicothe, the principal Indian town on Little Miami.

On the 18th of February we arrived there, after an uncomfortable journey in
very severe weather.

On the 10th of March I and ten of my men were conducted to Detroit.

On the 30th we arrived there, and were treated by Governor Hamilton, the
British commander at the post, with great humanity.

The Indians had such an affection for me, that they refused 100l. sterling
offered them by the Governor, if they would leave me with the others, on
purpose that he might send me home on parole. Several English gentlemen there,
sensible of my adverse fortune, and touched with sympathy, generously offered
to supply my wants, which I declined with many thanks, adding that I never
expected it would be it my power to recompense such unmerited generosity. The
Indians left my men in captivity with the British at Detroit.

On the 10th of April they brought me toward Old Chelicothe, where we arrived
on the twenty-fifth day of the same month. This was a long and very fatiguing
march, through an exceeding fertile country, remarkable for fine springs and
streams of water. At Chelicothe I spent my time as comfortably as I could
expect; was adopted according to their custom, into a family, where I became a
son, and had a great share in the affection of my new parents, brothers,
sisters, and friends. I was exceedingly familiar and easy with them, always
appearing as cheerful and satisfied as possible and they put great confidence
in me. I often went a hunting with them, and frequently gained their applause
for my activity at our shooting matches.

I was careful not to exceed many of them in shooting; for no people are more
envious than they in this sport. I could observe in their countenances and
gestures the greatest expressions of joy when they exceeded me, and, when the
reverse happened of envy. The Shawnese king took great notice of me, and
treated me with profound respect, and entire friendship, often entrusting me to
hunt at my liberty. I frequently returned with the spoils of the woods, and as
often presented some of what I had taken to him, expressive of my duty to my
sovereign. My food and lodging was, in common with them, not so good indeed as
I could desire, but necessity made every thing acceptable.

I now began to meditate an escape, but carefully avoided giving suspicion.

Until the first day of June, I continued at old Chelicothe, and was then taken
to the salt springs on Sciotha, and kept there ten days making salt. During
this time I hunted with them, and found the land, for a great extent about this
river, to exceed the soil of Kentucke if possible, and remarkably well watered.

On my return to Chelicothe 450 of the choicest Indian warriors were ready to
march against Boonsborough, painted and armed in a fearful manner. This alarmed
me and I determined to escape.

On the 16th of June before sunrise, I went off secretly, and reached
Boonsborough on the 20th, a journey of 160 miles during which I had only one
meal, I found our fortress in a bad state, but we immediately repaired our
flanks, gates, posterns, and formed double bastions, which we completed in ten
days. One of my fellow prisoners escaping after me, brought advice that on
account of my flight, the Indians had put off their expedition for three weeks.

About August 1st I set out with 19 men to surprise Point Creek Town on
Sciotha. Within four miles we fell in with 40 Indians going against
Boonsborough. We fought and the enemy gave way, we suffered no loss. The enemy
had one killed and two wounded. We took three horses and all their baggage. The
Indians having evacuated their town and gone altogether against Boonsborough we
returned passed them on the sixth day, and on the seventh arrived safe at
Boonsborough.

On the 8th the Indian army 444 in number, commanded by Capt. Duquesne and
eleven other Frenchmen and their own chiefs, came and summoned the fort. I
requested two days consideration which was granted. During this we brought in
through the posterns all the horses and other cattle we could collect.

On the 9th in the evening, I informed their commander, that we were determined
to defend the fort while a man was living. They then proposed a treaty, and
said if we sent out nine men to ratify it, they would withdraw. The treaty was
held within sixty yards of the fort, as we suspected the savages. The articles
were agreed to and signed; when the Indians told us, it was their custom for
two Indians to shake hands with every white man in the treaty as an evidence of
friendship. We agreed to this also. They immediately grappled us to take us
prisoners, but we cleared ourselves of them, though surrounded by hundreds and
gained the fort safe, except one that was wounded by a heavy fire from their
army. On this they began to undermine the fort, beginning at the water mark of
Kentucke river, which is 60 yards from the fort. We discovered this by the
water being made muddy by the clay, and countermined them by cutting a trench
across their subterranean passage. The enemy discovering this by the clay we
threw out of the fort, desisted.

On the 20th of August they raised the siege.

During this dreadful siege, we had two men killed, and four wounded. We lost a
number of cattle. We killed 37 of the enemy, and wounded a great number. We
picked up 125 lb. of their bullets, besides what stuck in the logs of the fort.

Soon after this I went into the settlement, and nothing worthy of notice
passed for some time.

In July 1779, during my absence, Col. Bowman with 160 men, went against the
Shawnese of Old Chilicothe. He arrived undiscovered, a battle ensued, which
lasted until ten in the morning, when Colonel Bowman retreated 30 miles. The
Indians collected all their strength and pursued him, when another engagement
ensued for two hours, not to Col. Bowman's advantage. Col. Harrod proposed to
mount a number of horse and brake the enemy's line; who at this time fought
with remarkable fury. This desperate measure had a happy effect, and the
savages fled on all sides. In these two battles we had nine men killed and one
wounded. Enemy's loss uncertain, only two scalps being taken.

June 22d 1780, 600 Indians and Canadians under Col. Bird, attacked Riddles and
Martain's station, and the Forks of Licking River with six pieces of artillery;
they took all the inhabitants captives, and killed one man and two women,
loaded the others with the heavy baggage, and such as failed in the journey
were tomahawked.

The hostile disposition of the savages caused General Clark, the commandant at
the falls of Ohio, to march with his regiment and the armed force of the
country against Peccaway, the principal town of the Shawanese, on a brach of
the Great Niami, which he finished with great success took seventeen scalps,
and burned the town to ashes, with the loss of seventeen men.

About this time I returned to Kentucke with my family; for during my
captivity, my wife, thinking me killed by the Indians, had transported my
family and goods on horses through the wilderness, amidst many dangers to her
father;s house in North Carolina. The History of my difficulties in going and
returning is too long to be inserted here.

On the 6th of October 1780, soon after my settling again at Boonsborough, I
went with my brother to the Blue Licks and on our return he was shot by a party
of Indians, they followed me by scent of a dog, which I shot and escaped.

The severity of the winter caused great distress in Kentucke the enemy during
the summer having destroyed most of the corn. The inhabitants lived chiefly on
Buffaloe's flesh.

In spring 1782, the Indians harrassed us.

In May they killed one at Ashton's station, and took a Negro. Capt. Ashton
pursued them with 25 men, and in an engagement which lasted two hours, his
party were obliged to retreat, having 8 killed, 4 mortally wounded; their brave
commander fell in this action.

August 10th, two boys were carried off from Major Hoy's station, Captain
Holder pursued with 17 men, they were also defeated, and lost 4 and 1 wounded.

Our affairs became more and more alarming. The savages infested the country,
killing men at every opportunity.

In a field near Lexington, an Indian shot a man, and running to scalp him, was
himself shot from the fort and fell dead upon his enemy.

All the indian nations were now united against us.

August 15th* five hundred Indians and Canadians came against Briat's station 5
miles from Lexington, they assaulted the fort, killed all the cattle round it;
but being repulsed they retired the third day, having about 30 killed their
wounded uncertain. The garrison had 4 killed and 3 wounded.

August 18th, Col. Todd, Col. Trigg, Major Harland, and myself, speedily
collected one hundred and seventy-six men well armed and pursued the savages.
They had marchad beyond the Blue Licks to a remarkable bend of the main fork of
Licking River, about 43 miles from Lexington, where we overtook them on the
19th.

The savages observing us, gave way, and we, ignorant of their numbers, passed
the river. When they saw our proceedings having greatly the advantage in
situation, they formed their line of battle from one end of the Licking to the
other, aboat a mile from the Blue Licks. The battle was exceeding fierce for
about 15 minutes, when we being overpowered by numbers, were obliged to
retreat, with the loss of 67 men 7 of whom were taken prisoners. The brave and
much lamented Colonels Todd and Trigg, Major Harland and my second son, were
among the dead. We were afterward told that the Indians, on numbering their
dead, finding they had four more killed than we, four of our people they had
taken, were given up to their young warriors, to be put to death after their
barbarous manner.

On our retreat we were met by Col. Logan, who was hastening to join us, with a
number of well armed men. This powerful assistance we wanted on the day of
battle. The enemy said one more fire from us would have made them give way.

I cannot reflect upon this dreadful scene, but sorrow fills my heart. A zeal
for the defense of their country led these heroes to the scene of action,
though with a few men to attack a powerful army of experienced warriors. When
we gave way, they pursued us with the utmost eagerness, and in every quarter
spread destruction. The river was difficult to cross, and many were killed in
the flight, some just entering the river, some in the water, others after
crossing in ascending the cliffs. Some escaped on horseback, a few on foot; and
being dispersed every where in a few hours, brought the melancholy news of this
unfortunate battle to Lexington. Many widows were now made. The reader may
guess what sorrow filled the hearts of the inhabitants, exceeding any thing I
am able to describe. Being reinforced, we returned to bury the dead, and found
their bodies strewed every where, cut and mangled in a dreadful manner. This
mournful scene exhibited a horror almost unparalled; some torn and eaten by
wild beasts; those in the river eaten by fishes; all in such a putrid condition
that no one could be distinguished from another.

When General Clark at the Falls of Ohio, heard of our disaster, he ordered an
expedition to pursue the savages, we overtook them within two miles of their
towns, and we should have obtained a great victory, had not some of them met us
when about two hundred poles from their camp. The savages fled in the utmost
disorder, and evacuated all their towns. We burned to ashes Old Chelicothe,
Peccaway, New Chelicothe, Wills Town, and Chelicothe; entirely destroyed their
corn and other fruits; and spread desolation through their country. We took 7
prisoners, and 5 scalps, and lost only 4 men, 2 of whom were accidentally
killed by ourselves.

This campaign damped the enemy, yet they made secret incursions.

In October a party attacked Crap Orchard, and one of them being a good way
before the others, boldly entered a house, in which were only a woman and her
children and a negro man. The savage used no violence, but attempted to carry
off the negro, who happily proved too strong for him, and threw him on the
ground, and in the struggle the woman cut of his head with an axe -- whilst her
little daughter shut the door. The savages instantly came up and applied their
tomahawks to the door, when the mother putting an old rusty gun barrel through
a crevice, the savages immediately went off.

From that time until the happy return of peace between the United States and
Great Britain, the Indians did us no mischief.

Soon after this the Indians desired peace.

Two darling sons, and a brother I have lost by savage hands, which have also
taken from me 40 valuable horses and abundance of cattle. Many dark and
sleepless nights have I spent, separated from the cheerful society of men,
scorched by the summer's sun, and pinched by the winter's cold, an instrument
ordained to settle the wilderness. -- But now the scene is changed: Peace
crowns the sylvan shade.

DANIEL BOON.
Fayette County, Kentucke,
THE END OF Col. DANIEL BOON's ADVENTURES.
A NARRATIVE of the Captivity and Escape of Mrs. Francis Scott, an Inhabitant
of Washington County, Virginia.
ON Wednesday the 29th day of June, 1785, late in the evening, a large company
of armed men passed the house, on their way to Kentucky; some part of whom
encamped within two miles. Mr. Scott living on a frontier part, generally made
the family watchful; but on this calamitous day, after so large a body of men
had passed, shortly after night, he lay down in his bed, and imprudently left
one of the doors of his house open; the children were also in bed, and asleep.
Mrs. Scott was nearly undressed, when, to her unutterable astonishment and
horror, she saw rushing in through the door that was lest open, painted
savages with presented arms, raising a hideous shriek -- Mr. Scott being awake,
instantly jumped out of his bed, but was immediately fired at: he forced his
way through the middle of the enemy and got out of the door, but fell a few paces
from thence. An Indian seized Mrs. Scott, and ordered her to a particular spot
and not to move; others stabbed and cut the throats of the three youngest
children in their bed, and afterward lifted them up and dashed them down on
the floor, near the mother; the oldest, a beautiful girl of eight years old,
awoke and escaped out of the bed, and ran to her parent, and, with the most
plaintive accents, cried, "O mama! mama! save me" -- the mother, in the deepest
anguish of spirit, and with a flood of tears, entreated the savages to spare
her child; but, with a brutal fierceness, they tomahawked and stabbed her in
the mother's arms. Adjacent to Mr. Scott's dwelling house, another family
lived, of the name of Ball. The Indians also attacked them at the same instant
they did Mr. Scott's; but the door being shut, the enemy fired into the house
through an opening between two logs, and killed a young lad, and then essayed
to force the door open; but a surviving brother fired through the door, and the
enemy desisted, and went off; the remaining part of the family ran out of the
house and escaped. In Mr. Scott's house were four good rifles well loaded, and
a good deal of clothing and furniture, part of which belonged to people that
had left it on their way to Kentucky. The Indians loaded themselves with the
plunder, being 13 in number, then speedily made off, and continued traveling
all night; next morning their chief allotted to each man his share, and
detached nine of the party to steal horses from the inhabitants on Clinch. --

The eleventh day after Mrs. Scott's captivity, the four Indians that had her
in charge stopped at a place of rendezvous, and to hunt, being now in great
want of provisions. Three went out, and the chief, being an old man, was left
to take care of the prisoner, who, by this time, expressed a willingness to
proceed to the Indian towns, which seemed to have the desired effect of
lessening her keeper's vigilance. In the day time, as the old man was graining
a deer-skin, the captive, pondering on her situation, and anxiously looking for
an opportunity to make her escape, took the resolution, and going to the Indian
carelessly, asked liberty to go a small distance to a stream of water, to wash
the blood off her apron, that had remained besmeared since the fatal night of
the murder of her little daughter. He said to her in the English tongue, "go
along;" she then passed by him, his face being in a contrary direction from
that she was going, and he very busy. She, after getting to the water,
proceeded on without delay, made to a high barren mountain, and traveled until
late in the evening, when she came down to the valley, in search of the track
she had been taken along; hoping thereby to find the way back, without the risk
of being lost, and perishing with hunger in uninhabited parts. On coming across
the valley to the river side, supposed to be the easterly branch of Kentucky
river, she observed in the sand, tracks of two men, that had gone up the river,
and had just returned. -- She concluded these to have been her pursuers, which
excited emotions of gratitude and thankfulness to divine providence for so
timeous a deliverance. Being without any provisions, having no kind of weapon
or tool to assist her in getting any, and being almost destitute of clothing,
also knowing that a vast tract of rugged high mountains intervened, between
where she was and the inhabitants eastwardly, and that distance of the Kentucky
settlements unknown, and she almost as ignorant as a child of the method of
steering through the woods, excited painful sensations. -- But certain death,
either by hunger or wild beasts, seemed preferable rather than to be in the
power of beings who had excited in her mind such horror. She addressed heaven
for protection, and taking courage, proceeded onward. After traveling three
days, she had nearly met with the Indians, as she supposed, that had been sent
to Clinch to steal horses, but providentially hearing their approach, concealed
herself among the cane, until the enemy had passed. This giving a fresh alarm,
and her mind being filled with consternation, she got lost, proceeding
backwards and forwards for several days: at length she came to a river, that
seemed to come from the east; concluding it was Sandy river, she accordingly
resolved to trace it to its source, which is adjacent to the Clinch settlement.
After proceeding up the same several days, she came to where the river runs
through the great Laural mountain, where is a prodigious water-fall, and
numerous high craggy clifts along the water edge; that way seemed impassable,
the mountain steep and difficult: However, our mournful traveller concluded
that the latter way was the best. She therefore ascended for some time, but
coming to a range of inaccessible rocks, she turned her course toward the foot
of the mountain and the river side; after getting into a deep gulley, and
passing over several high steep rocks, she reached the river side, where, to
her inexpressible affliction, she found that a perpendicular rocks, or rather
one that hung over, of 15 or 20 feet high, formed the bank. Here a solemn pause
took place; she essayed to return, but the height of the steep rocks she had
descended over, prevented her. She then returned to the edge of the precipice,
and viewed the bottom of it, as the certain spot to end all her troubles, or
remain on the top to pine away with hunger, or be devoured by wild beasts.
After serious meditation, and devout exercises, she determined on leaping from
the height, and accordingly jumped off. Although the place she had to alight
on, was covered with uneven rocks, not a bone was broken; but, being
exceedingly stunned with the fall, she remained unable to proceed for some
space of time.

The dry season caused the river to be shallow -- she traveled in it, where
she could, by its edge, until she got through the mountain, which she concluded
was several miles. After this, as she was traveling along the bank of the
river, a venomous snake bit her on the ankle: she had strength to kill it, and
knowing its kind, concluded that death must soon overtake her. By this time
Mrs. Scott was reduced to a mere skeleton, with fatigue, hunger and grief;
probably this state of her body was the means of preserving her from the
effects of the poison; be that as it may, so it was, that very little pain
succeeded the bite, and what little swelling there was, fell into her feet. Our
wanderer now left the river, and, after proceeding a good distance, she came to
where the valley parted into two, each leading a different course.

Here a painful suspense again took place; a sorlorn creature, almost
exhausted, and certain, if she was far led out of the way, she would never see
a human creature. During this soliloquy, a beautiful bird passed close by her,
fluttering along the ground, and went out of sight up one of the valleys. This
drew her attention, and whilst considering what it might mean, another bird, of
the same appearance, in like manner fluttered past her, and took the same
valley the other had done. This determined her choice of the way; and, in two
days, which was on the 11th day of August, she reached that settlement on
Clinch, called New-Garden: whereas (she has since been informed by woodsmen)
had she taken the other valley, it would have led her back toward the Ohio.
Mrs. Scott relates, that the Indians told her, that the party was composed of
four different nations, two of whom she thinks they named Delawares and Mingoes.

She further relates, that, during her wandering, from the tenth of July to the
eleventh of August, she had no other subsistence but chewing and swallowing the
juice of young cane stalks, Sassafras leaves, and some other plants she did not
know the name of, that on her journey, she saw Buffaloes, Elks, Deers, and
frequently Bears and Wolves; not one of which offered to do her the least harm.
One day a bear came near her, with a young sawn in his mouth, and, on
discovering her, he dropped his prey and ran off. Hunger prompted her to go and
take the flesh and eat it; but on reflection, she desisted, thinking the bear
might return and devour her; besides she had an aversion to taste raw flesh. --
Mrs. Scott continues in a low state of health, and remains inconsolable for the
loss of her family, particularly bewailing the cruel death of her little
daughter.

FINIS.

