Good fetched out of Evil, IN Three short ESSAYS.

I. A Pastoral Letter, of Mr. JOHN WILLIAMS, The faithful and worthy pastor of
Deerfield; now detained a captive in Canada; written to part of his flock, and
some others, returning out of their captivity.

II. The conduct and constancy of the New English Captives when strongly
tempted unto the Popish Idolatries. And certain plai^ Poems, written by some of
them, to fortify their children against such temptations.

III. An account of most remarkable and memorable deliverances, received by
many of the captives; and great things done by their Almighty deliverer for
them.

Collected and published, That the glorious God may have the glory of his power
and goodness; and that his people may reap some advantage from what has
befallen their brethren.

Printed in the Year M,DCC,LXXXIII.

Good fetched out of Evil.
1. OUR Great REDEEMER, has by his good porvidence entertained and encouraged
his faithful people, with the redemption of many captives, from the hands of
our French and Ind^an enemies. It is infinitely reasonable, that this good
providence of Heaven should be glorified; and a collection, though an imperfect
one, of certain memorables occurring to these children of the captivity, will
afford some great revenues of glory to it; which may be accompanied with
several things, where by the faithful also may be more than a little edified.

2. Our eastern Indians, had no sooner, with all possible assurances, renewed
their league of peace with us, but being moved by the instigation of the
French, they perfidiously and barbarously surprised, seven of our more naked
and secure plantations; and coming at once into the scattered families they
did, on August 10, 11. 1703. reward the hospitable civilities that were shown
them, with the murder of above seventy English people, and the captivity of
near an hundred. Upon this there ensued lesser depredations, and captivations,
as the treacherous enemy found opportunity for them.

About half a year after these calamities thus begun on the eastern parts of
the country, the western had a taste of the same cup given to them. On February
1703. 4. An army consisting, as it was judged, of about four hundred French and
Indians, made a descent upon the little town of Deerfield, the most northernly
settlement on Connecticut river, which had long been a watchful and an useful
barrier for the rest of the plantations in the neighborhood. They surprised
the place, about an hour or two before break of day, and in a little time, not
without loss to themselves, they butchered and captivated above one hundred and
fifty of the people. Mr. John Williams, the worthy minister of that pious and
holy flock, was carried into captivity, with five of his children; two of his
children were slain; and his desirable consort, beginning to faint, at about a
dozen miles of the doleful journey, they the^e, like themselves* cruelly
murdered her, and left her for the funeral which her friends afterward
bestowed on her. Before they reached unto Mont-Real, a journey dispatched by
the parcels now divided, in twenty days, more or less, near twenty more of the
captives lost their lives; for the manner was, that if any found themselves not
able to travel through the deep snow, now on the ground, the savages would
strike their hatches into their heads, and there leave them weltring in their
blood.

3. The condition of the captives, thus fallen into the hands of the enemy, has
furnished us with diverse matters, not unworthy to ^e observed and remembered.

The French did buy many of the captives, from the Indians, among whom they met
with many instances of humanity, more or less, according to the humor of
those, in whose families they became servants or sojourners. Others of the
captives were a long while detained with the Indians in their horrid and
howling wigwams, and some are to this day miserably circumstanced among those
dragons of the wilderness. Various methods have been used for the redemption of
these captives; and at several times, there have been returned several of them;
yea, several companies of them. The last, who came in number between forty and
fifty with Mr. Sheldon, (a good man, and a true servant of the church in
Deerfield, who twice took his tedious and dangerous j^urneys in the winter,
from New England unto Canada, on these occasions) came aboard at Quebec, May
30, and after nine weeks difficult passage, arrived at Boston, August 1, 1706.

4. At their coming away, that suffering and shining servant of God, Mr. John
Williams, who is held still in his ca^^ivity, and withheld by the French
papists (...) opportunities to make his personal addres^ to the rest of the
captives, for their establishment in our holy religion, addressed them with a
letter, which that so others may share with them in the benefit of it, shall
now be pu^^d.

TO MY Much respected FRIENDS, that are on their voyage FROM Quebeck, for
New England, present with care, I pray. Per SAMUEL SCAMMON, Q. D. C.
My brethren, dear friends, and Christian neighbors,
IN as much as I may neither be permitted to return with you, nor be permitted
to come to see you before you return; these come to acquaint you, that I am
truly desirous of your Prosperity, for soul and body. I would bless God who is
opening a door of return for you: and if God be your front-guard, and rereward,
it shall yet go well with you; a mercy, I would humbly be imploring for you. I
hope you will continue to pray for us that are left behind, that God would
preserve and recover us, and give us grace to glorify his holy name, though he
continue, ye^ i^crease our trials,, if we may be witnesses for God, and serve
him, though under fiery trials, we shall be no losers. The Lord help us by his
grace (for of our selve^ we are insufficient to do any thing) to keep the
faith, and suffer according to his will he has foretold us, that through much
tribulation we must enter into the kingdom of heaven. If God will bless; no
matter what men say of us. As for you, I would offer a few words of Counsel to
you in your voyage. What is it that it most upon your heart in your return? Is
it that you may with all freed^m glorify God, in bringing forth much fruit,
whereby he may be glorified, whilst you are again planted in the court-yards of
our God? How sorrowful is it, if your greatest design be to see your friends so
long separated from you: to gain estates, and recover your outward losses; and
to be free again to go and come as you lift! When you return, consult, Luke
8.39. and see from thence, that it well becomes them who have had eminent
mercies, to be showing to others what great things God has done for them.
Hereby you will be advancing the glory and ho^our of God the highest, last, and
most noble end man was made for. Hereby you will comply with the revealed will
of God: for he says, call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee,
and thou shall glorify me. Hereby you will also stir up others to glorify God
on your behalf. Hereby also you may gain good counsels, directions, and the
prayers of many in order to your ^mproving such mercies, so as God may have
glory, and your souls a continue profiting, yea hereby you may be instrumental
in putting others upon trusting God, and making him their refuge in an evil
day. Let God have the glory of preserving you; and don't ascribe it to your own
wisdom, or goodness; don't think to go sharets or partners with God in his
glory: He has done it for the honor of his name, Read Psalm. 86.13.14. and
learn from thence, that a truly gracicious soul delivered out of afflictions,
will be very careful to fu^fil his promises, and pay his vows made to God in
the day of his distress. For otherwise you will unavoidably fall into the
number of them spoken of, Psalm. 78 -- 34, 35, 36, 37. Without this, you will
fail of a comfortable evidence, that your deliverance is in special merry. It Is
certain, That he who glo^ifies God, is one that orders his conversation aright.
Be careful to perform your promises as to the matter, manner, time, and end of
obedience: Be thorough in your obedience. The performing your promises will
turn to your own special and peculiar gain and profit. Surely, God has a worse
prison, than any of you have yet been in, for them that will not honestly pay
their debts of obedience to him. Eccles. 5.4. Consider how angry God was with
Hezekiah, for not rendering to the Lord according to the mercy bestowed upon
him, 2 Chronicles. 32.25, God manifested his displeasure in very signal works of
judgment upon Israel in the wilderness for their unthankfulness to God for his
great mercy in bringing them from Egypt; yea, destroyed many of them in the
wilderness. You will have many temptations from within, and from without, to be
neglecting your duties of obed^ence. You have the world, as it were to begin
again. Well, consider the greatest concernment is to make sure of an
incorruptible inheritance, an house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens. We are here at longest, but only sojourners. If you turn again to
folly, God will be very ang^y, Jer. 2.20 etc. Surely a provoking God to anger
is not the way to thrive for soul or body. Yea, neglect of duty, will give
great ground to fear that the furnace has not been sanctified to your purging
and purifying. Peace and friendship with God, is the best peace and friendship.
Sincere souls have it much upon their hearts how they shall walk answerable to
the expectations of God from them for the mercies they receive at his hands,
Psalm. 116, 12. They are careful that their thoughts, desires, delights, choice,
refusals, words and actions be such as may be for God's glory and honor. They
are therefore very watchful against every thing that would draw away their
hearts from God, or prevent and hinder their living holily. Yea, all that have
gained spiritual benefit by afflictions, are much in bewailing their unsuitable
behavior under afflictions. Oh, it is a matter of shame to think how much they
pored upon their afflictions, and how little on their sins that procured all
their afflictions; that they were so impatient under afflictions; so much
concerned to get afflictions removed; and so little concerned to carry
graciously under them, to profit by them, to get them sanctified to them: Yea,
that they have been so very unbelieving, and full of carking cares under them,
and so backward to a committing all to God's disposal; that they have been so
full of guile and deceit, and unbroken in spirit in all their acknowledgments
and confessions of sin; so little of a gracious prayerfulness; Yea, that there
is so much opposition in their will to the will of God in disposing and
governing the affairs of the world according to the council of his own will;
Yea, that they have in so great a degree been forgetful of God, whilst they
have been inordinately afraid of man. They bewail that they were so very
unthankful for what mercies they had continued to them and that they did no
more improve them for God and his glory; whilst others bewail that they have
been so long under afflictions; do you bewail that you carried no better under
them. If God in special mercy be leading you forth; I am sure he is leading you
out in penitential weeping and supplications. If you come forth as gold well
refined; cleansed from all your filthiness, and saved from all your idols: What
a mercy do you enjoy! The best freedom, is freedom by Jesus Christ from
spiritual evils. Sirs, the expectations of god, and man too, will be great from
you. Oh! let it be made evident that you were brought into captivity for your
good. Oh! improve gospel privileges with all fidelity. Don't be grudge God
time for religious services. Don't content yourselves in being hearers; but be
you doers of the word. Let your thankfulness be expressed in a continued,
universal, holy conversation. Watch against all appearances of evil; and all
leading causes to a forgetting God, or ill requiting of him for all his
kindness to you.

Don't think after your return; that, having desired publicly in the
congregations of Go^'s people to have thanks returned to God on your behalf;
you have done your duty. This is the way to be like them that Sang his praises,
but soon forgot his wondrous works. Thanksliving is the best thansgiving. Oh!
that all your souls may flourish in exemplary holiness and piety, when you are
again settled in God's sanctuaries ^e^ God's sabbaths be duly at all times,
sa^ct^fied. If any of you are yet in an uncoverted state; let not your outward
freedom put away the sense of of the deplorableness and dangerousness of an
unconverted state: and of the depths of misery they are in, that ere captives
to sin and satan, and condemned already by a holy God, for not believing on the
name of the son of God. Oh! make all haste to get into a converted state.
Christ seems to be saying to you go and sin no more, lest a worse thing come
upon you. Improve all helps for a thorough, and well wrought conversion to God.
I^cline your ears to hear, and hearken diligently to the glad tidings of
salvation by Jesus Christ. If God has sanctfied to any of you your outward
captivity, to a purging away your sins, and to a making you partakers of his
holiness: Say with the psalmist, that it is good for you, that you have been
affl^cted: yea, that in faithfulness he has caused you to be afflicted. And at
your return, be you found among them that sit under christ's shadow with great
delight: and let his fruit be sweet to your taste. Draw nigh to him in all his
holy institutions, that your souls may be filled with the fullness of him who
fills all in all. Let your souls follow hard after the Lord, and the desire
of your souls be to the remembrance of his name. As to them of you who were
through christ reconciled to God, before your captivity; let it be evident that
you have been purged to bring forth more fruit; Joh. 15 2. If you lose your
^ross* I know you will [ye^] bless God, though he his exercised you with many
affl^ctions, and temptations, and heat the Furnace to a high deg^ee. For it is,
if need be, that we are in heaviness through manifold temptations. The unfruitful
three i^ unpruned, and reserved for the fire: when the choicest fruit bearing
tree is pruned in a great degree. Our heavenly father knows best what is best
for us; and in what way to lead us through a vale of tears, to his glory. The
experience of saints in all ages, proves that a long time of outward prosperity
has been more hurtful to the children of God, as to tht concerns of their
souls; than manifold trying afflictions for a long time. God has always a
father's love to his own; yea, even then, when he has his rod in his hand, or
be chastning with it: for he always aims at our profit. The rod and reproof
give wisdom. Well, see to it after your return, that you be more lively, more
exemplary, more self denying, more tender, more holy in all your conversation
than before. Be entirely devoted to the gloryfying of God. If any of you labor
under spiritual darkness, and be buffeted with temptations; spread your case
continually, without ceasing, before a prayer hearing God; Be advising with the
word of God for light and direction; Be acting and exercising the faith of
dependence on God, when you ha'nt a faith of assurance Isa. 50, 10. Use all
helps ap^^inted by God for your establishment. Oh! grow in grace and in the
knowledge of our Lord and savor Jesus Christ. Oh! endeavor to stir up all you
converse with* thoroughly to amend their ways and doings; whilst in all holiness
of conversation you have your walk among them. Tell others, how great a
privilege they enjoy, that have the scriptures, and so many days in God's
courts. And at your return, beware lest you forget your own judgment, whilst in
captivity, of the preciousness of such a choice mercy. Oh! be found daily, and
with all fervor of soul in your closets, pouring out your souls before God*
And pray for us, that are so dull and slow of heart to do our duty; and are
therefore kept under the rod. Oh! for the effectual pouring out of the spirit
from on high upon you that go, and upon us that stay here: Without, which
neither you nor we shall behave ourselves as becomes the gospel of Jesus
Christ. We have great encouragemens to be praying for the spirit: for our
glorious redeemer, whilst here, told us how acceptable it would be, to be
importunately crying to God for it; and how ready and willing he was to give
the spirit to them that ask.

When you return, doubtless you will find many temptations, as well as helps;
you had need therefore be daily upon your watch. Don't forget the way God has
led you in, to humble and prove you; that you might know what was in your
hearts. Spiritual idolatry, which is covetousness, is highly displeasing to
God. Having seen the vanity and trans^toriness of earthly comforts; let your
conversation for the future, be more in heaven. You will daily need to be in
the exercise of faith for a conquest over the world. Let us look after those
things that are unseen, that are eternal. Whilst others cry, give, give as to
the world; let our cry be for grace and spiritual blessings. The light of God's
countenance on the soul, will give more joy; than the time wherein corn, wine
and oil have been much increased. Seek first the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. Lay not up for
yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust does corrupt, and where
thieves break through and steel; but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven,
where neither moth nor rust do corrupt, and where thieves do not break through
and steal; for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

I have written more largely here, because I know your temptations (having the
world to begin again) will arise much from thoughts what to eat, and what to
drink, and wherewith to be clothed; having lost your earthly comforts. And our
great danger often lies in our cravings of, and seeking after lawful comforts.
Inordinacy of desire after lawful things, will put a stop to a lively exercise
of grace. Being forewarned, labor to be forearmed. I hope God will supply all
your wants for soul and body too. By the grace of God, my fellow sufferers
shall always be upon my heart, when I am before God. I wish you a healthy, a
safe, a speedy passage to your desired port; if it be the will of God. But
above all I wish you a gracious, truly penitent, Christ priz^ng, and soul
enriching, sanctifying voyage to a better port; when it is the pleasure of God
to call you to come home to your father's house; even that house not made with
hands, e^ernal in the heavens. There is an incorruptible inheritance; there is
perfect holiness* there is a perfect uninterrupted enjoyment of God; a seeing
of him in a glorious manner. Oh! let Christ Jesus, who is the best friend be
secured and pr^zed by us, for he is a never dying friend. As f^r many other
friends, and dear relations, who were ready to serve us under our trials; we
shall never m^re see them, or meet with them in this world* But comfortable
grounds of hope of meeting with them in a better world, should bear up our
hearts under our separations from them; and we should be careful to follow them
in every thing wherein they followed christ, let us all approve our selve^ in
all sincer^ty of heart acd life, the willing subjects of our exalted and
glorious Lord. H^s se^vice is perfect Freedom. Well! I commit you all to his
keeping care, and conduct; entreating you would take in good part these few
gene^al truths, and wo^ds of counsel, that, with a heart full of affection to
you, I have hastily drawn up, and sent as the only way I have, at present, to
have any converse with you. If they may be of any service* let God have the
glory. And I entreat your united prayers to God for us left behind, whilst you
are together; and afterward, the continuance of your prayers; that we may be
left to do nothing d^shono^able to God, scandalous to religion, or prejudicial
to our own souls; that we may not give occasion to the adversary to reproach or
speak evil of the right ways of God.

I am your brother in tribulations and Fellow Prisoner, JOHN WILLIAMS.
Chatoauriche, May 28, 1706.

5. The French use all the means imaginable, to seduce their captives under the
idolatries and superstitions of the church of Rome. Their clergy especially,
are indefatigable in their endeavors to captivate the minds of these poor
people, unto the Romish religion. It is an admirable effect of the divine power
and grace, that the exqu^site methods of the seducers, have been encountered by
so many of our poor people, with such a christian constancy. The successes of
the French converters, have been upon very few, but some feeble and easy
children* and little to be boasted of.

Two or three things have had a notable tendency to the establishment of our
confessors, under the assaults of the Canadians.

1st. The people of New England, have mostly been well acquainted with the
scriptures, and able to stop the mouths of their tempters, with an, -- it is
written, upon all occasions.

2d. Behold, O Protestants, the sensible influence which the Lord's day has
upon all religion! Our people had been brought up to a strict observation of
the Lord's day. And, even before they had made any further progress, in
weighing the cause of p^pery, the very first insuperable scand^^ which it gave
them, was, To see after what a le^d and vile manner the Lord's day was pr^fa^^d
among the Romanists. Our little boys and girls themselves, would still assi^n
this, as their first reason to the priests, wby they could not come over to
them; and the priests could never give them an answer to ^t, but what
insinuated, that the ten commandments were now out of date; an insinuation,
which our better instructed babes, would by no means think to be allowed of.

3d. Besides what was done by some letters from hence, our people took
opportunities to fortify one another; and when they were hindered from doing it,
by meeting and praying together, (which was forbidden to them) or by discourse
with one another, they did it by writing. Some of their composu^es a^e fallen
into our hands; two of which we will here insert and publish. If the reader
take notice of their plainess, let him consider, That they were plain folks for
whose benefit they were at first intended, (and such they are also, whose
edification is designed in our now exposing of them:) and why should not the
style, as well as the garb, of captivity, appear without any spruce ornaments
upon it?

Some instructions, written by Mr. John Williams, for his little son, when the
child was in danger of taking in the Popish poisons.
HOW wonderfully rich in grace
Is God to fallen men!
The height, length, breadth, and depth thereof
None can write with a pen.
Ungrateful wretches that we are
Who do no more admire
The grace of God to fallen man.
Nor after it aspire.
When angels lost their holiness
God cast them down to hell:
They are reserved in chains of wrath;
Who can their torments tell?
When man rebelled, and br^ke his law*
God might most righteously
Have made him fell his dreadful wrath
To all eternity.
No sooner had man sinned, but he
Was filled with shame and fear:
He sought to hide from sight of God*
He durst not there appear.
Most f^olish shifts he made to hide
His sin and misery;
H^s conscience him accused; to God
In prayer he durst not cry.
When God might have pursued in wrath,
He did pursue in love,
Unasked of man free grace he showed,
H^s mercy did him move.
O matchless love I consider child,
Who brought these tidings glad;
Of a redeemer from such wrath;
From all that makes thee sad!
The glorious god, whose righteous law
Man broke, to gratify,
The hateful enemy of God,
Condemned to misery.
Most horribly contemning God,
Requitting of him ill,
For all his goodness bountiful
Of which he had his fill.
He ^a^e more credit to the lies
Of the accursed one
Than to the God of truth, who had
His mercy to him shown.
The glorious God, blessed in himself,
From all eternity;
He needed not angels or men
To keep his glory high.
Thousands of angels before him stood
All ready to obey;
Who from their spotless purity
Did never go astray.
Consider yet again, for whom
These tidings good and great
Are brought; for man, who had rebelled?
Most wretched and ungrate,
No tidings of salvation brought
For angels who transgress't;
But for vile man, who fell and had
By sin lost all his rest.
Well may we stand amazed, and say*
Love without parallel!
By what means man delivered is,
When we consider well.
God gave his son a sacrifice;
A body did prepare
For him, that he might die and pay,
When we the debtors were.
O come with we; behold the love
Of our redeemer high,
Who came from heaven to earth, and lived
A life of misery.
He gave himself to death; a death
Full of most grievous pain.
He suffered shame; that we the plagues
Of hell might not sustain.
He came not in angelick form;
O^ Kings and Princes great
The quality he did pass by
And their magn^fick state;
He d^d appear, but in the form
O^ poor and needy man.
H^s mavelous hum^lity
D^^^a what mortal can?
The holy angels do admire
This glorious mystery;
Of ^im who equal was with God,
Equal in dignity!
Tha^ he should condescend to take*
The humane nature low;
And come into this lower world
Without great pomp or show.
He did not for a mother choose
An empress or a queen.
But he the virgin Mary chose,
Of low degree and mean,
Nor was he born in chambers filled
With gaudy bravery;
Where many should attend his birth
With great solemnity.
But in a stable he was born,
And in a Manger laid.
Of wondrous self-denial what
Proof grea^er can be had!
What senseless stupids then are we,
Who such impatience show!
When called to suffer shame, how loath
Reproach to undergo!
(...) for him who wi^h de'ight
All sufferings underwent,
And from all ranks of men to ^ear
Reproach was well content.
We were a crown of pricking thor^^
Upon his holy head.
He was most vi'^^y spit upon,
And basely buffeted.
He gave himse'f a sacrifice,
And on the cross he died;
His blood he shed; at last a sword
Pierced his sacred side.
His sufferings all were for our sake;
We had deserved death;
That we might live he suffered it,
And yielded his l^st breath.
How little have ^^ thought upon
His matchless love, and grace*
How often have we ungratefu^^y
Hidden from him our face.
What shall we render unto him,
For this his pearless love;
Oh! set thy love and hearts delight
On things that are above.
Take up Christ's cross, and follow him,
In ways of holiness.
Pu^ on the righteousness of Christ;
It is the richest dress.
To him we'll all obedience give;
We'll do it with contri^ion.
We'll praise him and we'll do^^ without
The Romish superstition.
On him we'll p^ace our trust entire;
He able is to save;
Y^^, to the uttermost ^ my child.
His life for us he gave.
Thus has our prophet, like Elisha of old, contr^cted himself into the little
dimensions of his child that he might (...) into him a lively resolution to
serve a glorious christ and suffer for him.

The singular circumstance of the little Au^horess, will make atonement for it,
if we now add a poem, written by a capt^ve damsel, about sixteen or seventeen
years of age; who being afraid that her younger sister at a d'^^ence from her
w^^ld be led away by the p^p^sh de^usions, addressed her in th^se (...)
DEAR sister, Jesus does you call
To walk on in his ways.
I pray make no delay at all*
Now in your you^hful ^ days.
O^ turn to him, who has you m^de,
While in your tender years.
For as the withering grass we fad^,
Which never more appears.
But if tha^ God should yo^ afford
A longer life to live,
Remember that unto the Lord
The praises you do give.
We still are called to begin
While we are in our youth^
For (...) d^part from ways of sin,
And serve the Lord in ^r^th.
It Is not to morrow Christ does say
That we shall mercy find;
Oh, then while it is called, to day,
Your great creator mind.
We are not certain in this world
We have no hour to spend;
But suddenly we may be hurled
W^ time shall have an end.
How (...) may this sad news be told*
We no assurance have;
In winding sh^^^ our corpse be ^^ll'd*
And we said in the g^ave.
But still our souls must live for ever.
In endless bliss or w^e,
If unprepared at the day*
We down to hell do go.
The ^ffi^er as Christ has said,
Shall us in prison bind;
Until the last far^hing ^e paid,
We the^e must be con^ined.
(...) we so often of this do hear,
Our tea^^ers have as told*
We shall without excuse appear,
If we to si^ are bold*
To dare the power of hell and d^^th;
Yea and of God most high,
Oh, le^ no, while we have our breath
Prostate before him lie.
And let us wisdom now desire
Before our glass is run;
For understanding let'^ enquire
While shining is our sun.
All wisdom's ways are pleasantness,
And all its paths are peace.
Those that God's throne aright addre^^,
Their joy shall never cease.
^et not your hearts on fading toys,
But still God's grace implore,
At his right hand are endless joys
And pleasures ever more.
That earthly things are fading ^^ow'^^
We by experience see;
And of our years and days and hours
We as uncertain be.
Of all degrees and every age,
Among the dead we find;
Many there fell by bloody rage,
When we were left behind,
Let us be silent then this day
under our smarting rod.
Let us with patience meekly say,
^is the will of God.
Of friends and paren^s we are bereaved,
Distress't and left alone;
Lord* we thy spirit often have grieved:
And now as doves we m^an.
For any worthiness of ours,
No me^cy ask we can;
But still God has laid helps and power*
Upon the son of man.
Now when the sabba^h does begin.
With sorrow we does say*
Oh! That we were God's house within,
To keep his holy day!
For God has in his anger hot
Out of his sanctuary,
Us banished far, that we hear not
Its pleasant melody.
The temple songs from us are gone,
To sighs they turned be;
Ensnared we are, and there is none
On earth to set us free.
It is the mighty hand of God
From which no man can fly.
We Are under both his grievous rod
And his all seeing eye.
Dear sister, for your sake now I
These verses written have.
Bea^ them upon your memory,
As going to the grave.
Dear sister, bear me in your mind;
Learn these few lines by heart;
Alas, an aching heart I find,
Since we are so long to part.
But to the care of God on high
Our cause we will commend.
For your soul sake these lines now I
Your loving sister send. MARY FRENCH.
December 23d, 1703.


ASTONISHING deliverances have been sent from Heaven, to many of our Captives.
They have been many a time upon the point of destruction; but, these poor ones
have cried unto the Lord, and he has remarkably delivered the^*

It Is a wonderful restraint from God upon the Brutish savages, that no English
woman was eve^ known to have any violence offered unto her chastity, by any of
them.

It Is wonderful, that no more of the captives have been murdered by them,
neither when they were drunk, nor when the Caprichio's, and the cruelties, of
their diabolical natures were to be gratified.

It Is wonderful, that when many of the captives have been just going to be
sacrificed, some strange interposition of the divine Providence has put a stop
to the execution, and prevented their being made a sacrifice. The stories are
numberless. Take a few of them.

ACRUE of Indians had been three days without any manner of sustenance. They
took an English child, and hung it before the fire to roast it for their supper;
but that these canibals might satiate their -- I want a name for it, -- as well
as their hunger, they would roast it alive. The child began to swell. A canoe
arrived at that instant, with a dog in it. The lesser devils of the crew,
proposed their taking the dog instead of the child; They did so; and the child
is yet living! Her name is, Hannah Parsons.

A Man had valiantly killed an indian or two, before the savages took him. He
was next morning to undergo an horrible death, whereof the manner and the
torture, was to be assigned by the widow Squa of the dead indian. The French
priests told him, they had labored to divert the tigers from their bloody
intention, but could not prevail with them; he must prepare for the terrible
execution. His cries to God were hard, and heard; When the sentence of the squa
was demanded, qui^e contrary to every one's expectation, and the revengful
inclination so usual and well known among these creatures; she only said, --
his death will not fetch my husband to life; Do nothing to him! So nothing was
done to him.

A Woman was carried aside, by her monster of a master; he fastened a rope
about her neck; It was in vain for her to contend; the hatchet must presently
have dispatched her, if the halter had failed; she had no remedy but to cry
unto God; her master throws up the end of the rope over the limb of the tree;
he ascends to hale her and to tie her up; and then a fine exploit for the
wretch! a memorable name! however the limb happily breaks; down he falls! full
of madness, he goes to repeat his brave action: An Indian commander just in the
nick of time comes in upon him; reproaches him very bitterly; takes her away
from him; and sends her away to Canada.

BUT we ought not to pass over the mavelous display of the power of God, in
supporting and preserving the poor captives, when they traveled through the
horrid wilderness, oftentimes much more than a score of miles in a day, and
through very deep snows, and with vast loads on their backs; and grievously
pinched with hunger, having scarce one bit of any refreshment, for whole days
together. Poor, weak, sick women have done so!

One cannot well imagine any other than supernatural and angelical assistances,
in some of the instances.

The Indians came upon the house of one Adams ^t Wells, and captivated the man
and his wife and assassinated the child^en; whereof one, who had an hatchet
struck into his skull, and was left for dead, was very strangely recovered The
woman had ^ain in about eight days. They dragged her out, and tied her to a
post, until ^he house was r^f^^d. They then loosed her, and bid her walk. She
could not stir. By the help of a stick she got half a step forward. She looked
up to God. On the sudden a new strength entered into her. She traveled that
very day, twenty miles a foot. She was up to the neck in water six times that
very day in passing of rivers. At night she fell over head and ears into a
slough in a swamp, and was hardly got out a live. She got not the least cough
nor cold by all of this; she is come home alive unto us.

Many more such instances might be mentioned, we will supersede them all, with
a relation of what b^fel Mrs. B^adley of Haverhill. Ab una disce omnes.

THIS virtuous woman, had been formerly for two years together, a captive in
the hands of the barba^ous indians; a subject of wondrous afflictions, of
wondrous deliverances. Her husband at length found her out, and fetched her
home, and their fam^ly went on happily for six years together after it. But,
the clouds return after the ra^n.

On Feb. 6, 1703, 4. She with her sister and a maid or two, and some children
(a man being also in the room) were talking about the Indians, and behold one
of the fierce tawnies looked in, with a gun ready to fire upon them. The
Englishman pulled him in, and got him down, and Mrs. B^adly took the
opportunity to pour a good quantity of scalding soap (which was then boiling
over the fire) upon him, whereby he was ki^l'd immediately. Another of the
tawnies followed at the heels of h^s brother; who stabbed the Englishman to the
heart. Unto him she dispensed also a quantity of her soap, which not killing
him, she with the other women and children ran into the chamber. The house was
fired by the indians, and M^s. B^adly with her companions found it nececessary
to retire behind the house. One of the women fell into the hands of the
indians; and they that remained were Mrs. Bradly and her sister; each of them
having a child of M^s Bradlies with her. The sister was discerned by the
indians, who commanded her to come out unto them, and threatened that they
would else cut her to pieces. Mrs. Bradly very generously bid her sit still,
and wait for a better time to escape; and offered her, that inasmuch as the
Indians knew of but one there, she would be that one, and go out in her stead.
She did so; and the^eby her obliged sister and the child with her were
preserved; but Mrs. Bradly was no sooner come to the savages, but they employed
a head-breaker on the child that she brought unto them.

She was now entered into a second captivity; but she had the great encumbrance
of being big with child, and w^thin six weeks of her time! After about an h^u^s
rest, wherein they made her put on snow shoes, which to manage requires more
than ordinary agility, she traveled with her tawny guardians all that night,
and the next day until 10 o'clock; associated with one woman more who had been
brought to bed but just one week before. Here they refreshed themselves a
little, and then traveled on till night; when they had no refreshment given
them, nor had they any till after their having traveled all the forenoon of
the day ensuing, and then too, whatever she took, she did through sickness
throw it up again.

She underwent incred^ble hardship and famine; a Mooses hide, as tough as you
may suppose it, was the best and the most of her diet. In one and twenty days
they came to their head quarters, where they staid a fortnight. But then her
snow shoes were taken from her; and yet she must go every step above the knee
in snow, with such weariness, that her faint soul often prayed, that the Lord
would put an end unto her weary life! until they came to another place, where
they stayed for three weeks together.

Here in the night, she found herself ^ll, and having the help of only one
woman, who got a little hemlock to lay about her, and with a few sticks made a
shift to blow up a little fire, she was in half an hour delivered of the
infant, that she had hitherto gone withal. There she lay, till the next night,
with none but the snow under her, and the heaven over her; in a misty and a
rainy season. She sent then unto a French Priest, that he would speak unto her
squa mistress, who then, without condescend^ng (...) upon her, allowed her a
little birch rind (...) her head from the injuries of the weather, and a little
bit of dried moose, which being boiled she drank the broth, and gave it unto
the child.

In a fortnight, she was called upon, to travel again with her child in her
arms; ever now and then, a whole day together, without the least morsel of any
food, and when she had any, she fed only on ground nuts, wild onions and lilly
roots. By the last of May, they arrived at Cowesick, where they planted their
corn; wherein she was put unto a hard task, so that the child extremely
suffered. The savages would sometimes also please themselves with casting hot
embers into the mouth of the child, which would render the mouth so sore, that
it could not suck for a long while together. So, that starved and died.

Their they staid until they weed their corn; but then some of our friend
indians coming on them, killed seven of them; whereat, away they fled for
Canada, and never saw their corn-field any more. But they made a forty-days
ramble of it, before they reached thither; in which, if at any time, her heart
began to faint, her mistress would be ready to strike the mortal hatchet into
her head.

The French being thought more civil to the English than to the Indians, her
mistress thereat provoked, resolved, that she would never sell her to the
French. Accordingly she kept her a twelvemonth with her, in her squal^d
wigwam: Where, in the following winter, she fell sick of a fever: but in the
very he^ghth and heat of her paroxysms, her mistress would compel her sometimes
to spend a winter night, which is there a very bitter one, abroad in all the
bitter frost and snow of the climate. She recovered; but four Indians died of
the fever, and at length her mistress also. Another Squa then pretended an
heirship unto her: with whom she lived and saw many more strange deliverances.
They had the small pox in the family; but she never had it. She was made to
pass the river on thence when every step she took she might have struct through
it if she pleased. Many more such preservations might come into her story.

At last, there came to the sight of her, a priest from Quebec, who had known
her in her former captivity at Naridgowock. He was very civil to her, and made
the Indians to sell her unto a French family, for fourscore livres, where, though
she wrought hard, she lived more comfortably and contentedly.

She poured out her continual supplications to heaven; sometimes two or three
of her own sex, would by stealth come to join with her in supplicating to the
glorious LORD She had her mind often irradiated with strong persuasions and
assurances, that she should yet see the goodness of God in this land of the
living. Her tender and loving husband, accompanied Mr. Sh^ldon in his last
expedition. He found her out, and fetched her home a second time; she arrived
with those of the last return from the captivity; and affectionately calls upon
her friends, O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt h^s name together!

BECAUSE of its having some affinity with the foregoing relations, and that we
may at once discharge our selves of what we can relate concerning our captives,
we will conclude with a copy af a letter sent unto one of the ministers in
Boston.

SEPT. 18, 1703. Reverend Sir,
THE occasion of my now writing to you is, because I lie under a vow and
promise, to the great and almighty God, to declare and make known his wonderful
goodness and mercy to me, and likewise to have his name blessed and praised in
your congregation on my behalf. I shall briefly inform you. "Being taken a
prisoner some time last January, by the French; in going to Port Royal we met
with very tempestuous weather and were fast in an harbor near Cape Sables. And
there two Frenchm^n had orders from their Capt. to take me with them, and go to
Port Royal by land. They took with them but little b^ead; and we traveled one
week in the woods, in a m^serable condition. I had myself no shoes nor
stockings, but a piece of skin wrapped about my feet; and the snow being very
deep, we could not tra^; being weak for want of provision, and (...) the woods,
not knowing which way to (...)

"One of the Frenchmen loaded his (...) presented it at me, telling me, That it
was imp^^^sible to find Port Royal, and I must die and they must eat me. Then I
begged liberty to pray unto God, before he killed me; and he granted it me. As
I was at prayer, it struck into my mind, That I had formerly heard yourself
declare in your pulpit, what great and wonderful things had been done by
prayer; particularly, that it had stopped the mouths of lions, and that it had
quenched the violence of the fire. So I earnestly begged of God that he would
manifest (...) great power to me, by turning the hearts of (...) that were
about to take away my life."

The words were be sooner out of my mouth but the Frenchman, seeming to have
tears in his eye^ b^d me rise up; he would try one day longer. And he b^d me go
get wood for a fire. It presently grew dark; and then I made an escape from
them, and hid myself in the woods, until the next day that they were gone. And
then I found the ^ay out of the woods, un^o the water side, and there I not
clams. These Frenchmen found the way (...) Port Royal, and there told what they
had (...). The governor put them in prison, and sent out two men, and charged
them not to re^urn (...) they had found me, dead or alive In ^our days after
these Frenchmen left me, they f^u^d me alive, and brought me provision, and a
pair of shoes and carried me to Port Royal.

(...) and many other favou^s have I received (...) God in the t^me of my
imprison^ (...) ^ssed and forever praised be h^s holy name (...). I pray sir,
^ive me directions, what I shall do, for the great and good God.

WILLIAM CLAP.


Psalm 107, 15. Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men.
FINIS

