FAITHFUL NARRATIVE OF Elizabeth Wilson; Who was EXECUTED at CHESTER, JANUARY
3d, 1786. Charged with the MURDER of her TWIN INFANTS. Containing some account
of her DYING SAYINGS; with some serious reflections. Drawn up at the request of
a friend unconnected with the deceased.

PHILADELPHIA. (...)

A Faithful Narrative, etc.
Borough of Chester, Jan. 5, 1786.
ON the third instant was executed here, pursuant to her sentence, ELIZABETH
WIL^ON; charged with the murder of her twin illegitimate infants, on the 12th
of October, 1784.

As the case (...) woman is of a singular nature, has engrossed the public
attention; and as there are v^ ^ports circulating respecting her, the following
narrative, drawn up at the request of (...) unconnected with her, may be
acceptable at this time.

WAS found, by a person with a dog, crossing the fields, in a piece of woods a
little distance from the road leading from Brandywine to the Turk's Head, two
dead infants. Upon enquiry, and from concurring circumstances, there was reason
to conclude, they were Elizabeth Wilson's; who some time before was delivered
of two children, not far from the place where they were found, and who about
eight week before, had left the house with the children; having a design, as
she said, of going (...) Philadelphia. She was accordingly apprehended, and
after examination before (...) Tailor, was ordered to this jail.

She was brought to trial the last court of Oyer and Terminer, which commenced
on the 17th of October last, before the Honorable Judge Atlee; circumstances
were so strong against her, that she was brought in guilty, and received
sentence of death.

Before, at, and after her trial, she persisted in denying the fact; her
behavior was such, in general, as gave reasons to conclude she was innocent of
the murder of which she was charged, or was an insensible, hardened creature,
and did not expect to die for this crime.

It was some time after she was sentenced, before she could be prevailed upon
to make a discovery of the person that committed the horrid murder. A great
deal of pains were taken to make her sensible that a promise of concealment,
under the circumstances she was in when made, and in a matter of such
consequence, was not binding. She was very desirous of seeing her younger
brother. This note, in her own handwriting, was found on her table -- O could
I but see my own brother! to speak just a few words to him, to ease my broken
heart that is so distressed. Oh how hard a thing it is that I cannot see him!
Was he in my place and I in his, I would go to him, was it on my hands and
knees; but he will not come to me, to speak one word to me, before I depart
this life and (...) ^an no more: so I just give myself up to the Lord, begging
that he would hear my cry, and gi^ (...) everlasting.
When he came to visit her, she proposed to him the making a real discovery of
the truth; he refused hearing it, until he had called several persons of
character as witnesses. The account she gave them, or the confession she then
made, and which was similar to the following one, together with their (...)
thereon, in finding the person charged with the murder, were presented (...)
the President and Council; who were pleased to grant her a respite for o^ (...)
with the respite came her death warrant, ordering her execution on Tuesda^
(...) of January, 1786.

(...) ^er confinement she was visited by serious people of different religious
denom^ (...) appeared amazingly ignorant respecting her spiritual state, until
some tim^ (...) sentenced, when many were much affected at the relation she
gave of h^ (...) ^cises, and the apparent concern and distress of her mind. She
said the du^ (...) ^e happiest place she ever was in in her life.

(...) before she was to be executed, she was visited, at her request, by two
min^ (...) ^e Baptist persuasion; and who, besides visiting her, came to attend
the exec^ (...) after some time spent in serious devotion, she made the
following confession: da^

Chester, Dec. 6, 1785, Tuesday Evening, 10 o'Clock.
I ELIZABETH WILSON, Daughter of John and Elizabeth Wilson, was born in
East-Marlborough, Chester County, of honest, sober parents. (...) ^teen to
twenty-one years of age, I had a religious concern, but through the subtilty of
(...) and corrupti^ of nature was led away to the soul-destroying sin of
fornication, which (...) ^lieve to be (...) predominant evil. I had three
children in an unlawful way before I fe^l into the wretch^ company of From her
account and description of the man, and from some persons who used Mr. Bogart's
hou^ ^ Cross Keys). 'twas found that the name he passed by with her, Joseph
Deshong, was not his pro^ (...)
Joseph Deshong. At the time I fell in company with him I lived in Philade^phia
at the sign of the Cross-Keys, in Chesnut-street, at the corner of
Third-street. In the b^ginning of the year 1784, he insinuated himself into my
company, under pretense of cou^ship, declaring himself a single man, and by
repeated promises of marriage deceived and pe^suaded me to consent to his
unlawful embraces. In a short time after I proved with chil^ of the two dear
innocents, for which I must shortly suffer an ignominous death. I told him ^ ^y
situation, and then he dropped entirely his purpose of marriage; but told me, I
must stay (...) I was delivered, and promised to bear all the expenses,
declaring I should n^ want for any thing. Accordingly I rented a room of Joseph
Rhoods in Union-street. I stayed there a few weeks, and provided for myself; in
which time he never came near me. And the time of my delivery drawing near, I
was in great want of money, and after repeate^ inquiries after him I found that
he had left me in that unhappy condition. I then found, (...) ^ould not live in
town; so proceeded to the house of Josiah Wilkinson, in East Bradford township,
Chester County, where I was delivered of my dear infants. I continued at said
house, ^or 5 weeks, and then I went to Philadelpia and lest the children at Mr.
Wilkinson's in order to find my deceiver, where I met with him and told him my
deplorable situation. When I told him, I had two children, he looked in my
face, saying, "the devil! you have? I requested him to do something for me by
fair means, assuring him, if he did not consent, I should apply to the law: He
answered, I need not go to law, for he would do for me, and seemed ^ sympathize
with me in my pitiful case. I then requested him to put one of the dear
children to nurse, the other I purposed to keep, on condition of his giving me
a supply of money. To which he consented, and gave me a small trifle to bear my
expenses back to the aforesa^ Wilkinson's. He then appointed a day for me to
return back to the city with my children, (...) order for him to fulfill his
promise. The fatal appointed day being come, I, according to pr^mise, set off
to meet him at the appointed place (Newtown-Square); but, contrary to my
e^pectations, he met me within two miles of the aforesaid Wilkinson's house.
When we met (...) ^indly accosted me, and getting off his horse, he jumped him
over the fence, and re^ go into the woods with him. Accordingly I went with
him, and sat down on ^g, with both my children in my arms. He asked me to let
him look at one of the (...) ^ order to see if it looked like him. He holding
it in his arms, asked me what I the ^ould do with them? I told him I thought it
was his place, according to promise, to ^em. After a little pause he laid the
dear infant on the ground, taking the (...) ^y arms, and laid it beside its
dear little fellow sufferer, making this reply (...) ^im for money: I have no
money for you, nor your bastards neither. He (...) ^e to take their dear lives;
which I would by no means consent to, but requ^ (...) ^e have them, and I would
beg for them. He then arose up, putting a pistol (...) ^rbidding me to make any
noise; then he wickedly stamped on their dear little bre^ (...) which the dear
infants gave a faint scream and expired; he still keeping the pistol (...)
^reast, forcing me most solemnly to vow, that I would never discover the
dreadful act; to which I, through fear, consented. He then requested me to strip
my dear dead infants naked. Through fear I took off each of their little gowns,
but could proceed no further; my bowels yearn^g over my dear children. He then
took them up, and made a place with his feet and co^ered them with leaves, and
throw'd a piece of brush over them, and took me to Philadel^hia. To the truth
of this relation, I appeal to the eternal God to witness, before whose ^readful
bar I expect to appear the ensuing day. A guilty rebel I acknowledge myself to
be. My sins are more in number than the hairs of my head; but my Righteous
Judge does know ^y innocence in respect of that cruel murder. I know I deserve
not only death, but hell; ^et, nevertheless, I hope to obtain mercy, through
the blood and righteousness of the Adorable Redeemer, to whose boundless mercy
I commend my poor naked soul; venturing into that un^nown world, only depending
(I trust) on the all-sufficient merits of that precious God-Man, who died on
the tree.

Lord Jesus! accept thy sinning creature! and receive my spirit! So prays the
dying

ELIZABETH WILSON
Her respite was brought by her brother about an hour after the confession was
wrote, and (...)
Taken from her own mouth, the evening before she suffered, by JOHN STANCLIFF,
Minister.

Present --
Mr. Thomas Tailor, Sub-sheriff, Reve. Thomas Fleeson, Joshua Vaughan.


This confession she signed; afterward the ministers were preparing to go to
Philadelphia to lay it before the Council, which was about two o'clock in the
morning: they were informed her brother had came down from Philadelphia that
evening, stops ^t Mr. Kerlin's, and said he would be in Chester early in the
morning. It was thought ^roper to see him before the ministers went up; two
persons went for him to his place, two miles from Chester; when he came, he
informed he had a respite for her, which ^perseded the necessity of going that
night. We are the more particular in this part of (...) relation, as we are of
opinion, neither the prisoner, minister, nor any person in or about the jail,
knew that she was respited. This confession was put into the hands of (...) of
the Council.

During the time of her respite her behavior was in general consistent with
her situati^^ (...) not appearing at all times so deeply affected, as when the
ministers visited he^ (...) ^rts of the prisoners, intimating the insincerity
of her profession, gave uneas^ (...) ^r friends: but when she was informed of
these reports she was greatly distressed (...) ^nt^d for them in such a manner,
as to remove all scruple of her sincerity.

(...) ^d, the morning of her execution, she was again visited by one of the
(...) ministers, and other serious persons, who spent some time with her (...)
^es. The minister exhorted her to a steadfast faith in the Son of God (...)
named to be called the "friend of sinners," and who came into t^ (...) and save
that which was lost," endeavoring to impress on her mind the (...) death, and
an eternal state, the necessity of a real change of heart and ho^ (...) nature,
as a meetness for the kingdom of God. Her behavior was serious ^n, and devout.

When informed there was no respite for her, and was desired to prepare for
death, s^ received the awful summons with a considerable degree of composure;
and, after ^ short space, said, "she did not expect to live." Hearing that her
brother was gone i^ haste to Philadelphia, she was much moved and said, My poor
brother is gone to Ph^^ladelphia with an aching heart, he has been concerned
about me, kind and tender to me I hope the Lord will reward him for all his
care. After some more serious conversatio^ with her, she was taken with a sit,
the women attended her, and the minister left the room.

She was attended to the place of execution by the beforementioned minister,
and ^ preacher of the Methodist order. On the way the sheriff put her in mind
where she wa^ going, and that if she had charged any person wrongfully, now was
the time to retract^ She said she had not, and seemed uneasy at her sincerity
being called in question. A^ the place of execution, after exhortation and
prayer, she requested her confession mig^ be read: leave being obtained of the
sheriff, it was read accordingly. She stood up an^ ^firmed what was therein
related, on the testimony of a dying woman; appeared p^^utent, resigned, and
engaged in prayer; prayed that others might take warning from he^ to shun those
sins that brought her to this shameful end; said she freely, and from h^ heart
forgave all that had injured her, and prayed for forgiveness of her sins, and
the the Lord would have mercy on her; once more declared her innocence of some
thing as before mentioned, and seemed uneasy that she should be suspected of
insincerity. B^ing asked the state of her mind, she said her burden was in a
great measure remove^ seemed easy at the thoughts of death: frequently
expressing her confidence in the ador^ble Redeemer and Savior of sinners.

The execution was prolonged to give time for her brother's return from
Philadelphia*

The Sheriff reminded her that she had but a few minutes to continue, and to
man the best use of her time, and appeared much affected.

In her last moment she appeared perfectly calm and resigned; took an
affectiona^ leave of the minister, no longer able to bear the sight, and said,
"she hoped to me^ him in a better world." The moment before she was to be
turned off the sheriff ask^ her if with her dying breath she sealed the
confession she had made? When she unde^^stood who spoke to her, she moved her
hand and said: "I do, for it is the truth." A^ in a moment was turned off, and
quickly left the world, in exchange, we hope, for ^ better.

But here we must drop a tear! What heart so hard, as not to melt at human woe!

Her brother came in all haste from Philadelphia, with a respite or letter from
the H^^norable the President and Council, to delay the execution, but through
unexpected a^ unavoidable hindrances on the road, did not arrive until
twenty-three minutes after t^ ^emn seen was closed. When he came with the
respite in his hand, and saw his sist^ irrecoverably gone, beheld her
motionless, and sunk in death, -- who can paint the mo^ful scene?

Let imagination if she can!

He took her body home, and some efforts were made to restore her to life, but
in ^ain. The day following she was decently enterred, and a large number of
respectable people attended her funeral. The minister that attended her in her
last moments attended her to the grave. The exercise was solemn; a deep concern
was conspicuous on the face of many, if not all that were present.

Thus ended the life of Elizabeth Wilson, in the 27th year of her age;
innocent; we believe, of the crime for which she suffered, but guilty in
concealing, or rather attempting to conceal, a crime of so horrid a nature,
which she was privy to.

May others reflect, that a few years past she was esteemed having a virtuous
character.

May they, agreeably to her dying request, take warning from her sufferings and
shameful end; and shun the paths of vice, which lead to endless woe: and as the
sin that brought her to this shameful end is so predominant, may they in an
especial manner guard against it, and be kept from it.

May they consider that sin is hateful to ^d, contrary to his pure and holy
nature, and that he cannot (...) o^ it, but with the ^^most abhorrence.

May they seriously reflect on its malignant nature! and dreadful! dreadful!
conse^^^nces. The wages of sin, says an inspired apostle, is death. Painful
idea!

Death, ^tural or corporal, a separation of the soul from the body. Death
spiritual, ^ separation of the soul from God. Death eternal, a separation of
soul and body from God; the absence of all good; the presence of all evil;
unspeakable torments in soul and body for ever and ever, where our Lord says,
their worm dies not, and the (...) is not quenched.

May they fly from sin to HIM that bled, and groaned, and died the painful,
shameful and accursed death of the cross for sinners; tha^ they may have
healing by his wounds and life by his death: so shall they be saved from sin
and its dreadful consequences h^r^ and for ever h^reafter.

Which God of his mercy grant, for the sake of his beloved coequal, and
co-(...) the Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

(...) own hand in the latter part of her confinement, as ap^ (...) by the
dates.
(...) the 2d. day of November, 1785, under whose eyes those (...) by me, a
poor distressed prisoner, that is begging for (...) my He^^^nly Father! But let
me entreat thee to show (...) O God! thou know my heart is broken within me!
O Blessed (...) say, that I leave this world; and give me life everlasting.
^orld without end.

(...) I have breath to breathe. O Lord! have mercy on me a poor (...) me fit
for thy kingdom, where I can have rest and pe^ce (...) my poor soul! for (...)
I have (...) this world.

ELIZABETH WILSON, in (...) 1^th day of November, 1785, under sentence of
death, ^es for mercy to God. Oh Lord! (...) mercy on me a poor begging sinner,
that is now pleading. O Lord! be merciful unto me! heal my soul! for I have
sinned against thee, blot out my iniquity, O my Heavenly Father! and give me to
feel thy power more and more! for my poor soul's sake. O Lord! (...) ^ember thy
blessed promise: They that seek thee with their whole heart is sure to find.
(...) dear ^ember! look down with an eye of pity on thy poor unworthy servant,
that can do nothing of myself ^ut thy help, O Lord of life and glory! hear thou
my cries! pity my poor distress^^ soul! O (...)! wash me, purge me, from all my
dross; and make me fit for thy kingdom: when (...). O Lord! I regard not what I
suffer here on earth, to go to thee above, where all tears (...) away, and
there is no more sorrow. And so farewell to all this world, hoping that God will
she (...) to (...) begging soul in Heaven; where there is joy and peace, for
ever and ever more. W^ (...). Amen, and Amen.

ELIZABETH WILSON, in Chester goal, under the sentence of death, on the 22d.
day of Octob^ in the year of our Lord 1785. O Lord! help my poor soul, and show
an eye of pity to thy distres^ (...), that is begging at thy door for mercy,
for her never dying soul! O Lord of life and glory! t^ (...) thy ear from me! O
my heavenly father! but grant me mercy! mercy! mercy! O Lord! that I (...) say
in peace. Amen to this world.

Psalm 55, verse 21. The words of his mouth were smoother than butter; but war
was in his hea^ his words were softer than oil; yet were they drawn swords.

Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain (...) suffer the
righteous to be m^ed, but thou, O God! shall bring them down into the pit of
destruction; bloody and deceitful men (...) not live out half their days; but I
will ^ust in thee.

Hymn on Death.
VAIN man thy fond pursuit forbear,
Repent, thy end is nigh --
Death at the farthest cannot be for,
Oh think before you die!
Reflect thou have a soul to save,
Thy sins how high they mount,
What are thy hopes beyond the grave?
How stands that dark account?
Death enters and there is no defense,
His time there is none can tell;
He Will in a moment call thee hence,
To heaven or to hell.
Thy flesh perhaps thy (...)
Shall crawling worms (...)
But ah, destruction (...)
Sin kills beyond the (...)
Today the gospel calls (...)
Sinners it speaks to (...)
Let every one f^rsake (...)
And mercy will (...)
Rich mercy dearly (...)
How vile soever (...)
Abundant par^^n, peace with (...)
All given entirely free.
FINIS.

