The Life and Confession of JOHNSON GREEN, Who is to be Executed this Day,
August 17th, 1786, for the Atrocious Crime of BURGLARY; Together with his LAST
and DYING WORDS.
I JOHNSON GREEN, having brought myself to a shameful and ignominious death, by
my wicked conduct, and as I am a dying man I leave to the world the following
History of my Birth, Education, and vicious Practices, hoping that all people
will take warning by my evil example, and shun vice and follow virtue.

I was born at Bridgwater, in the Country of Plymouth, in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, was twenty-nine years of age the seventh day of February last.
My father was a negro, and a servant to the Hon. Timothy Edson Esquire; late of
said Bridgwater, deceased. My mother was an Irish woman, named Sarah Johnson,
she was a widow, and her maiden name was Green. I have been called
Joseph-Johnson Green. When I was five years of age my mother bound me as an
Apprentice to Mr. Seth Howard of said Bridgwater, to be instructed in
Agriculture. I was used very tenderly, and instructed in the principles of the
Christian Religion. Whilst I was an apprentice my mother gave me much good
advice cautioned me against keeping company with those that used bad language
and other vicious practices, She advised me not to go to sea nor into the army,
foretold what has come to pass since the commencement of the late war, and said
it would not come to pass in her day. She died about sixteen years ago, and if
I had followed her good advice I might have escaped an ignominious death.

When I was eighteen years of age (contrary to my mother's advice) I inlisted
into the American service, and remained in the same for the duration of the
war. I would just observe to the world, that my being addicted to drunkenness,
the keeping of bad company, and a correspondence that I have had with lewd
women, has been the cause of my being brought to this wretched situation.

In March, 1781, I was married at F^stown, to one Sarah Phillips, a mus^^^, who
was brought up by Mr. Olney, of Providence. She has had two children since I
was married to her, and I have treated her exceeding ill.

When I began to steal I was about 12 years old, at which time I stole four
cakes of gingerbread and six biscuit, out of a horse cart, and afterward I
stole sundry small articles, and was not detected.

When I was about fourteen, I stole one dozen of lemons and one cake of
chocolate, was detected, and received reproof. Soon after I stole some hens,
and my conduct was so bad that my master sold me to one of his cousins, who
used me well.

I continued the practice of stealing, and just before I went into the army I
took my master's key, unlocked his chest, and stole two shillings; he
discovered what I had done, gave me correction, but not so severely as I
deserved.

Sometime after I was engaged in the American service, at a certain tavern in
Sherburne, I stole fifteen shillings, one case bottle of rum, one dozen of
biscuit, and a pillow case with some sugar.

In April, 1731, I stole at the Highlands, near West-Point, a pair of silver
shoe buckles, was d^^^cted, and received one hundred lashes.

In October, the same year, when I was at West-Point and we were extremely
pinched for the want of provisions, three of us broke open a settler's markee,
stole three cheeses, one small firkin of butter, and some chocolate. I only was
detected, and punished by receiving one hundred stripes.

Sometime in the winter of 178^, at Easton, I broke into a grist mill,
belonging to Mr. Timothy Randall, and stole about a bushel of corn, and at
sundry times the same year I broke into a cellar belonging to Mr. Ebenezer
Howard, of the same place, and stole some meat and tobacco; and I also broke
into a cellar and a corn house belonging to Mr. Abiel Kinsley, of the same
place, and stole some meat and corn; and at hast-Bridgewater, the same year, I
broke open a grist mill, and stole near a bushel of meal; and at same time
stole three of four dozen herrings our of a corn house. I also went to a corn
house belonging to Mr. Nathaniel Whitman, of Bridgwater, and stole two cheeses
out of it.

August Is It, 1784, I broke open a house in Providence, and stole goods to the
value of forty dollars. Soon after I broke open a shop near Patuxet Falls,
stole one pair of cards, two cod fish, and sundry other articles.

In 1784 I also committed the following crimes, viz. I broke into a cellar
about a mile from Patuxet Bridge, stole about thirty weight of salt pork, one
case bottle, and several other articles. About the same time I stole out of a
washing tub in Patuxet, a pair of trowsers, three pair of stocking, and a
shirt; and at Seaconk I stole two shirts and some stockings through an open
window. I stole at a barn between Seaconk and Attleborough, a woollen blanket,
and through an open window near the same place, I stole two sheets, one gown,
and one shirt. At Mr. Amos Shepherdson's in Attleborough, I stole out of
wash-tub, one shirt, two shirts, one short gown, and one pair of stockings.

At Norton, I broke into a cellar belonging to Col. George Leonard, and stole a
quarter of mutton. The same night I broke into another cellar near that place,
and stole between twenty and thirty weight of salt pork.

About the same time, I broke onto tavern near the same place, and stole near
two dollars in money, and one case-bottle of rum.

Between Providence and Attleborough, I broke open two cellars, and stole some
meat.

I broke into a house in Johnson, and stole betwixt twenty and thirty with. of
salt pork and beef, and one broom.

Some of the things I stole this year, I sold at the market in Providence.

April 23d. 1785. I was imprisoned at Nantucket, for striking a truckman, and
some other persons, at a time when I was intoxicated with liquor: The next day
I was released upon my paying a fine and the cost of prosecution.

I broke open a house in Stoughton, stole several aprons, some handkerchiefs,
and some other apparel.

I stole about two yards and an half of tow cloth from Col. David Lathrop, of
Bridgewater; and the same night I stole a shirt from a clothier, in the same
town; and I also stole one apron, one pocket-handkerchief, one pair of
stockings, and one shift from Thomas Howard, of East-Bridgewater, upon the same
night.

The next week I stole a piece of tow-cloth, in Halifax, and at the same time I
broke into a house, and stole about twenty pounds of salt beef, and three
pounds of wool.

October 15th, 1785, I broke open a shop in Walpole, and stole seven pair of
shoes.

Nov. 1785. I broke open a store in Natick, and stole a quantity of goods from
the owner, viz. Mr. Morris.

At Capt. Bent's tavern, in Stoughtonham, I went down chimney, by a rope,
opened a window and fastened it up with my jack-knife; immediately after, a man
came to the house for a gallon of rum; he called to the landlord, and his
daughter (as I took her to be) arose and waited upon him. She discovered the
open window, with the jack-knife, and said it did not belong to the house; it
was concluded that it belonged to some boys who were gone to a husking, and had
called there that evening. -- It was my design to have made my escape out at
the window, when I opened it, in case I should be discovered by any person in
the house: But when the man came up to the house, I fearing I might be
discovered, drawed myself up chimney and stood on the cross-bar until he was
gone and all the people were asleep; I then descended again, and stole near
three dollars out of the bar; then ascended the chimney and escaped without
being discovered.

The same month I hid a quantity of goods which I had stole (part of them being
the goods I had stolen at Natick) in a barn, belonging to Mr. Nathaniel Foster,
in Middleborough, and I engaged to come and work for the said Foster It
happened that I was taken upon suspicion that I had stolen a horse (which I had
taken and rode about four miles) and committed to gaol in the county of
Plymouth, but as no sufficient evidence appeared, I was set at liberty. In the
mean time the said Foster found the goods and advertised them. I sent my wife
to him, she owned and received the goods, and I escaped undiscovered, by her
telling him that I came to his house in the evening preceding the day I had
gromised to work for him; that as it was late in the night, and the weather
rainy, I did not choose to disturb him and his family, by calling them up; that
I was obliged to leave the goods and return home, and being taken up on the
suspicion aforesaid, I could not take care of the goods etc.

April 1st, 1786, I broke into a house, in Medford, and stole two pair of
stockings, one scarf, one gown, and one pair of buckles.

The same month I broke into the house of one Mr. Blake, innholder, opposite
the barracks in Rutland, and stole a bottle of bitters, and three or four
dollars in money.

Soon after I broke into Mr. Chickery's house, in Holden, and stole about
thirty dollars worth of clothing. The next day I lodged in the woods, and at
evening Mr. Chickery took me up after I had got into the highway, searched my
pack, and found his things. On his attempting to seize me, I ran off, and made
my escape. -- I left my pack, and the money I had stolen from Mr. Blake.

Not long after, I went to Mr. Jotham Howe's in Shrewsbury, and opened a
window, and stole a blanket.

I then went to another house, broke in, and stole a fine apron out of a desk.
The same night I went to a barn belonging to Mr. Baldwin, in said Shrewsbury,
and lodged in it the next day, and at evening I broke into his house, and stole
about three shillings and three pence in money, and about nine dollars worth of
clothing, for which crime I am now under sentence of death.

The same night I broke open the house of Mr. ^a^^or, In said Shrewsbury, and
stole i^ money and goods, to the value of near six dollars.

I also broke into the house of Mr. Ross Wyman, of the same town, and upon the
same night, and stole from him near two dollars.

Moreover, I stole a pair of thread stockings at a house just beyond said
Wyman's, and hid myself in the woods, where I lay all the next day, and at
evening I sat off toward Boston, and was taken up by a guard that was placed
by a bridge in the edge of Westborough. I was taken before General Ward,
confesesed the crimes alleged, was committed to gaol, and in April last, I
received sentence of death, for the crime aforementioned.

Upon the evening of the first day of June, I cleared myself of all my chains,
and made an escape from the gaol; And notwithstanding all the admonitions,
counsels and warnings that I had received from the good ministers and other
pious persons who had visited me under my confinement, I returned again to my
vicious practices, "like the dog to his vomit, and the sow that is washed, to
her wallowing in the mire;" for the very same evening I stole a cheese out of a
press in Holden: And the next Saturday I broke into the house of Mr. James
Caldwell, in Bar, and stole near twenty five dollars worth of clothing.

I tarried in Bar about twelve days, and then set off for Natick, and on the
way I broke into a cellar, in Shrewsbury, and stole some bread and cheese --
Whilst I tarried in Bar, I lived in the woods all the time -- when I had got
to Natick, I stole two pair of stockings and two pocket handkerchiefs, that
were hanging out near a house.

From Natick I went to Sherburne, and broke open a store belonging to Mr. Samud
Sanger, and stole between four and five dozen of buttons.

From thence I went to Mr. John Sanger's house, in the same town, broke it
open, and stole a case bottle of rum, one bottle of cherry rum, six cakes of
gigerbread, and as many biscuits: I searched for money, but found none.

At another tavern in the same town, I took out a pane of glass, and opened the
window, but I was discovered by the landlord, made my escape, and went back to
Natick, and tarried there two days.

From Natick I went to Sroughtonham, and at Capt. Bent's (the place were I went
down the chimney) the cellar being open, I went through it, and in the bar-room
I stole fifteen shillings in money, one case bottle of rum, and one half dozen
of biscuits.

Afterward I went to Easton, and on the way I broke open a house, and stole
some cheese, and two pair of shoes, and two pair of shoe buckles. At Easton I
tarried two days, and then made my escape from two men who attempted to take me
up on suspicion that I had broken gaol. From thence I went to Attleborough, and
through a window I stole two cheeses and at a tavern near the same place, I
stole six shillings and eight pence, one case bottle of rum, a sailor's jacket,
and one pair of silver knee buckles.

I then sat off for Providence, and by the way I opened a window, and stole one
cotton jacket, one jack-knife; and at another house on the same way, I stole
through a window one fine apron, one pocket handkerchief, and one pillow case.

I came to providence the 26th day of June, and not long after, I broke open a
cellar, and stole one bottle of beer, some salt fish, and ten pounds of butter.

A few nights after, I went to Col. Mantons's in Johnston, and the cellar being
open, I went into it, and stole twenty pounds of butter, near as much salt
pork, one milk pail, one cheese cloth, and one frock.

A few nights after, I went to Justice Belknap's in the same place, and broke
into his cellar, and stole about thirty pounds of salt pork, one neat's tongue,
one pair of nippers, one box of awls, and one bag. -- It remarkably happened on
the 13th ultimo (the day that had been appointed for my execution) that I was
committed to gaol in Providence, on suspicion of having stolen the things last
mentioned, and on the 18th ult. I was brought back and confined in this gaol
again. -- Many more thefts and other vicious, practices have I been guilty of,
the particulars of which might tire the patience of the reader.

Some of the things I have stolen I have used myself -- some of them I have
sold -- some have been taken from me -- some I have hid where I could not find
them again -- and others I have given to lewd women, who induced me to steal
for their maintenance. I have lived a hard life, by being obliged to keep in
the woods; have suffered much by hunger, nakedness, cold, and the fears of
being detected and brought to justice -- have often been accused of stealing
when I was not guilty, and others have been accused of crimes when I was the
offender. I never murdered any person, nor robbed any body on the highway. I
have had great dealings with women, which to their and my shame be it spoken, I
often too easily obtained my will of them. I hope they will repent, as I do, of
such wicked and infamous conduct. I have had a correspondence with many women,
exclusive of my wife, among whom were several abandoned Whites, and a large
number of Blacks; four of the whites were married women, three of the blacks
have laid children to me besides my wife, who has been much distressed by my
behavior.

Thus have I given a history of my birth, education and atrocious conduct, and
as the time is very high in which I must suffer an ignominious death, I
earnestly entreat that all people would take warning by my wicked example; that
they would shun the paths of destruction by guarding against every temptation;
that they would shun vice, follow virtue and become (through the assistance of
the ALMIGHTY) victorious over the enemies of immortal felicity, who are
exerting themselves to delude and lead nations to destruction.

As I am sensible of the heinousness of my crimes, and am sorry for my wicked
conduct, in violating the laws of the great Governor of the Universe, whose
Divine Majesty I have offended, I earnetly pray that he would forgive my sins,
blot out my multiplied transgressions, and receive my immortal spirit into the
Paradise of never ending bliss.

I ask forgiveness of my wife, and of all persons whom I have injured. I return
my sincere thanks to the Ministers of the Gospel, and others, who have visited
me under my confinement, for their counsels and admonitions, and for the good
care they have taken of me: God reward them for their kindness, and conduct us
all through this troublesome world to the regions of immortal felicity in the
kingdom of Heaven -- AMEN.

his mark. JOHNSON GREEN.
Worcester Gaol, August 16, 1786.
The following POEM was written at the request of JOHNSON GREEN, by a prisoner
in Worcester Gaol, and is at said GREEN's special request, added to his Life
and Confession, as a PART of his DYING WORDS.
LET all the people on the globe
Be on their guard, and see
That they do shun the vicious road
That Is trodden been by me.
If I had shunned the paths of vice;
Had minded to behave
According to the good advice
That my kind mother gave,
Unto my friends I might have been
A blessing in my days,
And shunned the evils that I Have seen
In my pernicious ways.
My wicked counduct has been such,
It Is brought me to distress;
As often times I Have suffered much
By my own wickedness.
My lewdness, drunkenness, and theft
Has often times -- (behold)
Caused me to wander, and be left
To suffer with the cold.
Hid in the woods, in deep distress,
My pinching wants were such,
With hunger, and with nakedness
I often did suffer much.
I Have lived a thief; it is a hard life;
To drink was much inclined;
My conduct has distressed my wife,
A wife both good and kind.
Though many friends which came to see
Me, in these latter times,
Did often with candor, caution me
To leave my vicious crimes;
Yet when I had got out of gaol,
Their labor proved in vain;
For then, alas! I did not fail
To take to them again.
If I had not conducted so;
Had minded to refrain;
Then I should not have had to go
Back to the gaol again.
Thus in the Devil's service, I
Have spent my youthful days,
And now, alas! I soon must die,
For these my wicked ways.
Repent, ye thieves, whilst ye have breath,
Amongst you let be wrought
A reformation, lest to death,
You, like myself, be brought.
Let other vicious persons see
That they from vice abstain;
Lest they undo themselves, like me,
Who in it did remain.
I hope my sad and disinal fate
Will solemn warning be
To people all, both small and great,
Of high and low degree.
By breaking of the righteous laws,
I to the world relate,
That I thereby have been the cause
Of my unhappy fate.
As I repent, I humbly pray
That God would now remit
My sins, which in my vicious way
I really did commit.
May the old TEMPTER soon be bound
And shut up in his den,
And peace and honesty abound
Among the sons of men.
May the great GOD grant this request,
And bring us to that shore
Where peace and everlasting rest
Abides for ever more.
his mark. JOHNSON GREEN.

Printed and Sold at the (...)


