THE POEMS OF PHILIP FRENEAU.

THE POEMS OF PHILIP FRENEAU.

WRITTEN CHIEFLY DURING THE LATE WAR.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY FRANCIS BAILEY, AT YORICK'S HEAD, IN MARKET STREET.
MDCCLXXXVI.

CONTENTS.
THE poetical history of the prophet Jonah, PAGE 1 Pyramids of Egypt, PAGE 13
Monument of Phaon, PAGE 18 Power of ^ancy, PAGE 23 Prayer of Orpheus, PAGE 28
Deserted Farm-house, PAGE 30 Citizen's Resolve, PAGE 32 Epitaph intended for
the tombstone of Patrick Bay, PAGE 35 of Peter Abelard (from the Latin) PAGE 36
The Dying Elm, PAGE 38 Columbus to Ferdinand, PAGE 39 The Rising Glory of
America, PAGE 42 Retirement, PAGE 59 Discovery, PAGE 60 The Distressed Orator,
PAGE 64 Libera nos, Domine, PAGE 65 General Gage's Soliloquy, PAGE 67 The
Midnight Consultations, or, a Trip to Boston, PAGE 72 Desolate Academy, PAGE 82
Seafaring Bachelor, PAGE 83 On the Conqueror of America shut up in Boston,
PAGE 85 The Vernal Ague, PAGE 86 Female Frailty, PAGE 88 Mac Swiggen, a satire,
PAGE 95 The House of Night, a vision, PAGE 101 Jamaica Funeral, PAGE 124
Beauties of Santa Cruz, PAGE 133 Psalm CXXXVII versified, PAGE 151 America
independent, PAGE 153 On the new American frigate Alliance, PAGE 164 Death of
captain Nicholas Biddle, PAGE 166 Captain Jones's Invitation, PAGE 169 George
the Third's Soliloquy for 1779. PAGE 171 The Retort, PAGE 174 A Dialogue
between his Britannic Majesty and Mr. Fox, PAGE 177 The Brit^sh Prison Ship,
PAGE 186 On Paul Jones's engagement with the Seraphis, etc. PAGE 207 To his
excellency General Washington, PAGE 212 Copy of an Intercepted Letter, PAGE 214
To Lord Cornwallis, PAGE 216 Dialogue between the Lords Dunmore and Mansfield,
PAGE 217 Epistle from Lord Cornwallis to Sir Henry Clinton, PAGE 219 A Moral
Thought, PAGE 221 On the Fall of Lord Cornwallis, PAGE 222 To the Memory of the
brave Americans, under General Green, who fell in the action of September 8,
1781. PAGE 229 Plato the philosopher to his friend The^n, PAGE 230 Prologue,
PAGE 234 On the Ruins of a Country Inn, PAGE 235 The Royal Adventurer, PAGE 237
Lord Dunmore's Petition to the Legislature of Virginia, PAGE 239 Epigram,
occasioned by the Title of Rivington's Royal Gazette being scarcely legible,
PAGE 241 On Mr. Rivington's new Titular Types to his Royal Gazette, PAGE 242 On
Mr. Rivington's new engraved King's Arms to his Royal Gazette, PAGE 243 A
Speech, that should have been spoken by the King of the island of Britain to
his Parliament, PAGE 244 Rivington's Last Will and Testament, PAGE 247 A
prophecy, PAGE 250 The Political Balance; or, the Fates of Britain and America
compared, PAGE 251 Sir Harry's Call, PAGE 261 A Dialogue at Hyde-Park corner,
PAGE 263 On the royal sloop of war, General Monk, PAGE 264 Truth anticipated,
PAGE 265 The Sailor's Invitation, PAGE 268 Song, on capt. Barney's victory over
the ship General Monk, PAGE 271 On Sir Henry Clinton's Recall, PAGE 275 Sir Guy
Carleton's Address to the Americans, PAGE 278 The English Quixote of 1778. PAGE
281 The Projectors, PAGE 284 On a Lady's singing Bird, PAGE 285 On General
Robertson's Proclamation, PAGE 287 The tenth Ode of Horace's book of Epodes
imitated, PAGE 290 Philosophical Reflections, PAGE 291 Prince William Henry's
Soliloquy, PAGE 294 The Flagellators, PAGE 296 Satan's Remonstrance, PAGE 298
To a writer who subscribes himself "A Foe to Tyrants." PAGE 299 To the "Foe to
Tyrants," PAGE 300 To the "Foe to Tyrants," on his farewell, PAGE 302 The
New York Refugees Petition to Sir Guy Carleton, PAGE 303 Sir Guy's Answer, PAGE
304 To those whom it may concern, PAGE 305 To those whom it may concern, PAGE
307 The Prophecy of king Tammany, PAGE 308 Rivington's Reflections, PAGE 310
Hugh Gaine's Life, PAGE 317 On the Departure of the British from Charleston,
PAGE 32^ On the king's Speech, recommending peace with America, PAGE 331 A
New York Tory's Epistle, PAGE 333 Rivington's Confessions, (Part I.) PAGE 337
New York, PAGE 341 Rivington's Confessions, (Part II.) PAGE 345 The dying
Indian, PAGE 350 Lines, intended for Mr. Peale's Exhibition, PAGE 352 On
General Washington's arrival in Philadelphia, PAGE 356 Humanity and Ingratitude
(from the French) PAGE 360 Pewter Platter All^y, PAGE 363 Verses made at sea,
in a heavy gale, PAGE 365 On the Death of a favorite Dog, PAGE 366 The
Progress of Balloons, PAGE 368 On the Death of General Joseph Reed, PAGE 372
The Five Ages, PAGE 373 The Tories Address to the Americans, PAGE 375 On the
Emigration to America, PAGE 378 The Seasons moralized, PAGE 380 New Year's
verses, for Francis Wrigley, News Carrier, 1783. PAGE 381 for the Pennsylvania
Evening Post, PAGE 383 for the Freeman's Journal, PAGE 385 for the Pennsylvania
Gazette, 1784. PAGE 387 for the Freeman's Journal, PAGE 389 for the Freeman's
Journal, 1785. PAGE 391
The Literary Plunderers, PAGE 393 Sketches of American History, PAGE 398
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE pieces now collected and printed in the following sheets, were left in my
hands, by the author, above a year ago, with permission to publish them
whenever I thought proper. A considerable number of the performances contained
in this volume, as many will recollect, have appeared at different times in
Newspapers, (particularly the Freeman's Journal) and other periodical
publications in the different Stat^s of America, during the late war, and
since; and from the avidity and pleasure with which they generally appear to
have been read by persons of the best taste, the Printer now the more readily
gives them to the world in their present form, (without troubling the reader
with any affected apologies for their supposed or real imperfections) in hopes
they will afford a high degree of satisfaction to the lovers of poetical wit,
and elegance of expression.

Francis Bailey.
PHILADELPHIA, June 1, 1786.
THE POETICAL HISTORY OF THE PROPHET JONAH.
This is rather to be considered as a paraphrase upon, than a mere
versification of the story as related in the Bible. Done in the year 1768.

CANTO I.
IN ages past, when smit with warmth sublime,
Their bards foretold the dark events of time,
And, piercing forward through the mystic shade,
Kings yet to come, and chiefs unborn, surveyed,
Amittai's son perceived, among the rest,
The mighty flame usurp his laboring breast: --
For thus, in dreams, the voice unerring came
Of HIM, who lives through every age the same:
"ARISE! and over the intervening waste,
"To Nineveh's imperial turrets haste;
"That mighty town to ruin I decree,
"Proclaim destruction, and proclaim from me:
"Too long it stands, to GOD and man a foe,
"Without one virtue left to shield the blow;
"Guilt, black as night, their speedy ruin brings,
"And hottest vengeance from the KING of KINGS."
The prophet heard -- but dared to disobey,
(Weak as he was) and fled a different way;
In Joppa's port a trading ship he found
Far over the main to distant Tarshish bound;
The price of passage to her chief he paid,
And there concealed with ruffian sailors stayed,
His purpose fixed, at once perverse and blind,
To leave his country, and his GOD behind.
BUT HE who spread the ocean's vast expanse,
And views all nature with a single glance,
Forth from their prisons bade the tempests fly --
The tempests swelled the ocean to the sky;
The trembling barque, as the fierce billow knocks,
Scarce bears the fury of repeated shocks;
Her crew distressed, astonished and afraid,
Each to his various god in anguish prayed,
Nor trust alone to penitence and prayer,
They clear the deck^, and for the worst prepare,
The costly lading to the deep they throw,
That lighter over the billows she may go,
Nor with regret the wealthy cargo spared,
For wealth is nothing, when with life compared.
BUT to the ship's remotest chambers fled
There pensive Jonah drooped his languid head,
And, new to all the dangers of the deep,
Had sunk, dejected, in the arms of sleep --
'Twas then the master broke the prophet's rest,
And as he cried, he smote his frantic breast --
"O sleeper, from thy stupid slumbers rise,
"At such an hour can sleep invade thine eyes? --
"If ever thou to heaven did send a prayer,
"Now send thy warmest supplications there,
"Perhaps thy God may pity our distress,
"And save us, foundering in this dark abyss."
THUS warned, the seer his vows repentant paid --
Meantime, the seamen to their fellows said;
"No common waves our shattered vessel rent,
"There must be one for whom this storm is sent,
"Some wretch we bear, for whom these billows rise,
"Foe to the gods, and hated by the skies;
"Come, since the billows all our arts defy,
"Come, let the lot decide for whom we die."
INSTANT the lots amid the vase they threw,
And the marked lot dejected Jonah drew!
THEN thus their chief the guilty man addressed,
"Say, for what crimes of thine are we distressed?
"What is thy country, what thy calling, say,
"Whence do thou come, what potentate obey?
"Unfold it all, nor be the truth denied." --
The master spoke -- and Jonah thus replied:
"A HEBREW I, from neighboring regions came,
"A Jewish prophet, not unknown to fame;
"That God I fear who spread this raging sea,
"Who fixed the shores by his supreme decree,
"And reigns throughout immeasurable space,
"His footstool earth, the heaven his dwelling place.
"But I, regardless of his high command,
"His mandate s^ighting, fled my native land,
"Fool that I was, from Joppa's port to fly,
"Who thought to shun his all pervading eye! --
"For this the tempest rends each tattered sail,
"For this, your vessel scarce supports the gale!"
THE seamen heard, distracted and dismayed;
When thus again their trembling captain said;
"How consist thou thus, ungenerous as thou art,
"Affront thy patron, and with us depart; --
"Lo! for thy crimes, and not our own, we die;
"Mark, how the wild waves threaten from on high,
"Our sails in fragments flit before the blast,
"Scarce to its station we confine the mast;
"What shall we do, unhappy man declare,
"How shall we act, or how direct our prayer,
"That angry Neptune may his rage restrain,
"And hush once more these tumults of the main?"
THE seer replied, "The means are in your power
"To still the tempest in this dreadful hour: --
"High on the sea-beat prow will I ascend,
"And let the boldest of your crew attend
"To plunge me headlong from that giddy steep
"Down to the bosom of the unfathomed deep;
"So shall the ocean from its raging cease,
"And the fierce tempest soon be hushed in peace: --
"'It Is for my crime this angry ocean raves,
"'It Is for my sin we plough these fearful waves;
"Dislodge me soon -- the storm shall then decay,
"Which still grows louder while on board I stay."
THUS he -- but they, to save their vagrant guest
Refused as yet to grant his strange request,
And though aloft on mountain waves they ride,
And the tossed galley reels from side to side,
Yet to their breasts they drew the sweepy oar,
And vainly strove to gain the distant shore;
The ruffian winds refuse that wished retreat,
And fiercer over the deck^ the billows beat,
THEN to the skies the chief his praye^ addressed,
"Thou JOVE supreme, the greatest and the best!
"Because thy sovereign pleasure does require
"That death alone must satisfy thine ire,
"O spare us for thy dying prophet's sake,
"Nor let us perish for the life we take;
"If we are wrong, his lot was thy decree,
"And thou have done as it seemed best to thee."
THEN from the summit of the washy prow,
They plunged the prophet to the depths below,
And straight the winds and straight the billows cease,
And every threatening surge lay hushed in peace;
The trembling crew adore the Power Supreme
Who kindly thus from ruin rescued them,
Their vows they send to his imperial throne,
And victims offer to this God unknown.
CANTO II.
WHEN from the prow's intimidating height
They plunged the prophet to the realms of night,
Not long he languish'd in the briny deep,
In death's cold arms not yet decreed to sleep. --
JEHOVAH saw him, from the abodes of bliss,
Sunk to the bottom of the vast abyss,
And bade a whale, the mightiest of the kind,
His prophet in these dismal mansions find --
The hostile form, approaching through the wave,
Received him, living, to a living grave,
Where three long days in dark distress he lay,
And often repenting, to his God did pray --
The power benign, propitious to his prayer,
Bade the huge fish to neighboring shores repair --
Instant the whale obeyed the high command,
And cast him safe on Palestina's strand.
THE prophet then his past transgressions mourned,
And grateful thus, to heaven his thanks returned*
"Afflicted from the depths of hell I prayed,
"The dark abyss of everlasting shade;
"My GOD in mercy heard the earnest prayer,
"And dying Jonah felt thy presence there.
"Because I dared thy mandate disobey,
"Far did thou plunge me from the face of day:
"In the vast ocean, where no land is found,
"The mighty waters closed thy prophet round;
"On me the waves their utmost fury spent,
"And all thy billows over my body went,
"Yet then, surrounded by the dismal shade,
"Thus to my MAKER from the depths I said:
"Though hid beneath the caverns of the main,
"To thy blessed temple will I look again,
"Though from thy sight to deepest darkness thrown,
"Still will I trust, and trust on thee alone; --
"With anguish deep I felt the billows roll,
"Scarce in her mansion stayed my frighted soul;
"About my head were wrapped the weeds of night,
"And darkness, mingled with no ray of light;
"I saw the caves the briny ocean fills,
"I saw the bases of the infernal hills,
"Earth, with her bars, encompassed me around,
"Yet, from the bottom of that dark profound
"Where life no more the swelling vein supplies,
"And Death reposes, did thou bid me rise;
"When fainting nature bowed to thy decree,
And the lone spirit had prepared to fle^,
Then from my prison I remembered thee,
"My prayer toward the heavenly temple came,
"The temple sacred to JEHOVAH'S name. --
"Unhappy they, who vanities pursue,
"And lies believing, their own souls undo --
"But to thine ear my grateful song shall rise,
"For thee shall smoke the joyous sacrifice,
"My vows I Will pay at thy imperial throne,
"Since my salvation was from thee alone."
CANTO III.
ONCE more the voice to humbled Jonah came
Of HIM, who lives through every age the same:
"Arise! and over the intervening waste
"To Nineveh's exalted turrets haste,
"And what to thee my SPIRIT shall reveal
"That preach -- nor dare the sacred truth conceal --
"To desolation I that town decree;
"Proclaim destruction, and proclaim from me."
Obedient to JEHOVAH'S high command,
The Prophet rose, and left Judea's land,
And now he near the spiry city drew,
(Euphrates passed, and rapid Tigris too,)
So vast the bulk of this prodigious place
Three days were scant its lengthy streets to trace;
But as he entered, on the first sad day,
Thus he began his tidings of dismay:
"O NINEVEH! to Heaven's decree attend!
"Yet forty days, and all thy glories end!
"Yet forty days, the skies prot^^ct thy fall,
"And desolation then shall bury all,
"Thy proudest towers their utter ruin mourn,
"And domes and temples unextinguish'd burn!
"O Nineveh! the GOD of armies dooms,
"Thy thousand streets to never ending glooms:
"Through mouldering fanes the hollow winds shall roar,
"And vultures scream where monarchs lodged before!
"Thy guilty sons shall bow beneath the sword,
"Thy captive matrons own a foreign lord. --
"Such is the vengeance that the heavens decree,
"Such is the ruin that must bury thee!"
THE people heard, and smit with instant fear,
Believed the fatal warnings of the seer:
This sudden ruin so their souls distressed,
That each with sackcloth did his limbs invest,
From him that glittered on the regal throne,
To him that did beneath the burden groan --
Soon to their monarch came this voice of fate,
Who left his throne and costly robes of state,
And over his limbs a vest of sackcloth drew,
And sat in ashes, sorrowful to view --
His lords and nobles, now repentant grown,
With equal grief their various sins bemoan,
And through the city sent this loud decree,
With threatening backed, and dreadful penalty:
"YE Ninivites, your wonted food refrain,
"Nor touch, ye beasts, the herbage of the plain,
"Let all that live be humbled to the dust,
"Nor taste the waters, though ye die of thirst:
"Let men and beasts the garb of sorrow wear,
"And beg yon' skies these guilty walls to spare:
"Let all repent the evil they pursue,
"And curse the mischief that their hands would do --
"Perhaps that GOD who leans to mercy still,
"And sent a prophet to declare his will,
"May yet the vengeance he designs, adjourn,
"And, ere we perish, from his anger turn."
JEHOVAH heard, and pleased beheld at last
Their deep repentance for transgressions past,
With pity moved he heard the earnest prayer
Of this vast city, humbled in despair;
Though justly due, his anger dies away,
He bids the angel of destruction stay --
THE obedient angel hears the high command,
And sheathes the sword he drew to smite the land.
CANTO IV.
BUT anger swelled the haughty prophet's breast,
Rage burned within, and robbed his soul of rest;
Such was his pride he wished they all in flame
Might rather perish than belie his fame,
And GOD'S own bolts the tottering towers assail,
And millions perish, than his word should fail.
Then to the heavens he sent this peevish prayer --
(Vain, impious man to send such pinings there):
"WHILE yet within my native land, I stayed,
"This would at last reward my toil, I said,
"Destruction through the Assyrian streets to cry,
"And then the event my mission falsify;
"For this I strove to shun thy sight before,
"And sought repose upon a foreign shore;
"I knew thou were so gracious and so kind,
"Such mercy sways thy vast creating mind,
"Averse thy bolts of vengeance to employ,
"And still relenting when thou should destroy,
"That when I had declared thy sacred will,
"Thou would not what I prophesied fulfill,
"But leave me thus to scorn, contempt, and shame,
"A lying prophet, blasted in my fame; --
"And now, I pray thee, grant my last request,
"O take my life, so wretched and unblest!
"If here I stay, it is but to grieve and sigh,
"Then take my life -- it is better far to die."
"IS it thy place to swell with rage and pride,
"(Thus to his pining prophet, God replied)
"Say, is it just thy heart should burn with ire
"Because the city is not wrapped in fire?
"What if I choose its ruin to delay,
"And send destruction on some future day,
"Must thou, for that, with wasting anguish sigh,
"And, hostile to my pleasure, wish to die?"
THEN Jonah parted from the mourning town,
And near its eastern limits sat him down,
A booth he builded with assiduous care,
(Formed of the cypress boughs that flourished there)
And anxious now beneath their shadow lay,
Waiting the issue of the fortieth day --
As yet uncertain if the Power Divine
Or would to mercy or to wrath incline --
Meantime, the leaves that roof'd his arbor over,
Shrunk up and faded, sheltered him no more;
But GOD ordained a thri^ty gourd to rise,
To screen his prophet from the scorching skies;
High over his head aspired the spreading leaf,
Too fondly meant to mitigate his grief,
So close a foliage over his head was made,
That not a beam could pierce the happy shade:
The wondering seer perceived the branches grow
And blessed the shadow that relieved his woe;
But when the next bright morn began to shine
(So GOD ordained) a worm attacked the vine,
Beneath his bite its goodly leaves decay,
And wasting, withering, die before the day!
But as the lamp of heaven still higher rose
From eastern skies a sultry tempest blows,
The vertie sun as fiercely poured his ray,
And beamed around insufferable day,
How beat those beams on Jonah's fainting head!
How often he wished a place among the dead!
All he could do, was now to grieve and sigh,
His life detest, and beg of GOD to die.
AGAIN, JEHOVAH to his prophet said,
"Art thou so angry for thy vanished shade --
"For a mere shadow do thou well to grieve,
"For this poor loss would thou thy being leave?"
"MY rage is just, (the frantic prophet cried),
"My last, my only comfort is denied --
"The spreading vine that formed my leafy bower,
"Behold it vanished in the needful hour!
"To beating winds and sultry suns a prey
"My fainting spirit droops and dies away --
"Give me a mansion in my native dust,
"For though I die with rage, my rage is just."
ONCE more the ALMIGHTY deigned to make reply --
"Does this lost gourd thy sorrow swell so high,
" Whose friendly shade not to thy toil was due,
"Alone it sprouted, and alone it grew;
"A night beheld its branches waving high,
"And the next sun beheld those branches die;
"And should not pity move the LORD of all
"To spare this vast Assyrian capital,
"Within whose walls uncounted myriads stray,
"Their Father I, my sinful offspring they? --
"Should they not move the great creating mind
"With six score thousand of the infant kind,
"And herds untold that graze the spacious field,
"For whom yon' meads their stores of fragrance yield;
"Should I this royal city wrap in flame,
"And slaughter millions to support thy fame,
"When now repentant to their GOD they turn,
"And their past follies, low in ashes, mourn? --
"Vain thoughtless wretch, recall thy weak request,
"Death never came to man a welcome guest; --
"Why wish to die -- what madness prompts thy mind,
"Too long the days of darkness thou shall find;
"Life was a blessing by thy Maker meant,
"Do thou despise the blessings he has lent --
"Enjoy my gifts while yet the seasons run
"True to their months, and social with the sun;
"When to the dust my mandate bids thee fall,
"All these are lost -- for death conceals them all --
"No more the sun illumes the sprightly day,
"The seasons vanish, and the stars decay:
"The trees, the flowers, no more thy sense delight,
"Death shades them all in ever during night.
"Then think not long the little space I lent --
"Of thy own sins, like Nineveh, repent;
"Rejoice at last the mighty change to see,
"And bear with them as I have borne with thee."
THE PYRAMIDS OF EGYPT. A DIALOGUE.
Scene. EGYPT. Persons. TRAVELLER, GENIUS, TIME.

Written in 1770.

Traveller. WHERE are those famed piles of human grandeur,
Those sphinxes, pyramids, and Pompey's pillar,
That bid defiance to the arm of TIME --
Tell me, dear GENIUS: for I long to see them.

Genius. At Alexandria rises Pompey's pillar,
Whose birth is but of yesterday, compared
With those prodigious fabrics that you see
Over yonder distant plain -- upon whose breast
Old Nile has never rolled his swelling streams,
The only plain so privileged in Egypt.
These pyramids may well excite your wonder,
They are of most remote antiquity,
Almost co-eval with those cloud-crown'd hills
That westward from them rise -- 'twas the same age
That saw old Babel's tower aspiring high,
When first the sage Egyptian architects
These ancient turrets to the heaven raised; --
But Babel's tower is gone, and these remain!

Traveller. Old Rome I thought unrivaled in her years,
At least the remnants that we find of Rome,
But these, you tell me, are of older date.

Genius. Talk not of Rome! -- before they lopt a bush
From the seven hills where Rome, earth's empress, stood,
These pyramids were old -- their birth day is
Beyond tradition's reach, or history.

Traveller. Then let us haste toward those piles of wonder
That scorn to bend beneath this weight of years --
Lo! to my view, the aweful mansions rise
The pride of art, the sleeping place of death!
Are these the four prodigious monuments
That so astonish every generation --
Let us examine this, the first and greatest --
A secret horror chills my breast, dear Genius,
To touch those monuments that are so ancient,
The fearful property of ghosts and death! --
Yet of such mighty bul^, that I presume
A race of giants were the architects. --
Since these pro^d fabrics to the heavens were raised
How many generations have decayed,
How many monarchies to ruin passed!
How many empires had their rise and fall!
While these remain -- and promise to remain
As long as yonder sun shall gild their summits,
Or moon or stars their wonted circles run.

Genius. The time shall come
When these stupendous piles you deem immortal,
Worn out with age, shall moulder on their bases,
And down, down, low to endless ruin verging,
Overwhelmed by dust, be seen and known no more! --
Ages ago, in dark oblivion's lap
Had they been shrouded, but the atmosphere
In these parched climates, hostile to decay,
Is pregnant with no rain, that by its moisture
Might waste their bulk in such excess of time,
And prove them merely mortal.
'Twas on this plain the ancient Memphis stood,
Her walls encircled these tall pyramids --
But where is Pharaoh's palace, where the domes
Of Egypt's haughty lords? -- all, all are gone,
And like the phantom snows of a May morning
Left not a vestige to discover them!

Traveller. How shall I reach the vortex of this pile --
How shall I clamber up its shelving sides?
I scarce endure to glance toward the summit,
It seems among the clouds -- When was it thou raised
O work of more than mortal majesty --
Was this produced by persevering man,
Or did the gods erect this pyramid?

Genius. Nor gods, nor giants raised this pyramid --
It was the toil of mortals like yourself
That swelled it to the skies --
See thou yon' little door? Through that they passed,
Who raised so high this aggregate of wonders!
What cannot tyrants do,
When they have subject nations at their will,
And the world's wealth to gratify ambition!
Millions of slaves beneath their labors fainted
Who here were doomed to toil incessantly,
And years elapsed while groaning myriads strove
To raise this mighty tomb -- and but to hide
The worthless bones of an Egyptian king. --
O wretch, could not a humbler tomb have done,
Could nothing but a pyramid inter thee!

Traveller. Perhaps old Jacob's race, when here oppressed,
Raised in their years of bondage this dread pile.

Genius. Before the Jewish patriarchs saw the light,
While yet the globe was in its infancy
These were erected to the pride of man --
Four thousand years have run their tedious round
Since these smooth stones were on each other laid,
Four thousand more may run as dull a round
Ere Egypt sees her pyramids decayed.

Traveller. But suffer me to enter, and behold
The interior wonders of this edifice.

Genius. It Is darkness all, with hateful silence joined --
Here drowsy bats enjoy a dull repose,
And marble coffins, vacant of their bones,
Show where the royal dead in ruin lay!
By every pyramid a temple rose
Where often in concert those of ancient time
Sung to their goddess ISIS hymns of praise;
But these are fallen! -- their columns too superb
Are levelled with the dust -- nor these alone --
Where is thy vocal statue, Memnon, now,
That once, responsive to the morning beams,
Harmoniously to father Phoebus sung!
Where is the image that in past time stood
High on the summit of yon pyramid? --
Still may you see its polished pedestal --
Where art thou ancient Thebes? -- all buried low,
All vanished! crumbled into mother dust,
And nothing of antiquity remains
But these huge pyramids, and yonder hills.

Time. Old Babel's tower has felt my potent arm
I ruined Ecbatan and Babylon,
Thy huge Colossus, Rhodes, I tumbled down,
And on these pyramids I smote my scythe;
But they resist its edge -- then let them stand.
But I can boast a greater feat than this,
I long ago have shrouded those in death
Who made those structures rebels to my power --
But, O return! -- These piles are not immortal!
This earth, with all its balls of hills and mountains,
Shall perish by my hand -- then how can these,
These hoary headed pyramids of Egypt,
That are but dwindled warts upon her body,
That on a little, little spot of ground
Extinguish the dull radiance of the sun,
Be proof to Death and me? -- Traveller return --
There Is naught but GOD immortal -- HE alone
Exists secure, when Man, and Death, and Time,
(Time not immortal, but a fancied point
In the vast circle of eternity)
Are swallowed up, and, like the pyramids,
Leave not an atom for their monument!

THE MONUMENT OF PHAON.
Written 1770.
Phaon, the admirer of Sappho, both of the isle of Lesbos, privately forsook
this first object of his affections, and sat out to visit foreign countries.
Sappho, after having long mourned his absence (which is the subject of one of
Ovid's finest epistles) is here supposed to fall into the company of Ismenius a
traveller, who informs her that he saw the tomb of a certain Phaon in Sicily,
erected to his memory by a lady of the island, and gives her the inscriptions,
hinting to her that, in all probability, it belonged to the same person she
bemoans. She thereupon, in a fit of rage and despair, throws herself from the
famous Leucadian rock, and perishes in the gulf below.

Sappho. NO more I sing by yonder shaded stream,
Where once intranc'd I fondly passed the day,
Supremely blessed, when Phaon was my theme,
But wretched now, when Phaon is away!
Of all the youths that graced our Lesbian isle
He, only he, my heart propitious found,
So soft his language, and so sweet his smile,
Heaven was my own when Phaon clasped me round
But soon, too soon, the faithless lover fled
To wander on some distant barbarous shore --
Who knows if Phaon is alive or dead,
Or wretched Sappho shall behold him more.

Ismenius. As late in fair Sicilia's groves I strayed,
Charmed with the beauties of the vernal scene
I sat me down amid the yew tree's shade,
Flowers blooming round, with herbage fresh and green.
Not distant far a monument arose
Among the trees and formed of Parian stone,
And, as if there some stranger did repose,
It stood neglected, and it stood alone.
Along its sides dependent ivy crept,
The cypress bough, Plutonian green, was near,
A sculptured Venus on the summit wept,
A pensive Cupid dropped the parting tear:
Strains deep engraved on every side I read,
How Phaon died upon that foreign shore --
Sappho, I think your Phaon must be dead,
Then hear the strains that do his fate deplore:
Thou swain that love the morning air,
To those embowering trees repair,
Forsake thy sleep at early dawn,
And of this landscape to grow fonder,
Still, O still persist to wander
Up and down the flowery lawn;
And as you there enraptured rove
From hill to hill, from grove to grove,
Pensive now and quite alone,
Cast thine eye upon this stone,
Read its melancholy moan;
And if you can refuse a tear
To the youth that slumbers here,
Whom the Lesbians held so dear,
Nature calls thee not her own.
ECHO, hasten to my aid!
Tell the woods and tell the waves,
Tell the far off mountain caves
(Wrapped in solitary shade);
Tell them in high tragic numbers,
That beneath this marble tomb,
Shrouded in unceasing gloom
Phaon, youthful Phaon, slumbers,
By Sicilian swains deplored --
That a narrow urn restrains
Him who charmed our pleasing plains,
Him, whom every nymph adored.
TELL the woods and tell the waves,
Tell the mossy mountain caves,
Tell them, if none will hear beside,
How our lovely Phaon died.
IN that season when the sun
Bids his glowing charioteer
Phoebus, native of the sphere,
High the burning zenith run;
Then our much lamented swain,
Over the sunny, scorched plain,
Hunting with a chosen train,
Slew the monsters of the waste
From those gloomy caverns chased
Round stupendous Etna placed. --
Conquered by the solar beam
At last he came to yonder stream;
Panting, thirsting there he lay
On this fatal summer's day,
While his locks of raven jett
Were on his temples dripping wet;
The gentle stream ran purling by
Over the pebbles, pleasantly,
T^mpting him to drink and die --
He drank indeed -- but never thought
Death was in the gelid draught! --
Soon it chilled his boiling veins,
Soon this glory of the plains
Left the nymphs and left the swains,
And has fled with all his charms
Where the Stygian monarch reigns,
Where no sun the climate warms! --
Dread Pluto then, as once before,
Passed Avernus' waters over;
Left the dark and dismal shore,
And strait enamored, as he gloomy stood,
Seized Phaon by the waters of the wood.
NOW over the silent plain
We for our much loved Phaon call again,
And Phaon! Phaon! ring the woods amain --
From beneath this myrtle t^ee,
MUSIDORA, wretched maid,
How shall Phaon a swer thee,
Deep in vaulted caverns laid! --
Thrice the myrtle tree has bloomed
Since our Phaon was entombed,
I, who had his heart, below,
I have raised this turret high,
A monument of love and woe
That Phaon's name may never die --
With deepest grief, O muse divine,
Around his tomb thy laurels twine
And shed thy sorrow, for to morrow
Thou, perhaps, shall cease to glow --
My hopes are crossed, my lover lost,
And I must weeping over the mountains go!

Sappho. Ah faithless Phaon, thus from me to rove,
And bless my rival in a foreign grove!
Could Sicily more charming forests show
Than those that in thy native Lesbos grow --
Did fairer fruits adorn the bending tree
Than those that Lesbos did present to thee!
Or did thou find through all the changing fair
One beauty that with Sappho could compare!
So soft, so sweet, so charming and so kind,
A face so fair, such beauties of the mind --
Not Musidora can be ranked with me
Who sings so well thy funeral song for thee! --
I Will go! -- and from the high Leucadian steep
Take my last farewell in the lover's leap,
I charge thee, Phaon, by this deed of woe
To meet me in the Elysian shades below,
No rival beauty shall pretend a share,
Sappho alone shall walk with Phaon there.
SHE spoke, and downward from the mountains height
Plunged in the plashy wave to everlasting night.

THE POWER OF FANCY.
Written 1770.
WAKEFUL, vagrant, restless thing,
Ever wandering on the wing,
Who thy wondrous source can find,
FANCY, regent of the mind;
A spark from Jove's resplendent throne,
But thy nature all unknown.
THIS spark of bright, celestial flame,
From Jove's seraphic altar came,
And hence alone in man we trace,
Resemblance to the immortal race.
AH! what is all this mighty WHOLE,
These suns and stars that round us roll!
What are they all, wherever they shine,
But Fancies of the Power Divine!
What is this globe, these lands, and seas,
And heat, and cold, and flowers, and trees,
And life, and death, and beast, and man,
And time -- that with the sun began --
But thoughts on reason's scale combined,
Ideas of the Almighty mind?
ON the surface of the brain
Night after night she walks unseen,
Noble fabrics does she raise
In the woods or on the seas,
On some high, steep, pointed rock,
Where the billows loudly knock
And the dreary tempests sweep
Clouds along the uncivil deep*
Lo! she walks upon the moon,
Listens to the ch^my tune
Of the bright, harmonious spheres,
And the song of angels hears;
Sees this earth a distant star Milton's Paradise Lost, B. II.v.1052.
,
Pendant, fl^ating in the air;
Leads me to some lonely dome,
Where Religion loves to come,
Where the bride of Jesus dwells,
And the deep ton'd organ swells
In ^otes with lofty anthems joined,
Notes that half distract the mind.
NOW like lightning she descends
To the prison of the fiends,
Hears the rattling of their chains,
Fee^s the^r never ceasing pains --
But, O never may she tell
Half the frightfulness of hell.
NOW she views Arcadian rocks,
Where the shepherds gu^rd their flocks,
And, while yet her wings she spreads,
Sees crystal streams and coral beds,
Wanders to some desert deep,
Or some dark, enchanted steep,
By the full moon light does show
Forests of a dusky blue,
Where, upon some mossy bed,
Innocence reclines her head.
SWIFT, she stretches over the seas
To the far off Hebrides,
Canvas on the lofty mast
Could not travel half so fast --
Swifter than the eagle's flight
Or instantaneous rays of light!
Lo! contemplative she stands
On Norwegia's rocky lands --
^ickle Goddess, set me down
Where the rugged winters frown
Upon Orc^'s howling steep,
Nodding o'e^ the northern deep,
Where the winds tumultuous roar,
Vexed that Ossian sings no more.
Fancy, to that land repair,
Sweetest Ossian slumbers there;
Waft me far to southern isles
Where the softened winter smiles,
To Bermuda's orange shades,
Or Demarara's lovely glades;
Bear me over the sounding cape,
Painting death in every shape,
Where daring Anson spread the sail
Shattered by the stormy gale --
Lo! she leads me wide and far,
Sense can never follow her --
Shape thy course over land and sea,
Help me to keep pace with thee,
Lead me to yon' chalky cliff,
Over rock and over reef,
Into Britain's fertile land,
Stretching far her proud command.
Look back and view, through many a year,
Caesar, Julius Caesar, there.
NOW to Tempe's verdant wood,
Over the mid-ocean flood
Lo! the islands of the sea
-- Sappho, Lesbos mourns for thee:
Greece, arouse thy humbled head,
Where are all thy mighty dead,
Who states to endless ruin hurled
And carried vengeance through the world? --
Troy, thy vanished pomp resume,
Or, weeping at thy Hector's tomb,
Yet those faded scenes renew,
Whose memory is to Homer due.
Fancy, lead me wandering still
Up to Ida's cloud-topt hill;
Not a laurel ther^ does grow
But in vision thou shall show, --
Every sprig on Virgil's tomb
Shall in livelier colors bloom,
And every triumph Rome has seen
Flourish on the years between*
NOW she bears me far away
In the east to meet the day,
Leads me over Ganges' streams,
Mother of the morning beams --
Over the ocean has she ra^,
Places me on Tinian;
Farther, farther in the east,
Till it almost meets the west,
Let us wandering both be lost
On Taitis sea-beat coast,
Bear me from that distant stran^,
Over ocean, over land,
To California's golden shore --
Fancy, stop, and rove no more.
NOW, though late, returning home,
Lead me to Belinda's tomb;
Let me glide as well as you
Through the shroud and coffin too,
And behold, a moment, there,
All that once was good and fair --
Who does here so soundly sleep?
Shall we break this prison deep? --
Thunders cannot wake the maid,
Lightnings cannot pierce the shade,
And though wintry tempests roar,
Tempests shall disturb no more.
YET must those eyes in darkness stay,
That once were rivals to the day --?
Like heaven's bright lamp beneath the main
They are but set to rise again.
FANCY, thou the muses pride,
In thy painted realms reside
Endless images of things,
Fluttering each on golden wings,
Ideal objects, such a store,
The universe could hold no more:
Fancy, to thy power I owe
Half my happiness below;
By thee Elysian groves were made,
Thine were the notes that Orpheus played;
By thee was Pluto charmed so well
While rapture seized the sons of hell --
Come, O come -- perceived by none,
You and I will walk alone.
THE PRAYER OF ORPHEUS.
SAD monarch of the world below,
Stern guardian of this drowsy shade,
Through thy unlovely realms I go
To seek a captive thou have made.
Over Stygian waters have I passed,
Contemning Jove's unjust decree,
And reached thy sable court at last
To find my lost Eurydice.
OF all the nymphs so decked and dressed
Like Venus of the starry train,
She was the loveliest and the best,
The pride and glory of the plain.
O free from thy despotic sway
This nymph of heaven-descended charms,
Too soon she came this dusky way --
Restore thy captive to my arms.
AS by a stream's fair, verdant side
In myrtle shades she roved along,
A serpent stung my b^ooming bride,
This brightest of the female throng --
The venom hastening through her veins
Forbid the freezing blood to flow.
And thus she left the Thracian plains
For these dejected groves below.
Even thou may pity my sad pain,
Since love, as ancient stories say,
Forced thee to leave thy native reign,
And in Sicilian meadows stray:
Bright Proserpine thy bosom fired,
For her you sought the unwelcome light,
Madness and love in you conspired
To seize her to the shades of night.
BUT if, averse to my request,
The vanished nymph, for whom I mourn,
Must in Plutonian chambers rest,
And never to my arms return --
Take Orpheus too -- his warm desire
Can never be quenched by your decree,
In life or death he must admire,
He must adore Eurydice.
THE DESERTED FARM-HOUSE.
THIS antique dome the unmouldering tooth of time
Now level with the dust has almost laid; --
Yet ere it is gone, I fix my humble rhyme
On these low ruins, that his years have made.
Behold the unsocial hearth! -- where once the fires
Blazed high, and checked the wint'ry travelers woes;
See the weak roof, that abler props requires,
Admits the chilling winds, and swift descending snows.
Here, to forget the labors of the day,
No more the swains at evening hours repair,
But wandering flocks assume the well known way
To shun the rigours of the midnight air.
In yonder chamber, half to ruin gone,
Once stood the ancient housewife's curtain'd bed --
Timely the prudent matron has withdrawn,
And each domestic comfort with her fled.
The trees, the flowers that her own hands had reared,
The plants, the vines that were so verdant see^,
The trees, the flowers, the vines have disappeared,
And every plant has vanished from the green.
So fits in tears on wide Campania's plain
The ancient mistress of a world enslaved
That triumphed over the land, subdued the main,
And Time himself in her wild transports braved.
So fits in tears on Palestina's shore
The Hebrew town, of splendour once divine --
Her kings, her lords, her triumphs are no more;
Slain are her priests, and ruined every shrine.
Once in the bounds of this sequestered room
Perhaps some swain nocturnal courtship made,
Perhaps some Sherlock mused amid the gloom,
Since Love and Death forever seek the shade.
Perhaps some miser, doomed to discontent,
Here counted over the heaps acquired with pain:
He to the dust -- his gold, on traffic sent,
Shall never disgrace these mouldering walls again.
Nor shall the glowworm fopling, sunshine bred,
Seek, at the evening hour, this wonted dome --
Time has reduced the fabric to a shed
Scarce fit to be the wandering beggar's home.
And none but I its piteous fate lament --
None, none but I over its cold ashes mourn,
Sent by the muse -- (the time perhaps misspent --)
To shed her latest tears upon its silent urn.
THE CITIZEN's RESOLVE.
Written 1770.
"FAR be the dull and heavy day
"And toil and restless care from me --
"Sorrow attends on loads of gold,
"And kings are wretched, I am told;
"Soon from the noisy town removed
"To such wild scenes as Shenstone loved,
"Where, fixed the leafless oaks between,
"Less haughty grows the winter green,
"There, Night, will I (locked in thy arms,
"Sweet goddess of the sable charms)
"Enjoy the dear, delightful dreams
"That Fancy prompts by sylvan streams,
"Where wood-nymphs walk their evening round,
"And fairies haunt the moonlight ground.
"BENEATH some mountain's towering height
"In cottage low I hail the night
"Where jovial swains with heart sincere
"Welcome the new returning year; --
"Each tells a tale, or chants a song
"Of her, for whom he sighed so long,
"Of Dolly fair or Delia coy,
"Negl^cting still her lovesick boy --
"While near the hoary headed sage
"Recalls the feats of youth's gay age*
"All that in past time ever was seen,
"And many a frolic on the green,
"How champion he with champions met,
"And fiercely they did combat it --
"Or how, full often with horn and hound
"They chased the deer the forest round --
"The panting deer as swiftly flies,
"Yet by the well aimed musket dies!
"THUS pass the evening hours away,
"Unnotic'd dies the parting day,
"Unmeasured flows that happy juice,
"Which mild October did produce,
"No surly sage, too frugal found,
"No niggard housewife deals it round,
"But swift as changing goblets pass
"They bless the virtues of the glass.
"BUT now the moon, exalted high,
"Adds luster to the earth and sky,
"And in the mighty ocean's glass
"Admires the beauties of her face --
"About her orb you may behold
"The circling stars that blush with cold --
"But they in brighter seasons please,
"Winter can find no charms in these,
"While less ambitious, we admire,
"And more esteem domestic fire.
"O COULD I there a mansion find
"Suited exactly to my mind,
"Near that industrious, heavenly trai^
"Of rustics honest, neat, and plain;
"The days, the weeks, the years to pass
"With some good natured, longing lass,
"With her the cooling spring to sip,
"And seize, at will, her damask lip;
"The groves, the springs, the shades divine,
"And all Arcadia should be mine.
"STEEP me, steep me some poppies deep
"In beechen bowl, to bring on sleep;
"Love has my soul in fetters bound,
"Through the dull night no sleep I found --
"O gentle sleep! bestow thy dreams
"Of fields, and woods, and murmuring streams,
"Deep, tufted groves, and grottoes rare,
"And Flora, charming Flora, there.
"DULL Commerce, hence, with all thy train
"Of debts, and dues, and loss, and gain; --
"To hills, and groves, and purling streams,
"To days of ease, and heaven-born dreams
"While wiser Damon hastes away,
"Should I in this dull city stay,
"Condemned to death by slow decays
"And care, that clouds my brightest days
"NO -- by Silenus' self, I swear,
"In rustic shades I Will kill that care."
SO spoke Lysander, and in haste
His clerks di^charg'd, his goods re-cas'd,
And to the western forests flew
With fifty airy schemes in view;
His ships were set to public sale --
But what did all this change avail? --
In three short months, sick of the heavenly train*
In three short months -- he moved to town again.
EPITAPH
Intended for the Tomb Stone of PATRICK B^Y, an Irish Soldier and Inn-holder,
killed by an ignorant Physician. 1760.

NOT Fate or Death, -- but doctor Row
Advanced to give the deadly blow
That smote me to the shades below.
Had Death alone approached too nigh,
Had Fate or Nature bid me die,
I must have borne it patiently.
But to be robbed of life and ease
By such infernal quacks as these,
And pay, besides, their modest fees,
And leave a world of joys behind! --
Doctor, if I may speak my mind,
It was not fair, it was not kind.
Now folks that travel by this way
Pointing toward my ^omb, shall say,
"There lie the bone^ of Patrick Bay,
"Who never a cheerful glass denied, --
"All force of arms and grog defy'^ --
"Yet by a vile Jack Pudding died*
EPITAPH OF PETER ABELARD.
FROM THE LATIN.
Petrus in hac petra latitat, quem mundus Homerum
Clamabat, sed ^am sidra sidus habent, etc.

PETER lies low beneath this humble stone
Whom mankind for a second Homer own.
Great in his fame, unconquered in distress,
But now the stars this brilliant star possess. --
He shined a sun to illume the wits of France,
But now, alas! the heavens have snatched him hence
And thus, fair Gallia's land is left to moan
Her brightest sun to endless slumbers gone.
He gained all knowledge in the reach of man,
And learned whatever the race of mortals can;
Science by him was from no master bought,
He conquered artists in the arts they taught: --
TO Gallia's land a Socrates was he,
A Plato of the west in him I see,
Excelling all that ever in logic shined,
Our Aristotle of exalted mind*
Prince of all genius on this earthly sphere,
Of reason piercing, subtle, and severe --
By soft persuasion, that no art can teach,
He gained all triumphs, by these powers of speech,
But now he triumphs, and surpasses more
Than ever man or angel did before:
THE DYING ELM.
SWEET, lovely Elm, who here do grow
Companion of unsocial care,
Lo! thy dejected branches die
Amidst this torrid air --
Smit by the sun or sickly moon,
Like fainting flowers, that die at noon.
Thy withering leaves, that drooping hang,
Presage thine end approaching nigh,
And lo! thy amber tears distill,
Attended with that parting sigh --
O charming tree! no more decline,
But be thy shades and lovesick whispers mine.
Forbear to die -- this weeping eve
Shall shed her little drops on you,
Shall over thy sad disaster grieve,
And wash thy wounds with pearly dew,
Shall pity you, and pity me,
And heal the languor of my tree!
Short is thy life, if thou so soon must fade
Like angry Jonah's gourd at Nineveh,
That in a night its bloomy branches spread
And perished with the day. --
COME, then, revive, sweet lovely Elm, lest I,
Through vehemence of heat, like Jonah, wish to die.
A monk of Cluni this great man became,
And learnt true science from a Savior's name,
Where, ending well a luckless length of days,
No sage for wisdom ever had greater praise --
The sweetest daughter of the blooming spring --
Sweet May to heaven our Abelard did wing! --
Enough -- within this tomb, in narrow space
Rests Peter Abelard, in death's embrace,
Who conquered arts, who made all learning plain,
And reached all knowledge, mortals can attain.
COLUMBUS TO FERDINAND.
Written 1770.
Columbus was a considerable number of years engaged in soliciting the court of
Spain to fit him out, in order to discover a new continent, which he imagined
existed somewhere in the western parts of the ocean. During his negotiations,
he is here supposed to address king Ferdinand in the following Stanzas.

ILLUSTRIOUS monarch of Iberia's soil,
Too long I wait permission to depart;
Sick of delays, I beg thy listening ear --
Shine forth the patron and the prince of art.
While yet Columbus breathes the vital air,
Grant his request to pass the western main:
Reserve this glory for thy native soil,
And what must please thee more -- for thy own reign.
Of this huge globe how small a part we know --
Does heaven their worlds to western suns deny? --
How disproportioned to the mighty deep
The lands that yet in human prospect lie!
Does Cynthia, when to western skies arrived,
Spend her sweet beam upon the barren main,
And never illume with midnight splendour, she,
The natives dancing on the lightsome green --?
Should the vast circuit of the world contain
Such wastes of ocean, and such scanty land? --
It Is reason's voice that bids me think not so,
I think more nobly of the Almighty hand.
Does yon' fair lamp trace half the circle round
To light the waves and monsters of the seas? --
No -- be there must beyond the billowy waste
Islands, and men, and animals, and trees.
An unremitting flame my breast inspires
To seek new lands amidst the barren waves,
Where falling low, the source of day descends,
And the blue sea his evening visage leaves.
Hear, in his tragic lay, Cordova's sage: Seneca the poet, native of Cordova in
Spain.

"The time shall come, when numerous years are past,
"The ocean shall dissolve the bands of things,
"And an extended region rise at last;
"And TYPHIS shall disclose the mighty land
"Far, far away, where none have roved before;
"Nor shall the world's remotest region be
"Gibraltar's rock, or THULE'S Supposed by many to be the Orkney and Shetland
Isles.
savage shore."
Fired at the theme, I languish to depart,
Supply the barque, and bid Columbus sail,
He fears no storms upon the untravell'd deep;
Reason shall steer, and skill disarm the gale.
Nor does he dread to lose the intended course,
Though far from land the reeling galley stray,
And skies above and gulphy seas below
Be the sole objects seen for many a day.
Think not that Nature has unveiled in vain
The mystic magnet to the mortal eye,
So late have we the guiding needle planned
Only to sail beneath our native sky?
Ere this was found, the ruling power of all
Found for our use an ocean in the land,
Its breadth so small we could not wander long,
Nor long be absent from the neighboring strand.
Short was the course, and guided by the stars,
But stars no more shall point our daring way;
The Bear shall sink, and every guard be drowned,
And great Arcturus scarce escape the sea,
When southward we shall steer -- O grant my wish*
Supply the barque, and bid Columbus sail,
He dreads no tempests on the untravell'd deep,
Reason shall steer, and shall disarm the gale.
THE RISING GLORY OF AMERICA.
Written 1771.
-- Venient annis
Saecula seris, quibus oc^anus
Vincula rerum laxet, ^t ingens
Pateat tellus, Typhisque novos
Detegat orbs; nec sit terris
Ultima Thule. --
Seneca. Med. Act III.V.375.
ARGUMENT.
The subject proposed -- The discovery of America by Columbus -- A
philosophical enquiry into the origin of the savages of America -- The first
planters from Europe -- Causes of their migration to America -- The
difficulties they encountered from the jealousy of the natives -- Agriculture
descanted on -- Commerce and navigation -- Science -- Future prospects of
British usurpation, tyranny, and devastation on this side the Atlantic -- The
more comfortable one of Independence, liberty, and peace -- Conclusion.

Acasto. NOW shall the adventurous muse attempt a strain
More new, more noble, and more flush of fame
Than all that went before --
Now through the veil of ancient days renew
The period famed when first Columbus touched
These shores so long unknown -- through various toils, N. B. This Poem is a
little altered from the original, (published in Philadelphia in 1772 such parts
being only inserted here as were written by the author of these Volumes. A few
more modern lines toward the conclusion are incorporated with the rest, being
a supposed prophetical anticipation of subsequent events.

Famine, and death, the hero forced his way,
Through oceans pregnant with perpetual storms,
And climates hostile ^o adventurous man.
But why, to prompt your tears, should we resume
The tale of Cortez, furious chief, ordained
With Indian blood to dye the sands, and choke,
Famed Mexico, thy streams with dead? or why
Once more revive the tale so often rehearsed
Of Atabilipa, by thirst of gold,
(All conquering motive in the human breast)
Deprived of life, which not Peru's rich ore
Nor Mexico's vast mines could then redeem?
Better these northern realms demand our song
Designed by nature for the rural reign,
For agriculture's toil. -- No blood we shed
For metals buried in a rocky waste.
Cursed be that ore, which brutal makes mankind,
And prompts mankind to shed a brother's blood.

Eugenio. But whence arose
That vagrant race who love the shady vale,
And choose the forest for their dark abode? --
For long has this perplexed the sages skill
To investigate. -- Tradition seems to hide
The mighty secret from each mortal eye,
How first these various nations, north and south,
Possessed these shores, or from what countri^^ came. --
Whether they sprang from some primaeval head
In their own lands, like Adam in the east, --
Yet this the sacred oracles deny,
And reason, too, reclaims against the thought:
For when the general deluge drowned the world
Where could their tribes have found security,
Where find their fate, but in the ghastly deep? --
Unless, as others dream, some chosen few
High on the Andes 'scap'd the general death,
High on the Andes, wrapped in endless snow,
Where winter in his wildest fury reigns,
And subtle either scarce our life maintains. --
But here Philosophers oppose the scheme;
This earth, say they, nor hills nor mountains knew
Ere yet the universal flood prevailed;
But when the mighty waters rose aloft,
Roused by the winds they shook their solid base,
And, in convulsions, tore the deluged world,
Till by the winds assuag'd, again they fell,
And all their ragged bed exposed to view.
PERHAPS far wandering toward the northern pole
The streights of Zembla, and the frozen zone,
And where the eastern Greenland almost joins
America's north point, the hardy tribes
Of banished Jews, Siberians, Tartars wild
Come over icy mountains, or on floats
First reached these coasts, hid from the world beside. --
And yet another argument more strange,
Reserved for men of deeper thought, and late,
Presents itself to view: -- In Pel^g's Genesis 2.25.
days,
(So says the Hebrew seer's unerring pen)
This mighty mass of earth, this solid globe
Was cleft in twain, -- divided east and west,
While straight between, the deep Atlantic rolled. --
And traces indisputable remain
Of this primaeval land, now sunk and lost. --
The islands rising in our eastern main
Are but small fragments of this continent,
Whose two extremities were Newfoundland
And St. Helena. -- One far in the north,
Where shivering seamen view with strange surprise
The guiding pole star glittering over their heads;
The other near the southern tropic rears
Its head above the waves -- Bermudas' isles,
Cape Verd, Canary, Britain, and the Azores,
With famed Hibernia, are but broken parts
Of some prodigious waste, which once sustained
Nations and tribes of vanished memory,
Forests, and towns, and beasts of every class,
Where navies now explore their briny way.

Leander. Your sophistry, Eugenio, makes me smile:
The roving mind of man delights to dwell
On hidden things merely because they are hid:
He thinks his knowledge far beyond all limit,
And boldly fathoms nature's darkest haunts --
But for uncertainties, your broken isles,
Your northern Tartars, and your wandering Jews,
(The flimsy cobwebs of a sophist's brain)
Hear what the voice of history proclaims --
The Carthaginians, ere the Roman yoke
Broke their proud spirits, and enslaved them too,
For navigation were renowned as much
As haughty Tire with all her hundred ^^eets,
Full many a league their venurous seamen sailed
Through straight Gibraltar, down the western shore
Of Africa, to the Canary isles
By them called Fortunate; so Flaccus Hor. Epod. 16.
sings,
Because eternal spring there clothes the fields
And fruits delicious bloom throughout the year. --
From voyaging here, this inference I draw,
Perhaps some barque with all her numerous crew
Falling to leeward of her destined port,
Caught by the eastern trade, was hurried on
Before the unceasing blast to Indian isles,
Brazil, La Plata, or the coasts more south --
There stranded, and unable to return,
Forever from their native skies estranged
Doubtless they made these virgin climes their own,
And in the course of long revolving years
A numerous progeny from these arose,
And spread throughout the coasts -- those whom we call
Brazilians, Mexicans, Peruvians rich,
The tribes of Chili, Patagon, and those
Who till the shores of Amazonia's stream.
When first the powers of Europe here attained
Vast empires, kingdoms, cities, palaces
And polished nations stocked the fertile land.
Who has not heard of Cusco, Lima, and
The town of Mexico -- huge cities formed
From Europe's architecture; ere the arms
Of haughty Spain disturbed the peaceful soil. --
But here, amid this northern dark domain
No towns were seen to rise. -- No arts were here;
The tribes unskilled to raise the lofty mast,
Or force the daring prow through adverse waves,
Gazed on the pregnant soil, and craved alone
Life from the unaided genius of the ground, --
This indicates they were a different race;
From whom descended it is not ours to say --
That power, no doubt, who furnished trees, and plants,
And animals, to this vast continent,
Spoke into being man among the rest,
But what a change is here! -- what arts arise!
What towns and capitals! how commerce waves
Her gaudy flags, where silence reigned before!

Acasto. Speak, my Eugenio, for I Have heard you tell
The dismal history, and the cause that brought
The first adventurers to these western shores;
The glorious cause that urged our fathers first
To visit climes unknown, and wilder woods
Than ever Tartarian or Norwegian saw,
And with fair culture to adorn that soil
Which never felt the industrious swain before.

Eugenio. All this long story to rehearse, would tire,
Besides, the sun toward the west retreats,
Nor can the noblest theme retard his speed,
Nor loftiest verse -- not that which sang the fall
Of Troy divine, and fierce Achilles ire.
Yet hear a part: -- By persecution wronged,
And sacerdotal rage, our fathers came
From Europe's hostile shores to these abodes,
Here to enjoy a liberty in faith,
Secure from tyranny and base control.
For this they left their country and their friends,
And dared the Atlantic wave in quest of peace;
And found new shores, and sylvan settlements,
And men, alike unknowing and unknown.
Hence, by the care of each adventurous chief
New governments (their wealth unenvied yet)
Were formed on liberty and virtue's plan.
These searching out uncultivated tracts
Conceived new plans of towns, and capitals,
And spacious provinces -- Why should I name
Thee, Penn, the Solon of our western lands;
Sagacious legislator, whom the world
Admires, and mourns: an infant colony,
Nursed by thy care, now rises over the rest
Like that tall Pyramid in Egypt's waste
Over all thy neighboring piles, they also great.
Why should I name these heroes so well known,
Who peopled all the rest from Canada
To Georgia's farthest coasts, West Florida,
Or Apalachian mountains? -- Yet what streams
Of blood were shed! what Indian hosts were slain,
Before these days of peace were quite restored!

Leander. Yes, while they overturned the rugged soil
And swept the forests from the shaded plain
'Midst dangers, foes, and death, fierce Indian tribes
With vengeful malice armed, and black design,
Often murdered or dispersed these colonies --
Encouraged, too, by Gallia's hostile sons,
A warlike race, who late their arms displayed
At Quebec, Montreal, and farthest coasts
Of Labrador, or Cape Breton, where now
The British standard awes the subject host.
Here, those brave chiefs, who, lavish of their blood,
Fought in Britannia's cause, in battle fell! --
What heart but mourns the untimely fate of Wolf,
Who, dying, conquered! -- or what breast but beats
To share a fate like his, and die like him!

Acasto. But why alone commemorate the dead,
And pass these glorious heroes by, who yet
Breathe the same air, and see the light with us? --
The dead, Leander, are but empty names,
And they who fall today the same to us
As they who fell ten centuries ago --!
Lost are they all that shined on earth before;
Rome's boldest champions in the dust are laid,
Ajax and great Achilles are no more,
And Philip's warlike son, an empty shade! --
A WASHINGTON among our sons of fame
We boast -- conspicuous as the morning star
Among the inferior lights --
To distant wilds Virginia sent him forth -- [1755.

With her brave sons he gallantly opposed
The bold invaders of his country's rights,
Where wild Ohio pours the mazy flood,
And mighty meadows skirt these subject streams. --
But now, delighting in his elm tree's shade*
Where deep Potowmac laves the enchanting shore,
He prunes the tender vine, or bids the soil
Luxuriant harvests to the sun display. --
BEHOLD a different scene -- not thus employed
Were Cortez and Pizarro, pride of Spain,
Whom blood and murder only satisfied,
And all to glut ambition! --

Eugenio. Such is the curse, Acasto, where the soul
Humane is wanting -- but we boast no feats
Of cruelty like Europe's murdering bre^^ --
Our milder epithet is merciful,
And each American, true hearted, le^^*
To conquer, and to spare; for coward souls
Alone seek vengeance on a vanquished foe.
Gold, fatal gold, was the alluring bait
To Spain's rapacious tribe -- hence rose the wars
From Chili to the Caribbean sea,
And Montezuma's Mexican domains:
More blessed are we, with whose unenvied soil
Nature decreed no mingling gold to shine,
No flaming diamond, precious emerald,
No blushing sapphire, ruby, chrysalite,
Or jasper red -- more noble riches flow
From agriculture, and the industrious swain,
Who tills the fertile vale, or mountain's brow,
Content to lead a safe, a humble life
Among his native hills, romantic shades
Such as the Muse of Greece of old did feign,
Allured the Olympian gods from crystal skies,
Envying such lovely scenes to mortal man.

Leander. Long has the rural life been justly famed,
And bards of old their pleasing pictures drew
Of flowery meads, and groves, and gliding streams:
Hence, old Arcadia -- wood-nymphs, satyrs, swains;
And hence Elysium, fancied heaven below! --
Fair agriculture, not unworthy kings,
Once exercised the royal hand, or those
Whose virtues raised them to the rank of gods.
See old Laertes Hom. Odyss. B. 24.
in his shepherd weeds
Far from his pompous throne and court august,
Digging the grateful soil, where round him rise,
Sons of the earth, the tall aspiring oaks,
Or orchards boasting of more fertile boughs,
Laden with apples red, sweet scented peach,
Pear, cherry, apricot, or spungy plumb;
While through the glebe the industrious oxen draw
The earth-inverting plough. -- Those Romans too,
Fabricius and Camillus, loved a life
Of neat simplicity and rustic bliss,
And from the noisy Forum hastening far,
From busy camps, and sycochants, and crowns,
'Midst woods and fields spent the remains of life,
Which full enjoyment only finds for fools.
HOW grateful, to behold the harvests rise,
And mighty crops adorn the extended plains! --
Fair plenty smiles throughout, while lowing herds
Stalk over the shrubby hill or grassy mead,
Or at some shallow river slake their thirst. --
The enclosure now succeeds the shepherd's care,
Yet milk-white flocks adorn the well stocked farm,
And court the attention of the industrious swain --
Their fleece rewards him well; and when the winds
Blow with a keener blast, and from the north
Pour mingled tempests through a sunless sky
(Ice, sleet, and rattling hail) secure he sits
Warm in his cottage, fearless of the storm,
Enjoying now the toils of milder moons,
Yet hoping for the spring. -- Such are the joys,
And such the toils of those whom heaven has blessed
With souls enamored of a country life.

Acasto. Such are the visions of the rustic re^gn --
But this alone, the fountain of support,
Would scarce employ the varying mind of man;
Each seeks employ, and each a different way:
Strip Commerce of her sail, and men once more
Would be converted into savages --
No nation ever grew social and refined
Till Commerce first had winged the adventurous prow,
Or sent the slow-paced caravan afar,
To waft their produce to some other clime,
And bring the wished exchange -- thus came, of old,
Golconda's golden ore, and thus the wealth
Of Ophir to the wisest of mankind.

Eugenio. Great is the praise of commerce, and the men
Deserve our praise, who spread the undaunted sail,
And traverse every sea -- their dangers great,
Death still to combat in the unfeeling gale,
And every billow but a gaping grave: --
There, skies and waters, wearying on the eye,
For weeks and months no other prospect yield
But barren wastes, unfathomed depths, where not
The blessful haunt of human form is seen
To cheer the unsocial horrors of the way --
Yet all these bold designs to Science owe
Their rise and glory -- Hail, fair Science! thou,
Transplanted from the eastern skies, do bloom
In these blessed regions -- Greece and Rome no more
Detain the Muses on Cithaeron's brow
Or old Olympus, crowned with waving woods,
Or Haemus' top, where once was heard the harp,
Sweet Orpheus' harp, that gained his cause below,
And pierced the heart of Orcus and his bride;
That hushed to silence by its voice divine
Thy melancholy waters, and the gales
O Hebrus! that over thy sad surface blow. --
No more the maids round Alpheus' waters stray,
Where he with Arethusa's wave does mix,
Or where swift Tiber disembogues his waves
Into the Italian sea, so long unsung;
Hither they wing their way, the last the best
Of countries, where the arts shall rise and grow,
And arms shall have their day -- Even now we boast
A Franklin, prince of all philosophy,
A genius piercing as the electric fire,
Bright as the lightning's flash, explained so well
By him, the rival of Britannia's sage Newton.
. --
This is a land of every joyous sound,
Of liberty and life, sweet liberty!
Without whose aid the noblest genius fails,
And Science irretrievably must die.

Leander. But come, Eugenio, since we know the past --
What hinders to pervade with searching eye
The mystic scenes of dark Futurity!
Say, shall we ask what empires yet must rise,
What kingdoms, powers and STATES, where now are seen
Mere dreary wastes and awful solitude,
Where melancholy sits, with eye forlorn,
And time anticipates, when we shall spread
Dominion from the north, and south, and west,
Far from the Atlantic to Pacific shores,
And shackle half the unequal of the main! --
A glorious theme! -- but how shall mortals dare
To pierce the dark events of future years
And scenes unravel, only known to fate?

Acasto. This might we do, if warmed by that bright coal
Snatched from the altar of cherubic fire
Which touched Isaiah's lips -- or of the spirit
Of Jeremy and Amos, prophets old,
Might swell the heaving breast -- I see, I see
A thousand kingdoms raised, cities, and men,
Numerous as sand upon the ocean shore! --
The Ohio soon shall glide by many a town
Of note; and where the Missisippi stream,
By forests shaded, now runs weeping on,
Nations shall grow, and STATES not less in fame
Than Greece and Rome of old! -- we too shall boast
Our Alexanders, Pompeys, heroes, kings,
That in the womb of time yet dormant lie,
Waiting the joyous hour of life and light --
O snatch me hence, ye muses, to those days
When through the veil of dark antiquity
Our sons shall hear of us as things remote,
That blossomed in the morn of days -- Alas!
How could I weep that we were born so soon,
Just in the dawning of these mighty times,
When scenes are pregnant with eternity!
Dissentions that shall swell the trump of fame,
And ruin brooding over one monarchy!

Eugenio. Nor shall these angry tumults here subside
Nor murders The massacre at Boston, March 5th, 1770, is here more particularly
glanced at.
cease, through all these Provinces,
Till foreign crowns have vanished from our view
And dazzle here no more -- no more presume
To awe the spirit of fair Liberty --
Vengeance shall cut the thread -- and Britain, sure,
Will curse her fatal obstinacy for it!
Bent on the ruin of this injured country,
She will not listen to our humble prayers,
Though offered with submission.
Like vagabonds, and objects of destruction,
Like those whom all mankind are sworn to hate,
She casts us off from her protection,
And will invite the nations round about,
Russians and Germans, slaves and savages,
To come and have a share in our perdition --
O cruel race, O unrelenting Britain,
Who bloody beasts will hi^e to cut our throats,
Who war will wage with prattling innocence,
And basely murder unoffending women! --
Will stab their prisoners when they cry for quarter,
Will burn our towns, and from his lodging turn
The poor inhabitant to sleep in tempests! --
These will be wrongs; indeed, and all sufficient
To kindle up our souls to deeds of horror,
And give to every arm the nerves of Sampson --
These are the men that fill the world with ruin,
And every region mourns their greedy sway,
Nor only for ambition! --
But what are this world's goods, that they for them
Should exercise eternal butchery?
What are these mighty riches we possess,
That they should send so far to finger them --? --
Already have we felt their potent arm --
And ever since that inauspicious day,
When first Sir Francis Bernard
His canons planted at the council door,
And made the assembly room a home for strumpets,
And soldiers rank and file -- ever since that day
This wretched land, that drinks its children's gore,
Has been a scene of tumult and confusion --!
Are there not evils in the world enough?
Are we so happy that they envy us?
Have we not toiled to satisfy their Harpies,
King's deputies, that are insatiable;
Whose practice is to incense the royal mind,
And make us despicable in his view? --
Have we not all the evils to contend with
That, in this life, mankind are subject to,
Pain, sickness, poverty, and natural death --
But into every wound that nature gave
They will a dagger plunge, and make them mortal!

Leander. Enough, enough -- such dismal scenes you paint,
I almost shudder at the recollection --
What, are they dogs that they would mangle us? --
To brighter skies I turn my ravished view,
And fairer prospects from the future draw --
Here independent power shall (...) sway,
And public virtue warm the patri^^ ^reast:
No traces shall remain of tyranny,
And laws, a pattern to the world beside
Be here enacted first. --

Acasto. And when a train of rolling years are past,
(So sung the exiled seer in Patmos isle)
A new Jerusalem, sent down from heaven,
Shall grace our happy earth -- perhaps this land,
Whose ample breast shall then receive, though late,
Myria^s of saints, with their immortal king,
To live and reign on earth a thousand years,
Thence called Millennium* Paradise anew
Shall flourish, by no second Adam lost.
No dangerous tree with deadly fruit shall grow,
No tempting serpent to allure the soul
From native innocence. -- A Canaan here,
Another Canaan shall excel the old,
And from a fairer Pisgah's top be seen.
No thistle here, nor thorn, nor briar shall spring,
Earth's curse before: The lion and the lamb
In mutual friendship linked, shall browse the shrub,
And timorous deer with softened tigers stray
Over mead, or lofty hill, or grassy plain:
Another Jordan's stream shall glide along,
And Sil^ah's brook in circling eddies flow:
Groves shall adorn their verdant banks, on which
The happy people, free from toils and death,
Shall find secure repose. No fierce disease,
No fevers, slow consumption, ghastly plague,
(Death's ancient ministers) again procla^m
Perpetual war with man: Fair fruits shall bloom,
Fair to the eye and grateful to the taste;
Nature's loud streams be hushed, and seas no more
Rage hostile to mankind -- and, worse than all,
The fiercer passions of the human breast
Shall kindle up to deeds of death no more,
But all subside in universal peace. --
Such days the world,
And such, AMERICA, thou first shall have,
When ages, yet to come, have run their round,
And future years of bliss alone remain.

RETIREMENT.
A HERMIT'S house beside a stream
With forests planted round,
Whatever it to you may seem
More real happiness I deem
Than if I were a monarch crowned.
A cottage I could call my own
Remote from domes of care;
A little garden, walled with stone,
The wall with ivy overgrown,
A limpid fountain near,
Would more substantial joys afford,
More real bliss impart
Than all the wealth that misers hoard,
Than vanquished worlds, or worlds restored --
Mere cankers of the heart!
Vain foolish man! how vast thy pride,
How little can thy wants supply! --
It Is surely wrong to grasp so wide --
We act as if we only had
To triumph -- not to die!
DISCOVERY.
Written 1772.
SIX thousand years in these dull regions passed,
It Is time, you will say, we knew their bounds at last,
Knew to what skies our setting stars retire,
And where the wint'ry suns expand their fire;
What land to land protracts the varied scene,
And where extended oceans roll between;
What worlds exist beneath antarctic skies,
And from Pacific waves what verdant islands rise.
IN vain did nature shore from shore divide,
Art formed a passage and her waves defied:
When his bold plan the master pilot drew [ Columb^

Dissever'd worlds stepped forward at the view,
And lessening still the intervening space
Disclosed new millions of the human race.
Proud even of toil, succeeding ages joined
New seas to vanquish, and new worlds to find;
Each following each still farther from the shore
Found some new wonder that was hid before,
Till launched at length, with avarice doubly bold,
Their hearts expanding as the world grew old,
Some to be rich and some to be renowned,
The earth they rifled, and explored it round.
AMBITIOUS Europe, polished in thy pride,
Thine was the art that toil to toil allied,
Thine was the gift to trace each heavenly sphere
And seize their beams to serve ambition here:
Hence, fierce Pizarro stocked a world with graves,
Hence Montezuma left a race of slaves --
Which project suited best with heaven's d^cree,
To force new doctrines, or to leave them free? --
Religion only feigned to claim a share,
Their riches, not their souls, ^mploy'd thy care --
Alas! how few of all that daring train
That seek new worlds embosom'd in the main,
How few have sailed on virtue's nobler plan,
How few with motives worthy of a man! --
While through the deep-sea waves we saw them go
Wherever they found a man they made a foe;
Superior only by superior art,
Forgot the social virtues of the heart,
Forgetting still, wherever they madly ran,
That sacred friendship binds mankind to man,
Fond of exerting power, untimely shown,
The momentary triumph all their own!
Met on the wrecks and ravages of time,
They left no native master of his clime,
His trees, his towns with hardened front they claim,
Seize his dear count^y in some tyrant's name,
And force the oath, that binds him to obey
Some prince unknown, ten thousand leagues away.
SLAVES to their passions, man's imperious race
Born for contention, find no resting place,
And the vain mind, bewildered and perplexed,
Makes this world wretched to enjoy the next.
Tired of the scenes that nature made their own
They love to conquer what remains unknown;
Avarice undaunted claims whatever she sees,
Surmounts earth's circle, and foregoes all ease:
Religion, bolder, sends some sacred chief
To bend the nations to her own belief;
To their vain standard Europe's sons invite,
Who claim it as their due to think aright,
Behold their varied tribes, in proud applause.
First in religion, liberty and laws,
And, while they bow to cruelty and blood,
Condemn the Indian with his milder god --
Ah, race to justice, truth, and honor blind,
Are thy convictons to convert mankind --!
Vain pride -- convince them that thine own are just,
Or leave them happy as you found them first.
WHAT charm is seen through Europe's realms of strife
That adds new blessings to the savage life? --
On them warm suns with equal splendour shine,
And each domestic pleasure equals thine,
Their native groves a happier bloom display,
As self-contented roll their lives away,
And the gay soul, in fancy's visions blessed,
Leaves to the care of chance her heaven of rest. --
What are these arts that rise on reason's plan
But arts destructive to the bliss of man?
What are these wars, wherever the tracks you trace,
But the sad records of our world's disgrace?
Reason degraded from her tottering throne,
And precepts, called divine, observed by none.
BLESSED in their distance from that bloody scene,
Why spread the sail to pass the gulphs between? --
If winds can waft to ocean's utmost verge,
And there new islands and new worlds emerge --
If wealth, or war, or science bid thee roam,
Ah, leave religion and thy laws at home,
Leave the free native to enjoy his store,
Nor teach destructive arts, unknown before --
Woes of their own these newfound worlds invade,
There, too, fierce passions the weak soul degrade,
Invention there has winged the unerring dart,
There the swift arrow vibrates to the heart,
Revenge and death contending bosoms share,
And pining envy claims her subjects there --
Are these too few? -- then see despotic power
Spends on a throne of turf her busy hour;
Hard by, and half ambitious to ascend,
Priests, interceding with the gods, attend --
Atoning victims at their shrines they lay,
Their crimson knives tremenduous rites display,
Or the proud despot's gore remorseless shed,
Through life detested, and adored when dead.
BORN to be wretched, search this globe around,
Dupes to a few the race of man is found:
Seek some new world in some new climate placed,
Some gay Ta-i-ti on the watery waste,
Though nature dress in all her bright array
Some proud tormentor steals her charms away,
However she smiles beneath these milder skies,
Though men decay the monarch never dies!
However the groves, however the gardens bloom,
A Monarch and a Priest is still their doom.
THE DISTRESSED ORATOR.
[Occasioned by R -- A -- 's (...) failing him in the mid^t of a public
discourse (...) got by ^ote.]

1.
SIX weeks, and more, he taxed his brain,
And wrote petitions to the Muses --
Poor Archibald! 'twas all in vain,
For what they lent your memory loses --
Now hear the culprit's self confess,
In strain of woe, his sad distress:
2.
"I went upon the public stage,
"I flounc'd and flounder'd in a r^ge,
"I gabbled like a goose:
"I talked of custom, fame, and fashion,
"Of moral evil and compassion,
"And pray what more?
3.
"My words were few, I must confess,
"And very silly my address,
"A melancholy tale!
"In short, I knew not what to say,
"I squinted this and the other way,
"Like Lucifer.
4.
"Alack a day! my friends, quoth I,
"I guess you will get no more from me --
"In troth I have forgot it! --
"O my oration! thou art fled;
"And not a trace within my head
"Remains to me!
5.
"What could be done? -- I gaped once more,
"And set the audience in a roar,
"They laughed me out of face --
"I turned my eyes from north to south,
"I clapped my fingers in my mouth --
"And down I came!"
Libera nos, Domine -- DELIVER US, O LORD.
Written 1775.
FROM a junto that labor for absolute power,
Whose schemes disappointed have made them look sour,
From the lords of the council, who fight against freedom,
Who still follow on where the devil shall lead 'em.
From the group at St. James's, that slight our Petitions,
And fools that are waiting for further submissions --
From a nation whose manners are rough and abrupt,
From scoundrels and rascals whom gold can corrupt.
From pirates sent out by command of the king
To murder and plunder, but never to swing*
From Wallace and Greaves, and Vipers and Roses Captains and Ships of the
British navy then employed on our coasts.
,
Whom, if heaven pleases, we'll give bloody noses.
From the valiant Dunmore, with his crew of banditti,
Who plunder Virginians at Williamsburg city,
From hotheaded Montague, mighty to swear,
The little fat man with his pretty white hair.
From bishops in Britain, who butchers are grown,
From slaves that would die for a smile from the throne,
From assemblies that vote against Congress proceedings,
(Who now see the fruit of their stupid misleadings).
From Tryon the mighty, who flies from our city,
And, swelled with importance, disdains the committee;
(But since he is pleased to proclaim us his foes,
What the devil care we where the devil he goes).
From the scoundrel, lord North, who would bind us in chains,
From a dunce of a king who was born without brains,
The utmost extent of whose sense is to see
That reigning and making of buttons agree.
From an island that bullies, and hectors, and swears,
I send up to heaven my wishes and prayers
That we, disunited, may freemen be still,
And Britain go on -- to be damned, if she will.
New York, Sep. 26, 1775.
GENERAL GAGE's SOLILOQUY.
Published in New York, by H. Gain, in August 1775.
Scene, BOSTON, besieged by the Men of Massachusetts. "DESTRUCTION waits my
call -- some demon say
Why does destruction linger on her way!
Charlestown is burnt, and Warren is deceased --
Heavens! shall we never be from war released?
Ten years the Greeks besieged the walls of Troy,
But when did Grecians their own towns destroy?
Faith, that is the point -- Let those who will, say, No;
If GEORGE and NORTH decree -- it must be so.
DOUBTS, black as night, disturb my loved repose --
Men that were once my friends have turned my foes --
What if we conquer this rebellious town,
Suppose we burn it, storm it, tear it down --
This land's like Hydra, cut off but one head,
And ten shall rise, and dare you in its stead.
If to subdue a league or two of coast
Requires a navy, and so large a host,
How shall a length of twice seven hundred miles
Be bro^ght to bend to two European Isles? --
And that, when all their utmost strength unite,
When twelve Georgia had not at this time acceded to the Union.
dominions swear to arm and fight,
When the same spirit darts from every eye,
One fixed resolve to gain their point or die.
As for myself -- true -- I was born to fight
As George commands, let him be wrong or right,
While from his hand I squeeze the golden prize
I Will ask no questions, and he will tell no lies --
But did I swear, I ask my heart again,
In such damned service to harrass my brain? --
Yes -- when Rebellion her artillery brings
And aims her arrows at the best of kings,
I stand a champion in my monarch's cause --
The men are rebels that resist his laws.
A VICEROY I -- like modern monarchs, stay
Safe in the town -- let others guide the fray:
A life, like mine, is of no common worth,
'Twere wrong, by heaven, that I should sally forth!
A random bullet from a RIFLE sent
Might pierce my heart! -- and ruin North's intent:
Let others combat in the dusty field,
Let petty captains scorn to live or yield,
I Will send my ships to neighboring isles, where stray
Unnumb'red herds, and steal these herds away,
I Will strike the women in this town with awe,
And make them tremble at my martial law.
SHOULD gracious heaven befriend our troops and fleet,
And throw this base-born region at my feet,
How would Britannia echo with my fame!
What endless honors would await my name!
In every province should the traveller see
Recording marbles, raised to honor me --
Hard by the lakes my sovereign lord would grant
A rural empire to supply my want,
A manor would but poorly serve my turn,
Less than a kingdom from my soul I s^^en!
An ample kingdom round Ontario's lake
By heaven should be the least reward I Would take,
There might I reign, unrivaled and alone,
An ocean and an empire of my own --!
What though the scribblers and the wits might say,
He built his pile on vanquished LIBERTY --
Let others meanly dread the slanderous tongue,
While I obey my king, can I do wrong?
Then to accomplish all my soul's desire
Let red-hot bullets set their towns on fire,
May heaven, if so the righteous judgment pass,
Change earth to steel, the sky to solid brass,
Let hell-cats darting from some blackguard sphere,
Strike this base offspring with dismay and fear;
Let heaven's broad concave to the center ring,
And blackest night expand her sable wing,
(Since it is most true, though some may think it odd,
The foes of Britain are the foes of God):
Let bombs, like comets, kindle all the air,
Let cruel famine prompt the orphan's prayer,
And every ill that war or want can bring
Be shower'd on subjects that resist their king.
WHAT is their plea? -- our sovereign only meant
This people should be taxed without consent,
Ten years the court with secret cunning tried
To gain this point -- the event their hopes belied:
How should they else than sometimes miss the mark
Who sleep at helm, yet think to steer the barque? --
North, take advice; thy lucky genius show,
Dispatch Sir Jeffery to the states below.
That gloomy prince, whom mortals Satan (...),
Must help us quickly, if he help at all --
You strive in vain with golden chains to tie,
They see through all your schemes with half an eye,
If open force with secret bribes I join,
The contest sickens -- and the day is mine!
BUT hark the trumpet's clangor -- hark -- ah me!
What means the march of Washington and Lee?
When men like these such distant marches make,
Fate whispers something -- that we cannot mistake;
When men like these defy my martial rule,
Good heaven! it is no time to play the fool --
Perhaps, they for their country's freedom rise;
North has, perhaps, deceived me with his lies. --
If George at last a tyrant should be found,
A cruel tyrant, by no sanctions bound,
And I myself in an unrighteous cause
Be sent to execute the worst of laws,
How will these dead whom I conjured to fight --
Who sunk in arms to everlasting night,
Whose blood the conquering foe conspired to spill
At Lexington and Bunker's fatal hill,
Whose mangled corpses scanty graves embrace --
Rise from these graves, and curse me to my face? --
Alas! that ever ambition bade me roam,
Or thirst of power, forsake my native home --
What shall I do? -- there, crowd the hostile bands;
Here, waits a navy to receive commands --
I speak the language of my heart -- shall I
Steal off by night, and over the ocean fly,
Like a lost man to unknown regions stray,
And to oblivion leave the darksome day? --
Or shall I to Britannia's shores again,
And, big with lies, conceal my thousands slain? --
Yes -- to some negro clime my course I steer,
To any country rather than be here,
To worlds where nature scarce exerts her law,
A branch-built cottage, and a bed of straw --
Even Scotland's coast seems charming in my sight,
And frozen Zembla yields a strange delight. --
But such vexations in my bosom burn,
That to these shores I never will return,
Till fruits and flowers on Greenland's coasts are known,
And frosts be thawed in climates once their own.
Ye souls of fire, who burn for chief command,
Come! take my place in this disastrous land;
To wars, like these, I bid a long goodnight --
Let NORTH and GEORGE themselves such battles fight.
THE MIDNIGHT CONSULTATIONS, OR, A TRIP TO BOSTON.
Published in New York, September 1775. by J. Anderson.
PART I.
UNBLEST are they whom Fate's too heavy hand
Confines through life to some small speck of land;
More wretched they whom heaven inspires to roam,
Yet languish out their lives, and die at home. --
Heaven gave to man this wide extended round,
No climes confine him and no oceans bound;
Heaven gave him forest, mountain, vale, and plain,
And bade him vanquish, if he could, the main;
But sordid cares our short-lived race confine,
Some toil at trades, some labor in the mine,
The miser hoards, and guards his shining store,
The sun still rises where he rose before --
No happier scenes his earth-born fancy fill
Than one dark valley, or one well-known hill,
To other shores his mind, untaught to stray,
Dull and inactive, slumbers life away.
BUT by the aid of yonder glimmering beam
The pole star, faithful to my vagrant dream,
Wild regent of my heart! in dreams convey
Where herded Britons their bold ranks display;
So late the pride of England's fertile soil,
(Her grandeur heightened by successive toil)
See, how they sicken in these hostile climes,
Themes for the stage, and subjects for our rhimes.
WHAT modern poet have the muses led
To draw the curtain that conceals the dead?
What bolder bard to Boston shall repair,
To view the peevish, half-starv'd specter there?
O MY poor country! why sustain these ills?
Why rest thy navies on their native hills?
See, endless forests shade the uncultur'd plain,
Descend, ye forests, and command the main:
A leafy verdure shades the mighty mast,
And every oak bends idly to the blast,
Earth's entrails teem with stores for your defense,
Descend, and drag the stores of war from thence:
Your fertile soil the flowing sail supplies,
And Europe's arts in every village rise --
No want is yours -- Disdain unmanly fear,
And swear no Tyrant shall reign master here;
Know your own strength -- in rocky deserts bred,
Shall the fierce tiger by the dog be led,
And bear all insults from that snarling race
Whose courage lies in impudence of face? --
No -- rather bid the wood's wild native turn,
And from his side the unfaithful guardian spurn.
NOW pleased I wander to the dome of state
Where Gage resides, our western potentate --
Chief of ten thousand, all a race of Huns,
Sent to be slaughtered by our Rifle-guns,
Sent by our angry Jove, sent sword in hand
To murder, burn, and ravage through the land --
You dream of conquest -- tell me how or whence --
Act like a man, and get you gone from hence,
A madman sent you to this hostile shore
To vanquish nations that shall spill your gore --
Go, friends, and each in friendly league combined
Destroy, distress, and triumph over mankind! --
It Is not our peace this murdering hand restrains,
The want of power is made the monster's chains;
Compassion is a stranger to his heart,
Or if it came, he bade the guest depart;
The melting tear, the sympathising groan
Were never yet to Gage or Jefferies known;
The seas of blood his heart fore-dooms to spill
Is but a dying serpent's rage to kill,
What power shall drive these vipers from our shore,
These monsters swollen with carnage, death, and gore!
TWELVE was the hour -- congenial darkness reigned,
And no bright star a mimic day light feigned --
First, GAGE we saw -- a crimson chair of state
Received the honor of his Honor's weight,
This man of straw the regal purple bound,
But dullness, deepest dullness, hovered round.
NEXT Graves, who wields the trident of the brine,
The tall arch-captain of the embattled line
All gloomy sat -- mumbling of flame and fire,
Balls, cannon, ships, and all their damned attire;
Well pleased to live in never-ending hum,
But empty as the interior of his drum.
HARD by, BURGOYNE assumes an ample space
And seemed to meditate with studious face,
As if again he wished our world to see
Long, dull, dry letters writ to General LEE --
Huge scrawls of words through endless circuits drawn,
Unmeaning as the errand he is upon. --
Is he to conquer -- he subdue our land? --
This buckram hero, with his lady's hand?
By Cesars to be vanquished is a curse,
But by a scribbling fop -- by heaven, is worse!
LORD Piercy seemed to snore -- but may the Muse
This ill-timed snoring to the peer excuse;
Tired was the long boy of his toilsome day,
Full fifteen miles he fled -- a tedious way,
How should he then the dues of Somnus shun,
Perhaps not used to walk -- much less to run?
RED faced as suns, when sinking to repose,
Reclined the infernal captain of the ROSE, [ C. Wallace

In fame's proud temple aiming for a niche,
With those who found her at the cannon's breech;
Skilled to direct the cannonading shot,
No Turkish rover half so murdering hot,
Pleased with base vengeance on defenseless towns,
His heart was malice -- but his words were, Zounds!
HOW, vexed to see his starving army's doom,
Once more besought the skies for elbow room --
Small was his stock, and theirs, of heavenly grace,
Yet just enough to ask a larger place. --
He cursed the brainless minister that planned
His bootless errand to this hostile land,
But awed by Gage, his bursting wrath recoiled,
And in his inmost bosom doubly boiled.
THESE, chief of all the tyrant-serving train,
Exalted sat -- the rest (a pension'd clan,
A sample of the multitudes that wait,
Pale sons of famine, at perdition's gate,
NORTH'S friends down swarming, (so our monarch wills*
Hungry as death, from Caledonian hills;
Whose endless numbers if you bid me tell,
I Will count the atoms of this globe as well)
Knights, captains, squires -- a wonder-working band!
Held at small wages till they gain the land,
Flocked pensive round -- black spleen assailed their hearts,
(The sport of plough boys, with their arms and arts)
And made them doubt (however for vengeance hot)
Whether they were invincible or not.
NOW Gage rebounding from his cushion'd seat
Swore thrice, and cried -- "'It Is nonsense to be beat!
Thus to be drubb'd! pray, warriors, let me know
Which be in fault, myself, the fates, or you --
Henceforth let Britain deem her men mere toys --
Gods! to be frighted thus by country boys;
Why, if our army had had a mind to sup,
They might have eat that schoolboy army up --
Three thousand to twelve hundred thus to yield,
And twice five hundred stretched upon the field --!
O shame to Britain, and the British name,
Shame damps my heart, and I must die with shame --
Thus to be worsted, thus disgraced, and beat! --
You have the knack, Lord Piercy, to retreat,
The death you 'scap'd my warmest blood congeals,
Heaven grant me too so swift a pair of heels --
In Chevy-Chace, as, doubtless, you have read,
Lord Piercy would have sooner died than fled --
Behold the virtues of your house decay --
Ah! how unlike the Piercy of that day!"
THUS spoke the great man in disdainful tone
To the gay peer -- not meant for him alone --
But ere the tumults of his bosom rise
Thus from his bench the intrepid Peer replies:
"WHEN once the soul has reached the Stygian shore,
My prayer book says, it shall return no more --
When once old Charon hoists his tar-black'd sail,
And his boat swims before the infernal gale,
Farewell to all that pleased the man above,
Farewell to feats of arms, and joys of love!
Farewell the trade that father Cain began,
Farewell to wine, that chears the heart of man;
All, all farewell! -- the pensive shade must go
Where cold Medusa turns to stone below,
Where Belus' maids eternal labors ply
To drench the cask that stays forever dry,
And Sistphus, with many a weary groan,
Heaves up the mount the still recoiling stone!
"SINCE, then, this truth no mortal dares deny,
That heroes, kings -- and lords themselves, must die,
And yield to him who dreads no hostile sword,
But treats alike the peasant and the lord;
Since even great George must in his turn give place
And leave his crown, his Scotchmen, and his lace, --
How blessed is he, how prudent is the man
Who keeps aloof from death -- while yet he can;
One well-aim'd ball could make us all no more
Than shipwrecked scoundrels on that leeward shore.
"BUT why, my friends, these hard reflections still
On Lexington affairs -- it is Bunker's hill --
O fatal hill! -- one glance at thee restrains
My once warm blood, and chills it in my veins --
May no sweet grass adorn thy hateful crest
That saw Britannia's bravest troops distressed --
Or if it does -- may some destructive gale
The green leaf wither, and the grass turn pale --
All moisture to your brow may heaven deny,
And God and man detest you, just as I --
It Is Bunker's hill, this night, has brought us here,
Pray question him who led your armies there,
Nor dare my courage into question call,
Or blame Lord Piercy for the fault of all."
HOW chanced to nod while heathenish Piercy spoke,
But as his Lordship ceased, his Honor 'woke,
(Like those whom sermons into sleep betray)
Then rubbed his eyes, and thus was heard to say:
"SHALL those who never ventured from the town,
Or their ship sides, now pull our glory down?
We fought our best -- so God my honor save --
No British soldiers ever shined more brave --
Resolved I led them to the hostile lines,
(From this day famed wherever great Phoebus shines)
Firm at their head I took my dangerous stand,
Marching to death and slaughter, sword in hand,
But wonted Fortune halted on her way,
We fought with madmen, and we lost the day --
Putnam's brave troops, your honors would have swore
Had robbed the clouds of half their nitrous store,
With my bold veterans strewn the astonished plain,
For not one musket was discharged in vain. --
But, honored Gage, why droops thy laurell'd head? --
Five hundred foes we packed off to the dead --
NOW captains, generals, hear me and attend!
Say, shall we home for other succors send?
Shall other navies cross the stormy main? --
They may -- but what shall awe the pride of Spain?
Still for dominion haughty Louis pants --
Ah! how I tremble at the thoughts of France. --
Shall mighty George, to enforce his injured laws,
Transport all Russia to support the cause --?
That allied Empire countless shoals may pour
Numerous as sands that strew the Atlantic shore,
But Policy inclines my heart to fear
They Will turn their arms against us when they are here --
Come, let us agree -- for something must be done
Ere autumn flies, and winter hastens on --
When pinching cold our navy binds in ice,
You Will find it is then too late to take advice."
THE clock strikes two! -- Gage smote upon his breast,
And cried, -- "What fate determines must be best --
But now attend -- a council I impart
That long has laid the heaviest at my heart --
Three weeks -- ye gods! -- nay, three long years it seems
Since roast-beef I have touched, except in dreams.
In sleep, choice dishes to my view repair,
Waking, I gape and champ the empty air. --
Say, is it just that I, who rule these bands,
Should live on husks, like rakes in foreign lands? --
Come, let us plan some project ere we sleep,
And drink destruction to the rebel sheep,
On neighboring isles uncounted cattle stray,
Fat beeves, and swine, an ill defended prey --
These are fit victims for my noon day dish,
These, if my soldiers act as I would wish,
In one short week should glad your maws and mine --
On mutton we will sup -- on roast beef dine."
SHOUTS of applause re-echo'd through the hall,
And what pleased one as surely pleased them all,
WALLACE was named to execute the plan,
And thus sheep-stealing pleased them to a man.
NOW slumbers stole upon the great man's eye,
His powdered foretop nodded from on high,
His lids just ope'd to find how matters were,
Dissolve, he said, and so dissolved ye are,
Then downward sunk to slumbers dark and deep,
Each nerve unstrung -- and even his guts asleep.
PART II.
WHAT are these upstarts from a foreign isle,
That we should fear their hate, or court their smile --
Pride sent them here, pride blasted in the bud,
Who, if she can, will build her throne in blood,
With slaughtered millions glut her tearless eyes,
And bid even virtue fall, that she may rise.
WHAT deep offense has fired a monarch's rage?
What moon-struck madness seized the brain of GAGE?
Laughs not the soul when an imprisoned crew
Affect to pardon those they cannot subdue,
Though thrice repulsed, and hemmed up to their stations,
Yet issue pardons, oaths, and proclamations! --
Too long our patient country wears their chains,
Too long our wealth all-grasping Britain drains,
Why still a handmaid to that distant land?
Why still subservient to their proud command?
Britain the bold, the generous, and the brave
Still treats our country like the meanest slave,
Her haughty lords already share the prey,
Live on our labors, and with scorn repay --
Rise, sleeper, rise, while yet the power remains,
And bind their nobles and their chiefs in chains:
Fallen on disast'rous times, they scorn our plea,
It Is our own efforts that must make us free --
Born to contend, our lives we place at stake,
And grow immortal by the stand we make. --
The time shall come when strangers rule no more,
Nor cruel mandates vex from Britain's shore,
When commerce shall extend her shortened wing,
And her rich freights from every climate bring,
When mighty towns shall flourish free and great,
Vast their dominion, opulent their state,
When one vast cultivated region teems
From ocean's side to Missisippi streams,
While each enjoys his vine tree's peaceful shade,
And even the meanest has no foe to dread.
AND you, who far from Liberty detained,
Wear out existence in some slavish land --
Forsake these shores, a self-ejected throng,
And armed for vengeance here resent the wrong: --
Come to our climes, where unchain'd rivers flow,
And loftiest groves, and nature's forests grow,
Here the blessed soil your future care demands;
Come, sweep the forests from these shaded lands,
And the kind earth shall every toil repay,
And harvests flourish as the groves decay.
O Heaven-born Peace, renew thy wonted charms --
Far be this rancour, and this din of arms --
To warring lands return, an honored guest,
And bless our crimson shore among the rest --
Long may Britannia rule our hearts again,
Rule as the ruled in George the Second's reign,
May ages hence her growing grandeur see,
And she be glorious -- but ourselves as free*
THE DESOLATE ACADEMY.
SUBJECTED to despotic rule
Once in this dome I went to school,
Where Pedro Passive held his reign,
The tyrant of a small domain.
BY him a numerous herd controlled,
The pert, the stupid, and the bold,
Essayed some little share to gain
Of the vast treasures of his brain --
Some learned the Latin, some the Greek,
And some in ^lowery style to speak --
Some writ their themes, while others read,
And some with Euclid stuffed the head --
Some toiled in verse, and some in prose,
And some in Logic sought repose --
Some learned to cipher, some to draw,
And some began to study law.
BUT all is ruined, all is done,
The Tutor to the shades is gone,
And all his pupils, led astray,
Have each found out a diff^rent way.
SOME are in chains of wedlock bound,
And some are hanged, and some are drowned;
Some are advanced to posts and places,
And some in pulpits screw their faces;
Some at the bar a living gain,
Perplexing what they should explain --
To soldiers turned, a bolder band,
Repel the invaders of the land;
Some to the arts of Physic bred,
Dispatch their patients to the dead;
Some plough the land, and some the sea,
And some are slaves, and some are free;
Some court the great, and some the muse,
And some subsist by mending shoes --
While others -- but so vast the throng,
The Cobblers shall conclude my song.
THE SEAFARING BACHELOR.
SO long harrass'd by winds and seas,
It Is time, at length, to take your ease,
And seek a bride -- for few can find
The sea a mistress to their mind. --
^n all your rounds, it is wondrous strange
No fair one tempts you to a change --
Madness it is, you must agree,
To lodge alone till forty-three.
Old Plato owned, no blessing here
Could equal Love -- if but sincere;
And writings, penned by heaven, have shown
That man can never be blessed alone.
Over life's meridian have you passed;
The night of death advances fast!
No props you plant for your decline,
No partner sooths these cares of thine.
If Neptune's self, who ruled the main,
Kept sea-nymphs there to ease his pain;
Yourself, who skim that empire over,
May surely have one nymph on shore.
Myrtilla fair, in yonder grove,
Has so much beauty, so much love,
That, on her lip, the meanest fly
Is happier far than you or I.
ON THE CONQUEROR OF AMERICA SHUT UP IN BOSTON.
Published in New York, August 1775.
REBELS you are -- the British champion cries;
Truth, stand thou forth, and tell Tom. Gage he lies --
Rebels! -- and see, this mock imperial Lord
Already threats those rebels with the cord --
THE hour draws nigh, the glass is almost run,
When truth must shine, and scoundrels be undone,
When this base miscreant shall forbear to s^eer,
And curse his taunts and bitter insults here.
IF to control the cunning of a knave,
Freedom adore, and scorn the name of slave,
If to protest against a tyrant's laws,
And arm for vengeance in a righteous cause,
B^ deemed Rebellion -- it is a harmless thing,
This bugbear name, like death, has lost its sting.
AMERICANS, at freedom's fane adore,
But trust to British clemency no more;
The generous genius of the isle has fled,
And left a mere impostor in his stead --
If conquered, rebels, their past records show,
Receive no mercy from this parent foe --
And even the grave, that sacred haunt of peace,
Where Nature gives the woes of man to cease,
Vengeance will search -- and mangled corpses there
Be raised to feast the armies of the air. --
If Britain conquers, help us, heaven, to fly,
Lend me your wings, ye ravens of the sky --
If Britain conquers -- we exist no more:
These lands shall redden with their children's gore,
Who, turned to slaves, their fruitless toils shall moan,
Toils in these fields that once they called their own!
TO arms! to arms! -- and let the trusty sword
Decide who best deserves the hangman's cord,
Nor think the hills of Canada too bleak,
When desperate Freedom is the prize you seek;
For that the voice of honor bids you go
Over frozen lakes and mountains wrapped in snow,
No toils can daunt the warlike and the bold,
They scorn all heat or wave-congealing cold;
Haste, to your tents in fetters bring
These slaves that serve their tyrant of a king,
So just, so virtuous is your cause, I say
Hell must prevail if Britain wins the day.
THE VERNAL AGUE.
WHERE the Blackbird roosts at night,
In groves of half distinguished light,
Where the evening breezes s^gh
Solitary, there stay I.
Close along the shaded stream,
Source of many a golden dream,
Where branchy cedars dim the day --
There I muse, and there I stray.
Yet what can please amid this bower,
That charmed my eyes for many an hour!
The budding leaf is lost to me,
And dead the bloom on every tree,
The winding stream that glides along,
The lark that tunes her early song,
The mountain's brow, the sloping vale,
The murmuring of the western gale,
Have lost their charms* -- the blooms are gone!
Trees put a darker aspect on,
The stream disgusts that wanders by,
And every zephyr brings a sigh.
Great guardian of our feeble kind,
Restoring Nature, lend thine aid,
And over the features of the mind
Renew these colors, that must fade,
When vernal suns forbear to roll,
And endless winter chills the soul.
FEMALE FRAILTY.
Written November 1775.
DAMON -- LUCINDA -- THYRSIS.

Damon. IN vain you talk of shady bowers
When frosts, my fair one, chill the plain
And nights are cold, and long the hours
That damp the ardour of the swain,
Who, parting from his social fire,
All comfort does forego,
And here and there, and every where,
Pursues the invading foe.
But we must sleep on frosts and snows,
No season hinders our campaign,
Hard as the oaks, we dare oppose
The autumnal or the wint'ry reign:
Alike to us the winds that blow
In summer's season gay,
Or those that rave on Hudson's cave,
And drift his ice away
Winter and death may change the scene,
The ball may pierce, the cold may kill,
And dire misfortunes intervene,
But Freedom shall be potent still
To drive these Britons from our shore,
Who, cruel and unkind,
With slavish chain shall strive, in vain,
Our freeborn hearts to bind.

Lucinda. They chide me, and tell me I must not complain
To part a few days with my favorite swain --
He is gone to the battle, and leaves me to mourn,
And, say what you please, he will never return.
When he left me, he kissed me, and said, "My sweet dear,
"In less than a month I again will be here." --
With anguish and sorrow my bosom did burn,
And I wept, being sure he would never return.
I said, My dear creature, I beg you would stay --
But he, with his soldiers, went strutting away!
Then why should I longer my sorrows adjourn? --
You may call me a fool if he ever return.

Thyrsis. Sweetest of the virgin train,
You must seek another swain,
Damon will not come again --
All his toils are over!
As you loved him to excess,
Your loss is great, I must confess;
But, madam, yield not to distress --
I will be your lover.

Lucinda. Not all the swains the world can show
Can from this bosom drive this woe,
Or bid another passion glow
Where Damon has possession.
Not all the gifts that wealth can bring,
Not all the airs that you can sing,
Nor all the music of that string
Can banish his impression.

Thyrsis. Marriage and Death forever prove
Destructive to the flames of love,
With equal strength they both combine
Hearts once united to disjoin;
Hence mutual loves so soon remit,
Hence die the fires that Cupid lit.
Female tears and April snow
Sudden come and sudden go --
Since his head is levelled low
Cease the memory of your woe.
Never yet was reason found
So distracted with love's wound
As to be in sorrow drowned
For a lover under ground.

Lucinda. What a picture have I seen! --
What can all these visions mean! --
Winter groves and empty halls,
Coffins wrapped in velvet palls,
Monuments and funerals;
Forms terrific to the fight,
Weeping phantoms clad in white,
Streams that ever seemed to freeze
Planted round with cypress trees
Ever drooping -- never green --
What a vision have I seen! --
One I saw of angel kind,
From the dregs of life refined,
All in beams of light arrayed,
And thus the gentle spirit said --
"Fair Lucinda, come to me:
"What has grief to do with thee?
"O forsake that joyless shore,
"Shrouded all with darkness over --
"Could you but a moment stray
"In the meadows where I play,
"You would beg to come away --
"Come away! and speed thy flight,
"All with me is endless light."

Thyrsis. You have not yet forgot your glooms,
The heavy heart, the downcast eye,
The cheek that no gay smile assumes,
The breast that heaves a sigh.

Lucinda. Had you the (...) cause to grieve
That in this (...) does lie,
Instead of (...) to relieve,
You (...) be just as I.

Thyrsis. What secret cause have you to grieve --
A lover gone away? --
If one was able to deceive,
Perhaps another may.

Lucinda. My lover has not me deceived,
A part he would disdain --
But he is gone -- and I am grieved --
He Will never come again --
He Will never come again!

Thyrsis. The turtle on yon' withered bough,
That lately mourned her murdered mate,
Has ^ound another comrade now --
Such changes all await!
Again her drooping plume is dressed,
Again she is willing to be blessed,
And takes ^er lover to her nest.
If nature has de^^e^d it so
With all above, and all below,
Let us, like them, to (...) our woe,
And not be killed wi^^ so^^ow.
If I should quit your arms to ^ight
And chance to die before 'twas light,
I would advise you -- and you might
Love again tomorrow.

Lucinda. The turtle on yon' withered tree!
That turtle never felt like me --
Her grief is but a moment's date;
Another day another mate --
Besides, observe, the feathered race
Hold a new lover no disgrace --
How would the world my guilt display!
What would censorious Chloe say --
Would say -- while laughing folly hears --
"She made a conquest by her tears."

Thyrsis. My Polly -- once the pride of all
That shepherd lads their charmers call --
Too early parted with her bloom,
And sleeps in yonder furzy tomb --!
Her fate has set me free --
Fair as the day, and sweet as May,
But what is that to me!
Since all must bow to death's arrest,
No love deceased shall rack my breast --
Come, then, Lucinda, and be blessed.

Lucinda. My Damon O! -- can I forget
The day you left these longing eyes
Over northern lakes to wander far
To colder climes, and darker skies! --
There, shrouded in his wastes of snow,
The Briton guards the joy shore,
And there my Damon wanders now --
The swain that shall return no more!

Thyrsis. Weep, weep no more, my lovely lass --
The pang is over that fixed his doom --
They too shall to destruction pas^,
Nor find a triumph in a tomb. --
Ah! dry these tears -- enough are shed --
They too shall have their hour of woe;
Fled is their fame -- their honors fled --
For WASHINGTON shall lay them low.

Lucinda. If you had once a soldier's guise,
The splendid coat, the sprightly air,
You might seem charming in these eyes,
Nor would I quite despair.
There Is something in your face, I find
Recalling Damon to my mind --
He Is dead -- but I must be resigned!
His handsome shape, his manly face,
His youthful step in you I trace --
All, all I wish for, but the lace.

Thyrsis. For you I would forego my ease,
And traverse lakes, or ravage s^as,
And dress in lace, or what you please.
This enchanting month of May,
So bright, so bloomy, and so gay,
Claims our nuptials on this day.
For her vernal triumphs, we
Tune the harp to symphony --
Conquest has attended me!
Brightest season for the mind,
Vigorous, free, and unconfined,
Golden age of human kind.
Still at variance with thy charms
Death's eternal empire stands*
Hymen, come -- while rapture warms,
And give Lucinda to my arms.

MAC SWIGGEN; A SATIRE.
Written 1775.
LONG have I sat on this disast'rous shore,
And, sighing, sought to gain a passage over
To Europe's towns, where, as our travelers say,
Poets may flourish, or, perhaps they may;
But such abuse has from your coarse pen fell
I think I may defer my voyage as well,
Why should I far in search of honor roam,
And dunces leave to triumph here at home?
GREAT Jove in wrath a spark of genius gave,
And bade me drink the mad Pierian wave,
Hence came these rhimes, with truth ascribed to me,
That swell thy little soul to jealousy:
If thus, tormented at these slighty lays,
You strive t^ ^last what never was meant for praise,
How will you bear the more exalted rhyme
By labor polished, and matur'd by time?
DEVOTED madman! what inspired thy rage,
Who bade thy foolish muse with me engage?
Against a windmill would thou try thy might,
Against a giant would a pigmy fight?
What could thy slanderous pen with malice arm
To injure him, who never did thee harm?
Have I from thee been urgent to attain
The mean ideas of thy barren brain?
Have I been seen in borrowed clothes to shine,
And, when detected, swear by Jove they are mine?
O miscreant, hostile to thine own repose,
From thy own envy thy destruction flows!
BLESSED be our western world -- its scenes conspire
To raise a poet's fancy and his fir^,
Lo, blue-topt mountains to the skies ascend!
Lo, shady forests to the breezes bend!
See mighty streams meandering to the main!
See lambs and lambkins sport on every plain!
The spotted herds in flowery meadows see!
But what, ungenerous wretch, are these to thee? --
You find no charms in all that nature yields,
Then leave to me the grottoes and the fields:
I interfere not with your vast design --
Pursue your studies, and I Will follow mine,
Pursue well pleased your theologic schemes,
Attend professors, and correct your themes,
Still some dull nonsense, low-bred wit invent,
Or prove from scripture what it never meant,
Or far through law, that land of scoundrels, stray,
And truth disguise through all your ma^y way,
Wealth you may gain, your clients you may squeeze,
And by long cheating, learn to live at ease;
If but in Wood or Littleton well read,
The devil shall help you to your daily bread.
O WAFT me far, ye muses of the west --
Give me your green bowers and soft seats of rest --
Thrice happy in those dear retreats to find
A safe retirement from all human kind --
Though dire misfortunes every step attend,
The muse, still social, still remains a friend --
In solitude her converse gives delight,
With gay poetic dreams she cheers the night,
She aids me, shields me, bears me on her wings,
In spite of growling whelps, to high, exalted things,
Beyond the miscreants that my peace molest,
Miscreants, with dullness and with rage oppressed.
HAIL, great MAC SWIGGEN! foe to honest fame,
Patron of dunces, and thyself the same,
You dream of conquest -- tell me, how, or whence?
Act like a man and combat me with sense --
This evil have I known, and known but once,
Thus to be galled and slandered by a dunce,
Saw rage and weakness join their dastard plan
To crush the shadow, not attack the man.
WHAT swarms of vermin from the sultry south
Like frogs surround thy pestilential mouth --
Clad in the garb of sacred sanctity,
What madness prompts thee to invent a lie?
Thou base defender of a wretched crew,
Thy tongue let loose on those you never knew,
The human spirit with the brutal joined,
The imps of Orcus in thy breast combined,
The genius barren, and the wicked heart
Prepared to take each trifling scoundrel's part,
The turned up nose, the monkey's foolish face,
The scorn of reason, and your sire's disgrace --
Assist me, gods, to drive this dog of rhyme
Back to the torments of his native clime,
Where dullness mingles with her native earth,
And rhimes, not worth the pang that gave them birth!
Where did he learn to write or talk with men --
A senseless blockhead, with a scribbling pen --
In vile acrostics thou may please the fair,
Not less than with thy looks and powdered hair,
But strive no more with rhyme to daunt thy foes,
Or, by the flame that in my bosom glows,
The muse on thee shall her worst fury spend,
And hemp, or water, thy vile being end.
ASPERSED like me, who would not grieve and rage!
Who would not burn, Mac Swiggen to engage?
Him and his friends, a mean, designing race,
I, singly I, must combat face to face --
Alone I stand to meet the foul-mouthed train,
Assisted by no poets of the plain,
Whose timorous Muses cannot swell their theme
Beyond a meadow or a purling stream --
Were not my breast impervious to despair,
And did not Clio reign unrivaled there,
I must expire beneath the ungenerous host,
And dullness triumph over a poet lost.
RAGE gives me wings, and fearless prompts me on
To conquer brutes the world should blush to own;
No peace, no quarter to such imps I lend,
Death and perdition on each line I send;
Bring all the wittlings that your host supplies,
A cloud of nonsense and a storm of lies --
Your kitchen wit -- Mac Swiggen's loud applause
That wretched rhymer with his lanthorn jaws --
His deep-set eyes forever on the wink,
His soul extracted from the public sink --
All such as he, to my confusion call --
And though ten myriads -- I despise them all.
COME on, Mac Swiggen, come -- your muse is willing
Your prose is merry, but your verse is killing --
Come on, attack me with that whining prose,
Your beard is red, and swine-like is your nose,
Like burning brush your bristly head of hair,
The ugliest image of a Greenland bear --
Come on -- attack me with your choicest rhimes,
Sound void of sense betrays the unmeaning chimes --
Come, league your forces; all your wit combine,
Your wit not equal to the bold design --
The heaviest arms the Muse can give, I wield,
To stretch Mac Swiggen floundering on the field,
'Swiggen, who, aided by some spurious Muse,
But bellows nonsense, and but writes abuse,
'Swiggen, immortal and unfading grown,
But by no deeds or merits of his own --
So, when some hateful monster sees the day,
In spirits we preserve it from decay,
But for what end, it is not hard to guess --
Not for its value, but its ugliness.
NOW, by the winds which shake thy rubric mop,
(That nest of witches, or that barber's shop)
Mac Swiggen, hear -- Be wise in times to come,
A dunce by nature, bid thy muse be dumb,
Lest you, devoted to the infernal skies,
Descend, like Lucifer, no more to rise --
Sick of all feuds, to Reason I appeal
From wars of paper, and from wars of steel,
Let others here their hopes and wishes end,
I to the sea with weary steps descend,
Quit the mean conquest that such swine might yield*
And leave Mac Swiggen to enjoy the field --
In distant isles some happier scene I Will choose,
And court in softer shades the unwilling Muse,
Thrice happy there, through peaceful plains to rove,
Or the cool verdure of the Orange grove,
Safe from the miscreants that my peace molest,
Miscreants, with dullness and with rage oppressed.
THE HOUSE OF NIGHT: A VISION.
ADVERTISEMENT -- This Poem is founded upon the authority of Scripture,
inasmuch as these sacred books assert, that the last enemy that shall be
conquered is Death. For the purposes of poetry he is here personified, and
represented as on his dying bed. The scene is laid at a solitary palace, (the
time midnight) which, though before beautiful and joyous, is now become sad and
gloomy, as being the abode and receptacle of Death. Its owner, an amiable
majestic youth, who had lately lost a beloved consort, nevertheless with a
noble philosophical fortitude and humanity entertains him in a friendly manner,
and by employing Physicians, endeavors to restore him to health, although an
enemy; convinced of the excellence and propriety of that divine precept, If
thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink. He nevertheless, as
if by a spirit of prophecy, informs this (fictitiously) wicked being of the
certainty of his doom, and represents to him in a pathetic manner the vanity of
his expectations, either of a reception into the abodes of the just, or
continuing longer to make havoc of mankind upon earth. The patient finding his
end approaching, composes his epitaph, and orders it to be engraved on his
tombstone, hinting to us thereby, that even Death and Distress have vanity; and
would be remembered with honor after he is no more, although his whole life has
been spent in deeds of devastation and murder. He dies at last in the utmost
agonies of despair, after agreeing with an avaricious Undertaker to intomb his
bones. This reflects upon the inhumanity of those men, who, not to mention an
enemy, would scarcely cover a departed friend with a little dust, without
certainty of reward for so doing. The circumstances of his funeral are then
recited, and the visionary and fabulous part of the poem disappears. It
conclude^ with a few reflections on the impropriety of a too great attachment to
the present life, and incentives to such moral virtue a^ may assist in
conducting us to a better.

1.
TREMBLING I write my dream, and recollect
A fearful vision at the midnight hour;
So late, Death over me spread ^is sable wings,
Painted with fancies of malignant power!
2.
Such was the dream the sage Chaldean saw
Disclosed to him that felt heaven's vengeful rod,
Such was the ghost, who through deep silence cried,
Shall mortal man -- be juster than his God.
3.
Let others draw from smiling skies their theme,
And tell of climes that boast unfading light,
I draw a darker scene, replete with gloom,
I sing the horrors of the House of Night.
4.
Stranger, believe the truth experience tells,
Poetic dreams are of a finer cast
Than those which over the sober brain diffused,
Are but a repetition of some action past.
5.
Fancy, I own thy power -- when sunk in sleep
Thou play'st thy wild delusive part so well
You lift me into immortality,
Depict new heavens, or draw the scenes of he^l.
6.
By some sad means, when Reason holds no sway*
Lonely I roved at midnight over a plain
Where murmuring streams and mingling rivers ^^ow,
Far to their springs, or seek the sea again.
7.
Sweet vernal May! though then thy woods in bloom
Flourished, yet naught of this could Fancy see,
No wild pinks blessed the meads, no green the fields,
And naked seemed to stand each lifeless tree:
8.
Dark was the sky, and not one friendly star
Shone from the zenith or horizon, clear,
Mist sat upon the woods, and darkness rode
In her black chariot, with a wild career.
9.
And from the woods the late resounding note
Issued of the loquacious Whip-poor-will, A Bird peculiar to America, of a
solitary nature, who never sings but in the night. Her note resembles the name
given to her by the country people.

Hoarse, howling dogs, and nightly roving wolves
Clamoured from far off clifts invisible.
10.
Rude, from the wide extended Chesapeke
I heard the winds the dashing waves assail,
And saw from far, by picturing fancy formed,
The black ship traveling through the noisy gale.
11.
At last, by chance and guardian fancy led,
I reached a noble dome, raised fair and high,
And saw the light from upper windows flame,
Presage of mirth and hospitality.
12.
And by that light around the dome appeared
A mournful garden of autumnal hue,
Its lately pleasing flowers all drooping stood
Amidst high weeds that in rank plenty grew.
13.
The Primrose there, the violet darkly blue,
Daisies and fair Narcissus ceased to rise,
Gay spotted pinks their charming bloom withdrew,
And Polyanthus quenched its thousand dies.
14.
No pleasant fruit or blossom gaily smiled.
Naught but unhappy plants and trees were seen,
The yew, the myrtle, and the churchyard elm,
The cypress, with its melancholy green.
15.
There cedars dark, the o^^er, and the pine,
Shorn tamarisks, and weeping willows grew,
The poplar tall, the lotos, and the lime,
And pyracantha did her leaves renew.
16.
The poppy there, companion to repose,
Displayed her blossoms that began to fall,
And here the purple amaranthus rose
With mint strong-scented, for the funeral.
17.
And here and there with laurel shrubs between
A tombstone lay, inscribed with strains of woe,
And stanzas sad, throughout the dismal green,
Lamented for the dead that slept below.
18.
Peace to this awful dome! -- when strait I heard
The voice of men in a secluded room,
Much did they talk of death, and much of life,
Of coffins, shrouds, and horrors of a tomb*
19.
Pathetic were their words, and well they aimed
To explain the mystic paths of providence,
Learned were they all, but there remained not I
To hear the upshot of their conference.
20.
Meantime from an adjoining chamber came
Confused murmurings, half distinguished sounds,
And as I nearer drew, disputes arose
Of surgery, and remedies for wounds.
21.
Dull were their feuds, for they went on to talk
Of Anchylosis, and the shoulder blade,
Os Femoris, Trochanters -- and whatever
Has been discussed by Cheselden or Meade:
22.
And often each to prove his notion true
Brought proofs from Galen or Hippocrates --
But fancy led me hence -- and left them so,
Firm at their points of hardy No and Yes.
23.
Then up three winding stairs my feet were brought
To a high chamber, hung with mourning sad,
The unsnuff'd candles glar'd with visage dim,
'Midst grief, in ecstasy of woe run mad.
24.
A wide leaf'd table stood on either side
Well fraught with phials, half their liquids spent,
And from a couch, behind the curtain's veil
I heard a hollow voice of loud lament.
25.
Turning to view the object whence it came,
My frighted eyes a horrid form surveyed; NOTES.] Verse 21. Anchylosis -- a
morbid contraction of the ^oints.

Verse 21. -- Os Femoris -- the thigh bone.

Verse 21. -- Trochanters -- two processes in the upper part of the thigh bone,
otherwise called, rotator major et minor, in which the tendons of many muscles
terminate.



Fancy, I own thy power -- Death on the couch
With fleshless limbs, at rueful length, was laid.
26.
And over his head flew jealousies and cares,
Ghosts, imps, and half the black Tartarian crew,
Archangels damned* nor was their Prince remote,
Borne on the vaporous wings of Stygian dew.
27.
Around his bed by the dull flambeaux glare,
I saw pale phantoms -- Rage to madness vexed,
Wan, wasting grief, and ever musing care,
Distressful pain, and poverty perplexed.
28.
Sad was his countenance, if we can call
That countenance, where only bones were seen
And eyes sunk in their sockets, dark and low,
And teeth, that only showed themselves to grin.
29.
Rest was his scull of hair, and no fresh bloom
Of cheerful mirth sat on his visage hoar:
Sometimes he raised his head, while deep drawn groans
Were mixed with words that did his fate deplore.
30.
Often did he wish to see the day light spring,
And often toward the window leaned to hear,
Forerunner of the scarlet-mantled morn,
The early note of wakeful Chanticleer.
31.
Thus he -- But at my hand a portly youth
Of comely countenance, began to tell,
"That this was Death upon his dying bed,
"Sullen, morose, and peevish to be well;
32.
"Fixed is his doom -- the miscreant reigns no more
"The tyrant of the dying or the dead;
"This night concludes his all-consuming reign,
"Pour out, ye heavens, your vengeance on his head.
33.
"But since, my friends, (said he) chance leads you here,
"With me this night upon the sick attend,
"You on this bed of death must watch, and I
"Will not be distant from the fretful fiend.
34.
"Before he made this lofty pile his home,
"In undisturbed repose I sweetly slept,
"But when he came to this sequestered dome
"'It Was then my troubles came, and then I wept:
35.
"Twice three long nights, in this sad chamber, I
"As though a brother languish'd in despair,
"Have 'tended faithful round his gloomy bed,
"Have been content to breathe this loathsome air.
36.
"A while relieve the languors that I feel,
"Sleep's magic forces close my weary eyes;
"Soft over my soul unwonted slumbers steal,
"Aid the weak patient till you see me rise.
37.
"But let ^o slumbers on your eyelids fall,
"That if he ask for powder or for pill
"You may be ready at the word to start,
"And still seem anxious to perform his will.
38.
"The bleeding Savior of a world undone
"Bade thy compassion rise toward thy foe,
"Then, stranger, for the sake of Mary's son,
"Thy tears of pity on this wretch bestow.
39.
"'It Was he that stole from my adoring arms
" Aspasia, she the loveliest of her kind,
"Lucretia's virtue, with a Helen's charms,
"Charms of the face, and beauties of the mind.
40.
"The blushy cheek, the lively, beaming eye,
"The ruby lip, the flowing jetty hair,
"The stature tall, the aspect so divine,
"All beauty, you would think, had centered there.
41.
"Each future age her virtues shall exto^,
"Nor the just tribute to her worth refuse;
"Famed, to the stars URANIA bids her rise,
"Theme of the moral, and the tragic Muse.
42.
"Sweet as the fragrance of the vernal morn,
"Nipt in its bloom this faded flower I see;
"The inspiring angel from that breast is gone,
"And life's warm tide forever chilled in thee!
43.
"Such charms shall greet my longing soul no more,
"Her lively eyes are closed in endless shade,
"Torpid, she rests on yonder marble floor;
"Approach, and see what havoc DEATH has made.
44.
"Yet, stranger, hold -- her charms are so divine,
"Such tints of life still on her visage glow,
"That even in death this slumbering bride of mine
"May seize thy heart, and make thee wretched too.
45.
"O shun the sight -- forbid thy trembling hand
"From her pale face to raise the enshrouding lawn, --
"Death claims thy care, obey his stern command,
"Trim the dull tapers, for I see no dawn!"
46.
So said, at Death's left side I sat me down,
The mourning youth toward his right reclined;
Death in the middle lay, with all his groans,
And much he tossed and tumbled, sighed and pined.
47.
But now this man of hell toward me turned,
And strait, in hideous tone, began to speak,
Long held he sage discourse, but I forbore
To answer him, much less his news to seek.
48.
He talked of tomb-stones and of monuments,
Of Equinoxial climes and India shores,
He talked of stars that shed their influence,
Fevers and plagues, and all their noxious stores.
49.
He mentioned too the guileful calenture,
Tempting the sailor on the deep sea main,
That paints gay groves upon the ocean floor,
Beckoning her victim to the faithless scene.
50.
Much spoke he of the myrtle and the yew, NOTE.] Verse 49. -- Calenture -- an
inflammatory fever, attended with a delirium common in long voyages at sea, in
which the diseased persons fancy the sea to be green fields and meadows, and,
if they are not hindered, will leap overboard..

Of ghosts that nightly walk the churchyard over,
Of storms that through the wint'ry ocean blow
And dash the the well-mann'd galley on the shore,
51.
Of broad-mouth'd cannons, and the thunderbolt,
Of sieges and convulsions, dearth and fire,
Of poisonous weeds -- but seemed to sneer at these
Who by the laurel over him did aspire.
52.
Then with a hollow voice thus went he on,
"Get up, and search, and bring, when found, to me,
"Some cordial, potion, or some pleasant draught,
"Sweet, slumb'rous poppy, or the mild Bohea.
53.
"But hark, my pitying friend --! -- and, if you can,
"Deceive the grim physician at the door --
"Bring half the mountain springs -- ah! hither bring
"The cold rock water from the shady bower.
54.
"For till this night such thirst did never invade,
"A thirst provoked by heaven's avenging hand;
"Hence bear me, friends, to quaff, and quaff again
"The cool wave bubbling from the yellow sand.
55.
"To these dark walls with stately step I came,
"Prepared your drugs and doses to defy;
"Smit with the love of never d^ing fame,
"I came, alas! to conquer -- not to die!"
56.
Glad, from his side I sprang, and fetched the draught,
Which down his greedy throat he quick^y swills,
Then on a second errand sent me strait
To search in some dark corner for his pills.
57.
Quoth he, "These pills have long compounded been
"Of dead men's bones and bitter roots, I trow;
"But that I may to wonted health return,
"Throughout my lank veins shall their substance go."
58.
So down they went -- He raised his fainting head
And often in feeble tone essayed to talk;
Quoth he, "Since remedies have small avail,
"Assist unhappy Death once more to walk."
59.
Then slowly rising from his loathsome bed,
On wasted legs the meagre monster stood,
Gaped wide, and foamed, and hungry seemed to ask,
Though sick, an endless quantity of food.
60.
Said he, "The sweet melodious flute prepare,
"The anthem, and the organ's solemn sound,
"Such as may strike my soul with ecstacy,
"Such as may from yon' lofty walls rebound.
61.
"Sweet music can the fiercest pains assuage,
"She bids the ^^ul to heaven's blessed mansions rise,
"She calms despair, controuls infernal rage
"And deepest anguish, when it hears her, dies.
62.
"And see, the mizzling, misty midnight reigns,
"And no soft dews are on m^ eyelids sent --!
"Here, stranger, lend thy hand; assist me, pray,
"To walk a circuit of no large extent." --
63.
On my pressed shoulders leaning, round he went,
And could have made the boldest spectre flee,
I led him up stairs, and I led him down,
But not one moment's rest from pain got he.
64.
Then with his dart, its cusp unpointed now,
Thrice with main strength he smote the trembling floor,
The roof resounded to the fearful blow,
And Cleon started, doomed to sleep no more.
65.
When thus spoke Death, impatient of control,
"Quick, move, and bring from yonder black bureau
"The sacred book that may preserve my soul
"From long damnation, and eternal woe.
66.
"And with it bring -- for you may find them there,
"The works of holy authors, dead and gone,
"The sacred tome of moving Drelincourt,
"Or what more solemn Sherlock mused upon:
67.
"And read, my Cleon, what these sages say,
"And what the sacred Penman has declared,
"That when the wicked leaves his odious way,
"His sins shall vanish, and his soul be spared."
68.
But he, unmindful of the vain command,
Reasoned with Death, nor were his reasonings few:
Quoth he -- "My Lord, what frenzy moves your brain,
"Pray, what, my lord, can Sherlock be to you,
69.
"Or all the sage divines that ever wrote,
"Grave Drelincourt, or heaven's unerring page;
"These point their arrows at your hostile breast,
"And raise new pains that time must never assuage.
70.
"And why should thus thy woe disturb my rest?
"Much of Theology I once did read,
"And there it is fixed, sure as my God is so,
"That Death shall perish, though a God should bleed.
71.
"The martyr, doomed the pangs of fire to feel,
"Lives but a moment in the sultry blast;
"The victim groans, and dies beneath the steel,
"But thy severer pains shall always last.
72.
"O miscreant vile, thy age has made thee dote --
"If peace, if sacred peace were found for you,
"Hell would cry out, and all the damned arise
"And, more deserving, seek for pity too.
73.
"Seek not for Paradise -- it is not for thee,
"Where high in heaven its sweetest blossoms blow,
"Nor even where gliding to the Persian main
"Thy waves, Euphrates, through the garden flow!
74.
"Bloody has been thy reign, O man of hell,
"Who sympathiz'd with no departing groan;
"Cruel wast thou, and hardly do deserve
"To have Hic Jacet stamped upon thy stone.
75.
"He that could build his mansion over the tombs,
"Depending still on sickness and decay,
"May dwell unmoved amidst these drowsier glooms*
"May laugh the dullest of these shades away.
76.
"Remember how with unrelenting ire
"You tore the infant from the unwilling breast --
"ASPASIA fell, and CLEON must expire,
"Doomed by the impartial God to endless rest:
77.
"In vain with stars he decked yon' spangled skies,
"And bade the mind to heaven's bright regions soar,
"And brought so far to my admiring eyes
"A glimpse of glories that shall blaze no more!
78.
"Even now to glut thy devilish wrath, I see
"From eastern realms a wasteful army rise:
"Why else those lights that tremble in the north?
"Why else yon' comet blazing through the skies?
79.
"Rejoice O ^^end; Britannia's tyrant sends
"From German plains his myriads to our shore.
"The fierce Hibernian with the Briton joined --
"Bring them ye winds! but waft them back no more.
80.
"To you, alas! the fates in wrath deny
"The comforts to our parting moments due,
"And leave you here to languish and to die,
"Your crimes too many, and your tears too few.
81.
"No cheering voice to thee shall cry, Repent!
"As once it echoed through the wilderness --
"No patron died for thee -- damned, damned art thou
"Like all the devils, nor one jot the les^.
82.
"A gloomy land, with sullen skies is thine,
"Where never rose or amaranthus grow,
"No daffodills, nor comely columbine,
"No hyacinths nor asplrodels for you.
83.
"The barren trees that flourish on the shore
"With leaves or fruit were never seen to bend,
"Over languid waves unblossom'd branches hang,
"And every branch sustains some vagrant fiend.
84.
"And now no more remains, but to prepare
"To take possession of thy punishment,
"That Is thy inheritance, that thy domain,
"A land of bitter woe, and loud lament.
85.
"And oh that HE, who spread the universe,
"Would cast one pitying glance on thee below;
"Millions of years in torments thou might fry,
"But thy eternity! -- who can conceive its woe!"
86.
He heard, and round with his black eye balls gazed,
Full of despair, and cursed, and raved, and swore:
"And since this is my doom, said he, call up
"Your wood-mechanics to my chamber door:
87.
"Blame not on me the ravage to be made;
"Proclaim, -- even Death abhors such woe to see;
"I Will quit the world, while decently I can,
"And leave the work to GEORGE my deputy."
88.
Up rushed a band, with compasses and scales
To measure his slim carcass, long and lean --
"Be sure, said he, to frame my coffin strong,
"You, master workman, and your men, I mean:
89.
"For if the Devil, so late my trusty friend,
"Should get one hint where I am laid, from you,
"Not with my soul content, he would seek to find
"That mouldering mass of bones, my body, too!
90.
"Of hardest ebon let the plank be found,
"With c^amps and ponderous bars secured around,
"That if the box by Satan should be stormed,
"It may be able for resistance found."
91.
"Yes, said the master workman, noble Death,
"Your coffin shall be strong -- that leave to me --
"But who shall these your funeral dues discharge?
"Nor friends nor pence you have, that I can see."
92.
To this said Death -- "You might have asked me too,
"Base caitiff, who are my executors,
"Where my estate, and who the men that shall
"Partake my substance, and be called my heirs.
93.
"Know, then, that hell is my inheritance,
"The devil himself my funeral dues must pay --
"Go -- since you must be paid -- go, ask of him,
"For he has gold, as fabling poets say."
94.
Strait they retired -- when thus he gave me charge,
Pointing from the light window to the west,
"Go three miles over the plain, and you shall see
"A burying-yard of sinners dead, unblest.
95.
"Amid the graves a spiry building stands
"Whose solemn knell resounding through the gloom
"Shall call thee over the circumjacent lands
"To the dull mansion destined for my tomb.
96.
"There, since it is dark, I Will plant a glimmering light
"Just snatched from hell, by whose reflected beams
"Thou shall behold a tombstone, full eight feet,
"Fast by a grave, replete with ghosts and dreams.
97.
"And on that stone engrave this epitaph
"Since Death, it seems, must die like mortal men;
"Yes -- on that stone engrave this epitaph,
"Though all hell's furies aim to snatch the pen.
98.
"Death in this tomb his weary bones has laid,
"Sick of dominion over the human kind --
"Behold what devastations he has made,
"Survey the millions by his arm confined.
99.
"Six thousand years has sovereign sway been mine,
"None, but myself, can real glory claim;
"Great Regent of the world I reigned alone,
"And princes trembled when my mandate came.
100.
"Vast and unmatched throughout the world my fame
"Takes place of gods, and asks no mortal date --
"No: by myself, and by the heavens, I swear,
"Not Alexander's name is half so great.
101.
"Nor swords nor darts my prowess could withstand,
"All quit their arms, and bowed to my decree,
"Even mighty JULIUS died beneath my ^and,
"For slaves and Cesars were the same to me!
102.
"Traveller, would thou his noblest trophies seek,
"Search in no narrow spot obscure for those;
"The sea profound, the surface of all land
"Is molded with the myriads of his foes."
103.
Scarce had he spoke, when on the lofty dome
Rushed from the clouds a hoarse resounding blast --
Round the four caves so loud and sad it played
As though all music were to breathe its last.
104.
Warm was the gale, and such as travelers say
Sport with the winds on Zaara's barren waste;
Black was the sky, a mourning carpet spread,
Its azure blotted, and its stars overcast!
105.
Lights in the air like burning stars were hurled,
Dogs howled, heaven muttered, and the tempest blew,
The red half moon peeped from behind a cloud
As if in dread the amazing scene to view.
106.
The mournful trees that in the garden stood
Bent to the tempest as it rushed along,
The elm, the myrtle, and the cypress sad
More melancholy tuned its bellowing song.
107.
No more that elm its noble branches spread,
The yew, the cypress, or the myrtle tree,
Rent from the roots the tempest tore them down,
And all the grove in wild confusion lay.
108.
Yet, mindful of his dread command, I part
Glad from the magic dome -- nor found relief;
Damps from the dead hung heavier round my heart,
While sad remembrance roused her stores of grief.
109.
Over a dark field I held my dubious way
Where Jack-a-lanthorn walked his lonely round,
Beneath my feet substantial darkness lay,
And screams were heard from the distempered ground.
110.
Nor looked I back, till to a far off wood
Trembling with fear, my weary feet had sped --
Dark was the night, but at the enchanted dome
I saw the infernal windows flaming red.
111.
And from within the howls of Death I heard,
Cursing the dismal night that gave him birth,
Damning his ancient sire, and mother sin,
Who at the gates of hell, accursed, brought him forth.
112.
[For fancy gave to my enraptured soul
An eagle's eye, with keenest glance to see,
And bade those distant sounds distinctly roll
Which, waking, never had affected me.]
113.
Often his pale breast with cruel hand he smote,
And tearing from his limbs a winding sheet
Roared to the black skies, while the woods around,
As wicked as himself, his words repeat.
114.
Thrice towered the skies his meagre arms he reared,
Invoked all hell, and thunders on his head,
Bid lightenings fly, earth yawn, and tempests roar,
And the sea wrap him in its oozy bed.
115.
"My life for one cool draught! -- O, fetch your springs,
"Can one unfeeling to my woes be found!
"No friendly visage comes to my relief,
"But ghosts impend, and specter hover round.
116.
"Though humbled now, disheartened and distressed,
"Yet, when admitted to the peaceful ground,
"With heroes, kings, and conquerors I shall rest,
"Shall sleep as safely, and perhaps as sound."
117.
Dim burnt the lamp, and now the phantom Death
Gave his last groans in horror and despair --
"All hell demands me hence" -- he said, and threw
The red lamp hissing through the midnight air.
118.
Trembling, across the plain my course I held,
And found the grave-yard, loitering through the gloom,
And, in the midst, a hell-red, wandering light*
Walking in fiery circles round the tomb.
119.
Among the graves a spiry building stood,
Whose rolling bell resounding through the shade
Sung doleful ditties to the adjacent wood,
And many a dismal drowsy thing it said.
120.
This fabric tall, with towers and chancels graced,
Was raised by sinners hands, in ages fled,
The roof they painted, and the beams they braced,
And texts from scripture over the walls they spread:
121.
But wicked were their hearts, for they refused
To aid the helpless orphan, when distressed,
The shivering, naked stranger they mis-us'd,
And banished from their doors the starving guest.
122.
By law^ protected, cruel and profane,
The poor man's ox these monsters drove away; --
And left Distress to attend her infant train,
No friend to comfort, and no bread to stay.
123.
But heaven looked on with keen, resentful eye,
And doomed them to perdition and the grave,
That as they felt not for the wretch distressed
So heaven no pity on their souls would have.
124.
In pride they raised this building tall and fair,
Their hearts were on perpetual mischief bent,
With pride they preached, and pride was in their prayer,
With pride they were deceived, and so to hell they went.
125.
At distance far approaching to the tomb
By lamps and lanthorns guided through the shade
A coal-black chariot hurried through the gloom,
Specter attending, in black weeds arrayed,
126.
Whose woeful forms yet chill my soul with dread,
Each wore a vest in Stygian chambers wove,
Death's kindred all -- Death's horses they bestrode,
And galloped fiercely, as the chariot drove.
127.
Each horrid face a grizly mask concealed,
Their busy eyes shot terror to my soul
As now and then, by the pale lanthorn's glare,
I saw them for their parted friend condole.
128.
Before the hearse Death's chaplain seemed to go,
Who strove to comfort, what he could, the dead;
Talked much of Satan, and the land of woe,
And many a chapter from the scriptures read.
129.
At last he raised the swelling anthem high,
In dismal numbers seemed he to complain;
The captive tribes that by Euphrates wept,
Their song was jovial to his dreary strain.
130.
That done, they placed the carcass in the tomb,
To dust and dull obl^vion now resigned,
Then turned the chariot towered the House of Night,
Which soon slew off, and left no trace behind.
131.
But as I stooped to write the appointed verse,
Swifter than thought the airy scene decayed,
Blushing the morn arose, and from the east
With her gay streams of light dispelled the shade.
132.
What is this Death, ye deep read sophists, say? --
Death is no more than one unceasing change;
New forms arise, while other forms decay,
Yet all is LIFE throughout creation's range.
133.
The towering Alps, the haughty Appenine,
The Andes wrapped in everlasting snow,
The Apalachian and the Ararat
Sooner or later must to ruin go.
134.
Hills sink to plains, and man returns to dust,
That dust supports a reptile or a flower;
Each changeful atom by some other nursed
Takes some new form, to perish in an hour.
135.
Too nearly joined to sickness, toils and pains,
(Perhaps for former crimes imprisoned here)
True to itself the immortal soul remains,
And seeks new mansions in the starry sphere.
136.
When Nature bids thee from the world retire,
With joy thy lodging leave, a sated guest,
In Paradise, the land of thy desire,
Existing always, always to be blessed.
THE JAMAICA FUNERAL.
1776.
1.
ALCANDER died -- the rich, the great, the brave;
Even such must yield to heaven's severe decree,
Death, still at hand, conducts us to the grave,
And humbles monarchs as he humbled thee.
2.
When, lingering, to his end Alcander drew,
Officious friends besieged his lofty door,
Impatient they the dying man to view
And touch that hand they soon must touch no more.
3.
Alas, he is gone! the sad attendants cry,
Fled is the breath that never shall return --
"Alas! he is gone! his tearful friends reply,
"Spread the dark crape, and round his pale corpse mourn.
4.
"Ye that attend the pompous funeral, due,
"In fable vestments let your limbs be clad,
"For vulgar deaths a common sorrow show,
"But costly griefs are for the wealthy dead.
5.
"Prepare the blessings of the generous vine,
"Let bulls and oxen groan beneath the steel,
"Throughout the board let choicest dainties shine,
"To every guest a generous portion deal." --
6.
A mighty crowd approached the mourning dome,
Some came to hear the sermon and the prayer,
Some came to shun Xantippe's voice at home,
And some with Bacchus to relieve their care.
7.
A Levite came, and sighed among the rest,
A rusty band and tattered gown he wore,
His leaves he tumbled, and the house he blessed,
And conn'd his future sermon over and over.
8.
And often a glance he cast toward the wine
That briskly sparkled in the glassy vase,
And often drank, and often wished to dine,
And red as Phoebus glowed his sultry face.
9.
Much did he chatter, and on various themes,
He published news that came from foreign climes,
He told his jests, and told his last year's dreams,
And quoted dull stuff from lord Wilmot's rhymes.
10.
And dunn'd the mourne^s for his parish dues
With face of brass, and scrutinizing eye,
And threatened lawsuits if they dared refuse
To pay his honest earnings punctually.
11.
An honest sire, who came in luckless hour
To hear the sermon and to see the dead,
Presuming on this consecrated hour,
Ventured to check the parson on that head.
12.
Quoth he, "My priest, (...) conduct is not fit
"For other speech this solemn hour demands:
"What if your parish owes its annual de^t,
"Your parish ready to discharge it stands."
13.
Nor more he said -- for charged with wounds and pain
The parson's staff like Jove's own lightning flew,
Which cleft his jaw bone and his cheek in twain,
And from their sockets half his grinders drew.
14.
Nor less deceased some moments lay the sire
Than if from heaven the forked lightnings thrown
Had pierced him with their instantaneous fire,
And sent him smoking to the world unknown.
15.
At last he moved, and, weltering in his gore,
Thus did the rueful, wounded victim say,
"Convey me hence -- so bloody and so ^ore
"I cannot wait to hear the parson pray;
16.
"And if I did, what pleasure could be mine --
"Can he allure me to the world of bliss --
"Can he present me at the heavenly shrine
"Who breaks my bones, and knocks me down in this?
17.
"The scripture says -- the text I well recall --
"A Priest or Bishop must no striker be,
"Then how can such ^ wicked priest but fall,
"Who at a funeral thus has murdered me?" --
18.
Thus he -- But now the sumpt^ous dinner came,
The Levite boldly seized the nobler p^ace,
Beside him sat the woe-struck widowed dame,
Who helped him drain the brimful china vase.
19.
Which now renewed, he drank that ocean too,
Like Polypheme, the boon Ulysses gave;
Another came, nor did another do,
For still another did the monster crave.
20.
With far-fetched dainties he regaled his maw,
And praised the various meats that crowned the board:
On tender capons did the glutton gnaw,
And well ^his platter with profusion stored.
21.
But spoke no words of grace -- I marked him well,
I fixed my eye upon his brazen brow --
He looked like Satan aiming to rebel,
Such pride and madness were his inmates now.
22.
But not contented with this hectoring priest,
Sick of his nonsense, softly I withdrew,
And at a ca^mer table shared the feast
To sorrow sacred, and to friendship due,
23.
Which now achieved, the tolling bell remote
Summoned the living and the dead to come,
And through the dying sea-breeze swelled the note,
Dull on the ear, and lengthening through the gloom
24.
The Bier was brought, the costly coffin laid,
And prayers were muttered in a doleful tone,
While the sad pall, above the body spread,
From many a tender breast drew many a groan.
25.
The Levite too some tears of Bacchus shed --
Reeling before the long procession, he
Strode like a general at his army's head,
His gown in tatters, and his wig -- ah me!
26.
The words of faith in both his hands he bore,
Prayers, cut and dry, by ancient prelates made,
Who, bigots while they lived, could do no more
Than leave them still by bigots to be said.
27.
But he admired them all! -- he read with joy
St. Athanasius in his thundering creed,
And cursed the men whom Satan did employ
To make king Charles, that heaven-born martyr, bleed.
28.
At last they reached the spiry building high,
And soon they entered at the eastern gate --
The parson said his prayers most learnedly,
And muttered more than memory can relate.
29.
Then through the temple's lengthy isles they went,
Approaching still the pulpit's painted door,
From whence, on Sundays, many a vow was sent,
And sermons plundered from some prelate's store.
30.
Here, as of right, the priest prepared to rise,
And leave the corpse and gaping crowd below,
Like sultry Phoebus glar'd his flaming eyes,
Less fierce the stars of Greenland evenings glow.
31.
Up to the pulpit strode he with an air,
And from the Preacher thus his text he read,
"More I esteem, and better is by far
"A dog existing than a lion dead.
32.
"Go, eat thy dainties with a joyful heart,
"And quaff thy wine with undissembled glee,
"For he who did these heavenly gifts impart
"Accepts thy prayers, thy gifts, thy vows, and thee."
THE SERMON.
33.
THESE truths, my friends, congenial to my soul,
Demand a faithful and attentive ear --
No longer for your 'parted friend condole,
No longer shed the tributary tear.
34.
Cursed be the sobs, these useless floods of woe
That vainly flow for the departed dead --
If doomed to wander on the coasts below
What are to him these seas of grief you shed?
35.
If heaven in pleasure does his hours employ --
If sighs and sorrows reach a place like this,
They blast his glories, and they damp his joy,
They make him wretched in the midst of bliss.
36.
And can you yet -- and here he smote his breast --
And can you yet bemoan that torpid mass
Which now for death, and desolation dressed,
Prepares the deep gulf of the grave to pass.
37.
You fondly mourn -- I mourn Alcander too,
Alcander late the living, not the dead;
His casks I broached, his liquors once I drew,
And freely there on choicest dainties fed.
38.
But vanished are they now! -- no more he calls,
No more invites me to his plenteous board,
No more I caper at his splendid balls,
Or drain his cellars, with profusion stored.
39.
Then why, my friends, for yonder senseless clay,
That never again befriends me, should I mourn?
Yon' simple slaves that through the cane-lands stray
Are more to me than monarchs in the urn.
40.
The joys of wine, immortal as my theme,
To days of bliss the aspiring soul invite;
Life, void of this, a punishment I deem,
A Greenland winter, without heat or light.
41.
Count all the trees that crown Jamaica's hills,
Count all the stars that through the heavens you see,
Count every drop that the wide ocean fills;
Then count the pleasures Bacchus yields to me.
42.
The aids of wine for toiling man were meant;
I prize the smiling Caribbean bowl --
Enjoy those gifts that bounteous nature lent,
Death to thy cares, refreshing to the soul.
43.
Here fixed today in plenty's smiling vales,
Just as the month revolves we laugh or groan,
September comes, seas swell with horrid gales,
And old Port Royal's fate may be our own.
44.
A few short years, at best, will bound our span,
Wretched and few, the Hebrew exile said;
Live while you may, be jovial while you can,
Death as a debt to nature must be paid.
45.
When nature fails, the man exists no more,
And death is nothing but an empty name,
Spleen's genuine offspring at the midnight hour,
The coward's tyrant, and the bad man's dream.
46.
You ask me where these mighty hosts have fled,
That once existed on this changeful ball? --
If aught remains, when mortal man is dead,
Where, ere their birth they were, they now are all. Quaeris, quo jaccas post
obitum loco? --
Quo non nata jacent.
Senec. Troas.

47.
Like insects busy, in a summer's day,
We toil and squabble, to increase our pain,
Night comes at last, and, weary of the fray,
To dust and darkness all return again.
48.
Then envy not, ye sages too precise,
The drop from life's gay tree, that damps our woe,
Noah himself, the wary and the wise,
A vineyard planted, and the vines did grow:
49.
Of social soul was he -- the grape he pressed,
And drank the juice oblivious to his care;
Sorrow he banished from his place of rest,
And sighs and sobbing had no entrance there.
50.
Such bliss be ours through every changing scene;
The glowing face bespeaks the glowing heart;
If heaven be joy, wine is to heaven akin,
Since wine, on earth, can heavenly joys impart.
51.
Mere glowworms are we all, a moment shine;
I, like the rest, in giddy circles run,
And Grief shall say, when I this life resign,
"His glass is empty, and his frolics done!"
52.
HE said, and ceased -- the funeral anthem then
From the deep choir and hoarse-ton'd organ came;
Such are the honors paid to wealthy men,
But who for Irus would attempt the same?
53.
Now from the church returning, as they went,
Again they reached Alcander's painted hall,
Their sighs concluded, and their sorrows spent,
They to oblivion gave the Funeral.
54.
The holy man, by bishops holy made,
Tuned up to harmony his trembling strings,
To various songs in various notes he played,
And, as he plays, as gallantly he sings.
55.
The widowed dame, less pensive than before,
To sprightly tunes as sprightly did advance,
Her lost Alcander scarce remembered more;
And thus the funeral ended in a dance.
THE BEAUTIES OF SANTA CRUZ.
1776.
Sweet orange grove, the fairest of the Isle,
In thy soft shade luxuriously reclined,
Where, round my fragrant bed, the flowrets smile*
In sweet delusions I deceive my mind.
But Melancholy's glooms assail my breast,
For potent nature reigns despotic here; --
A nation ruined, and a world oppressed,
Might rob the boldest Stoic of a tear.

1.
SICK of thy northern glooms, come, shepherd, seek
More equal climes, and a serener sky:
Why should thou toil amid thy frozen ground,
Where half year's snows, a barren prospect lie,
2.
When thou may go where never frost was seen,
Or north-west winds with cutting fury blow,
Where never ice congealed the limpid stream,
Where never mountain tipped its head with snow?
3.
Twice seven days prosperous gales thy barque shall bear
To isles that flourish in perpetual green,
Where richest herbage glads each shady vale,
And ever verdant plants on every hill are seen.
4.
Nor dread the dangers of the billowy deep,
Autumnal winds shall safely waft thee over;
Put off the timid heart, or, man unblest,
Never shall thou reach this gay enchanting shore.
5.
Thus Judah's tribes beheld the promised land,
While Jordan's angry waters swelled between;
Thus trembling on the brink I see them stand,
Heaven's type in view, the Canaanitish green.
6.
Thus, some mean souls, in spite of age and care,
Are so united to this globe below,
They never wish to cross death's dusky main
That parting them and happiness does flow.
7.
Though reason's voice might whisper to the soul
That nobler climes for man the gods design --
Come, shepherd, haste -- the northern breezes blow,
No more the slumbering winds thy barque confine.
8.
From the vast caverns of old ocean's bed
Fair SANTA CRUZ arising, laves her waist,
The threatening waters roar on every side,
For every side by ocean is embraced.
9.
Sharp, craggy rocks repel the surging brine,
Whose cavern'd sides by restless billows wore,
Resemblance claim to that remoter isle [ Eolia.

Where once the winds proud lord the scepter bore.
10.
Betwixt old Cancer and the midway line
In happiest climate lies this envied isle,
Trees bloom throughout the year, streams ever flow,
And fragrant Flora wears a lasting smile.
11.
Cool, woodland streams from shaded clifts descend,
The dripping rock no want of moisture knows,
Supplied by springs that on the skies depend,
That fountain feeding as the current flows.
12.
Such were the isles which happy Flaccus sung,
Where one tree blossoms while another bears,
Where spring forever gay, and ever young,
Walks her gay round through her unwearied years.
13.
Such were the climes which youthful Eden saw
Ere crossing fates destroyed her golden reign --
Reflect upon thy loss, unhappy man,
And see^ the vales of Paradise again.
14.
No lowering skies are here -- the neighboring sun
Clear and unveiled, his brilliant journey goes,
^^ch morn emerging from the ambient main,
And sinking the^e (...) evening to repose.
15.
In June's fair month the spangled traveller gains
The utmost limits of his northern way,
And blesses with his beams cold lands remote,
Sad Greenland's coast, and Hudson's frozen bay.
16.
The shivering swains of those unhappy climes
Behold the side-way monarch through the trees,
We feel his fiercer heat, his vertic beams,
Tempered with cooling winds and trade-wind breeze.
17.
Yet, though so near heaven's blazing lamp does run,
We court the beam that sheds the golden day,
And hence are called the children of the sun,
Who, without fainting, bear his downward ray.
18.
No threatening tides upon our island rise,
Gay Cynthia scarce disturbs the ocean here,
No waves approach her orb, and she, as kind,
Attracts no water to her silver sphere.
19.
The happy waters boast, of various kinds,
Unnumber'd myriads of the scaly race,
Sportive they glide above the deluged sand,
Gay as their clime, in ocean's ample vase.
20.
Some streaked with burnished gold, resplendent gla^e,
Some cleave ^he limpid deep, all silvered over,
Some, clad in living green, delight the eye,
Some red, some blue; of mingled colors more.
21.
Here glides the spangled Dolphin through the deep,
The giant-carcas'd whales at distance stray,
The huge green turtles wallow through the wave,
Well pleased alike with land or water, they.
22.
The Rainbow cuts the deep, of varied green,
The well fed Grouper lurks remote, below,
The swift Bonetta coasts the watery scene,
The diamond coated Angels kindle as they go,
23.
Delicious to the taste, salubrious food,
Which might some temperate studious sage allure
To curse the fare of his abstemious school,
And turn, for once, a cheerful Epicure.
24.
Unhurt may thou this luscious food enjoy,
To fullness feast upon the scaly kind,
These, well selected from a thousand more,
Delight the taste, and leave no plague behind.
25.
Nor think Hygeia Goddess of Health.
is a stranger here
To sensual souls the clime may fatal prove,
Anguish and death attend, and pain severe,
The midnight revel, and licentious love.
26.
Full many a swain, in youth's serenest bloom
Is borne untimely to this alien clay,
Constrained to slumber in a foreign tomb,
Far from his friends, his country far away.
27.
Yet, if devoted to a sensual soul,
If fondly their own ruin they create,
These victims to the banquet and the bowl
Must blame their folly only, not their fate.
28.
But thou, who first drew breath in northern air,
At early dawn ascend the sloping hills,
And often at noon to lime tree shades repair,
Where some soft stream from neighboring groves distills.
29.
And with it mix the liquid of the lime,
The old aged essence of the generous cane,
And sweetest syrups of this liquorish clime,
And drink, to cool thy thirst, and drink again.
30.
This happy beverage, joy inspiring bowl,
Dispelling far the shades of mental night,
Wakes bright ideas on the raptured soul,
And sorrow turns to pleasure and delight.
31.
Sweet verdant isle, through thy dark woods I rove,
And learn the nature of each native tree,
The fustick hard, the poisonous manchincel
Which for its fragrant apple pleases thee:
32.
Alluring to the smell, fair to the eye,
But deadliest poison in the taste is found --
O shun the dangerous tree, nor taste, like Eve,
This interdicted fruit in Eden's ground.
33.
The lowly mangrove, fond of watery soil,
The white barked gregory, rising high in air,
The mastick in the woods you may descry,
Tamarind, and lofty plumb-trees flourish there.
34.
Sweet orange groves in lonely valleys rise
And drop their fruits, unnotic'd and unknown,
The cooling acid limes in hedges grow,
The juicy lemons swell in shades their own.
35.
Once in these groves divine Aurelia strayed --!
Then, conscious nature, smiling, looked more gay;
But soon she left the dear delightful shade,
The shade, neglected, droops and dies away,
36.
And pines for her return, but pines in vain,
In distant isles beloved Aurelia died,
Pride of the plains, adored by every swain,
Sweet warbler of the woods, and of the woods the pride.
37.
Philander early left this rural maid,
Nor yet returned, by fate compelled to roam,
But absent from the heavenly girl he strayed,
Her charms forgot, forgot his native home.
38.
O fate severe, to seize the nymph so soon,
The nymph, for whom a thousand shepherds sigh,
And in the space of one revolving moon
To doom the fair one and her swain to die!
39.
Sweet, spungy plumbs on trees wide spreading hang,
Bell-apples here, suspended, shade the ground,
Plump grenadilloes and guavas gray,
With melons in each plain and lawn abound.
40.
The conic formed cashew, of juicy kind,
Which bears at once an apple and a nut;
Whose poisonous coat, indignant to the lip,
Does in its cel' a wholesome kernel shut.
41.
The prince of fruits, whom some jayama call,
Anana some, the happy flavour'd pine;
In which unite the tastes and juices all
Of apple, peach, quince, grape, and nectarine,
42.
Grows to perfection here, and spreads his crest;
His diadem toward the parent sun;
His diadem, in fiery blossoms dressed,
Stands armed with swords from potent nature won.
43.
Yon' cotton shrubs with bursting knobs behold,
Their snow white locks these humble groves array;
On slender trees the blushing coffee hangs
Like thy fair cherry, and would tempt thy stay.
44.
Safe from the winds, in deep retreats, they rise;
Their utmost summit may thy arm attain;
Taste the moist fruit, and from thy closing eyes
Sleep shall retire, with all his drowsy train.
45.
The spicy berry, they guava call,
Swells in the mountains on a stripling tree:
These some admire, and value more than all,
My humble verse, besides, unfolds to thee.
46.
The smooth white cedar, here, delights the eye,
The bay tree, with its aromatic green,
The seaside grapes, sweet natives of the sand,
And pulse, of various kinds, on trees are seen.
47.
Here mingled vines their downward shadows cast,
Here, clustered grapes from loaded boughs depend,
Their leaves no frosts, their fruits no cold winds blast,
But, reared by suns, to time alone they bend.
48.
The plantane and banana flourish here,
Of hasty growth, and love to fix their root
Where some soft stream of ambling water flows,
To yield full moisture to their clustered fruit.
49.
No other trees so vast a leaf can beast,
So broad, so long -- through these refreshed I stray,
And though the noon-sun all his radiance shed,
These friendly leaves shall shade me all the way,
50.
And tempt the cooling breeze to hasten there,
With its sweet odorous breath to charm the grove;
High shades and verdant seats, while underneath
A little stream by mossy banks does rove,
51.
Where once the Indian dames slept with their swains,
Or fondly kissed the moonlight eves away;
The lovers fled, the tearful stream remains,
And only I console it with my lay.
52.
Among the shades of yonder whispering grove
The green palmittoes mingle, tall and fair,
That ever murmur, and forever move,
Fanning with wavy bough the ambient air.
53.
Pomegranates grace the wild, and sweet-sops there
Ready to fall, require thy helping hand,
Nor yet neglect the papaw or mamee
Whose slighted trees with fruits unheaded stand.
54.
Those shaddocks juicy shall thy taste delight,
And yon' high fruits, the richest of the wood,
That cling in clusters to the mother tree,
The cocoa-nut; rich, milky, healthful food.
55.
O grant me, gods, if yet condemned to stray,
At least to spend life's sober evening here,
To plant a grove where winds yon' sheltered bay,
And pluck these fruits that frost nor winter fear.
56.
Cassada shrubs abound -- transplanted here
From every clime, exotic blossoms blow;
Here Asia plants her flowers, here Europe seeds,
And hyperborean plants, un-winter'd, grow.
57.
Here, a new herbage glads the generous steed,
Mules, goats, and sheep enjoy these pastures fair,
And for thy hedges, nature has decreed,
Guards of thy (...), the date and prickly pear.
58.
But chief the glory of these Indian isles
Springs from the sweet, uncloying sugar-cane,
Hence comes the planter's wealth, hence commerce send^
Such floating piles to traverse half the main.
59.
Whoever thou art that leave thy native shore
And shall to fair West India climates come,
Taste not the enchanting plant -- to taste forbear,
If ever thou would reach thy much loved home.
60.
Never through the Isle permit thy feet to rove,
Or, if thou do, let prudence lead the way,
Forbear to taste the virtues of the cane,
Forbear to taste what will complete thy stay.
61.
Whoever sips of this enchanting juice,
Delicious nectar, fit for Jove's own hall,
Returns no more from his loved Santa Cruz,
But quits his friends, his country, and his all,
62.
And thinks no more of home -- Ulysses so
Dragged off by force his sailors from that shore
Where lotos grew, and, had not strength prevailed,
They never would have sought their country more.
63.
No annual toil inters this thrifty plant,
The stalk lopt off, the freshening showers prolong,
To future years, unfading and secure,
The root so vigorous, and the juice so strong.
64.
Unnumber'd plants, besides, these climates yield,
And grass peculiar to the soil that bears
Ten thousand varied herbs array the field,
This glads thy palate, that thy health repairs.
65.
Along the shore a wondrous flower is seen,
Where rocky ponds receive the surging wave,
Some dressed in yellow, some arrayed in green
Beneath the water their gay branches lave.
66.
This mystic plant, with its bewitching charms
Too surely springs from some enchanted bower:
Fearful it is, and dreads impending harms,
And Animal the natives call the flower.
67.
From the smooth rock its little branches rise,
The objects of thy view, and that alone,
Feast on its beauties with thy ravished eyes,
But aim to touch it, and -- the flower is gone.
68.
Nay, if thy shade but intercept the beam
That gilds their boughs beneath the briny lake,
Swift they retire, like a deluding dream,
And even a shadow for destruction take.
69.
Warned by experience, seek not thou to gain
The magic plant thy curious hand invades;
Returning to the light, it mocks thy pain,
Deceives all grasp, and seeks its native shades.
70.
On yonder steepy hill, fresh harvests rise,
Where the dark tribe from Afric's sun burnt plain
Often over the ocean turn their wishful eyes
To isles remote high looming over the main,
71.
And view soft seats of ease and fancied rest,
Their native groves new painted on the eye,
Where no proud misers their gay hours molest,
No lordly despots pass unsocial by.
72.
See, yonder slave that slowly bends this way,
With years, and pain, and ceaseless toil oppressed,
Though no complaining words his woes betray,
The eye dejected proves the heart distressed.
73.
Perhaps in chains he left his native shore,
Perhaps he left a helpless offspring there,
Perhaps a wife, that he must see no more,
Perhaps a father, who his love did share.
74.
Cursed be the ship that brought him over the main,
And cursed the hands who from his country tore,
May she be stranded, never to float again,
May they be shipwrecked on some hostile shore --
75.
O gold accursed, of every ill the spring,
For thee compassion flies the darkened mind,
Reason's plain dictates no conviction bring,
And passion only sways all human kind.
76.
O gold accursed! for thee we madly run
With murderous hearts across the briny flood,
Seek foreign climes beneath a foreign sun,
And there exult to shed a brother's blood.
77.
But thou, who own'st this sugar-bearing soil,
To whom no good the great FIRST CAUSE denies,
Let freeborn hands attend thy sultry toil,
And fairer harvests to thy view shall rise.
78.
The teeming earth shall mightier stores disclose
Than ever struck thy longing eyes before,
And late content shall shed a soft repose,
Repose, so long a stranger at thy door.
79.
Give me some clime, the favorite of the sky,
Where cruel slavery never sought to reign --
But shun the theme, sad muse, and tell me why
These ^bject trees lie scattered over the plain?
80.
^he isles, l^st ^^ture should have proved too kind,
Or man have sought his happiest heaven below,
Are torn with mighty winds, fierce hurricanes,
Nature convulsed in every shape of woe.
81.
Nor scorn yon' lonely vale of trees so rest;
There plantane groves late grew of lively green,
The orange flourished, and the lemon bore,
The genius of the isle dwelt there unseen.
82.
Wild were the skies, affrighted nature groaned
As though approached her last decisive day,
Skies blazed around, and bellowing winds had nigh
Dislodged these cliffs, and tore yon' hills away.
83.
Over the wild main, dejected and afraid,
The trembling pilot lashed his helm a-lee,
Or, swiftly s^uc^ing, asked thy potent aid,
Dear pilot of the Gallilean sea.
84.
Low hung the glooms, distended with the gale
The clouds dark brooding winged their circling flight,
Tremendous thunders joined the hurricane,
Daughter of chaos, and eternal night.
85.
And how, alas! could these fair trees withstand
The wasteful madness of so fierce a blast,
That stormed along the plain, seized every grove,
And deluged with a sea this mournful waste.
86.
That plantane grove, where often I fondly strayed,
Thy darts, dread Phoebus, in those glooms to shun,
Is now no more a refuge or a shade,
Is now with rocks and deep sands overrun.
87.
Those late proud domes of splendor, pomp, and ease
No longer strike the view, in grand attire;
But, torn by winds, flew piecemeal to the seas,
Nor left one nook to lodge the astonished 'squire.
88.
But other groves the hand of Time shall raise,
Again shall nature smile, serenely gay,
So soon each scene revives, why should I leave
These green retreats, over the dark seas to stray?
89.
For I must go where the mad pirate roves,
A stranger on the inhospitable main,
Torn from the scenes of Hudson's sweetest groves,
Led by false hope, and expectation vain.
90.
There endless plains deject the wearied eye,
And hostile winds incessant toil prepare;
And should loud bellowing storms all art defy,
The manly heart alone must conquer there.
91.
On these blue hills to pluck the opening flowers
Might yet awhile the unwelcome task delay,
And these gay scenes prolong the fleeting hours
To aid bright Fancy on some future day.
92.
Thy vales, Bermuda, and thy sea-girt groves
Can never like these southern forests please;
And, lashed by stormy waves, you court in vain
The northern shepherd to your cedar trees.
83.
Not over those isles such equal planets rule,
All, but the cedar, dread the wintry blast;
Too we^l thy charms the banished Wal^er sung;
Too near^ he pilot's star thy doom is cast.
94.
Far over the waste of yonder surgy field
My native climes in fancied prospect lie,
Now hid in shades, and now by clouds concealed,
And now by tempests ravished from my eye.
95.
There, triumphs to enjoy, are, Britain, thine,
There, thy proud navy awes the pillaged shore;
Nor sees the day when nations shall combine
That pride to humble and our rights restore.
96.
Yet over the globe should thou extend thy reign,
Here may thy conquering arms one grotto spare;
Here -- though thy conquest vex -- in spite of pain,
I quaff the enlivening glass, in spite of care.
97.
What, though we bend to a tyrannic crown;
Still Nature's charms in varied beauty shine --
What though we own the proud imperious Dane,
Gold is his sordid care, the Muses mine.
98.
Winter, and winter's glooms are far removed;
Eternal spring with smiling summer joined; --
Absence, and death, and heart-corroding care,
Why should they cloud the sunshine of the mind?
99.
But, shepherd, haste, and leave behind thee far
Thy bloody plains, and iron glooms above,
Quit the cold northern star, and here enjoy,
Beneath the smiling skies, this land of love.
100.
The drowsy pelican wings home his way,
The misty eve sits heavy on the sea,
And though yon' sail drags slowly over the main,
Say, shall a moment's gloom discourage thee?
101.
Tomorrow's sun now paints the faded scene,
Though deep in ocean sink his western beams,
His spangled chariot shall ascend more clear,
More radiant from the drowsy land of dreams.
102.
Of all the isles the neighboring ocean bears,
None can with this their equal landscapes boast:
What could we do on SABA'S cloudy height;
Or what could please on 'STATIA'S barren coast?
03.
Could thou content on rough TORTOLA stray,
Confessed the fairest of the Virgin train;
Or could thou on these rocky summits play
Where high St. JOHN stands frowning over the main?
104.
Haste, shepherd, haste -- Hesperian fruits for thee,
And clustered grapes from mingled boughs depend --
What pleasure in thy forests can there be
That, leafeless now, to every tempest bend?
105.
To milder stars, and skies of clearer blue,
Sworn foe to arms, at least awhile repair,
And, till to mightier force proud Britain bends,
Despise her triumphs, and deceive thy care.
106.
Soon shall the genius of the fertile soil
A new creation to thy view unfold;
Admire the works of Nature's magic hand,
But scorn that vulgar bait, all potent gold.
107.
Yet, if persuaded by no lay of mine,
You still admire your climes of frost and snow,
And pleased, prefer above our southern groves
The darksome forests, that around thee grow;
108.
Still there remain -- thy native air enjoy,
Repel the tyrant, who thy peace invades,
While, pleased, I trace the vales of Santa Cruz,
And sing with rapture her inspiring sha^es.
PSALM CXXXVII VERSIFIED.
BY Babel's streams we sat and wept
When Sion bade our sorrows flow,
Our harps on loftiest willows slept
That nigh those distant waters grow;
The willows high, the waters clear
Beheld our toils and sorrows there.
The cruel foe that captive led
Our nation from their native soil,
The tyrant foe, by whom we bled,
Required a song, as well as toil --
"Come, with a song your sorrows cheer,
A song that Sion loved to hear."
How shall we, cruel tyrant, raise
A song on such a distant shore? --
If I forget my Sion's praise,
May my right hand be doomed no more
To strike the silver-sounding string,
And thence the slumbering music bring.
If I forget that happy home,
My perjured tongue forbear to move,
My eyes go out in endless gloom;
My joy, my rapture, and my love!
No rival grief my mind can share,
For thou shall reign unrivaled there.
Remember, Lord, that hated foe,
When conquered Sion drooped her head,
Who, laughing at our deepest woe,
Thus to our tears and sorrows said,
"From its proud height debase her wall,
"Destroy her towers, and ruin all."
Thou, Babel's offspring; hated race,
May some avenging monster seize
And dash thy venom in thy face
For crimes and cruelties like these,
And, proof to Pity's melting tear,
With infant blood your walls besmear.
AMERICA INDEPENDENT -- AND Her EVERLASTING DELIVERANCE from BRITISH TYRANNY
and OPPRESSION.
Written 1778 -- August.
IT IS done! and Britain for her madness sighs --
Take warning, tyrants, and henceforth be wise,
If over mankind man gives you legal sway,
Take not the rights of human kind away.
WHEN God from chaos gave this world to be,
Man then he formed, and formed him to be free,
In his own image stamped the favorite race --
How dare thou, tyrant, the fair stamp deface!
When on mankind you fix your abject chains,
No more the image of that God remains;
Over a dark scene a darker shade is drawn,
His work dishonored, and our glory gone!
WHEN first Britannia sent her hostile crew
To these far shores to ravage and subdue,
We thought them gods, and almost seemed to say
No ball could pierce them, and no dagger slay --
Heavens! what a blunder -- half our fears were vain;
These hostile gods at length have quit the plain,
On neighboring isles the storm of war they shun,
Happy, thrice happy, if not quite undone.
Yet soon, in dread of some impending woe,
Even from those islands shall these ruffians go --
This be their doom, in vengeance for the slain,
To pass their days in poverty and pain;
For their base triumphs be it still their lot
To triumph only over the rebel Scot,
And, to their insect isle henceforth confined,
No longer lord it over the human kind. --
But by the fates who still prolong their stay,
And gather vengeance to conclude their day,
Yet, ere they go, the angry Muse shall tell
The treasured woes that in her bosom swell: --
Proud, fierce, and bold, O Jove! who would not laugh
To see these bullies worshipping a calf:
But they are (...) who spurn at Reason's rules;
And men, once slaves, are soon transformed to fools. --
To recommend what monarchies have done,
They bring for witness David and his son;
How one was brave, the other just and wise,
And hence our plain republics they despise;
But mark how often, to gratify their pride,
The people suffered, and the people died:
Though one was wise, and one Goliath slew,
Kings are the choicest curse that man ever knew.
HAIL, worthy Britain! -- how enlarged your fame;
How great your glory, terrible your name,
"Queen of the isles, and empress of the main,"
Heaven grant you all these mighty things again;
But first insure the gaping crowd below
That you less cruel, and more just may grow:
If fate, vindictive for the sins of man,
Had favor shown to your infernal plan,
How would your nation have exulted here,
And scorned the widow's sigh, the orphan's tear!
How had your prince, of all bad men the worst,
Laid worth and virtue prostrate in the dust!
A second Sawney had he shone today,
A world subdued, and murder but his play.
How had that prince, contemning right or law,
Glutted with blood his foul, voracious maw:
In him we see the depths of baseness joined,
Whatever disgraced the dregs of human kind;
Cain, Nimrod, Nero -- fiends in human guise,
Herod, Domitian -- these in judgment rise,
And, envious of his deeds, I hear them say
None but a George could be more vile than they.
SWOLLEN though he was with wealth, revenge and pride,
How could he dream that heaven was on his side --
Did he not see, when so decreed by fate,
They placed the crown upon his royal pate,
Did he not see the richest jewel fall --
Dire was the omen, and astonished all --
That gem no more shall brighten and adorn;
No more that gem by British kings be worn,
Or swell to wonted heights of fair renown
The fading glories of their boasted crown.
Yet he to arms, and war, and blood inclined,
A fair-day warrior with a feeble mind,
Fearless while others meet the shock of fate
And dare that death, which clips his thread too late,
He to the fane (O hypocrite!) did go,
While not an angel there but was his foe,
There did he kneel, and sigh, and sob, and pray,
Yet not to lave his thousand sins away,
Far other motives swayed his spotted soul;
'Twas not for those the secret sorrow stole
Down his pale cheek -- 'twas vengeance and despair
Dissolved his eye, and planted sorrow there --
How could he hope to bribe the impartial sky
By his base prayers, and mean hypocrisy --
Heaven still is just, and still abhors thy crimes,
Not acts like George, the Nero of our times --
What were his prayers -- his prayers could be no more
Than a thief's wishes to recruit his store;
Such prayers could never reach the world above;
They were but curses in the ear of Jove; --
You prayed that conquest might your arms attend,
And crush that freedom honor did defend,
That the fierce Indian, rousing from his rest,
Might these new regions with his flames invest,
With scalps and tortures aggravate our woe,
And to the infernal world dismiss your foe.
NO mines of gold our fertile country yields,
But mighty harvests crown the loaded fields,
Hence, trading far, we gained the golden prize,
Which, though our own, bewitched their greedy eyes --
For that they ravaged India's climes before,
And carried death to Asia's utmost shore --
Clive was your envied slave, in avarice bold
He mowed down nations for his dearer gold;
The fatal gold could give no true content,
He mourned his murders, and to Tophet went.
LED on by lust of lucre and renown,
Burgoyne came marching with his thousands down,
High were his thoughts, and furious his career,
Puffed with self-confidence and pride severe,
Swollen with the idea of his future deeds,
Onward to ruin each advantage leads,
Before his hosts his heaviest curses flew,
And conquered worlds rose hourly to his view:
His wrath, like Jove's, could bear with no control,
His words bespoke the mischief in his soul;
To fight was not this miscreant's only trade,
He shined in writing, and his wit displayed --
To awe the more with titles of command
He told of forts be ruled in Scottish land; --
Queen 's colonel as he was, he did not know
That thorns and thistles, mixed with honors, grow;
In Britain's senate though he held a place,
All did not save him from one long disgrace,
One stroke of fortune that convinced them all
That we could conquer, and lieutenants fall.
FOE to the rights of man, proud plunderer, say
Had conquest crowned thee on that mighty day
When you, to GATES, with sorrow, rage, and shame
Resigned your conquests, honors, arms, and same,
When at his feet Britannia's wreaths you threw,
And the sun sicken'd at a sight so new;
Had you been victor -- what a waste of woe!
What souls had vanished to where souls do go!
What dire distress had marked your fatal way,
What deaths on deaths disgraced that dismal day!
Can laurels flourish in a soil of blood,
Or on those laurels can fair honors bud --
Cursed be that wretch who murder makes his trade,
Cursed be all arms that ever ambition made!
WHAT murdering Tory now relieves your grief
Or plans new conquests for his favorite chief;
Designs still dark employ that ruffian race,
Beasts of your choosing, and our own disgrace.
So vile a crew the world never saw before,
And grant, ye pitying heavens, it may no more*
If ghosts from hell infest our poisoned air,
Those ghosts have entered these base bodies here,
Murder and blood is still their dear delight --
Scream round their roofs, ye ravens of the night!
Whenever they wed, may demons, and despair,
And grief, and woe, and blackest night be there;
Fiends leagued from hell, the nuptial lamp display,
Swift to perdition light them on their way,
Round the wide world their devilish squadrons chase,
To find no realm that grants one resting place.
FAR to the north, on Scotland's utmost end
An isle there lies, the haunt of every fiend,
There screeching owls, and screeming vultures rest,
And not a tree adorns its barren breast!
No shepherds there attend their bleating flocks,
But withered witches rove among the rocks;
Shrouded in ice, the blasted mountains show
Their cloven heads, to f^ight the seas below;
The lamp of heaven in his diurnal race
Here scarcely deigns to unveil his radiant face,
Or if one day he circling treads the sky
He views this island with an angry eye,
Or ambient fog^ their broad, moist wings expand
Damp his bright ray, and cloud the infernal land;
The blackening wind* incessant storms prolong,
Dull as their night, and dreary as my song;
When stormy winds with rain refuse to blow,
Then from the dark sky drives the unpitying snow;
When drifting snows from iron clouds forbear
Then down the hailstones rattle through the air --
No peace, no rest, the elements bestow,
But seas forever rage, and storms forever blow.
HERE, miscreants, here with loyal hearts retire,
Here pitch your tents, and kindle here your fire;
Here desert nature will her stings display,
And fiercest hunger on your vitals prey,
And with yourselves let John Burgoyne retire
To reign the monarch, whom your hearts admire.
BRITAIN, at last to arrest your lawless hand,
Rises the genius of a generous land,
Our injured rights bright Gallia's prince defends,
And from this hour that prince and we are friends,
Feuds, once in bloom, are vanished from our view,
Once we were foes -- but for the sake of you --
Britain, aspiring Britain, now must bend --
Can she at once with France and us contend,
When we alone, remote from foreign aid,
Her armies captur'd, and distressed her trade --
Britain and we no more in combat join,
No more, as once, in every sea combine;
Dead is that friendship which did mutual burn,
Fled is the scepter, never to return;
By sea and land, perpetual foes we meet,
Our cause more noble, and our hearts as great;
Lost are these regions to Britannia's reign,
Nor shall these upstarts of their loss complain,
Since all the debt we owe to Britain's throne
Was mere idea, and the rest our own --
Our hearts are ravished from our former queen
Far as the ocean God has placed between,
They strive in vain to join this mighty mass
Torn by convulsions from its native place;
As well might men to flaming Hecla join
The huge high Alps or towering Appennine;
In vain they send their half-commissioned tribe
And whom they cannot conquer strive to bribe;
Their pride and madness burst our union chain,
Nor shall the unwieldy mass unite again.
NOR think that France sustains our cause alone;
With gratitude her helping hand we own,
But hear, ye nations -- truth itself can say
We bore the heat and danger of the day:
She calmly viewed the tumult from afar,
We braved each insult, and sustained the war*
Often drove the foe, or forced their hosts to yield,
Or left them more than once a dear bought field --
'Twas then, at last, on Jersey plains distressed,
We swore to seek the mountains of the west,
There a free empire for our seed obtain,
A terror to the slaves that might remain.
PEACE you demand, and vainly wish to find
Old leagues renewed, and souls once more combined --
Yet shall not all your base dissembling art
Deceive the tortures of a bleeding heart --
Yet shall not all your mingled prayers that rise
Wash out your crimes, or bribe the avenging skies;
Full many a corpse lies mouldering on the plain
That never shall see its little brood again:
See, yonder lies, all breathless, cold, and pale,
Drenched in her gore, Lavinia of the vale,
The cruel Indian seized her life away,
As the next morn began her bridal day! --
This deed alone our just revenge would claim,
Did not ten thousand more your sons defame,
RETURNED a prisoner to my native shore,
How changed I find those scenes that pleased before!
How changed those groves where fancy loved to stray,
When spring's young blossoms bloomed along the way;
From every eye distills the frequent tear,
From every mouth some doleful tale I hear!
Some mourn a father, brother, husband, friend,
Some mourn, imprisoned in their native land,
In sickly ships what numerous hosts confined
At once their lives and liberties resigned,
In dreary dungeons woeful scenes have passed,
Long in tradition shall the story last,
As long as spring renews the flowery wood,
As long as breezes curl the yielding flood! --
Some sent to India's sickly climes, afar,
To dig with slaves for buried diamonds there,
There left to sicken in that land of woe
Where over scorched hills infernal breezes blow,
Whose every blast some dire contagion brings,
Fevers or death on its destructive wings,
'Till fate relenting, its last arrows drew
Brought death to them, and infamy to you.
PESTS of mankind! remembrance shall recall
And paint these horrors to the view of all;
Heaven has not turned to its own works a foe
Nor left to monsters these fair realms below,
Else had your arms more general vengeance spread,
And these gay plains been died a deeper red. --
Over Britain's isle a thousand woes impend,
Too weak to conquer, govern, or defend,
To liberty she holds the lying claim --
The substance we enjoy, and they the name;
Her prince, surrounded by his mitred slaves,
Still claims dominion over the vagrant waves:
Such be his claims over all the world beside,
An empty nothing -- madness, rage, and pride.
FROM Europe's realm^ fair freedom has retired,
And even in Britain has the spark expired --
Sigh for the change thy haughty empire feels,
Sigh for the doom that no disguise conceals!
Freedom no more shall Albion's clifts survey;
Corruption there has planted all her sway,
Freedom disdains her honest head to rear,
To herd with North, or Bute, or Mansfield there;
She shuns their gilded spires, and domes of state,
Resolved, O Virtue, at thy shrine to wait,
'Midst savage woods and wilds she dares to stray,
And bids uncultur'd nature bloom more gay;
She is that glorious and immortal sun,
Without whose ray this world would be undone,
A mere dull chaos, sunk in deepest night,
An abject something, without form or light,
Of reptiles, worst in rank, the dire abode,
Perpetual mischief, and the dragon's brood.
LET Turks and Ruffians glut their fields with blood,
Again let Britain dye the Atlantic flood,
Let all the east adore the sanguine wreathe
And gain new glories from the works of death --
America! the works of peace be thine,
Thus shall thou gain a triumph more divine --
To thee belongs a second golden reign,
Thine is the empire over a peaceful main;
Protect the rights of human kind below,
Crush the proud tyrant who becomes their foe,
And future times shall own our struggles blessed,
And future years enjoy perpetual rest.
AMERICANS! revenge your country's wrongs;
To you the honor of this deed belongs,
Your arms did once this sinking land sustain,
And saved those climes where Freedom yet must reign --
Your bleeding so^l this ardent task demands,
Expel yon' thieves from these polluted lands,
Expect no peace till haughty Britain yields,
'Till humbled Britain quits your ravaged fields --
Still to the charge that routed foe returns,
The war still rages, and the battle burns --
No dull debates, or tedious counsels know,
But rush, at once, embodied on the foe; --
With hell-born spite a seven years war they wage,
The pirate Goodrich, and the ruffian Gage.
Your injured country groans while yet they stay,
Attend her groans, and force their hosts away;
Your mighty wrongs the tragic muse shall grace,
Your gallant deeds shall fire a future race;
To you shall kings and potentates appeal,
You shall the doom of jarring nations seal;
A glorious empire rises, bright and new!
Firm be its basis, and must rest on you --
Fame over the mighty pile expands her wings,
Remote from princes, bishops, lords, and kings,
Those fancied gods, who, famed through every shore,
Mankind have fashioned, and, like fools, adore.
Here yet shall heaven the joys of peace bestow,
While over our soil the streams of plenty flow,
And over the main we spread the trading sail,
Wafting the produce of the rural vale.
STANZAS On the New AMERICAN FRIGATE ALLIANCE.
AS Neptune (...) the azure main,
That owned so late (...) Britain's reign,
A floating pile approa^^^^ his car
The scene of terror, (...) of war.
As nearer still the monarch drew,
(Her starry flag displayed to view)
He asked a Triton of his train
"What flag was this that rode the main --
"A ship of such a gallant mien
"This many a day I have not seen,
"To no mean power can she belong,
"So swift, so warlike, stout and strong.
"See how she mounts the foaming wave --
"Where other ships would find a grave,
"Majestic, awful, and serene
"She walks the ocean like its queen." --
"Great monarch of the hoary deep,
"Whose trident awes the waves to sleep,
(Replied a triton of his train)
"This ship, that stems the western main,
"To those new, rising States belongs,
"Who, in resentment of their wrongs,
"Oppose proud Britain's rugged sway
"And combat her by land and sea.
"This pile of such superior fame
"From their strict union takes her name,
"For them she cleaves the briny tide,
"While terror marches by her side.
"When she unfurls her flowing sails,
"Though stormy blow the stubborn gales,
"In dreadful pomp she ploughs the main,
"While adverse tempests rage in vain.
"When she displays her gloomy tier,
"The boldest Britons freeze wi^h fear,
"And, owning her superior might,
"Seek their best safety in their flight.
"But, when she pours the dreadful blaze,
"And thunder from her cannon plays,
"The horrid flash that wings the ball,
"Compells those foes to strike or fall.
"Though she, with her triumphant train,
"Might fill with awe the British main,
"Yet filial to the land that bore
"She stays to guard her native shore.
"Though she might make their cruisers groan
"That sail beneath the torrid zone,
"She kindly lends a nearer aid,
"Annoys them here, and guards the trade.
"Now, traversing the eastern main
"She greets the shores of France and Spain;
"Her gallant flag displayed to view
"Invites the old world to the new.
"This task achieved, behold her go
"To seas congealed with ice and snow,
"To either tropic, and the line
"Where suns with endless fervor shine.
"Not, Argo, in thy womb was found
"Such hearts of brass, as here abound;
"They for their golden fleece did fly,
"These sail to vanquish tyranny." --
ON THE DEATH OF CAPTAIN NICHOLAS BIDDLE, Commander of the RANDOLPH Frigate,
Blown up near Barbados -- 1776.
WHAT distant thunders rend the skies,
What clouds of smoke in volumes rise,
What means this dreadful roar!
Is from his base Vesuvius thrown,
Is sky-topt Atlas tumbled down,
Or Etna's self no more!
Shock after shock torments my ear;
And lo! two hostile ships appear,
Red lightnings round them glow:
The Yarmouth boasts of sixty-four,
The Randolph thirty-two -- no more --
And will she fight this foe!
The Randolph soon on Stygian streams
Shall coast along the land of dreams,
The islands of the dead!
But fate, that parts them on the deep,
Shall save the Briton, still to weep
His ancient honors fled.
Say, who commands that dismal blaze,
Where yonder starry streamer plays;
Does Mars with Jove engage!
It Is BIDDLE wings those angry fires,
BIDDLE, whose bosom Jove inspires
With more than mortal rage.
Tremendous flash! -- and hark, the ball
Drives through old Yarmouth, flames and all:
Her bravest sons expire;
Did Mars himself approach so nigh,
Even Mars, without disgrace, might fly
The Randolph's fiercer fire.
The Briton views his mangled crew,
"And shall we strike to thirty-two,
(Said Hector, stained with gore)
"Shall Britain's flag to these descend --
"Rise, and the glorious conflict end,
"Britons, I ask no more!
He spoke -- they charged their cannon round,
Again the vaulted heavens resound,
The Randolph bore it all,
Then fixed her pointed cannons true --
Away the unwieldy vengeance flew;
Britain, thy warriors fall.
The Yarmouth saw, with dire dismay,
Her wounded hull, shrouds shot away,
Her boldest heroes dead --
She saw amidst her floating slain
The conquering Randolph stem the main --
She saw, she turned, and fled!
That hour, blessed chief, had she been thine,
Dear Biddle, had the powers divine
Been kind as thou were brave;
But fate, who doomed thee to expire,
Prepared an arrow tipped with fire,
And marked a watery grave,
And in that hour when conquest came
Winged at his ship a pointed flame
That not even he could shun --
The conquest ceased, the Yarmouth fled,
The bursting Randolph ruin spread,
And lost what honor won.
CAPTAIN JONES's INVITATION.
THOU, who on some dark mountain's brow
Have toiled thy life away till now,
And often from that rugged steep
Beheld the vast extended deep,
Come from thy forest, and with me
Learn what it is to go to sea.
There endless plains the eye surveys
As far from land the vessel strays;
No longer hill nor dale is seen,
The realms of death intrude between,
But fear no ill; resolve, with me
To share the dangers of the sea.
But look not there for verdant fields --
Far different prospects Neptune yields;
Green seas shall only greet the eye,
Those seas encircled by the sky,
Immense and deep -- come then with me
And view the wonders of the sea.
Yet sometimes groves and meadows gay
Delight the seamen on their way;
From the deep seas that round us swell
With rocks the surges to repel
Some verdant isle, by waves embraced,
Swells, to adorn the watery waste.
Though now this vast expanse appear
With glassy surface, calm and clear;
Be not deceived -- it is but a show,
For many a corpse is laid below --
Even Britain's lads -- it cannot be --
They were the masters of the sea!
Now combating upon the brine,
Where ships in flaming squadrons join,
At every blast the brave expire
'Midst clouds of smoke, and streams of fire;
But scorn all fear; advance with me --
It Is but the custom of the sea.
Now we the peaceful wave divide,
On broken surges now we ride,
Now every eye dissolves with woe
As on some lee-ward coast we go --
Half lost, half buried in the main
Hope scarcely beams on life again.
Above us storms distract the sky,
Beneath us depths unfathomed lie,
Too near we see, a ghastly sight,
The realms of everlasting night,
A watery tomb of ocean-green
And only one frail plank between!
But winds must cease, and storms decay,
Not always lasts the gloomy day,
Again the skies are warm and clear,
Again soft zephyrs fan the air,
Again we find the long lost shore,
The winds oppose our wish no more.
If thou have courage to despise
The various changes of the skies,
To disregard the ocean's rage,
Unmoved when hostile ships engage,
Come from thy forest, and with me
Learn what it is to go to sea.
GEORGE III. HIS SOLILOQUY FOR 1779.
WHAT mean these dreams, and hideous forms that ri^e
Night after night, tormentors to my eyes --
No real foes these horrid shapes can be,
But thrice as much they vex and torture me.
How cursed is he, how doubly cursed am I --
Who lives in pain, and yet who dares not die;
To him no joy this world of nature brings,
In vain the wild rose blooms, the daisy spring^.
Is this a prel^de to some new disgrace,
Some b^leful (...) to my n^me and ^s^e --!
It may be so -- e^e mighty Caesar died
Presaging Nature felt his doom, and ^ig^^d;
A bellowing voice through midnight groves was heard,
And threatening ghosts at dusk of eve appeared --
Ere Brutus fell, to adverse fates a prey,
His evil genius met him on the way,
And so may mine! -- but who would yield so soon
A prize some luckier hour may make my own? --
Shame seize my crown ere such a deed be mine --
No -- to the last my squadrons shall combine,
And slay my foes, while foes remain to slay,
Or heaven shall grant me one auspicious day.
IS th^^e a ^obbe^ close in Newgate hemmed,
Is there a cut-thr^at, fettered and condemned?
Haste, loyal slaves, to George's standard come,
Attend his lectures when you hear the drum;
Your chains I break -- for better days prepare,
Come out, my friends, from prison and from care,
Far to the west I plan your desperate sway,
There it is no sin to ravage, burn, and slay,
There witho^t fear your bloody aims pursue,
And show mankind what English thieves can do.
THAT day, when first I mounted to the throne,
I swore to let all foreign foes alone.
Through love of peace to terms did I advance,
And made, they say, a shameful peace with France.
But different scenes rise ho^rid to my view,
I charg^d my hosts to plunder and subdue --
At first, indeed, I thought short wars to wage
And sent a scoundr^l by the name of Gage,
For 'twas but right, that those we marked for slaves
Should be reduced by cowards, fools and knaves:
Awhile directed by his feeble hand
My troops were kicked and pelted through the land,
Or starved in Boston, cursed the unlucky hour
They left their dungeons for that fatal shore.
FRANCE aids them now, a desperate game I play,
And hostile Spain will do the same, they say;
My armies vanquished, and my heroes fled,
My people murmuring, and my commerce dead,
My shattered navy pelted, bruised, and clubb'd,
By Dutchmen bullied, and by Frenchmen drubb'd,
My name abhorred, my nation in disgrace,
How should I act in such a mournful case!
My hopes and joys are vanished with my coin,
My ruined army, and my lost Burgoyne!
What shall I do -- confess my labors vain,
Or whet my tusks, and to the charge again!
But where is my force -- my choicest troops are fled,
Some thousands crippled, and a myriad dead --
If I were owned the stoutest of mankind,
And hell with all her rage inspired my mind,
Could I at once with Spain and France contend,
And fight the rebels, on the world's green end?
The pangs of parting I can never endure,
Yet part we must, and part to meet no more!
Oh, damn this Congress, damn each upstart State,
On whose commands ten thousand captains wait;
From various climes that di^e Assembly came,
True to their trust, and hostile to my fame,
It Is these, ah these, have ruined half my sway,
Disg^^^'d my arms, and l^d my slaves astray --
Cursed be the day when first I saw the sun,
Cursed be the hour when I these wars begun,
The fiends of darkness then possessed my mind,
And powers unfriendly to the human kind.
To wasting grief, and sullen rage a prey,
To Scotland's utmost verge I take my way,
There with eternal storms due concert keep
And while the billows rage, as fiercely weep --
Ye highland lads, my rugged fate bemoan,
Assist me with one sympathizing groan,
For late I find the nations are my foes,
I must submit, and that with bloody nose,
Or, like our James, fly basely from the state,
Or share, what still is worse -- old Charles's fate.
THE RETORT.
IT IS nonsense, said I, to be wasting my time
When Whaycum as well may amuse them with rhyme,
Spectators, new poems, and essays sublime:
His jibes and his jeers,
His satires and sneers,
His tricks and his fancies are so very fine,
By the s^oul of shaint Patrick, I wish they were mine.
Now, mend me a pen, and I Will show you some fun,
It Is a folly to dance when the music is done --
Where nothing is ventured no laurels are won;
Although he was dead,
As the newspaper said,
It was folly to pay for his funeral bell,
For ^ere he returns to insult us from hell.
Spectator he gave us by way of new lecture.
But it vanished so quick we are apt to conjecture
Instead of Spectator it should have been spectre;
It Is life was a day,
And it vanished away
To those horrid retreats that dishonor the ground,
Where Settle and Dennis, and Tibbald are found.
What a splutter he makes with a dash of his quill,
What a grinding he keeps on his poetry-mill;
From morning till midnight it never stands still;
Lad bless us, said I,
With a tear and a sigh,
This poet of poets imported so late
Will kill his dear self for the good of our State.
Ye men of Assembly, his lectures attend,
Your wisest proceedings he knows how to mend,
He will give his advice like a true hearted friend;
Young widows he will kill
With a stroke of your bill;
For the sake of yourselves let it never be said
You slighted his counsels for three pence ahead.
Now a war with the Spaniards he threatens, O yes!
Here, beat up to arms, and relieve his distress!
In a month we shall end it, and who knows but less --
By the help of his song
We'll muster so strong
That Congress shall own their remonstrance is vain,
And make him their captain to conquer New Spain.
I never would charge my artillery high
When there is nothing to vex but the buzz of a fly,
When monkies and puppies are only to die --;
His head and his hand
Are both at a stand,
What malice to vent, or what nonsense to say,
What satire to write, or what new tune to play
So often attacked, shall I never reply --?
Must Whaycum forever all satire defy --?
Away with your comfort, and leave me to sigh*
The sun's in the west,
And I am oppressed
With fellows attempting to blacken my muse
Who hardly have genius to blacken my shoes.
But when I reflect that I have for a foe
A shadow departed full twelve days ago,
With a letter of license returned from below,
To his screeches and bawling
And such catterwauling,
Alas, it were madness in me to reply,
And so, Mr. Spectre, I bid you good by.
A DIALOGUE BETWEEN HIS BRITANNIC MAJESTY and Mr. Fox.
Supposed to have passed about the time of the approach of the combined fleets
of France and Spain to the British coasts, August 1779.

King G. GOOD master Fox, your counsel I implore,
Still George the third, but potent George no more.
By North conducted to the brink of fate,
I mourn my folly and my pride too late:
The promises he made, when once we met
In Kew's gay shades The royal gardens at Kew.
, I never shall forget,
That at my feet the western world should fall.
And bow to me the potent lord of all --
Curse on his hopes, his councils and his schemes,
His plans of conquest, and his golden dreams,
These have allured me to the jaws of hell,
By Satan tempted thus Iscariot fell:
Divested of majestic pomp I come,
My royal robes and airs I Have left at home,
Speak freely, friend, whatever you choose to say,
Suppose me equal with yourself today:
How shall I shun the mischiefs that impend?
How shall I make Columbia America, so called, by poetical liberty, from its
discoverer.
yet my friend?
I dread the power of each revolted State,
The unequal East hangs balanced with their weight.
How shall I dare the rage of France and Spain,
And lost dominion over the waves regain?
Advise me quick, for doubtful while we stand,
Destruction gathers over this wretched land:
These hostile squadrons to my ruin led,
These Gallic thunders fill my soul with dread,
If these should conquer -- Britain thou must fall
And bend, a province, to the haughty Gaul:
If this must be -- thou earth, expanding wide,
Unlucky George in thy dark entrails hide --
Ye oceans, wrap me in your dark embrace --
Ye mountains, shroud me to your lowest base --
Fall on my head, ye everlasting rocks --
But why so pensive, my good master Fox?

Fox. While in the arms of power and peace you lay,
Ambition led your restless soul astray.
Possessed of lands extending far and wide,
And more than Rome could boast in all her pride,
Yet, not contented with that mighty store,
Like a true miser, still you sought for more;
And, all in raptures for a tyrant's reign,
You strove your subjects dearest rights to chain:
Those ruffian hosts beyond the ocean sent,
By your commands on blood and murder bent,
With cruel hand the form of man defaced,
And laid the toils of art and nature waste.
(For crimes like these imperial Britain bends,
For crimes like these her ancient glory ends)
These lands, once truest to your name and ra^e,
Whom the wide ocean's utmost waves embrace,
Your just protection basely you denied,
Their towns you plundered, and you burnt beside.
Virginia's slaves, without one blush of shame,
Against their lords you armed with sword and flame;
At every port your ships of war you laid,
And strove to ruin and distress their trade,
Yet here, even here, your mighty projects failed;
For then from creeks their hardy seamen sailed,
In slender barques they crossed a stormy main,
And traffick'd for the wealth of France and Spain;
Over either tropic and the line they passed,
And, deeply laden, safe returned at last:
Nor think they yet had bowed to Britain's sway,
Though distant nations had not joined the fray,
Al^ne they fought your armies and your fleet,
And made your Clintons and your Howes retreat,
And yet while France stood doubting if to join,
Your ships they captur'd, and they took Burgoyne!
How vain is Britain's strength, her armies now
Before Columbia's bolder veterans bow;
Her gallant veterans all our force despise,
Though late from ruin The Year 1776.
we beheld them rise;
Before their arms our strongest bulwarks fall,
They storm the rampart and they scale the wall; Stoney Point, Powles Hook, etc.

With equal dread, on either service sent,
They seize a fortress, or they strike a tent.
BUT should we bow beneath a foreign yoke,
And potent France atchieve the humbling stroke,
Yet every power, and even ourselves, must say,
"Just is the vengeance of the skies today:"
For crimes like ours dire vengeance must atone;
Forbear your fasts, and let the skies alone --
By cruel kings, in fierce Britannia bred,
Such seas of blood have first and last been shed,
That now, distressed for each inhuman deed,
Our turn has come -- our turn has come to bleed:
Forbear your groans; for war and death array,
March to the foe, and give the fates their way.
Can you behold, without one hearty groan,
The fleets of France superior to your own?
Can you behold, without one poignant pang,
The foreign conquests of the brave D'Estaing? Grenada, etc.

North is your friend, and now destruction knocks,
Still take his counsel, and regard not Fox.

King G. Ah! speak not thus -- your words will break my heart,
Some softer counsel to my ears impart.
How can I march to meet the insulting foe,
Who never yet to hostile plains did go?
When was I versed in battles or in blood?
When have I fought upon the faithless flood?
Much better could I at my palace door
Recline and hear the distant cannons roar.
Generals and admirals Britain yet can boast,
So^e fight on land, and some defend the coast;
The fame of these throughout the globe resounds,
To these I leave the glory and the wounds;
But since this honor for no blood atones,
I must and will be careful of my bones.
WHAT pleasure to your monarch would it be,
If Lords and Commons could at last agree;
Could North with Fox in firm al^iance stand,
And Burke with Sandwich shake the social hand,
Then should we bring the rebels to our feet,
And France and Spain ingloriously retreat,
Her ancient glories to this isle return,
And we no more for l^st Columbia mourn.

Fox. Alliance! -- what* -- Your Highness must be mad:
Say, what alliance can with these be had?
Can lambs and wolves in social bands ally?
When these prove friendly, then will North and I.
Alliance! no -- I curse the horrid thought;
Ally with those their country's ruin sought!
Who to perdition sold their native land*
Leagued with the foe, a close connected h^nd --
Ally with these! -- I speak it to your face --
Alliance here is ruin and disgrace.
Angels and devils in such bonds unite,
So hell is allied to the realms of light --
Let North or German still my prayers deride,
Let turn-coat Johnston take the courtly side*
Even Pit, if living, might with these agree;
But no alliance shall they have with me.
BUT since no shame forbids your tongue to own
A royal coward sills Britannia's throne;
Since our best chiefs must fight your mad campaigne.
And be disgraced at last by him who reigns, NOTES.] Alliance! -- what, etc.
See his speech in the House of Commons, June 22, 1779, in answer to Lord Nugent.

Let turn-coat Johnston, etc. The worthy British commissioner, of bribing
memory, who, for the sake of a few guineas, belied his own conscience, and
sided with the majority.

And be disgraced at last by him who reigns. As Gage, the Howes, Burgoyne, etc.
for not doing impossibilities.



No wonder, heaven! such ill success attends!
No wonder North and Mansfield are your friends!
Take my advice, with these to ^^ttle go,
These book-learned heroes may confront the foe --
Those first who led us toward the brink of fate,
Should still be foremost when at Pluto's gate;
Let them, grown desperate by our run of woe^,
Collect new fury from this host of foes,
And, allied with themselves, to ruin s^eer,
The just conclusion of their mad career.

King G. No comfort in these cruel words I find --
Ungrateful words to my tormented mind!
With me alone both France and Spain contend,
And not one nation will be called my friend:
Unpitying now the Dutchman sees me fall,
The Russian leaves me to the haughty Gaul,
The German, grown as brutish as the Dane,
Consigns my carcass to the jaws of Spain.
Where are the hosts they promised me of yore,
When rich and great they heard my thunders roar,
While yet confessed the master of the sea,
The Germans drained their wide domain for me,
And aiding Britain with a friendly hand,
Helped to subdue the rebels and their land? The H^ssians, Waldeckers,
Anspachers, etc.

Ah! rebels, rebels! insolent and mad;
My Scottish rebels were not half so bad The Year 174^.
,
They soon submitted to superior sway Culloden.
;
But these grow stronger as my hosts decay:
What hosts have perished on their hostile shore!
They went for conquest, but returned no more.
Columbia, thou a friend in better times!
Lost are to me thy pleasurable climes.
You wish me buried in eternal night,
You curse the day when first I saw the light --
Thy commerce vanished, hostile nations share,
And thus you leave me naked, poor, and bare;
Despised by those who should my cause defend,
And helpless left without one pitying friend.
These dire afflictions shake my changeful throne,
And turn my brain -- a very idiot grown:
Of all the isles, the realms with which I part,
Columbia sits the heaviest at my heart,
She, she provokes the deepest, heaviest sigh,
And makes me doubly wretched ere I die.
SOME dreary convent's unfrequented gloom
(Like Charles of Spain) had better be my doom:
There while in absence from my crown I sigh,
The Prince of Wales these ills may rectify;
A happier fortune may his crown await,
He yet perhaps may save this sinking state.
I Will to my prayers, my bishops and my beads,
And beg God's pardon for my heinous deeds;
Those streams of blood, that spilt by my command,
Call ou^ for vengeance on this guilty land.

Fox. You ask for mercy -- can you cry to God, NOTES.] Like Charles of Spain,
etc. Charles V. who, in 1556, resigning the crown to his son Philip II. shut
himself up in the monastery of St. Just, in Spain, where he died two years
after.

I Will to my prayers, my bishops, and my beads. This is not said without
foundation, as he established the Roman Catholic religion in Canada, in 1775.



Who had no mercy on poor parson Dodd? Dr. William Dodd, whose history is well
known.

No inward image of the power divine,
No gentle feelings warm that soul of thine;
Convents you have -- no need to look for new,
Your convents are the brothel and the stew.
One horrid act In the case of Uriah.
disgraced old Jesse's son,
And that one blemish have you hit upon;
You seized an English Quaker's tempting wife,
And pushed him off to lose his sneaking life;
Even to that coast where freedom sent to quell,
All in their pride the flower of Britain fell.
But ruined was your scheme, the plan was vain,
For when were Quakers in a battle slain?
As well might Whales by closing waves expire,
Or Salamanders perish in the fire.
WHEN France and Spain are thundering at your doors,
Is this a time for kings to lodge with whores?
In one short sentence take my whole advice,
(It is no time to flatter and be nice)
With all your soul for instant peace contend,
Thus shall you be your country's truest friend --
Peace, heavenly peace, may stay your tottering throne, NOTE.] You seized an
English Quaker's tempting wife. The connection between vice and meanness is a
fit object for satire; but when the satire is a fact, it (...), with the
irresistible power of a diamond. If a Quaker, in defense of his just rights,
his property, and the chastity of his h^use, takes up a musket, he is expelled
the meeting; but the present king of England, who seduced and took into keeping
a sister of their society, is reverenced and supported with repeated
testimonies, while the friendly noodle from whom she was taken, (and who is now
in this city) continues a drudge in the service of his rival, as if proud of
being cuckolded by a creature called a king. American (...)* No. 1. Printed at
Philadelphia, 1777.



But wars and death and blood can profit none.
To Russia send, in humblest guise arrayed,
And beg her intercession, not her aid:
Withdraw your armies from the Americ' shore,
And vex Columbia with your fleets no more;
Vain are their conquests, past experience shows,
For what this hour they gain, the next they lose.
Implore the friendship of these injured States;
No longer strive against the stubborn fates.
Since heaven has doomed Columbia to be free,
What is her commerce and her wealth to thee?
Since heaven that land of promise has denied,
Regain by prudence what you lost by pride:
Immediate ruin each delay attends,
Imperial Britain scarce her coast defends;
Hibernia sees the threatening foes advance,
And feels an ague at the thoughts of France;
Jamaica mourns her half-protected state,
Barbados soon may share Grenada's fate,
And every isle that owns your reign today,
May bow tomorrow to great Louis' sway.
Yes -- while I speak, your empire, great before,
Contracts its limits, and is great no more.
Unhappy prince! what madness has possessed,
What worse than madness seized thy vengeful breast*
When white-rob'd peace before thy portal stood,
To drive her hence, and stain the world with blood?
For this destruction threatens from the skies;
See hostile navies to our ruin rise;
Our fleets inglorious shun the force of Spain,
And France triumphant stems the subject main.

THE BRITISH PRISON SHIP.
Written 1780.
CANTO I. The CAPTURE.
ASSIST me, CLIO! while in verse I tell
The dire misfortunes that a ship befell,
Which outward bound, to St. Eustatia's shore,
Death and disaster through the billows bore.
FROM Philadelphia's crowded port she came;
For there the builder planned her lofty frame,
With wondrous skill, and excellence of art
He formed, disposed, and ordered every part,
With joy be^eld the stately fabric rise
To a stout bulwark of stupendous size,
'Till launched at last, capacious of the freight,
He left her to the Pilots, and her fate.
FIRST from her depths the tapering masts ascend,
On whose firm bulk the transverse yards depend,
By shrouds and stays secured from side to side
Trees grew on trees, suspended over the tide,
Firm to the yards extended, broad and vast
They hung the sails susceptive of the blast,
Far over the prow the lengthy bowsprit lay,
Supporting on the extreme the taught Gib-stay,
Twice ten six pounders at their port holes placed
And ranged in rows, stood hostile in the waist:
Thus all prepared, impatient for the seas,
She left her station with an adverse breeze,
This her first outset from her native shore,
To seas a stranger, and untried before.
FROM the bright radiance that his glories spread
Ere from the east gay Phoebus lifts his head,
From the sweet morn, a kindred name she won,
AURORA called, the offspring of the sun,
Whose form projecting, the broad prow displays,
Far glittering over the wave, a mimic blaze.
THE gay ship now, in all her pomp and pride,
With sails expanded, flew along the tide;
'Twas thy deep stream, O Delaware, that bore
This pile intended for a southern shore,
Bound to those isles where endless summer reigns,
Fair fruits, gay blossoms, and enameled plains;
Where sloping lawns the roving swain invite;
And the cool morn succeeds the breezy night,
Where each glad day a heaven unclouded brings
And sky-topt mountains teem with golden springs.
FROM Cape H^NLOPEN, urged by favoring gales,
When morn emerg'd, we sea-ward spread our sails,
Then east-south-east explored the briny way,
Close to the wind, departing from the bay;
No longer seen the hoarse resounding strand,
With hearts elate we hurried from the land,
Escaped the dangers of that shelvy ground
To sailors fatal, and for wrecks renowned --
THE gale increases as we stem the main,
Now scarce the hills their sky-blue mist retain,
At last they sink beneath the rolling wave
That seems their summits, as they sink, to lave;
Abaft the beam the freshening breezes play,
No mists advancing to deform the day,
No tempests rising over the splendid scene,
A sea unruffled, and a heaven serene.
NOW Sol's bright lamp, the heaven born source of light,
Had passed the line of his meridian height,
And westward hung -- retreating from the view
Shores disappeared, and every hill withdrew,
When, still suspicious of some neighboring foe,
Aloft the Master bade a Seaman go,
To mark if, from the mast's aspiring* height
Through all the round a vessel came in sight.
TOO soon the Seaman's glance, extending wide,
Far distant in the east a ship espied,
Her lofty masts stood bending to the gale,
Close to the wind was braced each shivering sail;
Next from the deck we saw the approaching foe,
Her spangled bottom seemed in flames to glow
When to the winds she bowed in dreadful haste
And her lee-guns lay deluged in the waste:
From her top-gallant flowed an English Jack;
With all her might she strove to gain our track,
Nor strove in vain -- with pride and power elate
Winged on by hell, she drove us to our fate,
No stop, no stay her bloody crew intends,
(So flies a comet with its host of fiends)
Nor oaths, nor prayers arrest her swift career,
Death in her front, and ruin in her rear.
STRUCK at the sight, the Master gave command
To change our course, and steer ward the land --
Swift to the task the ready (...) run,
And while the word was uttered, half was done,
As from the south the fiercer breezes rise
Swift from her foe alarmed AURORA flies,
With every sail extended to the wind
She fled the unequal foe that chased behind;
Along her decks disposed in close array
Each at its port, the grim artillery lay,
Soon on the foe with brazen throat to roar;
But, small their size, and narrow was their bore;
Yet faithful they their destined station keep
To guard the barque that wastes them over the deep,
Who now must bend to steer a homeward course
And trust her swiftness rather than her force,
Unfit to combat with a powerful foe;
Her decks too open, and her waist too low.
WHILE over the wave with foaming prow she flies,
Once more emerging, distant landscapes rise;
High in the air the starry streamer plays,
And every ^ail its various tribute pays:
To gain the land we bore the weighty blast;
And now the wished for cape appeared at last;
But the vexed foe, impatient of delay,
Prepared for ruin, pressed upon her prey;
Near, and more near, in aweful grandeur came
The frigate IRIS, not unknown to fame;
IRIS her name, but HANCOCK once she bore,
Framed, and completed on NEW ALBION'S shore,
By MANLY lost, the swiftest of the train
That fly with wings of canvas over the main.
NOW, while for combat some with zeal prepare,
Thus to the heavens the Boatswain sent his prayer;
"List' all ye powers that rule the skies and seas!
"Shower down perdition on such thieves as these,
"Fate strike their hearts with terror and dismay,
"And sprinkle on their powder salt-sea spray!
"May bursting cannon, while his aim he tries,
"Destroy the Gunner, and be-damn his eyes --
"The chief who awes the quarter deck, may he
"Tripp'd from his stand, be tumbled in the sea.
"May they who rule the round-top's giddy height
"Be canted headlong to perpetual night;
"May fiends torment them on a leeward coast,
"And help forsake them when they want it most --
"From their wheeled engines torn be every gun --
"And now, to sum up every curse in one,
"May latent flames, to save us, intervene,
"And hell-ward drive them from their magazine*" --
THE Frigate, now, had every sail unfurled,
And rushed tremendous over the watery world;
Thus fierce Pelides, eager to destroy,
Chased the proud Trojan to the gates of Troy --
Swift over the waves while hostile they pursue
As swiftly from their fangs AURORA flew,
At length HENLOPEN'S cape we gained once more,
And vainly strove to force the ship ashore;
Stern fate forbade the barren shore to gain,
Denial sad, and source of future pain!
For then the inspiring breezes ceased to blow,
Lost were they all, and smooth the seas below;
By the broad cape becalmed, our lifeless sails
No longer swelled their bosoms to the gales;
The ship, unable to pursue her way,
Tumbling about, at her own guidance lay,
No more the helm its wonted influence lends,
No oars assist us, and no breeze befriends;
Mean time the foe, advancing from the sea,
Ranged her black cannon, pointed on our lee,
Then up she luff'd, and blazed her entrails dire,
Bearing destruction, terror, death, and fire.
VEXED at our fate, we prim'd a piece, and then
Returned the shot, to show them we were men.
Dull night at length her dusky pinions spread,
And every hope to 'scape the foe was fled,
Close to thy cape, Henlopen, though we pressed,
We could not gain thy desert, dreary breast;
Though ruined trees beshroud thy barren shore
With mounds of sand half hid, or covered over,
Though ruffian winds disturb thy summit bare,
Yet every hope and every wish was there,
In vain we sought to reach the joyless strand,
Fate stood between, and barred us from the land.
ALL dead becalmed, and helpless as we lay,
The ebbing current forced us back to sea,
While vengeful IRIS, thirsting for our blood,
Flashed her red lightnings over the trembling flood,
At every flash a storm of ruin came
'Till our shocked vessel shook through all her frame --
Mad for revenge, our breasts with fury glow
To wreak returns of vengeance on the foe;
Full at his hull our pointed guns we raised,
His hull resounded as the cannon blazed;
Through his main-topsail one a passage tore,
His sides re-echo'd to the dreadful roar,
Alternate fires dispelled the shades of night --
But how unequal was this daring fight!
Our stoutest guns threw but a six-pound ball,
Twelve pounders from the foe our sides did maul,
And, while no power to save him intervenes,
A bullet struck our captain of Marines;
Fierce, though he bid defiance to the foe
He felt his death and ruin in the blow,
Headlong he fell, distracted with the wound,
The deck distained, and heart blood streaming round.
Another blast, as fatal in its aim,
Winged by destruction, through our rigging came,
And, whistling tunes from hell upon its way,
Shrouds, stays, and braces tore at once away,
Sails, blocks, and oars in scattered fragments fly --
Their so^^est language was -- SUBMIT, OR DIE.
REPEATED cries throughout the ship resound;
Now every b^llet brough^ a different wound;
'Twixt wind and water, one assailed the side,
Through this (...) rushed the briny tide --
'Twas then the M^^^er trembled for his crew,
And bade thy shores* O Delaware, adieu! --
And must we yield to you ^estructive ball,
And must our colors to these r^ffians fall! --
They fall! -- his thunders ^orc'd our pride to bend,
The lofty topsails with their yards descend,
And the proud foe, such leagues of ocean pa^^'d,
His wish completed in our woe at last.
CONVEYED to YORK, we found, at length, too late,
That Death was better than the prisoner's fate,
There doomed to famine, shackles and despair,
Condemned to breathe a soul, infected air
In sickly hulks, devoted while we lay,
Successive funerals gloom'd each dismal day --
But what on captives British rage can do,
Another Canto, friend, shall let you know.
CANTO II. The PRISON SHIP.
THE various horrors of these hulks to tell,
These Prison Ships where pain and horror dwell,
Where death in tenfold vengeance holds his reign,
And injured ghosts, yet unaveng'd, complain;
This be my task -- ungenerous Britons, you
Conspire to murder those you cannot subdue. --
WEAK as I am, I Will try my strength today
And my best arrows at these hell hounds play,
To future years one scene of death prolong,
And hang them up to infamy, in song.
THAT Britain's rage should dye our plains with gore,
And desolation spread through every shore,
None ever could doubt, that her ambition knew,
This was to rage and disappointment due;
But that those monsters whom our soil maintained,
Who first drew breath in this devoted land,
Like famished wolves, should on their country prey,
Assist its foes, and wrest our lives away,
This shocks belief -- and bids our soil disown
Such friends, subservient to a bankrupt crown,
By them the widow mourns her partner dead,
Her mangled sons to darksome prisons led,
By them -- and hence my keenest sorrows rise,
My friend, my guardian, my Orestes dies;
Still for that loss must wretched I complain,
And sad Ophelia mourn her favorite swain.
A^! come the day when from this bloody shore
Fate shall remove them to return no more --
To scorched Bahama shall the traitors go
With grief and rage, and unremitting woe,
On burning sands to walk their painful round,
And sigh through all the solitary ground,
Where no gay flower their haggard eyes shall see,
And find no shade but from the cypress tree.
SO much we suffered from the tribe I hate,
So near they should me to the brink of fate,
When two long months in these dark hulks we lay
Barred down by night, and fainting all the day
In the fierce fervours of the solar beam,
Cooled by no breeze on Hudson's mountain-stream;
That not unsung these threescore days shall fall
To black oblivion that would cover all! --
NO masts or sails these crowded ships adorn,
Dismal to view, neglected and forlorn!
Here, mighty ills oppress the imprisoned throng,
Dull were our slumbers, and our nights too long --
From morn to eve along the decks we lay
Scorched into fevers by the solar ray;
No friendly awning cast a welcome shade,
Once was it promised, and was never made;
No favors could these sons of death bestow,
'Twas endless cursing, and continual woe:
Immortal hatred does their breasts engage,
And this lost empire swells their souls with rage.
TWO hulks on Hudson's stormy bosom lie,
Two, farther south, affront the pitying eye --
There, the black SCORPION at her mooring rides,
There, STROM^OLO swings, yielding to the tides;
Here, bulky JERSEY fills a larger space,
And HUNTER, to all hospitals disgrace --
Thou, Scorpion, fatal to thy crowded throng,
Dire theme of horror and Plutonian song,
Requir'st my lay -- thy sultry decks I know,
And all the torments that exist below!
The briny wave that Hudson's bosom fills
Drained through her bottom in a thousand rills,
Rotten and old, replete with sighs and groans,
Scarce on the waters she sustained her bones;
Here, doomed to toil, or founder in the tide,
At the moist pumps incessantly we plied,
Here, doomed to starve, like famished dogs we tore
The scant allowance, that our tyrants bore.
REMEMBRANCE shudders at this scene of fears --
Still in my view some English brut^ appears,
Some base-born Hessian slave walks threatening by,
Some servile Scot with murder in his eye
Still haunts my fight, as vainly they bemoan
Rebellions managed so unlike their own!
O may I never feel the poignant pain
To live subjected to such fiends again,
Stewards and Mates that hostile Britain bore,
Cut from the gallows on their native shore;
Their ghastly looks and vengeance-beaming eyes
Still to my view in dismal colors rise --
O may I never review these dire abodes,
These piles for slaughter, floating on the floods, --
And you, that over the troubled ocean go,
Strike not your standards to this miscreant foe,
Better the greedy wave should swallow all,
Better to meet the death-conducted ball,
Better to sleep on ocean's deepest bed
At once destroyed and numbered with the dead,
Than thus to perish in the face of day
Where twice ten thousand deaths one death delay.
WHEN to the ocean dives the western sun,
And the scorched Tories fire their evening gun,
"Down, rebels, down!" the angry Scotchmen cry,
"Damned dogs, descend, or by our broad swords die!"
HAIL, dark abode! what can with thee compare --
Heat, sickness, famine, death, and stagnant air --
Pandora's box, from whence all mischief flew,
Here real found, torments mankind anew! --
Swift from the guarded decks we rushed along,
And vainly sought repose, so vast our throng:
Three hundred wretches here, denied all light,
In crowded mansions pass the infernal night,
Some for a bed their tattered vestments join,
And some on chests, and some on floors recline;
Shut from the blessings of the evening air,
Pensive we lay with mingled corpses there,
Meagre and wan, and scorched with heat, below,
We loom'd like ghosts, ere death had made us so --
How could we else, where heat and hunger joined
Thus to debase the body and the mind,
Where cruel thirst the parching throat invades,
Dries up the man, and fits him for the shades.
NO waters laded from the bubbling spring
To these dire ships the British monsters bring --
By planks and ponderous beams completely walled
Invain for water, and invain, I called --
No drop was granted to the midnight prayer,
To Dives in these regions of despair! --
The loathsome cask a deadly dose contains,
Its poison circling through the languid veins;
"Here, generous Britain, generous, as you say,
"To my parched tongue one cooling drop convey,
"Hell has no mischief like a thirsty throat,
"Nor one tormentor like your David Sproat." Commissary of Prisoners at
New York.

DULL flew the hours, till, from the East displayed,
Sweet morn dispells the horrors of the shade;
On every side dire objects meet the sight,
And pallid forms, and murders of the night,
The dead were past their pain, the living groan,
Nor dare to hope another morn their own;
But what to them is morn's delightful ray,
Sad and distressful as the close of day,
Over distant streams appears the dewy green,
And leafy trees on mountain tops are seen,
But they no groves nor grassy mountains tread,
Marked for a longer journey to the dead.
BLACK as the clouds that shade St. Kilda's shore,
Wild as the winds that round her mountains roar,
At every post some surly vagrant stands,
Picked from the British or the Irish bands,
Some slave from Hesse, some hangman's son at least
Sold and transported, like his brother beast --
Some miscreant Tory, puffed with upstart pride,
Led on by hell to take the royal side;
Dispensing death triumphantly they stand,
Their muskets ready to obey command;
Wounds are their sport, as ruin is their aim;
On their dark souls compassion has no claim,
And discord only can their spirits please:
Such were our tyrants here, and such were these.
INGRATITUDE! no curse like thee is found
Throughout this jarring world's extended round,
Their hearts with malice to our country swell
Because in former days we used them well --!
This pierces deep, too deeply wounds the breast;
We helped them naked, friendless, and distressed,
Received their vagrants with an open hand,
Bestowed them buildings, privilege, and land --
Behold the change! -- when angry Britain rose,
These thankless tribes became our fiercest foes,
By them devoted, plundered, and accursed,
Stung by the serpents whom ourselves had nursed.
BUT such a train of endless woes abound,
So many mischiefs in these hulks are found,
That on them all a poem to prolong
Would swell too high the horrors of my song --
Hunger and thirst to work our woe combine,
And moldy bread, and flesh of rotten swine,
The mangled carcass, and the battered brain,
The doctor's poison, and the captain's cane,
The soldier's musket, and the steward's debt,
The evening shackle, and the noonday threat.
THAT juice destructive to the ^pangs of care
Which Rome of old, nor Athens could prepare,
Which gains the day for many a modern chief
When cool reflection yields a faint relief,
That charm, whose virtue warms the world beside,
Was by these tyrants to our use denied,
While yet they deigned that healthy juice to lade
The putrid water felt its powerful aid;
But when refused -- to aggravate our pains --
Then fevers raged and revel'd through our veins;
Throughout my frame I felt its deadly heat,
I felt my pulse with quicker motions beat:
A pallid hue over every face was spread,
Unusual pains attacked the fainting head,
No physic here, no doctor to assist,
My name was entered on the sick man's list;
Twelve wretches more the same dark symptoms took,
And these were entered on the doctor's book;
The loathsome HUNTER was our destined place,
The HUNTER to all hospitals disgrace;
With soldiers sent to guard us on our road,
Joyful we left the SCORPION'S dire abode;
Some tears we shed for the remaining crew,
Then cursed the hulk, and from her sides withdrew.
CANTO III. The HOSPITAL PRISON SHIP.
NOW towered the HUNTER'S gloomy sides we came,
A slaughterhouse, yet hospital in name;
For none came there (to pass through all degrees)
'Till half consumed, and dying with disease; --
But when too near with laboring oars we plied
The Mate with curses drove us from the side;
That wretch who, banished from the navy crew,
Grown old in blood, did here his trade renew,
His serpent's tongue, when on his charge let loose,
Uttered reproaches, scandal, and abuse,
Gave all to hell who dared his king disown,
And swore mankind were made for George alone:
Ten thousand times, to irritate our woe,
He wished us foundered in the gulf below;
Ten thousand times he brandished high his stick,
And swore as often that we were not sick --
And yet so pale! -- that we were thought by some
A freight of ghosts from Death's dominions come --
But calmed at length -- for who can always rage,
Or the fierce war of endless passion wage,
He pointed to the stairs that led below
To damps, disease, and varied shapes of woe --
Down to the gloom I took my pensive way,
Along the decks the dying captives lay;
Some struck with madness, some with scurvy pained,
But still of putrid fevers most complained!
On the hard floors these wasted objects laid,
There tossed and tumbled in the dismal shade,
There no soft voice their bitter fate bemoaned,
And Death trod stately, while the victims groaned;
Of leaky decks I heard them long complain,
Drowned as they were in deluges of rain,
Denied the comforts of a dying bed,
And not a pillow to support the head --
How could they else but pine, and grieve, and sigh,
Detest a wretched life -- and wish to die.
SCARCE had I mingled with this dismal band
When a thin spectre seized me by the hand --
"And art thou come, (death heavy on his eyes)
"And art thou come to these abodes, he cries;
"Why did thou leave the Scorpion's dark retreat,
"And hither haste a surer death to meet?
"Why did thou leave thy damp infected cell,
"If that was purgatory, this is hell --
"We too grown weary of that horrid shade
"Petitioned early for the doctor's aid;
"His aid denied, more deadly symptoms came,
"Weak, and yet weaker, glowed the vital flame;
"And when disease had worn us down so low
"That few could tell if we were ghosts, or no,
"And all asserted, death would be our fate --
"Then to the doctor we were sent -- too late.
"Here wastes away Autolycus the brave,
"Here young Orestes finds a watery grave,
"Here, gay Alcander, gay, alas! no more,
"Dies far sequestered from his native shore;
"He late, perhaps, too eager for the fray,
"Chased the vile Briton over the watery way
"'Till fortune jealous, bade her clouds appear,
"Turned hostile to his fame, and brought him here
"THUS do our warriors, thus our heroes fall,
"Imprisoned here, base ruin meets them all,
"Or, sent afar to Britain's barbarous shore,
"There die neglected, and return no more:
"Ah rest in peace, poor, injured, parted shade,
"By cruel hands in death's dark weeds arrayed,
"But happier climes, where suns unclouded shine,
"Light undisturbed, and endless peace are thine." --
FROM Brookland groves a Hessian doctor came,
Not great his skill, nor greater much his fame;
Fair Science never called the wretch her son,
And Art disdained the stupid man to own; --
Can you admire that Science was so coy,
Or Art refused his genius to employ! --
Do men with brutes an equal dullness share,
Or cuts yon' grovelling mole the midway air --
In polar worlds can Eden's blossoms blow,
Do trees of God in barren deserts grow,
Are loaded vines to Etna's summit known,
Or swells the peach beneath the torrid zone --?
Yet still he doomed his genius to the rack,
And, as you may suppose, was owned a quack.
HE on his charge the healing work begun
With antimonial mixtures, by the tun,
Ten minutes was the time he deigned to stay,
The time of grace allotted once a day --
He drencht us well with bitter draughts, it is true,
Nostrums from hell, and cortex from Peru --
Some with his pills he sent to Pluto's reign,
And some he blister'd with his flies of Spain;
His cream of Tartar walked its deadly round,
Till the lean patient at the potion frowned,
And swore that hemlock, death, or what you will,
Were nonsense to the drugs that stuffed his bill. --
On those refusing he bestowed a kick,
Or menaced vengeance with his walking stick;
Here uncontrolled he exercised his trade,
And grew experienced by the deaths he made,
By frequent blows we from his cane endured
He killed at least as many as he cured,
On our lost comrades built his future fame,
And scattered fate, wherever his footsteps came.
SOME did not seem obedient to his will,
And swore he mingled poison with his pill,
But I acquit him by a fair confession,
He was no Englishman -- he was a Hessian --
Although a dunce, he had some sense of sin
Or else the Lord knows where we now had been;
Perhaps in that far country sent to range
Where never prisoner meets with an exchange --
Then had we all been banished out of time
Nor I returned to plague the world with rhyme.
FOOL though he was, yet candor must confess
Not chief Physician was this dog of Hesse --
One master over the murdering tribe was placed,
By him the rest were honored or disgraced; --
Once, and but once, by some strange fortune led
He came to see the dying and the dead --
He came -- but anger so deformed his eye,
And such a faulchion glittered on his thigh,
And such a gloom his visage darkened over,
And two such pistols in his hands he bore!
That, by the gods! -- with such a load of steel
He came, we thought, to murder, not to heal --
Hell in his heart, and mischief in his head,
He gloom'd destruction, and had smote us dead,
Had he so dared -- but fate withheld his hand --
He came -- blasphemed -- and turned again to land.
FROM this poor vessel, and her sickly crew
An English ruffian all his titles drew,
Captain, esquire, commander, too, in chief,
And hence he gained his bread, and hence his beef,
But, sir, you might have searched creation round
Ere such another miscreant could be found --
Though unprovoked, an angry face he bore,
We stood astonished at the oaths he swore;
He swore, till every prisoner stood aghast,
And thought him Satan in a brimstone blast;
He wished us banished from the public light,
He wished us shrouded in perpetual night!
That were he king, no mercy would he show,
But drive all rebels to the world below;
That if we scoundrels did not scrub the decks
His staff should break our damned rebellious necks;
He swore, besides, that if the ship took fire
We too should in the pitchy flame expire;
And meant it so -- this tyrant I engage
Had lost his breath to gratify his rage. --
IF where he walked a captive carcass lay,
Still dreadful was the language of the day --
He called us dogs, and would have used us so,
But vengeance checked the meditated blow,
The vengeance from our injured nation due
To him, and all the base, unmanly crew.
SUCH food they sent, to make complete our woes,
It looked like carrion torn from hungry crows,
Such vermin vile on every joint were seen,
So black, corrupted, mortified, and lean
That once we tried to move our flinty chief,
And thus addressed him, holding up the beef:
"SEE, captain, see! what rotten bones we pick,
"What kills the healthy cannot cure the sick:
"Not dogs on such by Christian men are fed,
"And see, good master, see, what lousy bread!"
"YOUR meat or bread (this man of flint replied)
"Is not my care to manage or provide --
"But this, damned rebel dogs, I Would have you know,
"That better than you merit we bestow;
"Out of my sight!" -- nor more he deigned to say,
But whisk'd about, and frowning, strode away.
EACH day, at least three carcases we bore,
And scratched them graves along the sandy shore,
By feeble hands the shallow graves were made,
No stone memorial over the corpses laid;
In barren sands, and far from home, they lie,
No friend to shed a ^ear, when passing by;
Over the mean tombs insulting Britons tread,
Spurn at the sand, and curse the rebel dead.
WHEN to your arms these fatal islands fall,
(For first or last they must be conquered all)
Americans! to rites sepulchral just,
With gentlest footstep press this kindred dust,
And over the tombs, if tombs can then be found,
Place the green turf, and plant the myrtle round.
AMERICANS! a just resentment show,
And glut revenge on this detested foe;
While the warm blood exults the glowing vein
Still shall resentment in your bosoms reign,
Can you forget the greedy Briton's ire,
Your fields in ruin, and your domes on fire,
No age, no sex from lust and murder free,
And, black as night, the hell born refugee!
Must York forever your best blood entomb,
And these gorged monsters triumph in their doom,
Who leave no art of cruelty untried;
Such heavy vengeance, and such hellish pride!
Death has no charms -- his realms dejected lie
In the dull climate of a clouded sky,
Death has no charms, except in British eyes,
See, armed for death, the infernal miscreants rise,
See how they pant to stain the world with gore,
And millions murdered, still would murder more;
This selfish race, from all the world disjoined,
Perpetual disc^rd spread throughout mankind,
Aim to extend their empire over the ball,
Subject, destroy, absorb, and conquer all,
As if the power that formed us did condemn
All other nations to be slaves to them --
Rouse from your sleep, and crush the thievish band,
Defeat, destroy, and sweep them from the land,
Allied like you, what madness to despair,
Attack the ruffians while they linger there;
There Tryon sits, a monster all complete,
See Clinton there with vile Knyphausen meet,
And every wretch whom honor should detest
There finds a home -- and Arnold with the rest.
Ah! traitors, lost to every sense of shame,
Unjust supporters of a tyrant's claim;
Foes to the rights of freedom and of men,
Flushed with the blood of thousands you have slain,
To the just doom the righteous skies decree
We leave you, toiling still in cruelty,
Or on dark plans in future herds to meet,
Plans formed in hell, and projects half complete:
The years approach that shall to ruin bring
Your lords, your chiefs, your miscreant of a king
Whose murderous acts shall stamp his name accursed,
And his last triumphs more than damn the first.
ON THE MEMORABLE VICTORY OBTAINED By the gallant captain PAUL JONES, of the
Good Man Richard, over the Seraphis, etc. under the command of captain PEARSON.
Written August, 1781.
1.
OVER the rough main with flowing sheet
The guardian of a numerous fleet,
Seraphis from the Baltic came;
A ship of less tremendous force
Sailed by her side the self-same course,
Countess of Scarb'ro' was her name.
2.
And now their native coasts appear,
Britannia's hills their summits rear
Above the German main;
Fond to suppose their dangers over,
They southward coast along the shore,
Thy waters, gentle Thames, to gain.
3.
Full forty guns Seraphis bore,
And Scarb'ro's Countess twenty-four,
Manned with Old England's boldest tars --
Wha^ flag that rides the Gallic s^as
Shall dare attack such piles as these,
Designed for tumults and for wars!
4.
Now from the top-mast's giddy height
A seaman cried -- "Four sail in sight
"Approach with favoring gales,"
Pearson, resolved to save the fleet,
Stood off to sea these ships to meet,
And closely braced his shivering sails.
5.
With him advanced the Countess bold,
Like a black tar in wars grown old:
And now these floating piles drew nigh;
But, muse, unfold what chief of fame
In the other warlike squadron came,
Whose standards at his mast head fly.
6.
'Twas JONES, brave JONES, to battle led
As bold a crew as ever bled
Upon the sky surrounded main;
The standards of the Western World
Were to the willing winds unfurled,
Denying Britain's tyrant reign.
7.
The Good Man Richard led the line;
The Alliance next: with these combine
The Gallic ship they Pallas call:
The Vengeance, armed with sword and flame,
These to attack the Britons came --
But two accomplished all.
8.
Now Phoebus sought his pearly bed:
But who can tell the scenes of dread,
The horrors of that fatal night!
Close up these ^loating castles came;
The Good Man Richard bursts in flame;
Seraphis trembled at the sight.
9.
She felt the fury of her ball
Down, prostrate down, the Britons fall;
The decks were strewn with slain:
JONES to the foe his vessel lashed;
And, while the black artillery flashed,
Loud thunders shook the main.
10.
Alas! that mortals should employ
Such murdering engines, to destroy
That frame by heaven so nicely joined;
Alas! that ever the god decreed
That brother should by brother bleed,
And poured such madness in the mind.
11.
But thou, brave JONES, no blame shall bear;
The rights of men demand thy care:
For these you dare the greedy waves --
No tyrant on destruction bent
Has planned thy conquests -- thou art sent
To humble tyrants and their slaves.
12.
See! -- dread Seraphis flames again --
And art thou, JONES, among the slain,
And sunk to Neptune's caves below --
He lives -- though crowds around him fall,
Still he, unhurt, survives them all;
Almost alone he fights the foe.
13.
And can thy ship these strokes sustain?
Behold thy brave companions slain,
All clasped in ocean's dark embrace.
STRIKE, OR BE SUNK -- the Briton cries --
SINK, IF YOU CAN -- the chief replies,
Fierce lightnings blazing in his face.
14.
Then to the side three guns he drew,
(Almost deserted by his crew)
And charged them deep with woe:
By Pearson's flash he aimed the balls;
His mainmast totters -- down it falls --
Tremendous was the blow.
15.
Pearson as yet disdained to yield,
But scarce his secret fears concealed,
And thus was heard to cry --
"With hell, not mortals, I contend;
"What art thou -- human, or a fiend,
"That do my force defy?
16.
"Return, my lads, the fight renew."
So called bold Pearson to his crew;
But called, alas! in vain;
Some on the decks lay maimed and dead;
Some to their deep recesses fled,
And more were buried in the m^in.
17.
Distressed, forsaken, and alone,
He haul'd his tattered standard down,
And yielded to his gallant foe;
Bold Pallas soon the Countess took,
Thus both their haughty colors struck,
Confessing what the brave can do.
18.
But, JONES, too dearly did thou buy
These ships possessed so gloriously,
Too many deaths disgraced the fray:
Thy barque, that bore the conquering flame,
That the proud Briton overcame,
Even she forsook thee on thy way;
19.
For when the morn began to shine,
Fatal to her, the ocean brine
Poured through each spacious wound;
Quick in the deep she disappeared: --
But JONES to friendly Belgia steered,
With conquest and with glory crowned.
20.
Go on, great man, to daunt the foe,
And bid the haughty Britons know
They to our Thirteen Stars shall bend;
Those Stars that, veiled in dark attire,
Long glimmer'd with a feeble fire,
But radiant now ascend.
21.
Bend to the Stars that flaming rise
In western, not in eastern, skies,
Fair Freedom's reign restored --
So when the magi, come from far,
Beheld the God-attending Star,
They trembled and adored.
TO HIS EXCELLENCY GENERAL WASHINGTON.
Written September, 178^.
ACCEPT, great chief, that share of honest praise
A grateful people to your merit pays:
Verse is too mean your merit to display,
And words too weak our meaning to convey.
WHEN first proud Britain raised her heavy hand
With claims unjust to bind your native land,
Transported armies, and her millions spent
To enforce the mandates that a tyrant sent;
"Resist! resist!" was heard through every State,
You heard the call, and mourned your country's fate;
Then rising fierce her sons in arms arrayed,
And taught to vanquish those who dared invade.
THOSE British chiefs whom former wars had crowned
With conquest -- and in every clime renowned;
Who forced new realms to own their monarch's law
And whom even George beheld with secret awe,
Those mighty chiefs, compelled to fly or yield
Scarce dared to meet you on the embattled field:
To Boston's town you chased the trembling crew,
Quick, even from thence the British ruffians flew --
Through wint'ry waves they fled, and thought the sea
With all its storms less terrible than thee!
WHAT chief like you our armies could command,
And bring us safely to the promised land? --
Not Clinton-like, with victory elate --
It Is in misfortune you are doubly great:
When How victorious thy weak army chased,
And, sure of conquest, laid Cesarea waste,
When prostrate bleeding at his feet she lay
And the proud victor tore her wreaths away,
You undismayed put forth your (...) hand
And raised the drooping genius of the land,
Repelled the foe, their choicest warriors slain,
And drove them howling to their ships again.
WHILE others kindle into martial rage
Whom fierce ambition urges to engage,
An iron race by angry heaven designed
To conquer first and then enslave mankind;
In HIM a hero more humane we see,
He ventures life that others may be*
O! MAY you live to hail that glorious day
When Britain homeward shall pursue her way --
That race subdued, who filled the world with slain
And rode tyrannic over the subject main! --
What few presumed, you boldly have achieved,
A tyrant humbled, and a world relieved.
ROME's boasted chiefs, who, to their own disgrace,
Proved the worst scourges of the human race,
Pierced by whose darts a thousand nations bled,
Who captive princes at their chariots led;
Born to enslave, to ravage and subdue --
Return to nothing when compared to you;
Throughout the world thy growing fame has spread,
In every country are thy virtues read;
Remotest India hears thy deeds of fame,
The hardy Scythian stammers at thy name;
The haughty Turk, now longing to be free,
Neglects his Sultan to enquire of thee;
The barbarous Briton hails thee to his shores,
And calls him Rebel, whom his heart adores.
STILL may the heavens prolong thy vital date*
And still may conquest on thy banners wait:
Whether afar to ravaged lands you go,
Where wild Potowmac's rapid waters flow,
Or where Saluda laves the fertile plain
And swollen by torrents rushes to the main;
Or if again to Hudson you repair
To smite the cruel foe that lingers there --
Revenge their cause, whose virtue was their crime,
The exiled hosts from Carolina's clime.
LATE from the world in quiet may thou rise
And, mourned by millions, reach thy native skies --
With patriot kings and generous chiefs to shine,
Whose virtues raised them to be deemed divine:
May LOUIS only equal honors claim,
Alike in merits and alike in fame.
COPY OF AN INTERCEPTED LETTER FROM A New York TORY, to his friend in
Philadelphia, 1781.
DEAR Sir, I am so anxious to hear of your health,
I beg you would send me a letter by stealth:
I hope a few months will quite alter the case,
When the wars are concluded we'll meet and embrace.
For I Am led to believe from our brilliant success,
And what is as clear, your amazing distress,
That the cause of rebellion has met with a check
That will bring all its patrons to hang by the neck.
Cornwallis has managed so well in the South
That those rebels want victuals to put in their mouth,
And Arnold has stripped them, we hear, to the buff --
Has burnt their tobacco, and left them -- the snuff.
Dear Thomas, I wish you would move from that town
Where meet all the rebels of fame and renown;
When our armies victorious shall clear that damned nest
You may chance, though a Tory, to swing with the rest.
But again -- on reflection -- I beg you would stay --
You may serve us yet better than if moved away --
Give advice to Sir Harry of all that is passing,
What vessels are building, what cargoes amassing;
Inform to a day when those vessels will sail
That our cruisers may capture them all without fail --
By proceedings like these your peace shall be made,
The rebellious shall swing, but be you never afraid.
I cannot conceive how you do to subsist --
The rebels are starving, except those who 'list,
And as you reside in the land of Gomorrah,
You must fare as the rest do, I think, to your sorrow.
Poor souls! if ye knew what a doom is decreed,
(I mean not for you but for rebels indeed)
You would tremble to think of the vengeance in store,
The halters and gibbets -- I mention no more.
The rebels must surely conclude they are undone,
Their navy is ruined, their armies have run;
It is time they should now from delusion awaken --
The rebellion is done -- for the Trumbull is taken!
TORY.

TO LORD CORNWALLIS, At YORK -- VIRGINIA, October 8, 1782.
HAIL, great destroyer (equaled yet by none)
Of countries not thy master's, nor thine own;
Hatched by some demon on a stormy day,
Satan's best substitute to burn and slay;
Confined at last, hemmed in by land and sea
Burgoyne himself was but a type of thee!
LIKE his, to freedom was thy deadly hate,
Like his thy baseness, and be his thy fate:
To you, like him, no prospect Nature yields
But ruined wastes and desolated fields --
Invain you raise the interposing wall,
And hoist those standards that, like you, must fall,
In you conclude the glories of your race,
Complete your monarch's, and your own disgrace.
WHAT has your lordship's pilfering arms attained? --
Vast stores of plunder, but no STATE regained --
That may return, though you perhaps may groan,
Restore it, ruffian, for it is not your own --
Then, lord and soldier, headlong to the brine
Rush down at once -- the devil and the swine.
WOULD thou at last with Washington engage,
Sad object of his pity, not his rage?
See, round thy posts how terribly advance
The chiefs, the armies, and the fleets of France;
Fight while you can, for warlike Rochambeau
Aims at your head his last decisive blow,
Unnumber'd ghosts, from earth untimely sped,
Can take no rest till you, like them, are dead --
Then die, my Lord; that only chance remains
To wash away dishonorable stains,
For small advantage would your capture bring,
The plundering servant of a bankrupt king.
DIALOGUE BETWEEN The Lords DUNMORE and MANSFIELD, 1781.
Dunmore. EVER since I returned to my dear native shore,
No debtor in Cheapside was ever dunn'd more --
I Am dunn'd by my barber, my tailor, my groom;
How can I do else than to fret and to fume?
They join to attack me with one good accord,
From morning 'till night it is "my lord, and my lord."
And there comes the cobbler, so often denied --
If I had him in private, I Would thresh his damned hide.

Mansfield. Would you worry the man that has found you in shoes?
Come, courage, my lord, I can tell you good news --
Virginia is conquered, the rebels are banged,
You are now to go over and see them safe hanged:
I hope it is not to your nature abhorrent
To sign for these wretches a legal death warrant --
Were I but in your place, I Am sure it would suit
To sign their death-warrants and hang them to boot.

Dunmore. My lord! -- I Am amazed -- have we routed the so? --
I shall govern again then, if matters be so --
And as to the hanging, in short, to be plain,
I Will hang them so well they will never want it again.
With regard to the wretches who thump at my gates,
I Will discharge all their dues with the rebel estates;
In less than three months I shall send a polacca
As deep as she will swim, sir, with corn and tobacco.

Mansfield. And send us some rebels -- a dozen or so --
They Will serve here in London by way of a show;
And as to the tories, believe me, dear cousin,
We can spare you some hundreds to pay for the dozen.

AN EPISTLE FROM Lord CORNWALLIS to Sir HENRY CLINTON.
October, 1781.
FROM clouds of smoke, and flames that round me glow,
To you, dear Clinton, I disclose my woe:
Here cannons flash, bombs glance, and bullets fly;
Not Satan's self endures such misery.
Was I foredoom'd, like Korah, to expire,
Hurled to perdition in a blaze of fire?
With these blue flames can mortal man contend --
What arms can aid me, or what walls defend?
Even to these gates last night a phantom strode,
And hailed me trembling to his dark abode:
Aghast I stood, struck motionless and dumb,
Seized with the horrors of the world to come.
WERE but my power as mighty as my rage,
Far different battles would Cornwallis wage;
Beneath his sword yon' threatening hosts should groan,
The earth should quake with thunders all his own.
O crocodile! had I thy flinty hide,
Swords to defy, and glance the ball^ aside,
By my own prowess would I rout the foe,
With my own javelin would I work their woe --
But fate's averse, and heaven's supreme decree
Nile's serpent formed more excellent than me.
HAS heaven in secret for some crime decreed
That I should suffer, and my soldiers bleed?
Or is it by the jealous skies concealed,
That I must bend, and they ignobly yield?
Ah! no -- the thought o'erwhelms my soul with grief.
Come, bold sir Harry, come to my relief;
Come, thou brave man, whom rebels Tombstone call,
But Britons, Graves -- come Digby, devil and all;
Come, princely William, with thy potent aid,
Can George's blood by Frenchmen be dismayed?
From a king's uncle once Scots rebels run,
And shall not these be routed by a son?
Come with your ships to this disast'rous shore,
Come -- or I sink -- and sink to rise no more;
By every motive that can sway the brave
Haste and my feeble fainting army save;
Come, and lost empire over the deep regain,
Chastise these upstarts that usurp the main:
I see their first rates to the charge advance,
I see lost Iris wear the flags of France;
There a strict rule the wakeful Frenchman keeps;
There, undisturbed by dogs, lord Rawdon sleeps!
TIRED with long acting on this bloody stage,
Sick of the follies of a wrangling age,
Come with your fleet, and help me to retire
To Britain's coast, the land of my desire --
For, me the foe their certain captive deem,
And every school boy takes me for his theme --
Long, much too long in this hard service tried,
Bespattered still, be-devil'd, and belied;
With the first chance that favoring fortune sends
I Will fly, converted, from this land of fiends:
Convinced, for me, she has no gems in store,
Nor leaves one triumph, even to hope for, more.
A MORAL THOUGHT.
IN youth, gay scenes attract our eyes,
And not suspecting their decay
Life's flowery fields before us rise,
Regardless of its winter day.
But vain pursuits, and joys as vain,
Convince us life is but a dream*
Death is to wake to rise again
To that true life I best esteem.
So nightly on the flowing tide,
Often have I seen a raree-show;
Ref^ected stars on either side,
And glittering moons were seen below.
But when the tide had ebbed away,
The scene fantastic with it fled,
A bank of mud around me lay,
And sea-weed on the river's bed.
ON THE FALL OF GENERAL EARL CORNWALLIS, Who, with above seven thousand Men,
surrendered themselves prisoners of war, to the renowned and illustrious
General GEORGE WASHINGTON, commander in chief of the allied armies of France
and America, on the memorable 19th of October, 1781.
Give us the proudest prisoner of the Goths,
That we may hew his limbs, and on a pile
Ad manes fratrum sacrifice his flesh,
Before this earthly prison of their bones;
That so the shadows be not unappea^'d,
Nor we disturbed with prodigies on earth.
Shakespeare's Titus Andronicus. Act I. Scene II.
A Chieftain joined with How, Burgoyne, and Gage,
Once more, nor this the last, provokes my rage --
Who saw these Ni^rods first for conquest burn!
Who has not seen them to the dust return?
This ruffian next, who scoured our ravaged fields,
Foe to the human race, Cornwallis yields! --
None ever before essayed such desperate crimes,
Alone he stood, arch-butche^ of the time,
Roved uncontrolled this wasted country over,
Strewn plains with dead, and bathed his jaws with gore?
'TWAS thus the wolf, who sought by night his prey,
And plundered all he (...) wi^h on his way,
Stole what he could, and murdered as he passed,
Chanced on a trap, and lost his head at last.
WHAT pen can write, what human tongue can tell
The endless murders of this man of hell!
Nature in him disgraced the form divine;
Nature mistook, she meant him for a -- swine:
That eye his forehead to her shame adorns;
Blush! nature, blush -- bestow him tail and horns! --
By him the orphans mourn -- the widowed dame
Saw ru^n spreading in the wasteful flame;
Gash'd over with wounds beheld with streaming ey^
A son, a brother, or a consort, die! --
Through ruined realms bones lie without a tom^,
And souls he sped to their eternal doom,
Who else had lived, and seen their toils again
Blessed by the genius of the rural reign.
BUT turn your eyes, and see the murderer fall,
Then say -- "Cornwallis has achieved it all." --
Yet he preserves the honor and the fame
That vanquished heroes only ought to claim --
Is he a hero! -- Read, and you will find
Heroes are beings of a different kind: --
Compassion to the worst of men is due,
And mercy heaven's first attribute, it is true;
Yet most presume it was too nobly done
To grant mild terms to Satan's firstborn son.
CONVINCED we are, no foreign spot of earth
But Britain only, gave this reptile birth.
That white-cliff'd isle, the vengeful dragon's den,
Has sent us monsters where we looked for men.
When memory paints their horrid deeds anew,
And brings these murdering miscreants to your view,
Then ask the leaders of these bloody bands,
Can they expect compassion at our hands? --
BUT may this year, the glorious eighty-one,
Conclude successful, as it first begun;
This brilliant year their total downfall see,
And what Cornwallis is, may Clinton be.
O COME the time, nor distant be the day,
When our bold navy shall its wings display;
Maun'd by our sons, to seek that barbarous shore,
The wrongs revenging that their fathers bore:
As Samuel hewed the tyrant Agag down,
So hew the wearer of the British crown;
Unpitying, next his hated offspring slay,
Or into foreign lands the fiends convey:
Give them their turn to pine and die in chains,
'Till not one monster of the race remains.
THOU, who resid'st on those thrice happy shores,
Where white robbed peace her envied blessings pours,
Stay, and enjoy the pleasures that she yields;
But come not, stranger, to our wasted fields,
For warlike hosts on every plain appear,
War damps the beauties of the rising year:
Invain the groves their bloomy sweets display;
War's clouded winter chills the charms of May:
Here human blood the trampled harvest stains;
Here bones of men yet whiten all the plains;
Seas teem with dead; and our unhappy shore
Forever blushes with its children's gore.
BUT turn your eyes -- behold the tyrant fall,
And think -- Cornwallis has achieved it all. --
ALL mean revenge Americans disdain,
Often have they proved it, and now prove again;
With nobler fires their generous bosoms glow;
Still in the captive they forget the foe: --
But when a nation takes a wrongful cause,
And hostile turns to heaven's and nature's laws;
When, sacrificing at ambition's shrine,
Kings slight the mandates of the power divine,
And devastation spread o^ every side,
To gratify their malice or their pride,
And send their slaves their projects to fulfill,
To wrest our freedom, or our blood to spill: --
Such to forgive, is virtue too sublime;
For even compassion has been found a crime.
A PROPHET once, for miracles renowned,
Bade Joash smite the arrows on the ground --
Taking the mystic shafts, the prince obeyed,
Thrice smote them on the earth -- and then he stayed --
GRIEVED when he saw full victory denied,
"Six times you should have smote," the prophet cried,
"Then had proud Syria sunk beneath thy power;
"Now thrice you smite her -- but shall smite no more."
CORNWALLIS! thou art ranked among the great;
Such was the will of all-controuling fate.
As mighty men, who lived in days of yore,
Were figured out some centuries before;
So you with them in equal honor join,
Your great precursor's name was Jack Burgoyne!
Like you was he, a man in arms renowned,
Who, hot for conquest, sailed the ocean round;
This, this was he, who scoured the woods for praise,
And burnt down cities Charlestown, near Boston. See his letter on that
occasion.
to describe the blaze!
SO, while on fire, his harp Rome's tyrant strung,
And as the buildings flamed, old Nero sung.
WHO would have guessed the purpose of the fates,
When that proud boaster bowed to conquering Gates! --
Then sung the sisters The Parcae, or Fates, who, according to the Heathen
mythology, were three in number.
as the wheel wen^ round,
(Could we have heard the invigorating sound)
Thus surely did the fatal sisters sing --
"When just four years do this same season bring,
"And in his annual journey, when the sun
"Four times completely shall his circuit run,
"An angel then shall rid you of your fears,
"By binding Satan for a thousand years,
"Shall lash the serpent to the infernal shore,
"To waste the nations, and deceive no more,
"Make wars and blood, and tyranny to cease,
"And hush the fiends of Britain into peace."
JOY to your lordship, and your high descent,
You are the Satan that the sisters meant.
Too soon you found your race of ruin run,
Your conquests ended, and your battles done!
But that to live is better than to die,
And life you chose, though life with infamy,
You should have climbed your loftiest vessel's deck,
And hung a millstone round your halter'd neck --
Then plunged forever to the watery bed,
Hell in your heart, and vengeance on your head.
ALL must confess, that in regard to you,
'Twas wrong to rob the devil of his due --
For Hayne, for Hayne! no death but thine atones;
For thee, Cornwallis, ^ow the gallows groans!
That injured man's, and all the blood you have shed,
That blood shall rest on your devoted head;
Ashamed to live, and yet afraid to die,
Your courage slackened as the foe drew nigh --
Ungrateful wretch, to yield your favorite band
To chains and prisons in a hostile land:
To the wide world your Negro friends to cast,
And leave your Tories to be hanged at last! --
You should have fought with horror and amaze,
'Till scorched to cinders in the cannon blaze,
'Till all your host of Beelzebubs was slain,
Doomed to disgrace no human shape again --
As if from hell this horned host he drew,
Swift from the South the embodied ruffians flew;
Destruction followed at their cloven feet,
*Till you, Fayette, constrained them to retreat,
And held them close, 'till thy famed squadron came,
De Grass, completing their eternal shame.
WHEN the loud cannon's unremitting glare
And red hot balls compelled you to despair,
How could you stand to meet your generous foe?
Did not the ^ight confound your soul with woe? --
In thy great soul what god-like virtues shine,
What inborn greatness, WASHINGTON, is thine! --
Else had no prisoner trod these lands today,
All, with his lordship, had been swept away,
All doomed alike death's vermin to regale,
Not one been left to tell the dreadful tale!
But his own terms the vanquished murderer named --
HE nobly gave the miscreant all he claimed,
And bade Cornwallis, conquered and distressed,
Bear all his torments in his tortured breast.
NOW cursed with life, a foe to man and God,
Like Cain, I drive you to the land of Nod.
He with a brother's blood his hands did stain,
One brother he, you have a thousand slain.
And, O! may heaven affix some public mark
To know Cornwallis -- may he howl and bark! --
On eagle's wings explore your downward flight
To the deep horrors of the darkest night,
Where, wrapped in shade on ocean's utmost bound,
No longer sun, nor moon, nor stars are found;
Where never light her kindling radiance shed,
But the dark comets rove with all their dead See Whiston's Hypothesis.
,
Doomed through the tracks of endless space to run
No more revolving to confound the sun.
SUCH horrid deeds your spotted soul defame
We grieve to think your shape and ours the same!
Enjoy what comfort in this life you can,
The form you have, not feelings of a man;
Haste to the rocks, thou curse to human kind,
There thou may wolves and brother tigers find;
Eternal exile be your righteous doom
And gnash your dragon's teeth in some sequestered gloom:
Such be the end of each relentless foe
Who feels no pity for another's woe --
So may they fall -- even you, though much too late,
Shall curse the day you languish'd to be great;
Haste from the torments of the present life --
Quick, let the halter end thee or the knife;
So may destruction rush with speedy wing,
Low as yourself to drag your cruel king,
His head torn off, his hands, his feet, and all,
Deep in the dust may Dagon's image fall;
His stump alone escape the vengeful steel,
Saved but to grace the gibbet or the wheel.
TO THE MEMORY OF THE Brave AMERICANS, under General GREEN, who fell in the
action of September 8, 1781.
AT Eutaw springs the valiant died:
Their limbs with dust are covered over --
Weep on, ye springs, your tearful tide;
How many heroes are no more!
If in this wreck of ruin, they
Can yet be thought to claim a tear,
O smite thy gentle breast, and say
The friends of freedom slumber here!
Thou, who shall trace this bloody plain,
If goodness rules thy generous breast,
Sigh for the wasted rural reign;
Sigh for the shepherds sunk to rest!
Stranger, their humble gr^ves adorn;
You too may fall, and ask a tear:
It Is not the beauty of the morn
That proves the evening shall be clear --
They saw their injured country's woe;
The flaming town, the wasted field;
Then rushed to meet the insulting foe;
They took the spear -- but left the shield.
Led by thy conquering standards, GREEN,
The Britons they compelled to fly:
None distant viewed the fatal plain,
None grieved in such a cause to die --
But, like the Parthian, famed of old,
Who, flying, still their arrows threw;
These routed Britons, full as bold,
Retreated, and retreating slew.
Now rest in peace, our patriot band;
Though far from nature's limits thrown,
We trust they find a happier land,
A brighter Phoebus of their own.
PLATO, the PHILOSOPHER, TO His FRIEND THEON.
Semel omnibus calcanda via Lethi.

Hor.
WHY, Theon, would thou longer groan
Beneath a weight of years and woe,
Thy youth is lost, thy pleasures flown,
And time proclaims, "'It Is time to go."
To willows sad and weeping yews
With me a while, dear friend, repair,
Nor to the vault thy steps refuse,
Thy constant home shall soon be there.
To summer suns and winter moons
Prepare to bid a long adieu,
Autumnal seasons shall return
And spring shall bloom, but not for you.
Why so perplexed with cares and toil
To rest upon this darksome road,
It Is but a thin, a thirsty soil,
A barren and a bleak abode.
Constrained to dwell with pain and care,
These dregs of life are bought too dear,
It Is better far to die than bear
The torments of another year.
Subjected to perpetual ills
A thousand deaths around us grow,
The frost the tender blossom kills,
And roses wither as they blow.
Cold nipping winds thy fruits assail,
The infant apple seeks the ground,
The peaches fall, the cherries fail,
The grape receives a fatal wound.
The breeze that gently ought to blow
Swells to a storm and rends the main,
The sun that charmed the grass to grow
Turns hostile and consumes the plain;
The mountains waste, the shores decay,
On^e purling streams are dead and dry --
'Twas nature's work -- it is nature's play,
And nature says, that all must die.
Yon' flaming lamp, the source of light,
In chaos dark shall shroud his beam
And leave the world to mo^her night,
A farce, a phantom, or a dream.
What now is young must soon be old,
Whatever we love, we soon must leave,
It Is now too hot, it is now too cold --
To live is nothing but to grieve.
How bright the morn her course begun,
No mists bedimm'd the solar sphere --
The clouds arise -- they shade the sun,
For nothing can be constant here.
Now hope the longing soul employs,
In expectation we are blessed;
But soon the airy phantom flies,
For, lo! the treasure is possessed.
Those monarchs proud that havoc spread,
(While pensive nature dropped a tear)
Those monarchs have to darkness fled
And ruin bounds their mad career.
The grandeur of this earthly round,
Where Theon would forever be,
^ but a name, is but a sound --
Mere emptiness and vanity.
Give me the stars, give me the skies,
Give me the heaven's remotest sphere,
Above these gloomy scenes to rise
Of desolation and despair.
Those native fires that warmed the mind
Now languid grown too dimly glow,
Joy has to grief the heart resigned
And love itself is changed to woe.
The joys of wine are all you boast,
These for a moment damp thy pain;
The gleam is over, the charm is lost --
And darkness clouds the soul again.
Then seek no more for bliss below
Where real bliss can never be found,
Aspire where sweeter blossoms blow
And fairer flowers bedeck the ground;
Where plants of life the plains invest
And green eternal crowns the year,
The little god within thy breast
Is weary of hi^ mansion here.
Like Phosphor clad in bright array
His height meridian to regain
He can, nor will no longer stay
To shiver on a frozen plain.
Life's journey past, for death prepare,
It Is but the freedom of the mind,
Jove made us mortal -- his we are,
To Jove, dear Theon, be resigned.
PROLOGUE.
Written to a Theatrical Entertainment in Philadelphia, Dec. 1781.
WARS, bloody wars and hostile Britain's rage
Have banished long the pleasures of the stage;
From the gay painted scene compelled to part,
(Forgot the melting language of the heart)
Constrained to shun the bold theatric show,
To act long tragedies of real woe,
Heroes, once more attend the comic muse;
Forget our failings, and our faults excuse.
IN that fine language is our fable dressed
Which still unrivaled reigns over all the rest;
Of foreign courts the study and the pride,
Who to know this abandon all beside;
Bold, though polite, and ever sure to please;
Correct with grace, and elegant with ease;
Soft from the lips its easy accents roll,
Formed to delight and captivate the soul:
In this Eugenia tells her easy lay,
The brilliant work of courtly Beaumarchais:
In this Racine, Voltaire, and Boileau sung,
The noblest poets in the noblest tongue.
IF the soft story in our play expressed
Can give a moment's pleasure to your breast,
To you, GREAT SIR! Addressed to his excellency General Washington.
we must be proud to say
That moment's pleasure shall our pains repay:
Returned from conquest and from glorious toils,
From armies captur'd and unnumber'd spoils;
Ere yet again, with generous France allied,
You rush to battle, humbling British pride;
While arts of peace thy kind protection share,
O let the Muses claim an equal care.
You bade us first our future greatness see,
Inspired by you, we languish'd to be free;
Even here where freedom lately sat distressed,
See, a new Athens rising in the west!
Fair science blooms where tyrants reigned before,
Red war reluctant leaves our ravaged shore --
Illustrious hero, may you live to see
These new republics powerful, great, and free;
Peace, heaven born peace, over spacious regions spread,
While discord, sinking, veils her ghastly head.
STANZAS OCCASIONED By the Ruins of a Country INN, unroofed and blown down in a
Storm.
WHERE now these mingled ruins ly
A temple once to Bacchus rose,
^eneath whose roof, aspiring high,
Full many a guest forgot his woes*
No more this dome, by tempests torn,
Affords a social safe retreat;
But ravens here, with eye forlorn,
And clustering batts henceforth shall meet.
The Priestess of this ruined shrine,
Unable to survive the stroke,
Presents no more the ruddy wine,
Her glasses gone, her china broke.
The friendly Host, whose social hand
Acco^ted strangers at the door,
Has left at length his wonted stand,
And greets the weary guest no more.
Old creeping time, that brings decay,
Might yet have spared these mouldering walls,
Alike beneath whose potent sway
A temple or a ^aver^ falls.
Is this the place where mirth and joy,
Coy nymphs and sprightly lads were found?
Alas! no more the nymphs are coy,
No more the flowing bow^s go round.
Is this the place where festive song
Deceived the wint'ry hours away?
No more the swains the tune prolong,
No more the maidens join the lay.
Is this the place where Chloe slept
In downy beds of blue and green?
Dame Nature here no vigils kept,
No cold unfeeling guards were seen.
It Is gone! -- and Chloe tempts no more,
Deep, unrelenting silence reigns;
Of all that pleased, that charmed before,
The tottering chimney scarce remains!
Ye tyrant winds! whose ruffian blast
From locks and hinges rent the doo^,
And all the roof to ruin cast,
The roof that sheltered us before,
Your wrath appeased, I pray be kind
If Mopsus should the dome renew;
That we again may qua^t his wine,
Again collect our jovial crew.
THE ROYAL ADVENTURER.
PRINCE William of the Brunswick race,
To witness George's sad disgrace
The Royal Lad came over
Rebels to kill by Right Divine --
Derived from that illustrious line
The beggars of Hanover.
So many chiefs got broken pates
In vanquishing the rebel States,
So many nobles fell,
That George the Third in passion cried,
"Our royal blood must now be tried;
"'It Is that must break the spell:
"To you (the fat pot-valiant SWINE
"To Digby said) dear friend of mine,
"To you I trust my boy.
"The rebel tribes shall quake with fears,
"Rebellion die when he appears;
"My Tories leap with joy."
So said, so done -- the boy was sent,
But never reached the continent,
An island held him fast --
Yet there his friends danced rigadoons,
The Hessians sung in High Dutch tunes
"Prince William's come at last."
"Prince William comes!" -- the Briton cry^d --
"The glory of our empire wide
"Shall now be soon restored --
"Our monarch is in William seen,
"He is the image of our queen,
"Let William be adored!"
The Tories came with long address,
With poems groaned the Royal press,
And all in William's praise --
The boy astonished looked about
To find their vast dominions out,
Then answered in amaze,
"Where all your empire wide can be,
"Friends, for my soul I cannot see:
"'It Is but an empty name;
"Three wasted islands and a town
"In rubbish buried -- half burnt down,
"Is all that we can claim:
"I am of royal birth, '^is true,
"But what, alas! can princes do,
"No armies to command?
"Cornwallis conquered and distressed --
"Sir Henry Clinton grown a jest --
"I curse -- and leave the land."
LORD DUNMORE's PETITION TO THE Legislature of VIRGINIA.
HUMBLY SHOWS,
THAT a silly old fellow, much noted of yore,
And known by the name of John, earl of Dunmore,
Has again ventured over to visit your shore.
The reason of this he begs leave to explain --
In England they said you were conquered and slain,
(But the devil take him that believes them again) --
So, hearing that most of you rebels were dead,
That some had submitted, and others had fled,
I mustered my tories, myself at their head,
And over we scudded, our hearts full of glee,
As merry as ever poor devils could be,
Our ancient dominion, Virginia to see;
Our shoe boys, and tars, and the very cook's mate
Already conceived he possessed an estate,
And the tories no longer were cursing their fate.
Myself, the don Quixote, and each of the crew,
Like Sancho, had islands and empires in view --
They were captains and knights, and the devil knows who:
But now, to our sorrow, disgrace, and surprise,
No longer deceived by the Father of Lies, The Printer of the Royal Gaz^tte.

We hear with our ears, and we see with our eyes: --
I have therefore to make you a modest request,
(And I Am sure in my mind it will be for the best)
Admit me again to your mansions of rest.
There are Eden, and Martin, and Franklin and Tryon,
All waiting to see you submit to the Lion,
And may wait till the devil is king of Mount Sion: --
Though a brute and a dunce, like the rest of the clan,
I can govern as well as most Englishmen can;
And if I Am a drunkard, I still am a man:
I missed it some how in comparing my notes,
Or six years ago I had joined with your votes; 1775.
Not aided the negroes in cutting your throats.
Although with so many hard names I was branded,
I hope you will believe, (as you will if you're candid)
That I only performed what my master commanded.
Give me lands, whores and dice, and you still may be free;
Let who will be master, we sha'n't disagree;
If King or if Congress -- no matter to me; --
I hope you will send me an answer straightway,
For it is plain that at Charleston we cannot long stay --
And your humble petitioner ever shall pray.
DUNMORE.
CHARLESTON, Jan. 6, 1782.
EPIGRAM OCCASIONED By the Title of Rivington's ROYAL GAZETTE being scarcely
legible.
SAYS Satan to Jemmy, "I hold you a bet
"That you mean to abandon our Royal Gazette,
"Or, between you and me, you would manage things better
"Than the Title to print on so damned a Letter.
"Now, being connected so long in the art,
"It would not be prudent at present to part;
"And people perhaps would be frightened, and fret
"If the devil alone carried on the Gazette."
Says Jemmy to Satan (by way of a wipe)
"Who gives me the matter should furnish the type;
"And why you find fault I can scarcely divine,
"For the types, like the printer, are certainly thine.
"'It Is yours to deceive with the semblance of truth,
"Thou friend of my age, and thou guide of my youth!
"But to prosper, pray send me some further supplies,
"A set of new Types, and a set of new Lies."
February 13.
LINES OCCASIONED By Mr. Rivington's New Titular Types to his ROYAL GAZETTE, of
February 27, 1782.
WELL -- now (said the devil) it looks something better
Your title is struck on a charming new Letter:
Last night in the dark, as I gave it a squint,
I saw my dear partner had taken the hint.
I EVER surmised (though 'twas doubted by some)
That the old types were shadows of substance to come
But if the NEW LETTER is pregnant with charms,
It grieves me to think of those cursed King's Arms!
The Dieu et mon droit (his God and his right)
Is so dim, that I hardly know what is meant by it;
The paws of the Lion can scarcely be seen,
And the Unicorn's guts are most shamefully lean!
The Crown is so worn of your master the Despot,
That I hardly know whether it is a crown or a pisspot:
When I rub up my day-lights, and look very sharp
I just can distinguish the Irishman's Harp:
Another device appears rather silly,
Alas! it is only the shade of the LILLY!
For the honor of George, and the fame of our nation,
Pray give his escutcheons a rectification --
Or I know what I know, (and I Am a queer shaver)
Of HIM and his Arms I Will be the In-grave-r.
ON MR. RIVINGTON's New Engraved KING'S ARMS TO His ROYAL GAZETTE.
FROM the regions of night, with his head in a sack,
Ascended a person accoutred in black,
And upward directing his circular eye whites,
(Like the Jure-divino political Levites)
And leaning his elbow on Rivington's shelf,
While the printer was busy, thus mused with himself,
"My mandates are fully complied with at last,
"New ARMS are engraved and new letters are cast;
"I therefore determine and freely accord,
"This servant of mine shall receive his reward."
Then turning about, to the printer he said,
"Who late was my servant shall now be my Aid;
"Since under my banners so bravely you fight,
"Kneel down! -- for your merits I dubb you a KNIGHT,
"From a passive subalter^ I bid you to rise
"The INVENTOR as well as the PRINTER of LIES."
A SPEECH THAT Should have been spoken by the King of the Island of Britain to
his Parliament.
MY lords, I can hardly from weeping refrain,
When I think of this year and its cursed campaign;
But still it is folly to whine and to grieve,
For things will yet alter, I hope and believe.
Of the four southern States we again are bereaved,
They were just in our grasp (or I Am sadly deceived):
There are wizards and witches that dwell in those lands,
For the moment we gain them, they slip from our hands.
Our prospects at present most gloomy appear;
Cornwallis returns with a flea in his ear,
Sir Henry is sick of his station we know --
And Amherst* though pressed, is unwilling to go.
The HERO Johnstone.
that steered for the cape of Good Hope
With Monsieur Suffrein was unable to cope --
Many months are elapsed, yet his task is to do --
To conquer the cape, and to conq^^r Peru:
When his squadron at Portsmouth (...) went to equip
He promised great things from his FIFTY-GUN SHIP;
But let him alone -- while he knows which is which,
He Will not be so ready to " die in a ditch."
This session, I thought to have told you thus much
"A treaty concluded, and peace with the Dutch -- "
But as stubborn as ever, they vapor and brag,
And sail by my nose with the Prussian flag.
The empress refuses to join on our side,
As yet with the Indians we are only allied:
(Though such an alliance is rather improper,
For we English are white, but their color is copper.)
The Irish, I fear, have some mischief in view;
They ever have been a most troublesome crew --
If a truce or a treaty hereafter be made,
They shall pay very dear for their present free trade.
Dame Fortune I think has our standards forsaken,
For Tobago, they say, by Frenchmen is taken:
Minorca's besieged -- and as to Gibraltar,
By Jove if it is taken I Will take to the halter.
It makes me so wroth, I could scold like Xantippo
When I think of our losses along Missisippi --
And see in the Indies that horrible Hyder
His conquests extending still wider and wider.
'Twixt Washington, Hyder, Don Galvez, De Grass,
By my soul we are brought to a very fine pass --
When we have reason to hope new battles are won
A packet arrives -- and an army's undone! --
In the (...) this scene of dismay and distress
What is best to be done, is not easy to guess,
For things may go wrong though we plan them aright,
And blows they must look for, whose trade is to fight.
In regard to the rebels, it is my decree
That dependent on Britain they ever shall be;
Or I Have captains and hosts that will fly at my nod
And slaughter them all -- by the blessing of God.
But if they succeed, as they are likely to do,
Our neighbors must part with their colonies too:
Let them laugh and be merry, and make us their jest,
When La Plata revolts, we shall laugh with the rest --
It Is true that the journey to cast^e St. Juan
Was a project that brought the projectors to ruin;
But still, my dear lords, I would have you reflect
Who nothing do venture can nothing expect.
If the Commons agree to afford me new treasures,
My sentence once more is for vigorous measures:
Accustomed so long to h^ad winds and bad weather,
Let us conquer or go to the devil together.
RIVINGTON's LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT.
[A True Copy from the Records.]
SINCE life is uncertain, and no one can say,
How soon we may go, or how long we shall stay,
Methinks he is wisest who soonest prepares,
And settles in season his worldly affairs:
Some folks are so weak they can scarce avoid crying,
And think when they are making their wills they are dying;
It Is surely a serious employment -- but still,
Who ever died the sooner for making his will?
Let others be sad when their lives they review,
But I know whom I Have served -- and him faithfully too,
And though it may seem a fanatical story
He often has showed me a glimpse of his glory.
IMPRIMIS, my carcass I give and devise
To be made into cakes of a moderate size,
To nourish those tories whose spirits may droop,
And serve the king's army with Portable Soup.
Unless I mistake, in the scriptures we read
That "worms on the dead shall deliciously feed,"
The scripture stands true -- and that I am firm in,
For what are our tories and soldiers but vermin? --
This soup of soups cannot be called that of beef,
And this may to some be a matter of grief:
But I am certain the BULL would occasion a laugh,
That beef Portable Soup should be made of a CALF.
To the king, my dear master, I give a full set^
(In volumes bound up) of the Royal Gazette,
In which he will find the vast record contained
Of provinces conquered and victories gained.
As to Arnold the traitor and Satan his brother
I beg they will also accept of another;
And this shall be bound in Morocco red leathe^,
Provided they will read it like brothers together.
But if Arnold should die, it is another affair,
Then Satan surviving shall be the sole heir;
He often has told me he thought it quite clever,
So to him and his heirs I bequeath it forever.
I know there are some (that would fain be thought wise)
Who say my Gazette is the record of lies;
In answer to this, I shall only reply --
All the choice that I had was to starve or to ^^e.
My fiddles, my flutes, French horns and guittars
I leave to our heroes now weary of wars --
To the wars of the stage they more boldly advance,
The captains shall play and the soldiers shall dance*
To Si^ Henry Clinton, his use and behoof,
I leave my French brandy of very high proof;
It will give him fresh spirits for battle and slaughter
And make him feel bolder by land and by water*
Yet I caution the knight, for fear he do wrong
It Is avaunt la viande et apres le poisson Before flesh and after fish -- See
the Royal Gazette*
--
It will strengthen his stomach, prevent it from turning,
And digest the affront of his effigy burning.
To Baron Knyphausen, his heirs and assigns,
I bequeath my old h^^k, and my Burgundy wines,
To a true Hessian drunkard no liquors are sweeter,
And I know the old man is no foe to the creature.
To a general, my namesake, General James Robertson.
I give and dispose
Of a purse full of clipped, light, sweated half joes;
I hereby desire him to take back his trash,
And return me my HANNAY'S infallible WASH. Used in the venereal disease.

My chessmen and tables, and other such chattels
I give to Cornwallis renowned in battles:
By moving of these (not tracing the map)
He Will explain to the king how he got in the TRAP.
To good David Mathews (among other slops)
I give my whole cargo of Maredant's drops,
If they cannot do all, they may cure him in part,
And scatter the poison that cankers his heart:
Provided, however, and nevertheless,
That what other estate I enjoy and possess
At the time of my death (if it be not then sold)
Shall remain to the Tories TO HAVE AND TO HOLD.
As I thus have bequeathed them both carcass and fleece,
The least they can do is to wait my decease;
But to give them what substance I have, ere I die,
And be eat up with vermin, while living -- not I --
In WITNESS whereof (though no ailment I feel)
Hereunto I set both my hand and my seal;
(As the law says) in presence of witnesses twain,
'Squire John C^ghill Knap, A Notary Public in New York.
and brother Hugh ^aine.
JAMES RIVINGTON, (L. S.)
NEW YORK, Feb. 20, 1782.
A PROPHECY.
Written 17^2.
WHEN a certain great king, whose initial is G.
Shall force stamps upon paper, and folks to drink tea;
When these folks burn his tea, and stamped paper, like stubble,
You may guess that this king is then coming to trouble.
But when a petition he treads under his feet,
And sends over the ocean an army and fleet;
When that army, half-starved, and frantic with rage,
Shall be cooped up with a leader whose name rhymes to cage,
When that leader goes home dejected and sad,
You may then be assured the king's prospects are bad:
But when B and C with their armies are taken,
This king will do well if he saves his own bacon.
In the year seventeen hundred and eighty and two,
A stroke he shall get that will make him look blue;
In the year^ eighty-three, eighty-four, eighty-five,
You hardly shall know that the king is alive;
In the year eighty-six the affair will be over,
And he shall eat turnips that grow in Hanover.
The face of the lion shall then become pale,
He shall yield fifteen teeth, and be sheer'd of his tail.
O king, my dear king, you shall be very sore,
The Stars and the Lilly shall run you on shore,
And your lion shall growl, but never bite more.
THE POLITICAL BALANCE; OR, THE Fates of BRITAIN and AMERICA compared.
A TALE.
(...) Fates, in Homer's style, I show,
And bring contending Gods once more to view.

AS Jove the Olympian (who both I and you know,
Was brother to Neptune, and husband to Jun^)
Was lately reviewing his papers of state,
He happened to light on the records of Fate:
In Alphabet order this volume was written --
So he opened at B for the article Britain --
She struggles so well, said the god, I will see
What the sisters in Pluto's dominions decree.
And first on the top of a column he read
"Of a king with a mighty soft place in his head,
"Who should join in his temper the ass and the mule,
"The third of his name, and by far the worst fool:
"His reign shall be famous for multiplication,
"The sire and the king of a whe^p generation:
"But such is the will and the purpose of sat,
"For each child he begets he shall forfeit a s^ate:
"In the course of events, he shall find to his cost
"That he cannot regain what he foolishly lost;
"Of the nations around he shall be the derision,
"And know by experience the Rule of Division."
So Jupiter read -- a god of first rank --
And still had read on -- but he came to a bla^k:
For the Fates had neglected the rest to reveal --
They either forgot it or chose to conceal:
When a leaf is torn out, or a blot on a page
That pleases our fancy, we fly in a rage --
So, curious to know what the Fates would say next,
No wonder if Jove, disappointed, wa^ vexed.
But still as true genius not frequently fails,
He glanced at the V^rgin, and thought of the S^ales*
And said, "To determine the will of the fates,
"One scale shall weigh Britain, the other the States."
Then turning to Vulcan, his maker of thunder,
Said he, "My dear Vulcan, I pray you look yonder,
"Those creatures are tearing each other to pieces,
"And instead of abating, the carnage increases.
"Now, as you are a blacksmith, and lusty stout ham-eater,
"You must make me a globe of a shorter diameter;
"The world in abridgment, and just as it stands
"With all its proportions of waters and lands;
"But its various divisions m^st so be designed,
"That I can unhinge it whenever I Have a mind --
"How else should I know what the portions will weigh,
"Or which of the combatants carry the day?"
Old Vulcan complied, (we have no reason to doubt it)
So he put on his ^pron and stra^t went about it --
Made center, and circles as round as a pancake,
And here the Pacific, and there the Atlantic.
An axis he hammered, whose ends were the poles,
(On which the whole body perpetually (...))
A brazen meridian he added to these,
On which were engraven twice ninety degrees:
I am sure you had ^ugh'd to have seen hi^ droll attitude,
When he bent round the surface the circles of latitude,
The zones and the tropic^, meridians, equator,
And other fine things that are drawn on salt water.
Away to the southward (instructed by Pallas)
He placed in the ocean the Terra Australis,
New Holland, New Guinea, and so of the rest --
America lay by herself in the west:
From the regions where winter eternally reigns,
To the climes of Peru he extended her plains;
Dark groves, and the zones did her bosom adorn,
And the Cr^siers, Stars, in the form of a cross, which mark the South Pole in
southern latitudes.
new burnished, he hung at cape Horn.
The weight of two oceans she bore on her sides,
With all their convulsions of tempests and tides;
Vast lakes on her surface did fearfully roll,
And the ice from her rivers surrounded the pole.
Then Europe and Asia he northward extended,
Where under the Arctic with Zembla they ended;
The length of these regions he took with his garters,
(Including Siberia, the land of the Tartars).
In the African clime (where the cocoa nut tree grows)
He laid down the deserts, and even the Negroes,
The shores by the waves of four oceans embraced,
And elephants strolling about in the waste.
In forming East India, he had a wide scope,
Beginning his work at the cape of Good Hope;
Then eastward of that he continued his plan,
'Till he came to the empire and isles of Japan.
Adjacent to Europe he struck up an island,
(One part of it low, but the other was high land)
With many a comical creature upon it,
And one wore a hat, and another a bonnet.
Like emmits or ants in a fine summer's day,
They ^ver were marching in battle array,
Or skipping about on the face of the brine,
Like witches in egg-shells (their ships of the line).
These poor little creatures were all in a flame,
To the lands of America urging their claim,
Still biting, or stinging, or spreading their sails;
(For Vulcan had formed them with stings in their tails).
So poor and so lean, you might count all their ribs, Their national debt being
above L.200,000,000 ^terling.

Yet were so enraptured with crackers and squibs,
That Vulcan with laughter almost split asunder,
"Because they imagined their crackers were thunder."
Due westward from these, with a channel between,
A servant to slaves Hibernia was seen,
Once crowded with monarchs, and high in renown,
But all she retained was the Harp and the Crown!
Her genius, a female, reclined in the shade,
And, merely for music, so mournfully played,
That Jove was uneasy to hear her complain,
And ordered his blacksmith to loosen her chain:
Then tipped her a wink, saying, "Now in your time*
"(To rebel is the sin, to revolt is no crime)
"When your fetters are off, if you will not be free
"Be a slave if you will, but complain not to me."
But finding her timid, he cried in a rage --
"Though the doors are flung open, she stays in the cage!
"Subservient to Britain then let her remain,
"And her freedom shall be, but the length of her chain."
At length, to discourage all stupid pretensions,
Jove looked at the globe, and approved its dimensions,
And cried in a transport -- "Why! what have we here!
"Friend Vulcan, it is a most beautiful sphere!
"Now while I am busy in taking apart
"This globe that is formed with such exquisite art,
"Go, Hermes, to Libra, (you're one of her gallants)
"And ask, in my name, for the loan of her Balance."
Away posted Hermes as swift as the gales,
And as swiftly returned with the ponderous Scales,
And hung them aloft to a beam in the air,
So equally poised they had turned with a hair.
Now Jove to COLUMBIA his shoulders applied,
But aiming to lift her, his strength the defied --
Then turning about to their godships, he says --
"A BODY SO VAST is not easy to raise;
"But if you assist me, I still have a notion
"Our f^rces united can put her in motion,
"And swing her aloft, (though alone I might fail)
"And place her, in spite of her bulk, in our scale;
"If six years together the Congress have strove,
"And more than "Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet." Virg.
divided the empire with Jove; George III.

"With a JOVE like myself, who am ten times as great,
"You can join, like their soldiers, to heave up this weight."
So to it they went, with handspikes and levers,
And upward she sprung, with her mountains and rivers!
Rocks, cities, and islands, deep waters and shallows,
Ships, armies, and forests, high heads and fine fellows:
"Stick to it!" cries Jove -- "now heave one and all!
"At least we are lifting " one eighth of the ball!"
"If backward she tumbles -- then trouble begins,
"And then have a care, my dear boys, of your shins!"
When gods are determined what project can fail?
So they gave a fresh shove and she mounted the scale;
Suspended aloft, Jove viewed her with awe --
And the gods, American soldiers.
for their pay, had a hearty -- huzza!
But Neptune Minority in Parliament.
bawled out -- "Why Jove you're a noddy,
"Is Britain sufficient to poise that vast body?
"'It Is nonsense such castles to build in the air --
"As well might an oyster with Britain compare."
"Away to your waters, you blustering bully,"
Said Jove, "or I Will make you repent of your folly,
"Is Jupiter, sir, to be tutored by you? --
"Get out of my sight, for I know what I do!" --
Then searching about with his fingers for Britain,
Thought he, "This same island I cannot well hit on;
"The devil take him who first called her the GREAT:
"If she was -- she is vastly diminished of late!"
Like a man that is searching his thigh for a flea,
He peeped and he fumbl^d, but nothing could see;
At last he exclaimed -- "I am surely upon it --
"I think I have hold of a highlander's bonnet."
But finding his error he said with a sigh,
"This bonnet is only the island of Sky! An ^sland on the north-west of
Scotland.
"
So away to his namesake the PLANET he goes,
And borrowed two moons to hang on his nose.
Through these, as through glasses, he saw her quite clear,
And in raptures cried out -- "I have found her -- she is here!
"If this be not Britain, then call me an ass,
"She looks like a gem in an ocean of glass.
"But, faith, she is so small I must mind how I shake her;
"In a box I Will enclose her, for fear I should break her:
"Though a god, I might suffer for being aggressor,
"Since scorpions and ^ipers and hornets possess her;
"The white cliffs of Albion are full in my view --
"And the hills of Plinlimmon I think I could show --
"But, Vulcan, inform me what creatures are these,
"That smell so of onions and garlic and cheese?"
Old Vulcan replied -- "Odds splutter a nails!
"Why, these are the Welsh, and the country is Wales!
"When Taffy is vexed, no devil is ruder --
"Take care how you handle the offspring of TUDOR!
"On the crags of the mountains hur living hur seeks,
"Hur country is planted with garlic and leeks;
"So great is hur choler, beware how you teize hur,
"For these are the Britons -- unconquered -- by Caesar."
Jove peeped through his moons, and examined their features,
And said, "By my truth, they are wonderful creatures,
"The beards are so long that encircle their throats,
"That (unless they are Welchmen) I swear they are goats:
"But now, my dear Juno, pray give me my mittens,
"(The insects I am going to handle are Britons)
"I Will draw up their isle with a finger and thumb,
"As the doctor extracts an old tooth from your gum."
Then he raised her aloft -- but, to shorten our tale,
She looked like a CLOD in the opposite s^ale --
Britannia so small, and Columbia so large --
A ship of first rate, and a ferryman's barge!
Cried Pallas to Vulcan, "Why, Jove's in a dream --
"Observe how he watches the turn of the beam!
"Was ever a mountain outweigh'd by a grain?
"Or what is a drop when compared to the main?"
But Momus alleged -- "In my humble opinion,
"You should add to Great Britain her foreign dominion,
"When this is appended, perhaps she will rise,
"And equal her rival in weight and in size."
"Alas!" said the monarch, "your project is vain,
"But little is left of her foreign domain;
"And, scattered about in the liquid expanse,
"That little is left to the mercy of France;
"However, we'll lift them, and give her fair play" --
And soon in the s^ale with their mistress they lay;
But the gods were confounded and struck with surprise,
And Vulcan could hardly believe his own eyes!
For (such was the purpose and guidance of fate)
Her foreign dominions diminished her weight --
By which it appeared, to Britain's disaster,
Her foreign possessions were changing their master.
Then as he replac'd them, said Jove with a smile --
"Columbia shall never be ruled by an isle --
"But vapors and darkness around her shall rise,
"And tempests conceal her awhile from our eyes;
"So locusts in Egypt their squadrons display,
"And rising disfigure the face of the day;
"So the moon at her full has a frequent eclipse,
"And the sun in the ocean diurnally dips.
"Then cease your endeavors, ye vermin of Britain --
"(And here in derision their island he spit on)
"'It Is madness to seek what you never can find,
"Or think of uniting what nature disjoined;
"But still you may flutter awhile with your wings
"And spit out your venom, and brandish your stings,
"Your hearts are as black, and as bitter as gall,
"A curse to yourselves, and a blot on the BALL."
SIR HARRY's CALL.
COME gentlemen Tories, firm, loyal and true,
Here are axes and shovels, and something to do!
For the sake of our king,
Come, labor and sing;
You left all you had for his honor and glory,
And he will remember the suffering Tory:
We have, it is true,
Some small work to do;
But here is for your pay
Twelve coppers a day,
And never regard what the rebels may say,
But throw off your jerkin^ and labor away.
To raise up the rampart, and pile up the wall,
To pull down old houses and dig the canal,
To build and destroy --
Be this your employ,
In the day time to work at our fortifications,
And steal in the night from the rebels your rations*
The king wants your aid
Not empty parade;
Advance to your places
Ye men of long faces,
Nor ponder too much o^ your former disgraces,
This year, I presume, will quite alter your cases.
Attend, at the call of the fifer and drummer,
The French and the rebels are coming next summer,
And forts we must build
Though Tor^es are killed --
Then courage, my jockies, and work for your king,
For if you are taken no doubt you will swing --
If York we can hold
I Will have you enrolled;
And after you're dead
Your names shall be read
As who for their monarch both labored and bled,
And ventured their necks for their beef and their br^az.
It Is an honor to serve the bravest of nations,
And be left to be hanged in their capitulations --
Then scour up your mortars
And stand to your quarters,
It Is nonsense for Tories in battle to run,
They never need fear sword, halberd, or gun;
Their hearts should not fail 'em,
No ba^ls will assail 'em,
Forget your disgraces
And shorten your ^aces,
For it is true as the gospel, believe it or not,
Who are born to be hanged will never be shot.
A DIALOGUE, At HYDE-PARK Corner.
Burgoyne. LET those who will, be proud and sneer,
And call you an unwelcome peer,
But I am glad to see you here:
The prince that fills the British throne,
Unless successful, honors none;
Poor Jack Burgoyne! -- you're not alone.

Cornwallis. Thy ships, (...) ^rasse, have caused my grie^ --
T^ rebel (...) their relief
There never (...) happier chief:
In fame's black page it shall be re^d.
By Gallic arms my soldiers ble^^ --
The rebels ^hine in triumph led.

Burgoyne. Our fortunes various forms assume,
Had I been blessed with elbow-room,
I might have found a different doom;
But you, that conquered far and wide,
In little Yo^k thought fit to hide,
The subject ocean at your side.

Cornwallis. And yet no force had gained the post --
Not Washington, his country's boast,
Nor Rochambeau with all his host,
Nor all the Gallic fleet's parade --
Had Clinton struggled in my aid,
And Sammy Graves been not afraid.

Burgoyne. For head knocked off, or broken bones,
Or mangled corpse, no price atones;
Nor all that prattling rumo^^ ^aye,
Nor all the piles that art can raise,
The poet's or the person^s praise.

Cornwallis. Though I am brave, as well as you,
Ye^ still I think your notion true:
Dear brother Jack, our toils are over --
With foreign conquests plagued no more,
We'll stay and watch our native shore.

ON THE LATE Royal Sloop of War, Genesis MONK, [Formerly the WASHINGTON] Mounting
Six quarter deck* Wooden Guns.
April 24, 1782.
WHEN the Washington ship by the English was beat,
They sent her to England to show their great feat,
And Sandwich straightway, as a proof of his ^punk,
Dashed out her old name, and called her the Monk.
"This Monk hated rebels, said Sandy -- 'od rot them --
"So heave her down quickly, and copper her bottom;
"With the sloops of our navy we'll have her enrolled,
"And manned with picked sailors to make her feel bold.
"To show that our king is both valiant and good,
"Some guns shall be iron, and others be wood,
"And in truth (though I wish not the secret to spread)
"Her guns should be wooden, as well as his head."
TRUTH ANTICIPATED.
Written April, 1782.
WHAT weighty events have of late come to pass,
No less than the capture of Monsieur de Grass!
His majesty's Printer has told it for true,
As we had it from him, so we give it to you.
Many folks of discernment the story believed,
And the devil himself it at first had deceived,
Had it not been that Satan imported the stuff,
And signed it George Rodney, for that was enough.
Said Satan to Jemmy, "Let Us give them the whappers --
"Some news I have got that will bring in the coppers,
"And truth it shall be, though I pass it for lies,
"And making a page of your Newspapes size*
"A wide field is open to favor my plan,
"And the rebels may prove that I lie -- if they can;
"Since they jested and laughed at our lying before,
"Let it pass for a lie, to torment them the more. --
"My wings are yet wet with the West India dew,
"And Rodney I left, to come hither to you,
"I left him bedevil'd with brimstone and smoke,
"The French in distress, and their armament broke.
"For news so delightful, with heart and with voice
"The Tories of every degree shall rejoice;
"With charcoal and sulphur shall utter their joy
"'Till they all get as black as they paint the old B^y."
Thus, pleased with the motion, each cutting a caper,
Down they sat at the table, with pen, ink, and paper;
In less than five minutes the matter was stated,
And Jemmy turned scribe, while Satan dictated.
"Begin (said the devil) in the form of a Letter,
"(If you call it true copy, it is so much the better)
"Make Rodney assert that he met the French flee^,
"Engag^d 'em, and gave 'em a total defeat.
"But the better to vamp up a snow of reality,
"The tale must be told with circumstantiality,
"What vessels were conquered by Britain's bold sons,
"Their quotas of men, and their number of guns.
"There Is the Ville de Paris -- one hundred and ten --
"Write down, that Geo* Rodney has killed half her men,
"That her hull and her rigging are shattered and shaken,
"Her flag humbled down, and her admiral taken.
" Le Caesar, it is true, is a seventy-four,
"But Le Ville de Paris was thirty-six more;
"With a gray goose's quill if that ship we did seize on,
"Le Caesar must fall, or I Will know what is the reason.
"The next that I fix on to take is Le Hector,
"(Her name may be Trojan, but shall not protect her)
"Don't faulter, dear comrade, and look like a goose,
"If we have taken these three, we can take Glori^use.
"The last mentioned ship runs their loss up to ^our,
" Le Diadem sunk, shall make it one more;
"And now, for the sake of round numbers, dear cousin,
"Write Ardent, and then we have just half-a-dozen!"
Jemmy smiled at the notion, and whispered, "O fie!
"Indeed it is a shame to persuade one to lie" --
But Satan replied -- "Consider, my son,
"I am prince of the winds, and have seen what is done:
"With a conquest, like this, how bright we shall shine!
"That Rodney has taken six ships of the Line
"Will be in your paper a brilliant affair,
"How the tories will laugh, and the rebels will swear!
"But farther, dear Jemmy, make Rodney to say,
" If the sun two hours longer had held out the day,
" The rest were so beaten, so baisted, so tore,
" He had taken them ALL, and he knew not but MORE."
So the partners broke up as good friends as they met,
And soon it was all in the Royal Gazette;
The Tories rejoiced at the very good news,
And said, There Is no fear we shall die in our shoes.
Now let us give credit to Jemmy, forsooth,
Since once in a way he has hit on the truth,
If again he returns to his practice of lies,
He hardly reflects where he will go when he dies.
But still, when he dies, let it never be said
That he rests in his grave with no verse at his head;
But furnish, ye poets, some short epitaph,
And something like this, that the reader may laugh:
HERE lies a King's Printer, we needn't say who:
There is reason to think that he tells what is true;
But if he lies here, it is not over-strange,
His present position is but a small change,
So, reader, pass on -- it is a folly to sigh,
For all his life long he did little but lie.
THE SAILOR's INVITATION.
COME, all ye lads that know no fear,
To wealth and honor we will steer
In the Hyder Ally privateer,
Commanded by bold Barney.
She Is new and true, and tight and sound,
Well rigged aloft, and all well found --
Come and be with laurel crowned,
Away -- and leave your lasses.
Accept our terms without delay,
And make your fortunes while you may,
Such offers are not every day
In the power of the jolly sailor.
Success and fame attend the brave,
But death the coward and the slave,
Who fears to plough the Atlantic wave,
To seek out bold invaders.
Come, then, and take a cruising bout,
Our ship sails well, there is no doubt,
She has been tried both in and out,
And answers expectation.
Let no proud foes that Britain bore
Distress our trade, insult our shore --
Teach them to know their reign is over,
Bold Philadelphia sailors!
We'll teach them how to sail so near,
Or to venture on the Delaware,
When we in warlike trim appear,
And cruise without Henlopen.
Who cannot wounds and battles dare
Shall never clasp the blooming fair;
The brave alone their charms shall share,
The brave are their protectors.
With hand and heart united all,
Prepared to conquer or to fall,
Attend, my lads, to honor's call,
Embark in our Hyder Ally.
From an eastern prince she takes her name,
Who, smit with freedom's sacred flame,
Usurping Britons brought to shame,
His country's wrongs avenging;
See, on her stern the waving stars --
Inured to blood, inured to wars,
Come, enter quick, my jolly tars,
To scourge these haughty Britons.
Here Is grog enough -- then drink about,
I know your hearts are firm and stout;
American blood will never give out,
And often we have proved it.
Though stormy oceans round us roll*
We'll keep a firm undaunted soul,
Befriended by the cheering bowl,
Sworn foes to melancholy.
While timorous landsmen lu^k on shore,
It Is ours to go where cannons roar --
On a coasting cruise we'll go once more,
Despisers of all danger;
And Fortune still that crowns the brave
Shall guard us over (...) gloomy wave --
A fearful heart betrays (...) ^nave;
Success to the Hyder Ally.
SONG, ON Captain BARNEY's victory over the ship General Monk.
April 26, 1782.
OVER the waste of waters cruising,
Long the General Monk had reigned;
All subduing, all reducing,
None her lawless rage restrained
Many a brave and hearty fellow
Yielding to this warlike foe,
When her guns began to bellow
Struck his humbled colors low*
But grown bold with long successe^,
Leaving the wide watery way,
She, a stranger to distresses,
Came to ^r^ise within Cap^ May*
"Now we soon (said captain Rogers)
"Shall their men of commerce meet;
"In our hold we'll have them lodgers,
"We shall capture half their (...).
"Lo! I see their van appearing --
"Back our topsails to the ma^^ --
"They toward us full are steering
"With a gentle western blast:
"I Have a list of all their cargoes,
"All their guns, and all their men*
"I am sure these modern Argo's
"Cannot escape us one in ten:
"Yonder comes the Charming Sally
"Sailing with the General Green --
"First we'll fight the HYDER ALLY,
"Taking her is taking them:
"She intends to give us battle,
"Bearing down with all her sail --
"Now, boys, let our cannon rattle!
"To take her we cannot fail.
"Our eighteen guns, each a nine pounder,
"Soon shall terrify this foe;
"We shall maul her, we shall wound her,
"Bringing rebel colors low." --
While he thus anticipated
Conquests that he could not gain,
He in the Cape May channel waited
For the ship that caused his pain.
Captain Barney then preparing,
Thus addressed his gallant crew --
"Now, brave lads, be bold and daring,
"Let your hearts be firm and true;
"This is a proud English cruiser,
"Roving up and down the main*
"We must fight her -- must reduce her,
"Though our decks be strewn with slain.
"Let who will be the surviver,
"We must conquer or must die,
"We must take her up the river,
"Whatever comes of you or I:
"Though she shows most formidable
"With her eighteen pointed nines,
"And her quarters clad in sable,
"Let us baulk her proud designs.
"With four nine pounders, and twelve sixes
"We will face that daring band;
"Let no dangers damp your courage,
"Nothing can the brave withstand.
"Fighting for your country's honor,
"Now to gallant deeds aspire;
"Helmsman, bear us down upon her,
"Gunner, give the word to fire!"
Then yard arm and yard arm meeting,
Strait began the dismal fray,
Cannon mouths, each other greeting,
Belched their smoky flames away:
Soon the langrage, grape and chain shot,
That from Barney's cannons slew,
Swept the Monk, and cleared each round top,
Killed and wounded half her crew.
Captain Rogers strove to rally
His men, from their quarters fled*
While the roaring Hyder Ally
Covered over his de^ks with dead.
When from their tops their dead men tumbled,
And the streams of blood did flow,
Then their proudest hopes were humbled
By their brave inferior foe.
All aghast, and all confounded,
They beheld their champions fall,
And their captain, sorely wounded,
Bade them quick for quarters call.
Then the Monk's proud flag descended,
And her cannon ceased to roar;
By her crew no more defended,
She confessed the contest over.
Come, brave boys, and fill your glasses,
You have humbled one proud foe,
No brave action this surpasses,
Fame shall tell the nations so --
Thus be Britain's woes completed,
Thus abridg'd her cruel reign,
'Till she ever, thus defeated,
Yields the scepter of the main.
ON Sir HENRY CLINTON'S RECALL.
THE dog that is beat has a right to complain --
Sir Harry returns a disconsolate swain
To the face of his master, the devil's anointed,
To the country provided for thieves disappointed.
Our FREEDOM, he thought, to a tyrant must fall,
He concluded the weakest must go to the wall;
The more he was flattered the bolder he grew --
He quitted the old world to conquer the new.
But in spite of the dee^s he has done in his garrison,
(And they have been curious beyond all comparison)
He now must go home, at the call of his king,
To answer the charges that Arnold may bring.
But what are the acts that this chief has achieved? --
If good, it is hard he should now be aggrieved,
And the more, as he fought for his national glory,
Nor valued a farthing the RIGHT of the story.
This famous great man, and two birds Generals How and Burgoyne.
of his feather,
In the Cerberus frigate came over together;
But of all the bold chiefs that re-measure the trip,
Not two have been known to return in one ship.
Like children that wrestle and scuffle in sport,
They are very well pleased as long as unhurt,
But a thump on the nose, or a blow in the eye,
Ends the fray -- and they go to their daddy and cry.
Sir Clinton, thy deeds have been mighty and many,
You said all our paper was not worth a penny,
('It Is nothing but rags See his Letter to Genesis Parsons.
, quoth honest Will. Tryon,
Are rags to discourage the Sons of the Lion?)
But Clinton thought thus -- "It is folly to sight,
"When things may by easier methods come right,
"There is such an art as counterfeit-ation --
"And I Will do my utmost to honor our nation;
"I Will show this damned country that I can enslave her,
"And that by the help of a skilful engraver,
"And then let the rebels take care of their bacon,
"We'll play them a trick, or I Am vastly mistaken."
But the project succeeded not quite to your liking,
^o you paid off your artist and gave up BILL STRIKING;
But it is an affair I am glad you are quit on,
You had surely been hanged had you tried it in Britain.
At the taking of Charleston you cut a great figure,
The terms you propounded were terms full of rigor,
Yet could not foresee poor CHARLY'S Cornwallis.
disgrace,
Nor how soon your own COLORS would go the CASE.
When the town had surrendered, the more to disgrace ye,
(Like another true Briton that did it at 'Statia)
You broke all the terms yourself had extended,
Because you supposed the rebellion was ended;
Whoever the tories marked out as a whig,
If gentle, or simple, or little, or big,
No matter to you -- to kill 'em and spite 'em,
You soon had 'em up where the dogs could n't bite 'em.
Then thinking these rebels were snug and secure,
You left them to Rawdon and Nesbit Balfour:
(The face of the latter no mask need be draw'd on,
And to fish for the Devil my bait should be Rawdon.)
Returning to York with your ships and your plunder,
And boasting that rebels must shortly knock under,
The first thing that struck you as soon as you landed
Was the fortress at West Point, where Arnold commanded.
Thought you, "If friend Arnold this fort will deliver,
"We then shall be masters of all Hudson's river,
"The east and the south losing communication,
"The Yankies will die by the act of starvation."
So off you sent Andre, (not guided by Pallas)
Who soon purchased Arnold, and with him the gallows;
Your loss I conceive than your gain was far greater,
You lost a good fellow and got a damned traitor.
Now Carleton comes over to give you relief,
A knight like yourself, and commander in chief,
But the chief he will get, you may tell the dear honey,
Will be a black eye, hard knocks, and no money.
Now with -- "Britons, strike home*" your sorrows dispel,
Away to your master, and honestly tell
That his arms and his artists can nothing avail,
His men are too few, and his tricks are too stale:
Advise him at length to be just and sincere;
Of which not a symptom as yet does appear,
As we plainly perceive from his sending Sir Guy,
Commissioned to steal, and commissioned to lie.
SIR GUY CARLETON's ADDRESS TO THE AMERICANS.
FROM Britain's famed island once more I come over,
(No island on earth is in prowess above her)
With powers and commissions your hearts to recover!
Our king, I must tell you, is plagued with a phantom
(Independence they call it) that hourly does haunt him,
And relief, my dear rebels, you only can grant him.
Tom Gage and Sir Harry, Sir William, (our boast)
Lord How, and the rest that have scouted the coast,
All failed in their projects of laying this ghost:
So unless the damned spectre myself can expel
It will yet kill our monarch, I know very well,
And gallop him off on his Lion to hell.
But I heartily wish, that, instead of sir Guy,
They had sent out a seer from the island of Sky,
Who rebels and devils and ghosts may defy:
So great is our prospect of failing at last,
When I look at the present, and think of the past,
I wish with our heroes I had not been class'd;
For though, to a man, we are bullies and bruisers,
And covered with laurels, we still are the losers,
'Till each is recalled with his ^ory accusers:
But the war now is altered, and on a new plan;
By negotiation we'll do what we can --
And I am an honest, well-meaning old man;
Too proud to retreat, and too weak to advance,
We must stay where we are, at the mercy of chance,
'Till Fortune shall help us to lead you a dance.
Then lay down your arms, dear rebels -- O hone!
Our king is the best man that ever was known,
And the greatest that ever was stuck on a throne*
His love and affection by all ranks are sought;
Here take him, my honies, and each pay a groat --
Was ever a monarch more easily bought?
In pretty good case and very well found
By night and by day we carry him round;
He must go for a groat, if we cannot get a pound.
Break the treaties you made with LOUIS BOUR^ON;
Abandon the Congress, no matter how soon,
And then, all together, we'll play a new tune.
It Is strange that they always would manage the roast,
And force you their healths and the Dauphin's to toast;
Repent, my dear fellows, and each get a post;
Or if you object that one post is too few,
We generous Britons will help you to two,
With a beam laid across -- that will certainly do.
The folks that rebelled in the year forty-five,
We used them so well, that we left few alive,
But sent them to heaven in swarms from their hive.
Your noble resistance we cannot forget,
It Is nothing but right we should honor you yet;
If you are not rewarded, we die in your debt.
So, quickly submit and our mercy implore,
Be as loyal to George as you once were before,
Or I Will slaughter you all -- and probably more.
What puzzled Sir Harry, Sir Will. and his brother,
Perhaps may be done by the son of my mother,
With the Sword in one hand and the Branch in the other.
My bold predecessors (as ^itting their station)
At their first coming out all spoke PROCLAMATION*
It Is the custom with us, and the way of our nation.
Then Kil-la-la-loo! -- Shelaly, I say; --
If we cannot all fight, we can all run away --
And further at present I choose not to say.
THE ENGLISH QUIXOTE OF 1778; OR, MODERN IDOLATRY.
MY native shades delight no more,
I haste to meet the ocean's roar,
I s^ek a wild rebellious shore
Beyond the Atlantic main:
It Is honor calls! -- I must away! --
Nor ^^se nor pleasure tempts my stay,
Nor all that Love himself can say,
A moment shall detain.
To meet those hosts that dare disown
Allegiance to Britannia's throne
I draw the sword that pities none,
I draw their rebel blood*
Amazement shall their troops confound
When gasping, prostrate on the ground,
My sword shall drink from every wound
A life-destroying flood!
The swarthy Indian, yet unbroke,
Shall bend his neck to Britain's yoke,
Or flee from her avenging stroke
To des^rts all unknown;
The Atlantic isles shall own her sway,
Peru and Mexico obey,
And those The inhabitants of New Holland in the south seas.
who yet to Satan pray
Beyond the southern zone.
For George the third I dare to go
Through Etna's fire and Greenland's snow*
Wherever our kindred waters flow,
The vast unbounded main;
In him true glory shines complete,
In him a thousand virtues meet --
'Twere heaven to die at George's feet,
Could I that blessing gain!
For George the third I dare to fall,
Since he to me is all in all --
May he subdue this earthly ball,
And nations tribute bring: --
Yon' rebel States shall wear his chain
Where traitors now with tyrants reign --
And subject shall be all the main
To George our potent king.
When honor calls to guard his throne
My life I dare not call my own --
My life I yield without a groan
For him whom I adore:
In endless glory he shall reign --
It Is he shall conquer France and Spain --
Though I perhaps may never again
Behold my native shore!
['Tis so well known it is hardly worth relating
That men have worshipped gods, though of their own creating;
Art's handy work they thought they might adore,
And bowed to gods that were but logs before.
Idols, of old, were made of clay or wood,
And in themselves did neither harm nor good,
Acted as though they knew the good old rule,
"Friend, hold thy peace and you will be thought no fool."
Britons! their case is yours -- and linked in fate
You, like your Indian allies -- good and great --
Bow to the frowning block yourselves did rear,
And worship SATAN'S IMAGE -- out of fear -- ]
THE PROJECTORS.
BEFORE the brazen age began,
And things were yet on Saturn's (...)
None knew what sovereign bliss there lay
In ruling, were it but a day.
EACH with spontaneous food content,
His life in simple affluence spent;
The sun was mild, serene and clear,
And walked in Libra all the year;
No tempests did the heaven deform,
'Twas not too cold nor yet too warm;
People were then at small expense,
They dug no ditch, and made no fence,
No patentees by slight or chance
For Indian lands got ample grants,
Not for their wants, but just to say,
"If you come here, expect to pay."
BASE grasping souls, your pride repress;
Beyond your wants must you possess?
If ten poor acres will supply
A rustic and his family,
Why, grumblers, would you have ten score,
Ten thousand and ten thousand more?
IT is a truth well understood,
"All would be tyrants if they could."
The love of sway has been confessed
The ruling passion of the breast:
Those who aspire to govern states,
If balked by disapproving fates,
Resolve their purpose to fulfill,
And scheme for tenants at their will.
"TEN thousand acres, fit for toil,
"In Indiana's fertile soil --
"Ten thousand acres! let us agree --
"Let me become the patentee,
"And while the longing stomach crave^,
"I Will honor fools and flatter knaves."
IF Rome of old to greatness rose
Triumphant over all her foes,
None need believe that people then
Were more in strength than modern men;
If over the world her eagles waved,
'Twas policy the world enslaved;
From lands not shared amongst the few,
An independent spirit grew:
Each on a small and scanty spot,
With much ado his living got,
Great as a monarch on the throne
BY HAVING SOMETHING OF HIS OWN.
ON A LADY's SINGING BIRD, A NATIVE OF The Canary Islands, confined in a very
small Cage.
Written in Bermuda, 1778.
HAPPY in my native grove,
I from spray to spray did rove,
Full of music, full of love.
Dressed as fine as bird could be,
Every thing that I did see,
Every thing was mirth to me.
There had I been happy still,
With my mate to coo and bill
In the vale or on the hill;
But the cruel tyrant man,
Tyrant since the world began,
Soon abridg'd my little span:
How shall I the wrong forget! --
Over me he threw a net,
And I am his captive yet.
To this rough and rocky shore,
Ocean I was wafted over,
Never to see my country more.
To a narrow cage confined
I, who once so gaily shined,
Sing to please the human kind.
I so fond, so full of play,
I so innocently gay,
Sing my little life away.
Thus to pine and flutter here,
Thus to grieve from year to year,
This is usage too severe;
Gentle shepherds of the plain,
Who so fondly hear my strain,
Help me to be free again;
It Is a blessing to be free,
Fair Belinda, pity me,
Pity that which sings for thee:
But if cruel, you deny
That your captive bird should fly,
Here detained so wrongfully,
Full of anguish, full of woe,
I must with my music go
To the cypress groves below.
LINES, OCCASIONED BY Genesis Robertson's PROCLAMATION.
NEW YORK, June 22, 1782.
OLD Judas the traitor (nor need we much wonder)
Falling down from the gallows his paunch split asunder,
Affording, it is likely, a horrible scent
Rather worse than the sulphur o^ hell, where he went.
So now this (...) chieftain, who long has suspended
And kept out of view, what his master intended.
Bursts out all at once, and an inside discloses,
Disgusting the tories, who stop up their noses.
The short of the matter is thus, as I take it --
New York of true Britons is plainly left naked,
And their conduct amounts to an honest confession,
That they cannot depend on the run-a-way Hessian.
In such a dilemma pray what should they do?
Hearts loyal, to whom should they look but to you? --
You know pretty well how to handle the spade,
To dig their canals and to make a parade;
The city is left to your valiant defense,
And of course it will be but of little expense,
Since there is an old fellow that looks somewhat sooty
Who gratis will help you in doing your duty --
"In doing our duty! -- it is duty indeed
"(Says a Tory) if this be the way that we speed;
"We never loved fighting: the matter is clear --
"If we had, I am sure we had never come here.
"George we owned for our king, as his true loyal sons,
"But why will he force us to manage his guns? --
"Who 'list in the army or cruise on the wave,
"Let them do as they will -- it is their trade to be brave.
"Gun bullets in boxes we easily face,
"But when they are in motion -- it alters the case,
"To skirmish with HUDDIES is all our desire --
"For though we can murder we cannot stand fire.
"To the standards of Britain we fled for protection,
"And here we are gathered, a goodly collection;
"And most of us think it is rather too hard
"For refusing to arm to be put under guard;
"Who knows under guard what ills we may feel! --
"It is an expression that means a great deal --
"'Among the rebels they fine 'em who will not turn out,
"But here we are left in a sorrowful doubt --
"These Britons were always so sharp and so shifty --
"The rebels excuse you from serving when fifty,
"But here we are counted such wonderful men
"We are kept in the ranks, though we are five score and ten.
"Provided the clergy but preach non-resistance
"And passive obedience -- they wave their assistance;
"But we -- though we are sick and have death in our faces,
"Must purchase a proxy to serve in our places.
"If matters go thus, it is easy to see
"That as blockheads we have been, so slaves we shall be;
"And what will become of that peaceable train
"Whose tenets enjoin them from war to abstain?
"Our city commandant must be an odd shaver,
"Not a single exception to make in their favor! --
"Come let us turn round and rebelliously sing,
"Huzza for the Congress! -- the de'il take the king."
THE TENTH ODE OF HORACE'S Book of EPODES, imitated.
[Written in December 1781, upon the departure of Genesis Arnold from New York.]
WITH evil omens from the harbor sails
The ill-fated ship that hated Arnold bears,
God of the southern wind, call up thy gales
And whistle in rude fury round his ears.
With horrid waves insult his vessel's sides,
And may the east wind on a leeward shore
Her cables snap, while she in tumult rides,
And shatter into fragments every oar;
And let the north wind to her ruin haste,
With such a rage as when from mountains high
He rends the ^^ll oak with his weighty blast
And ruin spreads wherever his forces fly.
May not one friendly star that night be seen
Where sad Orion darts his parting ray,
Nor may she ride on oceans more serene
Than Greece triumphant found that stormy day,
When angry Pallas spent her rage no more
On vanquished Ilium then in ashes laid,
But turned it on the barque that Ajax bore, Ajax the younger, son of Oileus,
king of the Locrians. He debauched Cassandra in the temple of Pallas, which was
the cause of his misfortune, on his return from the siege of Troy.

Avenging thus her temple and the maid.
When tossed upon the vast Atlantic main
Your groaning ship the southern gales shall tear,
How will your sailors sweat, and you complain
And meanly howl to Jove that will not hear!
But if at last upon some winding shore
A prey to hungry cormorants you lie,
A wanton goat to every stormy power, The Tempests were goddesses amongst the
Romans.

And a fat lamb in sacrifice shall die.
PHILOSOPHICAL REFLECTIONS.
STILL round the world triumphant discord flies,
Still angry kings to bloody contest rise;
Hosts bright with steel in dreadful order placed,
And ships contending on the watery waste;
Distracting demons every breast engage,
Unwearied nations glow with mutual rage;
Still to the charge the routed Briton turns,
The war still rages and the ba^tle burns;
See, man with man in deadly combat join,
See, the black navy form the flaming line;
Death smiles alike at battles lost or won --
Art does for him what nature would have done.
CAN scenes like these delight the human breast? --
Who sees with joy humanity distressed?
Such tragic scenes fierce passions might prolong,
But slighted Reason says, they must be wrong.
CURSED be the day, how bright soever it shined,
That first made kings the masters of mankind;
And cursed the wretch who first with regal pride
Their equal rights to equal men denied;
But cursed, over all, who first to slavery broke
Submissive bowed and owned a monarch's yoke,
Their servile souls his arrogance adored
And basely owned a brother for a lord;
Hence wrath and blood, and feuds and wars began,
And man turned monster to his fellow man.
NOT so that age of innocence and ease
When men, yet social, knew no ills like these;
Then dormant yet, ambition (half unknown)
No rival murdered to possess a throne;
No seas to guard, no empires to defend --
Of some small tribe the father and the friend.
The hoary sage beneath his sylvan shade
Imposed no laws but those which reason made;
On peace not war, on good not ill intent,
He judged his brethren by their own consent;
Untaught to spurn those brethren to the dust;
In virtue firm, and obstinately just,
For him no navies roved from shore to shore,
No slaves were doomed to dig the glittering ore;
Remote from all the vain parade of state,
No slaves in diamonds saunter'd at his gate,
Nor did his breast the guilty passions tear,
He knew no murder and he felt no fear.
WAS this the patriarch sage? -- Then turn thine eyes
And view the contrast that our age supplies;
Touched from the life, I trace no ages fled,
I draw no curtain that conceals the dead;
To distant Britain let thy view be cast,
And say the present far exceeds the past;
Of all the plagues that ever the world have cursed,
Name George the tyrant, and you name the worst!
WHAT demon, hostile to the human kind,
Planted these fierce disorders in the mind?
All urged alike, one phantom we pursue,
But what has war with HAPPINESS to do?
In death's black shroud this gem can never be fou^^;
Who deals for that the life-destroying wound,
Or pines with grief to see a brother live,
That life dissolving which he cannot give?
IT IS thine, Ambition! -- Thee these horrors suit;
Lost to the human, she assumes the brute;
She proudly vain or insolently bold,
Her heart revenge, her eye intent on gold,
Swayed by the madness of the present hour
Mistakes for happiness EXTENT OF POWER;
That shining bait which dropped in folly's way
Temp^^ the weak mind, and leads the heart astray!
THOU happiness! still sought but never found,
We, in a circle, chase thy shadow round;
Meant all mankind in different forms to bless,
Which yet possessing, we no more possess: --
Thus far removed and painted on the eye
Smooth verdant fields seem blended with the sky,
But where they both in fancied contact join
In vain we trace the visionary line;
Still as we chase, the empty circle flies,
Emerge new mountains or new oceans rise.
PRINCE WILLIAM HENRY's SOLILOQUY.
[Occasioned by Public Rejoicings in Philadelphia for the birth of the Dauphin
of France, son to Louis XVI.]
PEOPLE are mad thus to adore the Dauphin --
Heaven grant the brat may soon be in his coffin --
The honors here to this young Frenchman shown,
Of right should be prince George's, or my own;
And all those wreathes that bloom on Louis now,
Should hang, unfading, on my father's brow.
TO these far shores with longing hopes I came,
(By birth a Briton, not unknown to fame)
Pleasures to share that loyalty imparts,
Subdue the rebels, and regain their hearts.
W^AK, stupid expectation -- all is done!
Few are the prayers that rise for George's son;
Naught through the waste of these wide realms I trace,
But rage, contempt, and curses on our race,
Hosts with their chiefs by bold usurpers won,
And not a blessing left for George's son!
HERE on these isles (my terrors not a few)
I walk attended by the Tory crew:
These from the first have done their best to please,
But who would herd with sycophants like these?
This exiled race, who their lost shores bemoan,
Would bow to Satan, if he held out throne --
Ruled by their fears -- and what is meaner far,
Have worshipped William only for his STAR!
To touch my hand their thronging thousands strove,
And tired my patience with unceasing love --
In fame's fair annals told me I should live,
But they, poor creatures, had no fame to give:
Must Digby's royal pupil walk the streets,
And smile on every russian that he meets;
Or teach them, as he has done -- he knows when --
That kings and princes are no more than men?
MUST I alas disclose, to our disgrace,
That Britain is too small for George's race?
Here in the west, where all did once obey,
Three islands only, now, confess our sway;
And in the east we have not much to boast,
For Hyder Ali drive^ us from the coast:
Yield, rebels, yield -- or I must go once more
Back to the white cliffs of my native shore;
(Where, in process of time, shall go sir Guy,
And where ^ir Harry has returned to sigh,
Whose hands grew weak when things began to cros^.
Nor made one effort to retrieve our loss)
Oatmeal and Scottish ^ale pots round me rise,
And Hanoverian turnips greet mine eyes; --
Welsh goats and naked rocks my bosom swell,
And Teague! dear Teague! -- to thee I bid farewell --
Curse on the Dauphin and his friends, I say,
He steals our honors and our rights away.
Digby -- our anchors! -- weigh them to the bow,
And eastward through the wild waves let us plough:
Such dire resentments in my bosom burn,
That to these shores I never will return,
'Till fruits and flowers on Zembla's coast are known,
And seas congeal beneath the torrid zone.
THE FLAGELLATORS.
The exemplary punishment of the grand pensionary, Van Berkel, must be the
preliminary article of any treaty of pacification entered into with Holland.
English Ministry.
FULL three long years has haughty Britain tried
By Dutchmen's hands to thresh Van Berkel's hide,
'Till this should be, she gave no hopes of peace,
For only this could make her anger cease.
What raised the droll conceit is hard to say,
"That poor Van Berkel's back for peace should pay,"
Long, very long, our heads were kept in doubt
Yet failed to find the stubborn secret out.
But lately reading of La Mancha's knight
And Sancho Panca, that ill-fated wight,
Sudden the clouds from my racked brains withdrew
And all the mighty secret rose to view.
Enchanted long fair Dulcinea lay
In a dark cave secluded from the day,
Changed to a country wench with haggard face --
Lost her imperial charms and every winning grace,
While sad Don Quixote through the wide world strayed
And mourned the hard fate of the peerless maid.
At length from hell's dark chambers Merlin came
And told him how he might release the dame,
And get her up from her dull situation
By Sancho's hide enduring flagellation.
"He on his back (said Merlin) though he grieve
"Three thousand stinging lashes must receive,
"(Even his own hand the scourging must inflict
"Or else my lady will at last be tricked)
"And when to these he adds just fifteen score
"Then Dulcinea comes, and not before."
"De'il take her, said the squire, and all her crew!
"What has her freedom with my back to do? --
"Ere my back basting shall her beauty save
"Faith she may go enchanted to her grave."
Britain, it is plain, has took the hint from hence
And peace, Van Berkel, seeks at thy expense:
Convince her now that you can hold your place,
And, armed with scorpions, lash her bull-dog race.
SATAN's REMONSTRANCE.
[Occasioned by Mr. Rivington's late Apology for Lying]
YOUR golden dreams, your flattering schemes,
Alas! where are they fled, Sir?
Your plans derang'd, your prospects changed
You now may go to bed, Sir. --
How could you thus, my partner dear,
Give up the hopes of many a year --?
Your fame retrieved, and soaring high
In TRUTH's resemblance seemed to fly;
But now you grow so wondrous wise,
You turn, and own that all is lies.
A fabric that from hell we raised,
On which astonished rebels gazed,
And which the world shall never forget,
No less than RIVINGTON's GAZETTE,
Demolished at a single stroke --
The angel Gabriel might provoke.
"That all was lies," might well be true,
But why must this be told by you?
Great master of the wooden head,
Where is thy wonted cunning fled?
It was a folly to engage
That truth henceforth should fill your page,
When you must know, as well as I,
Your only mission is to LIE.
Such are the plans which folly draws --
We now, like bears, may suck our paws; --
Brought up in lying from your youth,
You should have died a foe to truth,
Since none but fools in this accord,
That VIRTUE IS ITS OWN REWARD.
Your fortune was as good as made,
Great artist in the lying trade!
But now I see with grief and pain
Your credit cannot rise again:
No more the favorite of my heart,
No more will I my gifts impart.
Yet something shall you gain at last
For lies contrived in seasons past --
When pressing to the narrow gate
I Will show the portal marked by Fate,
Where all mankind (as parsons say)
Are apt to take the wider way,
And, though the ROYAL Printer swear,
Will bolt him in, and keep him there!
TO A WRITER WHO SUBSCRIBES HIMSELF "A FOE TO TYRANTS."
WHEN round the barque the howling tempest raves,
Tossed in the conflict of a thousand waves,
The lubber landsmen weep, complain and sigh,
And on the pilot's skill, or heaven rely,
Lurk in their holds, astonished and aghast,
Dreading the moment that must be their last --
The tempest over -- their terror also ceases,
And up they come and show their shameless faces,
At once grow brave, and tell the pilot too,
"He did no more than they themselves could do."
"A FOE TO TYRANTS!" -- One thy heart restores --
There is a Tyrant that thy soul adores,
And every stupid line too plainly shows
Your heart is hostile to that tyrant's foes.
WHAT mighty malice urged this Genius dull
With CHURCHILL's wreathes to shade his barren scull?
So utter darkness union claims with light,
So oil and water in one mass unite:
No more thy rage in borrowed rhimes repeat;
Sneak into prose -- the dunce's last retreat!
REED's patriot fame to distant times shall last,
When these base reptiles to the dogs are cast,
Or, when Oblivion spreads her dreary wings,
Lost in the lumber of forgotten things,
And none shall ask, nor wish to know, nor care
Who -- what their names -- or when they lived, or where.
TO THE "FOE TO TYRANTS."
VILE as they are, this lukewarm Tory crew
Seem viler still, when they are praised by you;
By you adorned, in yellow robes they shine,
Sweat through your verse, and stink in every line.
TRUE child of Dullness -- eldest of her tribe --
How could thou dream that thou wast worth a bribe?
Ill-fated scribbler, with thy clumsy quill
Retract the threat you dare not to fulfill,
And round your neck the with or halter twine,
And be the office of the hangman thine.
Have I from you purloin'd one shred of wit,
Or did I imitate one line you writ?
Peace to your works -- 'twere base to rob the dead,
The clay cold offspring of your empty head.
SCRIBBLER, retire -- what madness would it be
To point a cannon at a mite like thee!
Such noxious vermin crawling from the shell,
By squibs and crackers might be killed as well.
BUT if you must torment the world with rhimes,
(Since thou were sent to scourge us for our crimes)
In stupid odes indulge thy smoky wit,
Dull lyrics would thy happy genius fit;
With thy coarse white wash daub some scoundrel's face,
Blockheads in power, or traitors in disgrace:
To gain immortal praise I leave you free;
Go -- scratch and scribble unchastis'd by me.
Haste to the realms of nonsense and despair,
The ghosts of murdered rhimes shall meet you there,
Like rattling chains provoke incessant fears,
And with eternal jinglings stun your ears.
TO THE "FOE TO TYRANTS," ON His FAREWELL.
SINCE ink, thank heaven, is all the blood you spill,
Health to the driver of the true goose quill;
Such war shall leave no widow in despair,
Nor curse one orphan with the public care.
IT IS the worst wound the heart of man can feel,
Thus to be wounded by an ass's heel:
With generous satire give me all my due,
Nay, give me more, and call me scoundrel too,
Make me as black as hell's remotest gloom,
But still to genius let me owe my doom:
By Jove's red lightenings it is no shame to bleed,
But by a grovelling swine -- is death indeed.
NOW, by the laurels of your yellow crew,
I felt no shame 'till I engaged with you;
But such an odor scented from your song,
I stopped my nose, and quickly passed along,
Blushed for the wretch that could such filth display,
His guts disgorging in the public way.
ARMED as I stand, unusual tumults rise,
And all my soul comes swelling through my eyes,
To think that in the skirmish of a day
This bard must perish, and his fame decay,
So quick retire to black oblivion's clime,
Turned, chased, and routed by the power of rhyme!
I WISHED him still unhandled and unhurt,
I wished no evils to this man of dirt;
I thought to leave him swelt'ring in his den,
Not with such rotten trash to stain my pen,
But his base labors wrought his utter woe,
And his own efforts now shall lay him low: --
Before his eyes the sexton's spade appears,
And bells unceasing ring within his ears,
Already is his span of being fled,
Sense, wit, and reason -- all proclaim him dead;
In his own lines he tolled his funeral knell,
And when he could not sing he stunk FAREWELL.
THE NEW YORK REFUGEES PETITION TO Sir GUY CARLETON.
HUMBLY SHOWS,
THAT your Honor's petitioners, Tories by trade,
From the first of the war have lent Britain their aid,
And done all they could both in country and town
In support of the king and the rights of his crown;
But now to their grief and confusion they find
"The de'il may take them who are farthest behind."
In the rear of all rascals they still have been placed
And halter and gibbets full often have faced,
Have been in the midst of distresses and doubt
Whenever they came in or whenever they went out;
Have supported the king and defended his church
And now in the end -- must be left in the lurch.
Though often, too often, his arms were disgraced,
We still were in hopes he would conquer at last,
And restore us again to our sweethearts and wives
The pride of our hearts and the joy of our lives,
But he promised too far, and we trusted too much,
And who could have looked for a war with the Dutch?
Our board broken up, and discharged from our stations,
Sir Guy, it is cruel to cut off our ^ations;
Of a project like that whoever was the mover
It is, we must tell you, a cursed maneuver,
A plan to destroy us -- the basest of tricks
To get us away to the shallows of Styx.
If a peace be intended, as people surmise,
(Though we hope from our souls it is nothing but lies)
Inform us at once what we have to expect,
Nor treat us, as usual, with surly neglect;
Or else, by the mass and the will of the fates,
We'll go to the rebels -- and get our estates --
SIR GUY's ANSWER.
WE have reason to think there will soon be a peace*
And that war with the rebels will certainly cease;
But, be that as it will, I would have you to know
That as matters are changing we soon may change too;
In short, I would say, (since I have it at heart)
Though the war should continue, yet we may depart.
Four offers in season I therefore propose,
(As much as I can do in reason, God knows)
In which, though there be not too plentiful carving,
There still is sufficient to keep you from starving;
And, first, of the first, it would mightily charm me
To see you, my children, enlist in the army,
Or enter the navy, and get for your pay
A farthing an hour, which is sixpence per day --
There Is Hector M'Lean and Arthur O'Gregor
And Donald M'Donald shall rule you with vigor;
If these do not suit you, then take your new plan,
Make your peace with the rebels (that is, if you can)
There rank and distinction perhaps you may find
And rise into offices fit to your mind --
But if still you object -- to be all on a level,
Burn up your red coats and go off to the Devil.
TO THOSE WHOM IT MAY CONCERN.
THE sage that took the wrong sow by the ears,
And independence claimed for Vermonteers,
Who from twelve numbers down to eight decreased,
Is now your scribbler, and may serve for priest,
To him apply, dear Timon, in distress,
From him ask favors and to him confess,
He Will pardon all your sins -- ay, more than once,
And will forgive you, even for being a dunce.
WHEN first that slave of slaves began to write,
Truth cursed his pen, and reason took her flight,
Dullness on him her choicest opiates shed,
Black as his heart and empty as his head:
Him on her soil Hibernia could not bear,
The viper sicken'd in his native air.
Then rushed abroad, a Jesuit in disguise,
Borne on the wings of malice, rage, and lies,
To this new world a nuisance and a pest
To curse his betters and abuse the best.
THOU base born lump of impudence and dirt,
With all the will but not the power to hurt;
Whose barren soul each empty line reveals --
Come, let me tie thee to my chariot wheels,
And over the surface of this prickly ground
Drag thy vile carrion carcass round and round,
Or like a FELON, hanged to after time,
Be one more victim to the power of rhyme!
BEAR me, ye gods, to some sequestered place
Where never rascal showed his brazen face;
Remove me far from all the rascal kind
(Dullness with insolence forever joined)
To some retreat of solitude and rest --
Nor let another pang disturb my breast,
When I have wept to think the world shall know
I had to combat with so mean a foe.
TO THOSE WHOM IT MAY CONCERN.
SHOULD Timon's scribblers call you all that is base,
Abuse your stature and blaspheme your face,
Make you the worst and vilest of your kind,
With not one spark of reason in your mind,
Who would to Timon's rancorous page reply,
So famed for scandal, and so prone to lie?
STILL may those bagpipes of sedition play,
For fools must prate, and dogs must have their day;
Still from that page let hoarse mouthed whelps defame,
And madness rave and malice take her aim,
May scribes on scribes in verse and prose combine,
And one dark chaos gloom though every line!
Long may they write unquestioned and unhurt,
And all their rage discharge, and all their dirt:
Night owls must screech, by heaven's severe decree,
And wolves must howl, or wolves they would not be.
FROM empty froth these scribbling insects rose;
What honest man but counts them for his foes?
When they are lashed, may dunce with dunce condole,
And bellow nonsense from the tortured soul!
When they are dead, and in some dungeon crammed,
(For die they will, and all their works be damned)
When they shall belch their last departing groans,
May dogs and doctors barbecue their bones,
And the last horrors of their souls to calm,
Fallon, the priest, console them with a psalm!
THE PROPHECY OF KING TAMMANY.
THE Indian chief who, famed of yore,
Saw Europe's sons advent'ring here,
Looked sorrowing to the crowded shore,
And sighing dropped a tear!
He saw them half his world explore,
He saw them draw the shining blade,
He saw their hostile ranks displayed,
And cannons blazing through that shade
Where only peace was known before.
"Ah, what unequal arms!" he cried,
"How art thou fallen, my country's pride,
"The rural, sylvan reign!
"Far from our pleasing shores to go
"To western rivers, winding slow,
"Is this the boon the gods bestow!
"What have we done, great patrons, say,
"That strangers seize our woods away,
"And drive us naked from our native plain.
"Rage and revenge inspire my soul,
"And passion burns without control;
"Hence, strangers, to your native shore!
"Far from our Indian shades retire,
"Remove these gods that vomit fire,
"And stain with blood these ravaged glades no more.
"In vain I weep, in vain I sigh,
"These strangers all our arms defy,
"As they advance our chieftains die! --
"What can their hosts oppose!
"The bow has lost its wonted spring,
"The arrow faulters on the wing,
"Nor carries ruin from the string
"To end their being and our woes.
"Yes, yes, -- I see our nation bends;
"The gods no longer are our friends,
"But why these weak complaints and sighs?
"Are there not gardens in the west,
"Where all our far famed Sachems rest? --
"I Will go, an unexpected guest,
"And the dark horrors of the way despise.
"Even now the thundering peals draw nigh,
"'It Is theirs to triumph, ours to die!
"But mark me, Christian, ere I go --
"Thou, too, shall have thy share of woe,
"The time rolls on, not moving slow,
"When hostile squadrons for your blood shall come,
"And ravage all your shore!
"Your warriors and your children slay,
"And some in dismal dungeons lay,
"Or lead ^^em captive far away
"To climes unknown, through seas untried before.
"When struggling long, at last with pain
"You break a cruel tyrant's chain,
"That never shall be joined again,
"When half your foes are homeward fled,
"And hosts on hosts in triumph led,
"And hundreds maimed and thousands dead,
"A timid race shall then succeed,
"Shall slight the virtues of the firmer race,
"That brought your tyrant to disgrace,
"Shall give your honors to an odious train,
"Who shunned all conflicts on the main
"And dared no battles on the bloody plain,
"Whose little souls sunk in the gloomy day
"When VIRTUE ONLY could support the fray
"And sunshine friends kept off -- or ran away."
So spoke the chief, and raised his funeral pyre --
Around him soon the crackling flames ascend;
He smiled amid the fervours of the fire
To think his troubles were so near their end,
'Till the freed soul, her debt to nature paid,
Rose from the ashes that her prison made,
And sought the world unknown, and dark oblivion's shade.
RIVINGTON's REFLECTIONS.
December, 1782.
Inclusus poenam expectat.

Virg.
THE more I reflect, the more plain it appears,
If I stay, I must stay at the risque of my ears,
I have so be-pepper'd the foes of our throne,
Be-rebel'd, be-devil'd, and told them their own,
That if we give up to these rebels at last,
It Is a chance if my ears will atone for the past.
IT IS always the best to provide for the worst --
So evacuation I Will mention the first:
If Carleton should sail for our dear native shore
(As Clinton, Cornwallis, and How did before)
And take off the soldiers that serve for our guard,
(A step that the Tories would think rather hard)
Yet still I surmise, for aught I can see,
No Congress or Senates would meddle with me.
FOR what have I done, when we come to consider*
But sold my commodities to the best bidder?
If I offered to lie for the sake of a post,
Was I to be blamed if the king offered most?
The King's Royal Printer! -- Five hundred a year!
Between you and me 'twas a handsome affair:
Who would not for that give matters a stretch
And lie back and forward, and carry and fetch,
May have some pretensions to honor and fame:
But what are they both but the sound of a name,
Mere words to deceive us, as I have sound long since,
Live on them a week, and you will find they are but nonsense.
THE late news from Charleston my mind has perplexed.
If that is abandoned, I know what goes next:
This city of York is a place of great note,
And that we should hold it I now give my vote;
But what are our votes against Shelburne's decrees?
These people at helm steer us just where they please,
So often they have had us all hands on the brink,
They Will steer us at last to the devil, I think:
And though in the danger themselves have a share,
It will do us small good that they also go there.
IT is true that the Tories, their children and wives
Have offered to stay at the risque of their lives,
And gain to themselves an immortal renown
By ALL turning soldiers, and keeping the town:
Whoever was the Tory that struck out the plan,
In my humble conceit, was a very good man;
But our words on this subject need be very few --
Already I see that it never will do*
For, suppose a few ships should be left us by Britain,
With Tories to man them, and other things fitting,
In truth we should be in a very fine box,
As well they might guard us with ships on the stocks,
And when I beheld them aboard and afloat,
I am sure I should think of the bear in the boat. See Gay's ^ables.

ON the faith of a Printer, things look very black --
And what shall we do, alas! and alack!
Shall we quit our young princes and full blooded peers,
And bow down to Viscounts and French Chevaliers?
Perhaps you will say, "As the very last shift
"We'll go to New Scotland, and take the king's gift:"
GOOD folks, do your will -- but I vow and I swear,
I Will be boiled into soup before I Will live there:
Is it thus that our monarch his subjects degrades? --
Let him go and be d -- 'd with his axes and spades,
Of all the vile countries that ever were known
In the frigid or torrid or temperate zone,
(From accounts that I Have had) there is not such another;
It neither belongs to this world or the other:
A savor they think it to send us there gratis
To sing like the Jews at the river Euphrates,
And, after surmounting the rage of the billows,
Hang ourselves up at last with our harps on the willows:
Ere I sail for that shore may I take my last nap --
Why, it gives me the palsy to look on its map!
And he that goes there (though I mean to be civil)
May fairly be said to have gone to the Devil.
SHALL I push for Old England, and whine at the throne?
Alas, they have JEMMIES enough of their own!
Besides, such a name I have got from my trade,
They would think I was lying, whatever I said;
Thus scheme as I will, or contrive as I may,
Continual difficulties rise in the way:
In short, if they let me remain in this realm,
What is it to Jemmy who stands at the helm?
I Will petition the rebels (if York is forsaken)
For a place in their Zion which never shall be shaken;
I am sure they will be clever: it seems their whole study:
They hung not young ASGILL for old captain HUDDY,
And it must be a truth that admits no denying,
If they spare us for MURDER they will spare us for LYING.
RIVINGTON's REFLECTIONS.
[CONTINUED.]
Incertus quo fata serant, quo sistere detur.

Virg.
FOLKS may think as they please, but to me it would seem,
That our great men at home have done nothing but dream:
Such trimming and twisting and shifting about,
And some getting in, and others turned out;
And yet, with their bragging and looking so big,
All they did was to dance a theatrical jig:
Seven years now, and more, we have tried every plan,
And are just as near conquering as when we began,
Great things were expected from Clinton and How,
But what have they done, or where are they now?
Sir Guy was sent over to kick up a dust,
Who already prepares to return in disgust --
The object delusive we wish to attain
Has been in our reach, and may be so again --
But so oddly does heaven its bounties dispense,
And has granted our king such a small share of sense
That, let Fortune favor or smile as she will,
We are doomed to drive on like a horse in a mill,
And though we may seem to advance on our rout,
It Is but to return to where we sat out.
FROM hence I infer (by way of improvement)
That nothing is got by this circular movement;
And I plainly perceive, from this fatal delay,
We are going to ruin the round-about way!
Some nations, like ships, give up to the gale,
And are hurried ashore with a full flowing sail;
So Swede^ submitted to absolute power,
And freemen were changed to be slaves in an hour;
Thus Theodore soon from his grandeur came down,
Forsaking his subjects and Corsican crown;
But we -- it is our fate, without ally or friend,
To go to perdition close haul'd to the wind.
THE case is too plain, that if I stay here
I have something to hope and somewhat to fear:
In regard to my carcass, I should n't mind that --
I can say "I have lived," and have grown very fat;
Have been in my day remarkably (...),
And soon, very soon, will be verging on fifty.
It Is time for the state of the dead to prepare,
It Is time to consider how things will go there;
Some few are admitted to Jupiter's hall,
But the kitchen of Pluto is open to all --
The day is approaching as fast as it can
When Jemmy shall be a mere moderate man,
Shall sleep under ground both summer and winter,
The husk of a man, and the shell of a printer,
And care not a farthing for George, or his line,
What empires start up, or what kingdoms decline.
OUR parson last Sunday brought tears from my eyes,
When he told us of heaven, I thought of my lies --
To his flock he described it, and laid it before 'em,
(As if he had been in its Sanctum Sanctorum)
Recounted its beauties that never shall fade,
And quoted John Bunyan to prove what he said;
Debarred from the gate who the truth should deny,
Or "whosoe'er loves or makes a lie."
THROUGH the course of my life it has still been my lot
In spite of myself to say "things that are not,"
And therefore suspect that upon my decease
Not a poet will leave me to ^^umber in peace,
But at least once a week be-scribble the stone
Where Jemmy, poor Jemmy, lies sleeping alone!
HOWEVER in the long run these matters may be,
If the scripture is true it has bad news for me --
And yet, when I come to examine the text,
And the learned annotations that POOLE has annexed,
Throughout the black list of the people that sin
I cannot once find that I Am mentioned therein;
Whoremongers, idolaters, all are left out,
And wizzards and dogs (which is proper, no doubt)
But he who says I Am there, mistakes or forgets --
I^ mentions no PRINTERS of ROYAL GAZETTES!
IN truth, I have need of a mansion of rest,
And here to remain might suit me the best --
Philadelphia in some things would answer as well,
(Some Tories are there, and my papers might sell)
But then I should live amongst wrangling and strife,
And be forced to say credo the rest of my life:
For their sudden conversion I Am much at a los^ --
I am told that they bow to the wood of the cross,
And worship the relics transported from Rome,
St. Peter's toe-nails and St. Anthony's comb. --
If thus the true faith they no longer defend
I scarcely can think where the madness will end --
If the greatest among them submit to the Pope,
What reason have I for indulgence to hope?
If the Congress themselves to the CHAPEL did pass, On the 4th of November
last, the clergy and select men of Boston paraded through the streets after a
crucifix, and joined in a procession in praying for a departed soul out of
Purgatory; and for this they gave the example of Congress, and other American
leaders, on a former occasion at Philadelphia, some of whom, it is said, even
went so far as to sprinkle themselves with what they call holy water. Royal
Gazette, of December. 11. inst.

Ye may swear that poor JEMMY would have to sing mass.
CITY of NEW YORK, Jan. 1, 1783.
TO the Senate of York, with all due submission,
Of honest HUGH GAIN the humble Petition;
An Account of his Life he will also prefix,
And some trifles that happened in seventy-six;
He hopes that your Honors will take no offense,
If he sends you some groans of contrition from hence,
And further to prove that he is truly sincere,
He wishes you all a happy new year.

AND, first, he informs, in his representation,
That he once was a printer of some reputation,
And dwelt in the street called Hanover Square,
(You Will know where it is if you ever was there)
Next door to the drug shop of doctor Brownejohn,
(Who now to the dog-house of Pluto is gone)
But what do I talk -- who ever came to town,
And knew not HUGH GAIN at the Bible and Crown.
NOW, if I were ever so given to lie,
My dear native country I would n't deny;
(I know you love Teagues) and I shall not conceal
That I came from the kingdom where Phelim O'Neale
And other brave worthies ate butter and cheese,
And walked in the clover fields up to their knees:
Full early in youth, without basket or burden,
With a staff in my hand I passed over Jordan,
(I remember my comrade was doctor Magraw,
And many strange things on the waters we saw,
Sharks, dolphins, and sea-dogs, bonettas, and whales,
And birds at the tropic with quills in their tails)
And came to your city and government seat,
And found it was true you had something to eat;
When thus I wrote home -- "The country is good,
"They have plenty of victuals and plenty of wood:
"The people are kind, and, whatever they may think,
"I shall make it appear I can swim where they will sink;
"And yet they are so brisk, and so full of good cheer,
"By my soul I suspect they have always new year,
"And therefore conceive it is good to be here:"
SO said, and so acted -- I put up a press,
And printed away with amazing success;
Neglected my person, and looked like a fright,
Was bother'd all day, and was busy all night,
Saw money come in as the papers went out,
While Parker and Weyman New York Printers.
were driving about,
And cursing, and swearing, and chewing their cuds,
And wishing Hugh Gain and his press in the suds,
(Old Weyman was printer, you know, to the king,
And thought he had got all the world in a string,
Though riches not always attend on a throne)
For he swore I had found the philosopher's stone,
And called me a rogue and a son of a bitch,
Because I knew better than him to get rich.
TO malice like that 'twas invain to reply --
You had known by his looks he was telling a lie.
THUS life ran away, so smooth and serene --
Ah! these were the happiest days I had seen!
But the saying of Jacob I know to be true,
"The days of thy servant are evil and few!"
The days that to me were joyous and glad,
Are nothing to those which are dreary and sad!
THE feuds of the Stamp Act foreboded foul weather,
And war and vexation all coming together;
Those days were the days of riots and mobs,
Tar, feathers, and tories, and troublesome jobbs --
Priests preaching up war for the good of our souls,
And libels, and lying, and Liberty-Poles,
From which, when some whimsical colors you waved,
We had nothing to do, but look up and be saved --
(You thought, by resolving, to terrify Britain --
Indeed, if you did, you were damnably bitten)
I knew it would bring an eternal reproach,
When I saw you a-burning Cadwallader's Lieutenant Governor Cadwallader Colden.
coach;
I knew you would suffer for what you had done,
When I saw you lampooning poor Sawny his son,
And bringing him down to so wretched a level,
As to ride him about in a cart with the devil.
WELL, as I predicted that matters would be --
To the stamp act succeeded a tax upon Tea:
What chest-fulls were scattered, and trampled, and drowned,
And yet the whole tax was but threepence per pound!
May the hammer of Death on my noddle descend,
And Satan torment me to time without end,
If this was a reason to fly into quarrels,
And feud^ that have ruined our manners and morals;
A parson himself might have sworn round the compass,
That folks for a trifle should make such a rumpus,
Such a rout as to set half the world in a rage,
Make France, Spain, and Holland with Britain engage,
While the Emperor, the Swede, the Russ, and the Dane
All pity JOHN BULL -- and run off with his gain.
BUT this wa^ the season that I must lament --
I first was a whig with an honest intent;
Not a fellow among them talked louder or bolder,
With his sword by his side, or his gun on his shoulder;
Yes, I was a whig, and a whig from my heart,
But still was unwilling with Britain to part --
I knew to oppose her was foolish and vain,
I knew she would turn and embrace us again,
And make us as happy as happy could be,
By renewing the era of mild SIXTY-THREE:
And yet, like a cruel undutiful son,
Who evil returns for the good to be done,
To gain a mere trifle, a shilling or so,
I printed some treason for Philip F -- neau,
Some damnable poems reflecting on GAGE,
The KING and his COUNCIL, and writ with such rage,
So full of invective, and loaded with spleen,
So pointedly sharp, and so hellishly keen,
That, at least in the judgment of half our wise men,
ALECTO herself made the nib to his pen.
AT this time arose a certain king SEARS,
Who made it his study to banish our fears:
He was, without doubt, a person of merit,
Great knowledge, some wit, and abundance of spirit;
Could talk like a lawyer, and that without fee,
And threatened perdition to all that drank TEA.
Ah! don't you remember what a vigorous hand he put
To drag off the great guns, and plague captain Vandeput. Captain of the Asia
man of war.

That night August, 1775.
when the HERO (his patience worn out)
Put fire to his cannons and folks to the rout,
And drew up his ship with a spring on her cable,
And gave us a second confusion of Babel,
And (what was more solid than scurrilous language)
Poured on us a tempest of round shot and lang^age;
Scarce a broadside was ended 'till another began again --
By Jove! it was nothing but Fire away Flannagan! A cant phrase among
privateers men.

At first we supposed it was only a sham,
'Till he drove a round ball through the roof of black Sam; A noted tavern-keeper
in New-YorR.

The town by their flashes was fairly enlightened,
The women miscarried, the beaus were all frightened;
For my part, I hid in a cellar (as sages
And Christians were wont in the primitive ages:
Thus the Prophet of old that was rapt to the sky,
Lay snug in a cave 'till the tempest went by,
But, as soon as the comforting spirit had spoke,
He rose and came out with his mystical cloak)
Yet I hardly could boast of a moment of rest,
The dogs were a-howling, the town was distressed! --
But our terrors soon vanished, for suddenly SEARS
Renewed our lost courage and dried up our tears.
OUR memories, indeed, must have strangely decayed
If we cannot remember what SPEECHES he made,
What handsome harangues upon every occasion,
How he laughed at the whim of a British Invasion!
"P -- x take 'em, (said he) do ye think they will come?
"If they should -- we have only to beat on our drum,
"And run up the flag of American freedom,
"And people will muster by millions to bleed 'em!
"What freeman need value such blackguards as these?
"Let us sink in our channel some Chevaux de frise --
"And then let 'em come -- and we'll show 'em fair play --
"But they are not madmen -- I tell you -- not they!"
FROM this very day 'till the British came in,
We lived, I may say, in the Desert of Sin; --
Such beating and bruising and scratching and tearing;
Such kicking and cu^^ing and cursing and swearing!
But when they advanced with their numerous fleet,
And WASHINGTON made his nocturnal retreat,
(And which they permitted, I say, to their shame,
Or else your NEW EMPIRE had been but a name)
We townsmen, like women, of Britons in dread,
Mistrusted their meaning, and foolishly fled;
Like the rest of the dunces I mounted my steed,
And galloped away with incredible speed,
To NEWARK I hastened -- but trouble and care
Got up on the crupper and followed me there!
There I scarcely got fuel to keep myself warm,
And scarcely found spirits to weather the storm;
And was quickly convinced I had little to do,
(The Whigs were in arms, and my readers were few)
So after remaining one cold winter season,
And stuffing my papers with something like treason,
And meeting misfortunes and endless disasters,
And forced to submit to a hundred new masters,
I thought it more prudent to hold to the one --
And (after repenting for what I had done,
And cursing my folly and idle pursuits)
Returned to the city, and hung up my boots.
AS matters have gone, it was plainly a blunder,
But then I expected the Whigs must knock under,
And I always adhere to the sword that is longest,
And stick to the party that is like to be strongest:
That you have succeeded is merely a chance,
I never once dreamt of the conduct of France! --
If alliance with her you were promised -- at least
You ought to have showed me your STAR in the East,
Not let me go off uninform'd as a beast.
When your army I saw without stockings or shoes,
Or victuals -- or money to pay them their dues,
(Excepting your wretched Congressional paper,
That stunk in my nose like the snuff of a taper,
A cart load of which for a dram might be spent all,
That damnable bubble the old continental,
That took people in at this wonderful crisis,
With its mottos and emblems, and cunning devices;
Which, bad as it was, you were forced to admire,
And which was, in fact, the pillar of fire,
To which you directed your wandering noses,
Like the Jews in the desert conducted by MOSES)
When I saw them attended with famine and fear,
Distress in their front and How in their rear;
When I saw them for debt incessantly dunn'd,
Nor a shilling to pay them laid up in your fund;
Your ploughs at a stand, and your ships run ashore --
When this was apparent, (and need I say more?)
I handled my cane, and I looked at my hat,
And cried -- " G -- d have mercy on armies like that!"
I took up my bottle, disdaining to stay,
And said -- "Here Is a health to the Vicar of Bray,"
And cocked up my beaver, and -- strutted away.
ASHAMED of my conduct, I sneaked into town,
(Six hours and a quarter the sun had been down)
It was, I remember, a cold frosty night,
And the stars in the firmament glittered as bright
As if (to assume a poetical style)
Old Vulcan had lent them a rub with his file.
'TILL this cursed night, I can honestly say,
I never before dreaded the dawn of the day;
Not a wolf or a fox that is caught in a trap
Ever was so ashamed of his nightly mishap --
I could n't help thinking what ills might befall me,
What rebels and rascals the British would call me,
And how I might suffer in credit and purse,
If not in my person, which still had been worse:
At length I resolved (as was surely my duty)
To go for advice to parson AUCHMUTY:
(The parson, who now I hope is in glory,
Was then upon earth, and a moderate Tory,
Not COOPER himself, of ideas perplexed,
So nicely could handle and torture a text,
When bloated with lies, through his trumpet he sounded
The damnable sin of resisting a crowned head)
Like a penitent sinner, and dreading my fate,
In the gray of the morning I knocked at his gate;
(No doubt he was vexed that I roused him so soon,
For his worship was often in blankets till noon)
AT length he approached in his vestments of black --
(Alas, my poor heart! it was then on the rack,
Like a man in an ague, or one to be tried;
I shook -- and recanted, and snivell'd, and sighed)
His gown of itself was amazingly big,
Besides, he had on his canonical wig,
And frowned at a distance; but when he came near
Looked pleasant and said -- What, Hugh, are you here!
YOUR heart, I am certain, is horribly hardened,
But if you confess -- your sin will be pardoned;
In spite of my preachments, and all I could say,
Like the prodigal son, you wandered away,
Now tell me, dear penitent, which is the best,
To be with the rebels, pursued and distressed,
Devoid of all comfort, all h^pes of relief,
Or else to be here, and eat the king's beef?
MORE people resemble the snake than the dove,
And more are converted by terror than love:
Like a sheep on the mountains, or rather a swine,
You wandered away from the ninety and nine:
Awhile at the offers of mercy you spurned,
But your error you saw, and at length have returned:
Our Master will therefore consider your case,
And restore you again to favor and grace,
Great light shall arise from utter confusion,
And rebels shall live to lament their delusion.
"Ah, rebels! (said I) they are rebels indeed --
"Chastisement, I hope, by the king is decreed:
"They have hung up his subjects with bed-cords and halters,
"And banished his prophets, and thrown down his altars,
"And I -- even I -- while I ventured to stay,
"They sought for my life -- to take it away!
"I therefore propose to come under your wing,
"A foe to REBELLION -- a slave to the KING."
SUCH pitiful whining in scriptural style
Worked out my salvation, at least for awhile;
The parson pronounced me deserving of grace,
And so they restored me to profit and place.
BUT days such as these were too happy to last:
The sand of felicity settled too fast!
When I swore and protested I honored the throne
The least they could do was to let me alone;
Though George I compared to an angel above,
They wanted some solider proofs of my love;
And so they obliged me each morning to come
And turn in the ranks at the beat of the drum,
While often, too often (I tell it with pain)
They menaced my head with a hickory cane,
While others may betters as much were oppressed --
But shame and confusion shall cover the rest.
YOU doubtless will think I am dealing in fable
When I tell you I guard an officer's stable --
With usage like this my feelings are stung;
The next thing will be, I must heave out the dung!
Six hours in the day is duty too hard,
And Rivington sneers whenever I mount guard,
And laughs till his sides are ready to split
With his jests, and his satires and sayings of wit:
Because he is excused on account of his post
He cannot go by without making his boast,
As if I wa^ all that is servile and mean --
But Fortune perhaps may alter the scene,
And give him his turn to stand in the street,
Burnt brandy supporting his radical heat --
WITH his paunch of a hog* and his brains of an oyster,
Whence the mischief came he with his radical moisture,
Or what for the king or the cause has he done
That we must be toiling while he can look on?
FROM hence you may guess I do nothing but grieve,
And where we are going I cannot conceive --
The wisest among us a change are expecting;
It is not for nothing these ships are collecting,
It is not for nothing that MAT^HEWS the may'r
And legions of Tories for sailing prepare;
It is not for nothing that JOHN GUCHILL KNAP
Is filing his paper^ and plugging his tap;
See SKINNER himself, the fighting attorney,
Is boiling potatoes to serve a long journey;
But where they are going or meaning to travel
Would puzzle John Faustus himself to unravel,
Perhaps to Penobscot to starve in the barrens,
Perhaps to St. John's, in the gulf of St. Lawrence;
Perhaps to New Scotland to perish with cold,
Perhaps to Jamaica, like slaves to be sold,
Where scorched by the summer all nature repines,
Where Phoebus, great Phoebus, too glaringly shines,
And fierce from the zenith diverging his ray
Distresses the isle with a torrent of day.
SINCE matters are thus, with proper submission
Permit me to offer my humble PETITION;
(Though the form is uncommon, and lawyers may sneer,
With truth I can tell you the scribe is sincere)
THAT, since it is plain we are going away,
You will suffer Hugh Gain unmolested to stay,
His sand is near run (life itself is a span)
So leave him to manage as well as he can:
Whoever are his masters, or monarchs, or regents,
For the future he will promise to swear them allegiance;
If the Turk with his turban should set up at last here
While he gives him protection he will own him his master,
And yield due obedience (when Britain is gone)
Though ruled by the scepter of PRESBYTER JOHN.
MY press, that has called you (as tyranny drove her)
Rogues, rebels and rascals, a thousand times over,
Shall be at your service by day and by night,
To publish whatever you think proper to write
Those types which have raised George the third to a level
With angels -- shall prove him as black as the devil,
To him that contrived him a shame and disgrace,
Nor blessed with one virtue to honor his race!
WHO knows but, in time, I may rise to be great,
And have the good fortune to manage a state?
Great noise among people great changes denotes,
And I shall have money to purchase their votes --
The time is approaching, I Will venture to say,
When folks of my stamp shall come into play,
When the false-hearted Tory shall give himself airs,
And rise to take hold of the helm of affairs,
While the honest bold soldier that sought your renown,
Like a dog in the dirt shall be crushed and held down.
OF honors and profits allow me a share!
I frequently dream of a president's chair!
And visions full often intrude on my brain,
That for me to interpret, would rather be vain.
BLESSED seasons advance, when Tories shall find
That they can be happy, and Whigs can be kind,
When Rebels no longer at Traitors shall spurn,
When ARNOLD himself shall in triumph return!
BUT my paper informs me it is time to conclude;
I fear my address has been rather too rude --
If it has -- for my boldness your pardon I pray,
And further, at present, presume not to say,
Except that (for form's sake) in haste I remain
Your humble Petitioner -- honest -- HUGH GAIN.
STANZAS, OCCASIONED BY The Departure of the BRITISH from CHARLESTON, December
14, 1782.
HIS triumphs of a moment done;
His race of desolation run,
The Briton, yielding to his fears,
To other shores with sorrow steers:
To other shores -- and coarser climes
He goes, reflecting on his crimes,
His broken oaths, a murdered HAYNE,
And blood of thousands, spilt in vain.
To Cooper's stream, advancing slow,
Ashley no longer tells his woe,
No longer mourns his limpid flood
Discolored deep with human blood.
Lo! where those social streams combine
Again the friends of Freedom join;
And, while they stray where once they bled,
Rejoice to find their tyrants fled.
Since memory paints that dismal day
When British squadrons held the sway,
And circling close on every side,
By sea and land retreat denied --
Shall she recall that mournful scene,
And not the virtues of a GREEN,
Who great in war -- in danger tried,
Has won the day, and crushed their pride.
Through barren wastes and ravaged lands
He led his bold undaunted bands,
Through sickly climes his standard bore
Where never army marched before:
By fortitude, with patience joined,
(The virtues of a noble mind)
He spread, wherever our wars are known,
His country's honor and his own.
Like Hercules, his generous plan
Was to redress the wrongs of men;
Like him, accustomed to subdue,
He freed the world from monsters too,
Through every want and every ill
We saw him persevering still,
Through Autumn's damps and Summer's heat,
'Till his great purpose was complete.
Like the bold eagle, from the skies,
That stoops to seize his trembling prize,
He darted on the slaves of kings
At Camden plains and Eutaw Springs.
Ah! had our friends that led the fray
Survived the ruins of that day,
We should not damp our joy with pain,
Nor sympathising now complain.
Strange! that of those who nobly dare
Death always claims so large a share,
That those of feelings most refined
Are soonest to the grave consigned.
But fame is theirs -- and future days
On pillar'd brass shall tell their praise;
Shall tell -- when cold neglect is dead --
" These for their country fought and bled,"
STANZAS, OCCASIONED BY The King's SPEECH, recommending Peace with the American
States -- March, 1783.
GROWN sick of war, and war's alarms,
Good GEORGE has changed his note at last --
Conquest and Death have lost their charms;
He and his nation stand aghast
To see what horrid lengths they have gone,
And what a brink they stand upon.
Old BUTE and NORTH! twin sons of hell,
If you advised him to retreat
Before our humbled thousands fell
And lay submissive at his feet,
Awake once more his latent fire,
And feed with hope his heart's desire;
The Macedonian wept and sighed
Because no other world was found
Where he might glut his rage and pride,
And by its ruin be renowned;
The world that Sawny wished to view
George fairly had and lost it too!
Let jarring powers make war or peace,
Monster! -- no peace shall greet thy breast:
Our murdered friends shall never cease
To hover round and break thy rest!
The Furies shall thy bosom tear,
Remorse, distraction and despair
And hell with all its fiends be there!
Cursed be the ship that ever sets sail
Hence, freighted for thy odious shore;
May tempests over her strength prevail,
Destruction round her roar!
May Nature all her aids deny,
The sun refuse his light,
The needle from its object fly,
No star appear by night;
'Till the base pilot, conscious of his crime,
Directs the prow to some more grateful clime.
Genius! that first our race designed,
To other kings impart
The finer feelings of the mind,
The virtues of the heart;
Whenever the honors of a throne
Fall to the bloo^y and the base,
Like Britain's monster pull them down,
Like his be their disgrace!
Hibernia, seize each native right!
Neptune, exclude him from the main;
Like her that sunk with all her freight,
The Royal George, take all his fleet,
And never let them rise again:
Consine him to his gloomy isle,
Let Scotland rule her half,
Spare him to curse his fate awhile,
And WHITEHEAD, William Whitehead, Poet Laureat to his majesty -- author o^ the
execrable birthday Odes.
thou to write his Epitaph.
A NEW YORK TORY's EPISTLE TO One of his Friends in PENNSYLVANIA. -- Written
previous to his departure for Nova Scotia.
May, 1783.
DARK glooms the day that sees me leave this shore,
To which fate whispers I must come no more:
From civil broils what dire disasters flow --
Those broils condemn me to a land of woe
Where barren pine trees shade the dreary steep,
Frown over the soil or murmur to the deep,
Where sullen fogs their heavy wings expand,
And nine months winte^ chills the dismal land!
Could no kind stars have marked a different way,
Stars that presided on my natal day? --
Why is not man endued with power to know
The ends and upshots of events below?
Why did not heaven (some other gift denied)
Teach me to take the true-born BUCKSKIN side,
Show me the balance of the wavering fates
And fortune smiling on these newborn STATES!
FRIEND of my heart! -- my refuge and relief,
Who helped me on through seven long years of grief,
Whose better genius taught you to remain
In the soft quiet of your rural reign,
Who still despised the Rebels and their cause,
And, while you paid the taxes, damned their laws,
And wisely stood spectator of the fray
Nor trusted GEORGE, whatever he chose to say*
Thrice happy thou, who wore a double face,
And as the balance turned could each embrace;
Too happy JANUS! had I shared thy art,
To speak a language foreign to my heart,
And stooped from pomp and dreams of regal state,
To court the friendship of the men I hate,
These strains of woe had not been penned today,
Nor I to foreign climes been forced away:
Ah! GEORGE -- that name provokes my keenest rage,
Did he not swear, and promise, and engage
His loyal sons to nurture and defend,
To be their God, their father and their friend --
Yet basely quits us on a hostile coast,
And leaves us wretched where we need him most:
His is the part to promise and deceive,
By him we wander and by him we grieve;
Since the first day that these dissentions grew,
When Gage to Boston brought his blackguard crew,
From place to place we urge our vagrant flight
To follow still this vapor of the night,
From town to town have run our various race,
And acted all that is mean and all that is base --
Ye^ -- from that ^^ay until this hour we roam,
Vagrants forever from our native home!
AND yet, perhaps, fate sees the golden hour
When happier hands shall crush rebellious power,
When hostile tribes their plighted faith shall own
And swear subjection to the British throne,
When George the fourth shall their petitions spurn,
And banished Tories to their fields return.
FROM dreams of conquest, worlds and empires won
Britain awaking, mourns her setting sun,
No rays of joy her evening hour illume,
It Is one sad chaos, one unmingled gloom!
Too soon she sinks unheeded to the grave,
No eye to pity and no hand to save:
What are her crimes that she alone must bend?
Where are her hosts to conquer and defend --
Must she alone with these new regions part,
These realms that lay the nearest to her heart,
But soared at once to independent power,
Not sunk like Scotland in the trying hour? --
See slothful Spaniards golden empires keep,
And rule vast realms beyond the Atlantic deep;
Must we alone surrender half our reign,
And they their empires and their worlds retain?
Britannia rise -- send JOHNSTONE to PERU,
Seize thy bold thunders and the war renew,
Conquest or ruin -- one must be thy doom,
Strike -- and secure a triumph or a tomb!
BUT we, sad outcasts from our native reign,
Driven from these shores, a poor deluded train,
In distant wilds, conducted by despair,
Seek, vainly seek, a hiding place from care!
Even now yon' tribes, the foremost of the band,
Crowd to the ships and cover all the strand:
Forced from their friends their country and their god
I see the unhappy miscreants leave the sod!
Matrons and men walk sorrowing side by side
And virgin grief, and poverty, and pride,
All, all with aching hearts prepare to sail
And late repentance (...) avail?
While yet I stand on this forbidden ground
I hear the death-bell of destruction sound,
And threatening hosts with vengeance on their brow
Cry "where are Britain's base adherents now?"
These, hot for vengeance, by resentment led,
Blame on our hearts the failings of the head;
To us no peace, no favors they extend,
Their rage no bounds, their hatred knows no end;
In one firm league I see them all combined,
We, like the damned, can no forgiveness find --
As soon might Satan from perdition rise,
And the lost angels gain their vanished skies
As malice cease in their dark souls to burn,
Or we, once fled, be suffered to return.
CURSED be the union that was formed with France,
I see their lillies and the stars advance!
Did they not turn our triumphs to retreats,
And prove our conquests nothing but defeats? --
My heart misgives me as their chiefs draw near,
I feel the influence of all potent fear,
Henceforth must I, abandoned and distressed,
Knock at the door of pride, a beggar guest,
And learn from years of misery and pain
Not to oppose fair Freedom's ca^se again! --
One truth is clear from changes such as these,
Kings cannot always conquer when they please,
Nor are they rebels who mere freedom claim,
Conquest alone can ratify the name --
But great the task, their efforts to control
When genuine virtue fires the stubborn soul;
The warlike beast in Lybian deserts placed
To reign the master of the sunburned waste
Not tamely yields to bear a servile chain,
Force may attempt it, and attempt in vain,
Nervous and bold, by native valor led,
His prowess strikes the proud invader dead,
By force nor fraud from freedom's charms beguiled
He reigns secure the monarch of the wild.
TANTALUS.

RIVINGTON's CONFESSIONS.
PART I. Addressed to the WHIGS of NEW YORK.
December 31, 1783.
LONG life and low spirits were never my choice,
As long as I live I intend to rejoice;
When life is worn out, and no wine's to be had
It Is time enough then to be serious and sad.
It Is time enough then to reflect and repent
When our liquor is gone, and our money is spent,
But I cannot endure what is practiced by some
This anticipating of evils to come:
A debt must be paid, I am sorry to say,
Alike, in their turns, by the grave and the gay,
And due to a despot that none can deceive
Who grants us no respite and signs no reprieve.
Thrice happy is he that from care can retreat,
And its plagues and vexations put under his feet;
Blow the storm as it may, he is always in trim,
And the sun's in the zenith forever to him.
Since the world then in earnest is nothing but care,
(And the world will allow I have also my share)
Yet, tossed as I am in the stormy expanse,
The best way, I find, is to leave it to chance.
Look round, if you please, and survey the wide ball
And chance, you will find, has direction of all:
'Twas owing to chance that I first saw the light,
And chance may destroy me before it is night!
'Twas a chance, a mere chance, that your arms gained the day
'Twas a chance that the Britons so soon went away,
To chance by their leaders the nation is cast
And chance to perdition will send them at last.
Now because I remain when the puppies are gone
You would willingly see me hanged quartered and drawn
Though I think I have logic sufficient to prove
That the chance of my stay -- is a proof of my love.
For deeds of destruction some hundreds are ripe,
But the worst of my foes are your lads of the type:
Because they have nothing to put on their shelves
They are striving to make me as poor as themselves.
There Is LOUDON and KOLLOCK, these strong bulls Bashar
Are striving to book me away from my station,
And HOL^, all at once, is as wonderful great
As if none but himself was to print for the STATE.
Ye all are convinced I Would a right to expect
That a sinner returning you would not reject --
Quite sick of the scarlet and slaves of the throne,
It Is now at your option to make me your own.
Suppose I had gone with the Tories and rabble
To star^e, or be drowned on the shoals of cape Sable,
I had suffered, it is true -- but I Will have you to know,
You nothing had gained by the voice of my woe.
You say that with grief and dejection of heart
I packed up my awls with a view to depart,
That my shelves were dismantled, my cellars unstor'd,
My boxes afloat, and my hampers on board:
And hence you infer (I am sure without reason)
That a right you possess to entangle my weazon --
Yet your barns I never burnt, nor your blood have I spilt,
And my terror alone was no proof of my guilt.
The charge may be true -- for I found it in vain
To lean on a staff that was broken in twain,
And ere I had gone at Port Roseway to fix,
I had chose to sell drams on the margin of Styx.
I confess, that, with shame and contrition oppressed,
I signed an agreement to go with the rest,
But ere they weighed anchor to sail their last trip,
I saw they were vermin, and gave them the (...).
Now, why you should call me the worst man alive,
On the word of a convert, I cannot contrive,
Though turned a plain honest republican, still
You own me no proselyte, do what I will.
My paper is altered -- good people, don't fret;
I call it no longer the ROYAL GAZETTE:
To me a great monarch has lost all his charms,
I have pulled down his LION, and trampled his ARMS.
While fate was propitious, I thought they might stand,
You know I was zealous for George's command,
But since he disgraced it, and left us behind,
If I thought him an angel -- I Have altered my mind.
On the very same day that his army went hence
I ceased to tell lies for the sake of his pence;
And what was the reason -- the true one is best --
I worship no suns when they move to the west:
In this I resemble a Turk or a Moor,
Bright Phoebus ascending, I pros^rate adore;
And, therefore, excuse me for printing some lays,
An ode or a sonnet in Washington's praise.
His prudence alone has preserved your dominions,
This bravest and boldest of all the Virginians!
And when he is gone -- I pronounce it with pain --
We scarcely shall meet with his equal again.
Old Plato asserted that life is a dream
And man but a shadow, (whatever he may seem)
By which it is plain he intended to say
That man, like a shadow, must vanish away:
If this be the fact, in relation to man,
And if each one is striving to get what he can,
I hope, while I live, you will all think it best,
To allow me to bustle along with the rest.
A view of my life, though some parts might be solemn,
Would make, on the whole, a ridiculous volume:
In the life that is hereafter (to speak with submission)
I hope I shall publish a better edition:
Even swine you permit to subsist in the street; --
You pity a dog that lies down to be beat --
Then forget what is past -- for the year's at a close --
And men of my age have some need of repose.
NEW YORK.
September, 1783.
THOU mistress of a warlike State,
What crime of thine deserves this fate;
While other towns to freedom rise,
In thee that flame of honor dies.
With wars and horrors overspread,
Seven years and more, we fought and bled,
Seized British hosts and Hessian bands,
And all -- to leave thee in their hands.
While Tory tribes forsake our plains,
In you a motley crew remains --
Must vipers through thy streets prepare,
Must poison taint thy purer air?
Ah! what a scene afflicts mine eye,
In thee what putrid monsters lie!
What dirt and mud, and mouldering walls,
Burnt domes, dead dogs, and funerals!
Those grassy banks where often I stood,
And fondly viewed the passing flood,
There owls obscene, that day light shun,
Pollute the waters as they run.
Thus in the ^ast -- once Asia's queen,
P^lmyra's tottering towers are seen;
While through her streets the serpent feeds,
Thus she puts on her mourning weeds.
Lo! Skinner there collects a crew,
(Their temples brushed with Stygian dew)
While to receive the ghastly freight
A thousand sable galleys wait.
Had he been born in days of old,
When men with gods their beasts enrolled,
Like Nero's horse, he had been made
A consul for some Nero's aid:
O chief, that wrangled at the bar,
Grown old in less successful war,
What crowds of miscreants round thee stand
What vagrants bow to thy command!
Long, much too long, in York reside
A race that mortifies our pride --
A race that all the world defames,
And Nova Scotia only claims.
When Jove from darkness smote the sun,
And nature earth from chaos won,
One part to polish she forgot,
And Nova Scotia was the spot.
Jove saw her vile neglect, and cried,
"What madness did thy fancy guide!
"Why have thou left so large a place
"With winter brooding over its face!
"No trees of stately growth ascend*
"Eternal fogs their wings expand --
"My favorite, MAN, I place not here,
"But phantoms of a darker sphere:
"If Nature's self forgets her trade,
"What strange confusion will be made --
"Such scenes as this had been no crime,
"In Saturn's cold, unsocial clime;
"But such a blemish here to se^,
"How can it else but anger me?
"Where chilling winds forever freeze,
"What fool will fix in climes like these?"
Nature, half timorous, dared reply,
"When earth I formed, I don't deny
"Some parts I portion'd out for care,
"And Nova Scotia has her share;
"Mankind are formed of different souls,
"Some will be suited near the poles,
"Some pleased beneath the burning line,
"And some, New Scotland, will be thine:
"Yet, in due time, my plastic hand
"Shall mould it over, if you command;
"By you I act -- if you stand still,
"The world comes tumbling down the hill."
"Untouched (said Jove) remain the place; --
"In days to come, I Will form a race
"Born to commit the basest crime,
"With souls congenial to the clime.
"When traitors to their country die,
"To realms like this their phantoms fly,
"But when the brave by death decay,
"The soul finds out a different way:
"Then nature cease, at my command --
"As matters are, let matters stand,
"While this degenerate work of thine
"To thieves and traitors I resign."
RIVINGTON's CONFESSIONS.
PART II. Addressed to the WHIGS of NEW YORK.
BUT as to the Tories that yet may remain,
They scarcely need give you a moment of pain:
What dare they attempt when their masters are fled; --
When the soul is departed who wars with the dead?
Poor souls! for the love of the king and his nation
They have had their full quota of mortification;
Wherever they fought, or whatever they won
The dream's at an end -- the delusion is done.
The TEMPLE you raised was so wonderful large
Not one of them thought you could answer the charge,
It seemed a mere castle constructed of vapor,
Surrounded with gibbets and founded on PAPER.
On the basis of freedom you built it too strong!
And CLINTON confessed, when you held it so long,
That if any thing human the fabric could shatter
The ROYAL GAZETTE must accomplish the matter. Si Pergama dextra
Defendi possent, etiam hac defensa fuissent.
Virg.

An engine like that, in such hands as my own
Had shaken king CODJOE The Negro king in Jamaica, whom the English declared
in^^pendent in 173^.
himself from his throne,
In another rebellion had ruined the Scot,
While the Pope and Pretender had both gone to pot.
If ^ou stood my attacks, I have nothing to say --
I (...), like the Swiss, for the sake of my pay;
But while I was proving your fabric unsound
Our vessel missed stay, and we all went aground.
Thus ended in ruin what madness begun,
And thus was our nation disgraced and undone,
Renowned as we were, and the lords of the deep,
If our outset was folly, our exit was sleep.
A dominion like THIS, that some millions had cost! --
The king might have wept when he saw it was lost; --
This jewel -- whose value I cannot describe;
This pearl -- that was richer than all his Dutch tribe.
When the war came upon us, you very well knew
My income was small and my riches were few --
If your money was scarce, and your prospects were bad,
Why hinder me printing for people that had?
'Twoud have pleased you, no doubt, had I gone with a few setts
Of books, to exist in your cold Massachusetts;
Or to wander at Newark, like ill fated HUGH,
Not a shirt to my back, nor a soal to my shoe.
Now, if we mistook (as we did, it is plain)
Our error was owing to wicked HUGH GAIN,
For he gave us such scenes of your starving and strife
As proved that his pictures were drawn from the life.
On the waves of the Styx had he rode quarantine,
He could not have looked more infernally lean
Than the day, when returning dismayed and distressed,
Like the doves to their windows, he flew to his nest.
The part that he acted, by some men of sense
Was wrongfully held to be malice propense,
When to all the world it was perfectly plain,
One principle ruled him -- a passion for gain.
You pretend I have suffered no loss in the cause,
And have, therefore, no right to partake of your laws:
Some people love talking -- I find to my cost,
I too am a loser -- my character's lost!
Nay, did not your printers repeatedly stoop
To descant and reflect on my PORTABLE SOUP?
At me have your porcupines darted the quill,
You have plundered my Office, November, 1775,
and published my Will. See Page 247, etc.

Resolved upon mischief, you held it no crime
To steal my Reflections, See Pages 310, 313, etc.
and print them in rhyme,
When all the world knew, or at least they might guess,
That the time to reflect was no time to confess;
You never considered my children and wife,
That my lot was to toil and to struggle through life;
My windows you broke -- they are all on a jar,
And my house you have made a mere old man of war.
And still you insist I Have no right to complain! --
Indeed if I do, I Am afraid it is in vain --
Yet am willing to hope you're too learnedly read
To hang up a printer for being misled.
If this be your aim, I must think of a flight --
In less than a month I must bid you goodnight,
And hurry away to that whelp ridden shore
Where CLINTON and CARLETON retreated before.
From signs in the sky, and from tokens on land
I Am inclined to suspect my departure's at hand:
The man in the moon is unusually big,
And INGLIS, they tell me, has grown a good Whig.
For many days past, as the town can attest,
The tail of the weathercock hung to the west --
My shop, the last evening, seemed all in a blaze,
And a hen crow'd at midnight, my waiting man says;
Even then, as I lay with strange whims in my head,
A ghost hove in sight, not a yard from my bed,
It seemed General ROBERTSON, brawly arrayed,
But I grasped at the substance, and found him a shade!
He appeared as of old, when, head of the throng,
And loaded with laurels, he waddled along --
He seemed at the foot of my bedstead to stand
And cried -- "Jemmy Rivington, reach me your hand;
"And Jemmy, (said he) I am sorry to find
"Some demon advised you ^o loiter behind;
"The country is hostile -- you had better get off it,
"Here Is nothing but squables, all plague, and no profit!
"Since the day that Sir William came here with his throng
"He managed things so that they always went wrong,
"And though for his knighthood, he kept MESCHIANZA,
"I think he was nothing but mere Sancho Panca.
"That famous conductor of moonlight retreats,
"Sir Harry, came next with his armies and fleets,
"But, finding the rebels were dying and dead,
"He grounded his arms and retreated to bed.
"Other luck we had once at the battle of Boyne!
"But here they have ruined Earl Charles and Burgoyne,
"Here brave col'nel Monckton was thrown on his back,
"And here lies poor Andre! the best of the pack."
So saying, he flitted away in a trice,
Just adding, "he hoped I would take his advice -- "
Which I surely shall do if you push me too hard --
And so I remain, with eternal regard,
JAMES RIVINGTON, printer, of late, to the king,
But now a republican -- under your wing --
Let him stand where he is -- don't push him down hill,
And he will turn a true Blue-Skin, or just what you will.
THE DYING INDIAN, OR LAST WORDS of SHALUM.
March, 1784.
Debemur morti nos, nostraque.
"ON yonder lake I spread the sail no more!
Vigor, and youth, and active days are past --
Relentless demons urge me to that shore
On whose black forests all the dead are cast:
Ye solemn train, prepare the funeral song,
For I must go to shades below,
Where all is strange, and all is new;
Companion to the airy throng,
What solitary streams,
In dull and dreary dreams,
All melancholy, must I rove along!
To what strange lands must Shalum take his way!
Groves of the dead departed mortals trace;
No deer along these gloomy forests stray,
No huntsmen there take pleasure in the chase,
But all are empty unsubstantial shades,
That ramble through those visionary glades;
No spongy fruits from verdant trees depend,
But sickly orchards there
Do fruits as sickly bear,
And apples a consumptive visage show,
And withered hangs the hurtle-berry blue,
Ah me! what mischiefs on the dead attend.
Wandering a stranger to the shores below,
Where shall I brook or real fountain find?
Lazy and sad deluding waters flow --
Such is the picture in my boding mind!
Fine tales, indeed, they ^ell
Of shades and purling rills,
Where our dead fathers dwell
Beyond the western hills,
But when did ghost return his state to show;
Or who can promise half the tale is true?
I too must be a fleeting ghost -- no more --
None, none but shadows to those mansions go;
I leave my woods, I leave the Huron shore,
For emptier groves below!
Ye charming solitudes,
Ye tall ascending woods,
Ye glassy lakes and prattling streams,
Whose aspect still was sweet,
Whether the sun did greet,
Or the pale moon embraced you with his beams --
Adieu to all!
To all that charmed me where I strayed,
The winding stream, the dark sequestered shade;
Adieu all triumphs here!
Adieu the mountain's lofty swell,
Adieu, thou little verdant hill,
And seas, and stars, and skies -- farewell,
For some remoter sphere!
Perplexed with doubts, and tortured with despair,
Why so dejected at this hopeless s^eep?
Nature at least these ruins may repair,
When death's long dream is over, and she forgets to weep*
Some real world once more may be assigned,
Some new born mansion for the immortal mind! --
Farewell, sweet lake; farewell surrounding woods,
To other groves through midnight glooms I stray,
Beyond the mountains, and beyond the floods,
Beyond the Huron bay!
Prepare the hollow tomb, and place me low,
My trusty bow, and arrows by my side,
The cheerful bottle, and the ven'son store;
For long the journey is that I must go,
Without a partner, and without a guide."
HE spoke, and bid the attending mourners weep;
Then closed his eyes, and sunk to endless sleep.
LINES, INTENDED FOR Mr. Peale's EXHIBITION, Philadelphia, May 10, 1784.
1.
TOWARD the skies
What columns rise
In Roman style, profusely great!
What lamps ascend,
What arches bend,
And swell with more than Roman state!
2.
High over the central arch displayed,
Old Janus shuts his temple door,
And shackles war in darkest shade --
Saturnian times in view once more.
3.
Pride of the human race, behold
In Gallia's king the virtues glow,
Whose conduct proved, whose goodness told
That kings can feel for human woe.
Thrice happy France, in Louis blessed,
Thy genius droops her head no more;
In the calm virtues of the m^nd
Equal to him no Titus shined --
No Trajan -- whom mankind adore.
4.
Another scene too soon displays!
Griefs have their share, and claim their part,
They monuments to ruin raise,
And shed keen anguish over the heart:
Those heroes that in battle fell
Demand a sympathetic tear,
Who fought, our tyrants to repel --
Memory preserves their laurels here.
In vernal skies
Thus tempests rise,
And clouds obscure the brightest sun --
Few wreathes are gained
With blood unstained --
No honors without ruin won.
5.
The arms of France three lillies mark --
In honor's dome with these e^roll'd
The plough, the sheaf, the gliding barque
The riches of our State unfold.
6.
Allied in heaven, a sun and stars
Friendship and peace with France declare --
The branch succeeds the spear of Mars,
Commerce repairs the wastes of war;
In ties of concord ancient foes engage,
Proving the dayspring of a brighter age.
7.
These STATES defended by the brave,
Their military trophies, see!
The virtue that of old did save
Shall still maintain them great and free;
Arts shall pervade the western wi^d,
And savage hearts become more mild.
8.
Of science proud, the source of sway,
Lo! emblematic figures shine;
The arts their kindred forms display,
Manners to soften and refine:
A stately tree to heaven its summit sends,
And clustered fruit from thirteen boughs depends.
9.
With laurel crowned
A chief renowned
(His country saved) his faulchion sheaths;
Neglects his spoils
For rural toils,
And crowns his plough with laurel wreaths;
While we this Roman chief survey,
What apt resemblance strikes the eye!
Those features to the soul convey
A WASHINGTON, in same as high,
Whose prudent, persevering mind
Patience with manly courage joined,
And when disgrace and death were near,
Looked through the black distressing shade,
Struck hostile Britons with unwonted ^ear,
And blasted their best hopes, and pride in ruin laid!
10.
Victorious virtue! aid me to pursue
The tributary verse to triumphs due --
Behold the peasant leave his lowly shed,
Where tufted forests round him grow; --
Though clouds the dark sky overspread,
War's dreadful art his arm essays,
He meets the hostile cannon's blaze,
And pours redoubled vengeance on the foe.
11.
Born to protect and guard our native land,
Victorious virtue! still preserve us free;
PLENTY -- gay child of peace, thy horn expand,
And, CONCORD, teach us to agree!
May every virtue that adorns the soul
Be here advanced to heights unknown before;
Pacific ages in succession roll
'Till nature blots the scene,
Chaos resumes her reign
And heaven with pleasure views its works no more.
VERSES, OCCASIONED BY General WASHINGTON'S arrival in Philadelphia, on his way
to his seat in Virginia.
December, 1783.
1.
THE great, unequal conflict past,
The Briton banished from our shore,
Peace, heav'n-descended, comes at last,
And hostile nations rage no more;
From fields of death the weary swain
Returning, seeks his native plain.
2.
In every vale she smiles serene,
Freedom's bright stars more radiant rise,
New charms she adds to every scene,
Her brighter sun illumes our skies;
Remotest realms admiring stand,
And hail the Hero of our land:
3.
He comes! -- the Genius of these lands --
Fame's thousand tongues his worth confess,
Who conquered with his suffering bands,
And grew immortal by distress:
Thus calms succeed the stormy blast,
And valor is repaid at last.
4.
O WASHINGTON! -- thrice glorious name,
What due rewards can man decree --
Empires are far below thy aim,
And sc^ptres have no charms for thee;
Virtue alone has thy regard,
And she must be thy great reward.
5.
Encircled by extorted power,
Monarchs must envy thy Retreat,
Who cast, in some ill fated hour,
Their country's freedom at their feet;
'Twas thine to act a nobler part
For injured Freedom had thy heart.
6.
For ravaged realms and conquered seas
Rome gave the great imperial prize,
And, swelled with pride, for feats like these,
Transferred her heroes to the skies: --
A brighter scene your deeds display,
You gain those heights a different way.
7.
When Faction reared her snaky head,
And joined with tyrants to destroy,
Wherever you marched the monster fled,
Timorous her arrows to employ;
Hosts caught from you a bolder flame,
And despots trembled at your name.
8.
Ere war's dread horrors ceased to reign,
What leader could your place supply --?
Chiefs crowded to the embattled plain,
Prepared to conquer or to die --
Heroes arose -- but none like you
Could save our lives and freedom too.
9.
In swelling ve^se let kings be read,
And princes sh^ne in polished pro^e;
Without such aid your triumphs spread
Wherever the unequal ocean flows,
To Indian worlds by seas embraced,
And Tartar, tyrant of the waste.
10.
Throughout the cast you gain applause,
And soon the Old World, taught by you,
Shall blush to own her barbarous laws,
Shall learn instruction from the New:
Monarchs shall hear the humble plea,
Nor ^rge too far the proud decree.
11.
Despising pomp and vain parade,
At home you stay, while France and Spain
The secret, ardent wish conveyed,
And hailed you to their shores in vain:
In Vernon's groves you shun the throne,
Admired by kings, but seen by none.
12.
Your fame, thus spread to distant lands,
May envy's fiercest blasts endure,
Like Egypt's pyramids it stands,
Built on a basis more secure;
Time's latest age shall own in you
The patriot and the statesman too.
13.
N^w hu^rying from the busy scene,
Where thy P^^^wmack's waters flow,
May thou enjoy thy rural reign,
And every earthly blessing know;
Thus He Cincinnatus.
whom Rome's proud legions swayed,
Returned, and sought his sylvan shade.
14.
Not less in wisdom than in war
Freedom shall still employ your mind,
Slavery shall vanish, wide and far,
'Till not a trace is left behind;
Your counsels not bestowed in vain
Shall still protect this infant reign.
15.
So when the bright, all-cheering sun
From our contracted view retires,
Though fools may think his race is run,
On other worlds he lights his fires:
Cold climes beneath his influence glow,
And frozen rivers learn to flow.
16.
O say, thou great, exalted name!
What Muse can boast of equal lays,
Thy worth disdains all vulgar fame,
Transcends the noblest poet's praise,
Art soars, unequal to the flight,
And genius sickens at the height.
17.
For states redeemed -- our western reign
Restored by thee to milder sway,
Thy conscious glory shall remain
When this great globe is swept away,
And all is lost that pride admires,
And all the pageant scene expires.
HUMANITY AND INGRATITUDE; A COMMON CASE. [FROM THE FRENCH.]
December, 1784.
1.
BY the side of the sea, in a cottage obscure,
There lived an old fellow named Charlot Boncoeur,
Who was free to his neighbor and good to the poor,
Catching fish was his trade,
And all people said,
That mischief to nothing but fish he designed,
To all people else he was candid and kind.
2.
One day as he went to the brink of the lake,
Persuading the fishes their dinner to take,
(The last he intended they ever should make)
While his hooks he employed to their sorrow and woe,
A grunting he heard in the waters below,
And casting his eye to the bottom (for here
We'll suppose that the water was perfectly clear)
He saw on the bed of the liquid profound
An unfortunate wight who was drowning, or drowned.
3.
That the man to the surface once more might ascend,
He took up his pole, with a hook at the end,
And to it he fell,
And managed so well,
That soon to the margin the carcass was drawn,
And who should it be but his old neighbor John!
Now, some how or other, it popp'd in his head,
That in spite of his drowning the man was not dead,
And while he was thinking what means to devise
That his friend might recover and open his eyes,
He saw, with vexation and sorrow, no doubt,
Tha^ in lugging him up he had put one eye (...) --
However, convinced, from what he had heard,
That John might be living for aught that appeared;
To his cottage he took him, and there had him bled,
Rubbed, rolled on a barrel, and then put to bed.
So in less than a week (to his praise be it said)
In less than a week the man was as found
(Excepting the loss of his eye, and the wound)
As if in his life he had never been drowned.
5.
But when John had begun to travel about,
He was sadly chagrin'd that his eye was put ou^,
And forgetting what service his neighbor had done him,
Went off to a lawyer, and clapped a writ on him,
Talked much of the value of what he had lost,
That Charlot must pay all the damage and cost,
And if with such sentence he would not comply,
He swore he would have his identical eye.
6.
That Charlot was vexed, we hardly need say,
Yet he urged what he could in a moderate way,
Declared to the judges, by way of defense,
"That the action was wrought without malice propense,
That his conscience excused him for what he had done,
That fortune was only to blame -- and that John
Might have thought himself happy (when death was so nigh)
To purchase his life with the loss of an eye --
That the loss of an eye was a serious affair
Was certain -- and yet he would be bold to declare,
That the man who can show but one eye in his head,
Is better by far than a man that is dead."
7.
In answer to all the defendant's fine pleading,
John said, "He had never yet found in his reading
A people, or nation, or senator sage,
Or a law, or a custom in whatever age,
Permitting (unpunished) by force or surprise
One neighbor to put out his next neighbor's eyes."
8.
The lawyers and judges were all at a stand
Which way to conclude on the matter in hand.
'Till a half-witted fellow, who chanced to be there,
Undertook to decide on this weighty affair,
And cried, "Can you doubt in a case that is so plain
Be guided by me, and you will never doubt again:
The plea of the plaintiff rests wholly on this;
In fishing him up he takes it amiss,
That Charlot maneuvered with so little skill,
So aukwardly fumbled and managed so ill
As thus with his bungling to ruin John's look,
And put out an eye with the point of his hook --
Well, now, my lord judges, attend my decree,
Straitway let the plaintiff be thrown in the sea,
And after reposing a while on the bottom,
If he get out alone from where Charlot got him,
Safe, sound, and undamag'd -- why, then it is my sentence
That Charlot be punished and brought to repentance;
But if, after gasping and flouncing about,
He drowns in the water, and never gets out,
Why, then, it is justice, it must be confessed,
That Charlot forthwith be discharged from arrest,
Absolved from all punishment due to the wound,
And paid in the bargain, 'cause John was not drowned."
9.
The audience were struck with a world of surprise,
To find that a fool could give counsel so wise.
The judges themselves the sentence espoused,
And freely consented that John should be sous'd. --
JOHN finding that matters had took a wrong turn,
Nor waiting to see if the court would adjourn,
Sneaked out of the house, with a hiss of disgrace,
In dread, left the sentence should quickly take place --
Grown pliant at last, his cause he withdrew --
His plea was so bad, and his friends were so few,
It was needless he thought on the cast of a (...)
To (...) his life for the sake of an eye,
And concluded 'twas better to give up the suit,
Tha^ risk the one left, and be drowned ^o boot.
PEWTER PLATTER ALLEY.
A POEM.
FROM Christ Church graves, across the way,
A dismal, horrid place is found,
Where rushing winds exert their sway,
And Greenland winter chills the ground:
No blossoms there are seen to bloom,
No sun pervades the dreary gloom!
The people of that stormy place
In penance for some ancient crime
Are held in a too narrow space,
Like those beyond the bounds of time,
Who darkened still, perceive no day,
While seasons waste, and moons decay.
Cold as the shade that wraps them round,
This icy region prompts our fear;
And he who treads this frozen ground
Shall curse the chance that brought him here --
The slippery mass predic^^ his fate,
A broken arm, a wounded pate.
When August sheds his sultry beam,
May Celia never find this place,
Nor see, upon the muddy stream,
And mourn the wrinkles on her face!
And may I never discover there
The gray that mingles with my hair.
The watchman sad, whose drowsy call
Proclaims the hour forever fled,
Avoids this path to Pluto's hall;
For who would wish to wake the dead! --
Still let them sleep -- it is no crime --
They pay no tax to know the time.
No coaches hence, in glittering pride,
Convey their freight to take the air,
No gods nor heroes here reside,
Nor powdered beau, nor lady fair --
All, all to warmer regions flee,
And leave these glooms to Town Printer of the Evening Post.
and me.
VERSES MADE At SEA, in a heavy gale.
HAPPY the man who, safe on shore,
Now trim^, at home, his evening fire;
Unmoved, he hears the tempests roar,
That on the tufted groves expire:
Alas! on us they doubly fall,
Our feeble barque must bear them all.
Now to their haunts the birds retreat,
The squirrel seeks his hollow tree,
Wolves in their shaded caverns meet,
All, all are blessed but wretched we --
Foredoom'd a stranger to repose,
No rest the unsettled ocean knows.
While over the dark abyss we roam,
Perhaps, whatever the pilots say,
We saw the Sun descend in gloom,
^o more to see his rising ray,
But buried low, by far too deep,
On coral beds, unpitied, sleep!
But what a strange, uncoasted strand
Is that, where death permits no day --
No charts have we to mark that land,
No compass to direct that way --
What pilot shall explore that realm,
What new Columbus take the helm.
While death and darkness both surround,
And tempests rage with lawless power,
Of friendship's voice I hear no sound,
No comfort in this dreadful hour --
What friendship can in tempests be,
What comfort on this angry sea?
The barque, accustomed to obey,
No more the ^rembling pilots guide,
Alone she grop^s her trackless way,
While mountains burst on either side --
Thus, skill and science both must fall,
And ruin is the ^ot of all.
ELEGIAC VERSES ON THE DEATH of a favorite DOG.
1785.
IF all the world mourn for the loss of a friend,
And even in stanza their virtues commend,
Why, JOLLY, should thou by the green turf be pressed,
And not have a stanza along with the rest?
The miser, that never gave a farthing away,
Xantippe, that scolded throughout the long day,
The drunken young Quixote that died in his prime,
In their graves never fail to be flattered with rhyme.
There is an old a^age our poets have read,
That nothing but good should be spoke of the dead,
Hence even your critics of truth we defy,
When we write of the dead -- they allow us to lie.
But I, my dear dog, will a poem compose,
That shall break half the hearts of the belles and the beaus,
To the view of each reader your virtues shall shine
In verses, that Hannah shall fancy divine.
The Stoics of old were forbid to complain
At losses and crosses, vexation and pain --
When the day I recall that deprived me of you,
I find, my dear Jolly, I Am not of their crew.
How often in the year shall I visit your grave
Amid the long forest that darkens the wave!
How often lament, when the day's at a close,
That this kitchen of death is your place of repose.
Ah here! (I will say) was the path where he run; --
My dog with his smellers, and I with my gun --
And here, in this spot, where the willow trees grow,
He brought out a rabbit that lurked in the snow!
If absent a while on the ocean I strayed,
I still had in view to revisit this shade --
But alas! you considered the prospect as vain,
Or how could you die till I saw you again.
A country there is, it is invain to deny,
Where monkies and puppies are sent when they die,
But you -- and old MINOS shall grant you his pass --
Must rank with the dogs of the gentleman class.
The boatman of Styx shall a passage prepare,
And the dog at the portal shall welcome you there,
With the Cynics of hell you shall walk a grav^ pace,
For dogs among doctors are no such disgrace.
On the bark of this maple, that shadows your bones,
I am proud to engrave these poetical groans,
If a tombstone of wood serves a soldier -- it is clear,
This tree may preserve all your fame for a year.
For the squirrel you tree'd, and the duck from the lake,
These stanzas are all the return I can make;
But these, unaffected, my friendship will show --
And the world shall allow that I give you your due.
THE PROGRESS OF BALLOONS.
1785.
Perdomita te^lus, tumida ces^erunt freta,
Inferna nostros regna sensere impetus;
Immune coelum ett, dignus Alcidae labor,
In alta mundi spatia sublimes feremur.
Senec. Her^. Furens.
ASSIST me, ye muses, (whose harps are in tune)
To tell of the flight of the gallant balloon!
As high as my subject p^rmit me to soar
To heights unattempted, unthought of before.
Ye grave learned Doctors, whose trade is to sigh,
Who labor to chalk out a road to the sky,
Improve on your plans -- or I Will venture to say,
A chemist, of Paris, will show us the way.
The earth on its surface has all been surveyed,
The sea has been traveled -- and deep in the shade
The kingdom of Pluto has heard us at work,
When we dig for his metals wherever they lurk.
But who would have thought that invention could rise
To find out a method to soar to the skies,
And pierce the bright regions, which ages assigned
To spirits unbodied, and flights of the mind.
Let the gods of Olympus their revels prepare --
By the aid of some pounds of inflammable air
We'll visit them soon -- and forsake this dull ball
With coat, shoes and stockings, fat carcass and all!
How France is distinguished in Louis's reign!
What cannot her genius and courage attain?
Throughout the wide world have her arms found the way,
And art to the stars is extending her sway.
At sea let the British their neighbors defy --
The French shall have frigates to traverse the sky,
In this ^^vigation more fortunate prove,
And cruise at their ease in the climates above.
If the English should venture to sea with their fleet,
A host of balloons in a trice they shall meet.
The French from the zenith their wings shall display,
And souse on these sea-dogs and bear them away.
YE sages, who travel on mighty designs,
To measure meridians and parallel lines --
The talk being tedious -- take heed, if you please --
Construct a balloon -- and you will do it with ease.
And ye who the heaven's broad concave survey,
And, aided by glasses, its secrets betray,
Who gaze, the night through, at the wonderful scene
Yet still are complaining of vapors between,
Ah, seize the conveyance, and fearlesly rise
To peep at the lanthorn^ that light up the skies,
And floating above, on our ocean of air,
Inform us, by letter, what people are there.
In Saturn, advise us if snow ever melts,
And what are the uses of Jupiter's belts;
(Mars being willing) pray send us word, greeting,
If his people are fonder of fighting than eating.
That Venus has horns we have no reason to doubt,
(I forget what they call him who first found it out)
And you will find, I Am afraid, if you venture too near,
That the spirits of cuckolds inhabit her sphere.
Our folks of good morals it woefully grieves,
That Mercury's people are villains and thieves,
You Will see how it is -- but I Will venture to show
For a dozen among them, twelve dozens below.
From long observation one proof may be had
That the men in the moon are incurably mad;
However, compare us, and if they exceed
They must be surprizingly crazy indeed.
BUT now, to have done with our planets and moons --
Come, grant me a patent for making balloons --
For I find that the time is approaching -- the day
When horses shall fail, and the horsemen decay.
Post riders, at present (called Centaurs of old)
Who brave all the seasons, hot weather and cold,
In future shall leave their dull poneys behind
And travel, like ghosts, on the wings of the wind.
The stagemen, whose gallopers scarce have the power
Through the dirt to convey you ten miles in an hour,
When advanced to balloons shall so furiously drive
You Will hardly know whether you're dead or alive.
The man who at Boston sets out with the sun,
If the wind should be fair, may be with us at one,
At Gunpowder Ferry drink whiskey at three
And at six be at Edentown, ready for tea.
(The machine shall be ordered, we hardly need say,
To travel in darkness as well as by day)
At Charleston by ten he for sleep shall prepare,
And by twelve the next day be the devil knows where.
When the ladies grow sick of the city in June,
What a jaunt they shall have in the flying balloon!
Whole mornings shall see them at toilets preparing,
And forty miles high be their afternoon's airing.
YET more with its fitness for commerce I Am struck;
What loads of tobacco shall fly from Kentuck,
What packs of best beaver -- bar-iron and pig,
What budgets of leather from Conococheague!
If Britain should ever disturb us again,
(As they threaten to do in the next George's reign)
No doubt they will play us a set of new tunes,
And pepper us well from their fighting balloons.
To market the farmers shall shortly repair
With their hogs and potatoes, wholesale, through the air,
Skim over the water as light as a feather,
Themselves and their turkies conversing together.
SUCH wonders as these from balloons shall arise --
And the giants of old, that assaulted the skies
With their Ossa on Pelion, shall freely confes^
That all they attempted was nothing to this.
LINES OCCASIONED BY The Death of General JOSEPH REED -- March, 1785.
SWIFT to the dust descends each honored name
That raised their country to these heights of fame,
Sages that planned, and chiefs that led the way
To freedom's temple -- all too soon decay;
Alike submit to one unaltered doom,
Their glories closing in perpetual gloom,
Like the dim splendours of the evening, fade,
While night advances to complete the shade.
REED! it is for thee we shed the unpurchas'd tear,
Bend over thy tomb, and plant our laurels here,
Thy own brave deeds the noblest pile transcend,
And virtue, patriot virtue, mourns her friend,
Gone to those realms where worth may claim regard,
And gone where virtue meets her best reward.
NO single art engaged his manly mind,
In every scene his active genius shined,
Nature in him, in honor to our age,
At once composed the soldier and the sage; --
Firm to his purpose, vigilant, and bold,
Detesting traitors, and despising gold,
He scorned all bribes from Britain's hostile throne --
For all his country's wrongs were thrice his own.
REED, rest in peace, for time's impartial page
Shall blast the wrongs of this ungrateful age:
Long in these climes thy name shall flourish fair,
The statesman's pattern, and the poet's care;
Long on these plains thy memory shall remain,
And still new tributes from new ages gain,
Fair to the eye that injured honor rise --
Nor traitors triumph while the patriot dies.
THE FIVE AGES.
1785.
THE reign of old Saturn is highly renowned
For many fine things that no longer are found,
Trees always in blossom, men free from all pains,
And shepherds as mild as the sheep on their plains.
In the midland Equator, dispensing his sway,
The Sun, they pretended, pursued his bright way,
Not rambled, unsteady, to regions remote,
To talk, once a year, with the crab and the goat.
From a motion like this, have the sages explained,
How summer for ever her empire maintained;
While the turf of the fields by the plough was unbroke,
And a house for the shepherd, the shade of the oak.
YET some say there never was seen on this stage
What poets affirm of that innocent age,
When the brutal creation from bondage was free,
And men were exactly what mankind should be.
But why should they labor to prove it a dream? --
The poets of old were in love with the theme,
And, leaving to others mere truth to repeat,
In the regions of fancy they found it complete.
THREE ages have been on this globe, they pretend;
And the fourth, some have thought, is to be without end;
The first was of Gold -- But a fifth, we will say,
Has already begun, and is now on its way.
Since the days of Arcadia, if ever there shined
A ray of the first on the heads of mankind,
Let critics dispute -- but with us it is clear,
That the era of PAPER was realiz'd here.
FOUR ages, however, at least have been told,
The first is compared to the purest of Gold --
But, as bad luck would have it, its circles were few,
And the next was of Silver -- if Ovid says true.
But this, like the former, did rapidly pass --
While that which came after was nothing but Brass --
An age of mere tinkers -- and when it was lost,
Old Iron succeeded -- we know to our cost.
AND hence you may fairly infer, if you please,
That we are nothing but blacksmiths of various degrees,
Since each has a weapon, of one sort or other,
To stir up the coals, and to shake at his brother.
Should the Author of nature reverse his decree,
And bring back the age we are so anxious to see,
Agreement, alas! -- you would look for invain,
The stuff might be changed, but the staff would remain.
The lawyer would still find a client to fleece,
The doctor, a patient to pack off in peace,
The parson, some hundreds of hearers prepared
To measure his grace by the length of his beard.
Old Momus would still have some cattle to lead,
Who would hug hi^ opinions, and swallow his creed --
So it is best, I believe, that things are as they are --
If Iron's the meanest -- we have nothing to fear.
TO THE GREAT -- THE WARLIKE -- THE UNITED -- THE INDEPENDENT AMERICANS!
1785.
WE Tories, who lately were frightened away,
When you marched into York all in battle array,
Dear whigs, in our exile have somewhat to say.
From the clime of New Scotland we wish you to know
We still are in being -- mere specter of woe,
Our dignity high, but our spirits are low.
Great people we are, and are called the king's friends --
But on friendships like these what advantage attends?
We may starve and be damned when we have answered his ends!
The Indians themselves, whom no treaties can bind,
We have reason to think are perversely inclined --
And where we have friends is not easy to find.
From the day we arrived on this desolate shore
We still have been wishing to see you once more,
And your freedom enjoy, now the danger is over.
Although we be-rebel'd you up hill and down,
It was all for your good -- and to honor a crown
Whose splendors have spoiled better eyes than our own.
That villains we are, is no more than our due,
And so may remain for a century through,
Unless we return, and be doctor'd by you.
Although with the dregs of the world we are class'd,
We hope your resentment will soften at last,
Now your toils are repaid, and our triumphs are past.
When a matter is done, it is a ^olly to fret --
But your market day mornings we cannot forget,
With your coaches to lend, and your horses to let,
Your dinners of beef, and your breakfasts of toast!
But we have no longer such blessings to boast,
No cattle to steal, and no turkies to roast.
Such enjoyments as these, we must tell you with pain,
It Is odds we shall only be wishing in vain
Unless we return, and be brothers again.
We burnt up your mills and your meetings, it is true,
And many bold fellows we crippled and slew --
(Ay! we were the boys that had something to do!)
Old Huddy we hung on the Neversink shore --
But, Sirs, had we hung up a thousand men more,
They had all been avenged in the torments we bore
When Asgill to Jersey you foolishly fetched,
And each of us feared that his neck would be stretched,
When you were be-rebel'd, and we were be-wretch'd.
IN the book of destruction it seems to be written
That Tories must still be dependent on Britain --
The worst of dependence that ever was hit on.
Now their work is concluded -- that pitiful jobb --
They send over convicts to strengthen our mob --
And so we do nothing but snivel and sob.
The worst of all countries has fell to our share,
Where winter and famine provoke our despair,
And fogs are for ever obscuring the air.
Although there be nothing but sea dogs to feed on,
Our friend Jemmy Rivington made it an Eden --
But* alas! he had nothing but lies to proceed on.
Deceived we were all by his damnable schemes --
When he colored it over with gardens and streams,
And grottoes and groves, and the rest of his dreams.
Our heads were so turned by that conjuror's spell,
We swallowed the lies he was tutored to tell --
But his "happy retreats" were the visions of hell.
We feel so enraged we could rip up his weazon,
When we think of the soil he described with its trees on,
And the plenty that reigned, and the charms of each season.
Like a parson that tells of the joys of the blessed
To a man to be hanged -- he himself thought it best
To remain where he was, in his haven of re^t.
Since he helped us away by the means of his types,
His precepts should only have lighted our pipes,
His example was rather to honor your stripes.
Now, if we return, as we are bone of your bone,
We'll renounce all allegiance to George and his throne
And be the best subjects that ever were known.
In a ship, you have seen (where the duty is hard)
The cook and his scullion may claim some regard,
But it takes a good fellow to brace the main yard.
However you despise us because you are free,
The world's at a loss for such fellows as we,
Who can pillage on land and can plunder at sea.
So long for our rations they keep us in waiting --
The Lords and the Commons, perhaps, are debating
If Tories can live without drinking or eating.
So we think it is better to see you, by far --
And have hinted our meaning to governor Parr --
The worst that can happen is -- feathers and tar.
STANZAS ON The EMIGRATION to AMERICA, and peopling the Western Country.
17^5.
TO western woods, and lonely plains,
Pal^mon from the crowd departs,
Where nature's wildest genius reigns,
To tame the soil, and plant the arts --
What wonders there shall freedom show,
What mighty States successive grow!
From Europe's proud, despotic shores
Hither the stranger takes his way,
And in our new found world explores
A happier soil, a milder sway,
Where no proud despot holds him down,
No slaves insult him with a crown.
What charming scenes attract the eye,
On wild Ohio's savage stream*
Here nature reigns, whose works outvie
The boldest pattern art can frame;
Here ages past have rolled away,
And forests bloomed -- but to decay.
From these fair plains, these rural sea^s,
So long concealed, so lately known,
The unsocial Indian far retreats,
To make some other clime his own,
Where other streams, less pleasing, flow,
And darker forests round him grow.
Great Sire of floods! whose varied wave [Missisippi.

Through clime^ and countries takes its way,
To whom creating nature gave
Ten thousand stre^^s to swell thy sway!
No longer shall they useless prove,
Nor idly through the forests r^^e;
Nor longer shall thy princely flood
From distant lakes be swelled in vain,
Nor longer through a darksome wood
Advance, unnotic'd, to the main,
Far other ends the fates decree --
And commerce plans new freights for thee.
While virtue warms the generous breast,
Here heaven-born freedom shall reside,
Nor shall the voice of war molest,
Nor Europe's all-aspiring pride --
Here reason shall new laws devise,
And order from confusion rise.
Forsaking kings and regal state,
(A debt that reason deems amiss)
The traveller owns, convinced though late,
No realm so free, so blessed as this --
The eas^ is half to slaves consigned,
And half to slavery more refined.
O come the time, and haste the day,
When man shall man no longer crush,
When reason shall enforce her sway,
Nor these fair regions raise our blush,
Where still the African complains,
And mourns his yet unbroken chains.
Far brighter scenes, a future age,
The muse predicts, these States shall hail,
Whose genius shall the world engage,
Whose deeds shall over death prevail,
And happier systems bring to view
Than all the eastern sages know.
THE SEASONS MORALIZED.
THEY who to warmer regions run,
May bless the favor of the sun,
But seek in vain what charms us here,
Life's picture varying with the year.
SPRING and her wanton train advance
Like Youth to lead the festive dance,
All, all her scenes are mirth and play,
And blushing blossoms own her sway.
The Summer next (those blossoms blown)
Brings on the fruits that spring had sown,
Thus men advance, impelled by time,
And nature triumphs in her prime.
Then Autumn crowns the beauteous year,
The groves a sicklier aspect wear.
And mournful she (the lot of all)
Matures her fruits to make them fall.
Clad in the vestments of a tomb,
Old age is only Winter's gloom --
Winter, alas! shall spring restore,
But youth returns to man no more.
NEW YEAR's VERSES, ADDRESSED To those Gentlemen who have been pleased to
favor Francis Wrigley, News Carrie^, with their custom.
January 1, 1783.
ACCORDING to custom, once more I appear
With the verse you expect at the dawn of the year:
For (...) we have got into EIGHTY AND THREE;
And in spite of proud Britain, are happy and free.
If the times have been hard, and our commerce gone wrong,
We still have been able to struggle along.
If some, through misfortunes, are slack in the purse,
It is not so bad but it might have been worse. --
Great things, the year past, were revealed to our eyes:
The Dutch have confessed us their friends and allies,
And humbled the pride of our haughty invaders,
By fighting their fleets and destroying their traders,
If the English succeeded in taking the COUNT,
To what, in the end, did their conquest amount?
With their (...) and their br^gs, and their shouts of applause,
It but saved them from ruin -- not ruined our cause.
BUT leaving the weight of political cares
To those, who are placed at the helm of affairs,
To the humors of fortune in all things resigned,
I mean by my visit to put you in mind,
That, as true as a clock, both early and late,
With the news of the day I have knocked at your gate,
And gave you to know what the world was a doing,
What LOUIS intended, or GEORGE was a brewing.
If sometimes the papers were trifling and flat,
And the news went against us, -- I could not help that;
If parties were angry, and vented their spite,
I bro't you their wranglings -- not helped them to write.
I therefore presume (and not without reason)
You Will remember your NEWSMAN, and think of the season;
The markets are high, and the weather is cold;
No party I serve, and no pension I hold.
We Hawkers are men, and have children and wives
To comfort our hearts, and to solace our lives:
But if I say more, you will think it is stuff;
And a word to the wise is, in reason, enough.
NEW YEAR's VERSES, ADDRESSED TO The Customers of the PENNSYLVANIA EVENING
POST, by the Printer's Lad who carries it.
January 4, 1783.
THROUGH wet and dry, and heat and cold,
By all mischances uncontrolled,
However the winds blew high or low,
Through dirty streets, or streets of snow,
I David, with the EVENING POST,
Despising darkness, rain and frost,
Your doors have 'tended twice a week,
Lest you should have the news to seek,
And plague your friends for that which we
Bestow you for a trifling fee.
THUS months run on, and seasons passed,
The old Year has run out at last;
Now once again, as Hermes true,
(Prostrate the old Year eighty-two)
I come to greet ye with the New:
I am a brisk and trusty Lad;
The war is long, and times are bad;
Not all attempts dame Fortune crowns,
On some she smiles, on others frowns,
Yet still beneficent to all,
Gives each his turn to rise and fall.
Though on the land our foes we beat,
And forced them early to retreat,
Drove them from Beersheba to Dan,
And made them quit their favorite plan,
By sea they still our coasts invade,
Distress our shores, obstruct our trade;
This hurts us all, it is confessed,
And Town and me among the rest.
SINCE Fortune then so often wavers,
And grants so sparingly her favors,
It Is in your power, good natured friends,
For her caprice to make amends,
And place us for at least a day
Beyond the limits of her sway,
Regardless of her whims and fancies,
Or whom she humbles or advances.
I MIGHT go on, God knows how long,
And plague you with my New Year song.
Harrass you with unnumber'd rhymes,
And moralize upon the Times;
Inform you as last year went round
That some were hanged, and some were drowned;
That some grow rich, while others fail,
That some are free, and some in jail;
Assert that things are scarce and dear,
A Shilling for a Quart of Beer: --
But what would all our rhymes avail?
Our subject is already stale,
Our last campaign has nothing done
That poets might descant upon,
And I have little else to say,
Except that time makes haste away,
And we are past the New Year's day:
As Time his circling path pursues
Perhaps I Will bring you better news;
Some new disgrace to British fleets,
Mishaps, disasters, and defeats;
So pray be kind, and I Will be steady,
Our Press and Paper always ready,
And the EVENING POST advance with vigor
'Till IT and I be something bigger.
NEW YEAR's VERSES, ADDRESSED TO The Customers of the FREEMAN's JOURNAL, by the
Lad who carries it.
January 8, 1783.
LET those who will, in hackney'd rhyme
And common cant, take up your time,
And even the muse's aid implore
To tell you what you knew before,
That days are short and nights are long,
The weather cold and hunger strong,
The markets high -- and such like stuff --
I Am sure you know it well enough; --
Untaught by us, I dare to say,
You hit, exactly, New Year's day,
And knew at least as well as we
The present year is eighty-three; --
(Such simple things as these to tell
A mere drum head would do as well --)
All this I knew you knew before,
And therefore knocked not at your door
Upon the individual day
When eighty-three came into play,
With verses for the purpose planned
Bidding you gravely watch your sand,
Since death is always near at hand;
All this I left to those whose trade is
To threaten beaus and frighten ladies,
And brought my papers, (swiftly speeding)
The Freeman's Journal, for your reading.
UNHAPPY JOURNAL, doomed by fate
To meet with unrelenting hate,
From those who can their venom spit,
Yet condescend to steal your wit;
While Timon, with malicious spirit,
Allows you not a grain of merit,
While he an idle pomp assumes
Let him return his borrowed plumes,
And you will find the insect creeping
With not a feather worth the keeping.
BUT this is neither here nor there,
May quarrels past dissolve in air;
In Stygian waves of sable hue
Be all absorbed with EIGHTY-TWO,
Or, lost on Lethe's silent shore,
Disgrace our rising State no more.
ANOTHER word I meant to say,
(Kind customers, have patience, pray,
My subject is the New Year's day)
How came it that mistaken man
Has thus inverted nature's plan,
And contradicted common reason
By making this the mirthful season,
When all is dreary dull and dead,
The sun to southern climates fled
To dart his fierce and downright beams
Intensely on Brazilian streams;
No daisies on the frozen plain,
No daffodils to please the swain,
The limpid wave compelled to freeze,
And not a leaf upon the trees! --
It Is wrong -- the very birds will say,
Their New Year is the bloom of May;
Then nature calls to soft delights,
And they obey as she invites.
AND yet this happiness below,
Which all would gain but few know how,
Is not to time or place confined,
It Is seated only in the mind;
Let seasons v^ry as they will
Contentment leaves us happy still,
Makes life itself pass smooth away,
Makes every hour a New Year's day.
NEW YEAR's VERSES, FOR Those who carry the PENNSYLVANIA GAZETTE to the
Customers.
January 1, 1784.
HOW things are changed since last New Year,
What dismal prospects then arose!
Scarce at your doors I dared appear,
So multisarious were our woes:
But time at length has changed the scene,
Our prospects now are more serene.
Bad news we brought you every day,
Your seamen slain, your ships on shore,
The army fretting for their pay --
'Twas well they had not fretted more!
'Twas wrong indeed to wear our shoes,
To bring you nothing but bad news.
Now let us be joyful for the change --
The folks that guard the English throne
Have given us ample room to range,
And more, perhaps, than was their own;
To western lakes they stretch our bounds,
And yield the Indian hunting grounds.
But pray read on another year,
Remain the humble Newsman's friend;
And he will engage to let you hear
What Europe's princes next intend. --
Even now their brains are all at work,
To rouse the Ruffian on the Turk.
Well -- if they fight, then fight they must,
They are a strange, contentious breed;
One good effect will be, I trust,
The more that is killed, the more you will read;
For past experience fully shows,
That WRANGLING is the LIFE of NEWS.
NEW YEAR's VERSES, ADDRESSED To the Customers of the FREEMAN'S JOURNAL, by the
Lad who carries it.
^^^uary 7, 1784.
BLESSED be the man who early proved
And first contrived to make it clear
That TIME upon a dial moved,
And traced that circle called a year;
Ere he arose, the savage, man,
No bounds to years nor seasons knew,
On Nature's book his reckoning ran,
And social festivals were few.
In after days, when folks grew wise
New wonderments were daily found,
Systems they built on pumpkin p^es,
And proved that every thing went round.
Experience shows they reasoned right,
(With laurels we their tombs should cro^^)
For half the world is in such plight
That one would swear it upside dow^*
Now I am one, (and pray attend)
Who, marching in a smaller (...)*
To set you right, my service (...)
By bringing Papers (...)*
Which to your Honors may impart
A thousand new invented schemes,
The works of wit, and toils of art,
News, commerce, politics, and dreams:
Though in a sheet, at random cast,
Our motley knowledge we dispose,
From such a mass, in ages past,
Have less substantial fabrics rose;
The Sybil wise, as Virgil says,
Her writings to the leaves con^ign'd,
Which soon were borne a thousand ways,
Derang'd and scattered by the wind.
Not such neglect in me is seen --
Soon as my leaves have left the press
I haste to bring them, neat and clean,
At all times in a New Year's dress.
Though winds their ancient spite retain,
And strive to tear them from my hold,
I bear them safe through wind and rain,
Despising heat, despising cold.
While thus employed, from week to week,
You surely will not think it hard
If, with the rest, I come to seek
Some humble token of regard.
Nor will you deem my conduct strange
If what I long have thought be true --
That life itself is constant change,
And death, the want of something new.
NEW YEAR's VERSES, ADDRESSED To the Customers of the FREEMAN'S JOURNAL, by the
Lad who carries it.
January 1, 1735.
"THE constant lapse of ^^lling years
"Awakes our hopes, provoke our fears
"Of something yet unknown;
"We saw the last year pass away,
"But who, alas! can truly sa^
"The next shall be his own?"
So Timon cries -- and thousands more
Will preach their ^oral doctrines over;
And when the preaching' done,
Each goes his various, wonted way,
To labor some, and some to play --
So moves the circle on.
How swift the vagrant seasons fly;
They Are hardly born before they die,
Yet in their wild career,
Like atoms round the rapid wheel,
We seem the same, though changing still,
Mere reptiles of a year.
Some run to seek a charming bride,
Some, rhimes to make on one that died;
And millions curse the day
When first in Hymen's silken bands
The parson joined mistaken hands,
And bade the bride obey.
While sad Emelia vents her sighs,
In epitaphs and elegies,
For her departed dear,
Who would suppose yon' muffled bell,
And mourning gowns, were meant to tell,
Her grief will last -- a year?
In folly's path how many meet --
What hosts shall live to lie and cheat --
How many empty pates
Shall, in this wise, discerning year,
In native dignity appear
To manage rising states!
It Is vain to sigh! -- the wheel must on --
And straws are to the whirlpool drawn,
With ships of gallant mien --
What has been once, shall time restore;
What now exists, has been before --
Years only change the scene.
In endless circles all things move,
Below, about, far off, above,
This motion all attain --
If Folly's self should flit away,
She would return some New Year's day,
With millions in her train.
Sun, moon, and stars, are each a sphere,
The earth the same, or very near,
Sir Isaac has defined --
In circles ^very coin is cast,
And hence our cash departs so fast,
Cash -- that no charm can bind.
From you to me -- from me it rolls
To comfort other cloudy souls: --
If once we make it square,
Perhaps the uneasy guest will stay
To cheer us in some wint'ry day,
And smooth the brow of care.
But now, to hint my meaning plain --
This day I come to seek again,
What all the worldly wise,
What lord, and prince, and knight, and squire,
And I -- as well as they -- admire.
With equal ^rdour prize.
THE LITERARY PLUNDERERS.
1785.
THE head, whose toiling concave teems
With millions of unfinished schemes,
Plans that in shapeless embrio ly,
Or projects formed, the Lord knows why,
Had better far those whims resign,
And aid this humble theme of mine;
Contrive some means to crush the power
Of MICE, that every art devour,
Check, with success, their hostile rage,
And slay these Vandals of the age.
FAME says that Wales did first contrive
To seize the unwary mice alive,
And they who scorned all locks and keys,
Were caught by means of toasted cheese --
Vain scheme! for still these fiends annoy,
And dare my favorite books destroy --
No cares of mine their rage defeat,
The Welchman's trap is incomplete! --
See Homer there, the bard renowned,
His Iliad one perpetual wound --
Each chief, by their infernal teeth,
Once more was doomed to suffer death;
Even Helen's charms they dared to gnaw,
Great Ajax' carcass filled their maw,
And half the gods that crowd his strain,
In mangled morsels, scarce remain.
BUT, wretch, who taught thee to engage
A poet of a later age?
Alas! thy cruel weapons tore
The only genius I adore --
Is SHAKESPEARE thus disgraced by you
Who looked the world of nature through,
Who fearing high, where others failed,
Invention's brightest heaven assailed,
And saw beyond the dark disguise
What lay too deep for vulgar eyes!
IS this the end of human wit,
Must mice untouched such spoils commit!
Must all these fine ideas die
That warmed the heart, or filled the eye --
Must reptiles thus our shelves molest,
Insects that Nature made in jest,
Who, when their learned feast is over,
Shrink from the light -- to rise no more.
YES -- fates like these, our toils attend,
And Goths have served no other end.
VEXED though I am, it is vain to frown,
I sigh -- and lay my cudgel down:
It Is worse than mad to arm for fight
When not a mouse appears in sight --
Yet, here they stood in dark array,
Their tragic footsteps I survey!
Here -- for no cat the plunderers chased --
They laid the lands of learning waste,
Made war with wit, such havoc there
As scarce three ages can repair! --
Like British hosts, wherever they go
They leave their vestiges of woe,
Towns half destroyed, polluted shades,
Fields robbed of fence, and ruined maids.
WHY, Susan, could not thou defend
These shelves that did with learning bend?
One mew of thine had put to flight
These children of congenial night.
Where wast thou when these cruel teeth
Spread through my leaves untimely death? --
See! how my MONTESQUIEU is torn --
See! RABELAIS, the mices scorn.
See, how they tore the MANTUAN SWAIN,
Who wrote in so divine a strain --
MILTON, whose fancy soared so high,
No more delights my tearful eye,
And SWIFT, so late a fund of wit,
No longer prompts the laughing fit.
A^, Susan, such neglect was hard --
I fear you kept a careless guard,
Or gadded over the neighboring plain,
To seek some favorite bright eyed swain --
Had but those eyes failed in their art,
To tell their language to your heart,
I should not thus have lost repose,
Nor sighed in vain to crush my foes.
MY mezzotintos -- ah behold --
The beauties famed in days of old!
She, who for Tarquin's lawless love
In her own breast the dagger drove,
These fiends of night have made their prey,
And gnawed her charming face away.
AND here in ragged robes is seen
Bright Cleopatra, Egypt's queen;
With cruel fangs those eyes they tore
That warmed a gazing world of yore,
With hostile tooth they gnawed that breast
Which robbed a Roman prince of rest,
He who for crowns and conquest strove,
'Till honor was disgraced by love.
AND here, in vile condition, lies
What once had charmed a hermit's eyes --
This picture art can never restore,
This VENUS, that shall bloom no more;
Art formed her such as angels are,
Beyond all mortal beauty fair; --
But time can every charm displace,
And MICE have spoiled the finest face!
BUT must that soft, bewitching eye
With meaner shreds neglected ly --
Must all those lovely colors fade,
By nicest art so lavish laid
On her fair face -- to sooth my pain,
I sigh, and look, and sigh again.
YES -- miscreant, though thy venom tore
The painting, art can never restore,
Still in the dreams of fancy blessed,
I steal her image to my breast,
By fancy's aid that form repair,
And, miser-like, retain it there.
GOOD captain Mouse, what moved thine ire,
To mangle what I most admire? --
Could not this chief have led his band
Where yonder brainless authors stand --
To those that deal in forms and modes,
To laureat Whitehead's New Year odes,
To verses wrote on puppies dead,
To elegies that never were read,
To Whaycum's tale, that brings repose,
To Wesley's hymns, or Whitefield's prose; --
Why did thou not attack the train
Who teize us with their frothy strain,
The tribe who female honor blast,
In sniveling rhimes, at random cast,
Or those who fly to domes of state,
At folly's door submissive wait,
And servile still, where wealth appears,
Their works inscribe to financiers?
TO arms, to arms! ye chosen few
Who science love, and arts pursue;
Or, if your arms should naught avail,
(Since mice may over men prevail)
Put on some wise, inventive cap,
AND FIND US A COMPLETER TRAP.
SKETCHES OF AMERICAN HISTORY.
17^5.
THE American world, as our histories say,
Secluded from Europe long centuries lay,
But peopled by beings whom white men detest,
The sons of the Tartars that came from the west.
These Indians, it is certain, were here long before ye all,
And dwelt in their wigwams from time immemorial;
In a mere state of nature, untutored, untaught,
They did as they pleased, and they spoke as they thought --
No priests they had then for the cure of their souls,
No lawyers, recorders, nor keepers of rolls;
No learned physicians vile nostrums concealed --
Their druggist was nature -- her shop was the field.
In the midst of their forests how happy and blessed,
In the skin of a bear or a buffalo dressed!
No care to perplex, and no luxury seen
But the feast, and the song, and the dance on the green.
Some bowed to the moon, and some worshipped the sun,
And the king and the captain were centered in one;
In a cabin they met on their councils of state,
Where age and experience alone might debate:
With quibbles they never essayed to beguile,
And nature had taught them the orator's style;
No pomp they affected, nor quaintly refined
The nervous idea that glanced on the mind.
When hunting or battle invited to arms,
The women they left to take care of their farms --
The toils of the summer did winter repay,
While snug in their cabins they snor'd it away.
If death came among them his dues to demand,
They still had some prospect of comfort at hand --
The dead man they sent to the regions of bliss,
With his bottle and dog, and his fair maids to kiss.
THUS happy they dwelt in a rural domain,
Uninstructed in commerce, unpracticed in gain,
Till, taught by the loadstone to traverse the seas,
Columbus came over, that bold Genoese.
From records authentic, the date we can show,
One thousand four hundred and ninety and two
Years, borne by the seasons, had vanished away,
Since the babe in the manger at Bethlehem lay.
What an era was this, above all that had passed,
To yield such a treasure, discovered at last --
A new world, in value exceeding the old,
Such mountains of silver, such torrents of gold!
Yet the schemes of Columbus, however well planned
Were scarcely sufficient to find the main land;
On the islands alone with the natives he spoke,
Except when he entered the great Oronoque:
In this he resembled old Moses, the Jew,
Who, roving about with his wrong-headed crew,
When at length the reward was no longer denied
From the top of Mount Pisgah he saw it and died.
These islands and worlds in the watery expanse,
Like most mighty things, were the offspring of chance,
Since, steering for Asia, Columbus, they say,
Was astonished to find such a world in his way!
No wonder, indeed, he was smit with surprise --
This empire of nature was new to their eyes --
Cut short in their course by so splendid a scene,
Such a region of wonders intruding between!
YET great as he was, and deserving, no doubt,
We have only to thank him for finding the rout;
These climes to the northward, more stormy and cold,
Were reserved for the efforts of CABOT the bold.
WHERE the sun in December appears to decline
Far off to the southward, and south of the line,
A merchant Americus Vespucius.
of Florence, more fortunate still,
Explored a new track, and discovered Brazil:
Good Fortune, Vespucius, pronounced thee her own,
Or else to mankind thou had scarcely been known --
By giving thy name, thou art ever renowned --
Thy name to a world that another had found!
COLUMBIA the name was that Merit decreed,
But Fortune and Merit have never agreed --
Yet the poets, alone, with commendable care
Are vainly attempting the wrong to repair.
THE bounds I prescribe to my verse are too narrow
To tell of the conquests of Francis Pizarro;
And Cortez it is needless to bring into view,
One Mexico conquered, the other Peru.
Montezuma with credit in verse might be read,
But Dryden has told you the monarch Indian Emperor, a tragedy.
is dead!
And the woes of his subjects -- what torments they bore,
De Casas, good bishop, has mentioned before:
Let others be fond of their stanzas of grief --
I hate to discant on the fall of the leaf --
Two scenes are so gloomy, I view them with pain,
The annals of Death, and the triumphs of Spain.
Poor Ata-bualpa I cannot forget --
He gave them his utmost -- yet died in their debt,
His wealth was a crime that they could not forgive,
And when they possessed it -- forbade him to live.
Foredoom'd to misfortunes (that come not alone)
He was the twelfth In^a that sat on the throne,
Who fleecing his brother Huascar, who was legal heir to the throne.
of half his domains,
At the palace of Cusco confined him in chains.
BUT what am I talking -- or where do I roam?
It Is time that our story was brought nearer home --
From Florida's cape did Cabot explore
To the fast frozen region of cold Labradore.
In the year fourteen hundred and ninety and eight
He came, as the annals of England relate,
But finding no gold in the lengthy domain,
And coasting the country, he left it again.
Next Davis -- then Hudson adventured, they say,
One found out a straight, and the other a bay,
Whose desolate region, or turbulent wave
One present bestowed him -- and that was a grave.
IN the reign of a virgin (whom some call a whore)
Drake, Hawkins, and Raleigh in squadrons came over --
While Barlow and Grenville succeeded to these,
Who all brought their colonies over the seas.
These, left in a wilderness teeming with woes,
The natives, suspicious, concluded them foes,
And murdered them all without notice or warning,
Ralph Lane, with his vagabonds, scarcely returning.
IN the reign of king James (and the first of the name)
George Summers with Hacluit to Chesapeake came,
Where far in the forests, not doomed to renown,
On the river Powhatan James River, Virginia.
they built the first town. James Town.

TWELVE years after this, some scores of Dissenters
To the northernmost district came, seeking adventures;
Outdone by the bishops, those great faggot fighters,
They left them to hell with their cassocks and mitres.
Thus banished forever, and leaving the sod,
The first land they saw was the pitch of Cape Cod,
Where famished with hunger and quaking with cold
They planned their new Plymouth -- so called from the old.
They were, without doubt, a delightful collection; --
Some came to be rid of a Stuart's direction,
Some sailed with a view to dominion and riches,
Some to pray without book, and a few to hang witches.
Some came, on the Indians to shed a new light,
Convinced long before that their own must be right,
And that all who had died in the centuries past
On the devil's lee-shore were eternally cast.
SKETCHES OF AMERICAN HISTORY.
[CONTINUED.]
Sit mihi fas audita loqui -- Virg.
THESE exiles were cast in a whimsical mould,
And were awed by their priests, like the Hebrews of old;
Disclaimed all pretenses to jesting and laughter,
And sighed their lives through, to be happy hereafter.
On a crown immaterial their hearts were intent,
They looked toward Zion, wherever they went,
Did all things in hopes of a future reward,
And worried mankind -- for the sake of the Lord.
With rigor excessive they strengthened their reign,
Their laws were conceived in the ill-natured strain,
With mystical meanings the saint was perplexed,
And the flesh and the devil were slain by a text.
The body was scourged for the good of the soul,
All folly discouraged by peevish control,
A knot on the head was the sign of no grace,
And the Pope and his comrade were pictured in lace.
A sto^e in their churches, or pews lined with green,
Were horrid to think of, much less to be seen.
Their bodies were warmed with the linings of love,
And the fire was sufficient that flashed from above.
'Twas a crime to assert that the moon was opaque,
To say the earth moved, was to merit the stake;
And he that could tell an eclipse was to be,
In the college of Satan had took his degree.
On Sundays their faces were dark as a cloud --
The road to the meeting was only allowed,
And those they caught rambling, on business or pleasure,
Were sent to the stocks, to repent at their leisure.
This day was the mournfullest day in the week --
Except on religion none ventured to speak --
This day was the day to examine their lives,
To clear off old scores, and to preach to their wives.
In the school of oppression though woefully taught,
'Twas (...) to be the oppressors they sought;
All, all but themselves were be-devil'd and blind,
And their narrow-soul'd creed was to serve all mankind.
This beautiful system of nature below
They neither considered, nor wanted to know,
And called it a dog-house, wherein they were pent,
Unworthy themselves, and their mighty descent.
They never perceived that in nature's wide plan
There must be that whimsical creature call'^ MAN,
Far short of the rank he affects to attain,
Yet a link in its place, in creation's vast chain.
WHATEVER is foreign to us and our kind
Can never be lasting, though seemingly joined --
The hive swarmed at length, and a tribe that was teased
Set out for Rhode Island, to think as they pleased.
Some hundreds to Britain ran murmuring home --
While others went off in the forests to roam,
When they found they had missed what they looked for at first,
The downfall of sin, and the reign of the just.
Hence, dry controversial reflections were thrown,
And the old dons were vexed in the way they had shown;
So those that are held in the workhouse all night
Throw dirt the next day at the doors, out of spite.
AH, pity the wretches that lived in those days,
(Ye modern admirers of novels and plays)
When nothing was suffered but mu^ty, dull rules,
And nonsense from Mather, and stuff from the schools!
No story, like Rachel's, could tempt them to sigh,
Susanna and Judith employed the bright eye --
No fine spun adventures tormented the breast,
Like our modern Clarissa, Tom Jones, and the rest.
Those tyrants had chosen the books for your shelves,
(And, trust me, no other than suited themselves,
For always by this may a bigot be known,
He speaks well of nothing but what is his own.)
From indwelling evil these souls to release,
The Quakers arrived with their kingdom of peace --
But some were transported and some bore the lash,
And four they hanged fairly for preaching up trash.
The lands of New England (of which we now treat)
Were famous, ere that, for producing of wheat;
But the soil (or tradition says strangely amiss)
Has been pestered with pumpkins from that day to this.
THUS, feuds and vexations distracted their reign*
(And perhaps a few vestiges still may remain)
But time has presented an offspring as bold,
Less free to believe, and more wise than the old.
Their phantoms, their wizzards, their witches are fled --
Matthew Paris's See Neal's history of New England.
story with horror is read --
His daughters, and all the enchantments they bore --
And the demon, that pinched them, is heard of no more.
Their taste for the fine arts is strangely increased,
And Latin's no longer a mark of the Beast:
Mathematics, at present, a farmer may know,
Without being hanged for connections below.
Proud, rough, INDEPEN^ENT, undaunted and free,
And patient of hardships, their task is the sea,
Their country too barren their wish to attain,
They make up the loss by exploring the main.
Wherever bright Phoebus awakens the gales,
I see the bold YANKEES expanding their sails,
Throughout the wide ocean pursuing their schemes,
And chasing the whales on its uttermost streams.
No climate, for them, is too cold or too warm,
They reef the broad canvas, and fight with the storm;
In war with the foremost their standards display,
Or glut the loud cannon with death, for the fray.
No valor in fable their valor exceeds,
Their spirits are fitted for desperate deeds;
No rivals have they in our annals of fame,
Or if they are rivall'd, it is YORK has the claim.
INSPIRED at the sound, while the name she repeats,
Bold Fancy conveys me to Hudson's retreats --
Ah, sweet recollection of juvenile dreams
In the groves, and the forests that skirted his streams!
How often, with rapture, those streams were surveyed
When, sick of the city, I flew to the shade --
How often the bard, and the peasant shall mourn
Ere those groves shall revive, and those shades shall return!
Not a hill, but some fortress disfigures it round!
And ramparts are raised where the cottage was found!
The plains and the valleys with ruin are spread,
With graves in abundance, and bones of the dead.
The first that attempted to enter this straight
(In anno one thousand, six hundred, and eight)
Was HUDSON (the same that we mentioned before,
Who was lost in the gulf that he went to explore.)
For a sum that they paid him (we know not how much)
This captain transferred all his right to the Dutch;
For the time has been here, to the world be it known,
When all a man sailed by, or saw, was his own.
The Dutch on their purchase sat quietly down,
And fixed on an island to lay out a town;
They modeled their streets from the horns of a ram,
And the name that best pleased them was, New Amsterdam.
They purchased large tracts from the Indians for beads,
And sadly tormented some runaway Swedes,
Who, none knows for what, from their country had flown
To live here in peace, undisturbed and alone.
NEW BELGIA, the Dutch called their province, be sure,
But names never yet made possession secure,
For Charly (the second that honored the name)
Sent over a squadron, asserting his claim.
(Had his sword and his title been equally slender,
In vain had they summoned Mynheer to surrender)
The soil they demanded, or threatened their worst,
Insisting that Cabot had looked at it first.
The want of a squadron to fall on their rear
Made the argument perfectly plain to Mynheer --
Force ended the contest -- the right was a sham,
And the Dutch were sent packing to hot SURINAM.
'Twas hard to be thus of their labors deprived,
But the age of republics had not yet arrived --
Fate saw -- though no wizzard could tell them as much --
That the crown, in due time, was to fare like the Dutch.
FINIS.

