DISSERTATIONS ON THE NATURE AND EFFECT OF CHRISTIAN BAPTISM, CHRISTIAN
COMMUNION, AND RELIGIOUS WAITING UPON GOD.

By JOSEPH PHIPPS.

LONDON, PRINTED: NEW YORK, REPRINTED, BY WILLIAM ROSS, BROAD-STREET, NEAR THE
EXCHANGE.

^. DCC. ^^^XVI.

DISSERTATIONS, etc.
CHAP. I. ON BAPTISM.
JOHN the Baptist was sent as a voice crying in the wilderness, to proclaim the
approach of the Messiah; to point him out, upon his personal appearance, to the
people; to preach the necessity of repentance for the remission of sins; and to
baptize with water, as prefiguring the spiritual administration of the Savior
under the dispensation of the gospel, in baptizing with the Holy Ghost, to the
purification of souls, and fitting them for an eternal inheritance with the
saints in light.

John came not to institute, but to precede and prepare the way for, this
glorious dispensation; he therefore represented the new covenant of the Prince
of life and peace, under the title of the kingdom of heaven, which he declared
to be at hand, or near to take place.

This gospel-establishment the prophet Jeremiah had foretold, should Jer. xxi.
32.
not be according to the old covenant of symbolical forms and shadows, which
the inspired author of the epistle to the Hebrews observed, Heb. ix. 9, 10.
could not make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the
conscience; because it stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and
carnal ordinances, imposed on them until the time of reformation.

John's baptism, being of the same exterior nature with the rituals of the law,
could no more add toward the purification of the heart, and the perfection of
a good conscience, than they: like them, it was a figure for the time then
present, to shadow forth the internal effect of the Lord's baptism, but no
further requisite thereunto. John knowing this, when Jesus came to partake of
his baptism, as he likewise did of the ordinances of the law (not that he might
give a sanction to their continuance, but that he might fulfill them, as having
been primarily of divine authority, and not yet disannulled) appeared surprised
that he whom he knew to be the inward and effectual baptizer, should apply to
him for his outward baptism, saying, Mat. iii. 14, 15.
I have need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? but upon our Lord's
answering, "Suffer it to be so now," (which intimated his own spiritual baptism
was not yet to commence, so as to put a final period to that of John) he
admitted it; and soon after directed his hearers to him, saying, John i. 29.
Behold the Lamb of God, Which takes away the sin of the world.

For this gracious end, the Son of God resigned himself up to become I Tim. ii.
6.
a ransom for all mankind, to be testified, or outwardly verified, in due time,
by which he showed the love of God to fallen man, and his willingness to pardon
sinners upon their repentance; in order to which, he Psalm lxviii. 18.
received gifts for men; yea for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might
dwell among them. Hence I Cor. xii. 7.
the manifestation of the spirit is given to every man, to prosit withal; that
on their embracing it, in faith and obedience, the might, by its baptizing
power and virtue, be delivered from the condemnation due for sins committed,
and be cleansed from all unrighteousness.

To this import are the following expressions of John; Mat. iii. 11, 12.
I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance; but he that comes after me
(or whose ministration shall succeed mine) is mightier than I, whose shoes I am
not worthy to bear, he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire;
whose fan is in his Hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather
his wheat into his garner; but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable
fire. John here shows the true distinction betwixt his own baptism, and that of
our Savior: the first with water; the last with the Holy Ghost; and also
metaphorically inculcates, that the baptism of Christ should winnow the soul of
its chaffy, or sinful nature, and operate as fire, to the perfect consumption
of all its defilement.

John iii. 30.
He must increase, said John, but I must decrease. This indicates, that as the
spiritual ministration of Christ should advance, John's watery one should
recede; not be joined with it. Neither was the regenerating baptism of the
spirit consequent upon it when administered; for the Acts viii.
Samaritans received the Holy Ghost some time after their water baptism; Acts
x. 47.
Cornelius and his friends received it (...); and Acts viii.
Simon the sorcerer received it not at all, though he was baptized with water.

Spirit-baptism, therefore, is not connected with water baptism, nor at all
dependant upon it. The baptism of the Savior is complete in itself, without
exterior form and shadow. By its renewed impressions on the believing and
attentive soul, the newbirth of the spirit is brought forth therein, and in
proportion to its growth and increase, the old man, with his corrupt deeds,
becomes crucified, and the soul delivered, and raised up into newness of life.

This is the baptism which is essential to salvation, as our Lord gave
Nicodemus to understand, when he said, John iii.
Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. And again,
Except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. The word water here, like that of fire, Mat. iii. 12. is used
to signify the purifying virtue of the spirit in the regeneration of the soul.

Liberty of Prophesying, page 231.
Bishop Tailor says, The water and the spirit in this place signify the same
thing; and by water is meant the effect of the spirit cleansing and purifying
the soul, as appears in its parallel of Christ baptizing with the spirit and
fire.

That our Lord meant it of the spirit only, sufficiently appears from his own
explanatory expression, verse 6. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and
that which is born of the spirit, is spirit.

Those who advocate the continuance of waterbaptism, plead our Savior's
commission, Matthew xxviii. 19. but he there makes no mention of water, nor do
his words imply it; for his expressions are such as suit only with his own
spiritual baptism. Neither did his Disciples from thence begin the practice of
water-baptisin. They had taken it up some time before, most probably from
John's example, whom they justly venerated as a messenger sent from God, and in
great estimation with their Lord and master; for they administered it after the
same manner he did, and so continued to do, when they used it after our Lord's
ascension, as well as before. Whereas, if they had understood his command to
intend water baptism, they would certainly have altered their terms, and have
administered it in the very words of his commission, which we do not find in
holy writ they ever did. It was therefore still John's baptism in nature, and
far below the effectual baptism of the great Messiah; who, notwithstanding he
bore such honorable testimony concering John, as a burning and shining light,
and one of the greatest prophets born of woman, as being his immediate
forerunner, yet, at the same time he said, Luke vii. 23.
He that is least in the kingdom of God, is greater than he. This implies that
the lowest attainment in the spiritual dispensation of Christ, is superior in
nature to the highest in John's ministration: this being but the temporary
sign, and that the substantial and permanent reality signified by it.

Let us now consider what the commission was, and to whom it was given. It
appears to have been merely verbal; for we find it was not immediately attended
with the authority requisite to its execution. The qualification still
necessary was the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, which the disciples were to
receive afterward; without which they were not to enter upon the work of the
ministry, but to wait in patience for its illuminating and powerful virtue, to
put them forth, and to abilitate them for the service. Luke xxiv. 49.
"Behold," said the great Minister of the sanctuary, I send the promise of my
Father upon you; but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with
power from on high. Acts i. 5.
John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost
not many days hence." -- Ibid v. 8.
"Ye shall receive power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye
shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem and in all Judea, and in Samaria,
and unto the uttermost part of the earth.

Thus was the spiritual baptism of Christ, which had been predicted by John, to
commence, and those who ministered, were to teach baptizing into the same
spirit themselves were baptized with. Unless the ministers were baptized with
the spirit, they could not baptize their believing hearers with it; nor could
their hearers without faith receive it.

This appears to be the baptism intended in the commission; for it relates not
to the baptism of John, but to that of Christ, and holds forth the preaching of
the gospel in the spirit and power of God. Therefore the commission was given
to those in the primitive age, who were divinely inspired for that purpose, and
it unquestionably reaches to all influenced by THE SAME SPIRIT, and to such
only, to the end of the world.

The words of the commission are, Mat. xxviii. 19.
Go ye, and teach all nations, baptizing them, (...) into the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. The word name here is not to be
understood literally, but of that divine power, virtue, and heavenly influence,
which emphatically denotes and characterizes the Godhead above all other
beings; which our Lord often expressed by the same word. John xvii. 6. I have
manifested thy name unto the men thou gave me;" ver. 12. "I kept them in thy
name;" and verse 11. he prayed, "Holy Father, keep through thine own name,
those thou have given me! In this name is strength and salvation. Prove. xviii.
10.
The name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous runs into it, and is
safe. The knowledge of it gives faith, Psalm ix. 10.
They that know thy name will put their trust in thee. It is the consolating
unction from the Holy One. Cant. i. 3.
Thy name is as ointment poured forth; therefore do the virgins (the chaste in
heart) love thee. Into the internal virtue and influence of this sacred and
all-sufficient name, or spirit, are all the truly regenerate measurably
baptized; for, Romans viii. 9.
If any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

The apostles, with many of the primitive brethren, received this baptism into
the name, or spirit, of the Godhead to a high degree, which enabled them to
teach baptizing with such efficacy, that multitudes Aris ii. 37.
were pricked in their heart, Acts iv. 33.
and with great power gave the apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord
Jesus, so that even Ibid vi. 10.
their enemies were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which they
spoke.

Peter relating the result of his visit to Cornelius, and his company, about
eight years after the great effusion of the Holy Ghost at the time of
Pentecost, thus testifies to its baptizing power in the true ministry of the
word: Ibid xi. 15. 16.
As I began to speak, the Holy Ghost fell on them, as on us in the beginning.
Then remembered I the word of the Lord, how that he said, John indeed baptized
with water; but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost. This plainly shows,
that the spiritual baptism of Christ accompanied their preaching, and therefore
was the baptism intended in his commission. The same apostle also witnesses
more generally, 1 Peter i. 12.
that the gospel was preached with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven.

Some object, that it is not in the power of men, but of God only, to baptize
with the Holy Ghost. But let such consider, that he is pleased to work
instrumentally, as well as immediately; and though, in a common way of
expression, we may say, the ministers of Christ baptize with the spirit of
Christ; it is no more meant that they can do it in their own wills, or by their
own powers, than it was so intended of the primitive ministers, who are said to
work miracles. To the Lord alone is the power and glory of all to be
attributed. He is the sole effector of all good, and the best of men are but
his instruments when he is pleased to make use of them; yet by a metonymy of
the instrument for the power that uses it, it is usual to say, such a person
instantly made the cripple to walk, healed the diseased, or conferred the Holy
Ghost, without any intention to attribute that to man which is only due to God.

John xv. 5.
"Without me," said our Lord to his disciples "ye can do nothing." But when he
had endued them with the spirit, Gal. iii. 5.
they ministered the spirit, as well as the doctrines of Christianity; for true
gospel ministry is not that of words only, but of words with power. Therefore
the true minister of the gospel always baptizeth, more or less, in his ministry
according to the measure of divine influence upon him; who without it would be
only as salt without savor, however he might be furnished with scholastic
argument and human eloquence. These may entertain the head, and move the
passions, which is not the business of an inspired minister; but (...) subject
them, and to instruct, and quicken the soul into an inward sense of the
effective power and virtue of the divine life. Cor. ii. 4, 5.
My speech, and my preaching" said Paul, though a learned person, was not with
enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit, and of
power; that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power
of God.

Our Lord constantly gave his followers an example of this baptismal teaching
in his own practice; which induced his hearers to confess, that he taught Mat.
vii. 29
with authority, and not as the scribes. They were astonished at his doctrine;
for Luke iv. 32.
his word was with power. The scribes had human authority, but his was divine;
which so struck even the officers sent by the chief priests and pharisees to
take him, that they excused themselves by saying, John vii. 46.
Never man spoke like this man. This was unquestionably true; for if any other
spoke the same words, none could enforce them with the same fullness of divine
power and authority. Thus he led the way to what he afterward commissioned and
empowered his disciples to do, in the measure he afforded them respectively.

The Apostle Paul undoubtedly had an equal share in the gospel commission with
any other inspired minister, and was equally bound to baptize in the sense
intended therein; but, with water, he declared Cor. i. 17.
he was not sent to baptize: consequently, water baptism was not the baptism
enjoined in the commission. But, he asserts, he was sent to preach (...)
gospel, which is the special matter of that commission, that is, to teach,
baptizing into the life and power of the Holy Spirit that qualified him for it.
Accordingly he reminds the believers, 1 These. i. 5.
Our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy
Ghost, and in much assurance." He also shows the effect it had on them, These.
ii. 13.
"When ye received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as
the word of men; but, as it is in truth, the word of God, which effectually
works also in you that believe. Hence we may observe this distinction, that
the preaching of the gospel by immediate inspiration, is to be received as the
word of God; but preaching concerning it without inspiration, is only to be
esteemed as the word of man.

Many have been trained up to believe, that our Savior made water-baptisn the
condition of our admittance into his kingdom. Were it so, the salvation of all
mankind depends upon it; and if the sprinkling or dipping of infants be, either
the saving baptism, or the sole means through which it is to be received, the
salvation of the child who dies before it attains to years of understanding, or
power of choice, depends upon the precarious conduct of its parents, or that of
others, without any will, knowledge, or default of its own.

But what rational and considerate person can believe, that the just Creator,
and kind Savior of mankind, is so void of equity and commiseration, as to
suffer those innocents who die in their infancy, to fall into everlasting
misery, for the want of a ceremonial, which, if it be a duty, cannot be theirs,
but that of their parents, or of those who have the care of their concerns upon
them, and whose omission must be their fault, if it be any, and not that of the
children, who can be no way chargeable with it? The solemn denunciation of the
great God, who affords of his Tit. ii. 11.
saving grace unto all men, is, Ezekiel. xviii. 20
The soul that sins, it shall die. The son shall not bear the iniquity of
the father; neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son. The
righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the
wicked shall be upon him.

The tender infant has neither ability to receive a law, nor to transgress it,
therefore it cannot be guilty of the commission of sin; and to hold it guilty,
because its primogenitors transgressed long before it existed, and that it is
justly punishable merely for descending from them in the state of their fallen
nature, which it could not avoid, is too barbarous for truth and righteousness
to warrant. Yet this cruel notion, the production of error and bigotry, has
been zealously espoused and propagated.

Fidus, an African bishop in the third century, advised the baptism of infants
for the purgation of original sin, alleging that the Jews circumcised theirs.
This at first seemed new and strange to Cyprian; but he afterward fell in with
a collection of 66 bishops and presbyters, who enjoined it. The practice became
preached up afterward by diverse as necessary; and the Milevitan and
Carthagenian councils, in the fore part of the fifth century, went so far as to
fix an anathema upon all who held that young children might be saved without
water baptism; which was ratified by several succeeding popes. Augustine
carried the matter still further, teaching that even embryos, if they had been
quickened in the mother's womb, and there died unbaptized, were damned, as
guilty of original sin. This put the wisdom of the priesthood upon contriving a
remedy: some they took up out of their graves, and christened, as they
superstitiously called it, the dead body: others they baptized by proxy, in
imitation of those early misled professors among the Corinthians, who also
doubted of the resurrection; in proof of which, the apostle doubly argued with
them; First, from their own practice, who, from a notion of the necessity of
water baptism unto salvation, took upon them to be baptized for those who died
without it: 1 Cor. xv. 29, 30.
What shall they do," said he, who are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise
not at all? Why are they then baptized for the dead? The manner of this baptism
was thus; one of them placed himself under the bed of the deceased, who being
asked if he would be baptized; the party under his bed answered for him in the
affirmative, and then was baptized in his stead; which Godwin, properly enough,
compares to the acting of a play upon the stage.

Secondly, The apostle reasons from his own exercise, and that of his concerned
brethren; Why stand we in jeopardy every hour? The import of which seems to be,
why are we continually baptized in affliction, suffering, and danger, for the
sake of those who are dead in trespasses and sins, that they may be quickened
by the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, if none are to be so quickened, and if
there shall be no resurrection hereafter?

As the followers of Jacobus Cyrus took the word water, John iii. 5. in the
literal sense, so they did the word fire, Mat. iii. 11. and thence branded
their children, either in the face, or upon the arm, with a heated iron in the
form of a cross. But this having something of cruelty, as well as absurdity in
it, did not so generally obtain as water-sprinkling; in the ministration of
which, the Romish church teemed abundantly with modes and fancies of imaginary
significance.

The self-flattering notion, that the new birth of the spirit is either
concurrent with, or consequent upon, the ministration of water baptism, is
neither supported by scripture nor experience. If it insensibly accompany it,
how do we know it? If it immediately follow, how do its fruits appear more in
those who have received water baptism, than in those who have not? Gal. v. 22.^^
"The fruit of the spirit," says the apostle, is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance." -- Ephesians.
(...)
"The fruit of the spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth. Are
these fruits more conspicuous in the baptized, than in the unbaptized? If those
who are baptized with water are born of the spirit, and made heirs of the
kingdom of heaven, how comes it that such as have received it, either in adult
age or infancy, and become afterward awakened to a sense of their condition,
are still conscious of a body of sin remaining within them, and are made to cry
out in anxiety of soul, A Savior, or I die! A Redeemer, or I perish for ever!
Are not such painfully sensible, that they still want remission and
regeneration, notwithstanding their water baptism?

If any say, This may arise from sins committed after their baptism. I answer,
the apostle John says, (...)
Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin; for his seed remains in him,
and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. But it is evident in fact, that
he who is baptized only with water, can sin as freely and fully as he who is
not; therefore he who is baptized with water, is not in consequence born of God.

It is pleaded, that Peter commanded water baptism, Acts x. 48. which he
certainly would not have done, had he not held the practice necessary. On the
same foundation it may be argued, that he would not have (...) ii. (...)
compelled the believing Gentiles to live after the manner of the Jewish law,
had he not held it necessary; yet we find Paul openly reproved him for it. This
shows, that Peter, though one of the most eminent apostles, in the early time
of the gospel, sometimes went a little too far, in compliance with the
prejudices of his Jewish brethren, diverse of whom were present when he
commanded those Gentile convert, to be baptized. But in this particular
instance at the house of Cornelius, Peter might not be blameable; for we have
reason to believe, that such a prudential tenderness both toward Jews and
Gentiles, was permitted for a season, as to allow the practice of diverse
rituals, till their attachment to them should become lessened, by the
prevalence of the Holy spirit in their hearts.

Upon this ground he probably exhorted the people, Acts ii. 38, 39. Repent, and
be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
your sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is
unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off.

This general promise he had thus cited from Joel in the beginning of his
discourse: (...)
It shall come to pass in the last days, says God, I will pour out of my
spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and
your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams: and on
my servants, and on my handmaidens, I will pour out in those days of my spirit,
and they shall prophesy.

This dispensation of the spirit to both sexes, then eminently took place, and
the apostle, undoubtedly, expressed himself in the words before-cited, with
allusion to the spiritual baptism of Christ, which operates to true repentance,
and brings to experience that conversion of heart, which is followed by the
remission of sins, and the reception of the Holy Ghost. This he plainly taught
in a parallel passage of the following chapter: (...)
Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when
the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.

These renovating and consolatory effects follow not in consequence of the
ministration of water baptism; for if they did, Simon the sorcerer, and all the
wicked amongst men that ever received it, would have had remission, and the
gift of the Holy Ghost.

We find the apostle Paul also conformed at times in this, and diverse other
ceremonials; but when he afterward perceived hurt already had, and was likely
still to ensue from such conformity, he forbore it; and (...)
thanked God that he had only baptized Crispus, Gaius, and the household of
Stephanas; declaring, that Christ sent him not to baptize, (that is, with
water) but to preach the Gospel.

Peter himself also afterward, probably observing a danger of water baptism
being received and espoused as the real baptism of the Gospel, guards the
believers against such a dangerous mistake, (...)
by showing what the true christian baptism is; to wit, that it is not that
which puts away the filth of the flesh, but that which produces the answer of
a good conscience toward God. Thus it is not the figurative, but the effective
baptism pointed to by the figure, the refining baptism of the Holy Ghost that
saves.

It is well known by the experience of many, that this baptism is gradually
effected by spiritual immersions of the soul, according to the measure of
corruption it has imbibed, and to the strictness or laxity of its attention to
the great Baptizer. A sense of its sinful condition, with the distance it
stands at from the God of perfect purity, is first given it, whereby it is
brought into self-abasement, contrition, and, at length, into humble
resignation of all to him. Thus it becomes baptized into the similitude of the
death of Christ, which is a death unto all that is of a carnal and sensual
nature. Through baptism it also rises with him into newness of life, which
enableth it to bring sorth the fruits of the spirit to his praise. To those who
had thus followed Christ in the regeneration, the apostle said, Col. ii. 10 etc.
Ye are complete in him, who is the head of all principality and power. In whom
also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting
off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ; buried
with him in baptism, wherein ye are also risen with him, through the faith of
the operation of God.

True Christian baptism is a great and important work; the work of Christ
himself whereby the soul is measurably baptized into his spirit, and endowed
with its virtues. This is quite another thing than a ceremonious formalization
under his name. The latter is easy to the flesh, but the former crucifies it.
Gal. v. 24.
They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and
lusts." -- Ibid iii. 27.
As many of you," said Paul, "as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ. To take the name Christian upon us, and to be joined to the promiscuous
body of a prosessing church, is only to put on a profession of Christ; but to
have really put him on, is to be endued in degree with his Holy Spirit and
nature; which those, who have been baptized into him, certainly are. For, Cor.
v. 17. 18.
if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are passed away,
behold all things are become new, and all things are of God. Such are become
inwardly united to Christ, grafted as branches in him the living vine, daily
partaking of his life and virtue, which renders them fruitful according to
their measure; to these he pressingly shows the necessity of care and
watchfulness, that they may abide in him: John xv. 4, 5, 6.
"As the branch," said he, cannot bear fruit of itself, (or) except it abide in
the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye are the
branches. He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much
fruit; for without me ye can do nothing. If a man abide not in me, he is cast
forth as a branch, and is withered. This manifests that maxim, once in grace,
and always in grace, to be no better than a broken reed, and dangerous for any
who have been sensible of a divine visitation to rest their salvation upon.

It is improper to imagine, that the sign of circumcision, given to Abraham and
his descendants, was a type of water baptism, which was only an outward and
typical sign itself. Ceremony and substance are type and antitype; not ceremony
and ceremony. What the circumcision of the foreskin pointed to, was the inward
circumcision of the fleshly heart, called for by Moses, Deuteronomy. x. 16. and
promised, chap. xxx. 6. Water Baptism in like manner typified Tit. iii. 5.
the washing of regeneration; which is effected by the renewing of the Holy
Ghost.

Mark xvi. 16. "He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved." This must
be understood of that saving faith, which works by love, to the purification
of the heart, and of that saving baptism, which operates to the answer of a
good conscience. If we do not believe unto obedience, if we have not that faith
which overcomes the world in our hearts, we shall not be found in the faith
once delivered to the saints; and, if we are not John iii. 8.
washed by the Lord himself, whoever else may baptize us, we have no part in
him. Simon Magus believed, and was baptized with water, yet remained so far
from a state of salvation, that when he offered money for the Holy Ghost, the
inspired apostle sharply answered him, Acts viii. 13, 21, 23.
Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not right in
the sight of God. -- I perceive thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the
bond of iniquity. What therefore had his bare believing and water baptism done
for him?

Misapprehension at first, and tradition afterward, having inculcated
water baptism as a permanent institution of our Lord's, and an indispensable
part of the gospel-ministration, some of its advocates have weakly argued for
it as such, from his washing John xiii.
the feet of his disciples, and directing it as their duty to do the like to
each other. But this instance had no relation to that ceremony; for our Lord
was not then instructing his followers how to initiate new converts, but
figuratively showing them what their own conduct should be amongst themselves,
by setting them a pattern of humility, condescension, and brotherly kindness
one to another. This undoubtedly was his intent; not the establishment of the
exterior act of pedal ablution.

Water Baptism being an essential part of John's commission, he properly
admitted his disciples by it; which the great Administrator of spiritual
baptism (...) not. When he called to any, Follow me, those, who obeyed his
call, immediately became his disciples, without any ceremonial. We find he
accepted Peter, Andrew, John, James, Levi, Philip, Nathaniel, and Zacheus,
without either baptizing them, or directing them to be baptized with water. As
it was then, so it remains to be; those who are obedient to his call are his
followers, whether they are water-baptized, or not. On the contrary, those who
obey not the internal manifestations of his spirit, are none of his, whoever
baptizeth them with water. Formality may render any man a nominal Christian;
but the effectual baptism of the spirit only can make a real one.

The practice of sprinkling infants under the name of baptism, has neither
precept nor precedent in the New Testament. For want of real instances, mere
suppositions are offered in support of it. Because it is said in the case of
Lydia, Acts xvi. 15.
that she was baptized, and her household; and by the apostle, "I baptized also
the household of Stephanas;" it is supposed, there might be infants, or little
children, in those households; from whence it is inferred such were baptized.
But could such improbabilities be ever so well ascertained, they would fall
very short of proving the practice a divine and perpetual institution.

The words of our Savior, Mark x. 13.
Suffer the little children to come unto me, afford no ground for
infant baptism. He made no mention of it, much less did he recommend it as
requisite to prepare them for his kingdom; for he declared their fitness
already: "Forbid them not," said he, for of such is the kingdom of heaven. Who
are they that presume to forbid such as unqualified to enter it, unless they
are sprinkled by their hands? The intention of our Lord in admitting the
children to him, appears to have been, that he might exhibit them as examples
of innocence and fitness to those actual sinners about him; to whom he said,
Verily I say unto you whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a
little child, he shall not enter therein. Had he meant to adopt and establish
paedo-baptism as a standing ordinance, a fairer opportunity could hardly offer,
either to baptize the children himself, or command his disciples to do it;
neither of which he did; but graciously showed his acceptance of them without
it, for he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and blessed them.

We never find either the Lord Jesus, or his apostles, preaching up
water baptism as his, nor telling the people they cannot be his followers
without it. His conditions of discipleship are not so easy to the carnal mind.
Luke ix. 27.
If any man will come after me, said he, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross daily, and follow me. -- Ibid xiv. 27.
Whosoever does not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be my disciple.
Hence it is clear, that it is not water baptism, nor any kind of rituals
whatsoever, which renders any man a Christian in our Savior's account; but
obedience to the operation of his Holy Spirit, which humbles the heart,
purifieth the soul, and baptizeth it measurably into the divine nature. But
mortification of self being irksome, and highly disagreeable to the flesh too
many are rather willing to content themselves with assuming the name Christian
under the outward sign, than to endure the pain of crossing their carnal
propensities, in order to put on Christ, and become Christians indeed. But let
such attentively consider this salutary admonition of the apostle. Gal. vi. 7,
8.
Be not deceived; God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he
also reap. For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption;
but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.

The command, Go teach all nations, baptizing, etc. shows that the baptism
therein meant, should be as general as the preaching there intended, both among
Jews and Gentiles; which waterbaptism evidently was not. For Paul, who was sent
chiefly to the Gentiles, was very sparing in the use of it, and thanked God
that he had baptized but two or three families with it, declaring that was not
his commission; yet he planted many churches, which contained numbers who
received the spirit, and walked in the faith and fellowship of the gospel, and
who were as real Christians without water baptism, as others were with it. This
shows, that it was neither made an essential, nor an integral part of
Christianity; and consequently, that the continuance of it was but an
occasional condescension; for it having been an ancient custom both among Jews
and Gentiles, to initiate their proselytes by it, and also administered by John
under divine authority, and taken up from him by the disciples of our Lord, it
was become a ceremony of considerable account with the generality, who saw not
sufficiently into the purity and simplicity of the Gospel: therefore it could
not, even after the baptism of Christ by the Holy Ghost appeared, be every
where laid aside suddenly; neither was it required so to be, but, as John
intimated, to decrease, or fall into disuse by degrees. In like manner the
apostles also occasionally complied with the rites of the Mosaic law in various
particulars; as circumcision, vows, shavings, exterior purifications,
sacrifices, anointings, etc. all which were permitted for a season; yet, had
the professors of Christianity abode in the spirit of it, and sincerely sought
a growth therein, ceremonials of all kinds would soon have been extinct in the
church. But instead of growing in grace, and in the saving knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ, a falling away began early to take place, and in proportion
as the life of religion dwindled, forms and shadows were more and more fastened
upon, and gradually increased upon the declining state of the church, as the
spirit of antichrist gained ground. But to return.

We read, Ephesians. v. 25, 26. Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for
it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the
word; that he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish.
This is the work of Christ himself, and therefore is done by his own spiritual
baptism. The water of the word signifies its cleansing power, as 1 Peter ii. 2.
the milk of the word denotes its nutrimental virtue; and this sanctifying word
is the issuing forth of the spirit of Christ for great and gracious purposes,
who is himself the emphatical and all powerful Word, through whom the Father
effects his will, and communicates all things to his people. By him alone the
church can be rendered holy, and presented without blemish.

According to apostolic doctrine, there is but one baptism now remaining in
force: Ephesians. iv. 5.
One Lord, one faith, one baptism. And as the Christian dispensation is that of
Christ, the one baptism must be the baptism of Christ; which is not by water,
but the Holy Ghost: 1 Cor. xii. 13.
"For," says Paul, by one spirit are we all baptized into one body. By
receiving the same spirit, we become of the same spiritual body. The outward
and visible sign may introduce us into membership with such an outward and
visible church as holds with the retention of the sign; but it is the effectual
operation of the spirit of Christ in us, that renders us members of his body,
or true spiritual church.

The distinction betwixt our Savior's baptism, and that of John, lies not in
the same elementary ministration after a different mode, or under another form
of words. (...)
I, (says John) indeed have baptized you with water; but he shall baptize you
with the Holy Ghost. This plainly shows, that the baptism of Christ, and that
of John, were two separate baptisms, and that they are perfectly distinct, and
different from each other, as type and antitype.

Some have argued, that as the soul is not properly a man without the body, nor
the body without the soul, but both in conjunction make the man; so
water baptism and spirit-baptism are both requisite to make up the one
Christian baptism. But though soul and body be the two constituent parts of a
man, the two baptisms have no such constitutional connection. That of the
spirit, being the effective reality, is complete in itself; but that of water
was only a temporary figure, and no more a part of the baptism of Christ, than
the circumcision of the foreskin was a part of the circumcision of the heart.

The transaction of Philip with the Ethiopian eunuch, Acts viii. has been
treated as if meant to give a miraculous sanction to water baptism. But it is
evident, this great and well-disposed man had been at, Jerusalem with a pious
intention to worship the true God, who knowing the sincerity of his heart, sent
Philip to instruct him, and to preach his Son Jesus to him, as the Savior of
mankind. After he had so done, as they passed near a certain water, the eunuch
judging, according to the custom of both Jews and Gentiles, that he must be
entered as a proselyte by the usual ceremony, made a motion to Philip that he
might be there baptized. And, as the apostles, in this early time of the
gospel, saw fit occasionally to condescend to this and various other rituals,
Philip went into the water with him, and baptized him. But, if any miracle was
wrought, the text affords no testimony that it was done to give a sanction to
water baptism, nor that it is a perpetual institution of our Lord. It does not
appear in the New Testament, that he ever instituted, adopted, or once
administered water baptism himself. The evangelist declares, that John iv. 2.
Jesus himself baptized not: that is, not with water; and undoubtedly for this
reason, because it was not his baptism, but John's, who was the only person we
find divinely commissioned for it. Our Lord's submitting himself to it, under
John's ministration, was upon the same footing that he submitted to the Jewish
ceremonials. They had all been divinely commanded, and in acknowledgment of
them as such, he countenanced the practice of them, till the period of their
obligation should arrive, by the establishment of his own spiritual
dispensation.

No one outwardly-connected body upon earth, has a right to engross to itself
the title of the true church, and thence to assert, there is no salvation but
within its own peculiar pale; for all professing churches are composed, more or
less, of a promiscuous number of those who love and fear God, and of those who
regard him not with that reverence and subjection all ought to do. Those who
walk most in the spirit, will undoubtedly be most in his favor; but without
obedience thereunto, none can be so; Romans viii. 14.
For, as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God: and,
Ibid 9.
If any man have not the spirit of Christ (as his leader) he is none of his.
Whatever doctrines he may profess, and whatever forms he may practice, he is no
true follower of Christ. John x. 27, 28.
The sheep of Christ hear his voice; they carefully regard the leadings of his
spirit, wherein he gives unto them eternal life, and none can pluck them out of
his hand. Here is the pale of true salvation; for Ibid 16.
there is but one fold under one shepherd. Of this fold are the righteous under
all denominations; for Acts x. 34, 35.
God is no respecter of persons; but in every nation, he that fears him, and
works righteousness, is accepted with him.

Our Lord declared himself to be the door of entrance into this fold. John x.
7, 9.
Verily, verily, I am the door of the sheep -- I am the door, by me if any man
enter, he shall be saved. No ceremonial can open this door, much less can it be
the door. By the communication of faith to the returning sinner, Christ opens
the way for him to be purified in heart, and fitted for admission into his
church militant here, and the church triumphant hereafter: Ephesians. ii. 8.
For by grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of yourselves; it is
the gift of God.

He is also the means of grace: John i. 17
For the law was given by Moses; but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. And
it always comes by him; for says the apostle, (...).
Unto every one of us is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of
Christ.

The seal or pledge of the kingdom of heaven, is what entitles to, or insures
it. This is the oil of divine grace, kept burning and shining in the lamp of
the wise virgin soul, or, in other words, the earnest of the spirit in the
renewed heart. 2 Cor. i. 22.
He who establishes us with you in Christ," says Paul, "is God, who has
sealed us, and given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts." -- Ephesians. i. 13.
"In whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of
promise. -- Ibid iv. 30.
"Grieve not the holy spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of
redemption. The Christian seal, therefore, is the sacred impress of the holy
spirit.

The mark or badge of true Christian fellowship is love: John xiii. 35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to
another. This is not to be understood of a bare natural affection, or the
attachment of party; but of that uniting love which is shed abroad in the
hearts of the regenerate by the Holy Ghost; to which the apostle John thus
exhorts, I John iv. 7.
Let us love one another; for love is of God, and every one that loves is born
of God, and knows God.

Typical forms may be made as doors of entrance into outward and visible
churches, and as marks and pledges of fellowship amongst men; but they are not
such to the spiritual community of the invisible church of Christ, the members
whereof, I Peter ii. 5.
as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer
up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

CHAP. II. ON CHRISTIAN COMMUNION.
AS the baptism of Christ is purely spiritual, so is that communion which is
truly the Lord's Jupper. Cor. xii. 13.
"For," says holy writ, by one spirit are we all baptized into one body,
whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have been all
made to drink into one spirit. This indicates, that the communion of real
inward Christians, whereby they partake of divine strength and consolation, is
in the one spirit they are all baptized by.

Undoubtedly, the sign has been piously used by many, and still may be so by
those to whom the termination of it does not yet appear; but seeing it is not
in itself of the spiritual nature of the gospel dispensation, the necessary
question now is, Whether our Lord instituted it with a declared intention, that
the observance of it should be an universal establishment throughout the
Christian churches to the end of time? If this be not ascertained in the
affirmative, it cannot, with propriety, be insisted on as an ordinance
obligatory upon us at this day. Dean Stilling fleet has justly observed,
Whatsoever is binding upon Christians, and so becomes an article either of
faith or practice, as an universal standing law, must be clearly revealed as
such, and laid down in scripture in such evident terms, as that all who have
their senses exercised therein, may discern it to have been the will of Christ,
that if should perpetually oblige all believers to the end of the world. Let us
a little enquire, whether such clear evidence of the perpetual obligation of
this ceremonial appears in the texts that most immediately relate to the
subject.

Our Savior and his disciples being engaged in the celebration of the Jewish
passover, the same night he was betrayed, we read, Matt. xxvi. 26-30.
As they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave
it to his disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body. And he took the cup,
and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it; for this is
my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of
sins. But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the
vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom. Luke
adds the following expression: Luke xxii. 19.
"This do in remembrance of me." But the apostle Paul delivers it in a fuller
and more explanatory manner. 1 Cor. xi. 25, 26.
This do ye, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me." Adding, For as often
as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's death till he
come.

There is nothing in these texts that enjoins the perpetuity of the symbols.
The words, till he come, shows the observance of them to be no longer of
obligation than till his second coming. We do not read, You shall thus
participate of the signs through all future generations; nor have we any
specific direction how often they should be used in the interval, which
indicates a liberty in that respect; but no authority for their extension
beyond the time of the Lord's coming. When they were received, it was to be in
remembrance of him, which must be during his absence from them; for when
present, he must be an object of sense, not of remembrance; therefore the time
intended for the reception of those tokens of memorial, could only be till he
should come again, and afresh communicate a sense of his divine presence to
them.

This second coming of our Lord he had repeatedly given them sufficient ground
to expect should be after a spiritual manner. John xiv. 28.
"Ye have heard," said he, how I said unto you, I go away, and come again to
you. He had assured them of this, where he told them, Ibid xiv. 16, 17, 18.
I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever: even the spirit of truth, whom the world cannot
receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him; but ye know him, for he
dwells with you, and shall be in you. I will not leave you comfortless: I
will come to you. Here he first speaks of himself in the third person under the
name of the Comforter, the spirit of truth; and then assuming the first,
inculcates, that he who was then a strength and comfort to them, without them,
by his bodily presence, should, after his corporeal departure, come again in
spirit, to be the strength and comfort of his followers within them, and to
abide with them for ever. He also showed, that his spiritual advent, and
indwelling, was not to be confined to his present disciples; but should also be
manifested to all that love him, and keep his commandments. John v. 23.
If any man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we
will come unto him, and make our abode with him.

The apostle Paul likewise concurrently testified, Heb. ix. 28.
Christ was offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him,
shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation. To those who then
looked for him in spirit he certainly did come, according to that testimony of
John, 1 John v. 20.
We know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding, that
we may know him that is true; and we are in him that is true; even in his Son
Jesus Christ. This coming of Christ, by which they received an understanding
that they were in him, must be after a spiritual manner, agreeable to his
promise, John xiv. 20. At that day, ye shall know, that I am in my Father, and
you in me, and I in you.

Thus they experienced the knowledge of that great gospel-mystery, which had
been hid from ages and generations in forms and shadows: Col. i. 26, 27.
"But now" says the apostle, is made manifest to his saints, to whom God would
make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles;
which is Christ in you, the hope of glory.

The inward and true Christian thus knows him to be come, by the illuminating
and quickening life he receives from him; which all ought inwardly to seek
after, and not stick in the outward and visible sign, with an expectation to
find him in that from whence he is risen. They who look only thus outwardly for
him, in truth see him not. John xiv. 29.
Yet a little while," said he, "and the world sees me no more; but ye see me,
because I live, ye shall live also. The unregenerate world could discern no
more of him than his corporeal appearance, and when that was removed, they saw
him no more; but those who have been baptized into him, as a vital principle of
divine life, still spiritually see him, and because he lives in them, they live
also; and by the influence of his Holy Spirit are most effectually kept in mind
of the shedding of his precious blood without the gates of Jerusalem, 1 John
ii. 2.
as a propitiation for their sins, and not for theirs only, but for the sins of
the whole world. These stand not in need of signs and symbols to remind them of
him. They cannot be forgetful of that inexpressible love and mercy, wherein he
gave up his prepared body to die, that they might live; but are graciously
preserved in humble thankfulness, and deep admiration, that he should so
condescend to suffer for them, who must ever acknowledge themselves most
unworthy of such astonishing goodness.

The outward and visible sign appears to have been recommended by our Lord,
only for the interval between his personal departure and his spiritual return,
the use of it being to commemorate his death till he came; consequently, when
he was come, the observance of it was no longer obligatory, but occasionally
permitted, like the washing of one another's feet, or the anointing of the sick
with oil, till they should gradually drop away, as the reality wherein they
terminated should advance in the hearts of the believers. But the progress of
these in spirituality being early obstructed, by the disinclination of many
toward the cross; their love to truth, and zeal for it waxed cold, and a
disposition prevailed to rest in symbolical religion, which they could easily
practice, without parting with their inward corruptions, and walking in that
self-denial the gospel requires. This became an exercise to the apostles, and
occasioned Paul to query, Gal. iv. 9. -- iii. 3.
How turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire again
to be in bondage? -- Are ye so foolish? Having begun in the spirit, are ye now
made perfect by the flesh?

Rev. iii. 20.
"Behold," says Christ, I stand at the door and knock; if any man hear my
voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he
with me. This is the true supper of the Lord, which stands not in partaking of
the outward elements one with another, but in the participation of his divine
life, the true bread from heaven, and the new wine of the kingdom. This is also
communicated in religious congregations, to those of Phil. iii. 3.
the circumcision which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus,
and have no confidence in the flesh." When such draw near to him, he draws near
to them. Mat. xviii. 20.
"Where two or three," said he, "are gathered together into my name, there am I
in the midst of them. Our common translation has it in my name; but in the
original it is (...) into my name; which name, as observed in the preceding
chapter, is the power and virtue of his spirit, wherein alone true Christian
communion is enjoyed.

The spiritually-minded under former dispensations were not excluded from this
communion. The apostle shows, that the fathers of Israel 1 Cor. x. 4.
did all eat of the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual
drink; for they drank of that spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock
was Christ. He also intimates, that himself and his brethren then partook in
the same spiritual communion, under the metaphorical terms of the body and
blood of Christ. Ibid ver. 16, 17.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? As if he had said, Is it but the outward shadow, and not the inward and
spiritual reality? Certainly it is, for we being many are one bread, and one
body; for we are all partakers of that one bread. This implies, that by the
participation of the one spirit of life in Christ Jesus, they were, in their
several measures, made partakers of the divine nature, and, through its
cementing virtue, were inwardly united one unto another, as members of the same
spiritual body, and all unto Christ the head; Col. ii. 19.
from which, says the apostle, "all the body by joints and bands having
nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase of God.

Having spoken to such as had experienced a degree of inward sanctification,
the apostle turns to those intemperate carnal professors, who had fallen into a
shameful abuse of the outward sign. Cor. xi. 20.27, etc.
These he sharply reproved, and intimated to them, that as often as they
partook of the exterior elements, it ought to have been in a reverent
remembrance of him who suffered for them. For whilst they had no discerning, or
inward sense, of his spiritual body, and persisted in such abuse of the form,
he let them know they ate and drank to their own condemnation; for such as
partake but of the sign, under a pretense of divine communion, and do it so
unworthily, are in the judgment of the apostle, guilty of vilifying the body
and blood of the Lord; because, whilst they profess to honor him, they, by
their evil conduct, may be said, in some respect, Heb. vi. 6.
to crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame.

Though our Savior was seen of his disciples at times forty days after his
resurrection, he partook not with them of any outward species in the form of
communion, as may be concluded from his own words, I will not drink henceforth
of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my
Father's kingdom. He knew, though it was still hid from them, that by the
regenerating baptism of the Holy Ghost, they should be made new creatures, and
inwardly translated into that spiritual kingdom, wherein he would give them to
partake with him of the new wine thereof. For Mat. vi. 10.
the coming of this kingdom he had before taught them to pray, and also told
them, Mark ix. 1.
There be some of them that stand here, who shall not taste of death till they
have seen the kingdom of God come with power. He had also informed them, that
this kingdom Luke xvii. 20, 21.
comes not with observation, or outward show; for, said he, the kingdom of God
is within you.

If this kingdom comes not with outward observation, it is in vain to seek it
by outward observations, and to pretend to support it by them. If it be within
us, it must be an inward and spiritual kingdom, and it cannot come to us, but
by the spirit. And if, as the apostle declares, Romans xiv. 17.
the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, peace, and joy in
the Holy Ghost, it is not bread and wine; which are meat and drink. As the
kingdom is spiritual, its communion is spiritual, and its receivers are
spiritually such. Well therefore might the apostle say, Ibid ii. 28, 29.
He is not a Jew who is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is
outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew who is one inwardly, and circumcision is
that of the heart in the spirit, and not in the letter. Thus it is with the
Christian. He is not a real Christian, who is only one by profession and form;
neither is that the baptism, nor the communion of the gospel, which is outward
and ceremonial; but he is a Christian who is one inwardly, and that is the true
baptism, and the true communion, which is of the heart, in the spirit, and not
in the letter, or outward form. With what sound reason then can any insist on
the practice of outward and visible signs, as if the very existence of
Christianity depended upon them, and that persons of the greatest faith, piety,
and probity, could have no claim to the name of Christians without them?

Had the most eminent of the evangelists, John, esteemed the continuance of the
sign to have been of essential moment, or lasting obligation, he would hardly
have failed to mention it as such. He is particularly expressive of the
circumstance of our Savior's washing his disciples feet, showing that he both
enjoined it with great precision, and recommended it by his example; yet it is
generally agreed to have been only figurative and temporary, and therefore
disused by Protestants, and very little practiced by the Romanists; but John,
in his relation of the transactions of that important evening, passes the
outward supper wholly without notice. His total omission of it may reasonably
intimate, that when he wrote his history, which was long after the rest of the
evangelists, the season for it was fully past; and that the use of it had been
only meant as a figure, to weak converts for a time, and then to drop away, and
give place to the reality.

Yet, notwithstanding this apostolic historian has omitted the ceremonial, he
has given a large account of our Lord's discourse concerning the substance, in
chap. 6. wherein, amongst many other similar expressions, he says, John vi.
32, 51, 54.
My Father gives you the true bread from heaven -- I am the living bread which
came down from heaven -- Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has
eternal life. This intimates, that those who spiritually partake of the divine
life in him, which is of an eternal nature, receive the living bread, and the
flesh and blood he here intended. Such feed not of that body which suffered on
the cross, but of his spiritual body, which is a mystery to the carnal mind.

Knowing in himself, that by apprehending his metaphorical expressions in a
literal sense, many of his disciples, as well as the Jews, took offense, he,
for explanation, directly told them, verse 63. It is the spirit that
quickens; the flesh profits nothing. From whence it appears, that could we
eat the very flesh, and drink the blood of the outward body of Christ, it would
not profit us. How vain and useless therefore, as well as contrary to sense and
reason, is the Romish notion, that the bread consecrated by a priest, is
transubstantiated into that body of flesh and blood, which, if actually
received, would profit nothing to the soul!

It is both carnal and absurd to inser, that upon our Savior's blessing the
bread, it instantly became that very body which brake it, handed it to the
disciples, and ate of it with them. But, that a new-made wafer, or a piece of
bread of yesterday, should, upon the priest's imitative performance of a mere
ceremony, be instantly rendered that very body of Christ, which existed many
hundred years before it, and that it is to be worshipped as God; and also that
every one of the many thousands of these consecrated wafers is the whole of
that same body; and all this, whilst they remain as utterly unchanged, to every
evidence of sense and reason, as when they came out of the hands of the baker;
that any people should suffer these manifest impossibilities to be imposed upon
them as mysterious truths, is a flagrant instance of the great subtlety of
Satan, the boldness of his instruments, and the credulity of mankind.

This irrational and idolatrous abuse has arisen from the taking expressions,
evidently figurative, in a literal sense. Take the connecting verb is, in the
phrases, "This is my body, this is my blood," in like manner with many parallel
expressions in scripture, and the mystery is easily solved, without putting any
unnatural force upon the text, or any imposition upon the senses,
understandings, or consciences of mankind. We read, Genesis xli. 26.
The seven good kine are seven years, and the seven good ears are seven years.
-- Gal. iv. 5.
This Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia. -- Rev. xvii. 9, 12.
The seven heads are seven mountains. -- The ten horns thou saw ar ten
kings. These are universally allowed to have been only representative signs of
what they are literally said to be. In like manner, those expressions of our
Lord, "This is my body, This is my blood," figuratively signified, the bread
and wine to be exterior signs, representing, that as they imparted strength and
refreshment to the body, the communication of his spiritual body should afford
strength and refreshment to the soul.

Whatever any thing feeds upon must be of a nature suitable to its own. The
soul, being of a spiritual nature, is not to be fed with material flesh and
blood; the body prepared for Christ to appear in upon earth was such; therefore
it was not that body concerning which he said, John vi. 54 to 58.
Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will
raise him up at the last day. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink indeed. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me,
and I in him. As the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father; so
he that eats me, even he shall live by me. This flesh and blood is,
therefore, another kind of body than that material one, wherein he then
appeared to the world. It is a spiritual body, suitable and alimentary to the
soul; the true life of which is spiritual, and its feeding spiritual: The flesh
profits it nothing. It is both quickened and supported by that spiritual body
of Christ (metaphorically called the 1 Cor. x.
Rock) upon which the fathers of Israel fed long before he took the outward
body upon him, and upon which the primitive Christians fed, and all who are
truly such now feed, and, like them, become nourished up unto eternal life.

The rituals of the Mosaic law were once of divine institution, but being only
Heb. x. 1.
shadows of good things to come in the spiritual dispensation of the gospel,
the good things themselves being come, their shadows appear to us no longer
obligatory; so the exterior forms of water baptism and the supper, (...)
shadows of the good things already come under the spiritual ministration of the
Savior, are ^^perceded thereby, and become of no more force than the past
rudiments of the law. Nevertheless, we condemn not those who are conscientious
in the (...) of them. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind.

The profane as well as the pious may partake of the outward elements. Judas
partook of these, even when Satan had entered him, and he had covenanted to
betray his Lord; but he could not in that state participate of the true
communion with him; therefore the outward supper is not the true communion.

The communion of the church triumphant in heaven, and that of the church
militant upon earth, is in the same spirit. It is the communion of the Holy
Ghost in both; but the latter being in a state of travail and probation, amidst
the temptations and trials of the world, does not enjoy it in that
uninterrupted brightness and fullness, which the former does in the state of
perfect purity and immutable glory.

CHAP. III. ON WAITING UPON GOD, etc.
THE apostle Paul showed, that Tim. ii. 5.
there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus;
Ephesians. ii. 18.
through whom we have access by one spirit unto the Father, Ibid. i. 6.
and in whom alone we are accepted. We have no power to draw near unto God but
by him. John xiv. 6.
I am the way," said he, "and the truth, and the life; no man comes unto the
Father but by me. In order to worship aright, therefore, we must first wait for
him, that we may feel the power of his spirit in our hearts, to illuminate,
quicken, and enable us, inwardly to approach the throne of divine grace, in
faith and resignation; that our offerings may come up with acceptance on his
holy altar.

The communication of his spirit being of his own free grace, it is not in the
power of man to obtain it when he pleases; therefore, it must be waited for.
Activity, in exterior ordinances, is an employment very different from true
waiting; which consists in a solemn and steady inward retirement of soul to
him, in humility, faith, and patience, that he may condescend to renew its
strength in him, and enable it to worship him in spirit and in truth, according
to his will.

In this practice, the people of God, in all generations, sensibly experienced
the times of refreshing from his presence, and ability to withstand temptation,
to hold on their way amidst the various assaults of the powers of evil, and
occasionally to stand firm in suffering for his glorious cause. Hence we find
them, in holy writ, frequent in expressing the benefit of waiting upon God, and
earnest in their exhortations to it. Let us attend to a few instances.

Psalm xxvii. 14. Wait on the Lord. Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen
thine heart. Wait, I say, on the Lord. This contains encouragement, and
repeated exhortation to waiting.

Hosea xii. 6. Turn thou to thy God; keep mercy and judgment, and wait on thy
God continually. This intimates the necessity of perseverance in waiting, as
well as in the practice of uprightness and charity.

Psalm xxxiii. 20. Our soul waits for the Lord; he is our help, and our
shield. This shows, their waiting upon him was in expectation of his divine
assistance.

Isa. xl. 31. They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength. They
shall (...) up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; they
shall walk, and not faint. Herein are held forth gracious assurances of
quickening strength in the practice of waiting.

Micah vii. 7. I will look unto the Lord; I will wait for the God of my
salvation. My God will hear me. This indicates the holy resolution of the
prophet, and his confidence in waiting.

Habak. ii. 1. I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will
watch to see what he will say unto me, or in me, and what I shall answer when I
am reproved. Watching here is synonymous with waiting, and this passage denotes
the dependence of the prophet, in this inward and mental exercise, to have been
upon the Lord for instruction.

Psalm. xl. 1, 2. I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and
heard my cry. He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the miry
clay, and set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings. This evinces the
propriety of a continuance in waiting, and the happy success attending it.

That this waiting was not only the practice of particulars, but also of the
congregated bodies of God's people, appears from that reprehension of the
spirit of prophecy in Ezekiel, against the insincere amongst the Israelites:
Ezekiel. xxxiii. 31.
They come unto thee as the people comes, and they sit before thee as my
people, and they hear thy words; but they will not do them.

We also find, that whilst the elders of Judah sat before the prophet, he was
led through such a variety of divine visions concerning the state of that
people, as take up from chap. viii. 1. to chap. xi. 4. to relate. During the
time he was thus inwardly engaged, the elders undoubtedly sat in silence, as
well as himself; for in conclusion, he says, The spirit of the Lord fell upon
me, and said unto me, Speak, etc.

Psalm xxxvii. 7. and lxii. 1. show the waiting of the Lord's servants began,
and continued for some time in silence; for, according to the Hebrew, these
texts are, Be silent to the Lord, and wait patiently for him." -- "Truly my
soul is silent upon God (or silent in attention upon him) from him comes my
salvation.

Lam. iii. 25, 28. The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul
that seeks him. It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for
the salvation of the Lord. It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his
youth. He sits alone, and keeps silence, because he has borne it upon
him. Here is great encouragement to the submissive silent waiter.

The evangelical prophet is still more expressive.

Isa. lxiv. 4. Since the beginning of the world, men have not heard, nor
perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he
has prepared for him that waits for him. This evidenceth, there is something
more excellent than is possible to the conceived by the natural, or
unregenerate, man, to be enjoyed in devout and patient waiting. Hence arises
the fervency of zeal for thus waiting, and the great earnestness therein of
those who experienced the benefit of it; which we find emphatically expressed
in the following texts.

Psalm cxxx. 6. My soul waits for the Lord more than they that watch for the
morning: I say, more than they that watch for the morning.

Isa. xxvi. 9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night; yea, with my
spirit within me will I seek thee early.

Psalm xlii. 1, 2. As the heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my
soul after thee, O God! My soul thirsts for God, for the living God. When
shall I come and appear before God?

As the spiritually-minded, under past dispensations, were sensible of their
inability properly to discharge their respective duties, without the renewed
assistance of God's Holy Spirit, and therefore often waited upon him to receive
it; so under this gospel dispensation, which essentially is the pure
ministration of the Spirit, it must necessarily be waited for. Our Lord
therefore directed this dispensation to commence in solemn waiting. For, being
assembled together with his disciples, Acts i. 4.
he commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the
promise of the Father: the enduement of power from on high. Accordingly, whilst
the disciples were congregated and sitting together with one accord, Ibid ii. 4.
they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other
tongues, as the spirit gave them utterance.

Thus led into solemn waiting by their Lord and Master, and divinely favored
therein, the primitive Christians had sufficient ground to continue the
practice; which it appears they did from the following texts: 1 Cor. i. 6, 7,
8. The testimony of Christ was confirmed in you; so that ye come behind in no
gift, waiting for the coming, or revelation, of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall also confirm you unto the end. This shows they received the gifts of the
spirit, and the confirmation of it, through waiting."

1 These. i. 9, 10. Ye turned to God from idols, to serve the living and true
God, and to wait for his Son from heaven. And, 2 These. iii. 5. the apostle
prays, The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the patient
waiting for Christ. This patient waiting for the revelation of Christ from
heaven, must have an immediate respect to their worship, as well as to their
qualification for service, and is to be understood of his inward and spiritual
appearance; which the apostle gives comfortable assurance of, Heb. ix. 28.
Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for
him shall he appear the second time, without sin unto salvation. By this we
understand, that as he once appeared after an outward and corporeal manner, and
gave up the body prepared for him, as an expiation for the sins of all who
should come to repentance; so to those who should look internally for him in
faith, he shall again appear by the revelation of his spirit in their hearts,
to effect the work of regeneration in them, in order to their eternal
salvation. For, this second appearance of Christ to those who piously look, and
patiently wait, for him, cannot intend his last advent; for then he shall also
appear to those that look not for him with desire, to their final condemnation.

From what has been said, it may sufficiently appear, that waiting upon God in
silence, faith, and patience, is not a modern peculiarity originated among the
people called Quakers, nor the fruit of a despicable enthusiasm; but a
necessary practice of ancient date and long continuance amongst the Lord's
people, as preparatory and requisite to the reception of divine ability to 1
Cor. xiv. 15.
pray with the spirit, and with a right understanding also. 1 Pet. iv. 7.
"Watch unto prayer," said Peter. Paul likewise exhorts to the duty of Ephesians. vi.
18.
praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching
thereunto with all perseverance.

Having experimentally received an inward sense of the divine goodness in thus
waiting, the living amongst the people abovementioned are engaged to sit down
in a watchful stillness, both in their public meetings and private retirements,
before Him who made heaven and earth, the seas, and the fountains of waters;
and whoever have any clear sense of the spirit, know it draws their minds into
this still waiting for it, so pathetically recommended in holy writ, and so
beneficially practiced by those who have devoted their souls to the God of
their life, and their never-failing helper in time of need. Let none,
therefore, by rejecting and deriding what they have not experienced, lose the
precious opportunity now afforded them; but address themselves earnestly to
Isa. lv. 6.
seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near, that
happily in Acts xvii. 27
feeling after him they may find him, who is not far from every one of us.

If we suffer the low concerns of this mutable world, its earthly profits, or
deceitful pleasures, its friendships, fashions, or any other of its
corruptions, to attach our minds, and divert them from attending to the motions
of the spirit of God in our hearts, till we fill up such a measure of iniquity
as shall occasion him to forsake us, we may seek him afterward, as Esau did
the blessing, in vain. For, he says, Genesis vi. 3.
My spirit shall not always strive with man. Time sufficient for repentance is
afforded to all, and the will of God is our sanctification. Why then, some may
query, are we not sanctified? Is Satan too strong for Almighty power? By no
means. Such questions are started from improper grounds. As the Lord, in
wisdom, has made man a reasonable creature, he deals with him according to
reason, and not by absolute force. He shows him good and evil, with their
opposite consequences, persuades, entreats, and presses him to refuse the
evil, and choose the good, that he may reap the fruit of it; even eternal life.
If the will of man be so perverse, as to prefer a continuance in the
gratifications of sin, he sows to the flesh, and of the flesh must reap
corruption. If he wilfully reject the kind reproofs of the spirit in his own
conscience, to the full extent of divine sufferance, as revolting Jerusalem
did, he sins out the day of his merciful visitation, grace is withdrawn from
him, his opportunity is lost, and the way of peace is hid from his eyes.
Knowing this, the good apostle thus earnestly addressed the believers: 2 Cor.
vi. 1.
We then as workers together with Him, beseech you also, that ye receive not
the grace of God in vain. For, though the grace of God that brings salvation
has appeared to all men, its appearance is rendered in vain to such as by
their disobedience to it, and rejection of it, frustrate the accomplishment of
its gracious end and purpose toward them.

It is a weak argument, that we have now a complete canon of the scriptures,
and therefore have less need of the spirit than the primitives; as if the
letter could supply the place, and do the work of the spirit. As all men by a
natural and corporeal birth enter into the kingdom of this world; so our
Savior himself showed the Jewish ruler John iii.
, that unless we experience a spiritual and supernatural birth, we cannot enter
into the kingdom of God. The holy scriptures, which so strongly recommend us to
be led by the spirit, to live in the spirit, and to walk in the spirit, could
not be intended to supersede and set aside the spirit, and to render its
internal operation unnecessary.

The apostle Paul, who had a share of both divine and human knowledge, teaches
that 1 Cor. ii. 14.
the natural or unregenerate man (notwithstanding his arts, languages, and
philosophy) receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
fooliskness unto him; neither can he know them (by his learned researches)
because they are spiritually discerned. That is, they are only to be understood
by the light of the spirit; and therefore to be received by its own
illumination. We may gather up theoretic notions concerning them from the
declarations of those who did receive them; but this will not convey the
realities they express to us. It will center far short of creating us anew in
Christ Jesus, without which we may profess ourselves Christians; but Gal. v. 24.
they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and
lusts.

But some, who allow that the assistance of the Holy Spirit is still afforded
to mankind, deny that any man now has an internal sense of it, so as to
distinguish its motions in them from those of their own minds. But, certainly,
whoever feels any inward convictions for sin conceived or committed, not under
the cognizance of law, nor open to other men's knowledge, may easily distinguish
the motions of the reproved which leads into sin, from those of the reprover
who smites for it, to lead out of it; and if any ever become insensible of it,
it is for want of obeying it. Such as continue to reject it, may occasion it to
become silent in them for a season; but it always remains present with them,
though they feel it not, and will revive upon them with inexpressible terror,
at a time when they shall find no way to escape.

1 John iii. 24. and iv. 13. we read, Hereby we know that he abides in us, by
the spirit which he has given us. -- Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and
he in us, because he has given us of his spirit. This inculcates that the Holy
Spirit, like the sun in the firmament, manifests itself to the mind by its own
evidence. Yet, notwithstanding John i. 5, 9.
the true light which lights every man that comes into the world, shines in
the dark hearts of men; if they wilfully retain their darkness, they comprehend
not the light. Job xxiv. 13.
Those that rebel against the light, they know not the ways thereof. Abiding
under the beclouding influence of prejudice, unbelief, or self-confidence, they
shut themselves up against the light, and often decry and ridicule it; but
those who embrace it as from God, come to experience the new birth of the
spirit, and in the new birth receive a new life, and in the new life a new
sense. The life and sense of the first birth are carnal; the life and sense of
the second are spiritual, which nothing but the spirit can communicate.

Peter told the regenerate formerly, I Pet. i. 22.
Ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the spirit. They had
joined the truth, that is, the spirit of truth, in its operation to the
purification of their souls, and certainly, not without a sense of it. This
spirit of truth is the spirit of Christ, which he promised should come to John
xvi. 8, 13
reprove, or convince, the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment, and
to guide into all truth.

Hence we see, the spirit comes not only to rebuke, convince, and disquiet
mankind in evil to lead them out of it, but also to accompany them in
faithfulness, and guide them into all truth. For when they are brought to
receive it, believe in it, and cleave to it, they become the sheep of Christ;
they John x. 3, 4, 14, 27.
hear and follow him, for they know his voice; that is, they are enabled to
distinguish the motions of his spirit from those of the stranger, which they
will not follow, but flee from.

There is as much difference betwixt the internal voice of Christ, and other
voices, as there is between light and darkness. Ibid viii. 12.
"He that follows me," said he, shall not walk in darkness; but shall have
the light of life. He that walks in the light, must necessarily see by it, and
have a sense of it.

John xiv. 12.
He that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and
manifest myself to him. This manifestation of himself to those who love him is
by his spirit, and the manifestation of his spirit must be the discovery of it
the soul of him to whom it is manifested. There can be no manifestation to any
but those who receive a sense of it; for that cannot be manifested to me, which
I have no distinct perception of. Insensible manifestation is a
self-contradiction.

Ephesians. ii. 1. You has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins Who
has not been, more or less, in the death of trespasses and sins? And who ever
experienced a resurrection from this death, unto life in Christ, by the
quickening power of his spirit, without a living sense of it? Insensibility is
not a property of life, but of death; therefore the living members of the body
or church of Christ, cannot be insensible of the life of Christ, by which their
souls are quickened, or made alive in him.

The ministration of the spirit has ever been the life of true religion. The
fairest form, and most plausible profession, are no more than a lifeless letter
without it. 2 Cor. iii. 6.
The letter kills, but the spirit gives life; and whosoever receives the
spirit, receives life, and those who receive life, receive a sense of that
life; for life is not without sense in proportion to its degree, and the higher
degree of life any receive, the more sensible they are of its quickening virtue.

The express terms of the new covenant, cited from the prophet, Heb. viii. 10,
11, are, This is the convenant that I will make with the house of Israel after
those days, says the Lord; I will put my laws into their mind, and write them
in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people.
And they shall not (of absolute necessity) "teach every man his neighbor, and
every man his brother, saying, know the Lord, for all shall know me from the
least to the greatest.

This plainly shows, that under the gospel-establishment, the Lord himself is
the teacher of his people, and that individually; that he opens his law in
their hearts so clearly and indubitably, that none who duly attend to his
immediate instructions, in their consciences, need to remain under a necessity
of being taught their duty to him by their brethren, or their neighbors.

From the gracious illumination of this Divine Teacher, arises the strongest
internal evidence of the truth of Christianity to those who become subject to
his instruction. Many, under various denominations, have acknowledged, that the
truth and excellence of the Christian dispensation has been rendered more
clear and certain to them by this inward principle, than by all other kinds of
evidence whatsoever; and it is a great proof of the good will of God to
mankind, that he has laid open to all, whether learned or void of literature,
this shortest and surest way to that evidence, which brings with it the most
clear and cogent degree of convincement.

Romans vi. 25.
"We are not under the law; but under grace," says the apostle. Great grace
indeed! That the God of infinite wisdom, and immutable excellence, should
condescend to be our immediate teacher! With what cordiality, humility, and
thankfulness ought we to accept of and embrace it; ever remembering that awful
warning, Heb. xii. 25.
See that ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not who refused
him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from
him that speaks from heaven.

REASONS FOR THE NECESSITY OF SILENT WAITING, IN ORDER TO THE SOLEMN WORSHIP OF
GOD. TO WHICH ARE ADDED, SEVERAL QUOT^^^^^S FROM ROBERT BARCLAY ^^^^OGY. BY
MARY BROOK.

THE SIXTH EDITION.

LONDON, PRINTED: NEW YORK, REPRINTED, BY WILLIAM ROSS, BROAD-STREET, NEAR THE
EXCHANGE.

M.DCC.LXXXVI.

REASONS FOR THE NECESSITY OF SILENT WAITING, etc.
SOLOMON says, Prove. xvi. 1.
"The preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue, are from
the Lord." If the Lord alone can prepare the heart, stir it up, or incline it
toward unfeigned holiness, how can any man approach him acceptably till his
heart be prepared by him? And how can he know this preparation, except he wait
in silence to feel it? Ephesians. ii. 18.
It is by the spirit that believers have access to the Father; and are not the
impressions and influences of the spirit to be felt and distinguished from the
workings of our own carnal minds? If they are, ought not believers to wait
patiently in silent submission of soul, in order to distinguish when the golden
scepter is stretched out, which gives liberty to approach the Sacred Presence?
And must not the preparations of the heart by the spirit make us sensible of
our real wants, before we can ask aright; and also of our miserable state,
before we can seek that relief which is proper for us? Must not the spirit
likewise impart help and consolation to us, before we can rejoice in its
salvation, praise the Lord on the banks of deliverance, and make sweet melody
in our hearts unto him? Can we bow before him in true reverence and fear, in
faith, till the spirit has mercifully begot these sensations in the soul? Must
not the carnal mind, which is at enmity with God, be silenced in us before
these impressions prevail over all? If we presume to approach him without the
sensible drawings of his spirit, may we not speak unadvisedly with our lips,
and offer somewhat like the polluted sacrifice of the wicked, which is an
abomination to him, and therefore cannot be acceptable from a disciple of
Christ? To such the apostle says, Phil. ii. 13.
"It is God that works in you, both to will and to do of his good pleasure."
Must we not consequently wait in silence till this will be raised in us, and
power given us to perform a holy worship, and to offer an offering in
righteousness?

The influences of the spirit are not at our command, circumscribed in our
time, or limited by our wills, and therefore must be humbly waited for, seeing
we can have no access without it; and if that in which all our spiritual
ability and strength is, be not our own, nor at our command, but must be freely
dispensed to us afresh by the great Giver, must we not submissively wait in
silence for his qualifying power, by which alone we can move aright? Hence
David, deeply sensible of his own inability, says, Psalm lxii. 1. "Truly my
soul waits upon (or, as in the margin, is silent before) God; from him comes
my salvation;" and verse 5. "my soul, wait thou only upon God; for my
expectation is from him."

Do not these remarks clearly point out the necessity of our patiently waiting
upon the Lord in silence, for renewed strength, that by the inward and powerful
operations of his Spirit, he may pluck the feet of our minds out of the mire
and clay of corrupt thoughts and carnal inclinations, and also beget a suitable
concern and travail of spirit in us, that from the arising of a true spiritual
exercise, the mouth may speak what the panting soul feels when it is athirst
for God; or, at least, be humbly sensible of those sighs and groans begotten
therein by the Spirit, which cannot be uttered in words? Is not this concern
and exercise wherein the soul is deeply engaged, and the judgment clearly
convinced, more acceptable to the all-seeing God, who calls for truth in the
inward parts, than a multitude of fine unfelt expressions dropped from the lips,
whilst the heart is wandering without due restraint, far from a sense of his
presence? Nay, will not five words spoke from a good understanding under the
influence of the Holy Spirit, have more weight with the Almighty, than five
thousand uttered from a lukewarm, insensible, or careless mind? Can we suppose
the infinitely wise Creator of all things is, like short-sighted man, either to
be deceived or pleased with our much speaking? Our Lord says, "When ye pray,
use not vain repetitions, as the Heathen do, for they think that they shall be
heard for their much speaking. Be not ye therefore like unto them; for your
Father knows what things ye have need of before ye ask him." Mat. vi. 7, 8.

The inspired prophet Isaiah, in the last verse of the fortieth chapter, says,
"They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength." In the first verse
of the next chapter immediately succeeding, he shows what is meant by waiting
in these words, "Keep silence before me, O islands! and let the people renew
their strength." Certainly this silence imports the same thing as waiting in
the former verse, seeing the same effect is attributed to both; and is not the
carnal mind and corrupt imagination here commanded to keep silence before God,
that the soul may properly wait and watch unto prayer? The prophet adds, "Let
them come near, then let them speak." This also appears to call the immortal
soul into deep silence, that therein it may first receive divine help to draw
near in spirit to the great Jehovah, and then speak forth its humble petition,
under a sense of that holy, solemn, awful reverence, which is due from a
dependent creature in its approaches toward its Almighty Creator.

A certain minister of the church of England, Charles Wheatly, M. A. Vicar of
Brent and Turner's Pelham, in Hertfordshire.
writing on the Common Prayer, and the sentences placed at the beginning of the
service, observes, That prayer requires so much attention and serenity of mind,
that it can never be performed without some preceding preparation; for which
reason, says he, according to Bingham's Antiquities, vol. 5. book xiii. chap.
11, 12. when the Jews enter into their synagogues to pray, they remain silent
for some time, and meditate before whom they stand. Can we think such a
reverent practice amongst Christians would not be more suitable and acceptable
to him, who need not be told what we are, than the too common custom of hastily
approaching his Sacred Presence, and presuming to speak to him without previous
recollection, and due consideration before whom they stand?

Ecclef. v. 1.
"Keep thy foot," says Solomon, "when thou go to the house of God, and be
more ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools; for they consider not
that they do evil." If caution and consideration were requisite under the law
of Moses, which made nothing perfect as pertaining to the conscience, how much
more is it so under the gospel dispensation, which more directly requires, John
iv. 23.
that the Lord be worshipped in spirit and in truth; not feignedly with the lip
only, but with the whole heart spiritually exercised? What foot is this that
must be kept in such subjection? Is it only the foot of the body, and not
rather the hasty forwardness of the carnal mind, that the attention of the soul
may become fixed upon God, the fountain of all spiritual strength and living
mercies, who must teach our hearts to pray, if ever we pray effectually?

Isaiah says, Isa. xxvi. 3.
"Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he
trusts in thee." Can any thing be more consistent with a silent dependent
waiting, than a mind stayed upon God, in a sincere confidence and firm
expectation of Divine Help; and if it behooves a Christian to have his mind thus
frequently stayed upon the Divine Power, how much more in solemn worship, and
near approaches to the Sacred Presence, who cannot possibly be deceived, or
amused by the arts of composition, or the powers of human eloquence; and who
has passed a sentence of Ibid xxix. 13.
condemnation on the too common practice of drawing near to him with the mouth,
and honoring him with the lips, whilst the heart is far from him? How can the
soul any way be more uninterruptedly stayed upon him, than in a silent waiting
for Divine Help, and the renewings of spiritual power, under a solid attention
to hear what he shall reveal unto it, as its present duty?

Christ says, John x. 27.
"My sheep hear my voice;" and he further declares, John iv. 5.
"they know his voice, and a stranger will they not follow." Now, what partakes
more of the stranger's voice than self-will and self-sufficiency in Divine
service? Ibid xv. 5.
"Without me, says the Lord to his disciples, ye can do nothing." That is,
nothing really and substantially good, or acceptable to God; because himself is
the Lord from heaven, the second Adam, the quickening spirit without whose
influence all we offer is void of spirit or life. He is that inexhaustible
fountain of power and wisdom, of vital holiness, and saving health to the soul,
which, like the sap that arises from the root of the vine, is the life and
nourishment of every branch. Such is the sensible connection of Christ, the
true head of the church, with the several members of his spiritual body: they
are dependent upon him, as the branch is on the vine, both sor life, and the
daily supply of spiritual nourishment of that life which is hid with Christ in
God; how therefore can they pray as they ought, in a spirit and manner suitable
to their present wants, till he open their hearts, and teach them, by the
wisdom of his spirit, what to pray for? If left to themselves, may they not ask
amiss, and consequently not receive? How can the ministers of the everlasting
gospel communicate the will of God, till they receive illumination and ability
from his spirit, to speak profitably to the present states of the people? How
can any come to the throne of Divine Grace without his immediate help and
influence? What can raise the sallen soul up to Godward, and humble it in due
prostration before him, give it a deep sense of its wants, and of the riches of
his love and mercy, but the Holy Spirit itself? How necessary then, and
reasonable it is, that we should patiently wait in submissive silence, for the
enlightenings and quickenings of its heavenly power, to guide both heart and
tongue in addressing the Holy One of Israel? David says, Psalm. li. 17.
"The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O
God! thou will not despise." What but his heart-humbling spirit can prepare
this sacrifice in the soul? If no power but his can do this, must we not
consequently watch and wait in silence to receive its assistance, and have the
impressions of the spirit before we can pray with the spirit, and with a right
understanding also? And seeing the Lord is a God of knowledge, and that by him
our actions are weighed, how careful should we be to know what spirit governs
and influenceth our souls in his solemn worship!

Solomon, under an awful sense of the Divine Greatness and Majesty, affords us
this necessary caution, when we present ourselves before him: Eccless. v. 2.
"Be not rash with thy mouth." This every one certainly is, who presumes to
speak to the Most High before he has duly considered in whose presence he is.
He adds, "Le not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God; for God is
in heaven, and thou upon earth, therefore let thy words be few." This plainly
inculcates, how much it behooves us to have a reverent sense of the majesty and
purity of the supreme searcher of hearts, and to be deeply humbled into a
feeling of our inability and nothingness, before we address him with our lips.

If it is not in man's power duly to prepare his own heart, and yet it is his
indispensable duty deeply and reverently to worship the Author of his being in
spirit and in truth, how necessary must an awful silence be, that he may know
his soul prepared by the immediate hand of God to approach him acceptably! On
the contrary, how inconsiderate, hasty, or presumptuous is the practice of
uttering words to him, which the heart does not understand, or of confessing a
state it never sensibly experienced! Certainly, if we believe the Lord is of
purer eyes than to behold iniquity with approbation, we must conclude, he is
more jealous of his honor than to accept of such dissimulation. Is not an
humble, conscientious, silent waiting in submission, to be influenced and led
by him, abundantly preferable in his sight? Then how much more the sighs and
expressions that proceed from a real heart-affecting sense of his greatness and
omnipresence, and of the lowness and unworthiness of the creature that
considers itself as dust and ashes before him! Does not such a weighty sense of
our meanness and inability of ourselves to offer any thing pleasing to him, who
is an infinite spirit superlatively glorious, unless he first condescend
graciously to help our infirmities, and teach us to pray as we ought, discover
more true regard, and real concern of heart, to offer up a spiritual sacrifice
that may be acceptable, through Jesus Christ the great Mediator, who never can
intercede with the Father to accept an insincere hypocritical offering, a
barely drawing near to him with the tongue, and honoring him with the lips,
whilst the heart is insensible of his fear, and amused with other objects? Is
it not more safe and rational to wait in silence upon the Lord, than thus to
deceive our souls with sparks of our own kindling, warming vain and foolish
self with a fire of its own lighting, instead of placing our expectation upon
him, who alone can teach his people rightly to profit, and enable them to pray
with the Spirit, and with a right understanding also?

There is an essential difference betwixt praying in reality as the spirit
shall teach us, and praying in form as men and books advise us. Those who pray
under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, pray with additional fervency, knowing
their attention fixed on God alone, their understandings are opened into a true
discerning of their spiritual wants, and their souls quickened to a lively,
humble, sincere worship; wherein their spirits are refreshed, and gain strength
in the Lord, and in the power of his might. On the other hand, men and books
may furnish with fair seemings, and plausible expressions, but they cannot
effect that brokenness of spirit, that contrition of heart, and sensibility of
soul which the Spirit of God gives. They may teach to say, Lord! Lord! whilst
Satan rules in the will and affections, and carries the imaginations after
diverse vanities; for nothing less than the power of the spirit can subdue and
chain down the carnal mind. How necessary then is an humble waiting in silence,
truly to know what spirit we are of, before we offer any thing to the living
God? Without this knowledge we must be liable to offer strange fire, which the
Lord never commanded, like the sons of Aaron, who, through negligence having
suffered the holy fire, divinely kindled, to go out, presented a strange fire
of man's kindling, for which they suffered death. Ought not this expressive
instance of divine displeasure against the presumptuous substitutions of men
after their own wills, and in the place of God's appointment, to deter mankind
from offering their own carnal conceptions and contrivances, instead of his
inward and spiritual requirings? Ought not this consideration to strike every
one with a deep and awful sense, that something more is due to the great
Jehovah, than those common, careless, unfelt modes of worship which too many
are apt to satisfy themselves with; and more especially as he has declared,
Lev. x. 3.
"I will be sanctified in them that come night me." How can he be sanctified in
us, but as his own pure Spirit awfully prevails in the soul, puts it forth in
humility, and influenceth the will and affections by its holy quickening energy?

If Christ is indeed our Lord, why are not we more seriously concerned to
honor him in our hearts? If he is our master, why do we not so fear his
displeasure, as to endeavor, with all diligence, to walk circumspectly, not as
fools, inattentive to his leadings; but as wise, seeking to redeem the time,
because the days are evil?

The Spirit, by the mouth of Zechariah, says, Zech. ii. 13.
"Be silent, O all flesh! before the Lord; for he is raised up out of his holy
habitation." Is not a modest humble silence properly due to the presence of the
King of kings, and Lord of lords? Does it not bespeak more real and awful
regard to his perfect holiness, wisdom and power, to wait for his Spirit to
open our hearts and lips, before we attempt vocally to speak forth his praise,
than to be hasty in uttering words without true knowledge before our all-seeing
Judge? Then how approveable is the practice of solemn silent waiting, till we
receive illumination and ability properly to worship the Almighty! Would the
potentates of the earth think themselves treated with becoming reverence,
should their subjects and servants immediately approach them with a multitude
of words, and continue them the whole time they stand in their presence,
instead of waiting silently to hear their pleasure, and receive their commands?
How much less ought we to expect such behavior is pleasing, or acceptable from
us, to him who searches all hearts, and knows us better than we know ourselves;
to whom we must be indebted for the true knowledge of every spiritual want,
before we can have wisdom to ask aright according to his will!

When the prophet Isaiah was admitted, in a vision, to behold the glorious
Majesty of God, he could only cry, Isa. vi.
"Woe is me!" till a live coal from the holy altar had touched his lips, and
purged away his sin. What a deep reverence of his Maker, and just abhorrence of
self filled his humbled mind, when he was favored with this awful sight of the
supreme glory! How self-abasing were his sensations, and emphatical his
expressions, when he cried, "Woe is me! for I am undone, because I am a man of
unclean lips! and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; for mine
eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts!" How different is this heartfelt
acknowledgment, proceeding from the powerful convictions of the Holy Spirit, to
those dry, formal, unfelt words that come from the lips of bare nominal
Christians! Notwithstanding every disciple has not so large a portion of the
Holy Spirit, as this great prophet had, yet every one is graciously favored
with a measure sufficient to render his offering spiritual and living.

We read, that after the ascension of Christ, his disciples Acts ii. 1, 4.
"were all with one accord in one place, when they were filled with the Holy
Ghost." Though the text does not expressly say, they were waiting in silence for
the promise of the Father, yet it appears as probable they were, as that they
were not; for there is no mention of any vocal exercise amongst them at that
time, before they were influenced thereunto by that peculiar communication and
impulse of the Holy Ghost, whence "they began to speak with other tongues, as
the Spirit gave them utterance." The attention is certainly more likely to be
fixed upon, and stayed in true watchfulness toward the Lord, and the mind more
fitly prepared to receive the influence of his divine light and power, in
silent waiting, than if agitated in a continual practice of running over a
multitude of unfelt expressions.

David, by inspiration, personating the Most High, says, Psalm. xlvi. 10.
"Be still, and know that I am God!" The prophet Habakkuk also says, Hab. ii.
20.
"The Lord is in his holy temple: let all the earth keep silence before him!"
Is not the carnal mind of man included in this prohibition? What is more likely
to scatter and divert his attention from the right object, than thoughts,
imaginations, and propensities of an earthly or sensual nature? What more
dishonorable to the Lord of perfection and purity, than the busy forward
actings of an unprepared and corrupt heart in spiritual things? What is more
necessary to be silenced than that which is at enmity with God? What more
becoming an humble dependent creature, sensible of the depravity of its nature,
of its inability to do any good, and of the honor due to the presence of its
Creator, than a deeply expressive solemn silence before him?

Our Lord Jesus Christ taught his disciples to avoid the practice of
hypocrites, Mat. vi. 5, 6, 7.
"Who love to pray standing in the synagogues, and in the corners of the
streets, that they may be seen of men." He also directed, "When ye pray, use
not vain repetitions, as the Heathen do, for they think that they shall be
heard for their much speaking;" and indeed, what now makes a greater show or
figure in religion amongst many, than to use long and frequent prayers, and
much formal devotion, as if their eye was more toward the praise of men than
acceptance with God, and as if they gloried in empty appearances? But what is
the precept of Christ? Ibid vi. 6.
"When thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou have shut thy door,
pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father, who sees in secret,
shall reward thee openly." Does not this teach us, that before we approach the
Fountain of all wisdom, to shut out every thing that would amuse or divert the
attention from the reverence due to the great object of our adoration, the
giver of every good and perfect gift? Can we be too solid, or feel our hearts,
affections, and desires, too much gathered out of transitory things, into a
humbling sense of the Divine Presence, when we apply ourselves to the solemn
act of worshipping the Majesty on high?

Since waiting upon God in silence for renewed strength and spiritual wisdom,
to lead our hearts, and direct our tongues in vocal prayer, or preaching, makes
no ostentatious show, but rather appears contemptible to the busy disposition
and wisdom of vain man, it is not reasonable to suppose, that this self-denying
practice should gain the approbation or praise of men; yet in must evidently
tend to prevent that great and offensive hypocrisy, of drawing near to the Lord
with the tongue, and worshipping him with the lips, whilst the heart is far
from him. Can there be any frame more fit or proper for the poor soul, wherein
to hear the still small voice of the true internal Shepherd, than that of an
attentive and submissive silent waiting?

Waiting upon God is abundantly recommended in holy writ, and waiting in
silence necessarily implied in order to hear his voice. John (...)
"My sheep, says the great Shepherd, hear my voice." When is the soul so
capable of hearing the quickening language of his spirit, as in a state of
silent watching for, and waiting to hear what he shall give it an understanding
of, and engage it in, as its requisite and reasonable duty, by the illuminating
virtue and enlivening power of his holy influence?

Our Lord forbids us to use vain repetitions; and what efficacy can those
prayers have, which are made in the will, and by the contrivance of man, or
that are uttered either from books, invention, or memory, whilst the heart
neither feels the thing the mouth speaks, nor ever experienced what the tongue
declares? What are these but vain repetitions and empty sounds? Whilst people
remain insensible of the real condition of their souls, and of the true
self-abasing fear of God, do they not seem to think they shall be heard for
their much speaking, if they content themselves with the frequent repetition of
long lifeless prayers, which they have not so much as weightily considered
before they uttered them? Is this to worship the Father in spirit and in truth;
the only worship instituted by Christ in this gospel-day, and therefore the
only worship acceptable to God, who is a Spirit? Can this spiritual worship be
performed till the soul feels its operation awfully to humble, engage, and
empower the mind to this solemn act? What but the Spirit of the Redeemer is
able to awaken and stir up the immortal soul, and endue it with wisdom and
utterance, suitably to express itself, according to and under a due sense of
its wants?

Christ in Spirit is the way, or leading power, to the Father; no man can come
to the Father but by him. What is the reason why so many, who profess to be
followers of Christ, complain of wandering thoughts, inattention, much
coldness, deadness, and insensibility in prayer, and other duties and
devotions? Is it not because they are too little dependent on the dictates of
the Spirit, and believe not its sensible influence necessary to every religious
act, nor wait for it to cleanse the thoughts of their hearts, and abilitate
them to approach the Most High and Holy God in truth and righteousness? Is it
not because such lean too much to their own unsubjected wisdom and
understanding, to place their dependence on the Spirit, and to wait for its
restraining heart-affecting power to lead them into all truth, and therefore
are sent empty away, and no more truly refreshed or benefited by their lifeless
devotions, than he who dreams he eats, but when he awakes, perceives he is
yet empty? Thus they ask and receive not, because they ask amiss; not in a
right frame, but in a lukewarm and unconcerned state of mind. The enemy is too
strong for such worshippers, and carries their thoughts and imaginations after
strange objects, while their lips only approach the Almighty. One secret
prayer, or deep sigh from the wrestling soul, produced by the Eternal Spirit,
is of more real service to it, issues from it with more fervor, prevails more
effectually with the Father, and procures it more refreshment than ten thousand
vain repetitions; because the virtue of the Spirit of the great Intercessor
being in these prayers and sighs, they cannot but find acceptance.

Does not the common complaint of wanderings in time of prayer, from those who
oppose silent waiting for the divine assistance of the Spirit, to speak or pray
according to the will of God, prove the necessity of such a practice, in order
to worship the Father in spirit and in truth? Our blessed Redeemer says, (...).
"Your Father knows what things ye have need of before ye ask him." How
requisite therefore is it, that he open our understandings, show us our true
conditions, discover to us our spiritual wants, and enable us to present our
petitions according to his will, before we can sensibly ask for the necessary
supplies, or cry Abba, Father; and for this end, how incumbent it is upon us
silently to wait for his immediate help and direction?

David faith, (...).
"Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit:
then (not before) will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be
converted unto thee." This shows, he placed his dependence upon the renewed
influence of the Holy Spirit, and that he held no former experiences, however
good in themselves, sufficient qualifications for divine service in the time
present. He knew, that nothing short of a fresh supply from the Fountain of
living virtue could properly enable him to preach to others; and therefore
prayed, Psalm. li. 15.
"Open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise."

The apostle Paul says, Romans viii. 26.
"The spirit also helps our infirmities; for we know not what we should pray
for as we ought, but the Spirit itself makes intercession for us with
groanings which cannot be uttered." By this just acknowledgment it appears, the
exercise of a mind deeply affected is more than words can express, therefore it
speaks to God in unutterable groans: a thing much despised and scoffed at by
many professors in this age. We see however, the apostle was not ashamed to own
it to be what himself and his brethren experienced to be true; which shows the
sense they had of their own natural inability and blindness, and also their
firm dependence upon the Holy Spirit, without which they knew not what to pray
for as they ought; and therefore found a necessity to wait for its renewals
upon them, before they could either pray for themselves, or preach to others
profitably, and with divine acceptance. How can we at this day presume to know
what to pray for as we ought without the sensible help of the Holy Spirit, if
this great apostle and his brethren did not? Yet, is there not ground for
suspicion, from the common practice of professing Christians now, that they do
not think themselves at a loss what to pray for acceptably; and therefore
presumptuously offer their invented supplications, without due fear and
caution, to him who looks at the heart, and remain insensible of the
necessity of feeling the Holy Spirit to disengage them from roving thoughts,
and concerns of a temporal nature, and to communicate of that discerning wisdom
and living power which is requisite to direct their hearts and tongues aright.

But, notwithstanding a previous waiting upon God is so much despised, the
apostle intimates, that the groanings of the Spirit are effectual without vocal
sounds; which proves there is an inward address deeper than the expression of
words, which is heard and accepted of God. Let me add, that Jesus himself
applied to the Father in this manner, when John xi. 33.38.41.
"He groaned in the Spirit twice," and afterward lift up his eyes, and before
he called Lazarus out of the grave, said, "Father, I thank thee that thou have
heard me." This shows his fervent groans were accepted, and his request
granted, without audible expressions; and does not the compassionate Father
still regard the groans begotten by the Spirit of his Son in the hearts of his
followers? Indeed there is much efficacy in groans that arise from this living
principle.

The apostle Paul says, Romans viii. 9. 11.
"If any man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. -- If the Spirit
of him who raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ
from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells
in you." When do Christians more need these quickenings than in their
assemblies for divine worship; and how must they distinguish them, except they
wait in silence? Is it an unwarrantable presumption, humbly to wait in
expectation of the promised assistance, to enable us sensibly to worship
freely, livingly, and powerfully, which cannot be, unless the Spirit of Christ
is our helper? If these internal quickenings be the continued privilege of
Christ's disciples, and if it is to the virtue thereof that all our services
owe their efficacy and acceptance, can it be right or safe to run before, and
without that which is the very life of true prayer and preaching? If not, there
is an absolute necessity for, and certainly great propriety in waiting
patiently for it, in submissive silence, that the sacrifice may be of the
Lord's preparing, and that it may be offered according to his will, under the
immediate conduct of his own pure Spirit. Thus qualified, we pray with the
Spirit, and with understanding also; which prayer must consequently profit and
refresh the thirsty soul; and if a filent attention had neither any express
command, nor example in scripture, it is necessarily implied in many parts of
it, as well as in the nature of true spiritual worship.

Is not the Almighty a most pure and perfectly glorious being, dwelling in the
light, whom no man can approach unto, but by the Spirit of the Mediator? And is
not man absolutely dependent on the merciful goodness and power of his Creator?
and is it not reasonable that such a creature should be made deeply sensible to
whom he must be indebted for all spiritual ability, as well as temporal
favors, before he can approach the Sacred Presence with becoming reverence?
And in what state is he so likely to be made sensible of this, as under an
abstraction of mind from earthly cogitations and concerns, into a silent
attention upon the omnipresent Spirit?

These things duly considered, is it just and reasonable to censure and despise
any people for conscientiously waiting upon God in silence, and frequently
falling into such an heart-engaging exercise of spirit in his fear, as cannot
often be uttered in words, and consequently must be experienced in silence? Who
can seriously think, that he who says, Isa lxvi. 2.
"To this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit,
and trembles at my word," will not hear and regard, when many hearts are
collectively bowed before him under an unfeigned concern and travail of spirit;
when the soul worships before him more deeply than can be expressed by lip or
tongue? What are the finest words and fairest forms to him who respects not
the outward show, but the inward frame of the heart, if they do not convey the
sincere feeling language thereof?

The apostle utterly disclaims all self-sufficiency: Cor (...);
"Not, says he, that we are sufficient of ourselves, to think any thing as of
ourselves, but our sufficiency is of God, who also has made us able ministers
of the New Testament, not of the letter, but of the Spirit; for the letter
kills, but the Spirit gives life." The virtue and excellence of the
Christian religion is justly ascribed to the Holy Spirit. The same apostle
declares, Ibid. (...).
"We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power
may be of God, and not of us." Therefore Christ has instituted no other
worship under the new covenant, but that which is performed in spirit and in
truth; and how can we perform this, till we have a sense of the spirit, and
feel the virtue of its influence engaging our souls in truth to this spiritual
worship? And how can we attain this feeling, without patiently waiting in
silence for its powerful assistance?

If the primitive Christians were of themselves so insufficient to think any
thing, or to point out to themselves their own line of duty according to the
divine will, they certainly could not of themselves pray or preach to others
consistent therewith, and therefore were obliged to wait for the renewals of
light and ability from the Holy Spirit wherein their sufficiency was. If the
case was such with them, is it less so with us? It certainly is not; for we are
under the same dispensation, and altogether as insufficient of ourselves as
they could be. It is therefore now as requisite for us, as it could then be for
them, to wait for divine direction and help, to give us a true sense both of
our state and duty, and to enable us to the performance of it; and how can we
reasonably expect to receive the assistance of the Spirit, but by humbly
watching, and waiting in silence for its appearance and operation in our souls?

The heavenly influence of the Holy Spirit is the very life and glory of the
gospel dispensation, and is now as surely to be distinguished by experienced
minds, as it was in the primitive age; else why was it promised to abide as the
guide and leader of true believers; and why does the apostle exhort Ephesians. vi. 18.
"To pray always with all supplication in the spirit, and to watch thereunto
with all perseverance?"

We read, that after the opening of the seventh seal, Rev. viii. 1.
"There was silence in heaven about the space of half an hour." If silent
worship is such an absurdity, as to be made the subject of ridicule, how came
it to be found and allowed of in heaven? Was not the great God then obeyed, and
adored there as profoundly as when they sang hallelujahs? If so, why should an
awful silent waiting upon him be treated, by any, as unprofitable and
inconsistent with divine worship? Why should any prefer the modes and forms
their own hearts have devised, or ignorantly espoused, to a solemn submissive
waiting in silence, to know the true state of the soul, and to receive the
blessed counsel of the Spirit, before they proceed vocally to address the Dread
of nations, or presume to preach as in his name, and declare any thing as his
will, whose all-seeing eye is continually upon them?

Elihu plainly expresses, Job. xxxii. 8.
"There is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them
understanding." When is the most likely time to be made sensible of this
inspiration? That in which the mind is attentively waiting upon him in a
profound and passive silence; or that wherein it is amused and busied with a
multitude of words and ideas, on various subjects? What avails praying or
preaching without this communicated understanding? Can it be any better than
sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal? When people presume to pray without a
sense of their real wants, and confess a state to the omniscient Being they
never truly felt, and also petition for those spiritual favors and divine
sensations they seek not to feel, do they not act as if they concluded, he will
accept of an insincere devotion, and that he is not so jealous of his honor,
as the sacred writings declare he is?

Besides the many scriptures in favor of a patient dependence upon, and silent
waiting for the quickening power of the Spirit, to give us a true sense of our
wants, and bring to our remembrance the great obligations we are under to the
mercy and goodness of God, there is also a cloud of witnesses, who have
experimentally profited, and edified much more in silence than they ever did
before they were in the practice of it, who, I believe, can say in truth and
righteousness, that when the just judgments of an offended God were heavy upon
them for transgression, and their tribulations were inexpressible, through
strong heartbreaking convictions of the exceeding sinfulness of sin, and they
lay groaning under it daily in great wretchedness, without finding any help or
deliverance from all their own workings, their many and long prayers, and
self-righteousness; then it pleased the merciful Redeemer to open a way for
them gradually into humble stillness, and to reveal his Son in them, as the
precious Lamb of God, who takes away the Sin of the world. This blessed
discovery raised them out of their distresses, and enabled them to say, "My
soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoiceth in God my Savior; for he
has regarded the low estate of his servant." This inclined them to sit
willingly at his feet in silence, and gladly to receive his pouring forth of
the wine and oil into their bleeding wounds, till he healed their backslidings,
and forgave their transgressions. For, I John i. 9.
"If we confess our sins (from a real abhorrence of sin) he is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." Who
can declare the sweet consolation such have felt, who believe in his name as
sufficient to purge the conscience from dead works, and enable them to serve
him in newness of life? Truly, they have experienced that testimony of David
fulfilled in their own hearts, Psalm xl. 1, 2.
"I waited patiently, says he, for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and
heard my cry. He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the miry
clay, and set my feet upon a rock." Thus they were brought out of darkness into
light, and came to know, that whereas they had been spiritually blind, now, by
the grace of God, they had received their sight, and by this power of
discerning, learn not to trust to themselves, or their own works, but
attentively to watch, and silently to wait, both to hear what the Spirit says
to the churches, and what it requires of them in their own particulars, that by
its heavenly power every thought might be brought into the obedience of Christ.
Thus they have been taught, and do certainly know, that no man can come to the
Father, but by him; nor that any can sufficiently see their own sins, truly
repent, effectually cry for deliverance, or rejoice in his salvation, but as
his saving power is exercised in them, and their minds become subjected
thereunto. This is the power they have learnt to wait for, and depend upon; in
which dependent state they meet with the Lord as a quickening Spirit, hear him
instruct them with convincing clearness, and feel his presence to impart fresh
life and strength to their souls; for he still speaks in his spiritual
manifestation, as he did in his bodily appearance, with divine authority, and
as never man spoke, and is the author of eternal salvation to all that obey
him. These can experimentally say, that he is come to teach his people himself,
and that he is made unto them wisdom, to direct their steps in the way to the
kingdom; righteousness, to clothe their spirits; their sanctification and
complete redemption; as they are concerned not only to receive him in the
beginning as their Lord and Savior, but also to grow up and persevere in the
power of the Spirit, earnestly desiring to be rooted and built up in its divine
nature, and established in the true faith. The Lord alone can profitably apply
the precious promises to the poor soul, as he leads it through the various
progressive states to which the promises belong; by whose guidance his faithful
followers are brought to escape the corruptions that are in the world, and
measureably to become partakers of the divine nature.

Christ dwells in the hearts of these by faith, as the holy, powerful,
appointed minister of the sanctuary and true tabernacle, which God has
pitched, and not man. He not only teaches infallibly and convincingly, but
also raises a hunger and thirst after a closer union with himself, and a
fuller possession and enjoyment of his everlasting righteousness. Those who
have attained this experience, cannot but esteem the time well spent in
silently waiting for his instruction what to pray for, and that he may open
their understandings to discern their present duty, and how to apply the sacred
writings to real profit, and also to commemorate what great things he has
mercifully done for their needy souls, both without and within them. This
frequently melts them into tears of unaffected contrition, and humble
gratitude; in which state they can adore his goodness, and put up their
petitions without a prayer book, and often without any vocal sound; for he is
then known to be in his temple, and the earthly part is in perfect silence
before him. What sober person, who considers how awful a thing it is to worship
the great Jehovah in spirit and truth, can lightly censure or disapprove of
such a silent dependence on his power, to help the poor creature under its
manifold infirmities? Psalm. xxxvii. 7, and xxvii. 14.
"Rest in the Lord, says David, or as in the margin, Be silent to the Lord,
and wait patiently for him; wait on the Lord; be of good courage, and he shall
strengthen thine heart. Wait, I say, on the Lord."

ROBERT BARCLAY, in his Apology for the true Christian Divinity, as held forth
by the people called Quakers, has wrote so clearly on the subject in his
eleventh proposition, that a few quotations from this author may serve to
illustrate the foregoing reasons, and confirm the testimonies of many
experimental witnesses on the subject, and profitableness of solemn silence.

IN his proposition on worship, in sect. 6. he has these remarks: We judge it
the duty of all to be diligent in the assembling of themselves together, and
when assembled, the great work of one and all ought to be to wait upon God; and
returning out of their own thoughts and imaginations, to feel the Lord's
presence, and know a gathering into his name indeed, where he is in the midst,
according to his promise. And as every one is thus gathered, and so met
together inwardly in their spirits, as well as outwardly in their persons,
there the secret power and virtue of life is known to refresh the soul, and the
pure motions and breathings of God's spirit are felt to arise; from which, as
words of declaration, prayers or praises arise, the acceptable worship is
known, which edifies the church, and is well-pleasing to God. And no man here
limits the Spirit of God, nor brings forth his own conned and gathered stuff;
but every one puts that forth which the Lord puts into their hearts: and it is
uttered forth not in man's will and wisdom, but in the evidence and
demonstration of the spirit and of power. Yea, though there be not a word
spoken, yet is the true spiritual worship performed, and the body of Christ
edified; yea, it may, and has often fallen out among us, that diverse meetings
have past without one word; and yet our souls have been greatly edified and
refreshed, and our hearts wonderfully overcome with the secret sense of God's
power and spirit, which, without words, has been ministered from one vessel to
another. This is indeed strange and incredible to the mere natural and
carnally-minded man, who will be apt to judge all time lost where there is not
something spoken that is obvious to the outward senses; and therefore I shall
insist a little upon this subject, as one that can speak from a certain
experience, and not by mere hearsay, of this wonderful and glorious
dispensation; which has so much the more of the wisdom and glory of God in it,
as it is contrary to the nature of man's spirit, will, and wisdom.

He also in sect. 7. on silent waiting on God, expresses himself thus: For many
thus principled, meeting together in the pure fear of the Lord, did not apply
themselves presently to speak, pray, or sing, etc. being afraid to be found
acting forwardly in their own wills, but each made it their work to retire
inwardly to the measure of grace in themselves, not being only silent as to
words, but even abstaining from all their own thoughts, imaginations, and
desires; so watching in a holy dependence upon the Lord, and meeting together
not only outwardly in one place, but thus inwardly in one Spirit, and in one
name of Jesus, which is his power and virtue, they come thereby to enjoy and
feel the arisings of this life, which, as it prevails in each particular,
becomes as a flood of refreshment, and overspreads the whole meeting: for man,
and man's part and wisdom, being denied and chained down in every individual,
and God exalted, and his grace in dominion in the heart; thus his name comes to
be one in all, and his glory breaks forth, and covers all; and there is such a
holy awe and reverence upon every soul, that if the natural part should arise
in any, or the wise part, or what is not one with the life, it would presently
be chained down and judged out. And when any are, through the breaking forth of
this power, constrained to utter a sentence of exhortation or praise, or to
breathe to the Lord in prayer, then all are sensible of it; Prove. xxvii. 19.
for the life in them answers to it, as in water face answers to face. This
is that divine and spiritual worship, which the world neither knows nor
understands, which the vulture's eye sees not into. Yet many and great are
the advantages which my soul, with many others, has tasted of hereby, and
which would be found of all such as would seriously apply themselves hereunto:
for, when people are gathered thus together, not merely to hear men, nor depend
upon them, but all are inwardly taught Isai. x. 20, and xxvi. 3.
to stay their minds upon the Lord, and wait for his appearance in their
hearts; thereby the forward working of the spirit of man is stayed and hindered
from mixing itself with the worship of God. --

In section 15. after having described the true worship in spirit established
by Christ, and clearly proved the necessity and advantage of it, he proceeds
thus: He has also instituted an inward and spiritual worship: so that God now
tieth not his people to the temple of Jerusalem, nor yet unto outward
ceremonies and observation; but takes the heart of every Christian for a
temple to dwell in; and there immediately appears, and gives him directions
how to serve him in any outward acts. Since, as Christ argues, God is a
Spirit, he will now be worshipped in the Spirit, where he reveals himself, and
dwells with the contrite in heart. Now, since it is the heart of man that now
is become the temple of God, in which he will be worshipped, and no more in
particular outward temples, since, as blessed Stephen said, out of the prophet,
to the professing Jews of old, The Most High dwells not in temples made with
hands. As before the glory of the Lord descended to fill the outward temple, it
behoved to be purified and cleansed, and all polluted stuff removed out of it;
yea, and the place for the tabernacle was overlaid with gold, the most precious
and cleanest of metals; so also before God be worshipped in the inward temple
of the heart, it must also be purged of its own filth, and all its own thoughts
and imaginations, that so it may be fit to receive the Spirit of God, and to be
actuated by it. And does not this directly lead us to that inward silence, of
which we have spoken, and exactly pointed out? And further, this worship must
be in truth; intimating, that this spiritual worship, thus actuated, is only
and properly a true worship, --

"Franciscus Lambertus," as quoted by Robert Barclay, in sect. 18. speaks
well, tract. 5. of "prophecy, chap. 3. saying, Where are they now that glory in
their inventions, who say, A fine invention! A fine invention! This they call
invention, which themselves have made up; but what have the faithful to do with
such kind of invention? It is not figments, nor yet inventions, that we will
have, but things that are solid, invincible, eternal, and heavenly; not which
men have invented, but which God has revealed: for if we believe the
scriptures, our invention profits nothing, but to provoke God to our ruin.
And afterward, It is not intended by us to adopt the sentiment of a liberty to
determine or choose the text; that, as well as the exposition, ought to be left
to the dictates of the Holy Spirit. See the whole section in R. B's Apology.
Beware (says he) that thou determine not precisely to speak what before thou
have meditated, whatsoever it be; for though it be lawful to determine the text
which thou art to expound, yet not at all the interpretation; lest if thou so
do, thou take from the Holy Spirit that which is his, to wit, to direct thy
speech, that thou may prophesy in the name of the Lord, void of all
learning, meditation, and experience, and as if thou had studied nothing at
all, committing thy heart, thy tongue, and thyself wholly unto his Spirit, and
trusting nothing to thy former studying or meditation; but saying with thyself,
in great confidence of the divine promise, The Lord will give a word with much
power unto those that preach the gospel. But, above all things, be careful thou
follow not the manner of hypocrites, who have written almost word for word what
they are to say, as if they were to repeat some verses upon a theater, having
learned all their preaching as they do that act tragedies. And afterward, when
they are in the place of prophesying, pray the Lord to direct their tongue; but
in the mean time, shutting up the way of the Holy Spirit, they determine to say
nothing but what they have written. O unhappy kind of prophets, yea, and truly
cursed, which depend not upon God's Spirit, but upon their own writings or
meditation! Why prayest thou to the Lord thou false prophet, to give thee his
Holy Spirit, by which thou may speak things profitable, and yet thou
repellest the Spirit? Why preferrest thou thy meditation or study to the Spirit
of God? otherwise, why committest thou not thyself to the Spirit.

Sect. 22. That there is a necessity of this inward retirement of the mind as
previous to prayer, that the Spirit may be felt to draw thereunto, appears, for
that in most of those places where prayer is commanded, watching is prefixed
thereunto, as necessary to go before, as Mat. xxiv. 42. Mark xiii. 33. and xiv.
38. Luke xxi. 36. from which it is evident, that this watching was to go before
prayer. Now to what end is this watching, or what is it, but a waiting to feel
God's Spirit to draw unto prayer, that so it may be done acceptably? For since
we are to " Ephesians. vi. 18.
pray always in the spirit, and cannot pray of ourselves without it,
acceptably, this watching must be for this end recommended to us, as preceding
prayer, that we may watch and wait for the seasonable time to pray, which is
when the Spirit moves thereunto.

FINIS.

