Dramatic Piece.

BY A CITIZEN OF THE UNITED STATES.

MUSA INQUIETA REGIONIS INSUETAS EXPLORAT.

NEW LONDON: PRINTED BY T. GREEN. M,DCC,LXXXVII.

PREFACE.
IMPROVEMENT in Elocution, for a select number of students, at a public school,
was one principal design of the author, when he began the following piece. --
How far he succeeded in that design, must be left to those who are acquainted
with the circumstances to judge -- And how far he may now succeed in gaining
the approbation of the public, time must determine.

Doubtless, those who are professed enemies to the Drama, in whatever garb it
may appear, if they pay any attention to this, will wholly condemn it; -- and
perhaps, those who are friendly to performances of the kind, and judges of
their merit, not without reason, will do the same.

Should the morose, uncandid Critic, who subsists on the faults, and follies of
others, be at leisure, and not think this piece beneath his notice, he may on a
slight examination, find it a very proper, and salutary morsel, just to
alleviate the cravings of his voracious appetite, till he can meet with
something more substantial to feed upon.

The author's most sanguine hopes, have never led him to expect that this
performance would escape the attack of the Critic, any other way, than by his
supposing it unworthy his notice, and therefore turning his exertions to some
other performances of more merit.

It Is allowed that the motives of Theatrical performances, ought, by striking
representations, to hold up Virtue, or virtuous actions, in a beautiful point
of light -- and, to represent Vice in its most odious colors, and vicious
actions meeting condign punishment: -- So far as these motives, or the effects
of them are inverted, it is generally allowed that performances of this kind
become detrimental. How far this rule is adherea to in the following pages,
must be determined by the judgment of those who peruse them.

The subject is what every person, in the United States, arrived to years of
understanding, is well acquainted with; and a subject, in which every one, in
the time the transactions referred to took place, thought themselves deeply
interested.

It will perhaps be said, that a performance of this kind if ever proper and
suitable, would have been much more so, just at the close of the war, when
these matters were fresh in the minds of all; but that now, there is no
propriety in it, since other matters must necessarily have occupied the minds
of people; while the former, are almost obliterated.

This objection, if it be one, was a principal motive which induced the author
to publish the piece.

It is well known that the estimate we set on what we possess, is in a great
measure proportioned to the arduous exertions we have made use of in obtaining
it.

If a man by a perilous undertaking, and the most painful struggles, at the
risque of his life and property, has obtained a valuable prize, so long at
least, as the danger to which he was exposed, and the earnest efforts he made
in the acquisition are fresh in his memory, we may be sure he will carefully
preserve and defend it.

Ought we not to esteem most sacredly, that freedom and independence secured to
us by the late important revolution? -- Ought we ever to forget those arduous,
those bloody struggles we endured in that dangerous contest? -- a contest in
which thousands of our dear friends yielded up their lives on the sanguine
plains. And shall we, who are enjoying the blessings for which they fought
'till their last breath, forget to celebrate those transactions?

Ought we not, on the other hand, ever to bear them on our minds, and endeavor
to impress on the minds of the rising generation, the inestimable value of the
liberties they possess, and the dangerous struggles their predecessors endured
to secure to them those invaluable blessings?

These considerations, with that of the improvement of youth in Elocution,
first induced the author to choose this subject, and have now induced him to
present this little performance to the public.

He is sensible that he has not pursued the common mode of procedure in
Theatrical performances -- nor was that his intention: -- It Is hoped however,
that the candid will overlook many imperfections, when they consider the great
difficulty of bringing a subject so copious and extensive, into the narrow
limits necessary for a performance of this kind.

The real characters here represented under fictitious names, are left for the
readers to apply. -- Many important transactions during the war, are wholly
omitted, and only some, and those very few of the most important, just glanced
at: -- Had this not been the case, the piece would have swelled far beyond the
size of a common pamphlet, -- which was not intended.

To conclude this preface, already much too long; -- the piece, some what
singular of its kind, and doubtless containing many inaccuracies, is now, with
a solicitation of candor, presented to the public, by one who will ever esteem
it his duty, and highest happiness to promote the welfare of his country.

PHILOPHRON.
March 15, 1787.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
Columbians. FABIUS, SOPHOS, ARATOR, TRACUNDUS,
a Traitor, PERJURUS,
Britons. PARAMONT, SCOTOS, JUSTITIUS, IRENEUS, INDIGNUS, AVARUS, ORONTES,

WOMEN.
COLUMBIA, BRITANNIA, GALLIA,
Spies, Servants, Attendants, etc. etc.

COLUMBIA and BRITANNIA.
ACT I.
Representing the state of the American colonies at the close of the French war
-- 1763.
Columbia sola. COLUMBIA. FROM regions long unknown, from pathless wilds
And dark retreats, wrapped in obscurity
I come: long hid from every eye, save those
O'erfilm'd with ignorance, half-discerning
Nature fixed upon me. --
No chearing symphony of harp or song
Mine ears delighted: --
No friendly intercourse ever taught my heart
The gentle sigh of sympathy, or waked
The tender passions of my soul: --
Nor did bright science, with her chearing beams,
Nor, education point the way to bliss:
But to the rough savage destined,
Long time in gloomy silence I remained:
In vain the genial sun rolled through the skies,
Or gentle showers refreshed the fertile glebe,
Heaven's bounties unimprov'd were lavish thrown,
On more than half the habitable world:
Till fair Europa's sons, roused by the call
Of chaste religion, kin^^^ led me forth
From dark oblivion, and barbarous hands.
Now, where once the wide-extended forests rung
With howling beasts of prey, or savage yells,
I hear the smiling fruitful fields resound,
With lowing herds, and joyful husbandmen.
Here, where once an o'ergrown thicket stood,
I now behold the towering spires to heaven ascend,
And lofty domes, now occupy the place
Where once the screaming owl, or ravenous wolf
From every human eye found safe retreat.
Here, in these gloomy realms where nothing then
Was in the youthful mind instilled,
Save how to weild the murderous knife,
Or through the pathless woods direct the course,
To crown the chase, or glut revenge,
Now I behold vast groups of sprightly youth,
Taught by the light of virtuous education,
And led by science in the path of glory. --
Happy change! --
May heaven propitious bless succeeding years,
And raise Columbia to renown. --
But see -- Britannia my dear parent comes;
I Will meet, and bid her joyful welcome,
For recent conquest and return of peace.
Enter BRITANNIA. Hail blessed Britannia! -- I Am happy thus to meet thee
And express the sincere joy, and gratitude I feel,
For the success of our united force,
In vanquishing the cruel savage foes,
And to our bleeding land restoring peace. --

BRITANNIA. Welcome, my dear Columbia --
Once more these eyes behold thee free --
Free from savage rage and Gallic usurpation:
Long have thou groaned beneath the insulting foe;
Threatening, on every side, destruction;
But now, thanks to that Power who rules the world
You're free, and once more happy --
Columbia -- ever dear to thy Britannia,
But yet much more endeared since I beheld
Thy Patriotic zeal, when unappall'd
Thou metst the daring foe, and joined
With British Thunder, crushed their bold designs*
Brave Columbia --
True to virtue's cause, thy bold intrepid
Sons withstood the face of death,
And mocked at danger. --
Peace has returned and crowned thy arduous toil.

COLUMBIA. Kind Britannia --
My joy for peace restored is still increased,
If through the dangers of a direful war,
In ought, I Have merited thy approbation,
This, has ever been my ambition's highest aim:
And gratitude and loyalty demand it still.
Happy reflection, it shall ever be,
That undivided interest still unites,
And makes Columbia, and Britannia ONE.

BRITANNIA. Yes, my dear Columbia --
Most justly thou deserve Britannia's
Warmest thanks, for thy sincere
Attachment to the general good,
Which even beyond thy share has prompted thee
To undertake, and bravely persevere
In carrying on a dangerous and expensive war;
And for the happy event, Britannia
Acknowledges herself to thee indebted. --
And now since war's devouring jaws are stopped,
And Discord's horrid yells are heard no more,
Go, virtuous offspring, reap the blessed rewards;
Go crowned with laurels, undisturbed enjoy
Those sacred rights, entailed to all mankind,
And amply due to thee.
[Exit Britannia.
Columbia sola. Thanks to the auspicious power who fixed my lot,
United with the blessed Britannia. --
Illustrious queen of nations! -- how I love,
And how revere thy mild majestic sway.
With thy united force, not all the brood
Of savage miscreants, who wildly roam
The boundless forest of this newfound world,
Nor the proud nations on the eastern main,
Shall shake my peace, or check my rising greatness.
Long, great Britannia may thy mighty power,
With blessed Columbia, awe the wondering world;
While unanimity, and peace, and love
Harmonious, firmly bind, and naught divide
But local situation, all our views. --
Now all my might shall be exerted,
How I may promote the general good,
And best deserve Britannia's praise.
May Heaven propitious bless this rising state,
And make Columbia with Britannia great.
[Exit.
End of the first Act.
ACT II.
Discovers Britannia on an elevated seat with her nobles around her, concerting
measures for the ruin of Columbia.
Paramont, Scotos, Justitius, Ireneus, Indignus and Avarus. PARAMONT.
Illustrious queen --
Impressed with all that humble gratitude,
Or most profound submission can inspire;
As loyal subjects, bound by every tie
To love, obey, and serve Britannia,
We ask your kind indulgence, that we may
Be permitted to express our minds on matters,
That we deem of great importance, and ourselves
In duty bound to certify Britannia.

BRITANNIA. My noble lords, whom I have chosen to protect,
And guard my realm;
With pleasing satisfaction I express,
My sincere thanks for your most strict attention
To the peace, and honor of Britannia,
Still conscious of your firmest rectitude,
I Will cheerfully attend, and quickly
Answer your requests. --
With freedom then, my lords, proceed. --

PARAMONT. May it please your royal highness --
We think it first our duty to express,
Sincerely to express, our real joy
And warm congratulations, for the late
Most fortunate event, and happy change,
Which closed a cruel war victorious;
When British thunder made proud Gallia tremble,
Checked her daring usurpation, and by force,
The great Canadian province gained.
Now peace the fair Columbian shores has blessed,
And all Britannia's empire smiles. --
We now would ask, as wholly aiming
At the general good of our wide realms,
That since Columbia, now so much enlarged,
By recent conquest, and extent of bounds,
Be somewhat checked --
Lest she forget her due allegiance,
To the crown of great Britannia,
Remind her of the vast expense of blood,
And treasure, which Britannia has lost,
In her protection, and defense. --
She Is rich, and flourishing;
Her subjects numerous, and rapidly increasing,
Will soon be equal, and perhaps exceed
In number, all Britannia's sons beside;
Then, forgetful of the debt she owes
For her protection and defense,
We fear she will break the bond of her allegiance,
And proudly grasp at Independence. --
May Heaven avert the unhappy period!
But from a firm attachment to the peace,
And welfare of Britannia,
We would in time express our fears. --

BRITANNIA. I hope, my lords, your fears are groundless --
-- Is It possible my dear Columbia,
Should entertain a thought like this? --

SCOTOS. Auspicious sovereign --
I would to Heaven, I could invalidate
That which my noble lord has just observed;
For my dear country's sake I wish it --
But, duty, truth and honor, all forbid. --
Your colonies, which now Columbia holds,
And under specious show of loyalty pretends
A strict attachment to Britannia,
Are restless and rebellious, fond of change, --
And even now, discover their desires
To separate from Britannia! --
It Is true, my sovereign, though shocking to relate,
That so forgetful is Columbia
Of the parent state -- of gratitude so void,
She Is now become quite proud and factious,
And even denies and scorns the sacred right,
Which great Britannia has
To rule and govern in the western world! --
Most sure I am, unless coercive measures
Soon are taken -- Columbia is lost!

BRITANNIA. What must be done, my lords? --
I am astonished that such a daring spirit
Should be found in young Columbia. --
It Is what I least have thought; --
Are you sure it is true may lords?

JUSTITIUS. With permission from your highness,
I must express my wonder and surprise,
At what has just been said --
I cannot even guess, from what my noble lords
Have taken their suspicions of disloyalty
In our young Columbia. --
Has she not ever given convincing
Proofs, of her most strong, and firm attachment
To the welfare of Britannia? --
Has she not shown her loyalty and valor,
Most conspicuous, in the late unhappy
Though victorious war?
For my single self, I must declare,
I Have ever thought Columbia loyal. --
As for coercive measures, which my lord
Was pleased to mention, --
I shudder at the thought! -- It Is big with
Horror and destruction! --
Too well Columbia knows the worth of freedom,
Tamely to resign it. --
If by coercive measures his lordship means,
To tear from her by force, those sacred rights,
Which heaven has given, and great Britannia
Has acknowledged hers -- Be cautious --
I think his lordship would do well to prove
The fact, or why such measures are required,
Before he urge their execution. --

SCOTOS. Columbia truly wears the specious
Face of loyalty, and well she may,
Because she knows herself as yet unable
To dispute the lawful claims of
Great Britannia. --
But, my lords, she cherishes the
Envenomed Asp, of cursed Rebellion! --
She secretly aspires to break the league
Which binds her to the parent state.
You cannot doubt the truth of this, my lords,
For does she not pretend to claim by right,
The power of Legislation? --

JUSTITIUS. No, my lord, -- no surther than Britannia
Has formerly been pleased to grant. --
I Am bold to say, my lords, there is not a
Single instance, wherein Columbia
Has infringed on that most sacred law
Of liberty, entailed to British subjects. --

BRITANNIA. Not doubting of your full exertions,
To promote the general good and happiness
Of our vast empire, to guard from threatening ill,
And check in embryo, the seeds of faction;
I hope, and trust, my lords, you will proceed
With cool, and calm deliberation,
Like those in whom Britannia confides.
And now, my Lords, I shall retire --
And leave you to consult the general good,
And welfare of my realm. --
[Exit Britannia with attendants, etc. (The Noblemen remain and proceed in
their consultation.)
PARAMONT. My lords, the matter now in question,
Demands immediate and close attention. --
It Is plain, Columbia needs a check;
Who that beholds her rising grandeur can deny,
That soon she will bid defiance to the world;
At least be far beyond Britannia's reach?
And has she not already by refusing
To submit to certain just demands
Of great Britannia,
Openly declared she deems herself too great
To be controlled? --
She has, -- nor can it be denied;
And if not soon restrained, my lords, --
She Is gone -- and is no more a part
Of Great Britannia's empire. --

JUSTITIUS. And what shall this illustrious house infer
From what the noble lord has just observed?
Why this, as I conceive, my lords, --
Columbia is rising high in grandeur,
Her numerous sons are fast increasing;
What then? --
Why surely she must be restrained and checked,
And why, my lords, shall not Britannia's isle,
This seat of empire, be restrained and checked?
No, says my lord, Columbia is factious,
And, refuses to submit --
Submit to what? -- to just and wholesome laws?
No, my lords, to laws repugnant to the rights
Of human nature, unconstitutional,
Unjust, infringing on the plighted faith
Of great Britannia to her subjects:
I dare affirm, my lords, and will maintain,
That if Britannia abide her faith,
However high Columbia's glory rise,
However powerful she may hereafter be,
Her greatness and her glory will be all Britannia's.

AVARUS. I Am much surpised, my lords, to find,
That any dare attempt to justify,
A spirit of rebellion and disorder
Among the subjects of Britannia! --
Columbia is proud, imperious, and haughty;
A daring spirit of rebellion now subsists;
And soon, if not suppressed, will burst the bands
Of her allegiance, and tear her from Britannia.
Who, and where is he that is possessed of half an eye,
That cannot see Britannia's perfect right.
Nay more, her present pressing need,
Of all the treasures of Columbia? --
Is not our nation much involved in debt?
Why then should not Columbia lend her aid,
To extricate her parent from destruction?
She Is rich, my lords, and whence has she derived
Her opulence and riches?
From Britannia; --
To her she owes her riches, life and liberty;
Of all, Britannia's the sole proprietor,
And has a full and perfect right to use,
Whatever she possesses, when and how
She pleases. --

IRENEUS. Where then, my lords, is liberty and freedom!
If thus Britannia's sons may be oppressed,
If life, and property are thus exposed,
My lords, I Am bold to say, there is not a nation
In the barbarous wilds of Afric,
Half so wretched. --
If thus Columbia may be treated, --
Then we on fair Britannia's isle, no more
May boast our freedom, but sink supinely
In the hideous gulf of abject servitude.
Where are the rights of human nature?
Where is Britannia's plighted faith to those
Who risq'd their lives and fortunes on the shores,
Then barbarous shores of young Columbia? --
Because Heaven prosper'd their designs, and blessed
Their dangerous enterprise,
Now, Britannia has right, full right, it is said,
By violence to seize whatever she possesses.
My lords, -- forbear; --
Most sure I am, Columbia never will resign,
But with her blood, what she with blood has won.

INDIGNUS. My noble lord most eloquently has spoken,
But from such principles as are absurd: --
His arguments have no foundation, in either
Fact, or reason. --
He Is pleased to say, that it is unjust to oppress
Britannia's subjects. -- But pray my lords,
Has not Columbia forfeited the right
Of British subjects?
Has she not refused to grant Britannia's
Demands, which by this house were thought
Most just and equitable?

IRENEUS. Yes -- she has refused some late demands,
But, such demands as were more void of justice,
Than your lordship said my arguments were
Of reason: --
I wish to Heaven, that those who tax
Columbia of disloyalty, as much as she, deserved
The name of British subjects! --

INDIGNUS. No doubt but those encouraging rebellion,
Deserve the name of British subjects. --
But why, my lords, this altercation and dispute? --
Is It not most evident, Columbia must
Be humbled? --

PARAMONT. Most evidently the case, my lords,
Nor does there need further debate,
Since nothing can be urged sufficient
To retard the purpose. --

IRENEUS. It Is evidently madness, -- errant madness; --
You may depend, my lords, the moment
That Britannia strikes Columbia, --
She strikes herself! -- and every wound
That she on her inflicts, --
Most bitterly herself will feel! --
Great Power, who rulest all below the skies,
O teach Britannia to be just and wise!
Exeunt omnes.
End of second Act.
ACT III.
Britannia sola. -- BRITANNIA. It Is fixed -- irrevocably fixed --
Nor shall Britannia wear the diadem in vain.
The subjects of my vast extended realm,
Submissive, shall obey my royal will,
Or shuddering sink beneath my vengeance. --
Like yon eternal orb of light, which rolls
Incessant through the skies, dispensing light,
And numerous blessings to mankind, I Will soar
Majestic, and this vast world shall own
Itself on me dependent. --
I Have ruled with too much lenity perhaps, as yet,
For I perceive that in the western world,
Columbia grows audacious, and presumes
To call her own, what my beneficence
Has only lent her for a time. --
No, proud Columbia, -- all thou have is mine,
Thyself, -- and more, the air thou breathst is mine;
The earth, the ocean all is mine. --
(Enter Columbia in a dejected air.) Who Is this -- that dares approach my
Presence thus uncalled? --

COLUMBIA. It Is she, whom often Britannia has welcomed
To her arms -- and she who once was
Happy there. --

BRITANNIA. Perhaps, among the numerous favors I Have bestowed
Nou've shared my royal bounty; --
But those so numerous are, I cannot pay
Particular attention; --
I would not now by any be disturbed, --
Retire. --

COLUMBIA. O Heavens! --
Is not Columbia known? --
Not known by her Britannia? --
What, O what, my parent, has thus estranged
That countenance, which once was clothed in smiles
Whenever I approached? --

BRITANNIA. O -- it is Columbia! --
Mighty queen -- I beg your pardon --
Great Columbia, --
Your highness is so changed, I must
Confess I quite had lost your countenance, --
So changed -- could you expect that I
Should know you? --

COLUMBIA. Could I expect to be thus trifled with? --
Was It thus Britannia was wont to meet
Her once beloved Columbia? --
Tell me, my dear parent, tell me why,
Is this so sudden change of treatment? --
When last we met, with mutual joy, and warm
Congratulations we caressed each other;
And in the strictest bonds of friendship parted. --
Most heartily I thanked the Powers above,
Who fixed my lot united with the blessed Britannia:
Could I then entertain one distant thought,
That soon this kind Britannia would assume,
Imperial airs, and for a tender parent,
Prove a harsh peremptory directress?
What have I done, that now Britannia claims
And even threatens to deprive Columbia
Of those sacred rights, which Heaven has given
And heretofore Britannia's self acknowledged? --

BRITANNIA. Do not too much presume to call in question,
The firm decrees of great Britannia: --
It Is true, most graciously I formerly
Have pleased to grant my subjects to enjoy
Some signal favors, free and undisturbed;
But they shall know, that by permission
They enjoy these tokens of my friendship --
And when my royal will demands
Whatever they possess, with cheerfulness
Shall be resigned: --
But still perhaps my kind indulgence
Had permitted you, young Columbia, to enjoy
Some favors heretofore I Have granted;
But, your daring insolence has provoked,
And roused my wrath --
You cherish in the western world, a tribe
Of factious miscreants, who daringly oppose
The sovereign power of great Britannia: --
Audacious wretches! they of late refused,
When I demanded but a part of that,
Which they have impudence to call their own.
Know, proud young dame --
That thou, thy subjects, life, and all
Thou have is mine. --

COLUMBIA. Britannia! --
O do not frown upon me thus;
I cannot endure the frowns of her, whose smiles
Have ever been so grateful --
Believe me, dear Britannia, much I Am wronged,
And much abused, by cruel envious foes,
Who me have falsely represented,
As cherishing rebellion in my subjects.
But, be assured, it is false, entirely false, --
Oh -- could you now but read this swelling heart,
You Would find it glowing with most ardent zeal,
And warm attachment to Britannia. --
Do not believe the groundless machinations
Of those who seek the ruin of Columbia. --
Trust me, dear parent, --
I ever have been loyal. --

BRITANNIA. Impossible! --
And dare you now audaciously affirm,
That those whom I have chosen to protect
My mighty realm, with envy should be moved,
With falsehood to impose on me their soverelgn?
No, proud Columbia, -- have you not refused,
To yield what I of you demanded? --
You have -- and therefore you
Shall feel my vengeance. --

COLUMBIA. O Britannia! don't thus tear my heart,
And drive me to distraction; --
For heaven's sake resume the parent,
And not the cruel unrelenting tyrant. --
I never have refused Britannia ought,
That like a parent she could ever demand.
Has not great Heaven granted to mankind
Some rights and liberties, which they should deem,
Most sacred and inviolable? --
Has not Britannia sworn, most firmly sworn,
That all her subjects should enjoy those rights
In unmolested peace? --
Am I not thine, by all the ties of nature?
I am -- Then do not treat me like a menial slave.
Have I not suffered, bled, my subjects sought,
And thousands died to raise Britannia's fame?
Did thou not thank me, and thyself confess,
That I beyond my share had born the hardships
Of a cruel war? --
Thou did -- Then why this sudden change? --
O cruel, cruel foes, who thus deceive Britannia,
And plot the ruin of Columbia! --

BRITANNIA. Patience! --
Thou perfect picture of the basest impudence!
Do thou, young puny infant, think to plead,
Thy worthless merit, and the gifts of Heaven? --
Durst thou pretend with me, the queen of nations,
To dispute the rights of human nature? --
From whence had thou, this wondrous share of knowledge,
And still more wondrous share of impudence?
Shall the pale ivy, too feeble to sustain,
Its own, though trifling weight, attempt to lift,
A single twig above, and then insult
Its kind supporter? --
Audacious wretch! --
By sad experience, thou and all thy race,
Shall know, my power and sovereign right to bind,
In every case my subjects, and inflict,
Whatever my supreme authority shall
Think most proper. --
Go from my sight -- thou traitress! --
Henceforth expect, and all thy rebel sons
To feel my anger, as the just reward
Of wicked disobedience. --

COLUMBIA. Oh Heavens! -- -- --
Is it then come to this! --
Witness ye sacred Powers who rule the world,
And weigh the ponderous fate of nations, --
Columbia, ever has been loyal. --
O most cruel, obdurate parent!
Is this the great Britannia, once beloved,
Revered and honored? --
Can she thus treat her once beloved
Columbia! -- --
Witness the throbbings of a bleeding heart, --
These gushing tears -- these artless sighs --
Which tear my bosom -- --
That I am innocent! --
See here thy once beloved child --
Pleading for mercy! --
I ask not gists, or treasures from Britannia;
I ask but freedom, liberty, and life, --
Pity my youth -- my unexperienced youth --
Pity those thousands who with me must bleed,
Whom in the early dawn of life
I Have taught to lisp Britannia's praise. --

BRITANNIA. Be gone -- I Will hear no more --
My vet'ran troops, my awful navy, soon
Shall speak to thee in thunder --
Do not expect by prayers and tears to move
The queen of nations from her firm decrees;
Submit thy life and liberty to me --
It is my royal pleasure now to take them;
If thou shall dare refuse --
Know then for certain -- that my wrath
Shall crush thee to the deepest misery! --

COLUMBIA. Know then for certain, great Britannia,
That Columbia, never will resign
Those sacred rights, deposited by Heaven,
She cannot, dare not do it --
If faith, if justice any where exist,
If Heaven yet has power to punish vice,
O may my cruel wrongs find some redress,
May Heaven in mercy, pity my distress.
[Exit Columbia.
Britannia sola. BRITANNIA. As when the loud tempestuous whirlwinds roar,
And dash the foaming billows on the shore,
Black gathering clouds in horror vail the skies,
Swift forked lightning through dark either flies,
Harsh bellowing thunder shakes the solid ground,
Old ocean trembling, through its vast profound:
So now my wrath resistless shall o'erthrow,
And with a storm of vengeance crush the foe;
Columbia now, shall sink beneath my rod,
And nations tremble at my sovereign nod. --
[Exit.
End of third act.
ACT IV.
Scene I.
Columbia sola, bewailing her situation. COLUMBIA. How false -- how frail --
are all the hopes of mortals?
Where now those pleasing expectations, --
Those bright imaginary scenes of glory!
On which so late my exulting heart depended!
Alas! -- they are gone! --
And now, a thick impervious gloom bedims
My sight, and paints a horrid dreary scene. --
-- O whither -- whither shall I turn!
On this side, all the horrors of a dismal war,
A cruel and unnatural war, --
On that, destruction, abject servitude and slavery;
Sad alternatives! --
Can I submit to chains and bitter thraldom?
Shall I to gratify the lawless pride
Of tyrant usurpation, plunge myself,
And all my friends, in misery's dreary gulf?
Oh no -- I cannot do it! --
But yet I dread the consequence, --
Britannia frowns, and threatens swift destruction:
All gracious Heaven! is not my cause most just?
O kindly shield, and guard me from the assaults
Of cruel unrelenting foes. --
But oh! -- --
See how Britannia's navies throng the seas,
And hosts in hostile armor clad,
Are wafted over the raging main, to deal
Destruction, death, and rapine!
Oh Heaven -- support me! --
[Exit in haste.
End of the first scene.
SCENE II.
Arator, Iracundus, Perjurus and Sophos. ARATOR. My countrymen and friends: --
The all-important crisis has arrived,
Which (...) calls on every son of freedom,
On every soul who values ought in life
That Is worth enjoying, to rouse from dull supineness,
And boldly to assert the rights of human nature.
Where is the silly, stupid wretch so dead
To all that is noble, so completely shut
Within the vail of ignorance and folly,
Who can behold cursed tyranny and pride
Usurp the seat of justice, trample virtue
In the dust, and still remain unmoved!
Shall those haughty lords beyond the atlantic,
Those miscreants accursed, who by their lies
Britannia have deceived, --
Shall they impunely vent their rage and malice
On Columbia? --
Then Hell my spout her cataracts to Heaven,
Or warring pigmies tear down stars! --
Can you my friends, sit tamely and behold,
Columbia thus insulted? --
I know you cannot; --
Then rouse my countrymen on every side,
And with united force, resist the foe.

SOPHOS. No, brave Arator --
We never can behold Columbia wronged
While we have strength to weild the sword in her defense:
But let us beware of rushing into danger; --
Let Us prudently, on the defensive act, --
Then, if hostilities commence,
We may convince the world we fight,
But merely in our own defense. --
Let Us confidently assert Columbia's right;
But, if possible, refrain from shedding blood.

IRACUNDUS. Why talks my friend of moderation?
I doubt not Sophos, of your firm intention
To defend Columbia's cause, --
But must we tamely see her thus abused,
Ourselves provoked, insulted, trod to death
Lest we be thought the aggressors?
Heavens! -- then let them cut our throats
If we can but avoid that imputation! --
There Is nothing else remains for them to do. --
I see no further need of all this caution --
Enough, my friends already has been done,
To wake the dead, and rouse our sleeping
Fathers from their tombs --
To upbraid the negligence of us their sons.
By all the powers above -- I Would rather snatch
A flaming thunderbolt, and hurl
Those bloody miscreants to destruction! --

PERJURUS. And so had I -- by all the joys of heaven,
And pangs of hell! --
Than live in such disgrace, let us bravely die;
For life is but an idle dream, --
When liberty is lost. --
A back curtain is partly drawn which discovers Columbia with eyes raised to
heaven, wringing her hands, in the extremity of grief -- Perjurus seeing her. O
Heavens! --
My friends! -- once raise your eyes and see
A sight that would affect an adamantine heart,
And cause the flinty rock to weep! --
O see Columbia in yon cypress grove,
With swimming eyes, fixed on the azure heaven,
Wringing her hands in grief unutterable! --
( All beholding in amazement.
ARATOR. Oh -- all ye guardian powers, with pity's softest eye
Look down on suffering, injured innocence!
My friends! -- My brothers! --
O what a sight is there! --
Does not a single glance at that most perfect
Picture of oppressed and tortured virtue,
Strike every nerve, and kindle indignation
To a raging flame, that nothing can extinguish
But a just revenge, on the accursed authors
Of such unparallelled distress? --

IRACUNDUS. Yes, if there is a heaven above or hell below,
May heaven in thundering vollies hurl them down,
And hell with hideous yawn, receive and close
Them in its deepest, hottest caverns! --
O my blood boils with rage and indignation,
To crush those monsters, and relieve
The burdened earth of such infernal demons.
[Columbia slowly retires.
SOPHOS. O my dear Columbia! --
My life -- my inmost soul are thine! --
See -- she retires ( pointing) with slow
And faultering steps, and casts on us a wishful
And expressive look. --

ARATOR. She does -- and seems by that to ask
Assistance. --

IRACUNDUS. Roused by her call let us resolutely go,
And sink her oppressors to the shades below.
[Exeunt omnes*
End of the second scene. SCENE III.
Enter Fabius solus. FABIUS. The sword is now unsheathed, -- and horrid war
With ghastly front, and frightful mein advances,
Menacing wide carnage, and destruction.
Columbian shores are stained with gore,
And sprinkled with the blood of wretched victims
Murdered by the rage of cruel tyrants; --
Nay more -- stained with the blood,
That gushes from the veins of children,
By their parents murdered! --
Columbia bathed in tears bewails the loss
Of many favorite sons, who have already died
In her defense.
( Columbia slowly enters, clad in mourning apparel. But see she comes, in
sorrow clad, and seems
In every gesture to demand compassion. --
Dear Columbia -- weep not -- thy cause is just --
And righteous Heaven most surely will avenge
Thy wrongs.

COLUMBIA. Dear Fabius --
I humbly hope kind Heaven will yet befriend
Columbia; -- and that she is those who bravely
Will defend the cause of innocence. --
Kind Fabius -- has not great Heaven sent me thee
To rouse the sons of freedom, and lead forth
The unexperienced, though courageous bands,
To quell the murderous foe? --
O Fabius! But cast your eyes on yonder fields;
See there the glowing cheek of youth,
All pale in death! -- The sprightly active limbs
Lie mangled on the ground, and heroes weltering
In their gore! -- Dear friends -- they bled
And died for virtue! --
See crowds of widows -- helpless orphans --
Parents childless -- by the fate of war! --
See these -- O Fabius, and avenge my wrongs. --

FABIUS. My dear Columbia --
Be assured that I am thine, devoted to thy service;
Bound by all the tender ties of nature,
To defend and serve Columbia;
To risque my life, and spill my blood
If called, in her protection. --
All this I Will freely do --
But, for me to take the important trust,
To lead Columbia's troops to war;
To have her fate so much on me depend,
Oh! it is a task I dare not undertake,
Being conscious of my weakness to fulfill
The important charge. --

COLUMBIA. Thy courage, Fabius, thy approved
Skill, too often have been tried
To leave a doubt of thine abilities.
Been tried, -- alas the sickning thought! --
When great Britannia and Columbia joined,
With force united to repel the common foe;
But now Britannia is herself the foe!
Refuse not, Fabius; to thee Columbia
Looks, -- to thee do suffering thousands look
And ask for thine assistance. --
Go rouse the sons of virtue, lead them forth,
To assert the sacred rights of human nature.

FABIUS. Since thus Columbia does in me confide,
I Will go -- and do my utmost to deserve
The honors she bestows upon me. --
And every nerve shall be exerted to defend,
And save my bleeding country from destruction.

COLUMBIA. Go then my Hero --
May all the guardian gods thy life protect,
And heaven above thy counsels all direct.
[Exit Fabius.
Columbia sola. Hope, sweet delirium of the human mind,
I grasp at thee -- but scarcely thee can find.
War's gloomy tempest, fast is gathering round,
And heroes now, lie bleeding on the ground.
[Exit Columbia.
End of the fourth Act.
[Singing.] BUNKER-HILL.
I.
" Why should vain mortals tremble at the sight of,
" Death and destruction, in the field of battle?
" Where blood and carnage, clothe the ground in crimson
" Sounding with death-groans.
II.
" Death will invade us, by the means appointed;
" And we must all bow, to the king of terrors:
" Nor am I anxious, if I am prepared,
" What shape he comes in,"
ACT V.
SCENE I.
ARATOR. Sophos, does not the hottest indignation fire
The breast of every true Columbian? --
See how the patriotic flame runs through
The various ranks, and rouses every feeling
Soul to assert his country's cause. --
And well it may. --
Tell me Sophos, -- for I know your zeal
For freedom; -- Tell me, why does not Columbia
Publicly explode, and disannul
All her relation and connection with Britannia?
Heavens! does she wait for further provocation?
Or does she fear some fatal consequence?
For my single self, most willingly I Would risque it.
And as one bound Columbia to defend,
Most heartily I wish it. --

SOPHOS. It Is true, sufficient provocation has been given
For an eternal separation;
But would it not, Arator, be presumption,
In Columbia? --
From my soul I wish it;
But yet I Am fearful what may follow. --

ARATOR. Can ought be worse than what we now endure?
Britannia is most inveterate,
And aims her thunder at Columbia's life; --
She Is strong and powerful, and perhaps
Will much distress, if not subdue us; --
And we can never obtain assistance from abroad,
Unless we first disown relation with
Britannia. -- But see --
Columbia comes --
I will to her propose the affair,
And strongly recommend it. --
Enter Columbia. Dear Columbia -- We Are happy here to meet thee, --
And hope -- sincerely hope 'ere long to meet thee,
When affliction's heavy hand, and war's
Tormenting curse, shall be removed. --

COLUMBIA. My friends -- though almost overwhelmed
With grief and woe, -- a gleam of hope remains,
Since I have those, in whom I can confide,
And who, I trust are wise and virtuous --
What can be done my friends? --
Britannia is implacable -- her fleets
Are crouding on our coasts, -- our towns
And peaceful habitations smoke in ruins,
The plaintive cries, and dying groans
Of murdered citizens, are heard resounding
Through the wounded air! --
Oh -- Can Columbia endure all this, and live!

ARATOR. All this -- and more, if Heaven befriend us,
As it hitherto has done --
Do not despair; --
We Have been consulting what might best be done
At this important Crisis for Columbia: --
We think it absolutely right and just;
And what will best promote her interest,
That she should wholly separate from Britannia, --
And openly declare herself entirely free
From all relation, and connection with the parent state.
Has not Britannia already forfeited
Her right, to claim the least relation to Columbia? --
She has -- and may she never more obtain it. --

COLUMBIA. But pray, Arator, can we be supported
In carrying on an open, and a dangerous war?
Britannia you know is strong and powerful,
She Is numerous veteran troops, and warlike stores
In great abundance. --

ARATOR. She has -- and so has Columbia, --
I dare affirm, that not a nation
In all the eastern world, could more
Successfully withstand the rage of
Great Britannia. --
We too have numerous veterans,
Who will bravely meet the face of death,
And mock the assault of millions
Of those vile mercenary bands.
It Is folly -- most egregious folly --
That Britannia should pretend, or we should fear,
That, with a mere show of force,
Columbia may be frightened
To submission. --
No -- it is clear as light, -- and as consistent
As the laws of Heaven, that now Columbia
Should assert her right, and openly
Declare her Independence. --

COLUMBIA. Arator, -- Since I believe you friendly
To the cause of suffering virtue, --
I Am much inclined to think, what you
Propose is right. --
Sophos -- say -- what is your opinion?

SOPHOS. At first I was a little doubtful, --
But on more mature reflection,
I fully do concur, with what Arator has proposed --
It Is just, and right, that now Columbia
Should openly renounce all her connection
And relation with Britannia, since
She has thus by her been treated. --

COLUMBIA. It Is done --
Ye Powers above, who with impartial eye,
Survey all nations, here below the sky:
Ye mortals who by reason's light can view,
And judge of actions -- I appeal to you --
That by oppression's cruel hand I Am driven
With FORCE to guard, the sacred gifts of Heaven.
I Have sought redress -- but none have ever obtained,
Or scarce a hearing from Britannia gained.
Such cruel treatment I no more can bear,
But now before the impartial world declare,
Proclaim from sea to sea, from shore to shore,
Columbia, is Britannia's NO MORE.
[Exeunt.
End of the first scene.
COLUMBIA.
" Columbia, Columbia, to glory arise,
" Thou queen of the world and the child of the skies;
" Thy genius commands thee, with raptures behold,
" And ages on ages thy splendour unfold:
" Thy reign is the last and the noblest of time,
" Most fruitful thy soil, most inviting thy clime;
" Let the crimes of the east never incrimson thy name,
" Be freedom and science and virtue thy fame.
SCENE II.
Fabius, Iracundus, and Arator. FABIUS. It Is now a time, my friends, for every
son
Of Freedom to exert his utmost strength;
Strain every nerve, to save his bleeding country.
The hostile foe like an o'erwhelming flood,
Pour in upon us, from the northern world,
With force as yet resistless, spreading
Wide carnage and destruction. --
Oh what a direful shock was that when great
Horatius fell in yonder northern region! --
Brave youth! --
Columbia groaned, and most severely felt,
Thy untimely death! --
You Have heard, my friends, what cruel
Devastation the enemy now make --
And with what fury they are rushing in upon us.
(During this scene TORIES and SPIES are seen lurking and listening round the
stage.)
ARATOR. Yes, I Have heard and wondered, heard and stood amazed.
What in the name of virtue, can this mean,
That all those northern bulwarks are resigned,
And nothing now remains to stop the inroads
Of the savage nations, and still more savage Britons?

FABIUS. It shocks my inmost soul to think,
Britannia's troops, once famed for true heroic
Valor, should thus degenerate into
Mean barbarity, -- and even urge the savage tribe,
To exercise their utmost skill in murdering
Our peaceful countrymen! --

IRACUNDUS. O horror! I cannot hear them mentioned
But my blood boils up in fury! --
To see the peaceful towns in flames,
To hear the female shrieks, and dying groans,
Of infants, murdered at their mothers breast!
Heavens! I cannot endure the thought.
(Draws his sword, and casts away the sheath). So Heaven befriend me: --
This sword no more shall meet the sheath
Until Columbia's injuries are revenged! --

Each drawing his sword. FABIUS. Nor this --

ARATOR. Nor this --

FABIUS. Let Us now my friends rouse all our troops,
And lead them forth to check the progress
Of the foe, so rapidly advancing. --
Columbian sons shall fiercely gather round,
And crush their legions, to the smouldering ground.
[Exeunt.
End of the second scene. SCENE III.
Discovers Orontes, a British general, sitting at a table
Enter Perjurus, a Columbian traitor. PERJURUS. Orontes, I come to treat --
(Shut every door, -- let not a spirit good or bad
Find any entrance here, -- lest it divulge
Our conversation.)
I have come to treat with you, of an affair
Big with great importance: --
You know, I now command the most important
Post, Columbia's troops possess. --
Orontes -- it is the key of all the states --
You cannot take it by assault. --

ORONTES. You do command a most important post,
Most valiant Perjurus --
And you are an important man --
Perhaps --
(Opening a drawer, throws out some money on the table.
PERJURUS. (Looking earnestly at the money.)
It Is very -- very strong --
And wholly now at my command --
It seems not right, a pack of villains
Like these rebels, should possess that fortress. --

ORONTES. Ay, -- most noble Perjurus, -- a pack
(...) villains -- one man like you is worth
A million such. --
(Throws out more money.
PERJURUS. Could this by you be gained, --
'Twould be the conquest of the states.

ORONTES. Ay, -- 'twould make the rebels tremble.
But is it wholly now at your command?

PERJURUS. Most noble general -- It Is mine entirely --
The rebels think me so attached to their cause,
That this important fortress, is most safe
While I command it --
But if -- (Looking at the money.

ORONTES. But will you now abandon their
Accursed cause? -- Do you not fear detection?

PERJURUS. I fear! -- Will you --
Will you be faithful?
'T will end the war -- if you can gain it --

ORONTES. Will you? --
By all that is good?
Perjurus nodding assent. (Orontes throws out more money.
PERJURUS. Again looking for some time at the money -- scrapes it off into his
hat. It Is yours!
The rebel states are all your own!
(Runs away in haste.
End of the third scene.
SCENE IV.
Fabius, Arator and Iracundus. Fabius holding a paper. FABIUS. Audacious
villain! --
Arator! -- Iracundus! --
Could you have thought that Perjurus was false?
(Hands them the paper.
Read that -- and blush that you are men!
(They read.
ARATOR. Perjured wretch! --
O faith! -- O virtue! -- O honor!
Despised and trampled in the dust!
Is it possible, a human being should be thus lost
To all that is noble, generous and brave!
A Traitor! -- an accursed Traitor!
The scorn of villains -- the scorn of brutes!

IRACUNDUS. Yes more -- the scorn of devils! --
For sure I am, there is not a spirit
Accursed, in all the infernal regions, --
That would not spurn him out of hell!

FABIUS. O cursed love of gold!
Where will thou not force the human mind
To rove! -- We Have been, my friends, upon the
Brink of ruin -- and just were falling
In woe remediless! -- Thanks to that power
Who kindly broke our fall! --
But now, my friends, let us hasten to unfold
The rest of this foul plot.

IRACUNDUS. O may just Heaven, with vengeance him pursue,
And by cursed Treason, may he perish too.

ACT VI.
SCENE I.
Columbia and Gallia. COLUMBIA. Illustrious Gallia, --
I Am happy now to have an interview
With her, whom I believe a friend to virtue,
And ever ready to relieve distressed innocence.
Gallia, thou know I have long endured
The cruel insults of Britannia, --
And long endured, before with open force,
I opposed her cruel measures. --
But now, constrained, I Have publicly renounced
My Dependence on Britannia. --
Thou know my rising empire, if it survive
The unequal contest, bids fair for great renown.
May not a mutual friendship,
Be of lasting service to us both?

GALLIA. Columbia, with indignation I have heard
The cruel insults of Britannia; --
It shocks my soul, to see thus trampled on, the rights
Of human nature.
I Have wondered at your patience, and admired,
That long before, you did not openly resist,
Such cruel and unjust proceedings. --
Yes, Columbia, I long have pitied your distress,
And now will lend whatever assistance
You shall ask, and I can give.

COLUMBIA. Kind Gallia, --
What words can I invent, to express
My gratitude and thanks, that you so readily
Afford, assistance to my just, my suffering cause!

GALLIA. Columbia -- words are needless --
Well I know your generous disposition;
I see the justice of your cause, and feel
Myself in duty bound, to lend assistance.
Why should Britannia's haughty lords pretend
To rule the world by a tyrannic sway,
And with a rod of iron scourge to death,
All who refuse to yield to her unjust commands?
No, Columbia -- I much admire your
Fortitude and zeal, in boldly acting in defiance
To the cruel machinations, of those haughty foes.
My fleets and armies shall assist, and join
Columbia's gallant troops, to quell
Those proud invaders, and rescue
Thee from slavery and destruction. --
And when thou art free, when peace benignly smiles,
When crowned with laurels, thou shall happily
Enjoy the rich rewards of victory and freedom,
Then, be assured, I shall be happy to enjoy
A mutual friendship, with the blessed Columbia. --

COLUMBIA. O Gallia!
While sun and moon endure, I shall esteem
Myself most strictly bound, by every tie of gratitude
And friendship, to respect thee as a kind
And generous ally. --
And if kind Heaven shall grant me victory,
And crown my arduous toils, with peace
And Independence, -- then be assured, kind Gallia,
My ambition's warmest aim shall be directed,
To preserve with thee, the strictest friendship
And reward thy kind assistance. --

GALLIA. Then, dear Columbia, let one common interest bind,
And all our dealings prove benevolent and kind.

COLUMBIA. Ye mortals hear, ye sacred powers of Heaven attest,
And kindly make great Gallia, with Columbia blessed.
[Exeunt.
End of the first scene.
[Singing.] DAUPHIN.
" Ye sons of virtue hear,
" Come join the festive throng,
" Come banish grief and fear,
" For Jove approves the song.
" Let gladness every heart expand, and gratitude inspire,
" Each patriot breast with joys unfeigned, to sound the golden lyre.
" See Gallia comes, let music wake,
" And echo round the sky:
" May Heaven kind Gallia bless,
" Columbia's great ally.
II.
" To visit earth once more
" Behold Astrea deigns;
" The golden age returns,
" Now peace and justice reign.
" See proud oppression hide its head, and tyranny expire,
" While Independence, Heaven's fair gift, lights freedom's sacred fire.
" See Gallia comes, etc. etc.
SCENE II.
Britannia sola -- dressed in mourning. BRITANNIA. Farewell my towering hopes!
--
Farewell ye happy days,
When over the waves of fame I rode majestic,
Scorning the loud bellowing rage of malice,
And the furious blasts of envy!
O what a frown of Heaven is too much glory!
To what a towering height of honor, have
I been raised -- 'till quite amazed, I lost my way --
And now am falling -- falling -- in the gulf of misery.
O dangerous flattery! -- O cursed deceit --
Whither have ye led me! --
Could I have thought, those men, whom I advanced
To seats of honor, entrusted with the care
Of my vast empire, would thus have led
Britannia into ruin? --
And this in specious show of loyalty! --
O honor! -- O sincerity! -- O virtue! --
Do ye with mortals any where exist!
Or are ye driven forever from the earth! --
-- O my suffering -- bleeding friends!
Britannia too late awaked, feels every
Drop of blood, that gushes from your veins,
And -- sinks -- with the reflection! --
Thou sun which rolls in yon blue arch of heaven!
Thou moon, -- ye stars, refulgent lamps of night,
No more emit your light, or kindly smile
On wretched -- lost Britannia! --
But let me far retire, within some gloomy
Cave, or hollow mountain's side -- there hide me
From disgrace -- there in sad lamentations mourn,
And to the flinty rocks and murmuring fountains,
Vent my sighs! --
(Weeps.
Enter Justitius and Ireneus. IRENEUS. Oh Britannia! --
I scarce can utter words, or find expressions
Fit to address my sovereign thus afflicted --
So unaccustomed to behold thee in distress,
The sight almost unmans me.
-- Do not despair, --
Although misfortune's heavy hand oppress thee,
And gathering clouds eclipse thy fame,
And darken thy meridian glory,
Perhaps thy sun will yet break through the gloom,
And shine with more refulgent brightness.

BRITANNIA. It Is noble to compassionate distress,
But oh -- I fear -- my friends, -- Britannia's glory,
Which lately with such splendour shone,
Now past the meridian height, and veiled in clouds,
No more will shine, but sink below the horizon,
And leave me in eternal darkness! --
Had I but heard, what you my lords,
So often forewarned me of -- had I but checked
Those vile pernicious measures, and destroyed
My wicked counselors --
I might have yet been happy. --

IRENEUS. And yet I trust you will be happy,
Dear Britannia, --
Although (...) appeared in opposition
To those measures lately taken, so destructive
To our nation -- yet be assured my heart
Is thine; and to promote thy happiness,
Shall ever be my aim. --
You thought me false, when I opposed;
But, so sure I was, that those proceedings
Were pernicious, cruel and oppressive,
I held myself in duty bound, while I
Had life, and breath, to oppose them. --

BRITANNIA. Too late, my lords, I feel my sad mistake:
-- O Columbia -- Columbia -- gone forever!
Torn from my side! -- ah -- thrust
By violence from me! --
O ye thousands who have died by my
Egregious folly, and in your last expiring breath,
Perhaps -- have blessed Britannia! --
Forgive -- forgive -- ye injured spirits, --
Oh forgive -- (Weeps.

IRENEUS. My dear Britannia -- for the honor
Of our nation, -- most earnestly I recommend,
That an immediate end be put to this
Destructive and unnatural war. --

JUSTITIUS. And I with all my heart and soul would urge it.
Why should we sink ourselves still lower
Into misery and disgrace? --
Why draw the blood from (...) veins?
For more than seven long years (...) groaned,
Beneath the burden of this war, --
A war which, if successful, would but wound us.
Peace, instant peace before our ruin
Be completed. --

BRITANNIA. Go then, my friends, avert if possible
Our sudden ruin -- strive for peace,
And stop the tide of human blood -- Blood!
Hark -- What do I hear! --
It Is Columbia -- in plaintive groans
Re-echoes, blood! -- blood! --
Oh thou dear suffering innocent -- forgive:
-- (Starts.) Oh -- see my lords --
See you that stream of blood? --
See -- see that savage with a bloody
Murderous knife! -- Heavens! --
Where am I? -- I know not where,
Or what I am -- If pity dwells
In yonder azure heaven -- if kind compassion
Rides upon the clouds -- ye powers
Propitious -- snatch me from destruction. --
Alas! -- I Am sick to death --
Scarce -- do the wheels of nature move --
My friends -- support me! --
[Exeunt supporting her.
End of the second scene.
[Singing.] BRITANNIA'S LAMENTATION.
I.
" In a mouldering (...) where the wretched retreat,
" Britannia sat (...) with care;
" She wept for her sons and exclaimed against fate,
" And gave herself up to despair.
II.
" The walls of her cells she had sculptured around,
" With the deeds of her favorite sons;
" And even the dust as it lay on the ground,
" Was engraved with some deeds they had done.
III.
" The sire of the Gods, from his crystalline throne,
" Beheld the disconsolate dame,
" And moved at her tears he sent Mercury down,
" And these were the tidings that came:
IV.
" Britannia forbear, not a sigh nor a tear
" For thy sons so deservingly loved;
" Your grief shall be changed into triumphs of joy,
" For they are not dead, but removed.
SCENE III.
Paramont, Scotos, Indignus and Avarus. PARAMONT. We Have met, my lords, in an
unlucky time,
And such a time as truly does require,
Some quick decisive measures. --
From what a pitch of glory has Britannia fallen!
What havoc do the rebels make among
Our gallant troops! -- What blood and treasure
Has been lost! -- How little have we gained!
Perhaps we have been too rash --

SCOTOS. What can we do, my lords?
We Have lost Columbia I fear;
No slaves nor money may we now expect
From thence: -- Gallia is in open war against us,
And what is worse, Britannia hates,
And wishes to destroy us; --
We are in a fine dilemma. --

PERJURUS. I think, my lords, we should directly
Raise --

PARAMONT. (Interrupting.) And who are you, pray, --
So very officious? --

PERJURUS. My name is Perjurus, my lord,
Well known for rendering signal service
To Britannia's cause.

SCOTOS. Ay, your servant, Mr. Perjurus, --
I think I Have heard your honor mentioned,
What did you, of so much service? --

PERJURUS. I kindly gave into your hands,
The strongest fortress of Columbia: --

PARAMONT. You did -- as kindly as a tender nurse
Who kills the child, to save its life. --

PERJURUS. I bravely burned some rebel towns. --

PARAMONT. You did, and bravely by their light ran off. --

INDIGNUS. Perhaps, brave Perjurus, you could with more
Success attack a full-grown pumpkin,
And with relentless fury tear it from the vine,
And crack the stubborn shell. --

PERJURUS. I Will crack your head --
Ungrateful Briton! --

AVARUS. Hold, hold -- Columbian traitor --
Be not so hasty here to show your valor.

PARAMONT. To tell you plainly, Mr. Perjurus,
We do not want your traitorship --
We bought you only for a present use;
And if for gold, you basely would betray
Your country's cause,
No doubt you would do the same to ours --
So -- sir, please to do yourself the honor --
To depart --

PERJURUS. (Going.) It Is deadly hard.
[Exit.
PARAMONT. My lords, we are indeed in an unhappy
Situation -- Britannia groans,
And begs relief -- I think, my lords,
We'd better end the war --
And then perhaps --
(Perjurus appears again.
SCOTOS. Ay, ay, my sweet friend -- you are come again;
We'll teach you to intrude.
( Canes him.
PERJURUS. My -- lords, I Have no where
Else to go. --
[Exeunt in confusion.
SCENE IV.
Fabius, Arator and Iracundus. FABIUS. Surprising change! Look back, my friends
To that distressing hour
When first Britannia struck the cruel blow,
Which roused Columbia's sons, with ardent zeal
To oppose her unjust measures: --
Where was Columbia then! destitute and weak,
Forlorn and wretched. --
Now see her gallant troops in bright array
March forth in all the pomp of war,
And boldly meet Britannia's proudest veterans.
See her who once was scarcely known among
The nations, now allied with mighty Gallia.

ARATOR. Yes, my friend, surprising is the change! --
Who could have thought the experienced general
Of Britannia, with numerous armies trained
To the art of war, should yield to young Columbia?
O how my heart exults with joy,
When I reflect on that auspicious day
When you, great Fabius, led our gallant troops
To the embattled field, -- when generous Gallia
Joined her powerful navy; --
Then thundering cannon rent the skies, and shook the ground,
When proud Alphonzo with his vaunting host,
Surrendered to Columbia's valiant troops.

IRACUNDUS. Now see the pride of great Britannia humbled,
That mighty queen of nations, who with a rod
Of iron, began to rule and crush opposers! --
See now the oppressive wand is broken,
And broken by young Columbia! --
In spite of wealth and power,
In spite of men and devils,
Columbia's arms have been successful. --
And soon we trust, with victory and peace,
Our toils will be rewarded.

FABIUS. Yes, my friends, like the return of morn
To the distressed mariner, that is tossed
Upon the tempestuous sea, expecting every moment
To be dashed on hidden rocks or shoals,
And buried in the briny deep. --
So now with hearts exulting we behold
Fair peace just rising to revive the world.
[Exeunt.
[Musick.] COLUMBIA. II.
" To conquest and slaughter let Europe aspire,
" Whelm nations in blood and wrap cities in fire,
" Thy heroes the rights of mankind shall defend,
" And triumph pursue thee and glory attend.
" A world is thy realm, for a world be thy laws;
" Enlarged as thine empire, and just as thy cause:
" On freedom's broad basis, thine empire shall rise,
" Extend with the main, and dissolve with the skies.

Columbia and Gallia. GALLIA. Hail blessed Columbia, favorite child of heaven,
Endowed with all that is to mortals given;
Celestial bounty, all thine empire fills,
Ambrosial nector from thy skies distills;
The genial sun through heaven's high concave rolls,
The teeming earth her choicest gifts unfolds.
For thee, and thee propitious heaven designed
A noble gift, a blessing to mankind;
Now see from yon bright regions downward bend,
Sweet peace, fair daughter of the skies descend,
With olive crowned, with blessings in her hand,
See, she alights on fair Columbia's land. --
Rejoice Columbia, let thy songs arise,
And sweetly echo round the neighboring skies:
Let hymns of praise ascend for blessings given,
And ring melodious through the arch of heaven.

COLUMBIA. Propitious Gallia -- welcome to my arms,
Now freed from chains, and horrid war's alarms:
The thundering cannon now no more are heard;
No more the murdering savage rage is feared:
No more shall gathering hosts becloud the plain,
Nor human gore the fertile glebe shall stain.
The horrid ravages of war now cease,
And minds ferocious soften into peace:
Even Discord's self her yawning mouth has closed,
In Peace's soft lap her grisly head reposed.
O Gallia -- thanks to kind indulgent Heaven,
Who such a kind ally to me has given;
And thanks to thee, that when in deep distress,
Thou did relieve and grant me kind redress. --
But see -- my heroes come -- Ye guardian Powers,
Pour down your blessings in eternal showers. --
[ Enter Fabius, Iracundus, Arator and Sophos. Joy -- joy my friends, that we
once more can meet;
Once more in happiness each other greet.
O -- my (...) heroes -- how my heart now swells;
More than my tongue can speak -- my heart now feels.
Let tears of joy -- expressive silence tell,
What thanks -- what gratitude to you I feel!
(And you dear shade -- who in my cause have died,
A tear of grief for you cannot be denied.)
-- Go, then, my sons, and be forever blessed;
Enjoy sweet peace, and undisturbed rest.
When life is closed, may Heaven in kindest love,
Receive you to the realms of peace above.

GALLIA. See, dear Columbia, lo Britannia comes
In placid aspect, with her favorite sons. --

[ Enter Britannia with Ireneus, Justitius, Scotos, Indignus, Orontes and
Avarus; Perjurus follows after, but is denied admittance into either party, at
length gets between them. GALLIA. Welcome, Britannia, to this joyful band,
Where smiling peace and love walk hand in hand!

COLUMBIA. Welcome, Britannia, to this heavenly scene,
Where peace and joy in every face are seen*

BRITANNIA. Welcome, my friends, to this auspicious hour,
When peace unites, and love sooths every power.
Let hate no more, nor baleful discord's jar,
Again provoke the horrid din of war:
But unanimity and peace divine
Our mutual hearts, in sweetest contact bind.
(They join hands.
O let our kindred souls be ever one,
Until the fleeting dream of life be gone!

GALLIA. 'Till purling streams or rivers cease to flow,
The rose to blossom or the forest grow!

COLUMBIA. 'Till rolling oceans quit their native shore,
Heaven's lamps grow pale, and time shall be no more!

FINIS.

