MR. BUCKMINSTER's SERMON, DELIVERED JUNE 7, 1787, BEFORE THE GENERAL-COURT OF
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT, THE HONORABLE COUNCIL,
AND THE HONORABLE THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE,
JUNE 7, 1787.

BY JOSEPH BUCKMINSTER, A. M.

PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN PORTSMOUTH.

GIVE ME NOW WISDOM AND KNOWLEDGE, THAT I MAY GO OUT AND COME IN BEFORE THIS
PEOPLE. KING SOLOMON. PORTSMOUTH: PRINTED, AND TO BE SOLD, BY ROBERT GERRISH.

M.DCC.LXXXVII.

STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE.
In the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, JUNE 7, 1787.
VOTED, That Mr. Pickering, Mr. Gains, and Mr. Emerson, be a Committee to
present the Rev. Mr. Buckminster with the thanks of this House for his public
performances, and request of him a copy of the discourse delivered before the
General-Court this day, that the same way be printed.

THOMAS BARTLET, Speaker P. T.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT, etc.
Men, Brethren, and Fathers,
NO Princes of any people, or representatives of freemen, were ever chosen to
higher or more important business than what will, probably, come before those
who are honored with these titles in the United States the present year.

THE General-Assembly of this State was, perhaps, never convened at a season
that called louder for the wisdom of the wise, the understanding of the aged,
the speech of the trusty, or the guidance of him who is wonderful in counsel
and excellent in working. -- No, not in those trying hours, when, in the face
of the hostile power of Britain, the arm of America was lifted to Heaven, and
she declared sovereign and independent. If to recover the bewildered traveller
is as interesting as to point him his way at first -- if to extricate from
embarrassments require as much wisdom as to prevent them -- and if to save a
kingdom is as important as to found one, the truth of those declarations will
be readily conceded.

THE fair morning that dawned over this infant empire, promising a serene and
glorious day, is soon changed: the curtains of the heavens are spread, murmurs
are heard in every region, "darkness covers the land, and gross darkness, the
people."

UNDER these circumstances, it is matter of peculiar regret, that you are
denied the learning, wisdom, and piety, of that aged master of assemblies The
Rev. Doctor Langdon, who for two years in succession has been appointed to
preach the election sermon, but has been prevented by the infirmities of a
broken bone.
who was to have led you, this morning, to the altar of God, and brought you
the message from his sacred word; and by this disappointment you are called to
attend upon one, who is but a Son in the Gospel, who would not have been so
early chosen to this service, could such a disappointment have been supposed
probable. But taught to obey every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, "being
called I came without gainsaying, and would now ask for what intent you have
sent for me?" Educated in the school of the Prophets, with which politics are
not necessarily connected, you must expect no direction in your civil police.
It would be almost presumption in any of this description, and would be
arrogance in me, in our present deranged and distracted state, when the wisest
Palinurus scarce knows which way to steer, to dictate to those who have made
politics their study.

I APPEAR, brethren, as a messenger from the Lord of Hosts, and as a servant of
Jesus Christ, and would lead your meditations to instructions that he has
given, peculiarly suited to circumstances like ours. You will find them in
JAMES 1st, 5th. IF any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives all
men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.

THERE is a GOD -- and MAN is his creature. -- The sovereign, independent, and
all-perfect character of GOD, and the weak, dependant, and imperfect character
of MAN, are clearly seen from the light of nature, reason, and experience. He
must be a fool and without excuse, who says in his heart, there is no God; or
boasts of his own powers and faculties, as though he had not received them.

WHEREVER we go, though among the most barbarous of the earth, we see the
Temple and the Altar, the sacrifice and the oblation, tokens of acknowledged
dependence upon an unseen Power.

WHAT the light of nature dictates, revelation confirms, and teaches us, that
though God made man after his own image, and gave him distinguished powers and
capacities to be his subordinate guides and directors, in the duties of his
elevated station; yet he communicated but his image, not his nature. He
retained man dependant upon himself, and in his best state man needed habitual
instruction and direction from his all-wise Creator.

THIS golden age is past, the powers of man have suffered an humiliating shock
in the sad apostasy of our race from God. "The understanding is darkened, being
alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in us, by reason
of the blindness of our hearts," and though man would be wise, he is born with
very little pretension to the exalted character.

MANY are the instances, in private life, in mere personal concerns, where the
wisdom of the prudent fails him, and he knows not what to do; well may we
suppose it will not be more adequate to the complicated affairs of civil
government, which involve the duty and interest of many individuals, or that
those who are honored with the important charge of guiding and directing these
will feel themselves in less need of a superior influence.

THERE is an instinctive propensity in our natures, in scenes of perplexity and
distress, especially if they are become sufficiently pressing, to look out for
foreign aid; and the light of reason leads us ultimately to him who teaches
man knowledge and gives him understanding.

PRAYER to God for wisdom is a duty of natural religion; and perhaps no nation
can be named that has not sought, in some expressive way, to the Deity it
acknowledged, for help in trouble, and guidance in important affairs of
government. The Heathen mariners, with whom Jonah fled to Tarshish, applied to
this duty in the hour of their distress, and thought him a miracle of stupidity
that he could sleep and neglect it. The Romans, no less renowned for their
wisdom than their valor, paid a very assiduous attention to this duty; they
consulted their auspices at the appointment of their civil and military
officers, and at the determination of every design of consequence. What they
did from the unassisted light of nature, we are directed to do by the light of
divine revelation, and that glorious Being from whom alone help comes, says,
"If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God." And he not only points us our
duty, but enjoins it under the highest encouragement; for he assures us, he
gives liberally. He is the all-wise and infinitely good God, and never said to
any, seek ye me in vain.

THE words of the text seem to be designed for the direction and encouragement
of an individual in his p^^^ate concerns, but they apply with higher energy and
encouragement to those that are entrusted with the concerns of thousands of
individuals, in proportion to the greater dignity of their station, the more
intricate perplexity of their affairs, and the more extensive influence of
their measures. And he not only gives liberally, but he upbraideth not: he does
not, as is too often the case with human counselors, censure the weakness or
ignorance of his supplicants, the triflingness of the occasions upon which they
apply, or their past neglect of him. He is not wearied with the frequency of
their addresses, nor with the earnestness and perseverance with which they
pursue them. He upbraideth not, but closes his encouragement with a promise of
success to him who asks aright, it shall be given him. The meek he will guide
in judgment; the meek he will teach his way.

THEY who are unacquainted with the great truths of the Gospel, may be accepted
in their immediate application to the throne of the divine Majesty; but they
who have heard of Jesus the mediator, is advocate and intercessor at the right
hand of God, must approach in his name as they would hope for audience and
acceptance; for no man comes to the Father but by him, and there is no other
name in which we can be heard. The apostle suggests as much in the words
immediately following the text, when he says, "Let him ask in faith nothing
wavering," for Christ is the author, the object, and the medium of faith; and
"whatsoever we ask the father in his name, believing, we shall receive."

I AM sensible there are those who, from the glorious perfections of the Deity,
endeavor to derive an argument against prayer; and improve the glory of the
divine character as a reason for witholding all explicit homage. Their argument
is, that as God is an omniscient and infinitely benevolent Being, he must know
all our wants, and be ready to supply them; and as he is the unchanging God,
the most fervent addresses can be of no efficacy. But the argument mistakes the
end and design of prayer, which is not to inform God, or influence him to
change, but to render us proper objects of divine mercies, and fit us to
receive them; and nothing can be plainer, from the word of God, than that
prayer is the enjoined duty of those that need mercies, and the usual
pre-requisite of Heaven to their bestowal. "Ask and ye shall receive, I will be
inquired of to do it for them. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God."
If this be true, the omniscience and unchangableness of God afford the
strongest arguments for prayer; for without it he must, in an ordinary way, see
us unfit to receive mercies, and must change his usual method to bestow them.

IN answer to our prayers for wisdom and direction, we are not to expect any
oracular responses, or miraculous communications; but a secret divine energy
attending the exercise of those faculties that heaven has given us to improve,
directing their use, strengthening them in exercise, removing darkness and
difficulties out of the way, and fixing in those resolves which he will
approve, whose counsel shall stand, and who will do all his pleasure. Shall
such communications be thought impossible or improbable, from him who is a
spirit? Who is the Father of our spirits, acquainted with all their powers and
principles, and who cannot but have intimate access to them? Are they not
communications that are consentaneous to the glorious character of God, as the
all-perfect spirit, and to the character of man as a rational, moral, and yet
dependant creature? "Man's heart devises his way, but the Lord directs his
steps. He gives understanding to the simple, and takes the wise in their own
craftiness." The objections to this duty, the scruples concerning it, originate
in infidelity and ignorance of God.

I HAVE already suggested the supplications and sacrifices of the Romans for
wisdom in the fairest era of their commonwealth; farther to enforce the duty,
as incumbent upon those that are entrusted with the affairs of states and
empires, let me call your recollection to the attention paid to it by the
renowned leaders of that people whose history is handed down in the sacred
pages. Moses, their lawgiver and deliverer, was a man of prayer, and though he
had the special tokens of the divine presence with him, in the pillars of cloud
and fire, to be his general directors; yet, on various emergencies, we find him
prostrate before Jehovah, seeking special guidance and direction, and
deprecating evils that impended his people, and the effect of his prayers, not
once nor twice, was the averting of those evils, and proved the lengthening of
their tranquillity. David, no less distinguished for his valor than his piety,
asked counsel of the Lord in a great variety of instances. Solomon, his son,
the wisest of men, when he was about succeeding his father in the throne of
Israel, most earnestly besought the Lord for a wise and understanding heart, to
guide him in his kingdom. And in what attitude did he ever appear more
dignified and exalted! God granted him his request, and what nation ever
enjoyed greater power and prosperity, or rose to more exalted heights of
national glory, than this, under his administration, 'till he forsook the Lord,
and called upon Gods that could not save? Hezekiah besought the Lord for a way
of escape, in a most critical and threatening situation, and the Lord opened it
for him, and restored prosperity. Jehosaphat, in like circumstances, fell
prostrate before the Lord, and in these expressive laconic terms, poured forth
his heart: Our God -- we know not what to do: but our eyes are upon thee. And
he stood still, and saw the salvation of God. What need I more say? -- the time
would fail me to mention the instances that might be adduced from the rulers of
Israel and Judah. Let it suffice to observe, that in them was verified that
observation of the wisest of their kings, that when the righteous were in
authority, the people rejoiced; but when the wicked bore rule, the people
mourned.

As we have examples of attention to this duty in the wisest and best
characters, and of success following it, so we are not destitute of instances
of unwise administration, and foolish resolves, ascribed to the neglect of this
duty. The children of Israel, imposed upon by the craft and subtilty of the
Gibeonites, entered into a league with them, which was injurious to their
interests, and led them to violate the express injunctions of Jehovah; and this
their rash and unwise procedure is ascribed to their neglect to ask counsel of
the Lord. They that honor God he will honor, and they that despise him he will
lightly esteem. The moral reasons of God's government are ever the same, and
they who neglect to ask counsel of the Lord must expect to have their councils
turned into foolishness, to meet darkness in their paths, see confusion in
their measures, and find themselves entangled in the maze of their own errors.
Job speaking of the Great God in his providential government, says, "He leads
counselors away spoiled, and makes the judges fools. He takes away the heart
of the chief of the people of the earth, and causes them to wander in a
wilderness where there is no way. They grope in the dark without light." Job
XIIth, -- 17, 24. "But they that wait on the Lord shall renew their strength."
. Humble application to God for wisdom and direction, is a duty incumbent upon
all, especially upon civil rulers; it has been practiced by all nations; the
most dignified human characters have honored themselves by their attention to
this duty: it is expressly enjoined by the all-wise God, and has been followed
with desired success. May I, then, be permitted, instead of those particular
addresses to the several branches of the legislature, which are common on those
occasions, to address to that honorable body, in their collective capacity, the
direction of the text.

IN a dark and threatening day, you are called to an high and honorable
station. You have the most flattering testimonies to your wisdom and abilities
in those suffrages of freemen, which have placed in your hands their most
important temporal concerns, in their present perplexed and embarrassed state.
Yet I should pay but an ill compliment to your heads or your hearts, to suppose
you felt yourselves equal to the arduous task; or were unconscious of your
needing superior instruction and guidance. Unable to afford any direction
myself, I have endeavored to point you to him who teaches man knowledge, and
gives him understanding; and to refresh your memories with a direction that he
has given to them that are embarrassed. His ministers you are, as well as
representatives of freemen: all civil rulers stand in this elevated station,
and are clothed with a delegated power from the King of Kings. This is an
additional reason why they should wait on God for instruction. The foreign
minister of an earthly monarch, would soon meet the frowns of his royal master,
who, in affairs important and perplexed, should neglect to ask instruction,
when there was an opportunity of obtaining it. And shall the minister of the
King of Kings be more excusable in neglecting his divine master, who is
infinite in wisdom, and has enjoined him in his commission, If he lack wisdom,
to ask of God. -- You have worthily commenced the business of the year, by
appearing in the most exalted attitude in which mortals can appear, bowing at
the Altar of the Lord for his instruction and blessing. It is only to be
regretted that you have not had a more skilful master of assemblies to lead
your devotions. -- You will, doubtless, commence the business of every day with
humble prayer to God, and in those addresses be careful not to repeat the folly
of God's ancient people, of drawing nigh with the lip and honoring with the
mouth, while the heart is far from him. Praying to God i^ presenting the
desires of our hearts, and saying amen to him that gives thanks. You will not
content yourselves with a public address to God for general direction, but will
carry every important subject to your closets, and beg of God to show you the
safe and the right way.

CONCERNS of the highest moment will, doubtless, come before you, in the course
of the present year, and your decisions may greatly affect the interest of the
present and succeeding generations. This heightens the importance of the
offices that are to be filled by your suffrages, and shows your need of a
divine influence to guide you in your choice. Let nothing be done through
prejudice or partiality, and remember that those are not, in general, most
worthy of offices who seek them, but those who are sought by them. If you lack
wisdom, ask it of God: imitate the example of the Apostles, who, though poor in
this world, were under a divine guidance, and say, "Thou, Lord, who know the
hearts of all, show whether of these thou have chosen."

BEFORE the year expires you will, probably, have laid before you the
resolutions of the Convention for revising the Confederation, by whose
determinations and the consequent conduct of the States, it is supposed, the
interests of this new empire will be greatly affected; and a way opened for her
rising into greatness, or closed against all her future prospects. In an affair
of such magnitude seek instruction from him whose ministers you are, and give
your suffrages as those that feel the fate of millions hanging on their hand.
Who, that was to decide the fate of an individual, but would most devoutly pray
to be directed aright? How much more important will be your decisions!

THE embarrassed state of our finances; the pressure of public and private
debts; and ways and means of relief; will, probably, employ many of your hours;
and it is not impossible that the subject of paper-money will again call up
your attention. And will you not need wisdom to guide you in this labyrinth? If
the circulating medium could be increased, it would probably afford some relief
in our present exigencies; and, if the legislature of New Hampshire are in
possession of the fancied philosopher's stone, or the fabled transmuting touch
of Midas, they might listen to a proposal of paper-money; but if they are not,
reason and experience reprobate the measure, as having a direct tendency to put
out of circulation every shilling of hard money, as a mean of further
embarrassment, and an engine of oppression, fraud, and cruelty, and no wisdom,
human or divine, can dictate a measure that leads to such evils. As in divinity
there can be no faith contrary to reason, so in politics there can be no wisdom
contrary to righteousness. "Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is the
reproach of any people." Righteousness is the rule of God's administration, and
ought to be the rule of theirs who reign or decree justice by him. Maxims of
convenience, or even of supposed necessity, as rules of legislation, to the
disregard of justice, righteousness, and truth, must ever involve in
perplexity, and lead on to ruin. Fiat justitia, ruat Caelum, is a motto that
ought to be inscribed over the door of every house of legislation, and engraven
on the breast of every legislator. Prideaux, Vol. II. page 194.
When Darius, king of Persia, lay a dying, his son asked him by what art he had
so happily managed the government, and so long preserved himself in it, to
which he received this memorable answer, "That it was by doing in all things
that which was just both toward God and Man." "The righteous Lord loves
righteousness, and his countenance does behold the upright, but the face of the
Lord is against them that do evil." -- The direction of God to his ancient
people, repeatedly recorded in the book of God, which speaks its importance, is
worthy the serious consideration of every legislator. Thou shall not have in
thy bag diverse weights, a great and a small: thou shall not have in thy house
diverse measures, a great and a small: but thou shall have a perfect and just
weight, a perfect and just measure shall thou have: that thy days may be
lengthened in the land which the Lord thy God gives thee: for all that do such
things, and all that do unrighteously, are an abomination unto the Lord thy
God. -- If weights and measures are to be of a fixed and invariable standard,
most certainly the medium of commerce, or trade, ought to be fixed and
invariable, for that is the weight and measure of every interchangeable
commodity. That which is the rule of justice must itself be just, if it be
otherwise it is a constant cheat. And a great writer Henry on Leviticus, 19.
of ancient date, whose passions could not be heated by the experiences of our
day, has said, To have an uncertainty in weights and measures is like a
corruption in judgment, it cheats under color of justice, and thus to deceive a
man to his damage, is worse than picking his pockets, or robbing him on the
highway.

THE only probable way of increasing the circulating medium, to the benefit of
the public, is by giving up, forever, the idea of paper-money; and by a strict
regard to justice in all public measures, restoring to men of property in the
government a confidence, that when they have parted with their property they
may, some time or other, realize it again. This, I have no doubt, would soon
afford a sufficiency of circulating cash, for all the purposes of mutual
intercourse, and internal commerce.

THE time would fail me to particularize the important matters that will engage
your attention, but whatever they may be, in them all acknowledge God, and he
will direct your steps; deliberate upon them in his fear; and if you lack
wisdom, ask of God, who gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not. This
habitual application to God, for guidance and direction, will not only secure
you the secret influence you need, as it is God's appointed method of bestowing
it, but it will have a natural tendency to bring coolness and candor into your
debates, to form your minds to that serene and placid state, which, like the
unruffled surface of the water, reflects the images of objects just as they
are, and it will suppress that prejudice and partiality, those heated passions
and prepossessions from which the greatest minds are not free, but which form
as false a medium of vision as the agitated surface of the troubled deep. The
mind that has reached the Throne of Grace in elevated devotion, in retiring
from that place of serenity and calmness, will bring a tincture of the region
into the legislative areopagus, and spread a luster all around him, resembling
the luster of Moses' face when he came from Mount Sinai from immediate converse
with God.

LET me, then, again recommend to you the direction of the text, ask counsel of
the Lord, call upon him, not only upon set and formal occasions, in public and
in secret, but whenever your decision is called for, upon any important matter,
let the devout breathing of your heart, to him that teaches man knowledge,
prepare you to judge for him who is with you in the judgment; nor need you say
who shall ascend to Heaven to bring God down from above: he stands in the
congregation of the mighty; he judges among the Gods. Nor are such ejaculatory
addresses without precedent or precept.

NEHEMIAH, while he was cup bearer to king Artaxerxes, and was performing the
duties of his office in the presence of his royal master, lifted up his heart
to God for direction and success in what he meditated for his people, (...) he
was heard and answered in the secret aspiration.

HONORABLE will be that civil ruler who imitates Nehemiah in his piety, and
happy will he be who is so great a benefactor to his people. If any of you lack
wisdom let him ask of God, who gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not,
and it shall be given him.

I AM not unapprehensive that many have been surprised at the choice of our
subject on this occasion, and will be disappointed, that they have not been
amused with a dissertation upon the nature of civil government, the character
of civil rulers, the dignity of their office, and its importance to the world.
They may wonder that they have heard nothing of the natural and political
advantages of this country, and its prospects of future eminence and glory.
These are pleasing and important subjects, and had I viewed our situation less
serious tha^ I do, and thought it an era for speculation, I should with
pleasure, indulged my imagination upon some of these themes. But, if I have any
discernment in the signs of the times, America is approaching a most
interesting crisis; and, if ^ver civil rulers found occasion to be serious, to
lay aside all levity, and summon up manly thought and reflection; if ever they
found occasion to seek superior guidance and instruction, the rulers of this
year will find the occasion repeated: and by them will be decided the fate of
this empire.

WHEN a beautiful edifice stands firm on its foundation, the spectator may
justly amuse himself in contemplating its symmetry, proportions, ornaments, and
prospects; but, if it were tottering to its fall, he would be unpardonable to
be thus employed, and neglect every effort to sustain and restore it.

I HAVE predicted the future glory of America; yet nothing but an attention to
the duty that has now been recommended, and a consequent conduct, correspondent
to it, will verify that prediction.

OUR political situation is not less hazardous or threatening than was the real
situation of the mariners with Jonah, when Heathen could exclaim, "Awake, O
sleeper, and call upon thy God!" -- Our sins, our neglect of God, and
forgetfulness of him, are the Jonah that have raised the tempest, and however
hard we may row to bring them to land, they must be cast overboard, or the
ship will sink.

IF we could be persuaded to arise and call upon God, in sincerity and faith,
amend our ways and doings that are not good, and give ourselves up to his
guidance in the practice of piety, righteousness, and virtue. If our civil
rulers, who are in the view of Heaven, and of surrounding nations, as all the
people; whose examples are of the most extensive influence, would acknowledge
God in all their ways, and sincerely ask wisdom of him who gives liberally,
and upbraideth not, -- he would cause light to arise in our darkness, bring
order out of our confusion, and establish and complete the fair political
edifice, whose foundation he has so happily laid; and this is the only way in
which complete deliverance can arise to us, unless God should change his
adorable perfections, or alter the general rule of his administrations; for
"they that honor him, he will honor; and they that despise him, he will lightly
esteem."

THE infidel and libertine, who feel too self-sufficient to acknowledge their
dependence upon Jehovah, will style all this rant and superstition; but there
can be none of these characters among our civil rulers: for the constitution
provides, that they should be of the Protestant religion, and he who is too
wise, in his own conceit, to ask counsel of God, must be viewed too weak in the
opinion of freemen, to be entrusted with their concerns; for there is more hope
of a fool than of him. And that c^vil minister of Jehovah, who neglects his
divine master, whatever reputation may attend his administration here, will
have a most solemn account to give when the kingdoms of this world shall all be
blotted out, and the earth and heavens be dissolved. Is there such an event
most certainly to take place! -- There is something, then, more important to us
all, whether as rulers or as subjects, than securing a happy state of civil
government here, which is securing our hearts before God, being interested in
his love and favor, that when all these things shall be dissolved we may
receive a kingdom that cannot be shaken, and enter into that glorious city, the
new Jerusalem, where shall be perfect liberty without licentiousness, perfect
government without oppression; a city that needs not the light of the sun,
neither of the moon, to shine in it; the glory of God enlightening it, and the
Lamb being the light thereof. -- God grant, that, whatever be the fate of
states and empires here, or our situation, as subjects of them, we may, in the
kingdom of glory, find an end of all our sorrows, and a completion of all our
joys.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 6, Line 14, for those, read these.

8, -- 6, read unto all.

15, -- 19, for power, read peace.

17, -- 16, for those, read these.


