Instruction with Delight.


A LITTLE PRETTY POCKETBOOK, INTENDED FOR THE INSTRUCTION and AMUSEMENT OF
LITTLE MASTER TOMMY, AND PRETTY MISS POLLY. With Two LETTERS from JACK the
GIANT-KILLER; AS ALSO A BALL and PINCUSHION; The Use of which will infallibly
make TOMMY a good Boy, and POLLY a good Girl. To which is added, A LITTLE
SONG-BOOK, BEING A NEW ATTEMPT to teach CHILDREN the Use of the English
Alphabet, by Way of Diversion.

THE FIRST WORCESTER EDITION.

PRINTED at WORCESTER, Massachusetts.

By ISAIAH THOMAS, And SOLD, Wholesale and Retail, at his Book-Store.
MDCCLXXXVII.

TO THE PARENTS, GUARDIANS, AND NURSES, IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, THIS
LITTLE POCKETBOOK, IS HUMBLY INSCRIBED BY THEIR MOST OBEDIENT SERVANT, THE
EDITOR.

A LITTLE PRETTY POCKETBOOK, etc.
THE grand Design in the Nurture of Children, is to make them Strong, Hardy,
Healthy, Virtuous, Wise, and Happy; and these good Purposes are not to be
obtained without some Care and Management in their Infancy.

Would you have your Child Strong, take Care of your Nurse, let her be a
prudent Woman, one that will give him what Meat and Drink is necessary, and
such only as affords a good Nutriment, not salt Meat, rich tarts, Sauces, Wine,
etc. a Practice too common amongst some indulgent People. She must also let the
Child have due Exercise; for it is this that gives Life and Spirits, circulates
the Blood, strengthens the Sinews, and keeps the whole Machinery in Order.

Would you have a Hardy Child, give him common Diet only, clothe him thin, let
him have good Exercise, and be as much exposed to Hardships as his natural
Constitution will admit. The Face of a Child, when it comes into the world
(says the great Mr. Lock) is as tender and susceptible of Injuries as any
other part of the Body; yet, by being always exposed, it becomes Proof against
the severest Season and the most inclement Weather; even at a Time when the
Body (though wrapped in Flannels) is pierced with Cold. It is beside my Purpose
to give a physical Reason for this; nor indeed will the Brevity of my Design
admit of it. It is a Fact sufficiently known, what every Man must be sensible
of, and therefore can need no Demonstration.

Would you have a Healthy Son, observe the Directions already laid down with
regard to Diet and Exercise, and keep him, as much as possible, from Physic;
for Physic is to the Body, as Arms to the State; both are necessary, but
neither to be used but in Cases of Emergency and Danger.

Would you have a Virtuous Son, instill into him the Principles of Morality
early, and encourage him in the Practice of those excellent Rules, by which
whole Societies, States, Kingdoms, and Empires are knit together. Take heed
what Company you entrust him with, and be always sure you set him a good
Example yourself.

Would you have a Wise Son, teach him to reason early. Let him read, and make
him understand what he reads. No Sentence should be passed over without a
strict Examination of the Truth of it; and though this may be thought hard at
first, and seem to retard the Boy in his Progress, yet, a little Practice will
make it familiar, and a Method of Reasoning will be acquired, which will be of
Use to him all his Life after. Let him study Mankind; show him the Springs and
Hinges on which they move; teach him to draw Consequences from the Actions of
others; and if he should hesitate or mistake, you are to set him right: But
then take Care to do it in such a Manner, as to forward his Enquiries, and pave
this his grand Pursuit with Pleasure. Was this Method of Reasoning put more in
Practice by Tutors, Parents, etc. we should not see so many dismal Objects in
the World, for People would learn by the Misfortunes of others to avert their
own.

I doubt not but every Parent, every Father and Mother, would gladly contribute
what they could toward the Happiness of their Children; and yet it is
surprising to see how blind they are, and how wide they mistake the Mark. What
the indulgent Parent generally proposes for the Happiness of his Child, is a
good Fortune to bear him up under the Calamities of Life* but daily Experience
tells us, this is insufficient. Happiness and Misery have their Source from the
Passions: If in the Midst of the greatest Affluence, we are always repining,
and think ourselves poor and miserable, we are so; and the Beggar in the Straw,
who is content, and thinks he has sufficient, is rich and happy. The whole
Matter subsists in the Mind, and the Constitution: Subdue therefore your
Children's Passions; curb their Tempers, and make them subservient to the Rules
of Reason. And this is not to be done by chiding, whipping, or severe
Treatment, but by Reasoning and mild Discipline. Were I to see my Son too much
ruffled and discomposed, I should take him aside, and point out to him the
Evils that attend passionate Men; tell him, that my Love for him would make me
overlook many Faults, but that this was of so heinous a Nature, that I could
not bear the Sight of him while he continued so wicked; that he should not see
his Mother, nor any of his Playmates, until he had sufficiently repented of
that Crime: Upon which, I would immediately order him (in a very calm Manner)
to be shut up from any Company for five or six Hours, and then, upon his
Confession of the Fault, asking Pardon for his Offense, and promising Amendment
for the future I would forgive him. This Method, regularly pursued, would soon
break his Passion of Resentment, and subdue it to Reason. The next prudent Step
to be taken, is to check his inordinate craving and desiring almost every Thing
he sees; and this, I think, might be as easily effected as the other; for, in
the first Place, I would lay down this as a Maxim with him, that he should
never have any Thing he cried for; and therefore, if he was willing to obtain
any Favor, he must come with some reasonable Request, and withdraw without the
Appearance of any Uneasiness in Case of a Disappointment.

Some over-fond People will think these are harsh Precepts. What, say they, are
Children never to be obliged? answer, Yes, I would have them obliged and
pleased, but not humoured and spoiled. They should have what they asked for in
a proper Manner; but then they should wait my Time, without seeming over
solicitous, or crying after it. I would make them exercise their Patience, that
they might know the Use of it, when the Cares of the World came on. And
therefore, I say again, Children should never have any Thing they cried for;
no, not on any Consideration whatsoever.

Children, like tender Osiers, take the Bow,
And as they first are fashioned, always grow.
DRYDEN. It Is Education forms the tender Mind;
Just as the Twig is bent, the Tree's inclined.
POPE. A LETTER FROM JACK THE GIANT-KILLER, TO LITTLE MASTER TOMMY.
My dear Tommy,
YOUR Nurse called upon me Today, and told me that you was a good Boy; that you
was dutiful to your Father and Mother, and that, when you have said your
Prayers in the Morning and the Evening, you asked their Blessing, and in the
Daytime did every Thing they bid you. She says, you are obedient to your
Master, loving and kind to your Play-fellows, obliging to every Body; that you
rise early in the Morning, keep yourself clean, and learn your Book; that when
you have done a Fault you confess it, and are sorry for it. And though you are
sometimes naughty, she says you are very honest and good-humoured; that you do
not swear, tell Lies; nor say indecent Words, and are always thankful when any
Body gives you good Advice: that you never quarrel, nor do wicked Things, as
some other Boys do.

This Character, my Dear, has made every Body love you; and, while you continue
so good, you may depend on my obliging you with every Thing I can. I have here
sent you a Little Pretty Pocketbook, which will teach you to play at all those
innocent Games that good Boys and Girls divert themselves with: And, while you
behave so well, you shall never want Play, I assure you. But my dear Tommy, in
order that you may be as good as possible, I have also sent you a Ball, the one
Side of which is Red, the other Black, and with it ten Pins; and I must insist
upon making this Bargain, that your Nurse may hang up the Ball by the String to
it, and for every good Action you do, a Pin shall be stuck on the Red Side, and
for every bad Action a Pin shall be stuck on the Black Side. And when by doing
good and pretty Things you have got all the ten Pins on the Red Side, then I
will send you a Penny, and so I will as often as all the Pins shall be fairly
got on that Side. But if ever the Pins be all found on the Black Side of the
Ball* then I will send a Rod, and you shall be whipped, as often as they are
found there. But this my Dear, I hope you will prevent by continuing a good
Boy, that every Body may still love you, as well as

Your Friend, JACK the GIANT-KILLER.
P. S. When you are tired with playing, I have added, for your further
Amusement, a Collection of pretty Songs, which your Nurse will take Care to
teach you; and I must insist on your getting them perfectly, because the
Knowledge of these Songs will recommend you to the Favor of all the Gentlemen
and Ladies of America who sing in that Manner.



A LETTER FROM JACK THE GIANT-KILLER, TO PRETTY MISS POLLY.
Dear Miss Polly,
YOUR Nurse called upon me Today, and told me that you was a good Girl; that
you was dutiful to your Father and Mother, and that, when you have said your
Prayers in the Morning and the Evening, you asked their Blessing, and in the
Daytime did every Thing they bid you. She says, you are obedient to your
Mistress, loving and kind to your Play-fellows, and obliging to every Body;
that you rise early in the Morning, keep yourself clean, and learn your Book;
that when you have done a Fault you confess it, and are sorry for it. And
though you are sometimes naughty, she says you are very honest and
good-humoured; that you do not tell Lies, nor say indecent Words and are always
thankful when any Body gives you good Advice; that you never quarrel, nor do
wicked Things, as some other Girls do.

This Character, my Dear, has made every Body love you; and while you continue
so good, you may depend on my obliging you with every Thing I can. I have here
sent you a Little Pretty Pocketbook, which will teach you to play at all those
innocent Games that good Boys and Girls divert themselves with: And, while you
behave so well, you shall never want Play, I assure you. But then my dear
Polly, in order that you may be as good as possible, I have also sent you a
Pincushion, the one Side of which is Red and the other Black* and with it ten
Pins; and I must insist upon making this Bargain, that your Nurse may hang up
the Pincushion by the String to it, and for every good Action you do, a Pin
shall be stuck on the Red Side, and for every bad Action a Pin shall be stuck
on the Black Side. And when by doing good and pretty Things you have got all
the ten Pins on the Red Side, then I will send you a Penny, and so I will as
often as all the Pins shall be fairly got on that Side. But if ever the Pins be
all found on the Black Side of the Pincushion, then I will send a Rod, and you
shall be whipped as often as they are found there. But this, my Dear I hope you
will prevent by continuing a good Girl, that every Body may still love you, as
well as

Your Friend, JACK the GIANT-KILLER.
P. S. When you are tired with playing, I have added, for your further
Amusement, a Collection of pretty Songs, which your Nurse will take Care to
teach you; and I must insist on your getting them perfectly, because the
Knowledge of these Songs will recommend you to the Favor of all the Gentlemen
and Ladies of America who sing in this Manner.



ADVERTISEMENT.
A worthy and learned Gentleman, whose Presence I am at this Time honored
with, intimates, that it would not be amiss for some Gentlemen to keep a Ball
contrived in this Manner, and some Ladies a Pincushion, by Way of Diary*
especially if they are often apt to forget themselves.

The great A Play.
CHUCK-FARTHING.
AS you value your Pence,
At the Hole take your Aim;
Chuck all safely in,
And you will win the Game.
MORAL.
Chuck-Farthing, like Trade,
Requires great Care;
The more you observe,
The better you will fare.
The little a Play.
Flying the KITE
UPHELD in Air, the gaudy Kite,
High as an Eagle takes her Flight;
But if the Winds their Breath restrain,
She tumbles headlong down again.
RULE of LIFE.
Soon as thou see the Dawn of Day,
To God thy Adoration pay.
The great B Play.
Dancing round the MAY POLE.
WITH Garlands here the May Pole crowned,
And all the Swains a dancing round,
Compose a numerous jovial Ring,
To welcome in the cheerful Spring.
RULE of LIFE.
Leave God to manage, and to grant
That which his Wisdom sees thee want.
The little b Play.
MARBLES.
KNUCKLE down to your Taw,
Aim well* shoot away:
Keep out of the Ring,
And you will soon learn to play.
MORAL.
Time rolls like a Marble,
And awes every State:
Then improve each Moment,
Before it is too late.
The great C Play.
HOOP and HIDE.
GO hide out, and hoop,
Whilst I go to sleep:
If you I cannot find,
My Post I must keep.
MORAL.
With Carefulness watch
Each Moment that flies,
To keep Peace at Home,
And ward off Surprise.
The little c Play.
THREAD the NEEDLE.
HERE Hand in Hand the Boys unite,
And form a very pleasing Sight;
Then through each other's Arms they fly,
As Thread does through the Needle's Eye.
RULE of LIFE.
Talk not too much; sit down content,
That your Discourse be pertinent.
The great D Play.
FISHING.
THE artful Angler baits his Hook,
And throws it gently in the Brook;
Which the Fish view with greedy Eyes,
And soon are taken by Surprise.
RULE of LIFE.
Learn well the Motions of the Mind;
Why you are made, for what designed.
The little d Play.
BLINDMAN'S BUFF.
BEREFT of all Light,
I stumble along;
But, if I catch you,
My Doom is your own.
MORAL.
How blind is that Man,
Who scorns the Advice
Of Friends, who intend
To make him more wise.
The great E Play.
SHUTTLE-COCK.
THE Shuttle-Cock struck
Does backward rebound;
But, if it be missed,
It falls to the Ground.
MORAL.
Thus checkered in Life,
As Fortune does slow;
Her Smiles lift us high,
Her Frowns sink us low.
The little e Play.
KING I AM.
AMBITION here fires every Heart,
And all assume the Monarch's Part,
For a few Minutes, though in Play,
Each rules with arbitrary Sway.
RULE of LIFE.
Descend into thy self, to find
The Imperfections of thy mind.
The great F Play.
PEG-FARTHING.
SOON as the Ring is once composed,
The Coin is in the Center closed;
And then the wished for Prize to win,
The Top that drives it out must spin.
RULE of LIFE.
Be silent if you doubt your Sense.
And always speak with Diffidence.
The little f Play.
KNOCK OUT and SPAN.
STRIKE out your Man strong;
For the very next one
Will bear off the Prize,
If you come to a Span.
MORAL.
This Span, my dear Boy,
Should your Monitor be;
It Is the Length of a Life,
As we oftentimes see.
The great G Play.
HOP, STEP, and JUMP.
HOP short and Step safe,
To make your Jump long;
This Art often has beat
The Efforts of the strong.
MORAL.
This old Maxim take,
TO embellish your Book:
Think well ere you talk*
And, ere you leap, look.
The little g Play.
BOYS and GIRLS come out to Play.
AFTER a sultry Summer's Day,
When the Moon shines, and Stars are gay;
The Nymphs and Swains well pleased advance,
And spend the Evening in a Dance.
RULE of LIFE.
Reflect Today upon the Last,
And freely own thy Errors past*
The great H Play.
I sent a LETTER to my LOVE.
THE Lads and Lasses here are seen,
All gaily tripping over the Green;
But one among them, to her Cost.
The Treasure of her Heart has lost.
RULE of LIFE.
If prosperous, of Pride beware:
Changes of Fortune frequent are.
The little h Play.
PITCH and HUSSEL.
POISE your Hand fairly,
And pitch plum your Slat;
Then shake for all Heads,
And turn down the Hat.
MORAL.
How fickle's this Game!
So Fortune or Fate
Decrees our Repentance,
When often it is too late.
The great I Play.
CRICKET.
THIS Lesson observe,
When you play at Cricket,
Catch All fairly out,
Or bowl down the Wicket.
MORAL.
This Maxim regard,
Now you're in your Prime;
Look ere it is too late*
By the Forelock take Time.
The little i Play.
STOOL-BALL.
THE Ball once struck with Art and Care,
And drove impetuous through the Air
Swift round his Course the Gamester flies,
Or his Stool's taken by Surprise.
RULE of LIFE.
Bestow your Alms whenever you see
An Object in Necessity.
The great K Play.
SWIMMING.
WHEN the Sun's Beams have warmed the Air,
Our Youth to some cool Brook repair;
In whose refreshing Streams they play,
To the last Remnant of the Day.
RULE of LIFE.
Think ere you speak; for Words once flown,
Once uttered, are no more your own.
The little k Play.
BASE-BALL.
THE Ball once struck off,
Away flies the Boy
To the next destined Post.
And then Home with Joy.
MORAL.
Thus Seamen, for Lucre
Fly over the Main,
But, with Pleasure transported
Return back again.
The great L Play.
TRAP-BALL.
TOUCH lightly the Trap*
And strike low the Ball;
Let none catch you out,
And you will beat them all.
MORAL.
Learn hence, my dear Boy,
To avoid every Snare,
Contrived to involve you
In Sorrow and Care.
The little l Play.
TIP-CAT.
THE Gamester here his Art displays,
And drives the Cat a thousand Ways,
For should he miss, when once it is tossed
He Is out -- and all his Sport is lost.
RULE of LIFE.
Debates and Quarrels always shun;
No one by Peace was ever undone.
The great M Play.
FIVES.
WITH what great Force the little Ball
Rebounds, when struck against the Wall;
See how intent each Gamester stands:
Mark well his Eyes, his Feet, his Hands!
RULE of LIFE.
Know this (which is enough to know)
Virtue is Happiness below.
The little m Play.
LEAP-FROG.
THIS stoops down his Head,
Whilst that springs up High;
But then you will find,
He Will stoop by and by.
MORAL.
Just so it is at Court:
Today you're in Place;
Tomorrow perhaps,
You're quite in Disgrace.
The great N Play.
BIRDS-NESTING.
HERE two naughty Boys,
Hard-hearted in Jest.
Deprive a poor Bird
Of her young and her Nest.
MORAL.
Thus Men, out of Joke,
(Be It spoke to their Shame)
Too often make free
With another's good Name.
The little n Play.
TRAIN-BANDING.
THE Sergeant Hero here appears,
Strutting before his Grenadiers;
And leads his mighty valiant Men,
First up the Hill, then down again.
RULE of LIFE.
Judge not between two Friends, but see
If you can bring them to agree.
The great O Play.
All the BIRDS in the AIR.
HERE various Boys stand round, and soon,
Each does some favorite Bird assume;
And if the Sl^^e once hits his Name,
He Is then made free and crowns the Game.
RULE of LIFE.
Live well, and then die soon or late.
For ever happy is your State.
The little o Play.
HOP-HAT.
OVER this Hat, and that,
Boys hop to the last;
Which once in their Mouths,
Behind them is cast.
MORAL.
Thus Men often struggle,
Some Bliss to obtain;
Which, once in their Power,
They treat with Disdain.
The great P Play.
SHOOTING.
THOUGH some Birds, too heedless,
Dread no Danger nigh;
Yet still by the Fowlers
They instantly die.
MORAL.
From hence we may learn
That, by one thoughtless Trip
Strange Accidents happen
'Twixt the Cup and the Lip.
The little p Play.
HOP-SCOTCH.
FIRST make with Chalk an oblong Square,
With wide Partitions here and there;
Then to the first a Tile convey;
Hop in -- then kick the Tile away,
RULE of LIFE.
Strive with good Sense to stock your Mind,
And to that Sense be Virtue joined.
The great Q Play.
Who will play at my SQUARES?
THIS well-invented Game's designed
To strike the Eye and form the Mind;
And he most doubtless aims aright,
Who joins Instruction with Delight.
RULE of LIFE.
So live with Men, as if God's Eye
Did into every Action pry.
The little q Play.
RIDING.
IN Quest of his Game,
The Sportsman rides on,
But falls off his Horse
Before he has done.
MORAL.
Thus Youth without Thought,
Their Amors pursue,
Though an Age of Pain
Does often accrue.
The great R.
GREAT A, B, and C,
And tumble down D,
The Cat's a blind buff,
And she cannot see.
a, b, c, d.
The little r.
GREAT E, F, and G,
Come here follow me,
And we will jump over
The Rosemary Tree.
e, f, g.
The great S.
Here Is great H, and I
With the Christmas Pie;
Who will eat the Plumbs out?
I, H, and I.
h, i.
The little s.
Here Is great K, and L,
Pray Dame can you tell,
Who put the Pig-Hog
Down into the Well?
k, l.
The great T.
Here Is great M, and N*
Are come back again,
To bring the good Boy
A fine Golden Pen.
m, n,
The little t.
SO great O, and P,
Pray what do you see?
A naughty boy whipped;
But that is not me.
o, p.
The great U.
Here Is great Q, and R,
Are both come from far,
To bring you good news
About the late War.
q, r.
The little u.
SO S, T, and U,
Pray how do you do?
We thank you -- the better
For seeing of you.
s, t, u.
The great W.
HERE IS great W, X,
Good Friends do not vex,
All things will go well
Dear W, and X.
w, x.
The little w.
THERE IS great Y, and Z,
On a Horse that is mad:
If you fall down, Farewell
Poor great Y and Z.
y, z.
The great X. FABLE I. The WOLF and the KID.
AS the Goat went to brouze,
Thus her Charge did begin
Be advised, my dear Kid,
And let nobody in.
The Wolf hearing this
For Admittance did try,
But the Kid answered, No:
I Will not trust you, not I.
The little x.
To Master Tommy, or Miss Polly.
YOU see, my Dear, the little Kid, by taking her Parent's Advice, preserved her
own Life; for had she been so wicked as to have neglected what the Goat (her
Mother) said to her, and had opened the Door, the Wolf would certainly have
torn her to Pieces. Take Care therefore to do always as your Papa and Mamma, or
your Master and Mistress shall direct you, and you will oblige,

Your old Friend, JACK the Giant-Killer.

The great Y. FABLE II. The HUSBANDMAN and the STORK.
A STORK, through Misfortune,
Trepanned by a Crane,
Was pleading his good Deeds,
But pleaded in vain.
The Crane is a Villain,
The Farmer replies,
And he that is his Comrade
Most certainly dies.
The little y.
To Master Tommy, or Miss Polly.
YOU see, my Dear, the sad Effects of keeping bad Company; if the poor harmless
Strork had not been in Company with the wicked Crane, he might probably have
lived until this Day; therefore of all Things take Care what Sort of Children
you play with, for those that are wicked will make you so too; and nothing will
more displease

Your sincere Friend, JACK the Giant-Killer.

The great Z. FABLE III. The SHEPHERD'S BOY.
A WANTON young Shepherd,
Though no Danger near,
Cries out to his Neighbors,
The Wolf, Sirs, is here.
They come, and are laughed at;
Soon he roars out again,
Now the Wolf's here indeed!
But his Cries are in vain.
The little z.
To Master Tommy, or Miss Polly.
THIS Boy's Fate, my Dear, is a remarkable Instance of the Folly and Wickedness
of telling Lies; if he had not deceived the People before, they would have
believed him, and ran to his Assistance, by which Means both him and his Sheep
might have been saved, which are now torn to Pieces: I hope you will remember
this, my Dear, and resolve in yourself never to tell a Lie; for if you do, I
shall be very angry.

I am, Your hearty Friend, JACK the Giant-killer.

FABLE IV. MERCURY and the WOODMAN.
A WOODMAN, at Work,
Dropped his Ax in a Pond,
And in Sorrow and Tears,
His Disaster bemoaned.
Merc'ry brings one all Gold,
And cries, Friend, is this thine?
No Sir, (says the Woodman)
Mine was not so fine.
Then he showed him the right,
Ah! that is mine by my Troth:
Thou art honest, says Merc'ry,
So, Friend take them both.
To Master Tommy, or Miss Polly.
BY this you may see, my Dear, that Honesty is the best Policy; had Mercury
found the Woodman a Rogue, he would not have given him any Thing; but as he was
an honest Man, he not only gave him his own Ax, but a golden one also.
Consider, my Dear, it is a fine Thing, to have a Golden Ax, and at the same
Time the Love and Esteem of all the World besides, and that you will certainly
have if you are strictly honest.

I am, Your affectionate Friend, JACK the Giant-killer.



SIR,

THERE was in my Country a little Boy who learned his Book to that surprising
Degree, that his Master could scarce teach him fast enough, for he had his
Lesson almost as soon as it was pointed out to him; which raised the Attention
of every Body: And as he was also very dutiful to his Parents and obliging to
his Playmates, every Body loved him. His Learning and Behavior purchased him
the Esteem of the greatest People, and raised him from a mean State of Life to
a Coach and Six, in which he rides to this Day. Learning is a most excellent
Thing, and easy to be acquired too, when little Boys set themselves earnestly
about it. I know several Masters at this Time, who all bid fair for the same
Honor the above Gentleman enjoys.

I am, Sir, etc.



MADAM,

I KNOW of a little Lady, no bigger than your pretty Miss, who has behaved so
that every Body is in love with her. She is extremely dutiful to her Parents
and Governess, kind to her School-fellows, and obliging to every Body. Then she
learns her Book to Admiration, works well with her Needle, and is so modest, so
willing to do as she is bid, and so engaging in Company, that my Lady Meanwell
has made her a Present of a fine Gold Watch, and declares that she shall ride
in her own Coach. It is this Learning, Madam, and good Behavior, that brings
us the Esteem of the whole World.

I am, Madam, Yours, etc.

A little Boy and Girl at Prayers.
ALL good Boys and Girls say their Prayers at Night and in the Morning, which
makes God Almighty love and bless them.

A little Boy and Girl asking a Blessing of their Parents.
ALL good Boys and Girls kneel down every Morning and Evening and ask their
Parents Blessing in these Words. Pray Papa and Mamma, pray to God to bless me,
and make me his true and faithful Servant. Which makes their Friends love them.

A little Boy and Girl reading.
ALL good Boys and Girls take Care to learn their Lessons, and read in a pretty
Manner; which makes every Body admire them.

A little Boy and Girl bestowing their Charity.
ALL good Boys and Girls, when they see a poor Man, or Woman, or a Child in
Want, will give them eiher Money or such Meat and Drink as they have to spare;
which makes the whole World love them.

A POETICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE FOUR SEASONS.
I. SPRING.
THE Bloom of Youth upon his Cheek is seen,
And where he treads fresh Flowers deck the Green:
His fragrant Breath perfumes the Evening Skies,
And turned to him the Sylvan Strains arise;
A pointed Javelin in his Hand he bears,
And on his Head a golden Helmet wears.
For then begins the stern Bellona's Rage,
And hostile Realms in Bloody Wars engage:
His calm Approach revives the peaceful Plain,
But leads on Death where Discord holds its Reign.
II. SUMMER.
IN silken Garb arrayed of cheerful Green,
Was sportive Summer next advancing seen;
A gilded Quiver at his Shoulder hung,
And in his Hand he trail'd a Bow unbent along.
His tawny Brow with faded Flowers was crowned,
And studded with thick Drops of Sweat around.
As if fatigued with the laborious Chase,
Or faint with Heat in sultry Titan's Rays;
He moving slow, invoked the friendly Air,
And sought the cooling Streams to quench his burning there.
III. AUTUMN.
AUTUMN succeeds, in flaming Yellow clad,
With Fullness smiling and with Plenty glad.
Laden with sunny Fruits of every Kind,
He dared the Cold that waited close behind.
A Wreath of ripened Corn his Temples bound,
Enriched with Leaves and clust'ring Grapes around.
An Harvest Crook employed his better Hand,
To reap the Grain and ease the burdened Land.
IV. WINTER.
WINTER was last in woolly Robes arrayed,
And bent with feeble Age his hoary Head;
Shrunk in himself he wrapped his Garments close,
And inly trembled as the Tempest rose.
His Length of Beard and deep intended Brow,
Were whitened over with an eternal Snow.
Prone to the Earth his bending Back declined,
And almost froze, he shivered in the Wind;
Propp'd on a Staff he slowly moved along;
And round him loud insulting Boreas rung.
TIME's ADDRESS TO PLUTUS and CUPID. By Way of APPLICATION.
IT IS I who measure vital Space,
And deal out Years to human Race.
Though little prized and seldom sought,
Without me Love and Gold are naught;
By me all useful Arts are gained,
Wealth, Learning, Wisdom is attained;
So subtle and so swift I fly,
Loves not more fugitive than I.
How heedless then are Mortals grown;
How little is their Interest known;
In every View they ought to mind me;
For when once lost they never find me.
SELECT PROVERBS For the USE of CHILDREN.
A FOOL's Bolt is soon shot.

A good Beginning, a good Ending.

A Fool and his Money are soon parted.

After Dinner sit a while,

After Supper walk a Mile.

After a Storm comes a Calm.

As good sit still, as rise up and fall.

A hasty Man never wants Woe.

Birds of a Feather will flock together.

The burnt Child dreads the Fire.

Better the End of a Feast than the Beginning of a Fray.

Enough's as good as a Feast.

Fine Feathers make fine Birds.

First come, first served.

Faint Heart never won fair Lady.

Fair and softly goes far.

Fast bind, fast find.

Good Wine needs no Bush.

Hunger is the best Sauce.

If a Man deceive me once, it is his Fault;

If twice, it is my own.

It Is a good Horse that never stumbles,

It Is a good Wife that never grumbles.

Make Hay while the Sun shines.

Nothing's so certain as Death.

Necessity has no Law.

New Lords, new Law.

None so proud as an enriched Beggar.

Pride will have a Fall.

Proffered Service stinks.

Set a Knave to catch a Knave.

Two Heads are better than one.

Too much Familiarity breeds Contempt.

They who are bound must obey.

Time and Tide stay for no Man.

Tell the Truth and Shame the Devil.

The best may mend.

Truth may be blamed, but cannot be shamed.

The new Broom sweeps clean.

The Eye is bigger than the Belly.

The weakest goes to the Wall.

When the Fox preaches beware of the Geese.

Wisdom is better than Riches.

Try your Friend before you trust him.

Look not a gift Horse in the Mouth.

A Bird in the Hand is worth two in the Bush.

RULES FOR BEHAVIOR IN CHILDREN.
CHAP. I. MIXED PRECEPTS.
1 FEAR GOD and believe in CHRIST. 2 Honor the Magistrates. 3 Reverence thy
Parents. 4 Submit to thy Superiors. 5 Despise not thy Inferiors. 6 Be
courteous with thy Equals. 7 Pray daily and devoutly. 8 Converse with the Good.
9 Imitate not the Wicked. 10 Hearken diligently to Instruction. 11 Be very
desirous of Learning. 12 Love the School. 13 Be always neat and cleanly. 14
Study Virtue and embrace it. 15 Provoke no Body. 16 Love thy School Fellows. 17
Please thy Master. 18 Let not Play entice thee. 19 Restrain thy Tongue. 20
Covet future Honor, which only Virtue and Wisdom can procure.
CHAP. II. Containing One Hundred and Sixty three Rules for Children's
Behavior, viz.
At the MEETING HOUSE. At HOME. At the TABLE. In COMPANY. In DISCOURSE. At the
SCHOOL. When ABROAD; and When among OTHER CHILDREN.
CHILDREN'S BEHAVIOR at the MEETING HOUSE.
1 DECENTLY walk to thy Seat or Pew; run not, nor go wantonly.

2 Sit where thou art ordered by thy Superiors, Parents or Masters.

3 Shift not Seats, but continue in the Place where your Superiors order you.

4 Lend thy Place for the easing of any one that stands near thee.

5 Keep not a Seat too long that is lent thee by another, but being eased
thyself, restore it to him that lent it to thee.

6 Talk not in the Meeting House, especially in the Time of Prayer or Preaching.

7 Fix thine Eye on the Minister, let it not wildly wander to gaze on any
Person or Thing.

8 Attend diligently to the Words of the Minister: Pray with him when he
prays, at least in thy Heart; and while he preaches, listen, that thou
may remember.

9 Be not hasty to run out of the Meeting House when the Worship is ended, as
if thou were weary of being there.

10 Walk decently and soberly Home, without Haste or Wantonness; thinking upon
what you have been hearing.

BEHAVIOR when at HOME.
1 MAKE a Bow always when you come Home, and be instantly uncovered.

2 Be never covered at Home, especially before thy Parents or Strangers.

3 Never set in the Presence of thy Parents without bidding, though no Stranger
be present.

4 If thou passest by thy Parents at any Place where thou see them, either by
themselves or with Company, bow toward them.

5 If thou art going to speak to thy Parents, and see them engaged in Discourse
with Company, draw back and leave thy Business until afterward; but if thou
must speak, be sure to whisper.

6 Never speak to thy Parents without some Title of Respect, viz. Sir, Madam,
etc. according to their Quality.

7 Approach near thy Parents at no Time without a Bow.

8 Dispute not, nor delay to obey the Commands of thy Parents.

9 Go not out of Doors without thy Parents leave, and return within the Time by
them limited.

10 Come not into the Room where thy Parents are with Strangers, unless thou
art called, and then decently; and at bidding go out; or if Strangers come in
while thou art with them, it is Manners with a Bow to withdraw.

11 Use respectful and courteous, but not insulting or domineering Carriage or
Language toward the Servants.

12 Quarrel not nor contend with thy Brethren or Sisters, but live in Love,
Peace and Unity.

13 Grumble not, nor be discontented at any Thing thy Parents appoint, speak or
do.

14 Bear with Meekness and Patience, and without Murmuring or Sullenness, thy
Parents Reproofs or Corrections: Nay, though it should happen that they be
causless, or undeserved.

BEHAVIOR at the TABLE.
1 COME not to the Table without having your Hands and Face washed, and your
Head combed.

2 Sit not down until thou art bidden by thy Parents or other Superiors.

3 Be sure thou never sit down until a Blessing be desired, and then in thy
due Place.

4 Offer not to carve for thyself, or to take any Thing, though it be that
which thou do greatly desire.

5 Ask not for any Thing, but tarry until it be offered thee.

6 Find no Fault with any Thing that is given thee.

7 When thou have Meat given thee, be not the first that begins to eat.

8 Speak not at the Table; if thy Superiors be discoursing, meddle not with
the Matter; but be silent, except thou art spoken unto.

9 If thou want any Thing from the Servants, call to them softly.

10 Eat not too fast, or with greedy Behavior.

11 Eat not too much, but moderately.

12 Eat not so slow as to make others wait for thee.

13 Make not a Noise with thy Tongue, Mouth, Lips or Breath, in eating or
drinking.

14 Stare not in the Face of any one, especially thy Superiors, at the Table.

15 Grease not thy Fingers or Napkin more than Necessity requires.

16 Bite not thy Bread, but break it; but not with slovingly Fingers, nor with
the same wherewith thou take up thy Meat.

17 Dip not thy Meat in the Sauce.

18 Take not Salt with a greasy Knife.

19 Spit not, cough not, nor blow thy Nose at the Table, if it may be avoided;
but if there be necessity, do it aside, and without much Noise.

20 Lean not thy Elbow on the Table, or on the Back of thy Chair.

21 Stuff not thy Mouth so as to fill thy Cheeks, be content with smaller
Mouthfuls.

22 Blow not thy Meat, but with Patience wait until it be cool.

23 Sup not Broth at the Table; but eat it with a Spoon.

24 Smell not of thy Meat, nor put it to thy Nose; turn it not the other Side
upward to view it upon thy Plate.

25 Throw not any Thing under the Table.

26 Hold not thy Knife upright in thy Hand, but sloping; and lay it down at thy
right Hand with the Blade upon thy Plate.

27 Spit not forth any Thing that is not convenient to be swallowed, as the
Stones of Plumbs, Cherries, or such like; but with thy left Hand, neatly move
them to the Side of thy Plate.

28 Fix not thine Eyes upon the Plate of another, or upon the Meat on the Table.

29 Lift not up thine Eyes, nor roll them about while thou art drinking.

30 Foul not the Napkin all over, but at one Corner only.

31 Bend thy Body a little downwards to thy Plate, when thou movest any Thing
that is sauced to thy Mouth.

32 Look not earnestly on any one that is eating.

33 Foul not the Tablecloth.

34 Gnaw not Bones at the Table, but clean them with thy Knife* unless they be
very small ones, and hold them not with a whole Hand, but with two Fingers.

35 Drink not nor speak with any Thing in thy Mouth.

36 Put not a Bit into thy Mouth until the former be swallowed.

37 Before and after thou drinkest, wipe thy Lips with thy Napkin.

38 Pick not thy Teeth at the Table, unless holding up thy Napkin before thy
Mouth with thine other Hand.

39 Drink not until thou have quite emptied thy Mouth, nor drink often.

40 Frown not nor murmur if there be any Thing at the Table which thy Parents,
or Strangers with them, eat of, while thou thyself have none given thee.

41 As soon as thou shall be moderately satisfied; or whenever thy Parents
think meet to bid thee, rise up from the Table, though others thy Superiors
sit still.

42 When thou risest from the Table, having made a Bow at the Side of the Table
where thou sattest, withdraw.

43 When Thanks are to be returned after eating, return to thy Place, and stand
reverendly until it be done; then with a Bow withdraw out of the Room, leaving
thy Superiors to themselves, unless thou art bidden to stay.

BEHAVIOR when in COMPANY.
1 ENTER not into the Company of thy Superiors without command or calling, nor
without a Bow.

2 Sit not down in Presence of Superiors without bidding.

3 Put not thy Hand in the Presence of others to any Part of thy Body, not
ordinarily discovered.

4 Sing not nor hum in thy Mouth, while thou art in Company.

5 Stand not wriggling with thy Body hither and thither, but steady, and
upright.

6 Play not wantonly like a Mimick, with thy Fingers or Feet.

7 In coughing or sneezing, make as little Noise as possible.

8 If thou can not avoid Yawning, shut thy Mouth with thine Hand or
Handkerchief before it, turning thy Face aside.

9 When thou blowest thy Nose, let thy Handkerchief be used, and make not a
Noise in so doing.

10 Gnaw not thy Nails, pick them not, nor bite them with thy Teeth.

11 Spit not in the Room, but in the Corner, and rub it with thy Foot, or
rather go out and do it abroad.

12 Lean not on the Chair of a Superior standing behind him.

13 Spit not upon the Fire, nor sit too wide with thy Knees at it.

14 Sit not with thy Legs crossed, but keep them firm and settled and thy Feet
even.

15 Turn not thy Back to any, but place thyself so that none may be behind thee.

16 Read not Books, Letters nor other Writings in Company, unless there be
necessity, and thou ask leave.

17 Touch not, nor look upon the Books or Writings of any one, unless the Owner
invite or desire thee.

18 Come not near when another reads a Letter or any other Paper.

19 Let thy Countenance be moderately cheerful, neither laughing nor frowning.

20 Laugh not loud, but silently smile upon any Occasion.

21 Stand not before Superiors with thine Hands in thy Pockets; scratch not
thy Head, wink not with thine Eyes, but modestly be looking strait before thee.

22 Walking with thy Superior in the House or Garden, give him the right, or
Upper Hand, and Walk not even with him, Cheek by Jole; but a little behind him,
yet not so distant as that it shall be troublesome to him to speak to thee, or
hard for thee to hear.

23 Look not boldly or wishfully in the Face of thy Superior.

24 To look upon one in Company and immediately whisper to another, is
unmannerly.

25 Whisper not in Company.

26 Be not among Equals forward and fretful, but gentle and affable.

BEHAVIOR in their DISCOURSE.
1 AMONG Superiors speak not until thou art spoken to, and bidden to speak.

2 Hold not thine Hand, nor any Thing else before thy Mouth when thou speak.

3 Come not over near to the Person thou speak to.

4 If thy Superior speak to thee while thou sit, stand up before thou
give any answer.

5 Sit not down until thy Superior bid thee.

6 Speak neither very loud: Nor too low.

7 Speak clear, not stammering, stumbbling nor drawling.

8 Answer not one that is speaking to thee until he has done.

9 Loll not when thou art speaking to a Superior, or spoken to by him.

10 Speak not without Sir, or some other Title of Respect, which is due to him
to whom thou speak.

11 Strive not with Superiors in Argument or Discourse; but easily submit
thine Opinion to their Assertions.

12 If thy Superior speak any Thing wherein thou know he is mistaken,
correct not nor contradict him, nor grin at the hearing of it; but pass over
the Error without Notice or Interruption.

13 Mention not frivolous or little Things among grave Persons or Superiors.

14 If thy Superior drawl or hesitate in his Words, pretend not to help him
out, or to prompt him.

15 Come not too near two that are whispering or speaking in secret, much less
may thou ask about what they confer.

16 When thy Parent or Master speaks to any Person, speak not thou, nor hearken
to them.

17 If thy Superiors be relating a Story, say not, I have heard it before, but
attend to it as if it were to thee altogether new: Seem not to question the
Truth of it: If he tell it not right, snigger not, nor endeavor to help him
out, or add to his Relation.

18 If any immodest or obscene Thing be spoken in thy hearing, smile not, but
settle thy Countenance as though thou did not hear it.

19 Boast not in Discourse of thine own Wit or Doings.

20 Beware thou utter not any Thing hard to be believed.

21 Interrupt not any one that speaks though thou be his Familiar.

22 Coming into Company, whilst any Topic is discoursed on, ask not what was
the preceding Talk, but hearken to the remainder.

23 Speaking of any distant Person, it is rude and unmannerly to point at him.

24 Laugh not in, or at thy own Story, Wit or Jest.

25 Use not any contemptuous or reproachful Language to any Person, though very
mean or inferior.

26 Be not over earnest in talking to justify thine own Sayings.

27 Let thy Words be modest about those Things which only concern thee.

28 Repeat not over again the Words of a Superior that asks thee a Question,
or talks with thee.

BEHAVIOR at the SCHOOL.
1 BOW at coming in pulling off thy Hat; especially if thy Master or Usher be
in the School.

2 Loiter not, but immediately take thine own Seat; and move not from one Place
to another, until School Time be over.

3 If any Stranger come into the School rise up and bow, and sit down in thy
Place again, keeping a profound Silence.

4 If thy Master be discoursing in the School with a Stranger, stare not
confidently on them, nor hearken to their Talk.

5 Interrupt not thy Master* while a Stranger or Visitant is with him, with any
Question, Request or Complaint; but defer any such Matter until he be at
leisure.

6 At no Time quarrel or talk in the School, but be quiet, peaceable and
silent. Much less may thou deceive thyself, in trifling away thy precious
Time in Play.

7 If thy Master speak to thee, rise up and bow; making thine Answer standing*

8 Bawl not aloud in making Complaints. A Boy's Tongue should never be heard in
the School but in answering a Question, or saying his Lesson.

9 If a Stranger speak to thee in School, stand up and answer with Respect and
Ceremony* both of Word and Gesture, as if thou speak to thy Master.

10 Make not haste out of School, but soberly go when thy Turn comes, without
Noise or Hurry.

11 Go not rudely Home through the Streets, stand not talking with Boys to
delay thee, but go quietly Home, and with all convenient Haste.

12 When it is Time to return to School again, be sure to be there in Season,
and not loiter at Home whilst thy Master is at School.

13 Divulge not to any Person whatsoever, elsewhere, any Thing that has passed
in the School either spoken or done.

BEHAVIOR when ABROAD.
GO not Singing, Whistling nor Hollowing along the Steet.

2 Quarrel not with any Body thou meetest or do overtake.

3 Affront none, especially thy Elders, by Word or Deed.

4 Jeer not at any Person whatsoever.

5 Always give the Right Hand to your Superiors, when either you meet or walk
with them; and mind also to give them the Wall, in meeting or walking with
them; for that is the Upper Hand, though in walking your Superior should then
be at your Left Hand. But when three Persons walk together, the middle Place is
the most honorable: And a Son may walk at his Father's Right Hand, when his
younger Brother walks at his Left.

6 Give thy Superiors leave to pass before thee in any narrow Place, where two
Persons cannot pass at once.

7 If thou go with thy Parents, Master or any Superior, go not wantonly nor
even with them; but a little behind them.

8 Pay thy Respects to all thou meetest of thine Acquaintance or Friends.

9 Pull off thine Hat to Persons of Desert, Quality or Office; show thy
Reverence to them by bowing thy Body when thou see them; and if it be a
Person of high Station, Governor, Magistate, Justice of the Peace, Minister or
Deacon, etc. stay thyself until they be passed by thee.

10 If a Superior speak to thee in the Street, answer him with thy Head
uncovered; and put not on thy Hat until he either go from thee, or bid thee
once and again be covered; take not Leave at the first bidding, but with a Bow
[and saying, by no means, Sir] modestly refuse it.

11 Run not hastily in the Street, nor go too slowly; wag not to and fro, nor
use any antic or wanton Postures, either of thy Head, Hands, Feet or Body.

12 Stare not at every unusual Person or Thing which thou see.

13 Throw not any Thing in the Street, as Dirt, Stones, etc.

14 If thou meetest the Scholars of any other School, jeer not nor affront
them, but show them love and respect, and quietly let them pass along.

15 Especially affront not the Master of another School, but rather, if thou
know him, or if he live near either thine House or School, uncover thy Head
to him, and bowing pass by him.

BEHAVIOR among other CHILDREN.
1 AS near as may be converse not with any but those that are good, sober and
virtuous. Evil Communications corrupt good Manners.

2 Be not quarrelsome, but rather patiently take, than mischievously occasion
any Wrong.

3 Reprove thy Companions as often as there shall be occasion, for any evil,
wicked, unlawful or indecent Action or Expression.

4 Give always Place to him that excels thee in Quality, Age or Learning.

5 Be willing to take those Words or Actions as Jesting, which thou have reason
to believe were designed as such; and fret not at thy Companions innocent Mirth.

6 If thy Companion be a little too gross or sarcastical in speaking, yet
strive not to take notice of it, or be moved at all therewith.

7 Abuse not thy Companion either by Word or Deed.

8 Deal justly among Boys thy Equals, as solicitously as if thou went a Man
with Men, and about Business of higher Importance.

9 Be not selfish altogether, but kind, free and generous to others.

10 Jog not the Table or Desk on which another writes.

11 At play make not thy Clothes, Hands or Face dirty or nasty, nor sit upon
the Ground.

12 Avoid sinful and unlawful Recreations, and all such as prejudice the
Welfare of Body or Mind.

13 Scorn not, laugh not at any for their natural Infirmities of Body or Mind;
nor because of them, affix to any a vexing Title of Contempt and Reproach, but
pity such as are so visited, and be thankful that you are otherwise
distinguished and favored.

14 Adventure not to talk with thy Companion about thy Superiors, to raise
Discourse reflecting upon, or touching another's Parents or Masters; nor
publish any Thing of thine own Family or Household Affairs. Children must meddle
only with the Affairs of Children.

FINIS
BOOKS for the Instruction and Amusement of Children, which will make them wise
and happy, printed and sold by I. THOMAS, in Worcester, Massachusetts, near the
Courthouse.
THE BROTHER's GIFT; or the naughty Girl reformed. Published for the Advantage
of the rising Generation.

The SISTER's GIFT; or the naughty Boy reformed.

The FATHER's GIFT; or the Way to be wise and happy.

The MOTHER's GIFT; or a Present for all little Children who wish to be good.

The FAIRING: Or, a golden Toy for Children of all Sizes and Denominations.

In which they may see all the Fun of the Fair, And at Home be as happy as if
they were there.

The SUGAR-PLUMB; or Sweet Amusement for Leisure Hours: Being an Entertaining
and instructive Collection of Stories. Embellished with curious Cuts.

BOOKS Sold by I. THOMAS.
The HOLY BIBLE abridged; or, the History of the Old and New Testament.
Illustrated with Notes and adorned with Cuts. For the use of Children.

The History of little King PIPPIN; with an Account of the melancholy Death of
four naughty Boys, who were devoured by wild Beasts. And the wonderful Delivery
of Master Harry Harmless, by a little white Horse.

A BAG of NUTS, ready cracked; or instructive Fables, ingenious Riddles, and
merry Conundrums. By the celebrated and facetious Thomas Thumb, Esquire. Published
for the Benefit of all little Masters and misses who love reading as well as
playing.

Nurse TRUE LOVE's new Year's Gift; or the Book of Books for Children. Adorned
with Cuts: And designed for a Present to every little Boy who would become a
great Mam, and ride upon a fine Horse; and to every little Girl* who would
become a great Woman, and ride in a Governor's gilt Coach.


