A JOURNEY FROM PHILADELPHIA TO NEW YORK, BY WAY OF BURLINGTON AND SOUTH-AMBOY.
BY ROBERT SLENDER, Stocking Weaver. EXTRACTED FROM THE AUTHOR's JOURNALS.

Egressum magna me excepit Aricia Roma
Hospitio modico; rhetor comes Heliodorus, ETC.
HOR. SAT. Lib. 1. Sat. 5. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY FRANCIS BAILEY, AT YORICK's
HEAD, IN MARKET STREET. M DCC LXXXVII.

THE EDITOR to the READER.
COURTEOUS READER,
THE following poem was found amongst the papers of my lately departed and very
valuable friend, Robert Slender. Some short time previous to his last illness
he one day called me to his bedside, and among other serious and edifying
discourse, observed to me that he had ever been so entirely convinced of the
vanity and folly of authorship, that he had hitherto published little or
nothing of his numerous writings himself, but begged that if any of his
intimate friends should discover any thing amongst them after his decease,
which should be, in their opinion, at all worthy of the public notice, they
would not fail to communicate it in due time and season.

I answered, that I, for my own part, should be ever ready on all occasions to
do every thing that lay in my power to oblige an old friend, and do honor to
his memory; but at the same time wished to know why the fate of his works was
so particularly impressed on his imagination at this time?

He then sighed heavily, and soon after intimated to me, that he was well aware
of the malice of critics, the ignorance of the generality of readers, and the
small degree of attention the world pays to any production whatever, that is
not at least two thousand years old, and imported upwards of one thousand
leagues: "This, however, (continued he) ought to be matter of small concern to
men in my situation, be they weavers or authors; I find the lamp of life is
burning low within me, the flame will soon be in the socket, and then farewell
to you, Robert Slender!"

Being much at a loss how to account for, or in what sense to understand this
odd speech, I only took occasion to observe by way of reply, that, provided he
had lived well, and attended faith fully to the duties of his loom, it was a
matter of little, very little consequence whether he departed this life at the
age of forty or at eighty-five; and that the world would never think the worse
of him for having lived to be only "once a man, and not twice a child." --

"That I am well convinced of (replied he), but there is one weakness, or
rather a delicacy of mind, of which I fear I shall not be able wholly to divest
myself in this transitory life, and that is, too great an anxiety for the
future fate of that bundle of writings, which are at present locked up in my
strong box: I am inclined to hope they will be looked upon in after times not
as the rags of a beggar, but rather as the remnants of a prince: as to death, I
consider it to be as natural to mankind as sleep; man is no more than a shadow
of the great world of nature, which like him must, after the accomplishment of
very many ages, be also buried in a lasting state of unconscious repose."

A few days after, he became delirious, and I saw him no more, till he had
departed hence to mingle with the celebrated weavers of antiquity. He had been
several times heard to say, that the perfecting of the following little piece
cost him full eight months severe labor; and though he could not be persuaded
to print it himself, several manuscript copies were nevertheless handed about
among his friends, during his life time; which, it was said, afforded them
considerable entertainment as well as edification. But, unhappily, this
indulgence was not without its evil consequences; inasmuch as a number of
various readings occur in the several manuscripts, occasioned, no doubt, by the
ignorance of copyists; but the reader will, in this edition, find these
carefully corrected throughout, from a copy preserved in the author's journals
on the left hand page, compared with several other earlier manuscripts of the
same work in the hands of his friends.

It may well be supposed that the comparing of the various copies (some of them
no better than execrable scrawls) has proved a painful and laborious task; and
indeed I was at first almost ready to faint at the prospect; but when I
considered the delectable amusement a printed account of this interesting
Journey would be likely to afford to all good humoured travelers, I was
encouraged to persevere, and have at length been enabled (through mercy) to
accomplish that which has been in long and anxious expectation. -- Vale, et
fruere nostris laboribus;

Thine, in all good fellowship, ADAM BUCKSKIN.

Of the Nature of the Poem.
THIS performance is not exactly of the epic kind of poetry, like the Conquest
of Canaan, by Timothy Dwight, nor of the didactic, like the poem of Lucretius
on the Nature of the Gods; nor yet of the lyric, like the odes and epodes of
Horace; but it is merely a simple account of what really befell the author,
Robert Slender (late stocking weaver) and some of his companions on a Journey
from Philadelphia to New York, in the seventeen hundred and eighty-third year
of the Christian era. The story is, for the most part, light and comic, but it
was very near having been deeply tragical, and the cause of many tears. This
poem contains as few impertinencies as possible, and of consequence not many
episodes. -- Would to heaven, gentle reader, all other travelers were as
scrupulous of truth in the printed and written accounts of their peregrinations
as this ingenious weaver has been in his narrative, which is now recommended to
thy notice, by him who, on all occasions, wishes ever to be at thy service.

ADAM BUCKSKIN.
N. B. The author's original Journal is dated, November -- 1783.



Of the Originality of the Poem.
ALTHOUGH Horace once made a Journey from Rome to Brundusium in company with
Virgil and Mecenas, in order to assist in compromising some differences between
Augustus and Antony, yet as our good friend, Robert Slender, traveled with no
such companions, and was concerned in no such great affairs; so neither has he
imitated a line of that satire, or Journey, from whence our Latin motto, in the
title page, is taken. Such as this poem is, reader, enjoy it. Perhaps we shall
give thee more of the same kind in due season; for lo, this is but a small part
of the works of Robert Slender: and it is even said there existeth somewhere a
humorous and laughable narrative of his Return from York to Philadelphia, by
way of Princeton. But this we have not yet been so happy as to discover.

Thine, evermore, ADAM BUCKSKIN.

Of the Persons, or Characters, of the Poem.
AS to the characters, the author seems to have taken them as he found them,
and represented them such as they really were in rerum natura; not creating
imaginary excellent personages merely to please squeamish stomachs.

A. B.

PERSONS OF THE POEM.
WILLIAM SNIP a Philadelphia tailor. SAM his apprentice. Captain O'KEEFE an
Officer in the army. Monsieur TOUPPEE a French barber. BILLY O'BLUSTER an
American seaman in the British service. EZEKIEL a Rhode Island lawyer. BOB a
Poet and Ballad-singer. ROBERT SLENDER stocking weaver. SUSANNA SNIPINDA Snip's
wife. CYNTHIA a young Milliner.
CANTO I. Characters of the TRAVELERS.
TORMENTED with critics, and pestered with care,
This life, I protest, is a tedious affair;
And, since I have got a few shillings to spare,
I Will even take a jaunt, for the sake of fresh air.
SINCE the day I returned to this vagabond shore
Where George and his cronies are masters no more,
And others are placed at the helm of affairs,
Relieving the weight of his majesty's cares;
Through many long years, it has still been my doom
To sit like a Mopus, confined to my loom, The stocking-loom was invented by a
young man who paid his addresses to a handsome stocking knitter, and being
rejected, in revenge contrived this curious machine, which, it is said,
consists of no less than six thousand different pieces.

Whose damnable clatter so addles my brain,
That, say what they will, I am forced to complain.
OUR citizens think, when they sit themselves down
In the gardens that grow in the skirts of the town,
They think they have got in some rural retreat
Where the nymphs of the groves, and the singing birds meet,
When only a fence shuts them out from the street;
With the smoke of the city be-weeping their eyes
They sit in their boxes, and look very wise,
Take a sip of bad punch, or a glass of sour wine;
Conceiting their pleasures are equal to mine,
Who rove where I will, and wherever I roam,
In spite of new faces am always at home.
POOR Richard, the reel-man, had nothing to say;
He knew very well I would have my own way; --
When I said, "My dear Richard, I Am sick of the town,
" And Dutchmen that worry me, upstairs and down,
" A book of bad debts, and a score of bad smells,
" The yelping of dogs, and the chiming of bells;
" I am sick of the house, and the sight of small beer,
" And the loom may be going, though I am not here;
" I therefore shall leave you, and that, to be plain,
" 'Till I feel in a humor to see you again." --
Poor Richard said nothing to all that I spoke,
But kindled his pipe, and redoubled his smoke.
YET it would have been nothing but friendship in him
To have said, -- "Robert Slender, it is only a whim --:
A trip to the Schuylkill, that nothing would cost,
Might answer your ends, and no time would be lost;
But if you are thinking to make a long stay,
Consider, good Robert, what people will say:
" His rent running on, and his loom standing still --
" The man will be ruined! -- he must, if he will --!
" If tradesmen will always be flaunting about,
" They may live to repent it -- before the year's out!""
AS I never could relish to travel alone,
I looked round about, but could hit upon none
Whom Satan was tempting to leave their own houses
And travel to York with their daughters and spouses;
At last, by repeating my trouble and care,
And preaching, a month, on the sweets of fresh air,
I got a small party to join in the trip;
And the first I shall mention was honest WILL. SNIP,
A tailor by trade (and a dabster was he
To make a silk knee-band set snug to the knee)
With his wife (and he says I may mention her name)
SUSANNA SNIPINDA; so charming a dame,
The sun had with pleasure looked down on her head,
So freckled was she, and her tresses so red.
TO wait on the will of so handsome a lady
A youngster was ordered to hold himself ready,
A sly looking lad that was 'prentice to Snip,
And long had been learning to cabbage and clip; --
When Snip was in sight, he was mild as a lamb;
When absent, the devil could hardly rule SAM.
THE next I describe is one Captain O'KEEFE,
A killer of men, and a lover of beef:
To the sound of a fife and the tune of no song
With his Andra Ferrara A (...) kind of sword, in use among the Italians.
he paddled along:
From his manners so rough, and his dealing in ruin,
The ladies would often miscall him Sir Bruin;
He was, among women, a man of great parts
And often had traveled the road to their hearts:
He had a sweet creature put under his care,
And he was so gallant, and she was so fair,
A Milliner's girl, with a bundle of lace,
Whom CYNTHIA Cynthia, is also a poetical name for the Moon.
he called, from the shape of her face; --
At a ball or a frolic how glib his tongue ran,
He was, I may say, an unparalleled man,
Very apt to harangue on the hosts he has slain
Of people -- most surely created invain --;
Yet so kind to the sex of the feminine make
By his words he would venture to die for their sake,
Whence some have suspected that some he adored
Have more than made up for the wastes of his sword.
THE third in succession was Monsieur TOUPPEE,
A barber from Paris, of noble degree,
(For often when he takes up his razor, to strap it,
He tells his descent from the line of Hugh Capet A popular French nobleman,
who, A D. 987. usurped the crown of France, and was the first of a new race of
monarchs.
)
This barber, though willing for pleasure to stray,
Yet had some pomatum to sell by the way,
Perfumes, and fine powders, and essence of roses,
And liquids in vials, to cheer up our noses,
Some printed receipts, and some choice eau-de-vie French brandy.
--
And such was the cargo of Monsieur Touppee.
A SINGER of ballads was next in our train,
Who long had been dealing in ballads invain:
He sometimes would sing in a musical tone,
And sometimes would scribble a song of his own:
Yet never was seen with his brethren to mix --
And laughed at your poets in coaches and six;
Who sing, like the birds, when the weather is fine;
Whose verses the ladies pronounce "so divine;"
Who ride with Augustus, wherever he goes,
And, meeting old Homer, would turn up the nose --
As to those, like himself, that were held to the ground,
He knew it was folly to feed them with sound --
He knew it was nonsense, to crown them with bays,
And was too much their friend -- to insult them with praise.
FOR a dozen long years he had lived by the mob;
On the word of a weaver I pitied poor BOB!
The Babes in the wood was his favorite song,
Or Barbara Allan, or Johnny Armstrong;
Yet so bad was his luck, or so poor was the trade,
And the Muses, he thought, were so sneakingly paid,
That if times didn't alter, and that very soon,
He said, and he swore, he must sing his last tune.
SOME devil had put it, somehow, in his head
If he traveled through Jersey his fortune was made:
Some devil had told him (but whether in dreams
Or waking, I know not) some devil, it seems,
Had made him believe that the nymphs and the swains
Were fairly at war with their old-fashioned strains,
That the tunes which the kirk or the curates had made
(And which always had ruined the balladman's trade)
Were wholly disused, and that now was the time
For singers of catches and dealers in rhyme
To step from their stalls, where they long were disgraced,
Reform the old music, and fix a new taste.
A MATE of a schooner, bespattered with tar,
Who had lately come in from Savanna-le-Mar A seaport town in the S. W. quarter
of Jamaica.
,
Was the next I prevailed on to step from his deck
And venture a jaunt, at the risque of his neck,
His name, I remember (unless I mistake)
Was BILLY O'BLUSTER, and much of a rake;
His life was sustained by the virtues of GROG,
And many long miles he had sailed by the log. --
Of battles and storms he had known a full share,
And his face, it was plain, was the worse for the wear;
To see a mean fellow, lord, how it would fret him;
And he hated a puppy, wherever he met him --
He was ready to bleed for the good of each STATE,
But since they had left the poor seamen to fate;
Themselves in the suds, and their fair ones in tears,
And many brave fellows detained in Algiers --!
Had spirit sufficient to make themselves free,
But not to be equal with Britain at sea! --
As this was the case -- he must give us the bag, A phrase common among seamen;
importing to abscond or slip out of the way.

Adhere to Old England, and sail with her flag.
AT cursing and swearing he played a good hand,
But never was easy a minute on land;
If the wind was ahead, or his Kitty untrue,
Why, patience was all the relief that he knew --:
In the midst of misfortune he still was serene,
And Kitty, he said, was a feeble machine:
His heart was too hard for a lady to sigh,
Yet I guessed him a rogue by the leer in his eye;
The world, he would say, is a whimsical dance, --
And reason had taught him to leave it to chance;
In chase of dame Fortune his prime he had passed,
And now was beginning to fail very fast,
But thought it was folly his heart to perplex,
As Fortune was just like the rest of her sex; --
And though he was always astern in the chase,
He smoothed up his whiskers, and wore a bold face.
ON horseback he first had attempted to go,
But the horse was no fool, and had lent him a throw;
He fell in a pond, and with not a dry rag on
The horse brought him back to the sign of the wagon,
Where three times he called for a dram of their best,
And three times the virtues of brandy confessed;
Then took some tobacco, and soberly said,
" De'il take such a vessel, she is all by the head,
" Broached to on a sudden, and then, d' ye see,
" Myself and the saddle went over the lee."
HIS head was so full of his ragged command
He could scarcely believe he was yet on dry land:
He would rise in his sleep; call the watch up at four,
Ask the man at the helm how Lewes-town bore;
Then, rubbing his eyes, bawl out, "By my soul,
" We are bearing right down on the Brandywine Shoals in the bay of Delaware.
shoal;
" The devil may trust to such pilots as you:
" We are close on Joe Flogger Shoals in the bay of Delaware.
-- the breakers -- halloo!"
THE sixth, and the last, that attended our Journey,
Was a man of the law, a Rhode Island attorney,
As cunning as Satan to argue or plead,
To break an entailment, or cancel a deed:
They called him EZEKIEL -- I cannot tell what --
Perhaps I forget it -- perhaps I do not --
He had once been a parson, and studied at Yale, Yale College in New Haven.

But took to the law, when his preaching grew stale;
In his system of thinking, not well understood,
I wandered about, like a man in a wood;
For he wickedly thought that religion and law
Were meant for the vulgar, to keep them in awe,
And often asserted, and proved it beside,
That pleading and preaching were nearly allied,
That the church and the bar, like a man and a maid,
Might, just when they pleased, lend each other their aid;
And brought some examples -- take one, if you please;
"If they let me sell butter, why may not I sell cheese?"
CANTO II. The Chapter of DEBATES.
HAVING pitched on our party, the first thing, of course,
Was how we should travel, by water or horse?
" For my part, said Snip, I was always afraid
" Of sailors, and ships, and the shallopman's trade,
" And the reason thereof I will heartily tell,
" My grandmother, Mopsy, was drowned in a well,
" I therefore entreat you, and fervently pray
" We may go with the wagons the Burlington way."
" HOLD, puppy," the sailor replied in a fret,
" The devil's not ready to bait for you yet:
" Even this way you know there is water to pass,
" And twenty long miles we should sail with an ass;
" But, gentlemen all, will you take my advice?
" Here is Albertson's Commanders of Philadelphia and New York packets.
sloop; she is so new and so nice,
" Her bottom so sleek, and her rigging so trim:
" Not Bailey Commanders of Philadelphia and New York packets.
or Hyde Commanders of Philadelphia and New York packets.
can be mentioned with him;
" In her cabin and steerage is plenty of room,
" And how clever she looks with her flying-jib-boom,
" A topsail aloft that will stand by the wind,
" And a yard rigged athwart, for a squaresail designed?
" ODDS fish! I would sooner some little delay
" Than go, like a booby, the fresh water way,
" Where your cream-colour'd captains never swear a bad word
" And sail without compass or quadrant on board,
" See catfish and sturgeons, but never a whale,
" Nor balance a mizen, to fight with the gale!
" But Albertson goes by the rout of Cape May,
" Dares tempests, and sees the bold porpusses play,
" Where the shore of the coast the proud ocean controuls
" He travels, nor strikes on the Barnegat shoals."
" YOU tar-painted monster! (Snipinda rejoined)
" Your jargon has almost disordered my mind:
" If Snip should be drownded, and lost in the sea,
" You never once think what a loss it would be!
" I should then be a widow, dejected and sad,
" And where should I find such another sweet lad!
" And Paddy O'Fagen Mr. Slender has left us wholly in the dark in regard to
any knowledge of this person. We are apt to suspect he was some intimate friend
or acquaintance of Mr. Snip's, in Pennsylvania.
a letter has wrote,
" As how, in three weeks, he will want a new coat."
SNIP's heart, at her answer, seemed ready to break:
" Snipinda," said he, "I would live for your sake!
" If I should be drownded, indeed, it is true,
" It would be a bad bargain for Sam and for you!" --
FOR fear they should hear him, Sam whispered -- In troth
I would give my new hat that the devil had both.
" IF Snip should be drowned," said Captain O'Keefe,
" The widow, I promise, should soon have relief;
" However, for aught that a soldier can see,
" There are dozens as brisk at the needle as he,
" And, though it were hard that the seafish should tear him,
" I am fully convinced that his brethren can spare him:
" BUT were I to mention the very best way,
" And the quickest to boot, (for they go in a day)
" I would sleep overnight at the sign of the Queen, Indian Queen.

" (Where the wine is so good, and the beds are so clean)
" Then starting by daybreak, and riding in state,
" Arriving in Bristol, we breakfast at eight,
" Then push on our way with a rapid career,
" With nothing to hinder, and nothing to fear,
" 'Till Trenton, and Princeton, and Brunswick are passed,
" And safe on the Hudson they drop us at last." --
WHEN the captain had finished, the Frenchman arose,
And, shaking his noddle, cried out, Me dispose
To go by the way of the Burlington town,
Where one friseur does live, to whom I am known,
And some lady, that dress up their hair alamode,
At the sign of the crown, by the side of the road!
" HOLD, varlet, be still" -- said the Yankee attorney --
" Are you to decide on the rout of our journey?
These run-a-bout fellows, I cannot but hate 'em,
With their rings, and their ruffles, and rolls of pomatum:
But, gentlemen, (if I may venture to speak
In the style I was wont when I dabbled in Greek,
When I blew on my trumpet, and called up my pack,
Who thought I was holy because I was black;
Or, if you permit me to quote, in my way,
Some words that were frequent with parson Dushay)
" We all have in view to arrive at one town,
" Yet each one would find out a way of his own;
" What a pity it is that we cannot agree
" To march all together to heaven!" -- said he --
But, since I Am convinced that it cannot be so,
(For his journey resembles our journey below)
Like the sects in religion, I heartily pray
That each, as he pleases, may have his own way,
Let Snip, and the Captain, adventure by land,
The sailor by sea -- he can reef, steer, and hand:
Let the Frenchman set out in a flashy balloon,
He Will either be there, or be dead, very soon --
For my own part, I Am fond of the Burlington boat,
But still, if you're willing, I Will put it to vote."
THE hint was sufficient -- he put it to vote,
And fate bade us go with the Burlington boat.
CANTO III. The PASSAGE to Burlington.
THE morning was fair, and the wind was at west,
The flood coming in, and the ladies were dressed;
At the sign of the Billet we all were to meet,
And Snip was the first that appeared in the street;
He strutted along with a mighty brisk air,
While Sam and Snipinda walked slow in the rear.
DRESSED, booted, and buttoned, and cutting a shine,
The Captain came next, with his loaded carbine,
Then handed on board the Milliner's maid;
The Barber and Ballad-man longer delayed,
For one had some ballads to sing and to play,
And one had some beards to take off by the way:
At last they arrived, and the sailor along,
But he was besotted -- his dram had been strong:
The lawyer Ezekiel was last to appear,
And Snip, on the quarter deck, welcomed him there.
BUT just as we all were prepared to embark,
The wind came ahead, and the weather looked dark;
So, while they were busy in hoisting the sails,
And trimming close aft, to contend with the gales,
Snip wished himself home, with his needle and sheers,
Then whispered the sailor, and told him his fears: --
Our seaman advised them to take in a reef,
As the vessel was light; but the skipper was deaf: --
" It Is not for myself I Am afraid," said the sailor,
" But here is in your care an unfortunate tailor -- "
" PEACE, peace, cried the skipper, you salt water gander,
At sea you may talk, but here I Am the commander:
The worst of all puppies are puppies from sea; --
Your top-ropes, and bowlines, are nothing to me;
Clue-garnets, and clue-lines, and courses, and stays --
I wish, from my heart, they were all in a blaze:
Your topmasts, and yards, and your studding sail booms
Are sweet pretty things -- for the handles of brooms;
For your back-stays and braces I care not a pin,
Nor when you went out, or when you came in: --
Away to the cabin, and look out a seat,
And touch, at your peril, a halyard, or sheet!" --
" YOU ague-cheek'd, cream-colour'd son of a bitch,
" Who have sailed all your life on a fresh water ditch,
" Whose mate (answered Billy) might be an old wife,
" Who never have rattled a shroud in your life,
" Whose guts would come up if a ship were in motion,
" Whose barque never looked at the foam of the ocean,
" Whose whole navigation must follow your nose,
" Since that is her pilot wherever she goes; --
" In sight of your dock you can talk very glib,
" But I know what you are by the cut of your jibb. -- "
" HOLD your jaw, said the skipper, or else go ashore:
Here Is a cann of strong grog, if you will say nothing more."
THEN a storm coming on, we stowed away snug,
And Snip, in the cabin lay wrapped in a rugg:
Snipinda and Sam were inclining to sleep,
And the lawyer harangu'd on the risques of the deep,
O'Bluster was busy in looking for squalls,
And Cynthia discoursed upon dances and balls;
And, while the poor Ballad-man gave us a song,
The Frenchman complained that his stomach was wrong.
OUR travels, at length, in the boat being past,
And arriving at Burlington safely at last,
While the Quakers came down to welcome us there,
And the lads and the lasses, to laugh and to stare,
The first thing we did was to settle our fare:
To the sign of the Anchor we then were directed,
Where Captain O'Keefe a fine turkey dissected,
And Billy O'Bluster would give us a jog,
And pestered the ladies to taste of his grog:
" Without it (said Billy) I never can dine,
" It Is better, by far, than your balderdash wine;
" It braces the nerves, and it strengthens the brain; --
" Without it, the world is a prison of pain,
" And MAN, the most wretched of all that are found
" To creep in the dust, or to move on the ground! --
" It is, of all physic, the best I have seen
" To keep out the cold, and to cut up the spleen:
" Here, madam -- miss Cynthia -- it is good, you will confess --
" Now, taste; or you will wish you had been in my mess --
" With grog, I Am as great as a king on his throne,
" The worst of all climates is -- where there is none;
" New Holland, New Zealand -- those islands accursed --
" Here Is a health to the man that invented it first!
NEXT morning, by three, the wagon was geer'd --
The Frenchman and I were the first that appeared:
The tailor came next and demanded a dram,
Then wakened Snipinda, and cudgelled up Sam.
All drowsy and lazy, each had his complaint,
Snipinda declared she was ready to faint,
And Cynthia protested, she thought it not right
That people should thus be disturbed in the night;
The Frenchman was fretting, and cursing the moon
That always was rising or setting too soon;
The Lawyer was vexed to be roused before day,
And swore by his docket it was n't fair play;
The captain advanced with the milliner's maid,
"Take care of my bundle, dear captain" -- she said;
Then, full of importance, stepped out in the street,
Marched up to the wagon, and took the best seat:
The singer of ballads was last in advancing,
He had paid for his supper with singing and dancing.
CANTO IV. The Chapter of VEXATIONS and DISASTERS.
COOPED up in a wagon, the curtains let down,
At three, in the morning, we drove out of town;
A morning more dark I never saw in my life,
And the fog was so thick -- it would cut with a knife;
In a morning like this were the Trojans undone,
When the HORSE was admitted, that never could run; --
It was a fit season for murders and rapes,
For drunken adventures, and narrow escapes:
So, with something to think of, and little to say,
The driver drove on, looking out for the day,
'Till we came to the brow of a damnable hill
Six miles on our way, when the cattle stood still:
" Are you sure you are right with the wagon?" cried Snip --
" I am" -- said the driver, and cracked with his whip:
Then away ran the horses, but took the wrong road,
And down went the wagon, with all its full load;
Down, deep in a valley -- rolled over and over,
Fell the flying machine, with its curtains and cover;
Where shattered and wounded -- no glimpse, yet, of day;
A mass of perdition together we lay! --
THEN howlings were heard that would frighten a stone:
"Morbleu!" cried the Frenchman, "me quite be undone;
"Mon poudre perdu, and my fine eau-de-vie;
Diable take him for one bon fricassee!"
NEXT rose from his ruins tall captain O'Keefe;
The first thing he thought of was Cynthia's relief,
Then felt for his sword, but chanced on a cane,
And rushed at the stageman, to smite him in twain.
AS fortune would have it, the stageman had fled,
And Snip the whole vengeance received on his head: --
The staff had been aimed with so hellish a sweep,
That Snip in a moment was all in a heap; --
We had room to suppose that his senses were hurt,
For, in spite of our bruises, he gave us some sport;
His head, he conceited, "was made of new cheese;"
And asked, "if the sexton would give up his fees?"
Then rolling away, on the side of the hill
With his head in a puddle he lay very still:
At last he bawled out -- "I am sick at my heart!
Come hither, Snipinda, and see me depart!
I am hasting away from the Delaware streams,
To make no more coats, and to sew no more seams,
A phantom I see, with a needle and sheers,
He clips at my coat, and he threatens my ears!
Snipinda, Snipinda! alas! I must leave her!
And all for the sake of this rascally weaver,
Who never would give me a moment of rest,
'Till I left my dear shop-board -- and thus am distressed!
But a time will arrive (if I deem not amiss)
When Robert, the weaver, shall suffer for this --
May his breeches, hereafter, be always too wide,
Or so narrow and scant, as to torture his hide;
May his jerken be ever too long or too short,
And the skirts of his tunic not two of a sort! --
And, when from this horrible jaunt you return,
Tell Paddy O'Fagen it is needless to mourn;
Ah, tell him I firmly believed I was going
Where people no longer are stitching or sewing,
Where white linen stockings will ever be clean,
And g'emmen go dressed in your black bombazeen;
Where, with old continental our debts we can pay,
And the BUDS OF his BEAUTY -- no blossoms display!
Where with pretty brass thimbles the streets are all paved --
And a remnant -- at least -- I am told -- shall be saved;
Where cloth may be cabbag'd, and that without fear,
And journeymen work, thirteen months to the year!"
SNIPINDA was moved at so dismal a yell,
And groping about, to find where he fell,
She cried, "I have got a sad bruise on one hip,
But matters, I fear, are far worser with Snip."
"YES, yes, (answered Snip) I Am preparing to go!
Be speedy, Snipinda, my pulse is so low!" --
THEN she came where he lay, and took hold of his head,
And whispered the Captain -- "How much he has bled!"
(For she thought, as he lay with his nose in the puddle,
The water was blood that had flowed from his noddle)
"Ah, where is the Doctor, to give him a pill,
And where is the Lawyer to scribble his will?
Ezekiel, Ezekiel --! attend to his words; --
If I am his widow -- I will have my thirds!
But can you (and here she reclined on his breast)
And can you resolve to forsake me distressed!
Is it thus you would quit me, my love, and my joy,
And leave me alone with this cursed bad boy?
Is it thus you consign me to trouble and woe!
When you are departed -- ah, where shall I go!
I shall then be a widow -- forsaken and sad! --
And where shall I find such another sweet lad!
Who then will provide me a mint-water dram,
Gallant me to meeting, and who will flog Sam!"
BY this time the story was currently spread,
And most were convinced that the tailor was dead:
" The tailor is dead, beyond all relief;
" The tailor is dead -- " -- cried Captain O'Keefe --
" THE tailor is dead (the lawyer exclaimed)
" God speed him! -- it is better to die than be maimed; --
" For the place where he is gone, may we also prepare,
" Where the mind, when admitted, shall rest from her care;
" And fiddles -- the finest that ever were seen,
" Shall play for his comfort a new Bonny Jean."
" THE tailor is dead" -- said the company round --
" The tailor is dead" -- the dark forests resound --
" He is dead!" -- blubbered Sam, with a counterfeit sigh,
When the sailor bawled out -- "By the lord, it is a lie --
" The fellow is only contriving some fun,
" His blood is not cold, and his race is not run --:
" If a vessel is crank, and exposes her keel,
" Are we frightened to death at a parlement-heel?
" If he chances to tumble, and bruises his pate.
" Is that a good reason to quarrel with fate? --
" His head, it is true, may have had a small shock:
" I Will bind it: -- 'twill only be strapping a block --
" Here, give us a neckcloth, a napkin, a clout;
" Now heave up his noddle, and frap it about:
" The symptoms of life are exceedingly plain,
" And Paddy O'Fagen shall see him again!"
THE matter turned out as he said and he swore,
And the tailor threw open his peepers once more.
WHEN the morning appeared, it is dismal to tell
What mischiefs the most of our crew had befell,
A bundle lay here, and a budget lay there,
The Frenchman was cursing, and pulling his hair:
The horses were feeding about on the hill,
And Snip, with his head on a hassock, lay still:
The driver beseech'd us the fault to excuse,
"The night had been dark, and he lost both his shoes." --
THEN, he raised up his wagon, rejoicing to find
That, by leaving the top, and the curtains behind,
We still might proceed; for the body was sound,
And the wheels, upon searching, uninjur'd all round.
BUT, dull and disheartened, we traveled along,
Our wagon dismantled, our harness all wrong.
The Lawyer was vexed that we went a snail's pace,
And Cynthia complained of a scratch in her face;
And Billy O'Bluster, who Snip had restored,
Asserted that Snip was the Jonas on board,
And often declared to the captain and me,
"He would give him a souse if he had him at sea."
SNIPINDA repented not yet of the trip;
She said, that she "only was sorry for Snip,
" Whose virtues were many; and, if he were dead,
" How Sam, the vile varlet, would have his own head." --
AT length, we arrived, with the marks of our fall,
And halted to dine with the man at Road-Hall;
Honest David has always a dish of the best,
But Snipinda declared there was nothing well dressed;
" And, Snip (she exclaimed) I would ask him to eat,
" But I know that he never could relish roast meat:
" I think it were better to get him some tea,
" He always was fond of slop-dinners, like me,
" But then -- he could never put up with Bohea.
" La Madam! is this the best tea that you keep? --
" By the taste and the smell, you have purchased it cheap:
" No Hyson or Congo to give a sick stranger;
" Poor Snip, I Am afear'd that his life is in danger!
"LET him die and be d -- d (said the sailor) who is he
That his lean-looking paunch should be pampered with tea? --
If I had him at sea, with the rest of our crew,
I Would burn out his guts with a bowl of burgoo!"
"FROM what I can gather (cried Captain O'Keefe)
I am sure he might venture to taste of the beef:
Nay, I think I can guess from the cast of his eye,
That he longs to have hold of the baked mutton pie."
" WHY, captain, (she cried) would you kill the poor sinner?
" -- If he cannot have tea, he shall go without dinner."
AND now to the ferry we soberly came
Like beasts in a cage, that blows had made tame;
The Frenchman and Snip were confoundedly lame;
The corpse of the captain was all in a wreck,
And the sailor complained of a kink in his neck,
He had a contusion, he said, on his thigh,
And the balladman talked of a bruise on his eye,
Then told me, how much he was vexed at the heart
That no one regarded the song singing art;
Yet the world was in love with his music (he said)
But never considered he lived by the trade;
That affronts and neglect were forever his lot,
And the lovers of music respected him -- not;
He had sung for the nymphs, and had sung for the swains,
But they were unwilling to purchase his strains,
When he put up his ballads, and called for his pay,
The swains turned about, and the nymphs ran away."
So, I said what I could to encourage poor Bob,
And told him, "the world was no more than a mob;
" That reptiles and wretches were all the world over,
" The wonder was only there were not some more;
" He should treat them alike if advanced to a crown,
" Arrayed in a rag, or disguised in a gown;
" That the time might arrive when we both should rejoice,
" And weaving and singing be matters of choice;
" That a poet of genius (all history shows)
" Never wanted a puppy to bark at his muse;
" And, though their productions were never twice read,
" Yet Bavius and Mevius must also be fed."
THEN, looking across to the city of Perth,
" I wonder (said he) if those people love mirth:
" A steeple I see, and that is a bad sign,
" As I once was informed by a cousin of mine;
" For the parson holds none to be worthy of grace
" If the gloom of December is not in their face;
" And a church and a clerk are always together,
" And a clerk and myself are not birds of one feather:
" While I am reduced to depend upon alms
" He thrives by retailing his old fashioned psalms;
" And so, my dear comrades, I think it is invain
" Any longer to meddle with ballads profane;
" A double advantage these fellows possess,
" In this wicked world they hold a good place,
" And when they go hence, there is room to surmise
" To the regions above, with their psalm-books, they rise,
" While I, with a load of unsanctify'd rhyme,
" In the service of Satan, am spending my time,
" If here I Am rewarded with wailing and woe
" When dead -- to perdition, no doubt, I shall go!"
WHEN supper was over we hurried to bed,
But I slept not a wink for a bruise on my head,
And the balladman's story was fresh in my brain,
For I was unhappy that he should complain.
THE waiter was ordered to rouse us at five --
When the sailor demanded, if Snip was alive? --
" Alive (answered Sam) and alive like to be;
" He talked the whole night about flogging of me."
THEN the skipper came in, with a horrible noise,
Exclaiming, "The stage-boat is ready, my boys!
" The wind is ahead, and the ebb is a making,
" The devil is in you not yet to be waking!" --
NOW, all were embarked, and the boat under sail
With a dark cloudy sky and a stiff blowing gale:
The wind at north-east made a hollow head sea,
Snip puk'd up his supper on Monsieur Touppee;
The Frenchman roared out -- "Diable! ah peste!
" I wish he was dead, in his coffin at rest:
" Good captain, tell me -- ah foutre, morbleu! --
" If the wind should blow tempest, den vat vill vee do?"
POOR Cynthia was frightened, and pale in the face,
And begged of O'Keefe to take care of her lace;
" For if I should chance to be drownded (said she)
" It would be a great loss to my madam and me!"
THE Lawyer replied -- "Sweet creature, don't fear;
" The skipper has been to New England, my dear,
" He knows very well when to take in a reef:
" Be quiet, and sit down by master O'Keefe." --
SNIP offered the skipper five dollars, and more,
And a pair of new trowsers, to run us on shore;
" And, if I was there (said the faint-hearted swain)
" No devils, or weavers, should tempt me again!
" On foot, it were better to trudge the world through,
" No shirt to my back, and no soal to my shoe!
" I had rather, by far, I had broken both legs,
" Been hurried to jail, or been pelted with eggs!"
BUT the mate of the schooner did nothing but laugh,
And called him a puppy, and fresh water calf;
The worse was the weather, the bolder he grew,
And swore at the winds as he swore at his crew;
All, all but himself were inclining to fear --
But it is time that our actors should now disappear.
SNIPINDA was sorry she ever left home:
Ezekiel allowed it was madness to roam:
Touppee was alarmed at the break of the seas,
And you, Robert Slender, were not at your ease,
Yet couldn't help laughing at Captain O'Keefe,
Who shunned little Cynthia -- and cast up his beef;
(And Bruin, she said, I am sick at my heart --!
Come hither -- and hug me -- before I depart!)
And Sam, while he owned what a thief he had been,
O'Bluster made love to a bottle of gin:
Bob's ballads and poems lay scattered about,
Himself in the suds, and his music run out:
Snip lay with his head by the side of a pot,
In doubt if his soul was departing or not! --
AT length, to relieve us, when looked for the least,
The wind came about to the south of south-east;
The barque, that was buried in billows before,
Now scudded away for the Manhattan The ancient name of the Island on which the
city of N. York stands.
shore,
And, gaining the port where we wished to arrive,
Was safe in the basin, precisely at five.
FINIS.

