A FORM OF DISCIPLINE, FOR THE Ministers, Preachers, and Members OF THE
METHODIST Episcopal CHURCH in AMERICA. Considered and approved at a CONFERENCE
Held at BALTIMORE, in the State of MARYLAND, On Monday the 27th of December,
1784: IN WHICH The Reverend THOMAS COKE, L. L. D. and the Reverend FRANCIS
ASBURY, presided. Arranged under proper HEADS, and METHODIZED in a more
acceptable and easy Manner.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY W. ROSS, IN BROAD-STREETS M.DCC.LXXXVII.

A FORM OF DISCIPLINE, etc.
SECTION I. Of the Rise of Methodism (so called) in Europe and America.
Quest. 1. WHAT was the Rise of Methodism, so called, in Europe?

Answ. In 1729, two young Men, reading the Bible, saw they could not be saved
without Holiness, followed after it, and incited others so to do. In 1737, they
saw likewise, that Men are justified before they are sanctified: but still
Holiness was their Object. God then thrust them out, to raise an holy People.

Quest. 2. What was the Rise of Methodism, so called, in America?

Answ. During the Space of thirty Years past, certain Persons, Members of the
Society, emigrated from England and Ireland, and settled in various Parts of
this Country. About twenty Years ago, Philip Embury, a local Preacher from
Ireland, began to preach in the City of New York, and formed a Society of his
own Countrymen and the Citizens. About the same Time, Robert Strawbridge, a
local Preacher from Ireland, settled in Frederick County, in the State of
Maryland, and preaching there formed some Societies. In 1769, Richard Boardman
and Joseph Pilmoor, came to New York; who were the first regular Methodist
Preachers on the Continent. In the latter End of the Year 1771, Francis Asbury
and Richard Wright, of the same Order, came over.

Quest. 3. What may we reasonably believe to be God's Design, in raising up the
Preachers called Methodists?

Answ. To reform the Continent, and spread scripture Holiness over these Lands.
As a Proof (...) seen in the Course of fifteen Years a great and glorious Work
of God, from New York through the Jersies, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia,
North and South Carolina, even to Georgia.

SECTION II. On the Method of holding a Conference, and the Business to be done
therein.
IT is desired that all Things be considered as in the immediate Presence of
God. That every Person speak freely whatever is in his Heart.

Quest. 1. How may we best improve our Time at the Conference?

Answ. While we are conversing, let us have an especial Care to set God always
before us.

2. In the intermediate Hours, let us redeem all the Time we can for private
Exercises.

3. Therein let us give ourselves to Prayer for one another, and for a Blessing
on our Labor.

Quest. 2. What is the Method wherein we usually proceed in a Conference?

Answ. We enquire, 1. What Preachers are admitted? 2. Who remain on Trial? 3.
Who are admitted on Trial? 4. Who desist from traveling? 5. Are there any
Objections to any of the Preachers? Who are named one by one. 6. How are the
Preachers stationed this Year? 7. What Numbers are in Society? 8. What is
collected for the contingent Expenses? 9. How is this expended? 10. What is
contributed toward the Fund for the superanuated Preachers, and the Widows and
Orphans of the Preachers? 11. What Demands are there upon it? 12. Where and
when shall our next Conferences begin?


Quest. 3. Is there any other Business to be done in Conference?

Answ. The electing and ordaining of Bishops, Elders and Deacons.

SECTION III. On the Nature and Constitution of our Church.
WE are thoroughly convinced, that the Church of England, to which we have been
united, is deficient in several of the most important Parts of Christian
Discipline; and that (a few Ministers and Members excepted) it has lost the
Life and Power of Religion. We are not ignorant of the Spirit and Designs it
has ever discovered in Europe, of rising to Pre-eminence and worldly Dignities
by Virtue of a national Establishment, and by the most servile Devotion to the
Will of temporal Governors: and we fear, the same Spirit will lead the same
Church in these United States (though altered in its Name) to similar Designs and
Attempts, if the Number and Strength of its Members will ever afford a
Probability of Success; and particularly, to obtain a national Establishment
which we cordially abhor as the great Bane of Truth and Holiness, the greatest
Impediment in the World to the Progress of vital Christianity.

For these Reasons, we have thought it our Duty to form ourselves into an
Independent Church. And as the most excellent Mode of Church Government
according to our maturest Judgment, is that of a moderate Episcopacy; and as we
are persuaded, that the uninterrupted Succession of Bishops from the Apostles,
can be proved neither from Scripture nor Antiquity; we therefore have
constituted ourselves into an Episcopal Church, under the Direction of Bishops,
Elders, Deacons, and Preachers, according to the Forms of Ordination annexed to
our Prayer Book, and the Regulations laid down in this Form of Discipline.

SECTION IV. On the constituting of Bishops, and their Duty.
Quest. 1. HOW is a Bishop constituted?

Answ. By the Election of a Majority of the Conference, and the laying on of
Hands of a Bishop, and the Elders present.

Quest. 2. What is his Duty?

Answ. To preside as a Moderator in our Conferences; to fix the Appointments of
the Preachers for the several Circuits; and in the Intervals of the Conference,
to change, receive or suspend Preachers, as Necessity may require; to travel
through as many Circuits as he can, and to settle all the spiritual Business of
the Societies.

Quest. 3. To whom is the Bishop amenable for his Conduct?

Answ. To the Conference: who have Power to expel him for improper Conduct, if
they see it necessary.

Quest. 4. If the Bishop ceases from traveling at large among the People,
shall he still exercise his Office among us in any Degree?

Answ. If he ceases from traveling without the Consent of the Conference, he
shall not hereafter exercise any ministerial Function whatsoever in our Church.

Quest. 5. If by Death, Expulsion or otherwise there be no Bishop remaining in
our Church, what Method shall be pursued?

Answ. Let the Conference immediately elect a Bishop, and let the Elders or any
three of them, consecrate him to his Office.

SECTION V. On the constituting of Elders, and their Duty.
Quest. 1. HOW is an Elder constituted?

Answ. By the Election of a Majority of the Conference, and by the laying on of
Hands of a Bishop, and the Elders present.

Quest. 2. What is his Duty?

Answ. 1. To travel through his appointed District.

2. To administer Baptism and the Lord's Supper; and to perform all Parts of
Divine Service.

3. In the Absence of a Bishop, to take Charge of all the Deacons, traveling
and local Preachers, and Exhorters.

4. To change, receive or suspend Preachers.

5. To direct in the Transaction of all the spiritual Business of his Circuit.

6. To take Care that every Part of our Discipline be enforced.

7. To aid in the public Collections.

8. To attend his Bishop when present, and give him when absent, all possible
Information, by Letter, of the State of his District.

N. B. No Elder that ceases to travel without the Consent of the Conference,
certified under the Hand of a Bishop, shall on any Account exercise the
peculiar Functions of his Office among us.

SECTION VI. On the constituting of Deacons, and their Duty.
Quest. 1. HOW is a Deacon constituted?

Answ. By the Election of a Majority of the Conference, and the laying on of
the Hands of a Bishop.

Quest. 2. What is the Duty of a Deacon?

Answ. 1. To baptize, and perform the Office of Matrimony in the Absence of the
Elder.

2. To assist the Elder in administering the Lord's Supper.

3. To see that the other Preachers in his Circuit behave well, and want
nothing.

4. To renew the Tickets quarterly, and regulate the Bands.

5. To appoint all the Stewards and Leaders, and change them when he sees it
necessary.

6. To hold Watch-Nights and Love Feasts.

7. To hold Quarterly Meetings, and therein diligently to enquire, both into
the temporal and spiritual State of each Society.

8. To take Care that every Society be duly supplied with Books: particularly
with the SAINTS' REST, INSTRUCTIONS FOR CHILDREN, and the PRIMITIVE PHYSIC,
which ought to be in every House.

9. To take an exact Account of the Numbers in Society, and bring it to the
Conference.

10. To send an Account of his Circuit every Quarter, to his Elder.

11. To meet the Men and Women apart in the large Societies, once a Quarter.

12. To overlook the Accounts of all the Stewards.

13. To appoint a Person to receive the Quarterly Collection in the Classes,
and to be present at the Time of receiving it.

14. To see that Public Collections be made quarterly.

15. To move a yearly Subscription through those Circuits that can bear it, for
building Churches.

16. To choose a Committee of lay Members, to make a just Application of the
Money, where it is most wanted.

Quest. 3. What other Directions shall we give the Deacons?

Answ. Several.

1. Take a regular Catalogue of the Societies in Towns and Cities, as they live
in Streets.

2. Leave your Successor a particular Account of the State of the Circuit.

3. See that every Band-Leader have the Rules of the Bands.

4. Vigorously, but calmly, enforce the Rules concerning needless Ornaments and
Drams.

5. As soon as there are four Men or Women Believers in any Place, put them
into a Band.

6. Suffer no Love-Feast to last above an Hour and a Half.

7. Warn all from Time to Time, that none are to remove from one Circuit to
another without a Note of Recommendation from the Elder or Deacon in these
Words: A. B. the Bearer has been an acceptable Member of our Society in C. and
inform them, that without such a Certificate, they will not be received into
other Societies.

8. Every where recommend Decency and Cleanliness.

9. Read the Rules of the Society, with the Aid of the Preachers, once a Year,
in every Congregation, and once a Quarter in every Society.

10. On any Dispute between two or more of the Members of our Society which
cannot be settled by the Parties concerned, the Deacon shall inquire into the
Circumstances of the Case, and having consulted the Stewards and Leaders,
shall, if agreeable to their Advice, recommend to the contending Parties a
Reference consisting of one Arbiter, chosen by the Plaintiff, and another by
the Desendent; which two Arbiters so chosen, shall nominate a third (the three
Arbiters being Members of our Society) and the Decision of any two of them,
shall be final. But if either of the Parties refuse to abide by such Decision,
he shall be immediately expelled.

N. B. If any Member of our Society enter into a Lawsuit with another Member
before these Measures are taken, he shall be expelled.

No Deacon that ceases to travel without the Consent of the Conference,
certified under the Hand of a Bishop, shall on any Account exercise the
peculiar Functions of his Office.

SECTION VII. On the Method of receiving Preachers, and their Duty.
Quest. 1. HOW is a Preacher to be received?

Answ. 1. By the Conference.

2. In the Interval of the Conference, by the Elder.

3. When his Name is not printed in the Minutes, he must receive a written
License from his Elder.

Quest. 2. What is the Duty of a Preacher?

1. To preach. 2. To meet the Societies of Classes, and Bands. 3. To visit the
Sick. 4. To meet the Leaders. 5. To preach in the Morning, where he can get
Hearers.
N. B. We are fully determined never to drop Morning-Preaching; and to preach
at five o'Clock in the Summer, and at six in the Winter, wherever it is
practicable.

Quest. 3. Are the Preachers to read our Liturgy?

Answ. All that have received a written Direction for that Purpose, under the
Hand of a Bishop or Elder, may read the Liturgy, as often as they think it
expedient.

Quest. 4. What are the Directions given to a Preacher?

Answ. 1. Be diligent. Never be unemployed. Never be triflingly employed. Never
trifle away Time; neither spend any more Time at any Place than is strictly
necessary.

2. Be serious. Let your Motto be, Holiness to the Lord. Avoid all Lightness,
jesting and foolish Talking.

3. Converse sparingly and cautiously with Women.

4. Take no Step toward Marriage without first consulting with your Brethren.

5. Believe Evil of no one: Unless you see it done, take Heed how you credit
it. Put the best Construction on every Thing. You know the Judge is always
supposed to be on the Prisoner's Side.

6. Speak Evil of no one: Else your Word especially would eat as does a Canker.
Keep your Thoughts within your own Breast, till you come to the Person
concerned.

7. Tell every one under your Care, what you think wrong in his Conduct and
Tempers, and that plainly as soon as may be: Else it will fester in your Heart.
Make all Haste to cast the Fire out of your Bosom.

8. Do not affect the Gentleman. You have no more to do with this Character
than with that of a Dancing Master. A Preacher of the Gospel is the Servant of
all.

9. Be ashamed of nothing but Sin.

10. Be punctual. Do every Thing exactly at the Time. And do not mend our
Rules, but keep them; not for Wrath but Conscience sake.

11. You have nothing to do but to save Souls. Therefore spend and be spent in
this Work. And go always not only to those that want, but to those that want
you most.

Observe. It is not your Business to preach so many Times, and to take Care of
this or that Society: But to save as many Souls as you can; to bring as many
Sinners as you possibly can to Repentance, and with all your Power to build
them up in that Holiness, without which they cannot see the Lord. And remember!
A Methodist Preacher is to mind every Point, great and small, in the Methodist
Discipline! Therefore you will need to exercise all the Sense you have.

12. Act in all Things, not according to your own Will, but as a Son in the
Gospel. As such it is your Part to employ your Time in the Manner which we
direct: Partly in preaching and visiting from House to House: Partly in
reading, Meditation and Prayer. Above all, if you labor with us in our Lord's
Vineyard, it is needful you should do that Part of the Work which we advise, at
those Times and Places which we judge most for His Glory.

Quest. 5. What Method do we use in receiving a Preacher at the Conference?

Answ. After solemn Fasting and Prayer, every Person proposed shall then be
asked, before the Conference, the following Questions (with any others which
may be thought necessary) viz. Have you Faith in Christ? Are you going on to
Perfection? Do you expect to be made perfect in Love in this Life? Are you
groaning after it? Are you resolved to devote yourself wholly to God and his
Work? Do you know the Rules of the Society? Of the Bands? Do you keep them? Do
you constantly attend the Sacrament? Have you read the Form of Discipline? Are
you willing to conform to it? Have you considered the Rules of a Preacher;
especially the first, tenth and twelfth? Will you keep them for Conscience
Sake? Are you determined to employ all your Time in the Work of God? Will you
endeavor not to speak too long or too loud? Will you diligently instruct the
Children in every Place? Will you visit from House to House? Will you recommend
Fasting or Abstinence, both by Precept and Example? Are you in Debt?

We may then, if he gives Satisfaction, receive him as a Probationer, by giving
him the Form of Discipline, inscribed thus: To A. B. "You think it your Duty to
call Sinners to Repentance. Make full Proof hereof, and we shall rejoice to
receive you as a Fellow Laborer." Let him then carefully read and weigh what
is contained therein; that if he has any Doubt, it may be removed. Observe!
Taking on Trial is entirely different from admitting a Preacher. One on Trial,
may be either admitted or rejected, without doing him any Wrong; otherwise it
would be no Trial at all. Let every Deacon explain this to them that are on
Trial.

After two Years Probation, being recommended by the Elder or Deacon, and
examined by the Bishop, he may be received into full Connection, by giving him
the Form of Discipline, inscribed thus: As long as you freely consent to, and
earnestly endeavor to walk by these Rules, we shall rejoice to acknowledge you
as a Fellow Laborer.

N. B. Let none who are local, preach or exhort in any of our Societies without
a Note of Permission from the Deacon: Let every local Preacher or Exhorter take
Care to have this renewed yearly: And let every Elder insist upon it.

SECTION VIII. Of the Collections that are made, and how the Money is to be
expended.
Quest. 1. HOW many Collections are to be made in a Year?

Answ. 1. A Quarterly Collection from the Members of the Society, to supply the
Preachers; and when that is deficient, a Public Quarterly Collection: If there
be any Overplus, let one third be reserved for future Deficiencies; one third
be given to the Poor in general; and one third applied to the building or
improving of our Churches.

2. A Yearly Collection from all our Members that are of Ability, for the
building of convenient Churches.

3. A Collection at Love Feasts, and on sacramental Occasions, for the Poor of
our own Society.

4. An Annual Collection or Subscription for the College.

5. An Annual Public Collection for the Contingencies of the Conference, which
shall be applied,

1. To discharge the Deficiencies of those Preachers, who shall not have
received their full Salary in their Circuits: and,

2. To defray the Expenses of our Missions to distant Parts of the Continent.

Quest. 2. What is the regular annual Salary of the Bishops, Elders, Deacons
and Preachers?

Answ Twenty-four Pounds Pennsylvania Currency, and their traveling Expenses.

Quest. 3. What shall be annually allowed the Wives of the married Preachers?

Answ. Twenty-four Pounds Pennsylvania Currency, if they are in want of it.

SECTION IX. On Class-Meeting.
Quest. 1. HOW may the Leaders of Classes be rendered more useful?

Answ. 1. Let each of them be diligently examined concerning his Method of
meeting a Class. Let this be done with all possible Exactness, at least once a
Quarter. In Order to this, take sufficient Time.

2. Let each Leader carefully inquire how every Soul in his Class prospers: Not
only how each Person observes the outward Rules, but how he grows in the
Knowledge and Love of God.

3. Let the Leaders converse with the Elder and Deacon frequently and freely.

Quest. 2. Can any Thing more be done in Order to make the Class-Meetings
lively and profitable?

Answ. 1. Change improper Leaders.

2. Let the Leaders frequently meet each other's Classes.

3. Let us observe which Leaders are the most useful: And let these meet the
other Classes as often as possible.

4. See that all the Leaders be not only Men of sound Judgment, but Men truly
devoted to God.

Quest. 3. How shall we prevent improper Persons from insinuating themselves
into the Society?

Answ. 1. Give Tickets to none till they are recommended by a Leader with whom
they have met at least two Months on Trial.

2. Give Notes to none but those who are recommended by one you know, or till
they have met three or four Times in a Class.

3. Read the Rules to them the first Time they meet.

Quest. 4. How shall we be more strict in receiving and excluding Members?

Answ. In large Societies we may read the Names of those that are received and
excluded, once a Quarter.

Quest. 5. What shall we do with those Members of Society who wilfully and
repeatedly neglect to meet their Class?

Answ. 1. Let the Elder, Deacon, or one of the Preachers, visit them, wherever
it is practicable, and explain to them the Consequence if they continue to
neglect, viz. Exclusion.

2. If they do not amend, let the Deacon exclude them in the Society; showing
that they are laid aside for a Breach of our Rules of Discipline, and not for
immoral Conduct.

SECTION X. On the Duty of Preachers, to God, themselves and one another.
Quest. 1. HOW shall a Preacher be qualified for his Charge?

Answ. By walking closely with God, and having his Work greatly at Heart: And
by understanding and loving Discipline, ours in particular.

Quest. 2. Do we sufficiently watch over each other?

Answ. We do not. Should we not frequently ask each other, Do you walk closely
with God? Have you now Fellowship with the Father and the Son? At what Hour do
you rise? Do you punctually observe the Morning and Evening Hour of Retirement,
viz. Five o'clock? Do you spend the Day in the Manner which the Conference
advises? Do you converse seriously, usefully and closely? To be more
particular: Do you use all the Means of Grace yourself, and enforce the Use of
them on all other Persons? They are either instituted or prudential.

I. The Instituted are,

1. Prayer; Private, Family, Public; consisting of Deprecation, Petition,
Intercession and Thanksgiving. Do you use each of these? Do you forecast daily
wherever you are, to secure Time for private Devotion? Do you practice it every
where? Do you ask every where, Have you Family Prayer? And do you ask
Individuals, Do you use private Prayer every Morning and Evening?

2. Searching the Scriptures, by

(1) Reading; constantly, some Part of every Day: regularly, all the Bible in
order: carefully, with Mr. Wesley's Notes: seriously, with Prayer before and
after: fruitfully, immediately practicing what you learn there? (2) Meditating:
At set Times? By Rule? (3) Hearing: Every Opportunity? With Prayer before, at,
after? Have you a Bible always about you?
3. The Lord's Supper: Do you use this at every Opportunity? With solemn Prayer
before? With earnest and deliberate Self-Devotion?

4. Do you use as much Abstinence and Fasting every Week, as your Health,
Strength and Labor will permit?

5. Christian Conference: Are you convinced how important and how difficult it
is to order your Conversation aright? Is it always in Grace? Seasoned with
salt? Meet to minister Grace to the Hearers? Do you not converse too long at a
Time? Is not an Hour commonly enough? Would it not be well always to have a
determinate End in View? And to pray before and after it?

II. Prudential Means we may use, either as Christians, as Methodists, as
Preachers, or as Ministers.

1. As Christians: What particular Rules have you in order to grow in Grace?
What Arts of Holy Living?

2. As Methodists: Do you never miss your Class or Band?

3. As Preachers: Do you meet every Society? Also, the Leaders and Bands?

4. As Ministers: Have you thoroughly considered your Duty? And do you make a
Conscience of executing every Part of it?

These Means may be used without Fruit. But there are some Means which cannot;
namely, Watching, Denying ourselves, taking up our Cross, Exercise of the
Presence of God.

1. Do you steadily watch against the World? Yourself? Your besetting Sin?

2. Do you deny yourself every useless Pleasure of Sense? Imagination? Honor?
Are you temperate in all Things? Instance in Food. (1) Do you use only that
Kind, and that Degree, which is best both for your Body and Soul? Do you see
the Necessity of this? (2) Do you eat no Flesh Suppers? (3) Do you eat no more
at each Meal than is necessary? Are you not heavy or drowsy after Dinner? (4)
Do you use only that Kind and that Degree of Drink which is best both for your
Body and Soul? (5) Do you choose and use Water for your common Drink? And only
take Wine and other Liquors medicinally?

3. Wherein do you take up your Cross daily? Do you cheerfully bear your Cross
(whatever is grievous to Nature) as a Gift of God, and labor to profit thereby?

4. Do you endeavor to set God always before you? To see His Eye continually
fixed upon you? Never can you use these Means, but a Blessing will ensue. And
the more you use them, the more will you grow in Grace.

SECTION XI. On the Necessity of Union among ourselves.
LET us be deeply sensible (from what we have known) of the Evil of a Division
in Principle, Spirit or Practice, and the dreadful Consequences to ourselves
and others. If we are united, what can stand before us? If we divide, we shall
destroy ourselves, the Work of God, and the Souls of our People.

Quest. 1. What can be done in order to a closer Union with each other?

Answ. 1. Let us be deeply convinced of the absolute Necessity of it.

2 Pray earnestly for, and speak freely to each other.

3. When we meet, let us never part without Prayer.

4. Take great Care not to despise each other's Gifts.

5. Never speak lightly of each other.

6. Let us defend each other's Character in every Thing, so far as is
consistent with Truth.

7. Labor in Honor each to prefer the other before himself.

SECTION XII. Of the Trial of those who think they are moved by the Holy Ghost
to preach.
Quest. 1. HOW shall we try those who profess to be moved by the Holy Ghost to
preach?

Answ. 1. Let them be asked the following Questions, viz. Do they know God as a
pardoning God? Have they the Love of God abiding in them? Do they desire and
seek nothing but God? And are they holy in all Manner of Conversation?

2. Have they Gifts (as well as Grace) for the Work? Have they (in some
tolerable Degree) a clear, sound Understanding, a right Judgment in the Things
of God, a just Conception of Salvation by Faith? And has God given them any
Degree of Utterance? Do they speak justly, readily, clearly?

3. Have they Fruit? Are any truly convinced of Sin, and converted to God by
their preaching?

As long as these three Marks concur in any one, we believe he is called of God
to preach. These we receive as sufficient Proof that he is moved by the Holy
Ghost.

SECTION XIII. Of the Spirit and Truth of Singing.
Quest. 1. HOW shall we guard against Formality in singing?

Answ. 1. By choosing such Hymns as are proper for the Congregation.

2. By not singing too much at once; seldom more than five or six verses.

3. By suiting the Tune to the Words.

4. By often stopping short, and asking the People, "Now! Do you know what you
said last? Did you speak no more than you felt?"

5. Do not suffer the People to sing too slow. This naturally tends to
Formality; and is brought in by those who have either very strong or very weak
Voices.

6. In every large Society let them learn to sing; and let them always learn
our Tunes first.

7. Let the Women constantly sing their Parts alone. Let no Man sing with them,
unless he understands the Notes, and sings the Base as it is pricked down in
the Tune-Book.

8. Introduce no new Tune till they are perfect in the old.

9. Recommend our Tune-Book every where: And if you cannot sing yourself, choose
a Person or two at each Place to pitch the Tune for you.

10. Exhort every Person in the Congregation to sing, not one in ten only.

11. Sing no Hymns of your own composing.

12. If a Preacher be present, let him alone give out the Words.

13. When the Singers would teach a Tune to the Congregation, they must sing
only the Tenor.

SECTION XIV. Rules by which we should continue, or desist from, Preaching at
any Place.
Quest. 1. IS it advisable for us to preach in as many Places as we can,
without forming any Societies?

Answ. By no Means: We have made the Trial in various Places; and that for a
considerable Time. But all the Seed has fallen by the Way-side. There is scarce
any Fruit remaining.

Quest. 2. Where should we endeavor to preach most?

Answ. 1. Where there are the greatest Number quiet and willing Hearers.

2. Where there is the most Fruit.

Quest. 3. Ought we not diligently to observe, in what Places God is pleased at
any Time to pour out His Spirit more abundantly?

Answ. We ought: and at that Time, to send more Laborers than usual into that
Part of the Harvest.

SECTION XV. On the Matter and Manner of Preaching, and other Public Exercises.
Quest. 1. WHAT is the best general Method of Preaching?

Answ. 1. To invite: 2. To convince. 3. To offer Christ. 4. To build up: And to
do this in some Measure in every Sermon.

Quest. 2. Are there any smaller Advices relative to Preaching, which might be
of Use to us?

Answ. Perhaps these: 1. Be sure never to disappoint a Congregation. 2. Begin
precisely at the Time appointed. 3. Let your whole Deportment before the
Congregation be serious, weighty and solemn. 4. Always suit your Subject to
your Audience. 5. Choose the plainest Texts you can. 6. Take Care not to ramble,
but keep to your Text, and make out what you take in Hand. 7. Take Care of any
Thing awkward or affected, either in your Gesture, Phrase or Pronunciation. 8.
Print nothing without the Approbation of the Conference, and one of the
Bishops. 9. Do not usually pray ex tempore above eight or ten Minutes (at most)
without Intermission. 10. Frequently read and enlarge upon a Portion of the
Notes: And let young Preachers often exhort without taking a Text. 11. Always
avail yourself of the great Festivals by preaching on the Occasion. 12. Be
courteous to all.

Quest. 3. Have not some of us been led off from practical Preaching by (what
is called) preaching Christ?

Answ. Indeed we have. The most effectual Way of Preaching Christ, is to preach
him in all his Offices; and to declare his Law, as well as his Gospel, both to
Believers and Unbelievers. Let us strongly and closely insist upon inward and
outward Holiness in all its Branches.

SECTION XVI. Against Antinomianism.
Quest. 1. WHAT can be done to guard against Antinomianism?

Answ. 1. Let all the Preachers carefully read over Mr. Wesley's and Mr.
Fletcher's Tracts. 2. Let them frequently and explicitly preach the Truth, but
not in a controversial Way. And let them take Care to do it in Love and
Gentleness: Not in Bitterness, returning Railing for Railing. 3. Answer all the
Objections of our People as Occasion offers. But take Care to do this with all
possible Sweetness both of Look and Accent.

Quest. 2. Wherein lies our Danger of it?

Answ. 1. With Regard to Man's Faithfulness, Our Lord himself taught us to use
the Expression. Therefore we ought never to be ashamed of it. We ought steadily
to assert upon his Authority, that if a Man is not faithful in the unrighteouss
Mammon, God will not give him the true Riches.

2. With regard to working for Life, which our Lord expressly commands us to
do. Labor (ergazesthe) literally work for the Meat that endures to
everlasting Life. And in Fact every Believer till he comes to Glory, works for,
as well as from Life.

3. We have received it as a Maxim, that "A Man is to do nothing in order to
Justification:" Nothing can be more false. Whoever desires to find Favor with
God, should cease from Evil, and learn to do well. So God Himself teaches by
the Prophet Isaiah. Whoever repents, should do Works meet for Repentance: And
if this is not in order to find Favor, what does he do for them?

Once more review the whole Affair.

1. Who of us is now accepted of God?

He that now believes in Christ with a loving, obedient Heart.

2. But who among those that never heard of Christ?

He that according to the Light he has, scareth God, and works Righteousness.

3. Is this the same with, He that is sincere?

Nearly, if not quite.

4. Is not this Salvation by Works?

Not by the Merit of Works, but by Works as a Condition.

5. The grand Objection to one of the preceding Propositions, is drawn from
Matter of Fact. God does in Fact justify those who by their own Confession
neither feared God, nor wrought Righteousness. Is this an Exception to the
general Rule?

It is a Doubt whether God makes any Exception at all. But how are we sure that
the Person in question never did fear God, and work Righteousness?

His own thinking so, is no Proof. For we know how all that are convinced of
sin, undervalue themselves in every Respect.

6. Does not talking without proper Caution of a justified or sanctified State,
tend to mislead Men? Almost naturally leading them to trust in what was done in
one Moment? Whereas we are every Moment pleasing or displeasing God, according
to our Works; according to the whole of our present inward Tempers, and outward
Behavior.

SECTION XVII. How to provide for the Circuits in the Time of Conference, and
to preserve and increase the Work of God.
Quest. 1. WHAT can be done to supply the Circuits, during the Sitting of the
Conference?

Answ. 1. Let all the Appointments stand according to the Plan of the Circuit.

2. Engage as many Local Preachers and Exhorters as will supply them; and let
them be paid for their Time in Proportion to the Salary of the
Travelling-Preachers.

3. If Preachers and Exhorters cannot attend, let some Person of Ability be
appointed in every Society, to sing, pray, and read one of Mr. Wesley's Sermons.

4. And if that cannot be done, let there be Prayer-Meetings.

5. Wherever you can, in large Societies, appoint Prayer-Meetings.

Lastly, let a Fast be published at every quarterly Meeting for the Friday
following; and a Memorandum of it be written on all the Class-Papers. Also be
active in dispersing the Books among the People.

SECTION XVIII. Of employing our Time profitably, when we are not traveling,
or not engaged in Public Exercises.
Quest. 1. WHAT general Method of employing our Time would you advise us to?

Answ. We advise you, 1. As often as possible to rise at four. 2. From four to
five in the Morning, and from five to six in the Evening, to meditate, pray and
read, partly the Scriptures with Mr. Wesley's Notes, partly the closely
practical Parts of what he has published. 3. From six in the Morning till
twelve (allowing an Hour for Breakfast) read in Order, with much Prayer, the
Christian Library, and other pious Books.

Quest. 2. Why is it that the People under our Care are not better?

Answ. Other Reasons may concur; but the chief is, because we are not more
knowing and more holy.

Quest. 3. But why are we not more knowing?

Answ. Because we are idle. We forget our first Rule, "Be diligent. Never be
unemployed. Never be triflingly employed; neither spend any more Time at any
Place than is strictly necessary." I fear there is altogether a Fault in this
Matter, and that few of us are clear. Which of you spends as many Hours a Day
in God's Work, as you did formerly in Man's Work? We talk, talk -- or read
History, or what comes next to Hand. We must, absolutely must, cure this Evil,
or betray the Cause of God. But how? 1. Read the most useful Books, and that
regularly and constantly. Steadily spend all the Morning in this Employment, or
at least five Hours in four and twenty. "But I have no Taste for reading."
Contract a Taste for it by Use, or return to your former Employment. "But I
have no Books." Be diligent to spread the Books, and you will have the Use of
them.

SECTION XIX. On Baptism.
LET every adult Person, and the Parents of every Child, to be baptized, have
the Choice either of Immersion, Sprinkling or Pouring.

N. B. We will on no Account whatever receive a Fee or Present for
administering Marriage, Baptism or the Burial of the Dead: Freely we have
received, freely we will give.

SECTION XX. On the Lord's Supper.
Quest. ARE there any Directions to be given concerning the Administration of
the Lord's Supper?

Answ. 1. Let those who choose, receive it kneeling; and those who do not,
either standing or sitting.

2. Let no Person that is not a Member of our Society, be admitted to the
Communion, without Examination, and some Token given by an Elder or Deacon.

SECTION XXI. On unlawful Marriages.
Quest. 1. DO we observe any Evil which has lately prevailed among our
Societies?

Answ. Many of our Members have married with unawakened Persons. This has had
fatal Effects. They have been either hindered for Life, or turned back to
Perdition.

Quest. 2. What can be done to put a Stop to this?

Answ. 1. Let every Preacher publicly enforce the Apostle's Caution, "Be ye not
unequally yoked together with Unbelievers."

2. Let him openly declare, Whoever does this, will be expelled the Society.

3. When any such is expelled, let a suitable Exhortation be subjoined.

4. Let all be exhorted to take no Step in so weighty a Master, without
advising with the most serious of their Brethren.

Quest. 3. Ought any Woman to marry without the Consent of her Parents?

Answ. In general, she ought not. Yet there may be Exceptions. For if, 1. A
Woman be under the Necessity of marrying: If, 2. Her Parents absolutely refuse
to let her marry any Christian: Then she may, nay, ought to marry without their
Consent. Yet even then a Methodist-Preacher ought not to marry her.

SECTION XXII. On Perfection.
LET us strongly and explicitly exhort all Believers to go on to Perfection.
That we may all speak the same Thing, we ask once for all, Shall we defend this
Perfection, or give it up? We all agree to defend it, meaning thereby (as we
did from the Beginning) Salvation from all Sin, by the Love of God and Man
filling our Heart. The Papists say, "This cannot be attained till we have been
refined by the Fire of Purgatory." Some Professors say, "Nay, it will be
attained as soon as the Soul and Body part." Others say, "It may be attained
before we die: A Moment after is too late." Is it so, or not? We are all
agreed, we may be saved from all Sin before Death. The Substance then is
settled. But as to the Circumstances, is the Change gradual or instantaneous!
It is both the one and the other. "But should we in Preaching insist both on
one and the other?" Certainly we should insist on the gradual Change; and that
earnestly and continually. And are there not Reasons why we should insist on
the instantaneous also? If there be such a blessed Change before Death, should
we not encourage all Believers to expect it? And the rather, because constant
Experience shows, the more earnestly they expect this, the more swiftly and
steadily does the gradual Work of God go on in their Souls; the more careful
are they to grow in Grace; the more zealous of good Works, and the more
punctual in their Attendance on all the Ordinances of God; (whereas just the
contrary Effects are observed, whenever this Expectation ceases.) They are
saved by Hope, by this Hope of a total Change, with a gradually increasing
Salvation. Destroy this Hope, and that Salvation stands still, or rather
decreases daily. Therefore whoever would advance the gradual Change in
Believers, should strongly insist on the instantaneous.

SECTION XXIII. On Dress.
Quest. 1. SHOULD we insist on the Rules concerning Dress?

Answ. By all Means. This is no Time to give any Encouragement to Superfluity
of Apparel. Therefore give no Tickets to any, till they have left off
superfluous Ornaments. In order to this, 1. Let every Deacon read the Thoughts
upon Dress, at least once a Year in every large Society. 2. In visiting the
Classes, be very mild, but very strict. 3. Allow of no exempt Case, not even of
a married Woman: Better one suffer than many. 4. Give no Tickets to any that
wear High Heads, enormous Bonnets, Ruffles or Rings.

SECTION XXIV. On the Privileges granted to serious Persons that are not of the
Society.
Quest. 1. HOW often shall we permit Strangers to be present at the Meeting of
the Society?

Answ. At every other Meeting of the Society in every Place, let no Stranger be
admitted. At other Times they may; but the same Persons not above twice or
thrice.

Quest 2. How often shall we permit Strangers to be present at our Love Feasts?

Answ. Let them be admitted with the utmost Caution; and the same Person on no
Account above twice or thrice, unless he becomes a Member.

SECTION XXV. On visiting from House to House; guarding against those Sins that
are so common to Professors, and enforcing Practical Religion.
Quest. 1. HOW can we further assist those under our Care?

Answ. 1. By instructing them at their own Houses. What unspeakable Need is
there of this? The World says, "The Methodists are no better than other
People." This is not true. But it is nearer the Truth than we are willing to
believe. For 1. Personal Religion either toward God, or Man, is very
superficial among us. We can but just touch on a few Generals. How little Faith
is there among us? How little Communion with God? How little living in Heaven,
walking in Eternity, Deadness to every Creature? How much Love of the World?
Desire of Pleasure, of Ease, of getting Money? How little brotherly Love? What
continual Judging one another? What Gossipping, Evil-speaking. Tale-bearing?
What Want of moral Honesty? To instance only one Particular; Who does as he
would be done by, in buying and selling?

2. Family-Religion is wanting in many Branches. And what avails Public
Preaching alone, though we could preach like Angels? We must, yea, every
Travelling-Preacher must instruct them from House to House. Till this is done,
and that in good Earnest, the Methodists will be little better than other
People.

Our Religion is not deep, universal, uniform; but superficial, partial,
uneven. It will be so, till we spend half as much Time in this Visiting, as we
now do in talking uselessly. Can we find a better Method of doing this than Mr.
Baxter's? If not, let us adopt it without Delay. His whole Tract, entitled,
Gildas Salvianus, is well worth a careful Perusal. Speaking of this visiting
from House to House, he says, (p. 351.)

"We shall find many Hindrances, both in ourselves and the People.

1. In ourselves, there is much Dullness and Laziness, so that there will be
much ado to get us to be faithful in the Work.

2. We have a base, man-pleasing Temper, so that we let Men perish, rather than
lose their Love; we let them go quietly to Hell, lest we should offend them.

Some of us have also a foolish Bashfulness. We know not how to begin, and
blush to contradict the Devil.

4. But the greatest Hindrance is Weakness of Faith. Our whole Motion is weak,
because the Spring of it is weak.

5. Lastly, we are unskilful in the Work. How few know how to deal with Men, so
as to get within them, and suit all our Discourse to their several Conditions
and Tempers: To choose the fittest Subjects, and follow them with a holy Mixture
of Seriousness and Terror, and Love, and Meekness?

But undoubtedly this private Application is implied in those solemn Words of
the Apostle, I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall
judge the Quick and Dead at his appearing, preach the Word, be instant in
Season, out of Season: Reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all Long-suffering.

O Brethren, if we could but set this Work on foot in all our Societies, and
prosecute it zealously, what Glory would redound to God. If the common
Lukewarmness were banished, and every Shop, and every House busied in speaking
of the Words and Works of God; surely God would dwell in our Habitations, and
make us His Delight.

And this is absolutely necessary to the Welfare of our People, some of whom
neither believe nor repent to this Day. Look round and see how many of them are
still in apparent Danger of Damnation. And how can you walk, and talk, and be
merry with such People, when you know their Case? Methinks when you look them
in the Face, you should break forth into Tears, as the Prophet did when he
looked upon Hazael, and then set on them with the most vehement Exhortations.
O, for God's Sake, and the Sake of poor Souls, bestir yourselves, and spare no
Pains that may conduce to their Salvation!

What Cause have we to bleed before the Lord this Day, that we have so long
neglected this good Work! If we had but engaged in it sooner, how many more
might have been brought to Christ? And how much holier and happier might we
have made our Societies before now? And why might we not have done it sooner?
There are many Hindrances: And so there always will be. But the greatest
Hindrance was in ourselves, in our Littleness of Faith and Love.

But it is objected, 1. This will take up so much Time, we shall not have
Leisure to follow our Studies.

We answer, ^^^^taining Knowledge is a good Thing, but saving Souls is a
better. 2. By this very Thing you will gain the most excellent Knowledge, that
of God and Eternity. 3. You will have Time for gaining other Knowledge too.
Only sleep not more than you need; and never be idle or triflingly employed.
But, 4. If you can do but one, let your Studies alone. I would throw by all the
Libraries in the World rather than be guilty of the Loss of one Soul.

It is objected, II. "The People will not submit to it." If some will not,
others will. And the Success with them, will repay all your Labor. O let us
herein follow the Example of St. Paul. 1. For our general Business, Serving the
Lord with all Humility of Mind: 2. Our special Work, Take Heed to yourselves
and to all the Flock: 3. Our Doctrine, Repentance toward God, and Faith in our
Lord Jesus Christ: 4. The Place, I have taught you publicly, and from House to
House: 5. The Object and Manner of Teaching, I ceased not to warn every one,
Night and Day, with Tears: 6. His Innocence and Self-Denial herein, I have
covetted no Man's Silver or Gold: 7. His Patience, Neither count I my Life dear
unto myself. And among all other Motives, let these be ever before our Eyes: 1.
The Church of God, which he has purchased with his own Blood. 2. Grievous
Wolves shall enter in; yea, of yourselves shall Men arise, speaking perverse
Things.

Write this upon your Hearts, and it will do you more good than twenty Year's
Study. Then you will have no Time to spare: You will have Work enough. Then
likewise no Preacher will stay with us who is as Salt that has lost its Savor.
For to such this Employment would be (...) Drudgery. And in order to it, you
(...) need of all the Knowledge you can procure.

The Sum is, Go into every House in course, and teach every one therein, young
and old, if they belong to us, to be Christians inwardly and outwardly Make
every Particular plain to their Understandings; fix it in their Minds; write it
on their Hearts. In order to this, there must be Line upon Line, Precept upon
Precept. What Patience, what Love, what Knowledge is requisite for this? We
must needs do this, were it only to avoid Idleness. Do we not loiter away many
Hours in every Week? Each try himself: No Idleness is consistent with Growth in
Grace. Nay, without Exactness in redeeming Time, you cannot retain the Grace
you received in Justification.

Quest. 2. Why are we not more holy, why do not we live in Eternity? Walk with
God all the Day long? Why are we not all devoted to God? Breathing the whole
Spirit of Missionaries?

Answ. Chiefly because we are Enthusiaists; looking for the End without using
the Means. To touch only upon two or three Instances: Who of you rises at four?
Or even at five, when he does not preach? Do you know the Obligation and
Benefit of Fasting or Abstinence? How often do you practice it? The Neglect of
this alone is sufficient to account for our Feebleness and Faintness of Spirit.
We are continually grieving the Holy Spirit of God by the habitual Neglect of a
plain Duty. Let us amend from this Hour.

Quest. 3. How shall we guard against Sabath-breaking, Evil-speaking,
unprofitable Conversation, Lightness, Expensiveness or Gaiety of Apparel, and
contracting (...) without due Care to discharge them?

Answ. 1. (...) preach expressly on each of these Heads. 2. Read in every
Society the Sermon on Evil-speaking. 3. Let the Leaders closely examine and
exhort every Person to put away the accursed Thing. 4. Let the Preacher warn
every Society, that none who is guilty herein, can remain with us. 5. Extirpate
Smugling, buying or selling uncustomed Goods, out of every Society. Let none
remain with us who will not totally abstain from every Kind and Degree of it.
6. Extirpate Bribery, receiving any Thing, directly or indirectly, for voting
at any Election. Show no Respect of Persons herein, but expel all that touch
the accursed Thing.

Quest. 4. What shall we do to prevent Scandal, when any of our Members fail in
Business, or contract Debts which they are not able to pay?

Answ. Let the Elder or Deacon desire two or three judicious Members of the
Society to inspect the Accounts of the supposed Delinquents; and if they have
behaved Dishonestly, or borrowed Money without a Probability of paying, let
them be suspended till their Credit is restored.

SECTION XXVI. On the Instruction of Children.
Quest. WHAT shall we do for the rising Generation? Let him who is zealous for
God and the Souls of Men begin now.

Answ. 1. Where there are ten Children whose Parents are in Society, meet them
an Hour once a Week; but where this is impracti^^^^^, meet them once in two
Weeks.

2. Procure our Instructions (...), and let all who can, read and commit them
to Memory.

3. Explain and impress them upon their Hearts.

4. Talk with them every Time you see any at Home.

5. Pray in Earnest for them. Diligently instruct and exhort all Parents at
their own Houses.

6. Let the Elders, Deacons and Preachers take a List of the Names of the
Children; and if any of them be truly awakened, let them be admitted into
Society.

7. Preach expressly on Education; "But I have no Gift for this." Gift or no
Gift, you are to do it; else you are not called to be a Methodist-Preacher. Do
it as you can, till you can do it as you would. Pray earnestly for the Gift,
and use the Means for it.

SECTION XXVII. On Building Churches, and on the Order to he observed therein.
Quest. 1. IS any Thing advisable in regard to Building?

Answ. Let all our Churches be built plain and decent; but not more expensively
than is absolutely unavoidable: Otherwise the Necessity of raising Money will
make Rich Men necessary to us. But if so, we must be dependent on them, yea,
and governed by them. And then farewell to the Methodist-Discipline, if not
Doctrine too.

N. B. 1. That no Person shall be eligible as a Trustee to any of our Churches
or Colleges, that is not in constant Church Communion, and a regular Leader or
Member of a Class. 2. That no Person that is a Trusttee, shall be ejected while
he is in joint Security for Money, unless such Relief be given him that is
demanded; or that the Person who makes the Loan will accept.

Quest. 2. Is there any Exception to the Rule, "Let the Men and Women sit
apart?"

Answ. There is no Exception. Let them sit apart in all our Churches.

Quest. 3. But is there not a worse Indecency than this, Talking in the
Congregation, before and after Service? How shall this be cured?

Answ. Let all the Ministers and Preachers join as one Man, and enlarge on the
Impropriety of Talking before or after Service; and strongly exhort those that
are concerned to do it no more. In three Months, if we are in Earnest, this
vile Practice will be banished out of every Methodist-Congregation. Let none
stop till he has carried his Point.

SECTION XXVIII. On raising a general Fund for the Propagation of the Gospel.
Quest. HOW may we raise a general Fund for carrying on the whole Work of God?

Answ. By a yearly Collection, and, if need be, a quarterly one, to be raised
by every Assistant in every principal Congregation in his Circuit. To this End,
he may then read and enlarge upon the following Hints in every such
Congregation.

"How shall we send Laborers into those Parts where they are most of all
wanted? Many are willing to hear, but not to bear the Expense. Nor can it as
yet be expected of them: Stay till the Word of God has touched their Hearts,
and then they will gladly provide for them that preach it. Does it not lie upon
us in the mean Time to supply their Lack of Service? To raise a general Fund,
out of which from Time to Time that Expense may be defrayed? By this Means
those who willingly offer themselves, may travel through every Part, whether
there are Societies or not, and stay wherever there is a Call, without being
burdensome to any. Thus may the Gospel, in the Life and Power thereof, be
spread from Sea to Sea. Which of you will not rejoice to throw in your Mite to
promote this glorious Work?

"Besides this, in carrying on so large a Work through the Continent, there are
Calls for Money in various Ways, and we must frequently be at considerable
Expense, or the Work must be at a full Stop. Many too are the occasional
Distresses of our Preachers, or their Families, which require an immediate
Supply. Otherwise their Hands would hang down, if they were not constrained to
depart from the Work.

"The Money contributed will be brought to the ensuing Conference.

"Men and Brethren, help! Was there ever a Call like this since you first heard
the Gospel-Sound? Help to relieve your Companions in the Kingdom of Jesus, who
are pressed above Measure. Bear ye one another's Burdens, and so fulfill the Law
of Christ. Help to send forth able, willing Laborers into your Lord's Harvest:
So shall ye be assistant in saving Souls from Death, and hiding a Multitude of
Sins. Help to propagate the Gospel of your Salvation to the remotest Corners of
the Earth, till the Knowledge of our Lord shall cover the Land as the Waters
cover the Sea. So shall it appear to ourselves and all Men, that we are indeed
one Body united by one Spirit; so shall the baptized Heathens be yet again
constrained to say, "See how these Christians love one another."

SECTION XXIX. Of the Method of raising a Fund for the Superannuated Preachers,
and the Widows and Orphans of Preachers.
Quest. 1. HOW can we provide for Superannuated Preachers, and the Widows and
Orphans of Preachers?

Answ. 1. Let every Preacher contribute two Dollars yearly at the Conference.

2. Let every one when first admitted as a Travelling-Preacher, pay twenty
Shillings Pennsylvania Currency.

3. Let this Money be lodged in the Hands of the Treasurers.

4. Let there be three Treasurers, three Clerks (each of whom shall keep a
separate Account) and three Inspectors, who shall annually lay before the
Conference an exact State of the Fund.

5. Let these nine form a Committee for the Management of the Fund; three of
whom shall be competent to proceed on any Business; provided one be a
Treasurer, another an Inspector, and the third a Clerk.

6. Out of this Fund, let Provision be made, first, for the Worn-out Preachers,
and then for the Widows and Children of those that are dead.

7. Every Worn-out Preacher shall receive, if he wants it, not usually more
than Twenty-four Pounds per Year, Pennsylvania Currency.

8. Every Widow of a Preacher shall receive yearly, if she wants it, during her
Widowhood, twenty Pounds.

9. Every Child of a Preacher shall receive once for all, if he wants it,
twenty Pounds.

10. But none shall be entitled to any Thing from this Fund, till he has paid
Fifty Shillings.

11. Nor any who neglects paying his Subscription for three Years together,
unless he be sent by the Conference out of these United States.

12. Let the Fund never be reduced to less than one hundred Pounds.

13. Let every Assistant, as far as possible, bring to Conference the
Contribution of every Preacher left behind in his Circuit.

SECTION XXX. Concerning Cokesbury-College.
AS a College has been erected with the Approbation of the Conference, for the
Benefit of the Connection; and as the whole Direction of the Seminary
ultimately rests with the Conference; we are determined to support it under
such Regulations as the Conference from Time to Time shall order, concerning
its literary, temporal and spiritual Interests: And therefore the Counsels, the
Authority and the Aid of the Conference are earnestly requested for the Support
of the Institution; that the necessary Collections may be raised, the Design of
the Seminary be fully explained and strongly recommended to the People, and all
the Objections which any of our mistaken Friends may entertain, be fully
answered.

SECTION XXXI. On the Printing of Books, and the Application of the Profits
arising therefrom.
AS it has been frequently recommended by the Preachers and People, that such
Books as are wanted, be printed in this Country, we therefore propose,

1. That the Advice of the Conference shall be desired concerning any valuable
Impression, and their Consent be obtained before any Steps be taken for the
Printing thereof.

2. That the Profits of the Books, after all the necessary Expenses are
defrayed, shall be applied, according to the Discretion of the Conference,
toward the College, the Preachers' Fund, the Deficiencies of Preachers'
Salaries, the distant Missions, or the Debts on our Churches.

INDEX.
SECTION I. Of the Rise of Methodism (so called) in Europe and America. Page 3
SECTION II. On the Method of holding a Conference, and the Business to be done
therein. p. 4 SECTION III. On the Nature and Constitution of our Church. p. 5
SECTION IV. On the Constituting of Bishops, and their Duty. p. 6 SECTION V. On
the Constituting of Elders, and their Duty. p. 7 SECTION VI. On the
Constituting of Deacons, and their Duty. p. 8 SECTION VII. On the Method of
receiving Preachers, and their Duty. p. 11 SECTION VIII. Of the Collections
that are made, and how the Money is to be expended. p. 15 SECTION IX. On
Class-Meeting. p. 16 SECTION X. On the Duty of Preachers, to God, themselves,
and one another. p. 17 SECTION XI. On the Necessity of Union among ourselves.
p. 20 SECTION XII. Of the Trial of those who think they are moved by the Holy
Ghost to Preach. p. 2^ SECTION XIII. Of the Spirit and Truth of Singing. p. 22
SECTION XIV. Rules by which we should continue, or desist from, Preaching at
any Place. p. 23 SECTION XV. On the Matter and Manner of Preaching, and other
Public Exercises ibid SECTION XVI. Against Antinomianism. p. 24 SECTION XVII.
How to provide for the Circuits in the Time of Conference, and to preserve and
(...) Work of God. p.26 SECTION XVIII. On employing our Time profitably, when
we are not traveling, or not engaged in Public Exercises. p. 27 SECTION XIX.
On Baptism. p. 28 SECTION XX. On the Lord's Supper. p. 29 SECTION XXI. On
unlawful Marriages. ibid SECTION XXII. On Perfection. p. 30 SECTION XXIII. On
Dress. p. 31 SECTION XXIV. On the Privileges granted to serious Persons that
are not of the Society. 32 SECTION XXV. On visiting from House to House;
guarding against those Sins that are so common to Professors, and enforcing
Practical Religion. ibid SECTION XXVI. On the Instruction of Children. p. 38
SECTION XXVII. On Building Churches, and on the Order to be observed therein.
p. 39 SECTION XXVIII. On raising a general Fund for the Propagation of the
Gospel. p. 40 SECTION XXIX. Of the Method of raising a Fund for the
Superannuated Preachers, and the Widows and Orphans of Preachers (...) p. 42
SECTION XXX. Concerning (...) College. p. 43 SECTION XXXI. O^ the Printing of
Books, and the Application of the Profits arising therefrom. p. 44

