MISCELLANIES, MORAL and INSTRUCTIVE, IN PROSE and VERSE; COLLECTED FROM
VARIOUS AUTHORS, FOR THE USE OF SCHOOLS, AND IMPROVEMENT OF YOUNG PERSONS OF
BOTH SEXES.

"It Is Education forms the common Mind;
"Just as the Twig is bent, the Tree's inclined."
POPE. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JOSEPH JAMES, in Chesnut-Street, between Front
and Second-Streets. MDCCXXXVII.

PREFACE.
THE right education of youth, being a point of great importance to the present
and succeeding generations, it is to be regretted, that the want of proper
books for the use of schools, should have been so general a subject of
complaint; and that very few attempts have been made to supply this deficiency,
by introducing something on such a plan, as might, besides improving the
understandings and morals, instructively amuse the vacant hours of young
people, and have a tendency to render the task of teaching a more agreeable
employment.

WITH a view to these objects, the following Miscellaneous Compilation is now
offered to the public. Most of the extracts which compose it, were collected
some years ago, from a variety of authors, by a person who had no other
intention, at the time, but that of preserving them for her own perusal and
amusement; and who, from motives wholly disinterested, has lately, at the
request of her friends, consented to their publication, with a hope, that if
they are favorably received, it may prove an incitement to some person of
greater abilities, to pursue this or a better plan, whereby our schools may be
furnished with a book more deserving their acceptance.

IT gives some concern to the compiler, that she neglected to distinguish the
different parts, with the names of their authors, at the time they were
selected, as it is not now in her power to supply the omission.

THE editor has thought it necessary to remark, that a few verbal alterations
have been made in some of the extracts, the better to adapt them to the use of
the present design; but as the sentiments and tenor of the original pieces are
not thereby materially changed, it is hoped this freedom will be excused by
their respective authors, to whom not the least injury or offense has been
intended.

THE EDITOR.

ONE of the most approved judges of books amongst us, after perusing some parts
of the manuscript, has expressed his approbation thereof as follows:

I HAVE read, with much pleasure, the manuscript specimen communicated to me of
the Miscellanies in Prose and Verse. I am glad to hear they are now ordered for
the press.

A BOOK, containing so many well chosen sentiments, and excellent instructions,
put into the hands of our children, cannot but be highly useful to the rising
generation.

B. FRANKLIN.


A MORNING HYMN.
TO thee, let my first offerings rise,
Whose sun creates the day,
Swift as his glad'ning influence flies,
And spotless as his ray.
What numbers with heart-piercing sighs
Have past this tedious night!
What numbers too have closed their eyes,
No more to see the light!
Sound was my sleep, my dreams were gay,
How short such time reviewed!
My night stole unperceived away;
I Am like the day renewed.
This day thy favoring hand be nigh,
So often vouchsafed before;
Still may it lead, protect, supply,
And I that hand adore.
If bliss thy Providence impart,
For which resigned I pray,
Give me to feel the grateful heart,
And without guilt be gay.
Affliction, should thy love intend,
As vice or folly's cure,
Patient to gain that gracious end,
May I the means endure.
Thus from my fixed or varying fate,
Some virtue let me gain,
That Heaven, nor high, nor low estate,
When sent, may send in vain.
Be this, and every future day
Still wiser than the past,
That life's improvement to survey
May well sustain my last.
THE duties of religion, sincerely and regularly performed, will always be
sufficient to exalt the meanest, and to exercise the highest understanding.
That mind will never be vacant, which is frequently recalled by stated duties
to meditations on eternal interests; nor can any hour be long, which is spent
in obtaining some new qualification for celestial happiness.

TO love an enemy, is the distinguishing characteristic of a religion, which is
not of man but of God. It could be delivered as a precept, only by him who
lived and died to establish it by his example.

IF thou do good to man, as an evidence of thy love to God, thy virtue will
be exalted from moral to divine; and that happiness, which is the foretaste of
paradise, will be thy reward upon earth.

RECREATION after business is allowable; but he that follows his pleasure
instead of his business, shall in a little time have no business to follow.

RESIGNATION.
THOU Power Supreme, by whose command I live,
The grateful tribute of my praise receive;
To thy indulgence, I my being owe,
And all the joys which from that being flow.
Scarce eighteen suns have formed the rolling year,
And run their destined courses round the sphere,
Since thou my undistinguished form surveyed,
Among the lifeless heaps of matter laid;
Thy skill my elemental clay refined,
The straggling parts in beauteous order joined;
With perfect symmetry composed the whole,
And stamped thy sacred image on my soul;
A soul, susceptible of endless joy!
Whose frame, nor force, nor time, can ever destroy,
But shall subsist, when nature claims my breath,
And bid defiance to the power of death,
To realms of bliss, with active freedom soar,
And live when earth and hell shall be no more.
Indulgent God, in vain my tongue assays,
For this immortal gift, to speak thy praise.
How shall my heart, its grateful sense reveal,
When all the energy of words must fail?
Oh! may its influence in my life appear,
And every action, prove my thanks sincere.
Grant me, great God! a heart to thee inclined,
Increase my faith, and rectify my mind;
Teach me betimes to tread thy sacred ways,
And to thy service consecrate my days;
Still as through life's uncertain maze I stray,
Be thou the guiding-star to mark my way;
Conduct the steps of my unguarded youth,
And point their motions to the paths of truth;
Protect me by thy providential care,
And teach my soul to avoid the tempter's snare;
Through all the various scenes of human life,
In calms of ease, or blustering storms of strife,
Through every turn of this inconstant state,
Preserve my temper, equal and sedate;
Give me a mind that bravely does despise,
The low designs of artifice and lies;
Be my religion, such as taught by thee,
Alike from pride and superstition free;
Inform my judgment, rectify my will,
Confirm my reason, and my passions still;
To gain thy favor be my only end,
And to that scope may every action tend;
Amidst the pleasures of a prosperous state,
Whose flattering charms too often the mind elate,
Still may I think to whom these joys I owe,
And bless the bounteous hand from whence they flow;
Or if an adverse fortune be my share,
Let not its terrors tempt me to despair,
But bravely armed, a steady faith maintain,
And own all best which thy decrees ordain;
On thy Almighty Providence depend,
The best protector and the surest friend:
Thus on life's stage may I my part maintain*
And at my exit thy applauses gain;
When thy pale herald summons me away,
Support me in that great catastrophe;
In that last conflict guard me from alarms,
And take my soul, expiring, to thy arms.
BLESSED are the poor in spirit, for their's is the kingdom of Heaven. -- Thus
our blessed Savior opened his sermon on the mount; and from his example we may
be assured, that humility is the richest garment that the soul can wear. By
this word is to be understood, not an abject poorness of spirit, that would
stoop to do a mean thing; but such an humble sense of human nature, as sets the
heart and affections right toward God, and gives us every temper that is
tender and affectionate toward our fellow creatures. This is the soil of all
virtues, where every thing that is good and lovely grows.

DESPISE not labor; if you do not want it for food, you may for physic: It
strengthens the body, invigorates the mind, and prevents the ill consequences
of idleness.

OBSERVE the ant, for she instructs the man,
And preaches labor, gathering all she can,
Then brings it to increase her heap at home,
Against the winter which she knows will come;
And when that comes she creeps abroad no more,
But lies at home and feasts upon her store.
AN EVENING REFLECTION.
WHILE night, in solemn shade, in^ests the pole,
And calm reflection sooths the pensi^e soul;
While reason, undisturbed, aff^ts her sway,
And life's deceitful colors fade away --
To thee, all-conscious Presence! I devote
This peaceful interval of sober thought.
Here all my better faculties confine,
And be this hour of sacred silence thine.
If by the day's illusive scenes misled,
My erring soul from virtue's path has strayed,
Snared by example or by passion warmed,
Some false delight my giddy sense has charmed;
My calmer thoughts the wretched choice reprove,
And my best hopes are centered in thy love.
Deprived of this, can life one joy afford!
Its utmost boast, a vain, unmeaning word.
But, ah! how often my lawless passions rove,
And break those awful precepts I approve!
Pursue the fatal impulse I abhor,
And violate the virtue I adore!
Often when thy better Spirit's guardian care,
Warned my fond soul to shun the tempting snare,
My stubborn will his gentle aid represt,
And checked the rising goodness in my breast;
Mad with vain hopes, or urged by false desires,
Stilled his soft voice and quenched his sacred sires.
With grief oppressed, and prostrate in the dust,
Should thou condemn, I own the sentence just.
But, oh! thy softer titles let me claim,
And plead my cause by mercy's gentle name --
Mercy, that wipes the penitential tear,
And dissipates the horror of despair;
From rig'rous justice steals the vengeful hour,
Softens the dreadful attribute of power,
Disarms the wrath of an offended God,
And seals my pardon in a Savior's blood.
All-pow'rful grace, exert thy gentle sway,
And teach my rebel passions to obey,
Lest lurking folly, with insidious art,
Regain my volatile, inconstant heart;
Shall every high resolve devotion frames,
Be only lifeless sounds and specious names?
Oh! rather while thy hopes and fears c^nt^oul,
In this still hour, each motion of my soul,
Secure its safety by a sudden doom,
And be the soft retreat of sleep my tomb;
Calm let me slumber in that dark repose,
'Till the last morn its orient beam disclose;
Then when the great archangel's potent sound
Shall echo through creation's ample round,
Waked from the sleep of death, with joy survey
The opening splendors of eternal day.
PRIDE hides a man's faults from himself, and magnifies them to others.

THERE is nothing (says Plato) so delightful, as the hearing or the speaking of
truth. For this reason, there is no conversation so agreeable, as that of the
man of integrity, who hears without any intention to betray, and speaks without
any intention to deceive.

Truth is always consistent with itself, and needs nothing to help it out; it
is always near at hand, and fits upon our lips, and is ready to drop out before
we are aware: Whereas a lie is troublesome, and sets a man's invention on the
rack, and one trick needs a great many more of the same kind to make it good.

MORAL virtues themselves, without religion, are but cold, lifeless and
insipid: It is religion only which opens the mind to great conceptions, fills
it with the most sublime ideas, and warms the soul more than sensual pleasures.

BY reading we enjoy the dead, by conversation, the living, and by
contemplation, ourselves. Reading enriches the memory, conversation polishes
the wit, and contemplation improves the judgment.

THE commands of Heaven (in the observance of which religion principally
consists) are very plain and obvious to the meanest understanding, and are
nothing else but exhortations to love and directions for social happiness.

GREAT is the steadiness of soul and thought,
By reason bred, and by religion taught:
Which like a rock amidst the stormy waves,
Unmoved remains, and all affliction braves.
WISDOM's an evenness of mind and soul,
A steady temper which no cares control;
No passions ruffle, no desires inflame;
Still constant to itself, and still the same.
ACCOMPLISHMENTS by Heaven were first designed,
Less to adorn, than to amend the mind;
Each should contribute to this general end,
And all to virtue as their center tend;
The acquirements which our best esteem invite,
Should not project, but soften, mix, unite,
In glaring light not strongly be displayed,
But sweetly lost, and melted into shade.
AS the gay flowers which nature yields
So various on the vernal fields,
Delight the fancy more than those
The garden gives to view in equal rows;
As the pure stream, whose mazy train,
The prattling pebbles check in vain,
Gives native pleasure, while it leads
Its random waters swiftly through the meads;
As birds on boughs, in ea^ly spring,
Their wood-notes-wild near rivers sing,
Grateful their warbling strains ^epeat,
And soothe the ear irregularly sweet;
So simple dress and native grace,
Will best become the lovely face;
For the judicious man suspects
In artful ornaments concealed defects.
MOST of the miseries of life, undoubtedly result from our straying from the
path which leads to content.

FRIENDSHIP delights in equal fellowship,
Where purity of rank, and mutual offices,
Engage both sides alike, and keep the balance even.
It Is irksome to a generous, grateful heart,
To be oppressed beneath a load of favors,
Still to receive and run in debt with friendship,
Without the power of paying something back.
NEVER say any thing directly tending to your own praise: and when you have
done or said any thing that deserves it, receive it from others with
indifference. Be neither too covetous of it, nor appear displeased or confused
at receiving it; but when you have done any thing worthy of praise, suffer
yourself to be told of it, without rebuffing those who are doing you justice.
In your private thoughts divest yourself of it, and return it to God, as the
giver of the gift, and the blesser of the action. Give him unfeigned thanks,
for making you an instrument of his glory for the benefit of others.

THE advice of Pythagoras is, that as the body is no more than the servant of
the soul, it should only be nourished so as it may best perform an humble and
obedient service to it.

THE duties that are owing to friends, are integrity, love, counsel and
assistance. It is not intimacy and frequency of conversation, that makes a
friend, but a disinterested observance of these duties.

THERE is no manner of life so strait, or miserable, that has not some solace
and consolation. Jonah had leisure to make his prayer unto God, even in the
belly of the whale, and was heard.

IT is some short refreshment to friends and relations, to see and hear from
one another, but it passes away; and we have here no continuing city, no
abiding delights in this world; our rest remains elsewhere. Those we have, lose
much of their sweetness, from the thoughts of parting with them, even while we
enjoy them; but the happiness to come is eternal.

BE very careful in your promises, and just in your performances, and remember
it is better to do, and not promise, than to promise, and not perform.

NEVER do any thing for your friends, that is not consonant to your honor and
your conscience; you ought always to prefer those to your friends.

-- WITH stealing foot,
Time follows mortals; overtakes the swift;
Stops the career of youth, and clogs the wheels
Of trembling age; and to one common doom
Brings kings and peasants, conquerors and slaves.
RELIGION's force divine is best displayed
In deep desertion of all human aid;
To succor in extremes is her delight,
And cheer the heart, when terror strikes the sight;
We, disbelieving our own senses, gaze,
And wonder what a mortal's heart can raise,
To triumph over misfortunes, smile in grief,
And comfort those, who come to bring relief:
We gaze, and as we gaze, wealth, fame decay,
And all the world's vain glories fade away.
WE need not travel, seeking ways to bliss,
He that desires contentment cannot miss;
No garden-walls this precious flower embrace,
It common grows in every desert place.
THE varying seasons every virtuous soul
With various pleasures, in their changes bless;
Raise cheerful hopes, and anxious fears control,
And form a paradise of inward peace.
WHEN constant faith, and holy hope shall die,
One lost in certainty, and one in joy*
Then thou, more happy power, fair charity,
Triumphant sister, great^st of the three,
Thy office and thy nature still the same,
Lasting thy lamp, and unconsum'd thy flame,
Shall still survive --
Shall stand before the throne of Heaven confessed,
Forever blessing, and forever blessed.
DEATH seems to enter a cottage only as a gentle deliverer from the miseries of
human life; but into courts and the seats of grandeur, with insult and terror.
To languish under a gilded canopy, to expire on soft and downy pillows, and
give up the ghost in state, has a more gloomy aspect, than at the call of
nature, to expire on a grassy turf, and resign the breathless clay, back to its
proper element. What does a crowd of friends or flatterers signify in that
important hour, to the most glorious mortal? Which of his numerous attendants
would stand the arrest of death, descend into the silent prison of the grave
for him, or answer the summons of the supreme tribunal?

BEAUTY is a short-lived flower, which is easily withered: A cultivated mind is
a treasure, which increases every moment; it is a rich soil, which brings forth
an hundred fold.

A PERSON never appears so ridiculous by the qualities he has, as by those he
affects to have. He gains more by being contented to be seen as he is, than by
attempting to appear what he is not.

TRUE greatness of soul pays itself, as it were, with its own hands, by the
satisfaction of doing good.

PEOPLE may talk like good Christians at their ease; but pretty sentences, and
formal speeches, are very trifling remedies to a real and unaffected sorrow.

THAT little incendiary, called the tongue, is more venomous than a poisoned
arrow; and more killing than a two-edged sword.

HOW few there are, that can be freely kind,
Or know to fix their favors on the mind;
Hence some, whenever they would oblige, offend,
And while they make the fortune, lose the friend.
KNOW that wherever love and virtue guide,
They lead us to the state of Heavenly bliss,
Where joys unknown to guilt and shame preside,
And pleasures, unallay'd, each hour increase.
THE princely pine, on hills exalted,
Whose lofty branches cleave the sky,
By winds long-brav'd at last assaulted,
Is headlong whirled in dust to lie;
Whilst the mild rose, more safely growing
Low in its unaspiring vale,
Amidst retirement's shelter blowing,
Exchanges sweets with every gale.
IMITATION of the 126th PSALM.
1
WHEN God revealed his gracious name,
And changed my mournful state,
My rapture seemed a pleasing dream,
The grace appeared so great.
2
The world beheld the glorious change,
And did thine hand confess;
My tongue broke out in unknown strains,
And sung surprising grace.
3
Great is the work, my neighbors cried,
And owned the power divine;
Great is the work, my heart replied,
And be the glory thine!
4
The Lord can change the darkest skies,
Can give us day for night;
Make floods of sacred sorrow rise
To rivers of delight.
5
Let those that sow in sadness wait,
'Till the fair harvest come*
They shall confess their sheaves are great,
And shout the blessings home.
A MIND formed upon the principles of the gospel, may look down with contempt
upon the luster of a throne, and yet know the value, and feel a sense of
gratitude, in the possession of a crumb. The most exalted situation in the
present life is exposed; yea, probably most exposed, to the fascinating
allurements of temptation; and whosoever shall look heedfully upon those who
are eminent for their riches, will not think their condition such as that he
should hazard his quiet, and much less his virtue, to obtain it. The rich and
the poor have their hours of sorrow, and their intervals of joy; neither
poverty nor wealth exempt them from feeling the common calamities of life, nor
confer that happiness we so eagerly pursue, but which we must not experience,
till our race is finished, and our work done.

WHAT in this life, which soon must end,
Can all our vain designs intend?
From shore to shore why should we run,
Where none his tiresome self can shun?
For baneful care will still prevail,
And overtake us under sail:
'Twill dodge the great man's train behind,
Outrun the do, outfly the wind.
INDUSTRY is needful in every condition of life; we cannot, without it, act in
any state to the benefit or satisfaction of others, or to our own advantage and
comfort; it is requisite for procuring ease and satisfaction to the mind; and
if attended with a good conscience, sweetens our enjoyments, and seasons our
seize; and is a guard to innocence, and a bar to temptation.

A PERSON under the influence and temper of the gospel, will say with gratitude
and joy, "I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content."
In the most trying circumstances, I have a sure and certain promise, that my
bread shall be given, and my water shall be sure; and if I am not favored with
all the elegancies of life, yet I am confident that the God whom I serve, will
afford me such temporary supplies, as shall be most conducive to my own
happiness and his glory.

TRUE religion will show its influence in every part of our conduct; it is like
the sap of a living tree, which penetrates to the most distant boughs.

ACTION keeps the soul in constant health, but idleness corrupts and rusts the
mind; for a man of great abilities may by negligence and idleness become so
useless as to be an encumbrance to society and a burden to himself.

HE is the most worthy of possessing riches, who knows best how to do without
them.

KEEP no company with a man who is given to detraction; to hear him patiently,
is to partake of his guilt, and prompt him to a continuance in that vice which
all good men shun him for.

THOU shall not curse the deaf, Lev. xix.14. Those that are absent are deaf;
they cannot right themselves, and therefore say no ill of them.

HAPPY are those who can see the beauty of virtue! -- Is it possible to see
her, without loving her? Is it possible to love her, without being happy?

Seeking for HAPPINESS.
NOT all that parent earth can give,
Can make her children ever live;
Nor yet afford them happiness --
For creatures never can truly bless.
If what we drink, and what we eat,
Can never make our bliss complete --
To rich variety of food*
And gay attire, and every good,
Give honor, titles, pomp and fame,
With every blessing we can name;
Give pleasure, profit, knowledge, ease,
Whatever can instruct or please;
Authority -- a vast estate,
With all that makes rich and great;
Yet these could never constitute
A man much happier than a brute:
For while our wretched passions reign,
Felicity is sought in vain.
Where then shall happiness be found?
That lovely, pleasing, joyous sound.
Great source of bliss! vouchsafe to show,
How I this pearl of price may know.
If grateful souls -- if souls resigned
To thy blessed will, this treasure find,
To me, great God! do thou impart,
A thankful and contented heart;
Drive far away all diffidence,
And give me, Lord! true confidence,
In thy unerring Providence.
Let all my vices be subdued,
Replace them, Lord, with gratitude!
My every want do thou redress,
Give me, oh give me, happiness!
RELIGION, the balm of life, the anchor of hope, the dispeller of f^^rs, the
haven of rest, will carry us into the arms of him, who is mighty to save from
every trouble; defended by his shield, though afflictions spring not out of the
dust, they shall not hurt us; supported by his power, though the mighty rage,
they shall not prevail against us; guided by his wisdom, though snares and evils
encompass our paths, we shall escape them all. In vain may be our toil for
riches to secure us; but our trust in him will never be in vain. The arrows of
affliction may reach the very pinnacle of greatness, and cares and terrors
climb up to us, how ever high we may place ourselves; but he is a tower of
defense, a place of safety, a rock of salvation. O then! amidst all the storms,
and tumults of the world, give ear to that voice which speaks peace, and
says, Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest; take my yoke upon you, and ye shall find rest to your souls; for my yoke
is easy, and my burden is light.

VIRTUE has secret charms which all men love;
And those that do not choose her, yet approve.
TRUE happiness -- man's general aim and end,
The point of rest to which our wishes tend,
To no externals ever was assigned,
But fixed the portion of a steady mind;
A steady mind, that no desires inflame,
Still constant to itself, and still the same;
The same when fortune blows an adverse gale;
The same when on a throne or in a jail:
A mind that can each mad excess control,
Subdue the passions, and direct the soul;
That, summoned, cheerfully resigns her breath,
Nor trembles, anxious at the approach of death.
Epitaph upon Epictetus, the Stoic Philosopher.
EPICTETUS, who lies here, was a slave and a cripple; poor as the beggar in the
proverb, and the favorite of Heaven.

In this distich is comprised the noblest panegyric, and the most important
instruction. We may learn from it, that virtue is impracticable in no
condition, since Epictetus could recommend himself to the regard of Heaven,
amidst the temptations of poverty and slavery. Slavery has been found so
destructive to virtue, that, in some languages, a slave and a thief are
expressed by the same word. And we may be admonished by it, not to lay any
stress on a man's outward circumstances, in making an estimate of his real
virtue, since Epictetus the beggar, the cripple, and the slave, was the
favorite of Heaven.

Occasioned by a Recovery from a tedious Illness.
FATHER Divine, Eternal One!
While Heaven pure homage pays,
From this dark point, beneath the sun,
Accept a mortal's praise.
Yet what is the praise my breath can give;
What Is all that I can say,
But that the God in whom I live
Has given me health today?
The theme my voice in vain assays,
Then let my life pursue;
Let what I am record thy praise,
Expressed in what I do.
Thee more than all -- and as myself,
Oh teach me man to love:
Be this my fame, my glory, wealth,
My bliss below -- above!
Nor let my love to man be vain,
My love to God be blind;
Of thee some knowledge let me gain,
Some blessing give mankind.
Through every change my life may know,
My ebbing, flowing tides,
Firm be my faith, that all below,
Love, joined with wisdom, guides.
That even thy justice tends to bless,
Though little understood;
That partial evils love express,
And work the general good.
But frail, alas! this mortal clay,
This reasoning mind how frail!
Let strength be equal to my day,
Nor height nor depth prevail.
When over my roof affliction low'rs,
Sustain my sinking heart;
In all my gay, unguarded hours,
Oh keep my better part!
And when this tottering fabric falls,
Assist my soul to soar,
Where full possession never palls,
To know and love thee more.
THE use of learning is not to procure popular applause, or excite vain
admiration, but to make the possessor more virtuous and useful to society, and
his virtue a more conspicuous example to those that are illiterate.

WHAT exalted mortal, in the last hour of life, would not resign all the
advantages of greatness and power, for a few moments of leisure and obscurity.

IF there is any happiness below the stars, it consists in a freedom from the
hurry and censure of the world, where the mind may devote all its bright and
se^^^e intervals to Heaven.

THE course of human things is all decreed,
With each minutest circumstance, above:
No fickle chance; no blind contingencies;
No unforeseen events arise, to cross
The purposes divine. --
Hope travels through. -- POPE.
THE sweet deceiver, hope, destroys,
By airy visions, real joys;
Each future scene, by her arrayed
In brightness, makes the present fade;
All the long day we wish for night,
Then sigh for the return of light;
Through gloomy winter's reign we mourn,
'Till pleasure-pinion'd-spring's return;
But here, with joyless feet, we tread
The verdant ^awn, or painted mead,
'Till summer comes -- yet even from this
Enjoyment's fled -- the promised bliss
Is now postpon'd, 'till autumn shows
Her golden fields and loaded boughs;
Hither we press -- but vain the chase!
The phantom flies with equal pace.
Now winter charms -- again it comes,
And her still tasteless reign resumes;
The trav'ler thus thick mists enclose,
But seem to fly where ever he goes.
HE is no fool, who parts with that which he cannot keep, when he is sure to be
recompensed with that which he cannot lose.

THE pursuit of glory and happiness in another life, by every means of
improving and exalting our own minds, becomes more and more interesting to us,
the nearer we draw to the end of all sublunary enjoyments.

AS that God, whom we all adore, is a God of peace and concord, there ought to
be a sacred harmony between all that profess and believe in the same Savior.

THEY must certainly be persons of narrow and mean conceptions, who (though under
the mask of superficial greatness of spirit) cannot raise their little ideas
above pleasures familiar to their senses.

BUT the main stress of all our cares must lie,
To watch ourselves with strict and constant eye:
To mark the working mind when passion's course
Begins to swell, and reason still has force;
Or if she is conquered by the stronger tide,
Observe the moments when they first subside;
For he who hopes a victory to win
Over other men, must with himself begin,
Else like a town, by mutiny oppressed,
He Is ruined by the foe within his breast.
ARISE my soul, survey the morn,
And purple beauties of the dawn,
In order as they shine;
The herbs that with the dew-drops glow,
The grass, the shrubs, the flowerets show
Their Maker all divine!
Hark how the warbling feathered throng
Now tune their soft melodious song,
From every leafy spray;
The blackbird here with mellow throat
And there the thrush with softer note,
In concert pour the lay.
Do thou my soul responsive join,
Ambitious of a theme divine,
And sing thy Maker's praise:
Unnumber'd objects he supplies,
For contemplation's wandering eyes,
And all the Muses lays.
FRIENDSHIP's a pure, a Heaven descended flame,
Worthy the happy region whence it came;
The sacred tie, that virtuous spirits binds,
The golden chain that links immortal minds.
WE should never be over eager for any thing, either in our pursuits or our
prayers, lest what we endeavor, or ask too violently for our interest, should
be granted us by Providence only in order to our ruin.

Concluding Stanzas of an Elegy on the Death of a Sister.
BUT lo! to give the unhappy mourners ease,
From pale affliction's eye to wipe the tear;
To bid the plaintive voice of sorrow cease,
Behold religion's Heavenly form appear.
"Attend (she cries) poor mortal! grieve no more,
"No more lament thy dear departed friends;
"Their souls are wafted to a happier shore,
"Where every sorrow, every trouble ends.
"Follow my steps, and soon you will meet again,
"Will meet in yonder blissful realms above;
"Forever there to join the seraph's strain,
"And sing the wonders of redeeming love."
None but the Almighty author of our beings, who knows our inmost thoughts and
desires, and from whom no secrets are hid, can see into futurit^: And he only
knows what is b^s^ and most proper for us; if we cheerfully rely on his
all-wise Providence, and confidently trust in his powerful protection, we may
rest ourselves assured, that he, who is our truest friend, will guard and
secure us from the many evils and dangers, which every where surround us. He
will guide and direct the future events of our lives in such a manner, as will
prove, by happy experience, to be the most conducive to our own good, and the
most consistent with the scheme of our own happiness, both here and hereafter.

AS some fair vi'let, loveliest of the glade,
Sheds its mild fragrance on the lonely shade,
Withdraws its modest head from public sight,
Nor courts the sun, nor seeks the glare of light;
Should some rude hand profanely dare intrude,
And bear its beauties from its native wood,
Exposed abroad its languid colors sly,
Its form decays, and all its odours die.
So woman born to dignify retreat,
Unknown to flourish, and unseen, be great;
To give domestic life its sweetest charm,
With softness polish, and with virtue warm;
Fearful of fame, unwilling to be known,
Should seek but Heaven's applauses and her own;
No censures dread but those which crimes impart,
The censures of a self-condemning heart.
With angel kindness should behold distress,
And meekly pity, where she cannot redress.
Like beaming mercy wipe affliction's tear,
But to herself, not justice so severe.
Her passions all corrected or subdued
But one -- the virtuous thirst of doing good.
This great ambition still she calls her own,
This best ambition makes her breast its throne.
HAIL Power Eternal, infinite, immense,
Creator and Redeemer, Lord of life,
All good, all wise, all perfect, all divine!
Increase my ardour, elevate my soul,
And draw me from this idle, useless world,
To better thoughts -- the thoughts of that to come!
Let me not beg of blessings from thy hand,
But for increase of virtue: Gracious pour
Thy Holy Spirit on my soul; so make
Thy servant perfect, fit for Heaven and thee:
And thou art good! Oh guide me with thy hand,
Cure all the fond, vain evils of my heart,
And stifle every growing folly there!
Oh! my Redeemer, kindly condescend
To hear my prayer and grant -- yet wherefore speak!
If it seems good, bestow the boon I wish;
(Thou know my thoughts) if not, thy will be done!
AN humble man leans not to his own understanding, he is sensible of the
deficiency of his own power and wisdom, and trusts not in it; Le is also
sensible of the all-sufficient power, wisdom and goodness of Almighty God, and
commits himself to him for counsel, guidance, direction and strength.

VIRTUE is the highest exercise and improvement of reason, the integrity, the
harmony and just balance of affection, the health, strength and beauty of the
mind.

WITH the talents of an angel a man may be a fool, if he judges amiss in the
supreme point; judging aright in all else but aggravates his folly, as it shows
him wrong, though blessed with the best capacity of being right.

WHAT a great deal of time and ease that man gains, who is not troubled with
the spirit of curiosity, who lets his neighbors thoughts and behavior alone,
confines his inspections to himself, and takes care of the point of honesty and
conscience.

A MAN of true piety, that has no designs to carry on, like one of an
established fortune, always makes the least noise. One never pulls out his
money, the other never talks of religion, but when there is occasion for it.

ADVERSITY does not make merit lose its name, it serves only as a foil to
virtue.

RETIREMENT.
HOW happy he who crowns, in shades like these,
A youth of labor, with an age of ease;
Who quits a world where strong temptations try,
And since it is hard to combat, learns to fly!
For him no wretches born, to work and weep,
Explore the mine, or tempt the dangerous deep;
No surly porter stands, in guilty state,
To spurn imploring famine from the gate;
But on he moves to meet his latter end,
Angels around befriending virtue's friend;
Bends to the grave with unperceived decay,
While resignation gently slopes the way,
And all his prospects, bright'ning to the last,
His Heaven commences ever the world be past!
HYMN TO THE EVENING.
EVER the sun's declining ray
Has left you' distant sky,
And the parting streak of day
Has shut upon the eye --
Come, modest evening, kindly spread
Thy dusk-ensabled vest,
And teach reflective thought to spread
Devotion on the breast.
Oh! lift the mind to bless the power,
Whose memory still shall last,
And bid him serve the present hour,
Whose madness lost the past.
Instructive, tell the pomp of state,
The pride of mighty blood,
That none are ever truly great,
That are not truly good.
To all one admonition give,
Unfearful of reply,
That he alone deserves to live,
Who best prepares to die.
WHEN modest merit seems to shun that praise
The admiring world to merit ever pays,
It takes, unknowingly, the road to fame,
And, by declining, gains a surer name.
BE mine to live in private bliss,
Safe and obscure in some recess,
Since faction and high-minded strife
But shake the peaceful lake of life;
And better is the little home,
Where conscious safety cheers the dome.
A PRAYER OF PRINCE EUGENE.
I BELIEVE in thee, oh my God! do thou strengthen my faith; I hope in thee,
confirm my hope; I love thee, inflame my love more and more; I repent of all my
sins, but do thou increase my repentance. As my first beginning, I worship
thee; as my last end, I long for thee; as my eternal benefactor, I praise thee;
and as my supreme protector, I pray unto thee, that it may please thee, O Lord!
to guide and lead me by thy providence; to keep me in obedience to thy justice;
to comfort me by thy mercy; and to protect me by thy almighty power. I submit
unto thee all my thoughts, words and deeds, as well as my afflictions, pains
and sufferings; and I desire to have thee always in my mind, to do all my works
in thy name, and for thy sake to bear all adversity with patience. I will
nothing, but what thou willest, O God! because it is agreeable unto thee. O
give me grace, that I may be attentive in my prayer, temperate in my diet,
vigilant in my conduct, and immovable in all good purposes. Grant, most
merciful Lord! that I may be true and faithful to those who have entrusted me
with their secrets; that I may be courteous and kind toward all men; and that
both in my words and actions I may show unto them a good example. Dispose my
heart to praise and admire thy goodness; to ^ate all errors and evil works, to
love my neighbor; and to despise the world. Assist me, good God! in subduing
lust by mortification; covetousness by liberality; anger by mildness; and
lukewarmness by zeal and fervency. Enable me to conduct myself with prudence in
all transactions; and to show courage in danger; patience in adversity; and in
prosperity an humble mind. Let thy grace illuminate my understanding; direct my
will; sanctify my body; and bless my soul. Make me diligent in curbing all
irregular affections; zealous in imploring thy grace; careful in keeping thy
commandments; and constant in working out my own salvation. Finally, O God!
make me sensible, how little is the world; how great thy Heavens; how short
time; and how long will be the blessed eternity. O! that I may well prepare
myself for death; that I may dread thy judgments; that I may avoid the torments
of hell; and obtain of thee, O God! eternal life, through the merits of Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

THERE is one sure way of pleasing in company, which is in every one's power to
practice, viz. showing a disposition to be pleased.

IT often happens, that those are most desirous of governing others, who are
least able to govern themselves.

IT is indeed a serious thing to die; but virtue disarms the gloomy king of all
his terrors, and brightens the prospect of futurity.

SENECA says, there is no difference betwixt possessing a thing and not
desiring it.

VAIN are all forms prescribed by art,
All outward modes of worship vain;
An honest, generous, pious heart,
Can only true acceptance gain.
FAREWELL, ye vain, I hate your ways,
Ye groveling sons of pride, adieu;
Poor avarice, how thy hope decays!
Thy steps I tremble to pursue.
To Sion's hill I lift my eye,
To Sion's hill direct my feet;
From all things learn to live and die,
From all the vile and vain retreat.
The character of the Lady of one of the ancient Earls of Westmoreland, written
by her husband, and inscribed in the chimney-wall of a large room, at Budstone
Place, in Kent, once the seat of that noble family.

SHE feared God, and knew how to serve him; she assigned times for her
devotion, and kept them; she was a perfect wife, and a true friend; she joyed
most to oblige those nearest and dearest to me; she was still the same, ever
kind and never troublesome; often preventing my desires; disputing none;
providently managing all that was mine; living in appearance above mine estate,
while she advanced it; she was of a great spirit; sweetly tempered; of a sharp
wit; without offense; of excellent speech; blessed with silence; of a cheerful
temper; mildly governed; of a brave fashion to win respect, and to daunt
boldness; pleasing to all of her sex; intimate with few; delighting in the
best; ever avoiding all persons and places in their honor blemished; and was
as free from doing ill as giving the occasion. She died as she lived, well; and
blessed in the greatest extremity; most patiently sending forth her pure soul
with many zealous prayers and hymns to her Maker; pouring out her affectionate
heart in passionate streams to her Savior. --

N. B. The beginning and ending of this inscription being defaced by time, the
date is uncertain.

MAN may, in scenes of every kind,
Fit lessons of instruction find:
The bird, for injury and wrong,
Repays the oppressor with a song;
Oh! blush to think, that, Heaven inspired,
Thy breast should be with malice fired!
Learn hence thy passion to restrain,
And still that god-like rule maintain,
To seek no vengeance on a foe,
But bless the hand that gives the blow.
IF you desire to live in peace and honor, in favor with God and man, and to
die in the glorious hope of rising from the grave to a life of endless
happiness -- if these things appear worthy your ambition, you must set out in
earnest in the pursuit of them. Virtue and happiness are not attainable by
chance, nor by a cold and languid approbation; they must be sought with ardour,
attended to with diligence, and every assistance must be eagerly embraced that
may enable you to obtain them.

TO take sincere pleasure in the blessings and excellencies of others, is a
much surer mark of benevolence than to pity their calamities.

EQUALLY vain and absurd is every scheme of life that is not subservient to,
and does not terminate in that great end of our being, the attainment of real
excellence, and of the favor of God. Whenever this becomes sincerely our
object, then will pride and vanity, envy, ambition, covetousness, and every
evil passion, lose their power over us; and we shall, in the language of
scripture, "walk humbly with our God."

Extract from a Poem called ancient and modern Rome.
REFLECTION has its joy, a pensive calm
That shrouds the soul, and bears it on the wings
Of vagrant thought, to mem'ry's wide domain!
Now let us indulge it, while we here remark
The mad career of fortune, and behold
Imperial Rome, 'midst all her triumphs, fallen!
So closes every scene, and thus decay
The works of man -- allowed a little space
To shine, attract, then fade, and be forgot!
For see the paths that lead to power, and fame,
And those which feel the peasant's silent step,
End in one point; observe ambition's flight,
And laugh at all the wild fantastic dreams
Of human folly. Seeking then thy arms,
Oh, virtue! let us court thee as our good;
Our only treasure, and our only hope;
Our shield, to guard us against a faithless world,
And all its poisoned arrows: Thou unhurt,
Sprung from immortal truth, serenely bright,
Sustain'st the general wreck; and like the sun
Shall still appear with undiminish'd light,
When all the boasted monuments of pride
Shall sink, and mingle with the dust they bid!
HABITUAL evils are not quickly changed;
But many days must pass, and many sorrows,
Conscious remorse, and anguish must be felt,
To curb desire, to break the stubborn will,
And work a second nature in the soul,
'Ere virtue can resume the place she lost:
It Is else dissimulation. --
IN the works of man, perfection is aimed at, but it can only be found in those
of the Creator.

CONSCIENCE is the law of the all-wise author of nature, written on our hearts,
or properly the application of this law, as it regards the judgments we should
form of particular actions. -- It is like a censor noting and observing our
actions, and therefore it has not undeservedly been called by some a portion of
the virgin soul, as not admitting the least blemish of prevarication. Hence
good actions beget security in the conscience, but bad cause anguish and
vexation, which is better known by experience than explained by words: For, if
it is painful to us to abide by the judgments of those we live with, and to put
up with their reprehensions, it will be more so to be condemned by our own
reason, and to carry about us so severe a judge of our actions. And thus it is,
that conscience performs the function both of a witness and judge, when it
reprimands us for having done amiss, as Juvenal says -- Not sharp revenge, nor
hell itself can find
A fiercer torment than a guilty mind;
Which day and night does dreadfully accuse,
Condemns the wretch, and still the charge renews.


RICHES, alas! are transient things,
And ti^les but an airy dream;
Our pleasures flow from nobler springs,
And give more lasting peace than them.
Let sordid mortals hope for wealth,
This never shall my prayer employ;
Give me but competence and health,
I envy not their short-lived joy.
PRIDE AND HUMILITY.
MARK how the stately tree disdainful rears
His towering head, and mingles with the clouds!
But by his fatal height the more exposed
To all the fury of the raging storm;
His honors fly, the sport of angry winds,
'Till the loud blast, with direful stroke, descends:
Torn from his basis, low on earth he lies,
And the hills echo to the sounding fall.
So pride with haughty port, defies in vain
The force of rough adversity, which rends,
With double violence, the stubborn heart.
But like a tender plant humility
Bends low before the threatening blast, unhurt
Eludes its rage, and lives through all the storm.
Pride is the liv'ry of the prince of darkness,
Worn by his slaves, who glory in their shame;
A gaudy dress, but tarnish'd, rent, and foul,
And loathsome to the holy eye of Heaven.
But sweet humility, a shining robe,
Bestowed by Heaven upon its favorite sons;
The robe which God approves, and angels wear;
Fair 'semblance of the glorious prince of light,
Who stooped to dwell (divine humility!)
With sinful worms, and poverty, and scorn.
Pride is the source of discord, strife and war,
And all the endless train of heavy woes
Which wait on wretched man! the direful sting
Of envy, and the dreaded frowns of scorn,
And gloomy discontent, and black despair.
But sweet humility, the source of peace,
Of amity and love, content and joy;
Where she resides a thousand blessings wait
To gild our lives, and form a Heaven below.
Pride leads her wretched vot'ries to contempt,
To certain ruin, infamy and death.
But sweet humility points out the way
To happiness, and life, and lasting honors.
Humility, how glorious! how divine!
Thus clothed and thus enriched, O may I shine;
Be mine this treasure, this celestial robe,
And let the sons of pride possess the globe.
WHAT walls can bound, or what compelling rein
The ungoverned lust of avarice restrain?
Wealth he has none, who mourns his scanty store,
And 'midst of plenty starves, and thinks he is poor.
WHEN Ulysses entrusted the education of his son to the nobles of Ithaca, "O my
friends," said he, if ever you loved his father, show it in your care toward
him; but above all, do not omit to form him just, sincere, and faithful in
keeping a secret.

THE surest way to purchase happiness, must be, to let as little of our time as
possible slip away unobserved and unimproved.

VARIOUS are the innocent diversions of life, by which we may lengthen time in
general, and prevent any part of it to be useless, or tedious.

BEFORE you make an absolute promise, weigh all the consequences of keeping it;
but, when once you have made it, let the circumstances be important, or ever so
trifling, hold it as sacred; and never be influenced to break it, unless the
making it good prove injurious to virtue.

THE table of a good oeconomist, is always attended with neatness, plenty and
^hearfulness. When we have provided enough to maintain us, in the order
suitable to our character, we ought to be proportionably hospitable; but the
more we live within decent bounds, the more of our fortune may be converted to
noble uses.

HE that keeps not open a constant intercourse with Heaven, by frequent fervors
of rational devotion, knows not the sublimest joy.

THERE are attractions in modest diffidence, above the force of words. A silent
address is the genuine eloquence of sincerity.

WHO look on disappointments, toils and strife,
And all the consequential ills of life,
Not as severities, or causeless woes,
But easy terms indulgent Heaven allows
To man, by short probation to obtain
Immortal recompense for transient pain;
The intent of Heaven, thus rightly understood,
From every evil we extract a good;
This truth divine, implanted in the heart,
Supports each drudging mortal through his part;
Gives a delightful prospect to the blind,
The friendless thence a constant succor find;
The wretch, by fraud betrayed, by power oppressed,
With this restorative, still sooths his breast;
This suffering virtue chears, this pain beguiles,
And decks calamity herself in smiles.
WHEREVER a great deal of gratitude is found in a poor man, it may be taken for
granted there would be as much generosity, if he were a rich man.

ADDISON, after a long and manly, but vain struggle with his distemper,
dismissed his physicians, and with them all hopes of life; but with his hopes
of life, he dismissed not his concern for the living, but sent for a youth
nearly related and finely accomplished, but not above being the better for good
impressions from a dying friend; he came, but life now glimmering in the
socket, the dying friend was silent; after a decent and proper pause, the youth
said, dear sir! you sent for me I believe, and I hope that you have some
commands; if you have, I shall hold them most sacred. May distant ages not only
hear but feel the reply! -- Forcibly grasping the youth's hand, he softly said,
see in what peace a Christian can die. He spoke with difficulty, and soon
expired.

Through grace divine, how great is man! through divine mercy how stingless death!
who would not thus expire?

BLESSED solitude! how sweet thy peaceful scenes!
Where contemplation's vot'ries love to stray;
Where in her sapient dress, religion reigns,
And shines more splendid than the noontide ray.
LET angry zealots quarrel for a name,
The good, the just, the virtuous are the same;
Virtue and grace are not to sects confined,
They blend with all, and spread amongst mankind.
And the pure flame that warms the pious breast,
Those cannot merit who condemn the rest.
THE terms of charity are never hard,
Love and compassion are their own reward*
A soul that succors virtue when distressed,
Can with reflection make a noble feast,
Which nourishes the mind, and overpays
A generous deed with self-approving praise.
WHAT can the man fear, who takes care in all his actions to please a Being
that is omnipotent? -- A Being who is able to crush all his adversaries? -- A
Being that can divert any misfortune from befalling him, or turn any such
misfortune to his advantage? The person who lives with this constant and
habitual regard to the great superintendant of the world, is indeed sure that
no real evil can come into his lot. Blessings may appear under the shape of
pains, losses and disappointments; but let him have patience, and he will see
them in their proper figures. Dangers may threaten him, but he may rest
satisfied, that they will either not reach him, or that if they do, they will
be the instruments of good to him. In short, he may look upon all crosses and
accidents, sufferings and afflictions, as means which are made use of to bring
him to happiness.

ALL the ways of growing rich, are equal to persons greedy of gain. Riches, in
their esteem, obtain the place of equity, reputation, their friends, relations,
and frequently their God.

THE WISH.
I ASK not fortune's partial smile,
Exhaustless source of care;
Not all her fancied gay delights
Can claim a serious prayer.
Nor pleasure's soft alluring form,
With ardent wish I seek;
Far less the captivating bloom
That glows on beauty's cheek.
I ask not, that in calm repose
My even days may flow,
Unruffled by adversity,
Exempt from human woe.
Enough that no reflections keen,
No crimes my soul oppress,
To rob me of the flattering hope
Of future happiness.
But grant me that blessed frame of mind,
Where no vain thoughts intrude;
That blessed serenity which springs
From conscious rectitude.
THE love of pleasure has so blinded the eyes of the present age, that they
cannot see clearly the satisfaction of a pure and rational life.

WHEN you see the choler of a friend begin to kindle, if you would do good,
throw water thereon to cool, not wood to inflame it.

NO simple custom is more blamable, than that of lying shut up in the arms of
sloth and darkness, when the cheerful return of day invites the whole creation
to joy and business. Sleep, any further than as it is a necessary refreshment,
is the poorest, dullest state of existence we can be in; and it is so far from
being a real enjoyment, that it bears the nearest resemblance of death, and
carries all the horrors of oblivion in it. We are forced to receive it, either
in a state of insensibility, or in the delusive folly of dreams. Sleep, when
too much humoured, gives a softness and idleness to all our tempers; and no
sluggish person can be qualified, or disposed, to enter into the true spirit of
prayer, or the exercise of any active virtue.

IT is not when misfortunes come upon us, the time to set about the philosophy
of bearing, or the resignation of submitting to them; it is in health we should
prepare ourselves against sickness.

IF affectation could be entirely banished, how few, in comparison with the
present state of things, would be the number of preposterous mistakes.

THE nicest rule in economy, is to make our being one uniform and consistent
scene of innocent pleasures, and moderate cares; and not to be transported with
joy on occasions of good fortune, or too much dejected, in circumstances of
distress.

VAGRANT desires, and impertinent mirth, will be too apt to engage our minds,
unless we can possess ourselves in that sobriety of heart, which is above all
transient pleasures, and which will fix our affections on things above.

-- BEHOLD, fond man!
See here thy pictured life: Pass some few years;
Thy flow'ring spring, thy summer's ardent strength,
Thy sober autumn fading into age,
And pale-concluding winter comes at last
And shuts the scene. -- Ah! whither now are fled,
Those dreams of greatness? those unsolid hopes
Of happiness? those longings after fame?
Those restless cares? those busy bustl'ing days?
Those gay-spent festive nights? those varying thoughts
Lost between good and ill, that shared thy life?
All now are fled! Religion sole remains
Immortal, never-failing friend of man,
His guide to happiness on high.
IF people took as much pains to be good, as they do to appear so, they would,
through grace, bring about their purpose.

GOD the Lord and Father of all, has given no one of his children such a
property in his peculiar portion of the things of this world, but that he has
given his needy brother a right in the surplusage of his goods; so that it
cannot justly be denied him, when his pressing wants call for it.

WHO is wise? He that learns from every one. Who is powerful? He that governs
his passions. Who is rich? He that is content.

FIXED in the shade of this imperfect state,
It Is ours, submissive, better scenes to wait,
And plaintive musing on each various pain,
Or over the pebbly brook or on the plain;
In love with nature, let us, while we stay,
To nature's parent true devotion pay;
By him soon summoned, shall we take our flight,
Far to the realms of uncreated light.
TRANSPORTING period! when will thou appear?
Thou blissful dawn of that immortal day,
That never shall see a dusky evening spread
To veil its light; which never shall need the sun,
Nor stars, nor glimmering moon, to cheer its shade.
Ye fair inhabitants of blissful seats,
Unfold your golden gates, and call me hence;
Sick of this mortal state, this round of error,
Of darkness and mistake, I long for rest.
THY force alone, religion, death disarms,
Breaks all his darts, and every viper ch^ms.
Softened by thee, the g^isly form appears
No more the horrid object of our fears.
We, undismayed, this awful power obey,
That guides us through the safe, though gloomy way,
Which leads to life. --
THE advantages of frequent thoughts of death are certainly unspeakable; and
most erroneous is the notion, that gloominess must be the consequence of such
meditation.

IT most certainly becomes us, as we are rational and mortal, to consider the
high things expected of us as rationals; and the haste we ought to make in
accomplishing them as we are mortal; and it would bespeak us wise, as we
ourselves would receive the benefit, if we, with great seriousness and
attention, pondered over and meditated upon that, which must, 'ere long, be our
lot; that hour, which high and low, rich and poor, must all arrive at; and by
which the beggar and the prince will be levelled with the dust.

LET prudence always attend your pleasures; it is the way to enjoy the sweets
of them, and not to be afraid of the consequences.

COMPANY and cheerfulness are necessary, and of use; but a constant course of
mirth betrays such a levity of mind, that your presence will never be desired,
but to divert others, whose regard ceases the instant the laughter is over; and
should your wit offend, you may be assured of an enemy.

IF you have any good quality, do not make eulogiums yourself upon it, as it
will not be credited upon your word only.

WE have to do with one whose power is unbounded, whose knowledge is infinite,
and whose justice is perfect; therefore from him we can hide no guilt; we can
fly to no place of defense, nor can we expect acceptance, but in the paths of
reason and religion; in them we shall find the highest pleasure, and join to
the cheerful enjoyment of the things of this world, the prospect of a
continuance and increase of pleasure when this world has no more to give.

SHORT is the date and narrow is the span,
Which bounds the little life of foolish man.
Gay scenes of bliss the ravished soul surprise,
Raise his vain hopes, and glitter in his eyes;
Of swelling titles he supinely dreams,
Vast are his projects, and refined his schemes;
But when his morning views of joy are past,
The melancholy evening comes at last;
The tyrant, death, a hasty summons sends,
And all his momentary glory ends.
SINCE then old time steals all away,
Take heed the sunshine of your day
Naught but true joys may find:
To proper use apply what is sent;
For know no beauty's permanent,
But beauty of the mind.
THE life of man is compared to the herbage of the field, but a shadow is a
more striking emblem; and the flux of time, measured by a shadow, is a lesson
that teaches us the necessity of preparing ourselves for a more permanent state.

AS too long retirement weakens the mind, so too much company dissipates it. It
is good sometimes to recollect one's self; nay, it is even necessary to give an
exact account of one's words and thoughts to one's self; and of the progress we
have made in wisdom. A man that would reap the fruits of reading and
conversation, and improve by what he has seen, must be no stranger to silence,
repose and meditation.

AS arrogance and conceitedness of our own abilities are very disgustful to men
of sense and virtue, we may be sure they are highly displeasing to that being
who delights in an humble mind.

THE reproofs of a relation may be thought to proceed from an affectation of
superiority; of an enemy, from a spirit of malice; and of an indifferent
person, from pride or impertinence, and so be slighted: But when they come from
one who loves us, and come armed with all the tender concern that an unfeigned
affection is known to dictate, they ought of course to take effect, and become
irresistible.

IT is possible to be happy in the absence of all that people call amusement
and diversion. When the mind is in a situation superior to the changing scenes
below the sun, in pursuit of boundless and immortal bliss, the soul, with a
noble freedom, ascends the celestial heights, in search of its great original,
the fountain of its existence, and center of all its hopes.

ON CONTENTMENT.
O THOU! whose power can sharpest grief assuage,
Or stop the torrent of impetuous rage;
Contentment, hear; Oh listen to my strain!
Nor let the muse implore thy aid in vain;
Teach me through life's adventurous paths to go,
TO enjoy the good, and calmly bear the woe;
To view unmoved the miser's hoarded store,
Without a sigh, or greedy wish for more;
To scorn the pomp, and pageantry of state,
The empty show, and titles of the great.
Grant me to live a peaceful, rural life,
Remote from envy and tumultuous strife;
There may I pass each hour by virtue's rules,
Nor vainly seek the applauding breath of fools.
GLIDE on securely, wisely tread,
The paths where truth and virtue lead.
It matters not how great the man,
If all is confined to life's short span;
It matters not how rich or poor,
Peace is no gift in human power;
They find her who contented dwell
In the cool grot or mossy cell.
TO keep the passions of others submissive, there is a necessity of triumphing
over one's own; to oblige them to be virtuous, one must set the example and be
the model: There is not a better lesson than that, which a superior makes it
his duty to practice.

THERE is so great a grace and authority in virtue, that it never fails to
attract the esteem even of those that are most abandoned to vice and
immorality; so that religion, by its own authority, and the reasonable force of
it, is sufficent to establish its empire in the mind of any thinking person.

LET your expectations be higher than any dignity or enjoyment this world can
boast. Let a celestial crown fire your ambition; and in the pursuit of infinite
happiness, grasp at nothing below the glories of immortality. With what a
divine ambition does the prospect of Heavenly joys inspire the soul. If you are
reckoned by any of the gay and giddy world the less polite for entertaining
such exalted thoughts of pleasure, be content in being unfashionably good,
since thereby you can keep your peace; be fearless and open to the inspection
of Heaven; justify yourself to your own conscience, and secure the divine
interest. Be always assured, that no character is more amiable than that of a
female, who in the gayest bloom of youth, and triumph of beauty, practices the
rules of purity and virtue; and that in the exercise of those qualities the
finest breeding consists.

IN all things preserve integrity; the consciousness of thy own uprightness
will alleviate the toil of business, and soften the harshness of ill success
and disappointments, and give thee an humble confidence before God, when the
ingratitude of man, or the iniquity of the times, may rob thee of other due
reward.

THE time of sickness or affliction is like the cool of the day was to Adam, a
season of peculiar propriety for the voice of God to be heard; and may be
improved into a very advantageous opportunity of begetting or increasing
spiritual life in the soul.

LIFE IS SHORT.
Man's life, like any weavers' shuttle flies,
Or like a tender flowret fades and dies;
Or like a race it ends without delay,
Or like a vapor vanishes away;
Or like a candle which each moment wastes,
Or like a vessel under sail it hastes;
Or like a post it gallops very fast,
Or like a shadow of a cloud it is past.
Our castle is but weak, and strong the foe,
Our breath is short, our death is certain too;
But as his coming is a secret still,
Let us be ready, come death when he will.
Concluding Stanzas of a Piece wrote on Recovery from Sickness.
FATHER of life! whose arm with equal power,
And equal goodness, can depress or raise;
Complete the blessings thou have deigned to shower,
And grant increasing worth to length of days.
Oh! grant me still to trust thy tender care,
In humble praise to use this added breath,
In health, the innocence of sickness wear,
And keep, through life, the sober thoughts of death.
A WISE Heathen, with great justice, compares prosperity to the indulgence of a
fond mother to her child, which often proves his ruin; but the affection of the
Divine Being to that of a wise father, who would have his sons exercised with
labor, disappointment and pains, that they may gather strength and improve
their fortitude. Sometimes too, a misfortune may happen to a good man, to
preserve him from a much greater one. Thus sickness may be a very great mercy
to him, if it keeps him from embarking in a vessel which will be lost in its
passage. Thus poverty may screen him from a great many evils which would be
brought upon him by riches, and the like. We are so short-sighted, that we know
not how to distinguish, and often take the greatest blessings for misfortunes,
and the heaviest curses for blessings. We are like mariners, who by fair winds
might run into the way of pirates; but by those contrary to their wishes, reach
their port in safety.

Extempore Exclamation on the Prospect of Winter.
OH! may our follies, like the falling trees,
Be stripped of every leaf by autumn's wind;
May every branch of vice embrace the breeze,
And nothing leave but virtue's fruit behind.
Then when old age, life's winter, shall appear,
In conscious hope, all future ills we'll brave,
With fortitude our dissolution bear,
And sink, forgotten, in the silent grave.
THE man within the golden mean,
Who can his boldest wish contain,
Securely views the ruined cell,
Where sordid want and sorrow dwell,
And in himself, serenely great,
Declines an envied room of state.
IT is a melancholy consideration, that our comforts often produce our greatest
anxieties; and that an increase of our possessions is but an inlet to new
disquietudes.

WEAK and feeble minds are most prone to anger, and by their exceeding
fierceness, generally disappoint their own purpose; but the greatest and
bravest of men, are always calm and sedate; they are above being disturbed with
little injuries, and can generously pardon the greatest; taking more delight in
mercy and forgiveness, than in prosecuting revenge when it is in their power.

OTHER vices are confined within certain bounds, and have a particular object,
but affectation diffuses itself over the whole man, and infects the good
qualities both of body and mind.

SHUN the least appearance of evil, that you may not be suspected; and if you
cannot avoid both, choose rather to be suspected, when you do not deserve it,
than to do evil, without being suspected.

BE very cautious of speaking or believing any ill of your neighbors; but be
much more cautious of making hasty reports of them to their disadvantage.

LET virtue and innocence accompany your recreations; for unlawful pleasures,
though agreeable for a moment, are too often attended with bad consequences; and
instead of relaxing the mind, plunge us into an abyss of trouble and affliction.

FILIAL submission to the sovereign will,
Glad of the good -- and patient of the ill,
I Will work, in narrow sphere, what Heaven approves,
Abating hatreds, and increasing loves;
My friendships, studies, pleasures all my own,
Alike to envy and to fame unknown;
Such in some blessed assylum let me lie,
Take off my fill of life, and wait, not wish to die.
WHEN beauty's charms decay, as soon they must,
And all its glories humbled in the dust,
The virtuous mind, beyond the rage of time,
Shall ever blossom in a happier clime,
Whose never-fading joys no tongue can tell,
Where everlasting youth and beauty dwell;
Where pain and sorrow never more shall move,
But all is pleasure, harmony and love.
SEARCHING AFTER HAPPINESS.
OH! happiness, thou pleasing dream,
Where is thy substance found?
Sought through the varying scenes in vain,
Of earth's capacious round.
The charms of grandeur, pomp and show,
Are naught but gilded snares;
Ambition's painful steep ascent,
Thick set with thorny cares.
The busy town, the crowded street,
Where noise and discord reign,
We gladly leave, and tired, retreat,
To breath and think again.
Yet, if retirement's pleasing charms
Detain the captive mind,
The soft enchantment soon dissolves,
It Is empty all as wind.
Religion's sacred lamp alone,
Unerring points the way,
Where happiness forever shines,
With unpolluted ray;
To regions of eternal peace,
Beyond the stormy skies,
Where pure, sublime, and perfect joys,
In endless prospect rise.
OH would thou, man! but now and then descend
Into the dark recesses of thy breast,
Before the seeds of baleful vice have sprung,
And taken possession of thy easy heart;
Then might thou think on other worlds to come,
And live in solitude without a fear.
HAPPY the man! whose tranquil mind,
Sees nature in her changes kind,
And pleased the whole surveys;
For him the morn benignly smiles,
And evening shades reward the toils,
That measure out his days.
The varying year may shift the scene,
The sounding tempests lash the main,
And Heaven's own thunders roll;
Calmly he sees the bursting storm,
Tempests nor thunder can deform
The morning of his soul.
THE industrious ant, by nature taught,
With more than common prudence fraught,
Lays up secure an annual store,
(It Is little date, perhaps no more:)
Would man (who Lord of all presides,
Alone whom reason's influence guides,
Whom Heaven, in mercy unconfined,
For nobler purposes designed)
Thus hoard against that common state
We all must prove, or soon or late;
How calm might he resign his breath,
And smiling, meet the arm of death!
With joy his soul to Heaven commend,
And fearless, wait his latter end.
NOT all the gifts of wealth, the pomp of state,
The gilded palace, or the envied throne,
Deserve the real tribute of applause.
Praise rather those who steadily pursue
The precepts of humility, who hear
The voice of cooler reason, nor desire
More than their flocks, and herds, the tufted cell,
Or moss-grown cottage, the abode of peace:
They steer securely down life's placid stream,
Rich in themselves, and crowned with length of days.
TEMPORAL things more ravish in the expectation, than in fruition; but things
eternal, more in the fruition than expectation.

VIRTUE is the greatest ornament; it is to the young necessary, to the aged
comfortable, to the poor serviceable, to the rich an ornament, to the fortunate
an honor, to the unfortunate a support. She ennobles the slave, and exalts
nobility itself. In short, let it be remembered, that none can be disciples of
the graces but in the school of virtue; and that those who wish to be lovely,
must learn to be good.

THE solid joys of human kind,
Are those that flow from peace of mind,
For who the sweets of life can taste,
With vice and timorous guilt oppressed?
It Is virtue softens all our toils,
With peace our conscience crowns;
Gives pleasure when our fortune smiles,
And courage when it frowns;
Calms every trouble, makes the soul serene,
Smooths the contracted brow, and cheers the heart within.
OH virtue, how lovely are thy charms! not half so fair the beauteous blushes
of the morn, the flowery meads, or all the cheering verdure of the groves.

THE man who has so little knowledge of human nature, as to seek happiness by
changing any thing, but his own dispositions, will waste his life in fruitless
efforts, and multiply the grief which he purposes to remove.

THERE can be no true and sincere pleasure in any sinful and vicious course,
though it be attended with all the pomp and splendor of outward happiness and
prosperity; for wherever sin or vice is, there must be guilt; and wherever
guilt is, the mind will be restless and unquiet.

PURE are the joys above the skies,
And all the regions peace;
No wanton lips nor envious eyes,
Can see or taste the bliss.
These holy gates forever bar
Pollution, sin and shame;
None shall obtain admittance there,
But followers of the Lamb.
O THOU, supremely wise, supremely good!
Whose ways are like the unfathomable flood,
Grant me to celebrate thy glorious name,
'Till death dissolves this late preserved frame;
And when this earth shall hasten to decay,
When seas shall burn, and mountains melt away;
When suns and stars, in wild confusion hurled,
Now crush each other, now destroy a world,
May I resume the sacred theme above,
Forever praise thee, and forever love.
HAIL, moderation! virtue, Heavenly bright,
Thou shining path, thou ever glorious light!
Steered and conducted by thy certain thread,
The lab'rinth of life we safely tread;
And with a sure unerring eye survey,
The various perils of our painful way;
From thee alone the mighty blessings flow,
To double pleasure and to lessen woe;
In every case to apply ^^e healing balm,
And sooth out stormy passions to a calm.
OF all the calamities to which the condition of mortality exposes mankind, the
loss of reason appears, to those who have the least spark of humanity, by far
the most dreadful; and they behold that last stage of human wretchedness with
deeper commiseration than any other.

THE forgiving of injuries, is a virtue which not only Christianity, but
morality enforces. The Heathens practiced it to admiration; the primitive
Christians exceeded them: But what a glorious example have we in the Lord and
Master of our salvation, who prayed for his crucifiers -- "Father, forgive
them," etc. Luke xxiii.34.

A Wise man will desire no more, than what he may get justly, use soberly,
distribute cheerfully, and leave contentedly.

EXPENSIVE dress is not a crime, because there is any harm in good apparel; but
because it shows a depravity of mind, which turns the necessary use of clothes
into extravagance, pride and folly.

O IT IS a Heavenly virtue, when the heart
Can feel the sorrows of another's b^som!
It dignifies the man. The stupid wretch,
Who knows not this sensation, is an image,
And wants the feeling to make up a life.
SHORT is the date of our existence here,
As the light rainbow in the lucid sphere;
Though sacred science all her stores expand,
Though wealth and honor flow from fortune's hand;
Though ev^ry virtue in progression rise,
To make us learned, benevolent and wise;
Though great in title, and renowned in birth,
Our last retreat's to the oblivious earth.
THOU Power Supreme! whose influence benign,
Over all creation's infinite extent
Shines forth ineffable, inspire my heart
With kindness universal; let not pride,
Envy malignant, sordid lust of gain,
Or any kindred discord-brooding vice,
Disturb my tranquil breast, but let me pass
Through all the varied scenes which life unfolds,
In social harmony with all around,
Serene and calm as glides the lucid stream.
REPUTATIONS are of a subtle, insinuating nature -- like water, derived from
the clearest spring, when it chances to mix with a foul current, it runs
undistinguished in one muddy stream; and they both partake of the same color
and condition. If we keep bad company, however little we may be criminal in
reality, we must expect the same censure that is due to the worst of our
associates.

HUMILITY is a virtue, which highly adorns the character in which it resides,
and sets off every other virtue; it is an admirable ingredient of a contented
mind, and an excellent security against many of those ills in life, which are
most sensibly felt by people of a delicate nature.

THAT man is most blessed, who receives his daily bread with gratitude and
thankfulness from the hand of God; and he who does, experiences a pleasure that
exceeds description. It is this that gives a relish to every repast; it is this
that makes the coarsest morsel delicious to the taste; and it is the want of
this that makes affluence a burden, instead of a blessing to the rich.

THE sleep of the laboring man is sweet; and if he toil hard for the bread
that perishes, he has, in the midst of every want, if a follower of Christ,
bread to eat tha^ the world knows nothing of. It is not said, happy are they
who possess abundance; but happy is the man who finds wisdom, which is
Christ, the pearl of great price. In him are hid those durable riches and
righteousness, the merchandise of which is better than that of silver, and the
gain thereof than fine gold.

TO complain that life has no joys, while there is a single creature whom we
can relieve by our bounty, assist by our counsels, or enliven by our presence,
is to lament the loss of that which we possess; and is just as rational as to
die of thirst with the cup in our hands.

ENOUGH has Heaven indulged of joy below,
To tempt our tarriance in this loved retreat;
Enough has Heaven ordained of useful woe,
To make us languish for a happier seat.
YE proved, ye selfish, ye severe,
How vain your mask of state!
The good alone have joy sincere;
The good alone are great.
LIFE's road let me cautiously view,
And no longer disdain to be wise,
Forbearing such paths to pursue,
As my reason should hate or despise.
To crown both my age and my youth,
Let me mark where religion has trod,
Since nothing but virtue and truth
Can reach to the throne of my God.
O DAYS, long lost to man in each degree,
The golden days of hospitality!
When liberal fortunes vi'd with liberal strife,
To fill the noblest offices of life;
The poor, at hand their natural patrons saw,
And lawgivers were supplements of law!
NEVER treat common beggars with contempt or aversion, though their appearance
be ever so offensive; but remember the kindness of our Savior and his apostles
toward them. Consider, that even they have an equal right with you, to the
protection of Heaven; be thankful that you are not afflicted with their
disorders, their sores, or their poverty, but always treat them as your
fellow creatures; for, as they are such, it is your duty to wish them peace of
mind in this world, and eternal happiness in the next; which it is impossible
you can sincerely do, and yet not have the heart to give them a small relief.

THE poor man is, from his situation, cut off from a thousand temptations to
vice; and that levity and dissipation of thought which are the common
attendants of ease and affluence, are obliged to give way to the steady
exercise of reason and cool reflection, which are as closely connected with
wisdom, as vice is with folly.

THE chest of the miser might as well contain brass as gold, unless benevolence
should pour it into the lap of distress, or generosity place it in the hands of
merit.

THE accidents of life are numerous; it is impossible to guard against them
all; he that meets with the fewest, has a double tie of gratitude to that Being
who is about his bed and his paths; he that meets with most, may convert them
into blessings, by using them as means to exalt and improve his virtues. On
both sides there is a strong call for the exercise of patience and compassion;
and he that exercises them most, bears the strongest resemblance to him whose
mercy endures forever.

WE often overlook the blessings which are in our possession, to hunt after
those which are out of our reach.

TRUE greatness of soul ought to be conformable to the rules of equity; its
object ought to be the doing of all the good it is capable of, without
requiring any retribution for the favors granted, or the treasures distributed.

TEACH me, oh thou! that teacher art
Of every duty here below;
The number of my days impart;
Be thou my guide where ever I go.
I ask no gold nor length of days,
I meet thy will, thy will be done;
I know that time itself decays,
And gold but sparkles in the sun.
When chasten'd, let me kiss the rod;
I wish no transient joy to claim;
Be thou my portion, oh, my God!
Through Heaven's eternal year the same.
Extract from an Ode to Sensibility.
NEVER let my soul, with haughty scorn,
The prayer of injured virtue spurn;
Never let my heart, with sour neglect,
Treat modest worth with disrespect;
But let my breast, like wax receive,
Each fair impression thou can give;
Taste all thy pleasures, all thy pain,
And pity the unfeeling train!
POOR were the expectations of the studious, the brave, the modest and the
good, if the reward of their labors and virtues was to be determined by this
life.

THAT friendship, which makes the least noise, is often the most useful; and a
prudent friend, is generally of more service than a zealous one.

THE surest means we can use, to arrive at a true estimate of ourselves, and to
find out the secret faults and vices that lurk within us, is to examine
ourselves by the rules which are laid down for our direction in sacred history,
and to compare our lives with the life of him who lived up to the perfection of
human nature, and is the standing example, as well as the great guide and
instructor, of those that receive his doctrines.

NO person is insensible to the injury of contempt; nor is there any talent so
invidious, or so certain to create ill will, as that of ridicule. The natural
effects of years, which all hope to attain, and the infirmities of the body,
which none can prevent, are surely of all others the most improper objects of
mirth.

TO receive advice, reproof and instruction, properly, is the surest sign of a
sincere and humble heart, and shows a greatness of mind, which commands our
respect and reverence, while it appears so willingly to yield to us the
superiority.

AVOID the folly of slighting those excellencies in others which you have not
acquired. Rather endeavor, with a well tempered emulation, to imitate them.

NEVER add confusion to the inquietudes of those who have failed of success in
any attempt; nor express a malicious joy at their disappointment.

WHENEVER you would an erring friend reprove,
Let gentle cautions show the motive's love;
Do not begin with rashness to exclaim,
But rather hint the fault, before you blame;
It Is not enough your admonition's just,
Prudence must guide it, or the labor's lost;
Friends should allure, and charm us into sense,
Harsh counsels less reform, than give offense.
A Thought on first waking.
TO God, who guards me all the night,
Be honor, love, and praise;
To God, who sheds the morning light,
And gives me length of days.
His power first called us forth from naught,
Inspired the vital flame,
And with amazing wisdom wrought,
The whole material frame.
He gave the soul its Heavenly birth,
He by his word divine
Prepared the fit enclosing earth,
And bade them both combine.
Strange, that a pure, immortal mind,
A bright celestial ray,
Should be with frailest nature joined,
And mixed with common clay.
O! wondrous union, so composed,
That none can understand,
It Is such as evidently shows
The Almighty Maker's hand.
GREAT inconveniences attend running into any extremes. Much of our happiness
depends upon an evenness of temper, in not suffering the scale of our reason to
mount us too high, in the season of prosperity; nor to sink us too low, with
the weight of adversity.

AS whatever worldly substance you enjoy, is the gift of Providence, make it,
in all cases, serve the wise and reasonable ends of a benificent, hospitable
life.

WE travel through time, as through a desert of wild and empty wastes, which we
would fain hurry over, to get at the imaginary points of rest and pleasure.

IT is a melancholy truth, that though among the talents of our stewardship,
TIME is the most valuable, yet in general, we are more profuse and regardless
of it than of any other.

HAPPY, thrice happy, he whose conscious heart,
Enquires his purpose and discerns his part;
Who runs, with heed, the involuntary race,
Nor lets his hours reproach him as they pass;
Weighs how they steal away, how sure, how fast,
And as he weighs them, apprehends the last;
Or vacant, or engaged, our minutes fly,
We may be negligent, but we must die.
THE laboring be, by God instructed, knows,
Where opening flowers their balmy sweets disclose;
The rising sun, her daily task renews,
Wide, over the plains, she sips the pearly dews;
From mead to mead, she wanders through the skies,
And yellow thyme distends her loaded thighs.
Each rifl'd flower rewards her painful toil,
And her full hive receives the golden spoil;
On flagging wings each load she thither bears,
And while the summer smiles, for winter's wants prepares.
The Ants and the Grasshopper.
THE ants, a prudent, painful train,
Brought forth and dried their heaps of grain,
A grasshopper half starved went by,
Who bowed and begged their charity:
To whom a hoary ant replied,
In harvest how is your time employed?
I sing (the insect said) and play,
To make the laboring peasants gay;
Ah! cried the ant, how just the chance --
As then you sung, you now may dance;
In vain you here for food apply,
I Will feed no idle folks, not I.
The Fall of the Leaf.
SEE the leaves around ye falling,
Dry and withered to the ground,
Thus to thoughtless mortals calling,
In a sad and solemn sound.
"Sons of Adam, once in Eden,
When like us he blighted fell,
Hear the lecture we are reading,
It Is, alas! the truth we tell.
Virgins much, too much presuming,
On your boasted white and red,
View us, late in beauty blooming,
Numbered now among the dead.
Griping misers, nightly waking,
See the end of all your care,
Fled on wings of our own making,
We have left our owners bare.
Sons of honor, fed on praises,
Fluttering high in fancied worth,
Lo, the fickle air that raises,
Brings us down to parent earth.
Learned sires, in system jaded,
Who for new ones daily call,
Cease, at length, by us persuaded,
Every leaf must have a fall.
Youth, though yet no losses grieve you,
Gay in health and many a grace,
Let not cloudless skies deceive you,
Summer gives to autumn place."
On the tree of life eternal,
Man, let all thy hopes be stayed,
Which alone, forever vernal,
Bears the leaves that never fade.
A MAN who entertains an high opinion of himself, is naturally ungrateful. He
has too great an esteem of his own merit, to be thankful for any favors
received.

WHEN tired and sick of all mortal vanities, the religious mind reposes itself
in the firm expectation of drinking at the fountain of life, and of bathing in
rivers of immortal pleasure; even death (which to the guilty is the gloomy
period of all their joys, and the entrance to a gulf of undying wretchedness)
brightens into a smile, and, in an angel's form, invites the religious soul to
endless rest from labor, and to endless scenes of joy.

THOU great, adored! thou excellence divine!
Beauty is thine in all its conquering powers --
What is there lovely in the spacious earth,
Or in the etherial round, compared to thee?
In thee we trace up pleasure to its source!
Thou art the great original of joy,
The eternal spring of life, the source of love
Divine -- beyond similitude supreme;
With whose immensity we are all surrounded!
ACTIVE in indolence, abroad we roam,
In quest of happiness, which dwells at home;
With vain pursuits fatigued, at length we find,
No place excludes it from an equal mind.
OH what a scene of bliss the soul employs,
Wrapped in the prospect of eternal joys!
Where all immortal Hallelujahs sing,
And praise the world's Redeemer, Heaven's King;
Where hymns of glory, every voice employ;
Where all is love, and harmony and joy.
A COURSE of virtue, innocence and piety, is superior to all the luxury and
grandeur, by which the greatest libertines ever proposed to gratify their
desires; for then the soul is still enlarged, by grasping at the enjoyments of
eternal bliss. The mind, by retiring calmly into itself, finds there capacities
formed for infinite objects and desires, that stretch themselves beyond the
limits of this creation, in search of the great original of life and pleasure.

SUCH is the uncertainty of human affairs, that we cannot assure ourselves of
the constant possession of any objects that gratify any one pleasure or desire,
except that of virtue; which, as it does not depend on external objects, we may
promise ourselves always to enjoy.

WHEN you are lawfully engaged in the business of life, take heed that your
heart and affections cleave not to the dust.

IT is not without good reason that we are exhorted to pass the time of our
sojourning in fear; an attachment to riches, to worldly greatness, or its
ca^^s, has a natural tendency to divert the mind from better objects, to draw
off its attention from the one thing needful, and to impede its progress in the
pursuit of that happiness, which is only worth pursuing.

O WHILE we breathe this fleeting air,
May we for endless life prepare;
To love divine, continue chaste,
All its sweet effluences taste;
'Till at the source, when going hence,
We drink our fill of joy immense!
PROVIDENCE is commonly indulgent to the honest endeavors of industrious
persons, that the more laborious they are in their employments, the more they
thrive and are blessed in them.

KNOWLEDGE, softened with complacency and good breeding, will make a person
beloved and admired; but being joined with a severe and motose temper, it makes
him rather feared than respected.

WHEN once the soul, by contemplation, is raised to any right apprehension of
the divine perfections, and the foretastes of celestial bliss, how will this
world, and all that is in it, vanish and disappear before his eyes! With what
holy disdain will he look down upon things, which are the highest objects of
other men's ambitious desires! All the splendor of courts, all the pageantry
of greatness, will no more dazzle his eyes, than the faint luster of a
glowworm will trouble the eagle after it has been beholding the sun.

WERE there but a single mercy apportioned to each minute of our lives, the sum
would rise very high; but how is our arithmetic confounded, when every minute
has more than we can distinctly number!

Reflections on the Close of the Year.
THE year expires, and this its latest hour --
Ah think, my soul, how swift the moment flies,
Nor idly waste it while it is in thy power;
Attend time's awful call, and be thou wise.
Twelve months ago, what numbers, blithe and gay,
Thoughtful, plan'd schemes for the succeeding year;
How vain were all their hopes, to death a prey,
Nor wealth they ask, nor poverty they fear.
I Have followed worth and merit to the grave,
The last sad duties to their ashes paid;
How soon may I the same kind office crave,
The pitying tear, sad sigh and friendly aid?
Almighty Lord! be pleased to extend
Thy wonted kindness; still thy blessings pour --
Oh! may thy grace into my breast descend,
Teach me to work thy will, and thee adore.
OF all the causes which conspire to blind
Man's erring judgment, and misguide the mind --
What the weak head, with strongest bias rules,
Is PRIDE, the never failing vice of fools.
A RICH man is no way happier than another man, but that he has more
opportunities ministered unto him of doing more good than his neighbor.

HUMILITY is the grand virtue that leads to contentment; it cuts off the envy
and malice of inferiors and equals, and makes us patiently bear the insults of
superiors.

POVERTY has not always the nature of an affliction or judgment, but is rather
merely a state of life appointed by providence for the proper trial and
exercise of the virtues of contentment, patience and resignation: And for one
man to murmur against God because he possesses not those riches he sees given
to another, is the wrath that kills the foolish man, and the envy that
slays the silly one.

SURELY if we did not lose our remembrance, or at least our sensibility, that
view would always predominate in our lives, which alone can afford us comfort
when we die.

A Serious and contemplative mind sees God in every thing. Every object we
behold, the food by which we are sustained, the raiment wherewith we are
clothed, suggest thoughts of piety and gratitude; and if we attend to the
silent voice of meditation, we shall "Find tongues in trees, books in the
running brooks,
"Sermons in stones, and good in every thing."


OUR principles only become pleasing and delightful, when by the influence of
them we learn to calm and govern our passions; and are formed by them into such
a temper, as renders us capable of cheerfully enjoying the blessings of the
present world, and the higher happiness of a better.

THE most momentous concern of man, is the state he shall enter upon, after
this short and transitory life is ended: And in proportion as eternity is of
greater importance than time, so ought men to be solicitous upon what grounds
their expectations, with regard to that durable state, are built; and upon what
assurances their hopes or their fears stand.

WE should take all the care imaginable, how we create enemies, it being one of
the hardest things in the Christian religion, to behave ourselves as we ought
to do toward them.

THE HAPPY MAN.
HAPPY the man, who free from noisy sports,
And all the pomp and pageantry of courts,
Far from the venal world can live secure,
Be moral, honest, virtuous -- though poor;
Who walking still by equity's just rules,
Detesting sordid knaves, and flattering fools;
Regarding neither fortune, power nor state,
Nor ever wishing to be vainly great:
Without malevolence and spleen can ^^ve,
And what his neighbor wants, with joy would give;
A foe to pride, no passion's guilty friend,
Obeying nature, faithful to her end;
Severe in manners, as in truth severe,
Just to himself, and to his friends sincere;
His temper even, and his steady mind
Refined by friendship, and by books refined:
Some low-roof'd cottage holds the happy swain,
Unknown to lux'ry, or her servile train;
He, studying nature, grows serenely wise,
Like Socrates he lives, or like him dies.
He asks no glory, gained by hostile arms,
Nor sighs for grandeur with her painted charms;
With calm indi^f^rence views the shifting scene,
Through all magnanimous, resigned, serene:
On hope sustained, he treads life's devious road,
And knows no fear, except the fear of God;
Would Heaven, indulgent, grant my fond desire,
Thus would I live, and thus should life expire.
THE middle state of life is best,
Exalted stations find no rest;
Storms shake the aspiring pine and tower,
And mountains feel the thunder's power.
The mind, prepared for each event,
In every state maintains content;
She hopes the best when storms prevail,
Nor trusts too far the prosperous gale;
Should time returning winters bring,
Returning winter yields to spring;
Should darkness shroud the present skies,
Hereafter brighter suns shall rise.
A WISE Heathen was of opinion, that if mankind, in general, had the power
given them to change their station in life, and at the same time were made
acquainted with the inconveniences attending every other state, as well as
their own, they would unanimously choose to continue in the situation (...)
were at first placed in by Providence.

THE first ingredient in conversation is truth; the next good sense; the third
good humor; the last wit.

DISCREET people generally have a reserve of necessaries beforehand, that when
the time comes for using them, there may be no hurry and confusion.

CIVILITY overacted, is always suspicious. A blast of thorns begins in a blaze,
and soon ends in a smoke; but a fire made of proper materials, designed to be
useful and lasting, at its first kindling breaks out from a cloud of smoke, and
grows clearer and brighter as it burns.

PLUTARCH (in his book of friendship) directs us, to "make a trial of our
friends, as of our money, and to be equally cautious of choosing both." Tacitus
tells us, that "the longer a friendship is contracted, so much the surer and
more firm it is." From this we may collect, that an old friend is always to be
most valued, the best to be loved, and the first to be trusted.

THE duties that are owing to friends, are integrity, love, counsel and
assistance. It is not intimacy, and frequency of conversation, that makes a
friend, but a disinterested observance of these duties.

NEVER admit (says the philosopher Seneca) vain glory into your heart; for
human glory is at best no more than human folly.

THE pleasing gales that gentle summer yields,
Amid the gay profusion of his store;
The smiles of nature, and of verdant fields,
Are all, alas! but blessings of an hour.
How vast the beauties they around display,
Till dreary winter reassumes his reign,
And sternly bids them vanish and decay,
And leave no traces on the pensive plain.
The golden cowslip on the enameled mead,
Displays his youthful glories to the view,
But soon he droops his solitary head,
And yields his virtue to the evening's dew.
Alas! how transient is the dream of life,
And every heartfelt comfort we enjoy;
And fraught with care, solicitude and strife,
Each hour attempts our blessings to destroy.
All human scenes are subject to decay,
And time asserts an all-prevailing power;
Expanding beauties to the morning's ray,
We bloom to wither, as the tender flower.
Not so the soul -- its views sublime and pure,
Where faith, and hope, and charity unite,
Shall rise, and dwell eternally secure,
In Heaven's unfading mansions of delight.
MERE bashfulness, without merit, is awkward; and merit, without modesty,
insolent: But modest merit has a double claim to acceptance, and generally
meets with as many patrons as beholders.

XENOPHON in his Cyrus, which he designed for the perfect idea of a good
prince, represents him in the last minutes of his life, addressing himself to
God to this purpose: Thou know that I have been a lover of mankind; and now
that I am leaving this world, I hope to find that mercy from thee which I have
shown to others.

THE man who keeps the golden mean
Where raging storms are seldom seen,
Avoids the dangerous rocks and pools,
That fright the wise, and swallow fools.
THE limits of our life, how like a shade --
A passing cloud -- our vain existence flies!
Yet all our boundless hopes, our future views,
For endless ages, on this narrow span,
This little rivulet of time, depend.
And Oh! how fast the gliding current flows!
Nothing retards its everlasting course;
Even now our hasty moments pass away,
Forever, O forever are they gone!
We die with every breath; no calling back
The nicest point of all our vain duration;
It Is past beyond retrieve! -- but Oh! there rest
Eternal things on this important point:
This span of life, this short allotted span,
Is all we have to manage for the stake
Of an immortal soul; the glorious weight
Of Heavenly crowns and kingdoms are suspended,
And Oh! -- if lost, can never be recalled!
WHAT impression can treasure and great possessions make upon the mind that is
contemplating, seriously, on the kingdom of Heaven, and a crown of glory that
never fades away? What are the pomp and majesty of an earthly court; the
magnificence of palaces and crowded theaters, to one who has in view the
glories of Heaven; the triumphs of the saints; and the ineffable splendor of
the angelic order? What are feasts, sports, plays, and all the varieties of
sensual pleasures and delights, to him who steadfastly fixes his eye on
celestial bliss, and everlasting transports of joy?

HE that would pass the latter part of life with honor and decency, must, when
he is young, consider that he shall one day be old, and lay up knowledge for
his support, when his powers of acting shall forsake him; and remember when he
is old, that he has once been young, and forbear to animadvert, with
unnecessary rigor, on faults which experience only can correct.

Written in the Holy Bible.
YE sacred tomes, be my unerring guide,
Dove-hearted saints, and prophets eagle-ey'd!
I scorn the moral fop and ethic sage,
But drink in truth from your illumined page:
Like Moses' bush, each leaf's divinely bright,
Where God invests himself in milder light;
Taught by your doctrines we devoutly rise,
Faith points the way, and hope unbars the skies.
You tune our passions, teach them how to roll,
And sink the body but to raise the soul;
To raise it, bear it to mysterious day,
Nor want an angel to direct the way!
TO THE MOTHER.
SAY, while you press, with growing love,
The darling to your breast,
And all a mother's pleasures prove,
Are you entirely blessed?
Ah! no; a thousand tender cares,
By turns your thoughts employ;
Now rising hopes, now anxious fears,
And grief succeeds to joy.
Dear innocent, her lovely smiles,
With what delight you view!
But every pain the infant feels,
The mother feels it too.
Then whispers busy, cruel fear,
"The child, alas, may die!"
And nature prompts the ready tear,
And heaves the rising sigh.
Say, does not Heaven our comforts mix
With more than equal pain,
To teach us, if our hearts we fix
On earth we fix in vain?
Then be our earthly joys resigned,
Since here we cannot rest;
For earthly joys were never designed
To make us fully blessed.
PATIENCE consists in a well pleased submission to the divine will, and a quiet
yielding to whatever it pleases the Deity to afflict us with. If we are
possessed with a sincere reverence and esteem of God, humility will fortify us
with patience to suffer, and not murmur, at his dispensations.

IN every affair of life, despair should give way to hope, and impatience to
content; for the hand of Providence is always nearest to assist us, when perils
are most evident.

AFFLICTIONS, if we make a discreet use of them, are messengers of love from
Heaven to invite us thither.

A SOUL immortal, spending all her fires,
Wasting her strength in strenuous idleness,
Thrown into tumult, raptured or alarmed,
At aught this scene can threaten or indulge,
Resembles ocean into tempest wrought,
To wast a feather, or to drown a fly.
The Knowledge of God natural to Man.
THAT gracious Power, who, from his kindred clay,
Bids man arise to tread the realms of day,
Implants a guide, that tells what will fulfill
His word, or what is repugnant to his will;
The author of our being marks so clear,
That none, but those who will be blind, can err;
Or wheresoe'er we turn the attentive eyes,
Proofs of a God on every side arise;
Nature, a faithful mirror, stands to show
God, in his works, disclosed to human view;
Whatever exists beneath the crystal floods,
Or cuts the liquid air, or haunts the woods;
The various flowers, that spread the enameled mead,
Each plant, each herb, or even the grass we tread,
Displays Omnipotence: None else could form
The vilest weed, or animate a worm.
Or view the livid wonders of the sky,
What hand suspends those ponderous orbs on high?
The comets flight, the planets mystic dance!
Are these the works of Providence or chance?
Themselves declare that universal cause
Who framed the system, and imposed their laws.
CHRISTIANITY is not a speculative science, but a practical obligation.

PIETY and pride can no more thrive together, than health and sickness, light
and darkness.

THOUGH our nature is imperfect and corrupt, yet it is so far improvable, by the
grace of God upon our own good endeavors, that we all may, though not equally,
be instruments of his glory, ornaments and blessings to this world, and capable
of eternal happiness.

THERE is a certain candor in true virtue, which none can counterfeit.

IN the moderate use of lawful things, there can be no crime; but in all
extremes there is.

WE cannot (says Amasis in his epistle to Polycartes) expect in this world an
unmixt happiness, without being frequently tempered with troubles and
disasters.

THE family is the proper province for private women to shine in.

TEMPERANCE is a regimen into which all persons may put themselves.

GOD has promised pardon to him that repents; but he has not promised
repentance to him that sins.

Heaven's favors here are trials, not rewards;
A call to duty, not discharge from care,
And should alarm us full as much as woes;
Awake us to their cause and consequence,
Over our scanned conduct give a jealous eye,
And make us tremble, weighed with our desert.
TO man's false optics (From his folly false)
Time, in advance, behind him hides his wings,
And seems to creep, decrepid with his age;
Behold him when passed by! what then is seen
But his broad pinions swifter than the winds?
And all mankind, in contradiction strong,
Rueful, aghast! cry out at his career.
A DREAM.
TORTURED with pain, as late I sleepless lay,
Oppressed with care, impatient for the day,
Just at the dawn, a gentle slumber came,
And to my wandering fancy brought this dream.
Methought my pains were hushed, and I was laid
In earth's cold lap, among the silent dead;
Prop'd on my arm, I viewed, with vast surprise,
This last retreat of all the great and wise;
Where fool, with knave, in friendly consort lies.
Whilst thus I gazed, behold a wretch appeared,
In beggar's garb, with loathsome filth besmeared,
His carcass, Lazar like, was crusted over
With odious leprosy, one horrid sore;
This wretch approached, and laid him by my side,
Good Heaven! -- how great a shock to mortal pride;
Enraged I cried -- "friend, keep the distance due
"To us of rank, from beggars such as you;
"Observe some manners, and do me the grace,
"To move far off, and quit your betters place."
"And what art thou? audacious (he replied!)
"That thus do show such relics of thy pride?
"What though in life the harder lot was mine,
"Of ease and plenty every blessing thine,
"Yet here, distinctions cease; a beggars dust
"Shall rise with kings -- more happy if more just;
"Till then we both one common mass shall join,
"And spite of scorn, my ashes mix with thine."
ON WRITING.
BLESSED be the man, his memory at least,
That found the art, thus to unfold his breast,
And taught succeeding times an easy way,
Their secret thoughts by letters to convey;
To baffle absence, and secure delight,
Which, till that time, was limited to sight;
The parting farewell spoke the last adieu,
The lessening distance past, then loss of view;
The friend was gone, which some kind moments gave,
And absence separated like the grave.
When for a wife the youthful Patriarch sent,
The camels, jewels, and a servant went,
And wealthy equipage, though grave and slow,
But not a line that might the lover show.
The rings and bracelets wooed her hands and arms;
But had she known of melting words the charms,
That under secret seals in ambush lie,
To catch the soul when drawn into the eye,
The fair Assyrian had not took his guide,
Nor her soft heart in chains of hair been ti'd.
WERE it lawful and becoming in man to choose his circumstances in life, a
mediocrity would perhaps be the most useful, and the freest from temptation;
though notwithstanding these advantages, some might think it not the most
desirable. Opulence may tempt us to dissipation, indolence, sensuality, and
total forgetfulness of God; poverty, to envy, falsehood, dishonesty and perjury.
Let us, therefore, say with Agur, Give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me
with food convenient for me; lest I be full and deny thee, and say, who is the
Lord? or be poor and steal, and take the name of my God in vain. But even those
Christians, who move in this middle sphere, have their sorrows and their joys;
they feel some degree of pain, some proportionable measure of anxiety and care;
they taste a bitter mixed with every sweet, and they find a faithful monitor
within, who tells them that the earth is not their portion, was not given as
their rest, nor intended as their home.

MY God, the steps of pious men
Are ordered by thy will;
Though they should fall, they rise again,
Thy hand supports them still.
I choose the path of Heavenly truth,
And glory in my choice;
Not all the riches of the earth
Could make me so rejoice.
To Mira, on removing into the Country.
MIRA, while on earth we stay,
Change our residence we may;
Change it often, and yet still
May be happy if we will.
Virtue still shall be our care,
The Deity is every where;
Every where to bless the good,
Seen, though little understood.
Seen his wisdom, goodness, power,
When we cultivate the flower;
Wisdom all its hues disclose,
Its perfume with goodness glows;
Finite powers in Heaven or earth
Could not give the charmer birth.
God shall send our board to spread
Healthful herbage from the bed;
Cooling fruit from every b^^^gh,
Milk and butter from the cow;
From the hive the comb replete,
Such was Israel's Canaan treat;
Chicks that once before our door
Picked the crumbs and asked for more;
Pigs that grunted in our sty,
Lambs that skip'd when we were by;
This is goodness in excess,
Oh! how Heaven delights to bless.
From the vine the generous juice,
Not for luxury but use,
Poured for Mira, poured for me --
If content, how happy we.
Wheresoe'er we turn our eyes,
How the varying prospects rise!
Fertiliz'd by sun and rain,
Earth how clothed with grass and grain;
Groves with music fill our ears,
How the God, the God! appears;
He over barren hill and dale
Bade the farmers toil avail;
Gave the linnet's note refined,
With its joys to charm mankind.
Mira, what so clear as this,
Joy in others gives us bliss?
With our superfluous store
Let us clothe and feed the poor.
Worth that from the public flies,
Let us seek and patronize;
Worth that hopes for no display,
'Till that all disclosing day;
Mira! then may you and I,
Claim a mansion in the sky.
FORTITUDE has its extremes, as well as the rest of the virtues; and ought,
like them, to be always attended by prudence.

THE end of learning is, to know God, and out of that knowledge, to love him,
and to imitate him, as we may the nearest, by possessing our souls of true
virtue.

CICERO says, Vicious habits are so great a stain to human nature, and so
odious in themselves, that every person actuated by right reason, would avoid
them, though he was sure they would be always concealed both from God and man,
and had no future punishment entailed upon them.

AS to be perfectly just, is an atribute of the divine nature; to be so to the
utmost of our abilities, is the glory of a man.

A VIRTUOUS habit of mind is so absolutely necessary to influence the whole
life, and beautify every particular action; to overbalance or repel all the
gilded charms of avarice, pride, and self-interest, that a man deservedly
procures the lasting epithets of good or bad, as he appears either swayed by,
or regardless of it.

A MAN of virtue is an honor to his country, a glory to humanity, a
satisfaction to himself, and a benefactor to the world. ^e is rich without
oppression or dishonesty, charitable without ostentation, courteous without
deceit, and brave without vice.

ANGER may glance into the breast of a wise man, but rests only in the bosom of
fools.

WHEN the last hour seems to be approaching, all terrestrial advantages are
viewed with indifference; and the value that we once set upon them, is
disregarded or forgotten. And if the same thought was always predominant, we
should then find the absurdity of stretching out our arms incessantly to grasp
that which we cannot keep; and wearing out ourselves in endeavors to add new
turrets to the fabric of ambition, when the foundation itself is shaking, and
the ground on which it stands is mouldering away.

TO him who is animated with a view of obtaining approbation from the Sovereign
of the universe, no difficulty should seem insurmountable.

WE have seen those virtues which have, while living, retired from the public
eye, generally transmitted to posterity, as the truest objects of admiration
and praise.

A Hymn. -- Psalm VIIIth.
LORD! how illustrious is thy name,
Whose power both Heaven and earth proclaim!
When I the Heavens, thy fabric, see,
The moon and stars, disposed by thee;
O! what is man, or his frail race,
That thou should such a shadow grace?
Next to thy angels most renowned,
With majesty and glory crowned!
All that on dales and mountains feed,
All that the woods and deserts breed,
Whatever through airy regions flees,
Or swims in deep and stormy seas,
Thou all beneath his feet have laid,
King of thy whole creation made;
Lord! how illustrious is thy name,
Whose power both Heaven and earth proclaim!
I ENVY no one's birth or fame,
Their title, train or dress;
Nor has my pride ever stretched its aim*
Beyond what I possess.
I ask not, wish not, to appear,
More beauteous, rich or gay;
Lord make me wiser every year,
And better every day.
A WISE and virtuous man can never be proud; nor can he be exalted in his
thoughts at any advantages he has above others, because he is conscious of his
own weakness and inability to become either wise or virtuous, by any thing he
finds in his own power; and his sense of the goodness of the bountiful God in
bestowing upon him more abundantly, what he has been pleased more sparingly to
vouchsafe to others, will inspire his soul with humility, thankfulness and
adoration.

MEN generally love to have their praises proclaimed, not whispered. There are
not many who can have the patience to stay till the day of judgment, to receive
the approbation and applause of their good actions.

Verses written on the Severity of Winter.
WHILE the fierce winter rages all around,
And the hard earth's with frosty fetters bound;
While clothes its surface a thin garb of snow,
And rapid rivers now no longer flow:
Though keen the piercing cold, the vital flood,
The rich can warm with raiment, fire and food;
But whence the poor enable to sustain
Oppressive want, and hunger's urgent pain?
How is it, naked, hungry -- they can bear,
In their defenseless state, the piercing air?
Whence shall their wants the just supply receive?
Ought man refuse, when God empow'rs to give?
None can -- but those in whom compassion fails;
In whom nor love of God nor man prevails;
In whom all serious sense of duty's lost,
Colder their hearts than snow, and harder than the frost.
ALL have their frailties. Whoever looks for a friend without imperfections,
will never find what he seeks; we love ourselves with all our faults, and we
ought to love our friend in like manner.

THERE is nothing so engaging as a benevolent disposition. This temper makes a
man's behavior inoffensive, a^^able and obliging; it multiplies friends, and
disarms the malice of an enemy.

A MAN without complaisance, ought to have a great d^al of merit in the room of
it.

HE whose lionest freedom makes it his virtue to speak what he thinks, makes it
his necessity to think what is good.

HYMN for the MORNING.
ON thee, each morning, O my God!
My waking thoughts attend,
In whom are founded all my hopes,
And all my wishes end.
My soul, in pleasing wonder lost,
Thy boundless love surveys,
And, fired with grateful zeal, prepares,
Her sacrifice of praise.
Thou lead'st me through the maze of sleep,
And bring'st me safe to light,
And with the same paternal care,
Conduct'st my steps till night.
When evening slumbers press mine eyes,
With thy protection blessed,
In peace and safety I commit
My wearied limbs to rest.
My spirit, in thy hand secure,
Fears no approaching ill;
For, whether waking or asleep,
Thou, Lord! art with me still.
What fit return can I, weak flesh,
Make to Almighty Power!
For so much goodness, so much love!
Such mercies every hour!
I Will daily, to the astonished world,
His wondrous acts proclaim,
Whilst all with me shall praises sing,
With me shall bless his name.
At morn, at noon, at night, I Will still,
The growing work pursue;
And him alone will praise, to whom
Alone all praise is due.
IT is a sign of great prudence, to be willing to receive instruction; the most
intelligent person, sometimes, stands in need of it.

THERE is nothing more disagreeable, than continual jesting. By endeavoring to
purchase the reputation of being pleasant, a man loses the advantage of being
thought wise.

IT is ungenerous to give a person occasion to blush at his own ignorance in
any one thing, who perhaps may excel us in many.

THE greatest wisdom of speech, is to know when, and what, and where to speak;
the time, matter and manner. The next to it, is silence.

AS we should never construe that in earnest, which is spoken in jest, so we
should not speak that in jest, which may be construed in earnest.

THE talent of turning men into ridicule, and exposing those we converse with,
is the qualification of little, ungenerous tempers. What an absurd thing it is
to pass over all the valuable parts of a man, and fix our attention on his
infirmities; to observe his imperfections more than his virtues!

AS, amongst wise men, he is the wisest who thinks he knows least, so, amongst
fools, he is the greatest who thinks he knows most.

THERE is far more satisfaction in doing, than receiving good. To relieve the
oppressed, is the most glorious act a man is capable of; it is in some measure
doing the business of God and Providence; and is attended with a Heavenly
pleasure, unknown but to those that are beneficent and liberal.

LET worldly minds the world pursue,
It has no charms for me;
Once I admired its trifles too,
But grace has set me free.
Its pleasures now no longer please,
No more content afford,
Far from my heart be joys like these,
Now I have known the Lord.
As ^y the light of opening day,
The stars are all concealed;
So earthly pleasures fade away,
When Jesus is revealed.
Now, Lord! I would be thine alone,
And wholly live to thee;
But may I hope that thou will own
A worthles^ ^orm like me?
Yes -- though of sinners I Am the worst,
I cannot doubt thy will,
For if thou had not loved me first
I had refused thee still.
ALPHONSUS, king of Sicily, being asked what he would reserve for himself, who
gave so much away? Even those things, said he, that I do give, for the rest I
esteem as nothing.

NO character is more attractive of universal respect, than that of helping
those who are in no condition of helping themselves.

THE temperate man's pleasures are durable, because they are regular; and all
his life is calm and serene, because it is innocent.

SOCRATES said, all the treasures of the earth were not to be compared to the
least virtue of the soul.

THE gifts of the mind are able to cover the defects of the body; but the
perfections of the body cannot hide the imperfections of the mind.

THOUGH prudence may oblige a man to secure a competency, yet never was any one
by right reason induced to seek superfluities.

RICHNESS of dress contributes nothing to a man of sense, but rather makes his
sense enquired into. The more the body is set off, the mind appears the less.

THE greatest pleasure wealth can afford us, is that of doing good.

OF all the things this world affords us, the possession and enjoyment of
wisdom alone is immortal. A strict adherence to virtue, and a well regulated
life, renders our pleasures more solid and lasting.

IF we apply ourselves seriously to wisdom, we shall never live without true
pleasure, but learn to be pleased with every thing. We shall be pleased so far
with wealth, as it makes us beneficial to others; with poverty, for not having
much to care for; and with obscurity, for being unenvied.

The Angler and the Philosopher.
BESIDE a gentle murmuring brook,
An angler took his patient stand;
He eyed the stream with anxious look,
And waved his rod with cautious hand.
The bait with nicest art was dressed,
The fishes left their safe retreat,
And one more eager than the rest,
Looked, longed, and swallowed the deceit.
Too late she felt the poignant smart,
Her pitying friends her fate deplore,
The angler, with well-practic'd art,
I looked, played, and drew her to the shore.
Lured by the beauty of the day,
The sun now sinking in the sky,
A sage pursued his walk that way,
And saw the bleeding victim lie.
Far in the vale of years declined,
He watched the course of ^ature's law;
And thus with philosophic mind,
He moraliz'd on what he saw.
Indulge, a while, the pensive vein,
And fix this image in your mind,
You Have hooked a fish -- observe its pain,
And view the state of human kind.
Fate gives us line, we shift the scene,
And jocund, traverse to and fro,
Pain, sickness, still will intervene,
We feel the hook where ever we go.
If proudly, we our schemes extend,
And look beyond the present hour,
We find our straightened prospects end,
And own an overruling power.
Awhile we sport, awhile lament,
Fate checks the line and we are gone;
Dragged from our wonted element
To distant climes, untried, unknown.
IT is no common blessing to meet with a faithful, sensible, and discreet
friend; faithful to conceal nothing from us; sensible to remark our faults; and
discreet to reprehend us for them. But to be able to believe and follow his
advice, is indeed a real happiness. It frequently happens, that we take a pride
in following our own conceits; like those travelers that lose their way for
want of taking a guide, or enquiring after the road.

SLANDER is the revenge of a coward, and dissimulation his defense.

BEWARE what earth calls happiness; beware
All joys, but joys that never can expire;
Who builds on less than an immortal base,
Fond as he seems, condemns his joys to death.
Inscription over the Door of a Gentleman's Retreat:
BENEATH this moss-grown roof, within this cell,
Truth, liberty, content and virtue dwell;
Say you who dare, this happy place disdain,
What splendid palace boasts so fair a train?
VIRTUE's the friend of life, the soul of health,
The poor man's comfort, and the rich man's wealth.
IT is not sufficient, that the Christian avoid only the commission of known
actual sins; for more is certainly required of him who is commanded to abstain
from all appearance of evil; who is to speak the truth to his neighbor, and so
to walk that he may be pronounced blameless and without rebuke in the midst of
this crooked and perverse generation. Circumspection in the ordering of our
speech, is, in some respects, perhaps, as necessary for the ornament of
religion, as the outward deportment of our conduct in the world; or, at least,
as necessary for the approbation of him, who, as one expresses, "Views effects
in their causes, and actions in their motives;" or, to use words still more
awful, who has declared, that Every idle word which men shall speak, they
shall give an account thereof in the day of judgment.

DISCRETION does not only show itself in words, but in all the circumstances of
action, and is like an under agent of Providence, to guide and direct us in the
ordinary concerns of life.

IMPRINT this maxim deeply in your mind, that there is nothing certain in this
human and mortal state; by which means you will avoid being transported with
prosperity, and being dejected in adversity.

O! BORN for nobler ends! dare to be wise;
It Is not even now too late, assert thy claim;
Rugged the path conducting to the skies,
But the fair prize is an immortal fame.
HOUSEHOLD affairs ought insensibly to slide along, and represent a still
current without noise or waves.

CLEARNESS is the rule of speaking, as sincerity is the rule of thinking. Too
bright sallies of wit, like flashes of lightning, rather dazzle than illuminate.

LESSONS and precepts ought to be gilded and sweetened as we do pills and
potions, so as to take off the disgust of the remedy; for it holds both in
virtue and in health, that we love to be instructed, as well as physick'd with
pleasure.

Verses sent to a young Woman, with a Carnation growing in a Flower-Pot.
WHILE this gay flower attracts thy eager sight,
And gives to every feeling sense delight,
Let its best use thy better thoughts employ,
And yield thee profit, while it gives thee joy.
Like thee in beauty's fairest noon it blows,
Flames as the sun, and as the ruby glows;
But time, that fixes every mortal's sat,
Marks its short exit, and uncertain date.
Thus the bright charms of youth and love decay,
As the fine flower that scents a summer's day;
Soon will the spoils of time thy mind engage,
And even thy beauty wither into age;
Amid the frolics of engaging youth,
Be thine the care to hoard the charms of truth;
To mark the moment fancy's powers decay
And place thy bliss beyond the fleeting day.
A TREE that is every year transplanted, will never bear fruit; and a mind that
is always hurried from its proper station, will scarce ever do good in any.

SUPPOSING men were to live forever in this world, it would be hardly possible
for them to do more toward their establishment here, than they now do.

LIBERALITY should have such a mixture of prudence, as not to exceed the
ability of the giver.

WITH a false companion, it is hard to retain innocence; be, therefore, very
cautious in choosing your company.

RESOLVE to speak and act well in company, in opposition to those that do ill;
whose vice set against thy virtue, will render it the more conspicuous and
excellent.

An Elegy written when the Bells were tolling for the Interment of a Corpse.
HARK! now the solemn peal begins,
And sounds the sad alarm;
Forsake, it cries, forsake your sins,
And shun impending harm.
Behold! the corpse approaching near,
View there your transient state;
Bestow at least one pious tear,
And with submission wait.
'Ere long this melancholy scene,
Shall on your hearse attend;
With haste employ the space between,
To make of God your friend.
Then shall your mind feel sweet repose,
Nor care disturb your rest,
Virtue alone this p^ace bestows,
And thus rewards the blessed.
SLIGHT not those joys Heaven's bounty does bestow,
Pursuing what was never found below;
So many ills in stormy life abound,
"In Heaven alone true happiness is found."
The Close of the Year.
AS rapid rolls the year away,
Down the swift current of the times,
A moment let the reader stay,
And mark the moral of my rhymes.
As rivers glide toward the sea,
And sink and lose them in the main,
So man declines -- and what is he?
His hope, his wish, alas, how vain!
Fast goes the year, but still renewed,
The ball of time knows no decay;
Sure signal of that greatest good,
We hope in God's eternal day.
YOUR wit may make clear things doubtful; but it is your prudence to make
doubtful things clear.

IN conversation, a man of good sense will seem to be less knowing, to be more
obliging, and choose to be on a level with others, rather than oppress with the
superiority of his genius.

IT is according to nature, to be merciful; for no man that has not divested
himself of humanity, can be hard-hearted to others, without feeling a pain in
himself.

TRUE honor, as defined by Cicero, is the concurrent approbation of good men;
such only being fit to give true praise, who are themselves praiseworthy.

NOBILITY is to be considered only as an imaginary distinction, unless
accompanied with the practice of those generous virtues by which it ought to be
obtained. Titles of honor, conferred upon such as have no personal merit to
deserve them, are at best but the royal stamp set upon base metal.

TO PEACE.
COME, lovely, gentle, peace of mind,
With all thy smiling nymphs around,
Content and innocence combined,
With wreath of sacred olive crowned.
Come, thou that love the walk at eve,
The banks of murmuring streams along,
That love the crowded court to leave,
And hear the milk-maid's simple song;
That love, with contemplation's eye,
The headlong cataract to view,
That foams and thunders from on high,
While echoes often the sound renew;
That love the dark sequestered wood,
Where silence spreads her brooding wings,
Nor less the lake's translucent flood,
The mossy grots and bubbling springs.
With thee, the lamp of wisdom burns,
The guiding light to realms above;
With thee, the raptured mortal learns
The wonders of celestial love.
With thee, the poor have endless wealth,
And sacred freedom glads the slave;
With thee, the sick rejoice in health,
The weak are strong, the fearful brave.
O lovely, gentle peace of mind,
Be thou on earth my constant guest;
With thee, whatever in life I find,
This pledge of Heaven shall make me blessed.
AS no man lives so happy, but to some his life would seem unpleasant; so we
find none so miserable, but one shall hear of another that would change
calamities with him.

HE that is ashamed to be seen in a mean condition, would probably be proud of
a splendid one.

IMPRINT this maxim deeply in your mind, that there is nothing certain in this
human and mortal state; by which means you will avoid being transported with
prosperity, and being dejected in adversity.

ENDEAVOR to make peace among thy neighbors. It is a worthy and reputable
action, and will bring greater and juster commendations to thee, and more
benefit to those with whom thou conversest, than wit or learning, or any of
those so much admired accomplishments.

PREFER solid sense to wit; never study to be diverting, without being useful;
let no jest intrude upon good manners, nor say any thing that may offend
modesty.

BE slow in choosing a friend, and slower to change him; courteous to all;
intimate with few. Slight no man for his meanness, ^or esteem any for their
wealth and greatness alone.

AN idle body is a kind of monster in the creation. All nature is busy about
him. How wretched is it to hear people complain, that the day hangs heavy upon
them; that they do not know what to do with themselves. How absurd are such
expressions among creatures, who can apply themselves to the duties of religion
and meditation; to the reading of useful books; who may exercise themselves in
the pursuits of knowledge and virtue, and every hour of their lives make
themselves wiser and better than they were before.

A Contemplation on Night.
WHETHER amid the gloom of night I stray,
Or my glad eyes enjoy revolving day,
Still nature's various face informs my sense
Of an all-wise, all-powerful Providence.
When the gay sun first breaks the shades of night,
And strikes the distant hills with eastern light,
Color returns, the plains their liv'ry wear,
And a bright verdure clothes the smiling year;
The blooming flowers with opening beauties glow*
And grazing flocks the^^ milky fleeces show.
The barren cliffs, with chalky fronts, arise,
And a pure azure arches over the skies.
But when the gloomy reign of night returns,
Stripped of her fading pride, all nature mourns;
The trees no more their wonted verdure boast,
But weep, in dewy tears, their beauty lost.
No distant landskips draw our curious eyes,
Wrapped in night's robe the whole creation lies.
Yet still even now, while darkness clothes the land,
We view the traces of the Almighty hand;
Millions of stars in Heaven's wide vault appear,
And with new glories hang the boundless sphere.
The silver moon her western couch forsakes,
And over the skies her nightly circle makes;
Her solid globe beats back the sunny rays,
And to the world her borrowed light repays.
Whether those stars that twinkling luster send
Are suns, and rolling worlds those suns attend,
Man may conjecture, and new schemes declare,
Yet all his systems but conjectures are.
But this we know, that Heaven's eternal king,
Who bid this universe from nothing spring,
Can at his word bid numerous worlds appear,
And rising worlds the all-powerful word shall hear.
When to the western main the sun descends,
To other lands a rising day he lends;
The spreading dawn another shepherd spies,
The wakeful flocks from their warm folds arise.
Refreshed, the peasant seeks his early toil,
And bids the plow correct the fallow soil;
While we, in sleep's embraces, waste the night,
The climes opposed enjoy meridian light.
And when those lands the busy sun forsakes,
With us again the rosy morning wakes;
In lazy sleep the night rolls swift away,
And neither clime laments his absent ra^.
When the pure soul is from the body flown,
No more shall night's alternate reign be known;
The sun no more shall rolling light bestow,
But from the Almighty streams of glory flow.
Oh! may some nobler thought my soul employ,
Than empty, transient, sublunary joy!
The stars shall drop, the sun shall lose his flame,
But thou, O God! forever shine the same.
AS riches are in general the means of procuring some of the comforts, and
almost all the conveniences of life, we most commonly think that happiness is
annexed to the possession of them. We, therefore, toil and labor for
abundance; and when abundance is obtained, we find as many wants, as many
cares, and as many sorrows, as when humble poverty was our only burden; when
industry procured the necessaries of life; or when mediocrity of circumstances
placed us beyond the reach of want.

IT is our business to follow the leadings of Divine Providence, as the best
and wisest rule for our conduct in every stage and circumstance of life. If
worldly affluence is to be the portion of the laboring man, the hand of God
will point out the way, and he will surmount the greatest difficulties.

LET us be particularly careful to shun all occasion of superfluous discourse,
and watch over our words, that we utter nothing but what may tend to the glory
of God, or the good of our neighbor.

HE that does good for virtue's sake, seeks neither praise nor reward, though
sure of both at last.

THIS fib'rous frame, by nature's kindly law,
Which gives each joy to keen sensation here,
Over purer scenes of bliss the veil may draw,
And cloud reflection's more exalted sphere.
When death's cold hand, with all-dissolving power,
Shall the close tie with friendly stroke unbind;
Alike our mortal as our natal hour
May to new being wake the rising mind;
On death's new genial day the soul may rise,
Born to some higher life, and hail some brighter skies.
THIS is the state of man; today he puts forth
The tender leaves of hope, tomorrow blossoms,
And bears his blushing honors thick upon him;
The third day comes a frost, a killing frost,
And -- nips his root.
SO fond of liberty is man, that to restrain him from any thing, however
indifferent, is sufficient to make that thing an object of desire.

NO man ever did a designed injury to another, without doing a greater to
himself.

MAN's chief good is an upright mind, which no earthly power can bestow, not
take from him.

TAKE no advantage of the ignorance, necessity or prodigality of any man, for
that gain can never be blessed.

UPON whatsoever foundation happiness is built, when that foundation fails,
happiness must be destroyed; for which reason, it is wisdom to choose such a
foundation for it, as is not liable to destructive accidents.

IF happiness be founded upon riches, it lies at the mercy of theft, deceit,
oppression, war and tyranny; if upon fine houses, and costly furniture, one
spark of fire is able to consume it; if upon wife, children, friends, health or
life, a thousand diseases, and ten thousand accidents, have power to destroy
it; but, if it be founded upon the infinite bounty and goodness of God, and
upon those virtues that entitle to his favor, its foundation is unmovable,
and its duration eternal.

PHARAOH's DAUGHTER.
FAST by the margin of her native flood,
Whose fertile waters are well known to fame,
Fair as the bord'ring flowers the princess stood,
And rich in bounty as the generous stream.
When, lo! a tender cry afflicts her ear,
The tender cry declares an infant's grief;
Soon she, who melted at each mortal's care,
With tenderest pity sought the babe's relief.
The babe, adorned in beauty's early bloom,
But to the last distress exposed, appears,
His infant softness pleads a milder doom,
And speaks with all the eloquence of tears.
The kind Egyptian gazed upon his charms,
And with compassion viewed the weeping child;
She snatched the little Hebrew to her arms,
And kissed the infant -- the sweet infant smiled.
Again she clasps him with a fond embrace,
Yet more she pities the young stranger's woe;
She wiped the tears that hung upon his face,
Her own the while in pious plenty flow.
Now, cruel father, thy harsh law I see,
And feel that rigor which the Hebrews mourn;
O! that I could reverse the dire decree,
Which dooms the babe a wretch as soon as born!
But that, alas! exceeds my slender power --
And must this tender innocent be slain?
Poor harmless babe! born in a luckless hour,
Yet sweet as ever soothed a mother's pain.
Must thou, poor undeserving infant, die?
No! in my bosom every danger shun;
A princess shall thy parents loss supply,
And thou art worthy to be called her son.
SENECA himself allows, that in conferring benefits, the present should always
be suited to the dignity of the receiver. Thus the rich receive large presents,
and are thanked for accepting them. Men of middling stations are obliged to be
content with presents something less, while ^^e poor beggar, who may be truly
said to want indeed, is tho^ght to be well paid if a single farthing rewards
his warmest solicitations.

SELF-DENIAL is the most exalted pleasure; and the conquest of evil habits is
the most glorious triumph.

THE true way to advance another's virtue, is to follow it; and the best means
to cry down another's vice, is to decline it.

HOW ought every testimony of God's goodness to excite our love, our gratitude
and praise! The smallest temporal advantage is a blessing, to which we have no
title; if we have food and raiment, they are more than we deserve.

WHY are we commanded to pray, "Give us this day our daily bread," if not to
teach us, among other things, our daily dependence upon God as the dispenser of
all our temporal blessings? Our various wants return with the morning; and to
whom should we look, but to him who is able to supply them? We need his
direction through the perplexities and difficulties of every day; and without
his blessing and support, we can effect nothing to any valuable purpose. In the
evening, we seek rest in vain, unless he give slumber to the eyelids, and
sleep to the eyes: And as there are wants common to every family, and what all
its members constantly experience, they ought certainly to unite in
supplicating the same divine goodness* and also in returning thanks for the
mercies of which they have all been joint partakers.

THE neglect of any spiritual duty, arises from a declension of religion in the
soul. Were we to live more under the sensible enjoyment of divine love, we
should be more active, vigorous, and steady in the performance of every divine
precept or command. The ways of God would not then appear either burdensome or
grievous, but as they truly are "Ways of pleasantness, and paths of peace."

THE discontents of the poor are much easier allayed, than those of the rich.

ON GOD.
WHAT though no object strike upon the sight,
Thy sacred presence is an inward light.
What though no sound shall penetrate the ear,
To listening faith the voice of truth is clear.
Sincere devotion wants no outward shrine,
The center of an humble soul is thine.
There may I worship, and there may thou raise
Thy seat of glory, and thy throne of grace;
Yea, fix (if Christ my advocate appear)
The strict tribunal of thy justice there.
Let each vain thought, and each impure desire,
Meet in thy wrath with a consuming fire.
Thou too can raise (though punishing for sin)
The joys of peaceful penitence within;
Thy justice and thy mercy both are sweet;
Thou make our sufferings and salvation meet.
Befall me then, whatever God shall please,
His wounds are healing and his griefs give ease;
He is the true physician of the soul,
Applies the medicine that can make it whole.
I Will do, I Will suffer, whatsoever he wills;
I see his aim through all these transient ills:
It Is to ensure a salutary grief,
To fit the mind to absolute relief;
Till purged from every false and finite love,
Dead to the world, alive to things above;
The soul renewed, as in its first formed youth,
Shall worship God in spirit and in truth.
NONE should be so implacable, as to refuse an humble submission; he whose very
best actions must be seen with favorable allowance, cannot be too mild,
moderate and forgiving.

A PASSIONATE temper renders a man unfit for advice; deprives him of his
reason; robs him of all that is great or noble in his nature; it makes him
unfit for conversation; destroys friendship; changes justice into cruelty; and
turns all order into confusion.

THERE is no greater sign of a mean and sordid spirit, says Cicero, than to
dote upon riches; nor is any thing more magnificent, than to lay them out
freely in acts of bounty and liberality.

A FIRM trust in the assistance of an Almighty being, naturally produces
patience, hope, cheerfulness, and all other dispositions of mind, that
alleviate those calamities which we are not able to remove.

DIVINE Providence always places the remedy near the evil. There is not any
duty, to which Providence has not annexed a blessing; nor any affliction, for
which he has not provided a remedy.

A GOOD conscience, and a contented mind, will make a man happy in all
conditions.

HE that overcomes his passions, conquers his greatest enemies.

THE desire of being thought wise, is often an hinderance to being so; for such
a one is more solicitous to let the world see what knowledge he has, than to
learn that which he wants.

A WISE man endeavors to shine in himself; a fool to outshine others. The
first is humbled by the sense of his own infirmities; the last is lifted up by
the discovery of those which he observes in others. The wise man considers what
he wants; and the fool, what he abounds in. The wise man is happy when he gains
his own approbation; and the fool, when he recommends himself to the applause
of those about him.

NO knowledge, which terminates in curiosity and speculation, is comparable to
that which is of use; and of all useful knowledge, that is most so which
consists in a due care and just notion of ourselves.

OF all parts of wisdom, the practice is the best. Socrates was esteemed the
wisest man of his time, because he turned his acquired knowledge into morality,
and aimed at goodness more than greatness.

THOUGH it be an argument of a great wit, to give ingenious reasons for many
wonderful appearances in nature; yet, it is an evidence of small judgment, to
be positive in any thing but the knowledge of our own ignorance.

THE highest learning is, to be wise; and the greatest wisdom is, to be good.

INSTEAD of laboring in nice learning and intricate sciences; instead of
trifling away precious time upon the secrets of nature, or mysteries of state,
it were better to seek that only which is really and substantially good.

TRUE philosophy, says Plato, consists more in fidelity, constancy, justice,
sincerity, and in the love of our duty, than in a great capacity.

THE best people need afflictions for trial of their virtue. How can we
exercise the grace of contentment, if all things succeed well? Or that of
forgiveness, if we have no enemies?

THE most excellent of all moral virtues, is to have a low esteem of ourselves,
which has this particular advantage, that it attracts not the envy of others.

IF a man should forsake a kingdom, and all the world, if he cannot renounce
himself, he has hardly done any thing.

WHATSOEVER convenience may be thought to be in falsehood and dissimulation, it
is soon over; but the inconvenience of it is perpetual, because it brings a man
under a continual jealousy and suspicion; so that he is not believed when he
speaks truth, nor trusted, when perhaps he means honestly.

Reflection by a Person in his Sixtieth Year.
PLACED on the world's distracted stage,
And forced to act a joyless part,
Why should I shrink at creeping age,
Which warns me friendly to depart?
Why do I rather not rejoice,
That I my hapless course have ran?
And ruled by wisdom's Heavenly voice,
Make my last exit like a man.
Fierce, though affliction's billows roll,
And deep distress deforms the scene;
If innocence secure the soul,
Vain is their rage, the tumult vain.
Serene she smiles, yet smiling sighs,
To qu^t this darksome, dull abode,
Wishing to win her native skies,
And find a lasting rest in God.
Weari'd, then let me quit the strife,
Kind Heaven assent and set me free!
For why should I be fond of life,
When life itself is tired of me!
ORDER is Heaven's first law, and this confessed,
Some are, and must be, greater than the rest;
More rich, more wise -- but who infers from hence,
That such are happier, shocks all common sense.
BE careful not to endeavor to imitate other men's ways except it be in their
essential virtues.

THE distribution of all our temporal mercies is wisely regulated by the hand
of God. Some men are favored with a large share of worldly blessings; some
with things just necessary and convenient; while some, equally deserving, have
scarcely whereon to lay their heads. The disposal of these thing is the work of
God: He makes poor and makes rich; I^ brings low and lists up, and none
have a right to say to him, what do thou?

EVERY serious person must trace the marks of an invisible hand in all the
variegated paths of life. He must acknowledge, that it is not in man who
walks, to direct his steps; yea, he will rejoice to find they are ordered by
the Lord, who delights in his way. And were we more observant of the hand of
Providence, many of our enquiries would be needless; we should see the path
marked out before us, and if at any time through mistake we should turn either
to the right hand or to the left, we should hear a still small voice whispering
behind, "this is the way, walk in it."

The contented Swain.
I SEEK not India's pearly shore,
Nor western climes will I explore;
Nor midst the world's tumultuous strife,
Will waste what now remains of life.
I seek not aught that me may lead,
From tufted grove or flowery mead;
Or from my native swains among,
Who listen to my artless song.
For naught Gol^onda's gems avail,
In this sequestered humble dale;
Nor joys can crowded cities yield,
Like those of hill or daisi'd field.
Calm as the summer ev'ning's sun,
May here my glass of life be run!
And bright as is his parting ray,
My prospect of a future day!
Mean while, the laboring hind to cheer,
To wipe the widow's falling tear,
Such tranquil pleasures will bestow,
As riot's sons can never know.
This, this be mine! the speaking eye
Shall then the sculptured stone supply;
As over my turf the rustics bend,
The poor shall say, "here lies our friend."
LET your promises be sincere, and so prudently considered, as not to exceed
the reach of your ability; he who promises more than he is able to perform,
disgraces himself; and he who does not perform what he has promised, is false
to his friend.

THE immortal mind, perhaps, will quit a cottage with less regret than it would
leave the splendor of a palace; and the breathless dust sleep as quietly
beneath the grassy turf, as under the parade of a costly monument. These are
insignificant circumstances, to a spirit doomed to an endless duration of
misery or bliss.

AS the belief of a God is the foundation of all religion, there can be no
religion without faith; but as true religion includes virtue, religion can not
be perfect without works.

AMAZED, the wonders of thy God behold!
And meditate his mercies manifold.
Oh! happy time, when shaking off this clay,
The human soul at liberty shall stray
Through all the works of nature! shall descry
Those objects which evade the mortal eye;
No distance, then, shall stretch beyond its flight,
No smallness 'scape its penetrating sight;
But, in their real essence, shall be shown
Worlds unexplor'd, creations yet unknown.
REFLECTIONS.
WHAT, oh! my heart, overflowing with happiness! are the sentiments that ought
to spring up in thee, when admitted, either in the solemnities of public
worship, or the retiredness of private devotion, into the more immediate
presence of thy Maker -- who does not govern, but to bless! whose divine
commands are sent to succor human reason in search of happiness! Let thy law,
Almighty! be the rule, and thy glory the constant end, of all I do. Let me not
build virtue on any notions of honor, but of honor to thy name. Let me not
sink piety in the boast of benevolence; my love of God in the love of my
fellow creatures. Can good be of human growth! No -- it is thy gift, Almighty,
and All-good! Let not thy bounties remove the donor from my thought; nor the
love of pleasures make me forsake the fountain from which they flow. When joys
entice, let me ask their title to my heart: When evils threaten, let me see thy
mercy shining through the cloud, and discern the great hazard of having all to
my wish. In an age of such licentiousness, let me not take comfort from the
number of those who do amiss; an omen rather of public ruin, than of private
safety. Let the joys of the multitude less allure than alarm me; and their
danger, not example, determine my choice. In this day of domineering pleasures,
so lower my taste as to make me relish the comforts of life. And in this day of
dissipation, O give me thought sufficient to preserve me from being so
desperate, as in this perpetual flux of things, and as perpetual swarm of
accidents, to depend on tomorrow; a dependence that is the ruin of today, as
that is of eternity. Let my whole existence be ever before me, nor let the
terrors of the grave turn back my survey. When temptations arise, and virtue
staggers, let imagination sound the final trumpet, and judgment lay hold on
eternal life. In what is well begun, grant me to persevere, and to know, that
none are wise, but they who determine to be wiser still. And since, O Lord! the
fear of thee is the beginning of wisdom, and, in its progress, its secret
shield, turn the world entirely out of my heart, and place that guardian angel,
thy blessed fear, in its stead. Turn out a foolish world, which gives its money
for what is not bread; which hews out broken cis^erns, that hold no water; a
world, in which even they, whose hands are mighty, have found nothing. There is
nothing, Lord God Almighty! in Heaven, in earth, but thee -- I will seek thy
face; bless thy name; sing thy praises; love thy law; do thy will; enjoy thy
peace; hope thy glory, till my final hour! Thus shall I grasp all that can be
grasped by man. This will heighten good, and soften evil, in the present life,
and when death summons, I shall sleep sweetly in the dust, till his mighty
conqueror bids the trumpet sound, and then shall I, through his merits, awake
to eternal glory.

ALL pleasures are imperfect here below;
Our sweetest joys are mixed with bitter woe;
The draught of bliss, when in our goblet cast,
Is dashed with grief, or spilt before we taste.
CONTENTED poverty's no dismal thing,
Free from the cares unwieldy riches bring;
At distance, both alike deceive our view;
Nearer approached, they take another hue.
The poor man's labor relishes his meat;
His morsel's pleasant, and his rest is sweet:
Not so the rich, who find their weari'd taste
Palled with the prospect of the cumb'rous feast;
For what they have more than they can enjoy,
Instead of satisfying, does but cloy.
The Divine Presence.
THE high and mighty King of Kings,
Whose praise the whole creation sings,
Has fixed, in love to human kind,
His blessed image in our mind. --
The lines are strong, the picture fair,
No need of anxious search and care;
Look but within, and strait appears,
The signature all nature wears!
Wherever I am, however oppressed,
This Heavenly portrait in my breast
Inspires, with confidence divine,
And comfort flows from every line!
Through dangers numberless I go,
Yet weather all the storms that blow --
To lead me to the peaceful shore,
My God and guide is still before!
At night, before I close my eyes,
And in the morning, when I rise,
I pray for safety, health and grace,
And still the Lord before me place!
He sheds his odours round my head,
And makes me sleep secure in bed;
In all the labors of the day
He goes before and points the way!
Soon as my passions wild prevail,
And faith and reason both assail;
When strong temptations spread their net,
Before me still the Lord I set;
His presence can the passions lay,
And teach them reason to obey;
Temptation's charms soon disappear,
And truth succeeds when God is near!
When sorrows upon sorrows roll,
And sharpest arrows pierce my soul;
When deepest sunk in black despair,
I lift my eyes and heart in prayer!
Just when all human help had failed,
And friend and neighbor naught availed,
This best of friends, in constant view,
Shows what himself alone can do!
Through all the future ills of life,
Amidst contempt, reproach and strife,
I Will set the Lord before me still,
And live obedient to his will!
So when through death's dark vale I move,
He will a light before me prove;
Conduct me safe to endless joy,
And mark me out some blessed employ.
WHEN the oil of grace actuates the soul, the wheels of obedience move with
celerity; but when this is wanting, every duty, if not neglected, will be
indifferently performed.

TRUE happiness is of a retired nature, and an enemy to pomp and noise; it
arises, in the first place, from the enjoyment of one's self; and, in the next,
from the friendship and conversation of a few select companions. It loves shade
and solitude, and naturally haunts groves and fountains, fields and meadows: In
short, it feels every thing it wants within itself, and receives no addition
from multitudes of witnesses and spectators. On the contrary, false happiness
loves to be in a crowd, and to draw the eyes of the world upon her. She does
not receive any satisfaction from the applauses which she gives herself, but
from the admiration which she raises in others. She flourishes in courts and
palaces, theaters and assemblies; and has no existence, but when she is looked
upon.

IF good we plant not, vice will fill the mind,
And weeds despoil the space for flowers designed.
The human heart never knows a state of rest,
Bad tends to worse, and better leads to best;
We either gain or lose, we sink or rise,
Nor rests our struggling nature 'till she dies;
Those very passions that our peace invade,
If rightly pointed, blessings may be made;
Then rise, my friend, above terrestrial aims,
Direct the ardour which your breast inflames
To that pure region of eternal joys,
Where fear disturbs not, nor possession cloys;
Beyond what fancy forms of rosy bowers
Or blooming chaplets of unfading flowers;
Fairer than ever imagination drew,
Or poets warmest visions ever knew;
Press eager onward to those blissful plains,
Where one unbounded spring forever reigns.
LEARN to pursue virtue from the man that is blind, who never makes a step,
without first examining the ground with his staff.

SET bounds to your zeal by discretion; to error by truth; to passion by
reason; and to division by charity.

THE path of virtue is the path of peace; in that only we can travel with
safety, or rationally hope to enjoy permanent pleasures.

LET useless riches never engross my care,
The bane of piety, the miser's prayer;
Yet let my purse the moderate store contain,
To satisfy my wants, and ease my pain;
And when the needy at my threshold stand,
To soothe their cares, and fill the craving hand.
CONTENT.
HAPPY the man (but oh! how few we find)
Who feels the pleasures of a tranquil mind!
Who meets all blessings in content alone,
Nor knows a station happier than his own!
No anxious cares disturb his peaceful breast,
With life content, and with contentment blessed;
No pangs he feels to break his calm repose;
No envy fears, for he no envy knows.
To man still faithful, and to God resigned,
His body subject to its lord, the mind.
He must be good -- for surely Heaven never meant,
Without strict virtue, to bestow content.
It Is not the glory false ambition brings,
The wealth of misers, or the power of kings;
Nor all the fleeting joys by man possessed,
Can give this earthly frame that Heavenly guest;
Whatever the muse of love or glory sings,
Virtue alone the sacred stranger brings.
CONSCIENCE distasteful truths may tell,
But mark her sacred lessons well!
Whoever lives with her at strife,
Loses his better friend for life.
THE line of human understanding, is undoubtedly too short to fathom the depths
of the divine dispensations; and the most enlarged capacity too narrow, to
comprehend the ways of infinite wisdom.

IT is desirable, for the inward peace and ease of men's own minds within
themselves, that they should not be under the power of fretful passions, and
the lasting resentments of a revengeful spirit; but that they be meek and
gentle, peaceable, and easy to be reconciled; which sweetness of disposition,
improved upon religious principles into a habit of meekness, is a virtue,
reflecting upon itself that calm and sedate satisfaction, which is in a
peculiar manner a reward to itself; nor is it less beneficial to the public, as
being the great preservative against that beginning of strife, which Solomon
elegantly compares to the letting out of water; that is, the opening of a
breach, which no man can be sure to stop, before it proceeds to the most
calamitous events.

THERE is no terrestrial good, that can yield that substantial happiness, which
is suited to the nature and desires of the human mind; and he who thinks to
find it in any thing beneath the sun, is pursuing a phantom, that will elude
his chase; and if it seem to loiter for his approach, it will only be to
convince him of his folly, to show him a mistake that he never saw, and of
which thousands never thought, till their race terminated in that country, from
whence none ever yet returned to own their error, or confess their shame.

WOULD you the bloom of youth should last,
It Is virtue that must bind it fast;
An easy carrage wholly free
From four reserve or levity;
Good-natured mirth, an open heart,
And looks unskilled in any art;
These are the charms that never decay,
Though youth and beauty fade away;
And time, which all things else removes,
Still heightens virtue and improves.
BOAST not of health or beauty, or the days of youth. Delay not the care of the
soul, in hopes that you will live to old age, or that you can do all that is
required of youth, with respect to religion, on a bed of affliction. Strive, by
the grace of God, ever to be in readiness to go hence and be with our Savior,
which is infinitely better than all that this world can afford; and then you
may meet the king of terrors with a placid countenance, and a heart that
rejoiceth in hope.

THEY enjoy life best, who are best prepared for death; who look not for more
happiness from this world, than it is capable of giving; who live righteously,
soberly and piously; who pray to God for the blessings they need, and receive
thankfully all good things as his gifts -- and who can rejoice in the animating
hope of salvation, through a Redeemer.

WHEN you a wilder'd trav'ler meet,
Guide to the road his erring feet;
Or to your roof, if late, invite,
And shield him from the damps of night.
To still the voice of anguish, try
To wipe the tear from sorrow's eye;
And every good you can, impart
With ready hand, and glowing heart;
So shall ye pass, from manhood's stage,
Smoothly along the slope of age;
Then from the pleasing journey rest,
In peaceful sleep, beloved and blessed.
CONTENTMENT.
FORGET not that thy station on earth is appointed by the wisdom of the
eternal; who knows thy heart, who sees the vanity of all thy wishes, and who
in mercy often denies thy requests; yet for all reasonable desires, for all
honest endeavors, his benevolence has appointed, in the nature of things, a
probability of success. The uneasiness thou feel, the misfortunes thou
bewailest, behold the root from whence they spring, even thine own folly, thine
own pride, thine own distempered fancy; murmur not therefore at the
dispensations of God, but correct thine own heart; neither say within thyself,
if I had wealth or power, or leisure, I should be happy; for know, they all of
them bring to their several possessors their peculiar inconveniences.

THE poor man sees not the vexations and anxieties of the rich; he feels not
the difficulties and perplexities of power, neither the wearisomeness of
leisure, and therefore it is that he repineth at his own lot. But envy not the
appearance of happiness in any man, for thou know not his griefs. To be
satisfied with a little, is the greatest wisdom; and he that increases his
riches, increases his cares; but a contented mind is a hidden treasure, and
trouble finds it not. Yet if thou suffer not the allurements of fortune to
rob thee of justice or temperance, or charity or modesty, even riches
themselves shall not make thee unhappy; but hence shall thou learn, that the
cup of felicity, pure and unmixed, is by no means a draught for mortal man.

Virtue is the race which God has appointed him to run, and happiness the goal
which none can arrive at, till he has finished his course, and received his
crown in the mansions of eternity.

An Hymn to Contentment.
LOVELY, lasting peace of mind,
Sweet delight of human kind,
Heavenly born and bred on high
To crown the favorites of the sky,
With more of happiness below
Than victors in a triumph know.
Whither, oh! whither, art thou fled,
To lay thy meek contented head?
What happy region do thou please
To make the seat of charms and ease?
Ambition searches all its sphere
Of pomp and state to meet thee there;
Increasing avarice would find
Thy presence in its gold enshrined;
The bold advent'rer ploughs his way
Through rocks, amidst the foaming sea,
To gain thy love, and then perceives
Thou were not in the rocks and waves.
The silent heart which grief assails,
Treads soft and lonesome over the vales;
Sees daisies open, rivers run,
And seeks, as I have vainly done,
Amusing thought; but learns to know
That solitude's the nurse of woe.
No real happiness is found
In trailing purple on the ground;
Or in a soul, exalted high,
To range the circuit of the sky;
Converse with stars above, and know
All nature in its forms below;
The rest it seeks -- in seeking dies,
And doubts at last for knowledge rise.
'Twas thus, as under shade I stood,
I sung my wishes to the wood;
And, lost in thought, no more perceived
The branches whispered as they waved;
It seemed as all the quiet place
Confessed the presence of the grace,
When thus she spoke -- go rule thy will,
Bid thy wild passions all be still;
Know God, and bring thy heart to know
The joys which from religion flow.
Then every grace shall prove its guest,
And I Will be there to crown the rest.
Oh! by yonder mosy seat,
In my hours of sweet retreat,
Might I thus my soul employ,
With sense of gratitude and joy.
Raised, as ancient prophets were,
In Heavenly vision, praise, and prayer;
Pleasing all men, hurting none,
Pleased and blessed with God alone.
Then while the gardens take my sight,
With all the colors of delight,
While silver waters glide along,
To please my ear and court my song,
I Will lift my voice, and tune my string,
And thee, great Source of Nature, sing!
The sun, that walks his airy way,
To light the world and give the day;
The moon, that shines with borrowed light,
The stars, that glad the gloomy night,
The seas, that roll unnumber'd waves,
The wood, that spreads its shady leaves,
The field, whose ears conceal the grain,
The yellow treasures of the plain;
All of these, and all I see
Should be sung, and sung by me;
They speak their Maker as they can,
But want, and ask, the tongue of man.
Go search among your idle dreams,
Your busy or your vain extremes,
And find a life of equal bliss,
Or own the next begun in this.
GRATITUDE.
THERE is not a more pleasing exercise of the mind, than gratitude. It is
accompanied with such an inward satisfaction, that the duty is sufficiently
rewarded by the performance. It is not like the practice of many other virtues,
difficult and painful, but attended with so much pleasure, that were there no
positive command which enjoined it, nor any recompense laid up for it
hereafter, a generous mind would indulge in it for the natural gratification
that accompanies it. If gratitude is due from man to man, how much more from
man to his Maker. The Supreme Being does not only confer upon us those
bounties, which proceed more immediately from his hand, but even those benefits
which are conveyed to us by others. Every blessing we enjoy, by what means
soever it may be derived upon us, is the gift of him who is the great Author of
Good, and Father of Mercies.

WHEN thou have done a kindness, or good office to any, be sure thou boast not
of it. It is the employment of a great soul, rather to do things worthy to be
admired, than to ad^^re what himself has done.

NOTHING but virtue is capable of making us happy; if other advantages
contribute thereto in some measure, it is only in as much as virtue bears them
company.

SUPINENESS and effeminacy have ruined more constitutions, than were ever
destroyed by excessive labors; moderate exercise, far from prejudicing,
strengthens and consolidates the body.

WE ought never to think too lightl^ of other people's complaints; but to
regard the sorrows of our fellow creatures with sentiments of humanity and
compassion.

MAN should weigh well the nature of himself,
The varying frailness of this flattering world,
And the true excellence of Heaven's high Lord;
Then would he this despise, and trust in him.
The world deceives us all. In God is truth.
Let not thy riches or thy power prevail
To swell thy bosom with conceits of pride;
Look back, remember those thou have seen high,
And mark, if thou have never seen them sink;
Let this teach thee. One end awaits us all!
And when inevitable death commands,
That we should follow to his dreary realm,
Matters it much, if from a royal couch,
Or from a mattress, thrown upon the ground,
We rise to take our journey.
The Husbandman's Meditation in the Field.
WITH toilsome steps when I pursue,
Over breaking clods, the plough-share's way,
Lord! teach my mental eye to view
My native dissoluble clay.
And when with seed I strew the earth,
To thee all praises let me give,
Whose hand prepared me for the birth,
Whose breath informed and bade me live.
Pleased, I behold the stately stem
Support its bearded honor's load;
Thus, Lord! sustained by thee, I came
To manhood, through youth's dangerous road.
Purging from noxious herbs the grain,
Oh! may I learn to purge my mind
From sin, rank weed of deepest stain,
Nor leave one baleful root behind.
When blasts destroy the opening ear,
Life, thus replete with various woe,
Warns me to shun, with studious care,
Pride, my most deadly latent foe.
When harvest comes, the yellow crop
Prone to the reaper's sickle yields;
And I beneath death's scythe must drop,
And soon or late forsake these fields.
When future crops, in silent hoards,
Sleep, for a while to service dead;
Thy emblem this, oh grave! affords,
The path to life which all must tread.
EVENING HYMN.
INDULGENT God, whose bounteous care
Over all thy works is shown,
Oh! let my grateful praise and prayer
Ascend before thy throne.
What mercies has this day bestowed,
How largely have thou blessed,
My cup with plenty overflowed,
And with content my breast.
Safe, 'midst a thousand latent snares,
Thy careful hand has led,
And now, exempt from anxious cares,
I press the downy bed.
I fall this night into thy arms,
Which I have proved so kind;
Oh! keep my body from all harms,
And from all sins my mind.
Let balmy slumbers close my eyes,
From pain and sickness free;
And let my waking fancy rise,
To meditate on thee.
So bless each future day and night
'Till life's fond scene is over,
And then, to realms of endless light,
Oh! aid my soul to soar.
A little Ode to a little Maid, on her first going out after her Birth.
LITTLE zephyrs, loves and graces,
Bid each chilling wind be laid,
Sheltered in your warm embraces,
See where comes my little maid.
With your guardian wings protect her,
Every motion hover over;
Through her little path direct her,
She never ventured out before.
Forth she comes, a new born creature,
How her little blue eyes range!
Wonder sits on every feature,
All around is gay and strange.
Could thou, little maid, but paint me,
What thy little fancy warms,
Or thy little tongue acquaint me
Midst this glitter what most charms.
To a stranger all is inviting,
All a morning beauty wears;
Be the world, as now, delighting,
Taste its joys, but not its cares!
Pity, gentlest child of Heaven,
Little maid will thee attend;
Innocence is also given
As thy guardian, as thy friend.
She shall wake thy heart to pleasures,
Such as virtue can disclose;
Give the^ love and friendship's treasures,
Strew thy path with many a rose.
As in years, in wisdom growing,
Never from her side depart;
Through thy future life still showing
She had formed thy youthful heart.
Let the false world never confound thee,
From its vices turn thine ear;
Shun the bad examples round thee,
Give them but a sigh! -- a tear!
Thus self-guarded, thus defended,
Thy experience shall confess,
Spite of what is by fools pretended,
Virtue is true happiness!
Such a blameless tract pursuing,
Thy perfection's sense shall tell;
Often this little ode reviewing,
Little maid, I wish thee well.
THE CHURCHYARD.
THINK, oh my soul, that while friends or strangers are engaged on this spot,
and reading the date of my departure hence, thou will be fixed under a decisive
and unchangeable sentence, rejoicing in the rewards of time well improved, or
suffering the sorrows which shall attend the abuse of it, in an unknown world
of happiness or misery.

MODESTY seldom resides in a breast, that is not enriched with nobler virtues.

MODESTY is always, and justly, supposed to be a concomitant of merit; and
every appearance of it is winning and prepossessing.

PRAISE bestowed on living merit, is often found to injure the goodness it
applauds.

THE ingratitude of the world, can never deprive us of the conscious happiness
of having acted with humanity ourselves.

TO thee, oh God! thy suppliant lifts his eyes,
To thee Supreme, Omnipotent and Just;
On thee alone for succor he relies,
And in thy goodness places all his trust.
Teach me, with patience, meekly to submit
To whatsoever thy wisdom judges best;
To say, with humble Job -- the Lord thinks fit,
"Giving or taking let his name be blessed."
SURE it is a serious thing to die! My soul,
What a strange moment must it be, when near
Thy journey's end, thou have the gulf in view!
That awful gulf, no mortal ever repassed,
To tell what is doing on the other side.
THE wretch, condemned with life to part,
Still, still on hope relies;
And every pang that rends the heart,
Bids expectation rise.
Hope, like the glim'ring taper's light,
Adorns and cheers the way;
And still, as darker grows the night,
Emits a brighter ray.
MODESTY is not only an ornament, but also a guard to virtue. It is a kind of
quick and delicate feeling in the soul, which makes her shrink and withdraw
herself from every thing that has danger in it. It is such an exquisite
sensibility, as warns her to shun the first appearance of every thing which is
hurtful.

RICHES, in the hand of a beneficent man, are a blessing to the public. Such an
one is a steward to Providence, and the noble means of correcting the
inequalities of fortune, of relieving the miserable, and spreading happiness to
all that are within the reach of his acquaintance.

The Wife's Consolation to her Husband under Affliction.
NO more, loved partner of my soul,
At disappointment grieve,
Can flowing tears our fate control,
Or sighs our woes relieve?
Adversity is virtue's school,
To those who right discern;
Let us observe each painful rule,
And each hard lesson learn.
When wintry clouds obscure the sky,
And Heaven and earth deform,
If fixed the strong foundations lie,
The castle braves the storm.
Thus, fixed on faith's unfailing rock,
Let us endure awhile
Misfortune's rude impetuous shock,
And glory in our toil.
Ill fortune cannot always last;
Or, though it should remain,
Yet we each painful moment haste,
A better world to gain --
Where calumny no more shall wound,
Nor faithless friends destroy;
Where innocence and truth are crowned
With never-fading joy.
GOOD discourse is but the reflection or shadow of wisdom; the pure and solid
substance, is good actions.

THERE can be no true and sincere pleasure in any sinful and vicious course,
though it be attended with all the pomp and splendor of outward happiness and
prosperity; for wherever sin and vice is, there must be guilt; and wherever
guilt is, the mind will be restless and unquiet.

INDUSTRIOUS wisdom often prevents what lazy folly thinks inevitable. Industry
argues an ingenious, great and generous disposition of soul, by unweariedly
pursuing things in the fairest light, and disdaining to enjoy the fruit of
other men's labors, without deserving it.

CONCEITEDNESS and ignorance are a most unhappy composition; for none are so
invincible as the half-witted, who know just enough to excite their pride, but
not so much as to cure their ignorance.

ENDEAVOR to be religious without superstition; just without rigor; merciful
without partiality; cautious without fear; valiant without rashness; and great
without pride.

TO endeavor not to please, is ill nature; altogether to neglect it, folly;
and to overstrain for it, vanity and design.

WHEN winds the mountain-oak assail,
And lay its glories waste,
Content may slumber in the vale
Unconscious of the blast.
SWEET are the j^ss'min's breathing flowers,
Sweet the soft falling ^ernal showers,
Sweet is the gloom she grove affords,
And sweet the notes of warb'ling birds;
But not the groves, nor rains nor flowers,
Nor all the feathered songsters powers,
Can ever sweet or pleasing be
O! lovely freedom, without thee.
TEACH me between the two extremes to glide,
Not brave the stream, nor swim with every tide,
But more with charity, than zeal possessed,
Keep my own faith, yet not condemn the rest.
RELIGION better qualifies all sorts of men, and makes them in public affairs
the more serviceable; governors apter to rule with conscience; and inferiors,
for conscience sake, more willing to obey.

LIBERALITY is never so beautiful or engaging, as when the hand is concealed
which bestows the gift.

ECONOMY is no disgrace, it is better living on a little, than outliving a
great deal.

HOLY DAYS.
SOME Christians to the Lord observe a day,
While others to the Lord observe it not;
And though these seem to choose a different way,
Yet both at last to the same point are brought.
Who for the observance pleads, may reason thus --
"As on this day our Savior and our king
Performed some glorious act of love for us,
We keep the time in memory of the thing."
Hence he to Jesus points his good intent,
With prayers and praises celebrates his name;
And as to Christ alone his love is meant,
The Lord accepts it -- and who dares to blame?
For though the shell indeed is not the meat,
It Is not rejected when the meat's within;
Though superstition is a vain conceit,
Commemoration surely is no sin.
He likewise, that to days has no regard,
The shadow only for the substance quits;
Toward his Savior's presence presses hard,
And that preferring outward things omits;
For thus within he seriously reflects,
"My Lord alone I count my only good;
All empty forms for him my soul rejects,
And only seek the riches of his blood.
All days, in Jesus, is my sole delight,
The first and worthiest object of my care;
For whose dear sake all outward shows I slight,
Lest aught but him should my devotion share."
Let not the observer therefore entertain,
Against his brother any secret grudge;
And let the non-observer too refrain
From censuring others whom he should not judge*
Thus both their motives bringing to the test,
Our condescending Lord may both approve,
While each pursues the way he deems the best,
For none can walk amiss who walk in love.
IF at any time you are pressed to do any thing hastily, be careful: Fraud and
deceit are always in haste; but diffidence is the right eye of prudence.

IT is of little consequence to read eternal truths, if we pray not to obtain
the gift of understanding them aright.

MEN take a great deal more pains for this world, than Heaven would cost them;
and when they have it, do not live long to enjoy it.

THE time of life is the only time wherein we can prepare for another world;
and oh! how short and uncertain is this time! How frail and uncertain is the
life of man! What multitudes does death surprise in an hour, when they think
nothing of it! How silently and insensibly does time slide away; with what a
winged swiftness does it fly, and we cannot stay its progress, stop its course,
or retard its hasty motion.

IN the morning say to thyself, what shall I do this day, which God has given
me? How shall I employ it to his glory? In the evening consider within thyself,
and recollect, what have I done this day, and how have I spent it?

TO prevent speaking evil of your neighbor, think no evil of him; and if you
hear any, live in hopes that it is a mistake.

IF you desire to depend upon God, let it appear in every instance of his
Providence toward you: Be content with the want of those outward comforts
which he thinks fit to deny you.

IT IS commonly observed, that the first step to wickedness, is idleness; and
indeed there is little hopes of any one being a good man, or a good Christian,
who takes no care of his time.

OUR wants are daily, and the temptations which draw our hearts from God, to
the things of this world, are also daily; and upon both these accounts, ought
our prayers to be daily also.

LET it never enter into your head, that you are a man of merit. Be the only
person, who neither knows or speaks of your own worth.

THE well-taught philosophic mind,
To all compassion gives;
Casts round the world an equal eye,
And feels for each that lives.
IF friendless, in a vale of tears I stray,
Where briers wound, and thorns perplex my way,
Lord let my steady soul thy goodness see,
And with strong confidence lay hold on thee;
With equal eye my various lot receive,
Resigned to die, or resolute to live;
Prepared to kiss the scepter or the rod,
While God is seen in all, and all in God.
WE must never undervalue any person. The workman loves not that his work
should be despised in his presence. Now God is present every where, and every
person is his work.

TO live contented, in a moderate estate, we must never consider those that
have more, but those that have less than ourselves.

THE BEACHEN SHADE.
TO this lone shade, where peace delights to dwell,
Often let my unambitious muse retire,
Here bid the vain tumult'ous world farewell,
And praise my Maker with the wood-land choir.
How shall I joy the dew-bright morn to view!
With pleasure blushing over the fair domain;
The lowing herds and bleating flocks pursue,
Thick straggling over the verdant flowery plain.
To see fair nature, with parental love,
Give life and beauty to the rural scene,
While tuneful birds, in every vocal grove,
In sweet assemblage all around are seen.
To walk, by turns, the grove, the plain, the glade;
To trace the riv'let in its winding way,
At e^e's approach, to hail my beachen shade,
And eye, with silent joy, the dancing spray.
While through my veins a pleasing reverence thrills,
How should I joy to see the parting day,
Glide from the plains, the forests and the hills,
While Philomel begins her evening lay.
Then with bold wings still upwards might I soar,
And range, at will, the planetary field;
The hand that guides the glowing worlds adore,
And praise, in silent admiration, yield.
Hail, blissful silence! still this shade attend,
Be thou my constant, never-failing guest;
Be thou my guide, my counselor, my friend,
Unrivaled regent of my glowing breast.
Let not the vain parade of wealth, or show,
One wish of envy in my breast excite;
Ah! teach my heart this right'ous truth to know,
That all the works of Providence are right.
SERENITY and gladness of heart, will attend a devout mind, when it maintain^
an intercourse with the great Author of its Being. When we are in company with
our God, with our Redeemer, with our dearest and best of friends, our hearts
will burn with love, exult with gratitude, swell with hope, and triumph in the
consciousness of that presence, which every where surrounds us; or else we pour
out our fears, our troubles, or our dangers, to the great Supporter of our
existence.

THE happiness of a life religiously spent, plainly appears, from the poor and
trifling enjoyments, that all those are forced to take up with, who live
according to their own humor.

RELIGION is a secure refuge, in seasons of deepest distress; it smooths the
chagrin of life, makes us easy in all circumstances, and fills our souls with
the greatest peace that our natures are capable of. The contemplation of the
life and sufferings of our Divine Leader, must administer comfort in the
severest affliction; while the sense of his pow^^ and omnipotence, gives us
humiliation in prosperity*

ON RETIREMENT.
WHILE here sequestered from the busy throng,
Let calm reflection animate my song;
May sweet retirement, with its soothing powers
Compose each thought, and gild the passing hours;
And meek-ey'd peace, in whitest robes be seen,
To cheer the heart and make the mind serene;
Then while the world in busy scenes engage,
I Will shun the follies of a vicious age;
Freed from the dull impertinence of strife,
Serenely pass in solitude my life:
And when aurora ushers in the dawn,
And tuneful songsters hail the rising morn,
With grateful heart perform the ardent prayer,
And thank kind Heaven for its protecting care.
Then while the sun in radient splendor reigns,
And with its luster decks the hills and plains,
Often let me wander over the dewy vale,
And breathe sweet fragrance from the passing gale;
Or, led by fancy, frequent let me rove,
To some thick forest or some shady grove,
Where peaceful silence reigns throughout the scene,
And painted daisies deck the lovely green;
While gentle zephyrs, with their silken wings,
Display their beauties over the crystal springs,
Or on the margin of a purling stream,
(Indulge my mind on friendship's pleasing theme)
Whose gentle murmurs calm the troubled breast,
And soothe each sorrow when the mind's distressed.
Then when the sun, obedient to command,
Shall take his flight, and visit foreign land;
May pale-ey'd Cynthia, empress of the night,
With mildest luster, shed her solemn light;
While twinkling stars dispense a friendly ray,
And gently guide the trav'ler on his way:
At this lone hour when solemn silence reigns,
And mournful Philomel renews her strains,
May no sad thought my peaceful mind molest,
Each murmur stifled, and each sigh suppressed,
Save when compassion at another's woe
Shall cause the tears of tenderness to flow;
Freely I Will bear a sympathetic part,
And share the sorrows of the drooping heart;
With fervent prayers implore kind Heaven to bless,
And fondly strive to make their sorrows less.
Thus may my time in rural shades be spent,
Far from the world, enriched with calm content,
'Till death's cold hand shall close these languid eyes,
And hope conduct me to you blissful skies.
O GLORIOUS day! O day of peace, arise,
And with thy splendours glad my longing eyes.
O time! which often so quickly glid'st away,
Methinks thou ling'rest and defer'st the day;
Just like an arrow from a bow half strung,
Thy flagging pinions slowly skim along.
Oh! with new vigor, urge thy flying course,
And stretch each tendon with redoubled force;
That peace may flow like ocean's swelling tide,
"And seas but join the regions they divide."
IT is the peculiar excellence of a good name, that it is out of the reach of
death, and is not buried in the grave, but rather grows up from it. Solomon
has joined this good name, which is better than precious ointment, with the
day of one's death, which is better than the day of one's birth, as it
completes the character of those that finish their course well, and are
faithful unto death; whereas a great name, like the names of the great ones of
the earth, is often withered and blemished by death.

WHAT is the blooming tincture of a skin,
To peace of mind, to harmony within?
What the bright sparkling of the finest eye,
To the soft soothing of a calm reply?
Can comeliness of form, or shape, or air,
With comeliness of word^ or deeds compare?
No -- those at first the unwary heart may gain,
But these, these only, can that heart retain.
RELIGION naturally tends to all that is great, worthy, friendly, generous and
noble; and the true spirit of it, not only composes, but cheers the soul.
Though it banishes all levity of behavior, all vicious and dissolute mirth --
yet in exchange, it fills the mind with a perpetual serenity, and uninterrupted
pleasure. The contemplation of divine mercy and power, and the exercise of
virtue, are in their own nature so far from excluding all gladness of heart,
that they are the principal and constant sources of it.

TEACH me, what all believe, but few possess,
That life's best science is ourselves to know;
The first of human blessings is to bless,
And happiest he who feels another's woe:
Thus cheaply wise, and innocently great,
While time's smooth sand shall regularly pass,
Each destined atom's quiet course I Will wait,
Nor rashly break, nor wish to stop the glass.
And when in death my peaceful ashes lie,
If ever some tongue congenial speaks my name,
Friendship shall never blush to breathe a sigh,
And great ones envy such an honest fame.
HE that can say to himself, I do as much good, and am as virtuous, as my most
earnest endeavors will allow me, whatever is his station in the world, is as
to himself possessed of the highest honor. If ambition is not thus turned, it
is no other than a continual succession of anxiety and vexation. But when it
has this cast, it invigorates the mind; and the consciousness of its own worth
is a reward, which it is not in the power of envy, detraction, or reproach, to
take from it. Thus the seat of solid honor is in a man's own bosom; and no one
can want support, who is in possession of an honest conscience, but he who
would suffer the reproaches of it for other greatness.

THERE are some men, in whom a deficiency of sense or wit gives no pain; there
are some, in whom abundance of both gives no pleasure.

The following lines are taken from a description of Hawkstone, an elegant seat
in Shropshire. The author of that description tells us, they were composed by
the owner of the abovementioned seat, when he was contemplating the astonishing
scenes around him in his own park, where the verses are to be seen in a natural
cavern of a vast rock, from the top of which you command a very diversified and
romantic prospect.

WHILST all thy glories, O my God!
Through the creation shine,
Whilst rocks and hills, and fertile vales,
Proclaim the hand divine --
O! may I view, with humble heart,
The wonders of thy power,
Displayed alike in wilder scenes,
As in each blade and flower.
But whilst I taste thy blessings, Lord!
And sip the streams below,
O may my soul be led to thee,
From whom all blessings flow.
And, if such footsteps of thy love,
Through this lost world we trace,
How far transcendant are thy works
Throughout the world of grace!
Just as before you noontide sun,
The brightest stars are small;
So earthly comforts are but snares,
'Till grace has crowned them all.
Epitaph on a Country Clergy man.
STILL, like his Savior, known by breaking bread,
The rich he entertained, the needy fed --
Of humor easy, and of life unblam'd,
The friend delighted, while the priest reclaimed:
The friend, the father, and the husband gone,
The priest still lives in the recording stone,
Where pious eyes may read his praises over.
And learn each grace his pulpit taught before.
THE bent and inclination of a virtuous man is toward silence, as much as
possible, because the principal light and knowledge of this life, consists in
being thoroughly acquainted with the depth and greatness of his own ignorance.
So that those who make great progress in human sciences, for the most part
become peremptory and decisive: On the contrary, the proficients in the science
of God become more reserved, more inclind to silence, less addicted to their
own sense, and less venturesome to judge of others, because they discover more
and more how uncertain and obscure our knowledge is; how much we often deceive
ourselves in the things we think we know best; how many faults and errors we
run into by haste and precipitation in judging; and what disorders are often
caused by rash judgments and advices.

Inscription for an Hermitage.
FOND man, retire to this lone cell,
And bid the busy world farewell;
Ah! quit the city's noisy scene,
For pleasures tranquil and serene;
Seek in this calm, this sweet recess,
The rose-lip'd cherub -- happiness;
That haunts the hermit's mossy floor,
And simple peasant's rural door.
How pleasant is you oak's brown shade --
The spreading beach, the adjacent glade;
The crystal streams, that smoothly glide;
The warbling thrush, at even tide.
Fond man, here sweetly thou may spend
Thy fleeting days, nor fear thy end;
Stealing through life, as through the plain,
You rill flows silent to the main.
Here (when in russet vest the morn
Walks over the mountain or the lawn)
Thy early orisons begin,
And live secure from woe and sin;
Here too, at ev'nings sober hour,
Adore the great Almighty power;
The Sovereign Ruler of the skies,
Forever just, and good, and wise.
PATIENCE will wipe away the streaming tear,
And hope will paint the pallid cheek of fear:
Content will always happiness supply,
And virtue calls a blessing from on high.
WHEN any body's misbehaviour disturbs you, dismiss the image of the injury,
and bethink yourself whether you have not been guilty of the same fault. Such
reflection is the shortest and most certain way of becoming truly wise and
truly pious.

NO trees bear fruit in autumn, unless they blossom in the spring. To the end
that our age may be profitable, and laden with ripe fruit, let all endeavor,
that our youth may be studious, and flowered with the blossoms of learning and
observation.

WE may judge of men by their conversation toward God, but never by Gods
dispensation toward them.

TO learn to accommodate our taste to that portion of happiness, which
Providence has set before us, is of all the lessons of philosophy, surely the
most necessary. High and exquisite gratifications are not consistent with the
appointed measures of humanity; and perhaps if we would fully enjoy the relish
of our being, we should rather consider the miseries we escape, than too nicely
examine the intrinsic worth of the happiness we possess.

WHEN a man is in company with his betters, it is as much more advisable to
hear, than to speak, as it is better to reap, than to sow.

HE is the richest man, who desires no superfluity, and wants for no necessary.

RESTLESS mortals toil for naught,
Bliss in vain from earth is sought;
Bliss, a native of the sky,
Never wanders -- mortals try;
There you cannot seek in vain,
For to seek her is to gain.
COME gentle age! to me thou do appear
No cruel object of regret or fear;
Thy stealing step I unreluctant see,
Nor would avoid, or wish to fly from thee.
OTHER's good turns to thee be sure to tell,
But nothing say, when thou thyself do well.
SOME have pleased themselves with the thought, "That departed spirits supply
the place of guardian an^els to their friends; that they delight to follow them
in their solitary walks, and watch their nightly slumbers, and make impressions
on their sleeping fancy, to warn them of approaching dangers." It Is not
unlikely, that the tempests of human passions are sometimes composed by the
soft inspiring whispers of those propitious beings, while the seats of joy have
opened their glories in visionary scenes to their sleeping imagination.

YOU may enjoy what you have, if you do not wish for more. Like a clear stream,
which glides smoothly on, but by endeavoring to increase the waters, it
becomes a torrent.

OF greatness, and its pompous train,
What notions false we entertain!
The glittering dress, the splendid feast,
Those seeking most, who know them least;
Our time, anxiety, and cost,
In the vain acquisition's lost.
The man we envy often as blessed,
In secret pines with care oppressed.
MANY scripture parables and similitudes are taken from the common actions of
this life, that when our hands are employed about them, our hearts may the more
easily pass through them to divine and heavenly things.

EVERY thing is beautiful in its season; and it is the wisdom of the prudent,
so to order the duties of their general callings as Christians, and those of
their particular callings in the world, as that they may not clash or interfere.

IT is related of the pious Philip Henry, that if any asked his charity, whose
representation of their case he did not like, or who he thought did amiss to
take that course, he would first give them an alms, and then mildly reprove
them; laboring to convince them that they were out of the way of duty; that
they could not expect God should bless them in it, and would not chide, but
reason with them. He would say, if he should tell them of their faults, and not
give them an alms, the reproof would look only like an excuse to deny his
charity, and would be rejected accordingly.

TO be over solicitous after praise, to be greedy of it, and eager in pursuing
it, and to seem in some measure to beg it, instead of being the character of a
great soul, is the most certain sign of a vain and light disposition, which
feeds upon the wind, and takes the shadow for the substance.

THE ANTS.
SO when the ants, a small industrious train,
Embodied rob some golden heap of grain,
Studious, ere stormy winter frowns, to lay
Safe in their darksome cells the treasured prey:
In one long track the dusky legions lead
Their prize in triumph, through the verdant mead;
Here bending with the load, a panting throng,
With force conjoined, heave some huge grain along;
Some lash the stragglers to the task assigned,
Some to their ranks the bands that lag behind;
They crowd the peopled path in thick array,
Glow at the work, and darken all the way.
HOW blessed the man, who, like these insects, wise,
Exerts his powers to lay up Heavenly food;
Convinced, that naught like this beneath the skies
Deserves his care, and ought to be pursued.
WOULD you in safety plough the inconstant tide,
The helm let prudence ever watchful guide.
She shuns the deep, where mountain-billows roar,
And shuns alike the shallows and the shore.
The few, by precept or experience wise,
Who know the mean, the golden mean, to prize,
With equal scorn reject a sordid state,
And the gilt sorrows of the vainly great.
Fixed in that point, where all the virtues rest,
Between the extremes with peaceful pleasure blessed,
They know to curb irregular desires.
When avarice tempts them, or ambition fires.
POSTS of preferment, and the marks of respect annexed to them, may flatter the
ambition and vanity of mankind, but in themselves include no real glory or
solid greatness, as they are foreign to them -- as they are not always the
proof and reward of merit -- as they add nothing to the good qualities either
of body or mind -- as they correct none of our faults, but often, on the
contrary, serve only to multiply and make them more remarkable, by making them
conspicuous, and exhibiting them in a stronger light.

IT is virtue alone which fixes the price of every thing, and is the sole
source of solid glory and real greatness.

WIT is commonly looked upon with a suspicious eye, as a two-^^ged sword, from
which not even the sacredness of friendship can secure. It is more especially
dreaded in women.

A MAN may be reserved and modest in the midst of riches and honors, as he may
be proud and avaricious in the obscurity of a poor and wretched life.

TIME, always precious, can never be more so, than in our early years; the
first ideas make the strongest and most lasting impression.

NUMBERLESS are the branches of good nature! -- Numberless are the benefits we
ourselves receive by it, and confer on others!

MERE good humor, if abused, will degenerate into its reverse; but good nature
is always the same, and incapable of changing; like the divine source, of which
it is an emanation, it returns injuries with benefits; it endeavors to work on
the bad heart that offers them, by soft persuasion, and pities what it cannot
mend.

WHAT though today oppressed with various woes?
Tomorrow's dawn may happier scenes disclose.
The bounteous power that over wide nature reigns,
Now bids stern winter blast the freezing plains;
And now recalls the spring, the spring returns,
Each face now smiles, and every bosom burns;
New beauty bursts upon the ravished sight,
And all around is joy, and life, and light.
THROUGH life let manly fortitude prevail,
Whatever the current and whatever the gale;
Press forward still, and every adverse tide
Let thy slow, persevering bark, divide.
But when too strong the favoring breeze you find,
Furl the broad sail, nor trust the faithless wind.
To MIRA, with a Watch.
MIRA, this machine, you will find,
Suits a moralizing mind.
Has it motion? It Is as clear
Action is man's proper sphere.
Equal should its progress prove,
So through life let Mira move.
When you forward urge its pace,
Think it may be Mira's case;
In my passage to the sky,
Have I lingered? -- let me fly!
Backwards are the hands conveyed,
To the points from whence they strayed?
Blush not, Mira! to untread
Steps that wisdom never led.
If it stand, reflecting say,
Time for no machine will stay;
Heaven observes, and, will it find
Mira with him, or behind?
Mark its hands with thanks to Heaven,
For each hour and minute given;
Given as means to make us wise;
Given to form us for the skies.
False if either hand be viewed,
Some internal fault conclude,
Thus if Mira's life should sin,
Let her first reform within.
When it strikes the hour, admit
Silence is not always fit.
Every day its task pursued,
Hints how thine must be renewed.
Say, when winding up, alas!
Human wheels, like those of brass
Soon their functions would forego,
Naught if foreign hand bestow.
If all day it acted right,
When she hangs it by at night,
Then let Mira ask her heart,
How have I performed my part?
If it erred, let Mira pray,
Heaven forgive my faults today!
For its use, my present prize,
All besides neglect -- despise.
Shine its trinkets as they will,
Trinkets are but trifles still.
Mira! when at court arrayed
All in jewels, and brocade,
If at heart no merit dwell,
If no deeds that merit tell,
Though a lord should smile, or king,
You Are a glit'ring, useless thing.
If whatever its present praise,
All its power to serve decays,
Means to mend it vainly tried,
When you cast it from your side;
On a life of virtue past,
Joyful retrospection cast;
But let Mira think again,
Only virtue past were vain;
Perseverance, 'till we die,
Wins the Christian's crown on high.
A WOMAN of true sense, will be always ambitious -- not of gaining admiration,
but of deserving it.

THERE is no being long, and sincerely happy, without being good; which, as
common an observation as it has been, yet wants to be made anew, by most, even
of those, whom the world thinks both wise and happy.

GOOD humor shuns not an opportunity of obliging; but good nature is
industrious, in seeking out as many as it can. Good humor frequently promises
more than is in its power to perform; but good nature does more than it gives
you reason to expect.

THE want of thought creates many mischiefs among mankind; and this is the
reason that none ought to speak, 'till they have first reflected on every thing
that may possibly be the consequence of what they speak.

IT is indeed a dreadful thing, when people cannot resolve to content
themselves with the sphere in which they are placed by Heaven. It is this
restlesness of the mind, that occasions half the mischiefs that befall mankind;
and yet we are all, more or less, apt to have some share of it. Every one
wishes for something he has not, and that hinders him from enjoying, properly,
what he is possessed of. We fancy we know better than him that made us, what
would befit us, and accuse Providence of partiality, in the lot assigned to us.

LIFE is an uncertain ocean; numberless, nameless dangers, lurk beneath the
fairest surface. No one, at his first embarkation, can promise to himself that
he shall go through his voyage, unruffled with the storms which from above,
below, and every where, surround. Who then would not be glad to secure some
friendly bark at hand, whose kind assistance, in case of a wreck, might save
him.

THE seeds of those spiritual joys and raptures, which are to rise up and
flourish in the soul to all eternity, must be planted in her, during her
present state of probation.

BEWARE thy meddling hand in ought to try,
That does beyond thy reach of knowledge lie,
But seek to know, and bend thy serious thought,
To search the profitable knowledge out;
So joys, on joys, forever will increase,
Wisdom shall crown thy labors, and shall bless
Thy life with pleasure, and thy end with peace.
LET gratitude, in acts of goodness flow,
My love to God, in love to man below;
Be this my joy, to calm the troubled breast,
Support the weak, and succor the distressed;
Direct the wanderer, dry the widow's tear,
The orphan guard, the sinking spirits cheer.
Though small my power to act, though mean my skill,
God sees the heart, he judges by the will,
AN EVENING THOUGHT.
NOW down the steep of Heaven the source of day
Pursues, unwearied, his diurnal way;
Mild shine his rays, his beams serene descend,
And over the earth a sweet effulgence send.
The blustering winds a pleasing silence keep,
And in their caves, with folded pinions, sleep.
No longer from the cloud descends the rain,
But a clear azure spreads the etherial plain;
A solemn, pleasing silence, hovers round,
And peace, with downy wing, o'erspreads the ground.
While silver Cynthia sheds her milder light,
And ushers in the awful reign of night.
So when the lamp of life shall dimly burn,
And this frail frame to kindred dust return,
May the rude strife of earth-born passions cease,
And life's short journey terminate in peace.
May then no cares terrestrial break my rest,
Or keen reflections discompose my breast.
May then no fears, no dread of ills to come,
Make me shrink back with terror from the tomb;
But when the awful mandate from on high
The sentence shall proclaim, that bids me die,
Resigned and peaceful, let me bow my head,
And Heaven enjoy, when numbered with the dead.
TO be too inquisitive, into things in which we have no concern, and which,
with the utmost labor, assisted by the greatest learning, and strongest
capacity, we can never be able to penetrate, is doubtless both a sin and a
folly.

A MIND, eager to enquire into the minutest works of nature, will be insensibly
led to a contemplation on the greatest; and in all, we shall find sufficient
for our astonishment, and the exciting in us such ideas of the great Author of
Nature, as cannot fail to fill us with the highest sense of the in^inity of his
goodness to all his creatures; and to us in particular, to whom alone, of all
sublunary beings, he has given the power of reason and reflection.

THERE is nothing requires a greater delicacy of sentiment and expression, than
what we call raillery; and a person must be very polite indeed, who knows how
to practice it, so as not to give offense.

TO be merry ourselves, or make sport for others, on the errors or mistakes of
our friend or companion, is certainly very unkind; but if our jest is on the
defects or infirmities of his person, it is really cruel.

The dying Christian to his Soul.
I.
VITAL spark of Heavenly flame!
Quit, oh quit! this mortal frame --
Trembling, hoping, lingering, flying,
Oh! the pain, the blis of dying!
Cease, fond nature, cease thy strife,
And let me languish into life.
II.
Hark they whisper, angels say,
Sister spirit come away!
What is this absorbs me quite,
Steals my senses, shuts my sight;
Drowns my spirits, draws my breath,
Tell me, my soul, can this be death?
III.
The world recedes, it disappears!
Heaven opens on my eye^ -- my ears
With sounds seraphic ring:
Lend, lend your wings! I mount! I fly!
Oh! grave, where is thy victory?
Oh! death where is thy sting?
THOUGH plunged in ills, and exercised in care,
Yet never let the noble mind despair:
For blessings always wait on virtuous deeds,
And though a late, a sure reward succeeds.
THE brightest hours of prosperity, have their clouds; and the stream of life,
if it is not ruffled by obstructions, will grow putrid by stagnation.

WHATEVER busies the mind, without corrupting it, has at least this use, that
it rescues the day from idleness; and he that is never idle, will not often be
vicious.

KNOWLEDGE is praised and desired by multitudes, whom her charms could never
rouse from the couch of sloth.

SINCE life itself is uncertain, nothing which has life for its basis, can
boast much stability.

OF him that hopes to be forgiven, it is indispensably required, that he
forgive.

FEW are placed in a situation so gloomy and distressful, as not to see every
day beings yet more forlorn and miserable, from whom they may learn to rejoice
in their own lot.

A CONSTANT habit of unprofitable amusement, relaxes the tone of the mind, and
renders it totally incapable of application, study, or virtue.

TO insult over the miseries of an unhappy creature, is inhuman; not to
compassionate them, is unchristian.

THE wickedness of a woman changes her face, and darkeneth her countenance
like sackcloth.

As the climbing of a sandy way is to the feet of the aged, so is a wife full
of words to a quiet man.

A woman that will not comfort her husband in distress, makes weak hands and
feeble knees. Eccles. xxv. chap.

Extract from Young's Resignation.
WHAT cannot resignation do?
It wonders can perform;
That powerful charm, "thy will be done,"
Can lay the loudest storm.
Our hearts are fastened to this world,
By strong and tender ties;
And every sorrow cuts a string,
And urges us to rise.
When Heaven would kindly set us free,
And earth's enchantments end,
It takes the most effectual means,
And robs us of a friend.
Oh! how disordered our machine,
When contradictions mix;
When nature strikes no less than twelve,
And folly points at six.
They let unmarked, and unemploy'd,
Life's idle moments run,
And, doing nothing for themselves,
Imagine nothing done.
Dangerous mistake -- their fate goes on,
Their dread account proceeds --
And their not doing, is set down,
Amongst their darkest deeds.
IT was the practice of Vespasian, the Roman emperor, to call himself to an
account every night, for the actions of the past day; and as often as he let
slip one day without doing some good, he entered upon his diary this memorial
-- "I have lost a day."

THE grace of a wife delights her husband, and her discretion will f^t^^n his
bones.

A silent and l^ving woman is a gift of the Lord, and there is nothing so much
worth, as a mind well instructed.

As the sun when it arises in the high heaven -- so is the beauty of a good
wife in the ordering of her house. Eccl. xxvi.

TO hint at a fault, does more mischief, than speaking out; for whatever is
left for the imagination to finish, will not fail to be overdone.

MEEKNESS is imperfect, if it be not both active and passive; if it will not
enable us to subdue our own passions and resentments, as well as qualify us to
bear, patiently, the passions and resentments of others.

ALEXANDER (says Seneca) had two friends, Clitus and Lysimachus; the one he
exposed to a lion, the other to himself; he who was turned loose to the beast,
escaped, but Clitus was murdered, for he was turned loose to an angry man.

COUNT that day lost, whose low descending sun
Views from thy hand no worthy action done.
LOVE the great God, with all thy might,
And know, whatever is, is right.
To his disposal always yield,
Who clothes the lillies of the field,
And trust his ever-watchful care,
Which numbers every single hair.
Each day the sacred pages view,
For these give pleasures ever new.
The truths that there conspicuous shine,
Proclaim their author all divine --
See here thy great Redeemer's love.
Who left the radiant realms above --
To perfect all the gospel plan,
Then died, to save degenerate man.
To him prefer thy ardent prayer,
For such things as expedient are;
And if thy breast a mansion be,
Fit to receive t^^ Heavenly three,
The comforter shall soon be sent,
To fill the mind with sweet content;
And though the world, as all confess,
Can neither satisfy or bless,
H^n^^ may thou draw that liquid store,
Which he that drinks of, thirsts no more.
-- WITH Heaven's ennobling gifts
Benignly blessed, the blooming Lucia shines:
Pleasing her speech, by nature taught to flow,
Strong and persuasive sense, sincere and clear.
Her manners greatly plain; a noble grace
Self-taught, beyond the reach of mimic art,
Adorns her: Her calm temper, winning, mild,
Nor pity softer; truth itself the source:
Constant in doing well, she neither seeks,
Nor shuns applause. No bashful merit sighs
Near her neglected: Sympathizing, she
Wipes off the tear from sorrow's clouded eye
With kindly hand, and bids her heart to smile.
MEEKNESS may be called the pioneer of all the other virtues, which levels
every obstruction, and smooths every difficulty, that might impede their
entrance, or retard their progress.

IF it were only for mere human reasons, it would turn to a better account, to
be patient; nothing defeats the malice of an enemy, like a spirit of
forbearance; the return of rage for rage cannot be so effectually provoking.
True gentleness, like an impenetrable armor, repels the most pointed shafts of
malice; they cannot pierce through this invulnerable shield, but either fall
hurtless to the ground, or return to wound the hand that shot them

A MEEK spirit will not look out of itself for happiness, because it finds a
constant banquet at home; yet by a sort of Divine Alchymy, it will convert all
external events to its own profit, and be able to deduce some good, even from
the most unpromising; it will extract comfort and satisfaction from the most
barren circumstances; "it will suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the
flinty rock."

HONORS and dignities are transient, beauty and riches frail and fleeting, to
a proverb. Would not the truly wise, therefore, wish to have some one
possession, which they might call their own in the severest exigencies? But
this wish can only be accomplished, by acquiring, and maintaining, that calm
and absolute self-possession, which as the world had no hand in giving, so it
cannot, by the most malicious exertion of its power, take away.

AN amiable and wise woman will, always have something better to value herself
on than outward advantages, which, however captivating, are still but
subordinate parts of a truly excellent character.

HOW cruel is it to exti^^^ish, by neglect or unkindness, the precious
sensibility of an open temper, to chill the amiable glow of an ingenious soul,
and to quench the bright flame of a noble and generous spirit! These are of
higher worth, than all the documents of learning; of dearer price, than all the
advantages which can be derived from the most refined and artificial mode of
education.

THE best of men, and the best of books, can do us good, only so far as they
turn us from themselves, and every human comfort, to seek and receive every
kind of good, from God alone.

TO desire to communicate good to every creature, in the degree we can, and it
is capable of receiving from us, is a divine temper; for thus God stands
unchangeably disposed toward the whole creation.

IN vain thou hop'st for bliss on this poor clod;
Return, and seek thy Father and thy God.
Yet think not to regain thy native sky,
Borne on the wings of vain philosophy.
Mysterious passage! hid from mortal eyes;
Soaring you will sink, and sinking you will rise.
Let humble thoughts thy wary footsteps guide;
Regain by meekness, what thou lost by pride.
LET thy flock clothe the naked, and thy table feed the hungry; deliver the
poor from oppression, and let thy conversation be above. Thus shall thou
"rejoice in hope," and look forward to the end of life, as the consummation of
thy felicity.

WHAT an example is Job, to such as have lost their substance all at once, by
unforeseen misfortunes: -- "The Lord gave -- the Lord has taken away. Blessed
be the name of the Lord."

HUMANITY.
AH me! how little knows the human heart,
The pleasing task of softening other's woe;
Stranger to joys, that pity can impart,
And tears sweet sympathy can teach to flow.
If ever I Have mourned my humble, lowly state;
If ever I Have bowed my knee at fortune's shrine;
If ever a wish escaped me, to be great,
The fervent prayer, humanity, was thine.
Pity the man, who hears the moving tale
Unmoved, to whom the heartfelt glow's unknown;
On whom the widow's plaints could never prevail,
Nor made the injured wretch's cause his own.
How little knows he the extatic joy,
The thrilling bliss of chearing wan despair;
How little knows the pleasing, warm employ,
That calls the grateful tribute of a tear.
The splendid dome, the vaulted roof to rear,
The glare of pride and pomp, be grandeur thine;
To wipe from mis'ry's eye the wailing tear,
And soothe the oppressed orphan's woes, be mine.
Be mine the blush of modest worth to spare,
To change to smiles affliction's rising sigh;
The kindred warmth of charity to share,
Till joy shall sparkle from the tear-fill'd eye.
Can the loud laugh, the mirth inspiring bowl,
The dance, or choral song, or jocund glee,
Affect the glowing, sympathizing soul,
Or warm the breast, humanity, like thee?
ACCEPTABLE SACRIFICE.
HE that keeps the law, brings offerings enough: He that takes heed to the
commandment, offers a peace offering: He that requiteth a good turn offers
fine flour: And he that gives alms, sacrifices praise. To depart from
wickedness, is a thing pleasing to the Lord; and to forsake unrighteousness, is
a propitiation. Thou shall not appear empty before the Lord; for all these
things are to be done, because of the commandment. The offering of the
righteous makes the altar fat, and the sweet savor thereof is before the Most
High! The sacrifice of a just man is acceptable, and the memorial thereof shall
never be forgotten. Eccles. xxxv.

WE see almost every day, the unexpected death of our friends and our enemies;
we see new graves often opened for men older and younger than ourselves; for
the cautious and the careless, the dissolute and the temperate; for men, who
like us, were providing to enjoy or improve hours now irreversibly cut off; we
see all this, and yet, instead of living, let year glide after year, in
preparations to live.

A MAN that fasteth for his sins, and goes again and does the same, who will
hear his prayer? or what does his humbling profit him. Eccles. xxxiv.26.

THE mind is never so sensibly disposed to pity the sufferings of others, as
when it is itself subdued and softened by calamity. Adversity diffuses a kind
of sacred calm over the breast, that is the parent of thoughtfulness and
meditation.

HE that looks upon the business and bustle of the world, with the philosophy
with which Socrates surveyed the fair at Athens, will turn away at last with
his exclamation, "how many things are here which I do not want."

WHILE affliction prepares us for felicity, we may console ourselves under its
pressures, by remembering, that they are no particular marks of divine
displeasure, since all the distresses of persecution have been suffered by
those, "of whom the world was not worthy;" and the Redeemer of mankind himself
was "a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief."

IF thou have gathered nothing in thy youth, how can thou find any thing in
thine ag^^

Much experience is the ^wn of old men, and the fear of God is their glory.

Oh, how great is he that finds wisdom! Yet is there none above him that
fears the Lord! The fear of the Lord is the beginning of his love; and faith
is the beginning of cleaving unto him.

OF all the virtues, there are none ought more to be inculcated, into the mind
of a young girl, than modesty and meekness. Vanity and pride are perpetually
endeavoring to force their way into the heart; and too much care cannot be
taken to repulse their efforts.

WE must, in this world, gain a relish of truth and virtue, if we would be able
to taste that knowledge and perfection, which are to make us happy in the next.

The GOVERNESS: A SIMILE.
AS when blithe lambs their vernal revels keep,
Bound from the turf, and over the hillocks leap;
Now harmless try to butt, then run away;
Now wearied feed, and thus consume the day --
The indulgent shepherdess attentive lies,
Lest from the woods some sudden foe should rise,
And as they play, her harmless flock surprise.
So, the sage governess, whose constant care
By wisdom's dictates, forms the tender fair;
When her gay female throng, to sport inclined,
Suspend the nobler pleasures of the mind,
With jealous eyes each motion does survey,
Lest they should swerve from virtue in their play.
CHILDREN, like tender oziers, take the bow,
And as they first are fashioned, always grow;
For what we learn in youth, to that alone
In age we are by second nature prone.
Extract from Young's Night Thoughts.
THE chamber, where the good man meets his fate,
Is privileged beyond the common walk
Of virtuous life, quite in the verge of Heaven.
Fly, ye profane! if not draw near with awe,
Receive the blessing, and adore the hand
That threw in this Bethseda your disease.
If unrestor'd by this, despair your cure;
For here, resistless demonstration dwells --
A death-bed's a detector of the heart;
Here tired dissimulation drops her mask,
Through life's grimace, that mistress of the scene!
Here real, and apparent, are the same.
You see the man, you see his hold on Heaven,
If sound his virtue, as Philander's sound,
Heaven waits not the last moment, owns her friends
On this side death, and points them out to men --
A lecture silent, but of sovereign power!
To vice, confusion -- and to virtue, peace.
IT is a certain sign of an ill heart, to be inclined to defamation. They who
are harmless and innocent, can have no gratification that way; but it ever
arises from a neglect of what is laudable in a man's self, and an impatience of
seeing it in another.

TO forbear replying to an unjust reproach, and overlook it, with a generous,
or (if possible) with an entire neglect of it, is one of the most heroic acts
of a great mind.

EVERY appearance of amiable simplicity, or of honest shame, nature's hasty
conscience, will be dear to sensible hearts; they will carefully cherish every
such indication in a young female; for they will perceive, that it is this
temper, wisely cultivated, which will one day make her enamoured of the
loveliness of virtue and the beauty of holiness; from which she will acquire a
taste for the doctrines of religion, and a spirit to perform the duties of it.

THE hypocrisy of assuming virtues, which are not inherent in the heart,
prevents the growth and disclosure of those real ones, which it is the great
end of education to cultivate.

GOOD dispositions, of themselves, will go but a very little way, unless they
are confirmed into good principles. And this cannot be effected, but by a
careful course of religious instruction, and a patient and laborious
cultivation of the moral temper.

IN the great and universal concern of religion, both sexes, and all ranks, are
equally interested. The truly catholic spirit of Christianity accommodates
itself, with an astonishing condescension, to the circumstances of the whole
human race.

LET no mistaken girl fancy she gives a proof of her wit, by her want of piety;
or that a contempt of things serious and sacred, will exalt her understanding,
or raise her character, even in the opinion of the most avowed male infidels.

CICERO spoke it as the highest commendation of Cato's character, that he
embraced philosophy, not for the sake of disputing like a philosopher, but of
living like one. The chief purpose of Christian knowledge, is to promote the
great end of a Christian life.

From the book of wisdom: -- Hearken unto thy father -- despise not thy mother
when she is old. Extract:
IT IS wisdom speaks -- her voice divine
Attend my son, and life is thine.
Thine, taught to shun the devious way,
Where folly leads the blind astray:
Let virtue's lamp thy footsteps guide,
And shun the dangerous heights of pride;
The peaceful vale, the golden mean,
The path of life pursue serene.
From infancy what sufferings spring --
While yet a naked helpless thing,
Who over thy limbs a covering cast,
To shield thee from the inclement blast?
Thy mother -- honor her -- her arms
Secured thee from a thousand harms;
When helpless, hanging on her breast,
She soothed thy sobbing heart to rest;
For thee her peace, her health destroyed,
For thee, her every power employed:
Thoughtful of thee, before the day
Shot through the dark its rising ray;
Thoughtful of thee, when sable night
Again had quenched the beams of light;
To Heaven, in ceaseless prayer for thee
She raised her head, and bent her knee.
Despise her not, now feeble grown --
Oh! make her wants and woes thy own;
Let not thy lips rebel; nor eyes,
Her weakness frailty, years, despise;
From youthful insolence defend,
Be patron, husband, guardian, friend.
Thus shall thou soothe, in life's decline,
The mis'ries that may once be thine.
AN unwary moment may happen to the most guarded and re^erved; and this
reflection ought to fill us with charity for o^ers.

A PRUDENT man has his eyes open, and his mouth ^^at; and as much desires to
inform himself, as to instruct others.

IN discourse, make not too great a profusion or expense of your knowledge,
lest your treasure be soon exhausted.

THE thought of immortality, the hope of endless happiness, is enough to
animate the soul with the noblest ambition, and yet make it look, with the
humblest compassion, upon that part of the creation, that wants so divine a
hope.

The latter Part of the 3d Chap. of Habbakuk imitated.
ALTHOUGH the blooming plants forget to shoot,
The fig tree fade, and vines deny their fruit;
No tasteful olives finish our repast,
Nor opening buds survive the wintry blast;
The barren fields their wonted blades withhold,
And lambs no longer fill the scanty fold;
Nor flocks, nor herds, around the vale be seen,
But one stern famine sweep the impov'rish'd green --
Yet shall the God of nature claim my praise,
Wake my first songs, and share my latest lays.
Each night and morn shall string the duteous lyre,
And all my nerves retouch with sacred fire;
Hills, vales, and groves, the sounding anthem own,
And the sweet echoes reach the unshaken throne,
Where reigns forever, in unclouded day,
My guide, that leads at once and lights my way.
He from my paths will turn the opposing wind,
And give my feet the swiftness of the hind;
Life's rugged tracts make like the pleasant plains,
On whose smooth ground the trav'ler sooths his pains.
"IF thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink." That is, if
we behold our enemy laboring under any extraordinary distress or calamity,
which it is in our power to remove, or alleviate, as in the case of extreme
poverty, sickness, or misfortune, we ought then cheerfully to ^end him our help
and assistance, to extricate him out of his difficulties or afflic^ons. An
amiable example of which our Savior affords us in the parable of the good
Samaritan, who had a much better reason for neglecting the distressed
traveller, than either the priest, or the Levite, viz. Because he was a Jew,
and therefore his declared enemy. But in him all party-animosities were
overpowered by the tender feelings of pity and compassion.

SELFISHNESS may indifferently happen to be a motive to an action, that, in
itself, is either good or evil, either hurtful or beneficent. But, as far as
selfishness, merely, is a motive to any action, it never had, nor can have, any
relation to virtue. We must search somewhat deeper for the root of that tree,
which is productive of this divine fruit.

ALL who would please the great, must be flatterers; but the true province of
friendship is, to put us in mind of our own faults.

MEEKNESS makes any condition tolerable and easy to be endured. He that meekly
bears any suffering, takes off the edge of it, that it cannot wound him;
whereas he that frets and rages at it, whets it, and makes it much sharper than
it would otherwise be.

IT is said of our blessed Savior, that "he was led as a sheep to the
slaughter; that when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered,
threatened not." And if he, the Lord of glory, suffered thus meekly and
unjustly from his own creatures, with what face can we ever complain of any
injury done to us?

BE very watchful over thine heart, and never suffer it to seed on the fancy of
thy own worth; but whenever any such thought arises, beat it down immediately,
with the remembrance of some of thy follies or sins, and so make this very
motion of pride an occasion of humility.

NEVER compare thyself with those thou think more foolish or more wicked,
that so thou may, like the Pharisee, extol thyself for being better; but if
thou will compare, do it with the wise and godly; and then thou will find thou
come so far short, as may help to pull down thy high esteem of thyself.

POVERTY is apt to betray a man into envy, riches into arrogance; poverty is
too often attended with fraud, vicious compliance, repining, murmur and
discontent. Riches expose a man to pride and luxury, a foolish elation of
heart, and too great a fondnes^ for the present world. In short, the middle
condition is most eligible.

WINTER.
THE fields, disconsolate and sad,
No vegetation bring;
No verdure makes the peasant glad,
Nor shows the welcome spring.
No more the trees, in lively green,
Their leafy honors show;
The boughs, where trembling leaves were seen,
Exhibit flakes of snow.
The plumy race of various dies,
Have lost their wonted fire;
To thickets close, from lowering skies,
The feathered tribe retire.
The crystal floods, in fetters bound,
No rushing torrents feel;
In vain, auspicious gales are found,
To waft the glossy keel.
In icy fetters they remain,
Deprived of liberty,
'Till gentle zephyrs loose the chain,
And set the captives free.
The TRULY GREAT.
THEY ARE only great, whom no base motive rules,
Who owe no glory to the breath of fools;
Friends to true merit, to their country dear,
To others kind, but to themselves severe;
Quiet in suffering, with their lot content,
And careful to improve the talent lent;
Good without pride, though humble, yet not mean,
In danger fearless, and in death serene.
I ^^ every person would consider, that he is in this life nothing more than a
passenger, and that he is not to set up his rest here, but to keep an attentive
eye upon that state of being to which he approaches every moment, and which
will be forever fixed and permanent; this single consideration would be
sufficient to extinguish the bitterness of hatred, the thirst of avarice, and
the cruelty of ambition.

IT is a great presumption, to ascribe our successes to our own management, and
not to esteem ourselves upon any blessing, rather as it is the bounty of
Heaven, than the acquisition of our own prudence.

Extract from "A Midnight Thought."
WHILE active thought unseals my eye,
And midnight darkness shades the sky,
Be hushed, my soul, ye moments stay,
While I rejudge the guilty day.
See conscience glares, more dreadful made
By silence and the awful shade!
She points her poignard to my breast,
And bids my justice speak the rest.
Then think, my soul, while Heaven gives breath,
And antedate the stroke of death!
Reflect how swift the moments fly,
Nor linger, unprepared to die!
Pensive revolve, 'ere yet too late,
The scenes of an eternal state,
A series of unnumber'd years
Or crowned with joys, or lost in tears.
What awful hints these thoughts inspire,
They chill the blood, they pall desire;
They teach the soul her Heavenly birth,
And banish all the pomps on earth.
Here, as in air, a bubble tossed,
Her worth unknown, her genius lost;
At pleasure's fancy has she drove,
Forgetful of her seat above!
Oh! what such folly can atone?
Reason dejected from her throne;
Let humble penitence restore,
And bid my soul to err no more.
All clement thou, oh God! all just,
The good man's rock, the sinner's trust;
Accept the blood my Savior shed,
To save from woe this guilty head.
Oh! send thy life-restoring grace,
Effuse the luster of thy face;
From guilt and sorrow set me free,
And guide me, till I come to thee.
NOTHING will give a greater luster to all your virtues, than modesty.

HE that is his own appraiser, will be mistaken in the value.

A LITTLE esteem of one's lelf, hinders a great deal from others; boasting may
gain applause from fools, but it puts a wise man to the expense of a blush.

SELF esteem, is commonly punished by universal contempt.

NO revenge is more heroic, than that which torments envy by doing good.

IT is in vain for him to pretend to love either God or man' who loves his
money so much better, that he will see his poor brother (who is a man, and
bears the image of God) suffer all extremities, rather than part with any thing
to relieve him.

"He that gives to the poor, lends unto the Lord" -- and that too on solemn
promise of repayment. "That which he has given, will he pay him again." It is,
amongst men, thought a great disparagement, when we refuse to trust them: It
shows we either think them not sufficient, or not honest. How great an affront
is it then to God, thus to distrust him?

Innumerable accidents there are, which may, in an instant, bring a rich man to
beggary: And therefore, what course so prudent can we take for our wealth, as
to put it out of the reach of those accidents, by lending it to God, where we
may be sure to find it ready at our greatest need, and that too with
improvement and increase?

The contented Country Maid.
WHAT happiness the rural maid attends,
In cheerful labor while each day she spends;
She gratefully receives what Heaven has sent,
And, rich in poverty, enjoys content.
She seldom feels the spleen's imagined pains,
Nor melancholy stagnates in her veins;
She rarely loses life in thoughtless ease,
Nor on the velvet couch invites disease.
Her homespun dress in simple neatness lies,
And for no glaring equipage she sighs.
Her reputation, which is all her boast,
In a malicious visit never was lost.
No midnight masquerade her beauty wears,
And health, not paint, the fading bloom repairs.
If love and quiet in her bosom reign,
And like enjoyment in her happy swain,
No homebred jars her quiet state control,
Nor watchful jealousy torments her soul.
With secret joy she sees her little race
Rest on her knee, and her small cottage grace;
The fleecy ball their busy fingers cull,
Or from the spindle draw the lengthening wool;
Thus flow her hours, with constant peace of mind,
Till age the latest thread of life unwind.
OF all those sorrows that attend mankind,
With patience bear the lot to thee assigned,
Nor think it chance, nor murmur at the load,
For know what man calls fortune, is from God.
AMONG the ancient Romans, it was not the house which honored the master, but
the master the house. A cottage with them became as august as a temple, when
justice, generosity, probity, sincerity, and honor, were lodged in it; and how
can a house be called small, which contains so many and such great virtues?

AN extraordinary merit may lie hid under a mean habit, as a rich garment may
cover enormous vices.

THE nobility arising from birth, is by far inferior to that which proceeds
from merit.

MARCUS Aurelius was averse to every thing that had the air of pomp and luxury.
He lay upon the bare ground; at twelve years old he took the habit of a
Philosopher; he forbore the use of guards, the imperial ornaments, and the
ensigns of honor, which were carried before the Caesar's and the Augusti. Nor
was this conduct owing to his ignorance of what was grand and beautiful, but to
the juster and purer taste he had of both, and to an intimate persuasion, that
the greatest glory, and principal duty of man, especially if in power, and
eminently conspicuous, is so far to imitate the Deity, as to throw himself into
a condition of wanting as little as may be for himself, and doing all the good
to others he is capable of.

IF it shows a greatness of soul to overlook our own nobility, and not suffer
it to gain the ascendant over our actions, we may likewise observe, that it is
no less great in such as have raised themselves by merit, not to forget the
meanness of their extraction, nor be ashamed of it.

WE read in the scriptures, that Boaz, in the midst of riches, was laborious,
diligent in husbandry, plain without luxury, delicacy, sloth or pride. How
affable, how obliging and kind to his servants! "The Lord be with you," says he
to his reapers; and they answered him, "the Lord bless thee." This was the
beautiful language of religious antiquity; but how little known in our days.

How commendable was his behavior toward Ruth, when he desires her not to go
into any other field to glean, but to abide fast by his maidens, to eat and
drink with them, and the charitable order he gives his reapers to let her glean
even among the sheaves, and to let fall some of the handfuls on purpose for her
that she might gather them up without being ashamed; teaching us by this wise
conduct, to save those we oblige, the confusion of receiving, and ourselves the
temptation of vainglory in giving.

THE Providence of God is universal; it presides over all to the minutest
particular, and governs and directs all.

Part of the Book of Job versified.
FOND man, the vision of a moment made --
Dream of a dream, and shadow of a shade;
What worlds have thou produced, what creatures framed?
What insects cherished, that thy God is blamed?
When pained with hunger, the wild raven's brood
Call upon God, importunate for food,
Who hears their cry? Who grants their hoarse request,
And stills the clamor of the craving nest?
Who taught the hawk to find, in seasons wise,
Perpetual summers and a change of skies?
When clouds deform the year, she mounts the wind,
Shoots to the south, nor fears the storm behind.
The sun returning, she returns again,
Lives in his beams, and leaves ill days to men.
Am I a debtor? Have thou ever heard
Whence come the gifts that are on me conferred?
My lavish fruit a thousand valleys fills,
And mine the herds that graze a thousand hills.
Earth, sea and air, all nature is my own,
And stars and sun are dust beneath my throne,
And dare thou, with the world's great father vie,
Thou who do tremble at my creatures eye?
Then the Chaldean eased his laboring breast,
With full conviction of his crime oppressed.
Thou can accomplish all things, Lord of might!
And every thought is naked to thy sight --
But oh! thy ways are wonderful, and lie
Beyond the deepest reach of mortal eye.
Often have I heard of thine Almighty power,
But never saw thee till this dreadful hour.
Overwhelmed with shame, the Lord of life I see,
Abhor myself, and give my soul to thee.
Nor shall my weakness tempt thine anger more,
Man was not made to question, but adore.
To a Child of a Month old.
BLESSED babe, who stranger to all worldly strife,
Art lately launched upon the sea of life;
And midst those dangerous waves wilt soon be tossed,
Where some by pleasure, some by pain, are lost --
Who yet not feels, nor fear to feel the rage
Of storms, that threaten man's maturer age;
But view'st, with careless and indiff'rent eyes,
The clouds of folly that arround thee rise.
Accept, nor fear infection from my song,
Few authors flatter at an age so young.
Look round the habitable world and see,
Who would not wish to change their place with thee.
Would not the miser broach each favorite mine,
His heart as easy, thoughts as free as thine?
What would the hoary villain not endure,
His hands as innocent, his soul as pure.
Would not the spend thrift beg his squandered ore,
To purchase half the bliss thou have in store?
Never was a maxim truer sure than this,
That want of innocence is want of bliss;
It Is this, it is innocence, thy bosom cheers,
This calms thy troubles, this dispels thy fears;
This spreads over all its beautifying rays,
Makes every object, every play-thing, please.
This (whilst less things the guilty breast can awe)
Gives music to a key, and beauty to a straw.
So through the prism, to philosophic eyes.
The barren lawns in pleasing prospect rise.
Steep hills in azure tempt the distant ^ight,
Waste wilds look lovely in a borrowed light.
Decked by the glass the cottage apes the throne,
And shines in colors that were never its own.
Long may this pleasing calm remain within,
Unknown to trouble, as unknown to sin;
When infant reason shall begin to rise,
Prate on thy lips, and wanton in thy eyes,
Oh! may this charm thy every care beguile,
Assist thy prattle, and improve thy smile.
When growing sense, to ripening judgment joined,
Shall fix a doubtful empire in thy mind --
If heat of blood with wanton frenzy warm --
If ease should tempt thee, or if pleasure charm,
Oh! may this love of virtue, love of truth,
Lead thee still safe through all the paths of youth.
Next when thy part in life's still varying plan
Shall call thee forward on the stage of man,
Oh! may it keep thee honest, generous, just,
True to thy word, and cautious of thy trust;
Light in thy soul devotion's sacred flame,
Make virtue all thy wish, and Heaven thy aim.
And last, when manhood's vigor shall decay,
Time shake thy head, and silver't over with gray,
Long may this sovereign remedy remain,
To prop thy weakness, and assuage thy pain;
'Till the last moment shed its kindly ray,
And glad the evening of thy well-spent day.
But may ten thousand pleasures rise between
Thy opening curtain, and this closing scene;
May health attend thee, beautiful and gay,
And smooth, through life, thy else too rugged way.
PROSPERITY quickens, and gives a sort of false courage to men of low,
degenerate minds, and dresses them up in an outward grandeur, which imposes
upon the majority of mankind; but adversity is the touchstone of souls truly
great and generous.

SILENCE is sometimes more significant and sublime, than the most noble and
most expressive eloquence, and is, on many occasions, the indication of a great
mind.

But silence never shows itself to so great an advantage, as when it is made
the reply to calumny and defamation, provided that we give no just occasion for
them.

HOW different is the view of past life, in the man who is grown old in
knowledge and wisdom, from that of him who is grown old in ignorance and folly.
The latter is like the owner of a barren country, that fills his eye with the
prospect of naked hills and plains, which produce nothing either profitable or
ornamental; the other beholds a beautiful and spacious landscape, divided into
delightful gardens, green meadows, fruitful fields, and can scarce cast his eye
on a single spot of his possessions, that is not covered with some beautiful
plant or flower.

TO look upon the soul as going on from strength to strength, to consider that
she is to shine forever with new accessions of glory, and brighten to all
eternity; that she will be still adding virtue to virtue, and knowledge to
knowledge, carries in it something wonderfully agreeable to that ambition,
which is natural to the mind of man. Nay, it must be a prospect pleasing to God
himself, to see his creation forever beautifying in his eyes, and drawing
nearer to him, by greater degrees of resemblance.

THAT we might not want inducements to engage us in such an exercise of the
body, as is proper for its welfare, it is so ordered, that nothing valuable can
be procured without it. Not to mention riches and honor, even food and raiment
are not to be come at without the toil of the hands, and sweat of the brows.
Providence furnishes materials, but expects that we should work them up
ourselves.

As for those who are not obliged to labor, by the condition in which they are
born, they are more miserable than the rest of mankind, unless they indulge
themselves in that voluntary labor, which goes by the name of exercise.

Thoughts on the Grave of a Child. -- By a Father.
HERE, here she lies! oh! could I once more view
Those dear remains; take one more fond adieu;
Weep over that face of innocence, or save
One darling feature, from the noisome grave!
Vain wish! -- ^ow low in earth that form of love
Decays, unseen, yet not forgot above.
In angel light arrayed, beyond the stars,
Some more exalted form her spirit wears.
The work of God, that beauteous clay, which here
In infant charms so lovely could appear;
As though in nature's nicest model cast,
Exactly polished, wrought too fine to last --
By the same powerful hand again shall rise,
To bloom more gay, more lovely in the skies.
No sickness there can the pure frame annoy,
Nor death presume God's image to destroy.
Those seats of pleasure, not a tear shall slain,
In them not even a wish shall glow in vain.
That active mind, intent on trifles here,
Enlarges now to objects worth its care;
Looks down with scorn upon the toys below,
And burns, with transport, better worlds to know,
Where scenes of glory open to her sight,
And new improvements furnish new delight;
Where friendly angels, for her guidance given,
Lead her, admiring, through the courts of Heaven.
No wonder then her course so swiftly run,
Like the young eaglet, towering to the sun;
Winged for eternal bliss, and plumed for day,
Her soul, enraptured, made such haste away,
Impatient to regain its native shore,
Just smiled at folly, and looked back no more.
That winning nature, and obliging mien,
Pleased to see all, by all with pleasure seen.
Smiling and sweet as vernal flowers new blown,
Associates now with tempers like her own.
Her love to me (how artless and sincere!)
Rises from earth to Heaven, and centers there.
So pure a flame, Heaven's gracious Sire will own,
And with paternal love indulgent crown.
Cease, then, frail nature, to lament in vain,
Reason forbids to wish her back again;
Rather congratulate her happier fate,
And new advancement to a better state;
This blessing quick recalled, can Heaven bestow,
No more in pity to a father's woe?
Know the same God, who gave, has taken away,
He orders her to go, and thee to stay.
Though in this vale of misery, alone,
Deserted, weary, thou should travel on.
Still be resigned, my soul! his will be done.
Escaped from life, and all its train of ills*
Which, ah! too sure, the hoary pilgrim feels,
To shorter trial doomed, and lighter toil,
Ere sin could tempt her, or the world defile.
She, favored innocent, retires to rest,
Tastes but the cup of sorrow, and is blessed.
Such the mild Savior to his arms receives,
And the full blessings of his kingdom gives.
There angels wait, submissive, round his throne,
To praise his goodness in these infants shown.
Amidst that gentle throng, how Heavenly bright,
Distinguished Lucy shines, fair star of light.
Short, yet how pleasing, was her visit here,
She Is now removed to grace a nobler sphere;
There, while thy much loved parents mourn below,
Thou, happy child, shall not our sorrows know.
Eternal joys be thine, full anthems raise,
And glad all Heaven with thy Creator's praise.
IF we are firmly resolved to live up to the dictates of reason, without any
regard to wealth, reputation, or the like considerations, any more than as they
fall in with our principal design, we may go through life with steadiness and
pleasure; but if we act by several broken views, and will not only be virtuous,
but wealthy, popular, and every thing that has a value set upon it by the
world, we shall live and die in misery and repentance.

ENQUIRIES after happiness, and rules for attaining it, are not so necessary
and useful to mankind, as the arts of consolation, and supporting one's self
under affliction. The utmost we can hope for, in this world, is contentment; if
we aim at any thing higher, we shall meet with nothing but grief and
disappointments. A man should direct all his studies and endeavors, at making
himself easy now, and happy hereafter.

IT is of the last importance to season the passions of a child with devotion,
which seldom dies in a mind that has received an early tincture of it. Though it
may seem extinguished for a while by the cares of the world, the heats of
youth, or the allurements of vice, it generally breaks out, and discovers
itself again as soon as discretion, consideration, age, or misfortunes, have
brought the man to himself. The fire may be covered and overlaid, but cannot be
entirely quenched and smothered.

PURE devotion opens the mind to great conceptions, and fills it with more
sublime ideas, than any that are to be met with in the most exalted science;
and at the same time warms and agitates the soul more than sensual pleasure.

IT is of unspeakable advantage to possess our minds with an habitual good
intention, and to aim all our thoughts, words and actions, at the same laudable
end, the glory of our Maker, the good of mankind, and the benefit of our own
souls.

SOCRATES, on the day of his execution, a little before the draught of poison
was brought to him, entertaining his friends with a discourse on the
immortality of the soul, has these words: "Whether or no God will approve of my
actions, I know not; but this I am sure of, that I have at all times made it my
endeavor to please him; and I have a good hope, that this my endeavor will be
accepted by him."

HYMN.
WHEN rising from the bed of death,
Overwhelmed with guilt and fear,
I see my Maker, face to face,
O how shall I appear?
If yet, while pardon may be sound,
And mercy may be sought,
My heart with inward horror shrinks,
And trembles at the thought.
When thou, O Lord! shall stand disclosed,
In Majesty severe,
And sit in judgment on my soul,
Oh! how shall I appear?
But thou have told the troubled mind,
Who does her sins lament,
The timely tribute of her tears,
Shall endless woe prevent.
Then see the sorrows of my heart,
Ere yet it be too late,
And hear my Savior's dying groans,
To give those sorrows weight.
For never shall my soul despair,
Her pardon to procure,
Who knows thine only Son has died,
To make her pardon sure.
SELF-LOVE but serves the virtuous mind to wake,
As the small pebble stirs the peaceful lake,
The center moved, a circle strait succeeds,
Another still, and still another spreads;
Friend, parent, neighbor, first it will embrace,
His country next, and next all human race.
Wide and more wide, the o'erflowings of the mind
Take every creature in of every kind.
Earth smiles around with boundless bounty blessed,
And Heaven beholds its image in his breast.
IT may be laid down as a position, which will seldom deceive, that when a man
cannot bear his own company, there is something wrong. He must fly from
himself, either because he feels a tediousness in life from the equipoise of an
empty mind, which, having no tendency to one motion, more than another, but as
it is impelled by some external power, must always have recourse to foreign
objects; or he must be afraid of the intrusion of some unpleasing ideas, and
is, perhaps, struggling to escape from the remembrance of a loss, the fear of a
calamity, or some other thought of greater horror.

CAN a mortal look down, without giddiness and stupefaction, into the vast
abyss of eternal wisdom? Can a mind, that sees not infinitely, perfectly
comprehend any thing among an infinity of objects mutually relative? Remember,
that perfect happiness cannot be conferred on a creature, for perfect happiness
is an attribute as incommunicable, as perfect power and eternity.

Extract from Cowper's Poem called the Task.
-- DETESTED sport!
That owes its pleasures to another's pains;
That feeds upon the sobs and dying shrieks
Of harmless nature; dumb, but yet endued
With eloquence, that agonies inspire,
Of silent tears and hear^ distending sighs.
Vain tears, alas! and sighs that seldom find
A corresponding ^one in jovial souls.
Well, one at least is safe; one sheltered hare
Has never heard the sanguinary yell
Of cruel man exulting in her woes.
Innocent part'ner of my peaceful home,
Whom ten long year's experience of my care
Has made at last familiar, she has lost
Much of her vigilant, instinctive dread,
Not needful here beneath a roof like mine.
Yes, thou may eat thy bread, and lick the hand
That feeds thee; thou may frolic on the floor
At evening, and at night retire secure
To thy straw couch, and slumber unalarm'd,
For I have gained thy confidence, and pledged
All that is human in me, to protect
Thine unsuspecting gratitude and love.
If I survive thee, I will dig thy grave,
And when I place thee in it, sighing say,
I knew at least one hare that had a friend.
CRUEL sports, were thought very high reflections on the politeness of the
Romans. Are they not much greater on the mercy and humanity of Christians?

IT behooves us to accustom ourselves to a sober, modest way of speaking, and to
avoid all those modes of speech, which border upon, or naturally lead to
falsehood.

BE careful to practice nothing which you are ashamed of; to do nothing for
which you need be afraid of the eye or ear of God, and the world, then will you
be under no temptation of lying, to conceal what you have done amiss.

IF we had true notions of God, and eternity, right notions of ourselves, and
of the world, they could not fail to create in us thoughts full of humility
toward ourselves, full of contempt toward the vain world, full of the highest
adoration toward God, and full of earnestness to acquire a happy eternity.

PRAYER, unaccompanied with a fervent love of God, is like a lamp unlighted;
the words of the one, without love, being as unprofitable as the oil and cotton
of the other, without flame.

HE alone is a great man, whose heart is strongly disposed to acts of humanity
and benevolence; and who has fortitude enough to do his duty in all
circumstances of life; who acts for the good of mankind, as long as he is able,
and then finishes his course in the cause of virtue.

THE way to avoid prejudice, is to govern the passions with a steady hand; to
treat all things, in a calm and disinterested manner, not suffering our desires
or aversions to be moved, but by a just consideration of real usefulness.

TAKE but the humblest lilly of the field,
And if our pride will to our reason yield,
It must by sure comparison be shown,
That on the regal feat great David's son,
Arrayed in all his robes and types of power,
Shines with less glory, than that simple flower.
ENOUGH I think my present store,
Nor do I ask of Heaven for more,
But thank the kindness of my God,
For that small stock he has allowed.
Lo time still wastes, and wastes away,
And moons arise but to decay;
Then why, fond mortals, tell me why!
Ye raise your costly domes so high?
Why build ye palaces so great,
With all the extravagance of state,
When every stone must fall away,
And crumble still, and still decay?
Why strive ye to enrich ye more,
With ware from every foreign shore,
When death stands knocking at your door?
PRAYER.
THERE is such a thing as converse with God in prayer, and it is the life and
pleasure of a pious soul; without it we are no Christians, and he that
practices it most, is the best follower of Christ; for our Lord spent much time
in converse with his Heavenly Father. This is balm that eases the most raging
pains of the mind, when the wounded conscience comes to the mercy-seat, and
finds pardon and peace there. This is the cordial that revives and exalts our
natures, when the spirit, broken with sorrows, and almost fainting to death,
draws near to the Almighty physician, and is healed and refreshed.

THE mercy-seat in Heaven is our surest and sweetest refuge in every hour of
distress and darkness upon earth; this is our daily support and relief, while
we are passing through a world of temptations and hardships, in the way to the
promised land. "It is good to draw near to God."

THE Creator is to be first loved for his own sake, for his infinite goodness
and perfection, and then the creature, as his work, and in proportion to its
resemblance to him.

HE that thinks twice before he speaks once, will speak twice the better for it.

WHEN in thy sacred presence, Lord! I bow,
Let true devotion in my bosom glow;
There, with the sense of thy great goodness fraught,
May I with care correct each wandering thought;
Drink at my ears the preacher's Heavenly lore,
And still the more I hear, improve the more;
Make this short life an earnest of the next,
And all my acts a comment on thy text.
On the Vanity of Riches.
SEE thou, fond youth, yon precipice on high,
Robbed by the clouds, and turban'd by the sky,
How lowering darkly over the shadowed plains,
It strikes wild terror through the gazing swains?
Its craggy sides can boast no fertile soil,
No promised harvest tempts a rural toil;
No grazing cattle find their pasture there,
Nor fragrant flowers perfume the ambient air;
No sweet-meand'ring current glides along,
Courting the meadows with its murmuring song;
No shady bowers adorn its barren sides,
Nor fair enclosure its rough ground divides;
No lofty spires a wondering glance invite,
Nor artful gardens tempt the distant sight.
All rough and wild, it rears its rocky head,
And strikes the wondering eye with awful dread.
From its high top impetuous torrents flow,
Formed by dissolving tracts of native snow;
Sorrow sits brooding on its furrowed face,
And desolation triumphs over the place.
See thou all this, fond mortal? Think, if so,
Thou see the bliss the vain ambitious know.
Such are the barren pleasures they enjoy,
For this alone whole ages they employ.
They move our pity, though they tempt our sight,
High above all, but wre^hed by their height.
THE prince of peace -- He first reconciled God to man, and then endeavored to
reconcile men to each other. When he came into the world, he, by his angels,
proclaimed peace; and when he left the world, he bequeathed the same as his
legacy: "Peace I leave with you," etc.

THE merciful man will extend his hand of relief and comfort, as far as he may,
to his fellow creatures, whether they labor under temporal or spiritual
distress, whether they call for his pity from their sins or from their sorrows;
while, in every relation of life, he will exercise this Heavenly temper: As a
magistrate, gentle and humane, however compelled, in certain cases, to be
severely just: As a creditor, mild and forbearing, not flying hastily and
vigorously to the utmost extremity, much less condemning the unhappy debtor to
imprisonment, which may utterly incapacitate from all power and hope of
payment; and in short, in every case exercising that lenity, mildness,
forgiveness, and mercy, whereof the eternal God has set us so bright an
example; and all our expectation of which from him, he has made to depend on
our showing the same to others: "Blessed are the merciful, for they shall
obtain mercy."

-- YE good distressed,
Ye noble few! -- who here unbending stand
Beneath life's pressure, yet bear up a while,
And what your bounded view, which only saw
A little part, deemed evil, is no more;
The storms of wintry time will quickly pass,
And one unbounded spring encircle all.
On the Nativity of Christ.
AWAKE from silence every voice,
Each cheerful pipe and sounding string;
Let every grateful heart rejoice,
And every tongue in rapture sing.
On this distinguished day of grace
The eternal Prince of glory came,
To purge the guilt of human race,
And save them by his powerful name.
Bow down your heads, ye lofty pines,
Ye mountains crowned with cedars tall;
Be still, ye rude, imperious winds,
Throughout the wide terrestrial ball.
Let naught but harmony and love
Over all the expanded surface reign,
And let the sacred choir above
Approve, and join the Heavenly strain.
When we in bondage were exiled,
And rebels to the eternal God,
Our souls, with blackest guilt defiled,
Obnoxious to the impending rod;
That from his seat of perfect bliss
The Son of glory should descend,
To offer man the terms of peace,
And his unbounded grace extend.
Such goodness, such stupendous grace!
Nor men, nor angels can explore;
Then let us, what we cannot trace,
With awful reverence adore.
Ye winged inhabitants of air,
All ye that graze the verdant plain;
Ye herds, that to the wilds repair,
And ye that skim the surging main,
Some signs of exultation show,
While grateful minds your voices raise,
It Is all that mortals can below,
To hail the day in songs of praise.
While skilful hands the chorus join,
And tune the rapture-raising lyre,
While grateful strains of love divine,
Serene, extatic joys inspire.
Thus sacred be the happy day,
While sun, and moon, and stars endure;
Till nature feels her last decay,
And time itself shall be no more.
LET us entertain a general good opinion of all men, till unquestionable
evidence shall oblige us to give up that good opinion; yet, at the same time,
let us be cautious not to suffer our good opinion to betray us into any
improper compliances or connexions.

SELL not your hopes of Heavenly treasures, nor any thing that belongs to your
eternal interest, for any of the advantages of the present life: "What shall it
profit a man, to gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?"

TO piety join modesty and docility, reverence of your parents, and submission
to those who are your superiors in knowledge, in station, and in years.
Dependence and obedience belong to youth. Modesty is one of its chief
ornaments; and has ever been esteemed a presage of rising merit.

PROVIDENCE never intended, that any state here should be either completely
happy, or entirely miserable. If the feelings of pleasure are more numerous,
and more lively, in the higher departments of life, such also are those of
pain. If greatness flatters our vanity, it multiplies our dangers. If opulence
increases our gratifications, it increases, in the same proportion, our desires
and demands. If the poor are confined to a more narrow circle, yet, within that
circle, lie most of those natural satisfactions, which, after all the
refinements of art, are found to be the most genuine and true.

WE have seen, that inordinate passions are the great disturbers of life; and
that, unless we possess a good conscience, and a well governed mind, discontent
will blast every enjoyment, and the highest prosperity will prove only
disguised misery. Fix then this conclusion in your mind, that the destruction
of your virtue, is the destruction of your peace. "For our rejoicing is this,
the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not
with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in
the world, and more abundantly to you-wards." 2 Cor. i.12.

Caution against Pride.
CONSIDER what you shall be. Your flesh returns to corruption and common earth
again; nor shall your dust be distinguished from the meanest beggar or slave;
no, nor from the dust of brutes and insects, or the most contemptible of
creatures; and as for your souls, they must stand before God, in the world of
spirits, on a level with the rest of mankind, and divested of all your haughty
and flattering circumstances. None of your vain distinctions in this life,
shall attend you to the judgment seat. Keep this tribunal in view, and pride
will wither, and hang down its head.

MONEY, like manure, does no good, till it is spread; there is no real use of
riches, except in the distribution; the rest is all conceit.

BY love directed, and in mercy meant,
Are trials suffered, and afflictions sent.
To stem impetuous passion's furious tide;
To curb the insolence of prosperous pride;
To wean from earth, and bid our wishes soar
To that blessed clime, where pain shall be no more,
Where wearied virtue shall for refuge fly,
And every tear be wiped from every eye.
HAPPY are they who preserve their innocence unsullied by any great or wilful
crimes, and who have only the common failings of humanity to repent of; these
are sufficiently mortifying to a heart deeply smitten with the love of virtue,
and with the desire of perfection.

"WHATSOEVER ye would that men should do unto you, even so do unto them." There
is no occasion, great or small, on which you may not safely apply this rule for
the direction of your conduct; and, whilst your heart honestly adheres to it,
you can never be guilty of any sort of injustice or unkindness.

ENDEAVOR to acquire a temper of universal candor and benevolence; and learn
neither to despise nor condemn any persons on account of their particular modes
of faith and worship; remembering, always, that goodness is confined to no
party -- that there are wise and worthy men among all the sects of Christians
-- and that to his own master, every one must stand or fall.

VIRTUE is the foundation of honor and esteem, and the source of all beauty,
order, and happiness, in nature.

BEAUTY and wit will die, learning will vanish away, and all the arts of life
be soon forgot; but virtue will remain forever.

A GOOD word is an easy obligation; but not to speak ill, requires only our
silence, which costs us nothing.

The FIRESIDE.
I.
DEAR Chloe, while the busy crowd,
The vain, the wealthy, and the proud,
In folly's maze advance:
Though singularity and pride
Be called our choice, we'll step aside,
Nor join the giddy dance.
II.
From the gay world we'll often retire,
To our own family and fire,
Where love our hours employs:
No noisy neighbors enter here,
No intermeddling stranger near,
To spoil our heartfelt joys.
III.
If solid happiness we prize,
Within our breasts this jewel lies;
And they are fools who roam:
The world has nothing to bestow,
From our own selves our joys must flow,
And that dear hut our home.
IV.
Of rest was Noah's dove bereft,
When, with impatient wing, she left
That safe retreat, the ark:
Giving her vain excursion over,
The disappointed bird once more
Explored the sacred bark.
V.
Though fools spurn Hymen's gentle powers,
We who improve his golden hours,
By sweet experience know,
That marriage, rightly understood,
Gives to the tender, and the good,
A paradise below.
VI.
Our babes shall richest comforts bring;
If ^utor'd right, they will prove a spring
Whence pleasures ever rise:
We'll form their minds with studious care,
To all that is manly, good and fair,
And train them for the skies.
VII.
While they our wisest hours engage,
They Will joy our youth, support our age,
And crown our hoary hairs:
They Will grow in virtue every day,
And thus our fondest loves repay,
And recompense our cares.
VIII.
No borrowed joys, they are all our own,
While to the world we live unknown,
Or by the world forgot;
Monarchs! we envy not your state;
We look with pity on the great,
And bless our humble lot.
IX.
Our portion is not large indeed,
But then how little do we need,
For nature's calls are few:
In this the art of living lies,
To want no more than may suffice,
And make that little do.
X.
We'll, therefore, relish with content,
Whatever kind Providence has sent,
Nor aim beyond our power:
For if our stock be very small,
It Is prudence to enjoy it all,
Nor lose the present hour.
XI.
To be resigned when ills betide,
Patient when favors are denied,
And pleased with favors given:
Dear Chloe, this is wisdom's part,
This is that incense of the heart,
Whose fragrance smells to Heaven!
XII.
We'll ask no long, protracted treat,
(Since winter-life is seldom sweet)
But when our feast is over,
Grateful from table we'll arise,
Nor grudge our sons, with envious eyes,
The relics of our store.
XIII.
Thus hand in hand, through life we'll g^,
Its checkered paths of joy and woe
With cautious steps we'll tread:
Quit its vain scenes without a tear,
Without a trouble, or a fear,
And mingle with the dead.
XIV.
While conscience, like a faithful friend,
Shall through the gloomy vale attend,
And cheer our dying breath:
Shall, when all other comforts cease,
Like a kind angel whisper peace,
And smooth the bed of death!
SINCERITY is firm and substantial, and there is nothing hollow or unsound in
it; and because it is plain and open, fears no discovery; of which the crafty
man is always in danger.

PLUTARCH has written an essay on the benefits which a man may receive from his
enemies; and mentions this in particular, "that, by the reproaches cast upon us
we see the worst side of ourselves, and open our eyes to several blemishes and
defects in our lives and conversations, which we should not have observed
without the help of such ill-natured monitors."

LET us "keep the heart with all diligence, seeing out of it are the issues of
life." Let us account our mind the most important province which is committed
to our care; and as we cannot rule events, study at least to rule ourselves.

IT is too common with the young, even when they resolve to tread the path of
virtue and honor, to set out with presumptuous confidence in themselves.
Trusting to their own abilities, for carrying them successfully through life,
they are careless of applying to God, or of deriving any assistance from what
they are apt to reckon the gloomy discipline of religion. Alas! how little do
they know the dangers which await them?"

Neither human wisdom, nor human virtue, unsupported by religion, are equal for
the trying situations which often occur in life. By the shock of temptation,
how frequently have the most virtuous intentions been overthrown! Under the
pressure of disaster, how often has the greatest constancy sunk! Destitute of
the favor of God, you are in no better situation, with all your boasted
abilities, than orphans left to wander in a trackless desert, without any guide
to conduct them, or any shelter to cover them from the gathering storm.
Correct, then, this ill-founded arrogance. Expect not that your happiness can
be independent of him who made you. By faith and repentance, apply to the
Redeemer of the world. By piety and prayer, seek the protection of the God of
Heaven.

THE cheerfulness of a well-regulated mind, springs from a good conscience, and
the favor of Heaven, and is bounded by temperance and reason. It makes a man
happy in himself, and promotes the happiness of all around him. It is the clear
and calm sunshine of a mind illuminated by piety and virtue. It crowns all
other good dispositions, and comprehends the general effect which they ought to
produce on the heart.

LET no man rashly determine, that his unwillingness to be pleased, is a proof
of understanding, unless his superiority appears from a less doubtful evidence;
for though peevishness may sometimes boast its descent from learning or from
wit, it is much oftener of base extraction, the child of vanity and nursling of
ignorance.

LET the virtuous remember, amidst all their sufferings, that though the heart
of the good man may bleed, even to death, he will never feel a torment equal to
the rendings of remorse.

PLATO being told, that he had many enemies who spoke ill of him, "It is no
matter, said he, I will live so that none shall believe them." Hearing, at
another time, that an intimate friend of his had spoken detractingly of him, "I
am sure he would not do it, says he, if he had not some reason for it." This is
the surest, as well as the noblest way, of drawing the sting out of a reproach,
and the true method of preparing a man for that great and only relief against
the pains of calumny, a good conscience.

JUDGE not of mankind in general from the conduct of a few individuals. There
are persons capable of alleviating all our cares by a friendly participation,
and of heightening every satisfaction by sharing them. Cultivate an
acquaintance with the truly deserving, and the painful remembrance of
ingratitude will soon be lost in the reciprocal endearments of sincere
friendship.

DO thou ask a torch to discover the brightness of the morning? Do thou
appeal to argument for proofs of divine perfection? Look down to the earth on
which thou stand, and lift up thine eye to the worlds that roll above thee:
Thou beholdest splendor, abundance and beauty; is not he who produced them
mighty? Thou considerest -- is not he who formed thy understanding, wise? Thou
enjoyest -- is not he who gratifies thy senses, good? Can aught have limited
his bounty, but his wisdom? or can any defects be therein discovered by thy
sagacity?

RELIGION prescribes to every miserable man, the means of bettering his
condition; it shows him, that the bearing of his afflictions as he ought to do,
will naturally end in the removal of them; it makes him easy here, because it
can make him happy hereafter.

A CONTENTED mind is the greatest blessing a man can enjoy in this world; and
if in the present life his happiness arises from the subduing of his desires,
it will arise in the next from the gratification of them.

EVERY wise man will consider this life only as it may conduce to the happiness
of the other, and cheerfully sacrifice the pleasures of a few years to those of
an eternity.

HOWEVER far some men may have gone in the science of impartiality, perhaps
there is not one of them but would be surprised, if he could be shown how much
farther he might go.

THOUGH poor the peasant's hut, his feasts though small,
He sees his little lot, the lot of all;
Sees no contiguous palace rear its head,
To shame the meanness of his humble shed;
No costly lords the sumptuous banquet deal,
To make him loathe his vegetable meal --
But calm, and bred in ignorance and toil,
Each wish contracting, fits him to the soil;
Cheerful at morn he wakes from short repose,
Breathes the keen air, and carrols as he goes;
With patient angle trolls the finny deep,
Or drives his venurous plough-share to the steep;
Or seeks the den, where snow-tracks mark the way,
And drags the struggling savage into day.
At night returning, every labor sped,
He sits him down, the monarch of a shed;
Smiles by his cheerful fire, and round surveys
His childrens looks, that brighten at the blaze;
While his loved partner, boastful of her hoard,
Displays the cleanly platter on the board.
EVERY station of life has duties, which are proper to it. Those who are
determined, by choice, to any particular kind of business, are indeed more
happy than those who are determined by necessity; but both are under an equal
obligation of fixing on employments, which may be either useful to themselves,
or beneficial to others.

NO one of the sons of Adam, ought to think himself exempt from that labor and
industry, which were denounced upon our first parent, and in him, to all his
posterity. Those to whom birth or affluence may seem to make such an
application unnecessary, ought to find out some calling or profession for
themselves, that they may not lie as a burden on the species, and be the only
useless parts of the creation.

IT sometimes happens, that too close an attention to minute exactness, or a
too rigorous examination of every thing, by the standard of perfection,
vitiates the temper, rather than improves the understanding, and teaches the
mind to discern faults with unhappy penetration. It is incident, likewise, to
men of vigorous imaginations, to please themselves too much with futurities,
and to fret, because those expectations are disappointed, which should never
have been formed.

KNOWLEDGE and genius are often enemies to quiet, by suggesting ideas of
excellence, to which men, and the performances of men, cannot attain.

WE should always act with great cautiousness and circumspection, in points
where it is not impossible that we may be deceived.

LET no fond love of earth exact a sigh,
No doubt divert our steady steps aside,
Nor let us long to live, or dread to die,
Heaven is our hope, and Providence our guide.
A Thought on waking.
SLEEP by night, and cares by day,
Bear my fleeting life away:
Lo! in yonder eastern skies,
Sol appears, and bids me rise:
Tells me, "life is on the wing,
And has no returning spring:
Death comes on with steady pace
And life's the only day of grace."
Shining preacher! happy morning!
Let me take the important warning;
Rouse then all my active powers,
Well improve the coming hours;
Let no trifles kill the day,
(Trifles often our hearts betray.)
Virtue, science, knowledge, truth,
Guide the enquiries of my youth.
Wisdom, and experience sage,
Then shall soothe the cares of age;
Those with time shall never die,
Those will l^ad to joys on high;
Those the path of life display,
Shining with celestial day;
Blissful path! with safety trod,
As it leads the soul to God.
ON HAPPINESS.
LONG have I sought the wish of all,
True happiness to find,
Which some will wealth, some pleasure call,
And some a virtuous mind.
Sufficient wealth, to keep away
Of want the doleful scene,
And joy enough to gild the day,
And make life's course serene.
Virtue enough to ask my heart,
Art thou secure within?
Have thou performed an honest part?
Have thou no private sin?
This to perform, these things possess,
Must raise a no^^e joy,
Must constitute that happiness,
Which nothing can destroy.
O! THOU, whose power over moving worlds presides,
Whose voice created, and whose wisdom guides,
On darkling man, with fond effulgence shine,
And cheer the clouded mind with light divine.
It Is thine alone to calm the pious breast,
With silent confidence and holy rest;
From thee, great God! we spring, to thee we tend,
Path, motive, guide, original and end.
IT was a common saying among the Heathens, that the wise man hates nobody, but
only loves the virtuous. The Christian owes a more general love.

A Thought on Death.
DEATH, to a good man, is but passing through a dark entry, out of one little
dusky room of his father's house, into another, that is fair and large,
lightsome, glorious and divinely entertaining.

THERE is nothing of greater importance to us, than to sift our thoughts, and
examine all the dark recesses of the mind, if we would establish our souls in
such a solid and substantial virtue, as will turn to account in that great day,
when it must stand the test of infinite wisdom and justice.

ALL the real pleasures and conveniences of life, lie in a narrow compass; but
it is the humor of mankind, to be always looking forward, and straining after
those who have got the start of them in wealth and honor.

A Good conscience is to the soul, what health is to the body; it preserves a
constant ease and serenity within us, and more than countervails all the
calamities and afflictions which can possibly befall us. I know nothing so hard
for a generous mind to get over, as calumny and reproach; and cannot find any
method of quieting the soul under them, besides this single one, of our being
conscious to ourselves, that we do not deserve them.

The Rural Scene.
SWEET contemplation to pursue,
Behold a rural scene in view,
The bleating herds, the lowing kine,
The spreading oak, the towering pine;
The air, from noxious vapors free,
Whilst squirrels trip from tree to tree,
And the sweet songsters hover round,
Fruit, herbs and flowers, enrich the ground,
And each their various fruits produce,
Some for delight, and some for use.
Behold, O! youth, this scene, and see
What nature's God has given to thee.
With wonder view his great designs,
In which superior wisdom shines;
Revere his name, admire his love,
And raise thy thoughts to worlds above.
TO THE POOR.
THE Providence of Almighty God, has placed you under difficult circumstances
of life, and daily reads you a lesson in a more particular manner to depend
upon him. This you may be assured of for your comfort, that you are under God's
constant and immediate care: And one advantage you enjoy above the rich, in
your journey to Heaven, is, that you are not clogged and hindered in your
course thither, by those manifold encumbrances which lie on them* of whom our
Savior has said, "That it is very hard for them to enter into the kingdom of
Heaven." Their temptations are proportioned to their abundance; their cares are
more and their distractions greater; so that you have no reason to envy them,
nor repine at your own condition; and these are chiefly your temptations, and
against these you must be more particularly watchful. Certainly, if you
consider things aright, you will find that your storehouse is the most sure,
your supply most certain; for you are immediately in the hands of God, of him
who feeds the ravens, and cloatheth the grass of the field; so that you may
be much more assured that he will cloathe you. Endeavor to be humble, holy,
Heavenly minded; always remembering, that he is the poorest man, who is poor in
grace. Your Savior had not where to lay his head; let his example serve to
reconcile your low condition to you; and let your religious behavior under it,
be the means to sanctify it.

WHEREVER we turn our eyes, we find something to revive our curiosity, and
engage our attention. In the dusk of the morning, we watch the rising of the
sun, and see the day diversify the clouds, and open new prospects in its
gradual advance. After a few hours, we see the shades lengthen, and the light
decline, till the sky is resigned to a multitude of shining orbs, different
from each other in magnitude and splendor. The earth varies its appearance, as
we move upon it; the woods offer their shades, and the fields their harvests;
the hill flatters with an extensive view, and the valley invites with shelter,
fragrance and flowers.

LET not the curious from your bosom steal
Secrets, where prudence ought to set her seal;
Yet be so frank and plain, that at one view,
In other things, each man may see you through.
GOD of my soul! without thy strengthening grace,
How weak, how poor, how blind, is human race!
To sound thy praise, ten thousand worlds agree,
And nature lifts the grateful song to thee;
To thee, with awe, the brute creation bends,
When thunder bursts, or stormy rain descends;
Obedient to thy will, the rocks and trees
Now rest in snow, now bless the vernal breeze;
Yet man, presuming on his glimmering sense,
Rash man alone disclaims thy Providence;
The truths he dare not controvert, denies,
And against conviction shuts his ears and eyes.
OUR follies, when displayed, ourselves affright,
Few are so bad, to bear the hideous sight;
Mankind in herds, through force of custom stray,
Mislead each other into error's way,
Pursue the road, forgetful of the end,
Sin by mistake, and without thought offend.
SHE who values not the virtue of modesty in her words and dress, will not be
thought to set much price upon it in her actions.

IN case of temptation, it is a prudent caution to avoid the encounter, when we
are conscious of weakness, or unable to withstand it.

MOST men are ready enough to reckon up the income of their estates, and
compute how it will answer their several expenses; but few employ their
arithmetic to calculate the value and income of their life and time, or
consider how they may be expended to the best advantage. In these the beggar
has as large a revenue as the king, though they are justly accounted the more
valuable treasure.

THE soul, agitated with passions, fares like a weak bird in a stormy day; she
is not able to make a straight flight, but is tossed from the track she would
pursue, being lost and carried in the air at the pleasure of the winds. In this
condition is the soul, till, by a constant meditation on God, and application
to him, it has obtained a strong and vigorous faith to ballast and strengthen
it, and enable it to maintain the straight and steady course of virtue.

STILL as through life's meandring path I stray,
Lord! be the sweet companion of my way;
A kind conductor to the blessed abode
Of light, of life, of happiness and God.
RELIGION's sacred lamp alone
Unerring, points the way,
Where happiness forever shines
With unpolluted ray.
Written on a Watch.
WERE but our minds, like this machine,
Unmoved by passion, or by spleen,
And, true to nature's guardian power,
Could mark, with goodness, every hour,
Then health and joy would follow too.
As laws of thought and motion do;
Sweet health to pass the moments over,
And joy when time shall be no more.
IT IS a contradiction to imagine, that reputation or praise is a suitable
recompense for virtue; since it is a reward that nothing but vanity can make
acceptable; it declares a man both foolish and vicious, that can be pleased and
satisfied with it; and that his merit is only owing to his pride

TRUE virtue, as it has no other aims than the service and honor of God, so
the least and only recompense it aspires to, is his approbation and favor.

MY God! my all-sufficient good!
My portion and my choice;
In thee are all my hopes renewed,
And all my powers rejoice.
GRANT me to live, and if I live, to find
The dear loved portion of a peaceful mind;
That health, that sweet content, that pleasing rest
Which God alone can give, as suits me best.
CHARITY.
CHARITY, decent, modest, easy, kind,
Softens the high, and rears the abject mind;
Knows with just reins, and gentle hand to guide,
Betwixt vile shame, and arbitrary pride.
Not soon provoked, she easily forgives;
And much she suffers, as she much believes;
Soft peace she brings wherever she arrives,
She builds our quiet, as she forms our lives;
Lays the rough paths of peevish nature even,
And opens in each heart a little Heaven.
THERE is no preservative from vice, equal to an habitual and constant
intercourse with God: Neither does any thing equally alleviate distress, or
heighten prosperity; in distress it sustains us with hope, and in prosperity it
adds to every other enjoyment, the delight of gratitude.

IN true good nature, there is neither the acrimony of spleen nor the
sullenness of malice; it is neither clamorous nor fretful, neither easy to be
offended, nor impatient to revenge; it is a tender sensibility, a participation
of the pains and pleasures of others, and is, therefore, a forcible and
constant motive, to communicate happiness, and alleviate misery.

IT should be a general rule, never to utter any thing in conversation, which
would justly dishonor us if it should be reported to the world.

TO a benevolent disposition, every state of life will afford some
opportunities of contributing to the welfare of mankind. Opulence and splendor
are enabled to dispel the cloud of adversity, to dry up the tears of the widow
and the orphan, and to increase the felicity of all around them. Their example
will animate virtue, and retard the progress of vice. And even indigence and
obscurity, though without power to confer happiness, may at least prevent misery,
and apprize those who are blinded by their passions, that they are on the brink
of irremediable calamity.

O REPUTATION! dearer far than life.
Thou precious balsam, lovely sweet of smell,
Whose cordial drops once spilt by some rash hand,
Not all thy owner's care, nor the repenting toil
Of the rude spoiler, ever can collect
To its first purity and native sweetness.
Solomon's good Wife paraphrased. Proverbs, 31st Chapter.
THE wife, in whose soft, faithful bosom, dwells
The mingled warmth of love and virtue's flame,
As much in worth the ruby's price excells,
As greatest merits highest honors claim.
On her the partner of her breast relies,
In her can fullest confidence repose,
Can even the pride and spoils of war despise,
For good, not ill, from all her conduct flows.
The wool and flax employ her willing hands,
And though domestic arts are most her care,
Yet, as the merchant-ship from distant lands
Brings precious freight, she brings her food from far.
Ever light she forces sleep's soft bands to yield,
And to her household gives refreshment due;
With careful earnings purchases a field,
And, still more wondrous, plants a vineyard too.
By daily use her arms their strength increase --
Her merchandise is good, she gladly finds;
And as by day her labors rarely cease,
By night her candle unextinguish'd shines.
Her liberal hand extends to all the poor,
Bestowing alms as different wants require;
Nor fears her household hardships may endure,
For they in scarlet boast a rich attire.
To cloathe herself she weaves gay tapestry,
Purple and silk the labor of her hand,
With which bedecked, her husband sits on high,
Distinguished 'midst the elders of the land.
Fine linen* also, by her art is made,
And girdles offered to the merchant's choice,
While she in strength and honor well arrayed,
Through times to come shall happily rejoice.
The law of kindness in her heart presides,
The words of wisdom from her lips distill,
A meek discretion through her household guides,
And duteous all their destined task fulfill.
Her children, rising up with grateful voice,
Pronounce her blessed, as love or prudence sways,
Her husband, conscious of his happy choice,
With pleasure joins their voluntary praise.
Though many wives, in this and ages past,
Of virtuous conduct bright examples shine,
Yet all to her, the first as well as last,
The palm of female excellence resign.
True as when spoke, remains the royal word,
"That favour's transient, and all beauty vain;"
But she who keeps his law, and fears the Lord,
Shall the just tribute of applause obtain.
WHEN we consider the different allotments of Providence to his creature man,
in this state of existence, and compare the wants and sufferings of some, with
the ease and affluence of others, we should be almost ready to conclude, that
the preserving care of our Heavenly Father, was not equally extended to all;
though he has assured us in scripture, that he is no respecter of persons; but
we must be very cautious of making such an inference; for as our Great Creator
sees not as we see, and has a view in all his dispensations to the ultimate
good of his creatures, we ought rather to suppose, that the particular
condition of every man, so far from being an impeachment of divine
impartiality, is alloted him in perfect wisdom, in order to his happiness at
last.

THE necessities of the poor may be intended as the most certain means of
preserving their health, and keeping them moral, temperate and humble, which
are great virtues. While the superfluities of the rich, by subjecting them to
many vices, may render the final account of their stewardship a matter of the
greatest anxiety and distress of mind, to which no temporal suffering can be
equivalent. Hence, if we consider present less grievous than future evil, it
will appear, in this comparative view of the higher and lower ranks of men,
that the difference is rather in favor of the latter, under all the pressures
and mortifications of poverty. -- Yet this is by no means to be used as an
argument by the opulent, for withholding assistance and support from their
fellow creatures, in real want of them; for humanity, and, the cardinal virtue,
charity, call upon and require all, who are able, to succor and relieve such
objects -- to which may be added, that this is a duty particularly enjoined by
our blessed Savior, who has told us, as a forcible incitement to the practice
of it, that such as give to the poor, lend to the Lord, which is telling us, in
other words, that by this means treasure is to be laid up in Heaven.

SIMPLICITY, the inseparable companion both of geniune grace, and of real
modesty, if it does not always strike at first (of which it seldom fails) is
sure, however, when it does strike, to produce the deepest and most permanent
impressions.

IN solitude I Will spend the day;
The sultry hour I Will pass away,
In calm retirement's seat;
Enraptured, snatch her peaceful joys,
While others court ambition's toys,
And study to be great.
THE BEGGAR.
"PITY the sorrows of a poor old man,
Whose trembling limbs have led him to your door;
Whose days are dwindled to the shortest span,
Oh! give relief, and Heaven shall bless your store.
These tattered rags my poverty bespeak,
These hoary locks proclaim my length of years,
And many a furrow, in my grief-worn cheek,
Has been the channel to a stream of tears.
You house erected on the rising ground,
With tempting aspect drew me from the road,
For plenty, there a residence has found,
And grandeur, a magnificent abode.
Hard is the case of the infirm and poor,
There begging for a morsel of their bread,
A pampered menial thrust me from the door,
To seek a shelter in an humbler shed.
Oh! take me to your hospitable dome,
Keen blows the wind, and pier^ing is the cold,
Short is my passage to the friendly tomb,
For I am miserably poor and old.
Heaven sends afflictions -- why should we repine?
Here happiness we never were born to see,
Too soon, alas! your lot may be like mine,
The child of sorrow and of misery.
Was I to tell the source of every grief.
If soft compassion ever touched your breast,
Your hand could not withhold the kind relief,
And tears of pity could not be represt.
A little farm was my paternal lot,
Then, like the lark, I sprightly hailed the morn,
But ah! oppression drove me from my cot,
My cattle died, and blighted was my corn.
My daughter, once the comfort of my age,
Lured by a villain, left her native home,
Is now abandoned on the world's wide stage,
And doomed in scanty poverty to roam.
My tender wife, sweet soother of my care,
With anguish felt the sore calamity,
Fell, lingering fell, a victim to despair,
And left the world, and wretchedness, to me.
Pity the sorrows of a poor old man,
Whose trembling limbs have led him to your door,
Whose days are dwindled to the shortest span,
Oh! give relief, and Heaven will bless your store."
EVERY thing, overdone, is liable to suspicion. Innocence, in women, wants not
the aid of ostentation; like integrity in men, it rests in its own
consciousness.

AS cheerfulness is the most natural effect of real goodness, it is also its
most powerful recommendation. Wisdom is never so attractive, as when she smiles.

SHE that cannot "weep with them that weep," as well as rejoice with them that
rejoice," is a stranger to one of the sweetest sources of enjoyment, no less
than to one of the noblest lessons of Christianity. Those are the happiest
dispositions, which are the best.

THERE is not any thing more contemptible, or more to be pitied, than that turn
of mind, which, finding no entertainment in itself, none at home, none in
books, none in rational conversation, nor in the intercourses of real
friendship, nor in ingenious works of any kind, is continually seeking to
stif^le reflection in a tumult of pleasures, and to divert weariness in a crowd.

FEMALE modesty is often silent; female decorum is never bold. Both forbid a
young woman to lead the conversation; and true religion dreads every thing that
might look ostentatious. The most prudent course you can pursue, is to
associate, as much as possible, with those that from real principle love the
shade.

IF thou would bear thy neighbor's faults, cast thine eye upon thine own.

THE truly humble man, suffers quietly, and patiently, internal troubles; and
he is the man that makes great way in a little ^^^ne, like one that sails
before the wind.

PERFECTION does not consist in teaching the truth, but in doing it, because he
is neither the greatest saint, nor the wisest man, that knows the truth most,
but he that practices it.

WHEN a young woman behaves to her parents in a manner particularly tender and
respectful, from principle as well as nature, their is nothing good or gentle,
that may not be expected from her, in whatever condition she is placed.

The unknown World -- On hearing a Passing Bell.
HARK, my gay friend, that solemn toll
Speaks the departure of a soul.
It Is gone -- that is all we know, not where,
Or how the unbody'd soul does fare.
In that mysterious world none knows,
But God alone to whom it goes;
To whom departed souls return
To take their doom, to smile or mourn.
Oh! by what glimmering light we view,
The unknown world we are hastening to.
Swift flies the soul -- perhaps it is gone
A thousand leagues beyond the sun;
Or twice ten thousand more thrice told,
Ere the forsaken clay is cold.
And yet who knows, if friend^ we loved,
Though dead, may be so far removed,
Only this vail of flesh between,
Perhaps they watch us, though unseen.
Whilst we their loss lamenting say,
They Are out of hearing far away,
Guardians to us, perhaps they are near,
Concealed in vehicles of air,
And yet no notices they give,
Nor tell us how or where they live.
Though conscious, while with us below,
How much themselves desired to know,
As if bound up by solemn fate,
To keep this secret of their state;
To tell their joys or pains to none,
That man might live by faith alone.
Well, let my Sovereign, if he please,
Lock up his mavelous decrees;
Why should I wish him to reveal
What he thinks proper to conceal?
It is enough that I believe
Heaven's brighter than I can conceive;
And he that makes it all his care
To serve God here, shall see him there.
But oh! what worlds shall I survey,
The moment that I leave this clay;
How sudden the surprise -- how new --
Let it, my God! be happy too!
FROM the consideration of God, as he is in himself power, wisdom, goodness,
beauty and felicity itself, children must be often exc^ted and stirred up to
the desire of esteeming him, of praising him, of honoring him as he deserves,
and of pleasing him in every thing. They must be made to understand, that this
is ^he principal end for which we are sent into the world, namely, to esteem,
honor and praise God, without ceasing, by the continual desires and elevations
of our hearts to him; and that, since this is the employment of angels, by
being exercised in it, we become their companions in this world, and even
fellow-citizens of Heaven with them, by imitating those divine spirits.

SINCE both the imagination and the memory, are faculties which have the most
strength, and most activity in children, it would be well to cultivate them
from the very beginning, that we may communicate unto them as much knowledge of
the things of their salvation, as is possible, and as they are capable of
receiving.

SILENCE is necessary on many occasions, but you must always be sincere and
courteous; You ought to retain some thoughts, but disguise none.

AND, from the prayer of want, and plaint of woe,
O! never, never, turn away thine ear;
Forlorn, in this bleak wilderness below,
Ah! what were man, should Heaven refuse to hear?
To others do (the law is not severe)
What to thyself thou wishest to be done;
Forgive thy foes, and love thy parents dear,
And friends and native land; nor those alone,
All human weal and woe learn thou to make thine own.
TRUE dignity is his, whose tranquil mind
Virtue has raised above the things below,
Who every hope and fear to Heaven resigned,
Shrinks not, though adverse w^nds may keenly blow.
WE should be cautious and circumspect in all our ways, and watchful over
ourselves, living in the fear of God all the day long, that we sin not against
him.

LET us all endeavor to be spiritually-minded, and set our affections on
things above; subdue our passions, be peaceable and loving, meek, courteous,
modest, teachable and governable, not wise in our own conceit, not wilful or
stubborn.

WE must be contented with our present condition, not murmuring or repining at
it, or either ambitiously or covetously seeking one more high or plentiful;
neither fretting and vexing our own souls, nor envying others; but leaving
freely all things to God's disposal, and submitting cheerfully to his
providence.

MAY we wisely improve every talent that God has given us; doing as much good
as we can with every thing, both to ourselves and others. We must shun sloth
and idleness, vain pastimes, and superfluous recreations, costly vanities,
unprofitable studies and employments.

IN the evening reason with thyself and say, how have I spent this day? Am I
better than I was yesterday? Have I overcome any vice? and has God's grace
been effectual in me? if it has, then let my soul rejoice exceedingly, and
ascribe to her Lord the glory of her good actions.

THE heart is the fountain, and our words are the streams; and if the fountain
be muddy, the streams proceeding from it, cannot be clear.

BE my ambition only to excel
In the blessed art, "the art of living well;"
Who this attains, bids sin and sorrow cease,
With hope looks Heav'n-ward, and shall die in peace.
ON A WATCH.
WHILE this gay toy attracts thy sight,
Thy reason let it warn;
And sieze, my dear, that rapid time,
That never must return.
If idly lost, no art or care
The blessing can restore,
And Heaven requires a strict account
For every misspent hour.
Short is our longest day of life,
And soon its prospect ends,
Yet on that day's uncertain date
Eternity depends.
Yet equal to our being's aim
The space to virtue given;
And every minute, well improved,
Secures an age in Heaven.
YIELDING to immoral pleasures, corrupts the mind; living to animal and
trifling ones, debases it; both, in their degree, disqualify it for its genuine
good, and consign it over to wretchedness. Whoever would be really happy, must
make the diligent and regular exercise of his superior powers his chief
attention, adoring the perfections of his Maker, expressing good will to his
fellow creatures, and cultivating inward rectitude.

THE greatest honor you can pay to the author of your being, is by such a
cheerful behavior, as discovers a mind satisfied with his dispensations.

THE scripture says, we are to forgive until seventy times seven; that is,
perpetually, those who do repent; and those who do not repent, but persist in
injuring us, we are to pray for, and be willing to do acts of charity and
humanity to them, when need requires; and not to revenge, but much rather to
desire their amendment, and by all reasonable means promote reconciliation.

ONE part, one little part, we dimly scan,
Through the dark medium of life's fev'rish dream,
Yet dare arraign the whole stupendous plan,
If but that little part incongruous seem. --
Nor is that part perhaps what mortals deem;
Often from apparent ill our blessings rise;
Oh! then, renounce that impious, self-esteem,
For thou art but of dust; be humble, and be wise.
GOODNATURE is not of less importance to ourselves than to others. The morose
and petulant first feel the anguish that they give: Reproach, revilings and
invective, are but the overflowings of their own infelicity, and are constantly
again forced back upon their source.

The Ten Commandments.
RENOUNCE all other Gods, but only me,
And to no image bow thy heart or knee.
Take not the awful name of God in vain,
Nor ever his holy sabbath day profane.
Honor thy parents, and thou long shall live,
Commit not murder, but all wrongs forgive.
From filthy lusts, keep soul and body free,
Nor steal, though pressed by dire necessity.
Against thy neighbor, never false witness bear,
Nor covet goods, in which thou have no share.
From Pope's Essay on Man.
LO, the poor Indian! whose untutored mind
Sees God in clouds, or hears him in the wind;
His soul proud science never taught to stray
Far as the solar walk, or milky way;
Yet simple nature to his hope has given
Behind the cloud-topt hill, an humbler Heaven;
Some safer world in depth of woods embraced,
Some happier island in the watery waste,
Where slaves once more their native land behold,
No fiends torment, no Christians thirst for gold.
To be content's his natural desire,
He asks no angel's wing, no seraph's fire,
But thinks, admitted to that equal sky,
His faithful dog shall bear him company.
SO much have our common pursuits, which we plead as the means of supporting
life, diverted men from the true ends for which they were sent into the world,
that the judicious and pious, in all ages, since the time of Solomon, have
readily subscribed to his opinion, that all of them are indeed "vanity and
vexation of spirit." For we find there are some who spend their whole time in
grammar and rhetoric, or in learning to speak well, without allowing themselves
any leisure to study the more important concern of living well.

Others there are, who are so busy in finding out the riddles of a logical
sphinx, that they examine all the trifles and impertinencies of reason, to find
out what reason is, and in the search thereof, oftentimes lose themselves and
their reason too.

There are many, who, by arithmetic, learn to divide every thing into the most
minute fractions, and yet do not know how to divide an halfpenny with a poor
afflicted brother in the way of charity.

Many there are, who, by the help of geometry, can set limits to grounds, and
separate them from one another* can measure cities and countries, and yet
cannot attain to any rule whereby they are enabled to measure themselves.

The musician can bring different voices and tones into one harmony, and yet
all the while may have nothing that is harmonious in his own mind; nothing,
which, by reason of its perturbation, does not run counter to all musical
measures.

The astronomer, whilst with fixed eyes he looks up to Heaven, and attentively
views the motion of the stars, very frequently stumbles into the next ditch;
and while he is fortelling things to come, loses those that are present; for
though with fixed eyes he looks up to Heaven, yet his mind is too much darkened
and defiled with the mire of this world, to think of a better.

The philosopher disputes gravely and accurately, of the nature of things, and
yet, perhaps, is no wiser than a real child, as to the nature of himself, and
the things of Heaven.

The physician takes care of the health of others, but as to the knowledge of
the diseases of his own mind, may be as blind as a beetle; he diligently
watches the variations of his patient's pulse, but how to cure the evil
dispositions, and wrong tempers, in himself, he knows and cares but little
about them.

The historian has the Theban and Trojan wars at his fingers ends, but is
almost wholly ignorant of a much higher concern, the proper knowledge of
himself.

The lawyer, though he has spent whole years in the construction and exposition
of human laws, for the government of others, is too often but little acquainted
with that divine law which teaches and enjoins a strict government over his own
actions.

The theologist, earnestly contends for, and disputes about faith, but too
seldom thinks of charity; he speaks much of God, but to help his neighbor in
time of need, has too little concern.

The merchant is very solicitous of gain from every port to which he can extend
his trade, or in which he can obtain credit -- yet seldom troubles his head in
establishing a correspondence with that happy country, which offers the richest
merchandise -- that neither moth can corrupt, or thieves have power to steal.

The farmer, though daily exercised with much toil and fatigue, in breaking up
and improving the most stubb^^^ and rugged soils, with a view to a beneficial
crop, yet how does he neglect, year after year, to break up and improve the
barren soil of his own heart, which, without equal care and cultivation, will
never produce that crop of good works, which makes truly rich, and adds no
sorrow.

Arts and sciences do indeed weary the minds of men with continual labor, but
yield them no true felicity.

It is religion, only, can regulate the heart -- it causes it to melt in
sympathy with distress, or to glow with pleasure at the happiness of another --
it is that alone can harmonize the mind, "Attuning all its passions into peace."

The astronomer, if enlightened by it, must contemplate, with wonder and
admiration, those luminaries which his eye so often gazes on with pleasure. The
philosopher too, when the wonders of nature are opened to his view, with what
adoration and gratitude must he look to that great source from whence they
flow! And in all professions, how imperfect is man unless illumined by the
bright rays of religion, which, like the glorious luminary, the sun, will
enlighten all our paths.

HYMN.
THE Lord my pasture shall prepare,
And feed me with a shepherd's care;
His presence shall my wants supply,
And guard me with a watchful eye;
My noonday walks he shall attend,
And all my midnight hours defend.
2.
When in the sultry glebe I faint,
Or on the thirsty mountain pant,
To fertile vales, and dewy meads,
My weary, wandering steps he leads,
Where peaceful rivers, soft and slow,
Amid the verdant landscape flow.
3.
Though in the paths of death I tread
With gloomy horrors overspread,
My steadfast heart shall fear no ill,
For thou, O Lord! art with me still;
Thy friendly crook shall give me aid,
And guide me through the dreadful shade.
4.
Though in a bare and rugged way,
Through devious, lonely wilds I stray,
Thy beauty shall my pains beguile --
The barren wilderness shall smile,
With sudden greens and herbage crowned,
And streams shall murmur all around.
NO thought is beautiful, which is not just; and no thought can be just, which
is not founded in truth.

WE are apt to fancy, that we shall be happy and satisfied, if we possess
ourselves of such and such particular enjoyments; but either by reason of their
emptiness, or the natural inquietude of the mind, we have no sooner gained one
point, but we extend our hopes to another. We still find new inviting scenes
and landscapes, lying behind those which at a distance terminated our view.

IF we hope for what we are not likely to possess, we act and think in vain,
and make life a greater dream and shadow than it really is.

An Autumnal Reflection.
In fading grandeur, lo! the trees
Their tarnish'd honor shed;
While every leaf-compelling breeze
Lays their dim verdure dead.
Ere' while they shot a vigorous length,
Of flowers, and fruit, and green;
Now, shorn of beauty and of strength,
They stand a shattered scene!
Ere' long the genial breath of spring
Shall all their charms renew;
And flowers, and fruit, and foliage bring,
All pleasing to the view!
Thus round and round the seasons roll,
In one harmonious course,
And pour convictions on the foul
With unremitting force.
Not such is mans's appointed fate --
One spring alone he knows!
One summer, one autumnal state,
One winter's dead repose.
Yet, not the dreary sleep of death,
Shall ever his powers destroy,
But man shall draw immortal breath
In endless pain or joy.
Important thought! -- oh mortal! hear
On what thy peace depends;
The voice of truth invites thine ear,
And this the voice she sends.
"When virtue glows with youthful charms,
How bright the vernal skies!
When virtue like the summer warms,
What golden harvests rise!"
When vices spring without control,
What bitter fruits appear!
A wi^^ry darkness wraps the soul
And horrors close the year.
Let youth to virtue's shrine-repair,
And men their tribute bring,
Old age shall lose its load of care,
And death shall lose its sting.
Borne upwards on seraphic wing,
Their happy souls shall soar,
And there enjoy eternal spring,
Nor fear a winter more.
THERE is nothing in nature unworthy of a wise man's regard, because the most
inferior of all her productions, may, in some light or another, be made
instrumental to his improvement.

THERE is such a close affinity between a proper cultivation of a flower garden,
and a right discipline of the mind, that it appears difficult for a rightly
thoughtful person, that has made any proficiency in the one, to avoid paying a
due attention to the other. That industry and care which are so requisite to
cleanse a garden from all sorts of weeds, will naturally suggest to him how
much more expedient it would be to exert the same diligence in eradicating all
sorts of prejudices, follies and vices, from the mind, where they will be as
sure to prevail, without a great deal of care and correction, as common weeds
in a neglected piece of ground. And as it requires more pains to extirpate some
weeds than others, according as they are more firmly fixed, more numerous, or
more naturalized to the soil; so those faults will be found the most difficult
to be suppressed, which have been of the longest growth, and taken the deepest
root; which are more predominate in number, and most congenial to the
constitution.

IF our common life is not a common course of humility, self-denial,
renunciation of the world, poverty of spirit, and Heavenly affection, we do not
live the lives of Christians.

WEAK and imperfect men, shall, notwithstanding their frailties and defects, be
received, as having pleased God, if they have done their utmost to please him.

THE rewards of charity, piety and humility, will be given to those whose lives
have been a careful labor to exercise these virtues in as high a degree as
they could.

VALUE no man but for his probity, and living up to the rules of piety and
justice. If integrity does not make you prosperous, it will at least keep you
from being miserable; for no man can be truly religious, that is not likewise
conscientiously just and honest.

A SOUND faith is the best divinity; a good conscience the best law; and
temperance the best physic.

A Soliloquy on Death.
TO die, is but to take a last farewell
Of life, and all its transitory cares;
To close our eyes and shut out day forever.
Thus much we know: And that this frail existence
Shall to its sister earth again return,
To pulverize, and be dissolved to naught.
To die (however awful seems the sound)
Is but to lay us peaceful down to rest,
Sink into sleep, and waken in eternity.
Whence then proceeds this coward fear of death,
These conscience-working pangs, that plague us all,
And make us sink, even to the grave itself,
At the bare mention? Has not that Great Cause,
The Eternal One, whose wisdom cannot err,
From the beginning of the earliest time,
Declared, that man and all his race, should die?
It Is the essential passport that must bring
(No matter when, or how, or soon, or late)
All nature to that never-ending state,
Which immortality alone can give.
The soul, then, as instructed from above,
Soon as it quits its lifeless, clay-cold corse,
Mounts on the borrowed silver plumes of Heaven,
Through chequ'ring clouds, and soars above the stars.
But, oh! who dare enquire its fate decreed?
For Heaven that knowledge interdicts to man,
And stupifies the busy, wandering sense,
That may attempt this secret to explore.
GRANT I may ever, at the morning ray,
Open with prayer the consecrated day;
Tune thy great praise, and bid my soul arise,
And with the mounting sun ascend the skies;
As that advances, let my zeal improve,
And glow with ardour of consummate love;
Nor cease at eve, but with the setting sun
My endless worship shall be still begun.
Extract from young's last Day.
HAVE angels sinned, and shall not man beware?
How shall a son of earth decline the snare?
Not folded arms, and slackness of the mind,
Can promise for the safety of mankind:
None are supinely good: Through care and pain,
And various toils, the steep ascent we gain.
This is the scene of combat, not of rest,
Man's is laborious happiness at best;
On this side death his dangers never cease,
His joys are joys of conquest, crowned with peace.
JUST PUBLISHED, [Price Eight Shillings and Four-Pence] AND TO BE SOLD BY
JOSEPH JAMES, AT HIS Printing-Office, In Chesnut-Street, between Front and
Second-Streets, SCRIPTURE TRUTHS DEMONSTRATED, In Thirty-Two Sermons, by
STEPHEN CRISP; Together with his Prayers after Sermon. Carefully taken in
Characters or Shorthand, as they were delivered by him, at the Public
Meeting Houses of the People called QUAKERS, in and about London. The important
Truths contained in this Collection, must render it highly interesting to the
sober Enquirer.

HE HAS ALSO FOR SALE, A VARIETY OF SCHOOL BOOKS, AMONG WHICH ARE, Corderius,
Philadelphia Vocabulary, Rudiman's Rudiments, Webster's Institute, etc. with a
small, though valuable Collection of Books, suitable for an elegant and
well-chosen Library; among the Selection are -- Milton's Paradise Lost,
Goldsmith's animated Nature, Gibbon's Decline of the Roman Empire, Rollin's
ancient and Roman History, etc. etc.

JESSE WATERMAN, Bookseller and Stationer, In Third, between Market and
Arch-Streets, HAS FOR SALE, A large and general Assortment of Books and
Stationary, -- VIZ --
SCHOOL Bibles, and others; Testaments, Spelling-Books, by various Authors;
Webster's Institute of the English Grammar, a neat Edition; Buchanan's Syntax,
Ash's Introduction to the English Grammar, Ellwood's Davidies, Fisher's Young
Man's Companion and Arithmetic; Dilworth's Arithmetic, Mair's Book-Keeping,
Atkinson's Epitome of Navigation, Robertson's Navigation, Chapone's Letters on
the Improvement of the Mind, Entic's Pocket Dictionary and Spelling-Book;
Manson's Pocket Dictionary, adapted to Sheridan's Pronunciation; also Latin
Books for Schools, such as Rudiman's Rudime^; a Latin Grammar for the Use of
the University and Aca^emy of Pennsylvania; Corderius, Cicero's Offices and
Orations, Ovid's Metamorphosis, etc. Writing Paper, of various Kinds and Sizes,
wrapping ditto of the best Quality; Day-Books, Journals, Ledgers, Invoices and
Letter Books, of various Sizes, suited to Merchant's Compting-Houses; likewise
cyphering and copy Books, ready made for Schools; London and American
Ink-Powder; ready made Ink, in Bottles or by the Gill; Sealing-Wax and Wafers;
Slates and Pencils; best English Quills, Ink-Stands, best Penknives and
Scissars, etc. etc. blank Bonds, Bills of Lading, Bills of Exchange,
Apprentice's and Servant's Indentures, Carey Bills, etc. likewise a number of
Stephen Crisp's Sermons, lately printed in Philadelphia, by the Dozen or
single; American Museum, and the Columbian Magazine (monthly publications) also
Scott's spelling Dictionary, and Bell's British Poets, 109 Vol.

THE Book-Binding Business, Likewise carried on in the neatest Manner.


