THE RETURNED CAPTIVE. A POEM FOUNDED ON A LATE-FACT.

Among the free, aerial, warbling Race,
The artless Robin holds a humble (...):
Unskilled to pour the soul encha^^^^^ Lay,
^et aids the Chorus, from his (...) Spray,
And claims as well the Music of the Shade
As shriller Birds, in gayer Plumes arrayed.
HUDSON. Printed by ASHBEL STODDARD. M.DCC.LXXXVII.

THE Returned Captive.
William welcomes his friend John on his return from nine years captivity with
his child. John relates his wife's late marriage with another; her great
perplexity, fondness of the child, affection for him, and preference of him.
FAR in the winding valleys calm retreat
Industrious William holds his tranquil seat;
Despising pomp; of needful store possessed:
In wife, in children, friends, and neighbors blessed.
When Sirius last exerted all his force,
And Sol had journey'd half his da^ly course,
For noon repast his table they prepa^e,
A dainty meal of summer's choicest fare:
Then Watch, his ^aithful centry at the door,
Pricked up his ears, and loud began to roar.
Cries William, lo! what wonder strikes my eyes!
From shades of death does neighbor John arise?
Ingenious John! whose death we vainly mourned,
From nine long years captivity returned!
Thrice welcome John! while joy his voice surpress'd,
He said; and ardent seized him to his breast;
To break the silence each essayed in vain,
And tears of joy descend like showers of rain.
Then to salute him each in turn came nigh;
The briny dew descends from every eye;
(More grateful welcome, to a generous mind
Than all the forms of complaisance refined!)
Affecting scene! a pause of silence reigns,
That sympathetic feeling best explains.
William at length with feeble utt'rance cries,
And do thou live! and do thou bless my eyes!
We, since the bloody fight, have thought thee dead,
And for thee many bitter tears have shed.
Compose your throbbing bosom and relate
If ought you know of little Nelly's fate:
And how your presence operates at home,
For, by your course, from there you seemed to come.
John slowly then his answer thus addressed;
What various passions labor in my breast!
To see you I dissolve in joys excess;
But my domestic woes you well may guess!
My Nelly is returned, from regions wild:
I savage hands, I found my darling child:
I, with emotions quite unknown before,
With her this morning entered at my door:
My extacy improved my Phebe's charms,
Who, screeching, threw herself into my arms;
We eagerly prolong the fond embrace,
And silent tears descend from either face:
The dear extatic scene no words can show,
And none but by experiment can know.
Then I present her Nelly to her view,
Who now by certain marks alone she knew;
The child with melting ardour she caressed;
Dissolved in transport held her to her breast.
And yet it seemed my eye could plainly trace
Some bitter agitation in her face.
Now to my neighbor Charles I gave my hand,
Who seemed in discomposure strange to stand;
But when his lips declare the dreadful tale
With horror chilled my feeble sinews fail!
My charming fair! my soul's delight and pride!
No longer mine; but Charles's wedded bride!
Inured to woes of almost every kind,
Naught else methought could have depressed my mind;
My fundamental comfort from me torn,
The world appeared a wilderness forlorn!
I sat me down, with dumb amazement pressed,
Contending passions boiling in my breast;
My wife's inconstancy at length reprove,
And angrily upbraid the fair I love.
Then she, pale, trembling, with a piteous air,
My dearest spouse awhile your censure spare!
Hear my defense (I sink with woe oppressed)
Nor more, but fainting, leaned upon my breast:
In livid paleness cold, and void of breath,
Her eyes were fixed, as in the sleep of death:
Remorse, love, pity, all my bosom tear.
While on her couch I place the breathless fair:
For her recov'ry every measure tried;
While deedless Charles remained as petrified.
And now she almost seemed to gain her breath:
Now seemed declining, near the verge of death:
But when her vital warmth returned apace,
From sweat profuse, I gently wiped her face.
Then she at length reviving, turned her head
And with a melting look, she sweetly said:
Was it, my John, your kind officious care,
Recalled my spirit to the vital air:
With joy I see you still regard your wife;
Who cannot cease to love you more than life.
When William came, your fate to let me know,
And though in tears, yet strove to soothe my woe:
How could I doubt? for to confirm the news,
He bro't your stockings, writings, coat, and shoes;
Bought by Skenevus, in the fatal wood;
From him who boasted he had shed your blood.
Each foll'wing circumstance confirmed the same:
Letters, returns of war, and common fame,
By all with utmost confidence believed,
Till I this morning your approach perceived.
My woes to tell, would be a grievous tale!
My spirits at the recollection fail!
A pause ensues, and tears of silence flow:
Then she again resumes her strain of woe.
My sorrow pierced my soul with deadly smart:
I mourned in bitter anguish of my heart:
My spouse no more, and every comfort ^led:
My tears bedewed my solitary bed:
Your cruel slaughter on my spirit preys,
Long wakeful nights, and melancholy days.
At length the foe, by frequent inroads wide,
Spread fire and slaughter round, on every side,
When by their flight I lose my choicest friends,
Each to his own his whole attention bends;
Forlorn, abandoned, wretched, was my case!
Destruction yawning, star'd me in the face!
No sustenance to take! nor power to fly!
My own, and tender daughter's fa^e seemed nigh!
Now happily did our neighbor James appear;
With wife and family he sheltered here;
Too poor to journey from his native place,
Among strangers to support his numerous race;
Together long in safety we abide,
By slaught'ring bands alarmed on every side.
But when I lost my dear, my only child,
With sorrow stung, with dire distraction wild,
I bid adieu to every comfort here:
No hope remained, nor ought remained to fear:
My spirits failed: my wa^sting frame decayed:
While death invoked in vain, withheld his aid*
But fortitude at length on misery grows,
And ours abate by seeing others woes:
So time in part assuag'd my grief again;
As reason reasum'd her wonted reign:
And numerous instances around the land,
Of neighbors murdered by the vengeful hand;
Where children, matron, husband, aged sire,
By unrelenting slaughterers expire,
Made me forget my private grief in part;
While sympathetic horror filled my heart:
Such was my case while circling seasons roll,
The recollection rankles in my soul.
And now at length the bloody contest ends:
Again I see my dear returning friends;
James, and his family recross the plain;
In solitude I sit me down again;
No husband, friend, nor sire, to till my land,
'Till Charles atlength extends the helping hand.
To hymenial bands he wooed me long,
With tender care and importuning tongue:
Long time his suit I firmly did withstand,
But through advice I lately gave my hand:
William advised the deed; of him inquire:
Your heart with love and pity, he will inspire;
As your return my melting soul does move,
And lights up more than all my former love.
Charles interrupting angrily replies,
Ungrateful woman! fickle, and unwise!
Does his return your love of me destroy?
And must my absence then complete your joy?
Know John you cannot hunt me from the place,
Like guilty fugitive, or fellon base;
But if my presence much offend your eyes;
As none a rival's company can prize,
Go visit William, once your dearest friend;
This afternoon I Will also there attend;
In him no partiality has place:
On his arbitrament I Will risk the case.
When with returning strength my Phebe rose,
To shun his presence, with his terms I close:
For though my soul adores the blameless fair;
What husband can a rival husband bear?
You know the case, then William frank replies,
None was to blame, none need apologize;
Though for this sad event, your grief I share;
Your faithful spouse the error will repair,
And though your rival's lot must galling be,
Her choice is final, and her will is free.
And now they dine, the table richly stored;
Their guest partakes the dainties of their board,
His soul revived, his failing strength increased,
And social conversation crowns the feast.
They sated rose when Sol, with potent ray,
Two hours had journey'd on his evening way;
Then William, smiling on his welcome guest,
These words with free benevolence expres'd;
Since we, beyond our utmost hope, obtain
The happiness of seeing you again,
We yield this evening, with attentive ear,
Your interesting narative to hear;
Nor will it your tranquillity destroy,
For mis'ries wholly past are present joy.
Says John, though pleasant it is to know them past,
The dread ideas will forever last;
When silent night her sable curtain spreads,
And balmy sleep his kind oblivion sheds,
Their images horrific rise in view,
And all the frightful tragedy renew;
To shun the torturing hand I screeching rise;
In terror wake, and sleep forsakes my eyes.
Yet, as my case in circumstanc'd to day*
The tale may urge the troubled hours away.
John relates the bloody fight in which he was taken. The following massacre
and sufferings of the prisoners.
THE time, and place of our unhappy fight,
To you at large were needless to recite:
When in the wood our fierce inhuman foes,
With piercing yell from circling ambush rose:
A sudden volley rends the vaulted sky;
Their painted bodies hideous to the eye;
They rush, like hellish furies on our bands,
Their slaughter weapons brandished in their hands.
Then we with equal fury join th^^ fight,
Ever Phoebus gained his full meridian height:
Nor ceased the horrors of the bloody fray,
Till he had journey'd half his evening way.
Now hand to hand, the contest is for life,
With bay'net, tom'kawk, sword, and scalping knife:
Now more remote the work of death we ply,
And thick as ha^l the show'ring bullets fly:
Full many a hardy warrior sinks supine,
Yells, shrieks, groans, shouts, and thundering vollies join;
The dismal din the ringing forest fills,
The sounding echo roars along the hills.
Our friends and foes lie struggling in their blood,
An undistinguished carnage strews the wood;
And every streamlet drinks the crimson flood.
True valor, stubbornness, and fury here,
There fell revenge, despair and spite appear;
Long raged surrounding death, and no deliverance near,
While mangled friends, nor fated yet to die,
Implore our aid in vain with feeble cry.
Of two departments were the assailing fo^^
Wild savage natives lead the first of those;
Their almost naked frames, of various dies,
And rings of black, and red, surround their eyes:
On one side they present a shaven head;
The naked half of the vermillion red;
In spots the party-colored face they drew,
Beyond description horrible to view;
Their ebon looks in braid, with paint over spread;
The sliver'd ears depending from the head;
Their gaudry my descriptive power exceeds,
In plumes of feathers, glittering plates, and beeds.
With them of parricides a bloody band,
Assist the ravage of their parent land:
With equal dress, and arms, and savage arts;
But more than savage rancour in their hearts.
These for the first attack their force unite;
And most sustain the fury of the sight;
Their rule of warfare, devastation dire,
By undistinguished plunder, death, and fire;
They torture man and beast, with barbarous rage,
Nor tender infant spare, nor reverend sage.
Over them a horrid monster bore command,
Whose inauspicious birth disgraced our land,
By malice urged to every barbarous art;
Of cruel temper; but of coward heart.
The second was a reneg^^^ crew,
Who arm, and dress as Christian nations do,
Led by a chief who bore the first command;
A bold invader of his native land.
Such was the bloody fight: and such the foe:
Our smaller force returned them blow for blow,
By turns successfully their force defied;
And conquest wavering seemed from side to side.
But on the horrid fight I dwell no more,
Which from returning friends you have heard before,
At length too far advent'ring from the ground,
The savages encircled me around:
Each grisly monster drew his bloody dart;
My hair stood up and terror froze my heart:
To one I yield, a chief of vissage mild;
The aged chief receives me as his child,
Repressed the fury of the circling band,
And warded every blow with guardian hand:
While I, aghast, and shivering at their sight,
To my deliv'rer clung with mortal fright.
(...) neighbors gasping lay;
Their (...), and scalps, with fury torn away;
(...) whose (...) the ground*
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
There woven boughs repel the scorching ray;
A hemlock shade impervious to the day;
To them the generous fire resigned me over,
Nor took my arms, nor plundered ought I wore.
(And when a monster of the associate band,
To shed my blood had raised his cruel hand,
He raised his tomax at the barbarous foe,
The dastard fled, to shun the threat'ned blow.)
Then tenderly he shook me by the hand;
Nor longer chose to leave his subject band;
His face, that spoke benignity unfeigned,
Unlike the rest, its native hue retained.
To him my watch and ri^^e, I bestow,
While tears of gratitude in silence flow;
And now with nimble hands my clothes they share;
My drawers and my shirt alone they spare;
They bind my hands and triumph in my woes,
With imprecations, taunts, and cruel blows.
A number more of naked prisoners came,
Their stripes and cruel treatment was the same.
Soon came a savage troop, with horrid cries;
With bleeding wounds, and vengeance in their eyes,
Like panthers on the helpless prisoners fly,
Regardless of their agonizing cry.
Just then an officer rejoiced my eyes,
Of whom I begged my life with fervent cries;
He sent his sergeant, who unbound my hands,
And safely led me through the hostile bands.
Toward the British camp we took our way
And heard, with growing din, the battle bray.
A silver current down the valley strays,
Where late the feathered warblers tuned their lays;
But now in silence took their air^ flight,
To shun the clamor of the coming ^ight.
As this we passed, along the shady brink,
A panting motley crew reclined to drink;
There underneath an aged trunk of pine,
Where clust'ring ivies in^erweaving twine,
A wounded prisoner who had stole away.
In silent safety undiscovered lay;
But seeing, now the bloody foe so nigh,
He frighted supplicates the powers on high:
His prayers too loud, his hiding place betray;
With hideous yell they tear his scalp away.
They left him and returned to join the fight,
He struggled long, then rose at length upright;
I slowly walked before my guardian guide,
The bloody victim halting at my side;
At length he faintly realing to and fro,
A passing savage gave the final blow.
Then next we pass a gloomy thicket near,
(The distant battle sounding in the ear)
There sat the premier of the scalping bands,
His head reclining on his trembling hands;
He fierce menaces vents, with brow severe,
And villain, dog and rebel, fill my ear;
But I proceeded with my friendly guide,
Nor answered aught, nor turned my head aside.
Soon we o'ertook a herd of black, and white,
Who bore a wounded officer from fight:
Another guard, with prisoners I espy,
Of piteous aspect, shocking to the eye;
The wounded chief with vengeful threats severe,
Decreed the slaughter of the prisoners near:
Our guards who scarce prevent (...) horrid deed,
Advancing left the motley herd with speed.
And now the British camp appears at last!
Our souls exult to think our dangers past;
With sullen strut, a towering chief appears;
His bitter imprecations stu^ our ears:
We pass whole crowds of officers among,
Infernal rebel! sounds from every tongue.
The guard received us in the open wood;
With toil exhausted, faint for lack of food;
The briars my painful, naked limbs had torn;
My bleeding feet the rugged way had worn.
Pro^^ on the earth, my misery I deplore,
The tragic scene at leisure ponder over;
Then recollect with agitation wild,
My dear unhappy spouse, and darling child,
In though it my peaceful home, and neighbors rise,
The briny current trickling from my eyes.
Descending Phoebus now with milder blaze,
Darts through the western wood his evening rays;
The combatants returning, 'camp around;
With yells and shouts, the ringing woods resound.
Not half the savages returned from fight;
They to their native wilds had sped their flight;
Those that remained a long encampment made,
And rising fires illumined all the shade:
In vengeance for their numerous brothers slain,
For torture sundry prisoners they retain;
And three fell monsters, horrible to view,
A fellow prisoner from the centries drew:
The guards before received their chief's comm^nd,
To not withhold us from the slaughtering band;
But now the sufferer's fate they sympathize,
And for him supplicate with earnest cries.
I saw the General slowly passing by,
The sergeant on his knees, with tearful eye,
Implored the guards might wrest him for their hands,
Since now the troops could awe their lessened bands;
With lifted cane the General thus replies,
(While indignation sparkles from his eyes)
" Go, sirrah! mind your orders given before!
And for infernal rebels plead no more!"
For help the wretched victim vainly cries,
With supplicating voice and ardent eyes;
With horror chilled, I turn away my face,
While instantly they bear him from the place.
Dread scene! with anguish stung ^^iely groan,
To think the next hard lot may be my own:
And now I poring (...) now sudden start,
Through anxious agitation of my heart;
In every bush the coming foe appear,
Their sound in every breeze I seem to hear.
Nocturnal shades at length involve the sky,
The planets faintly glimmer from on high;
When through the grove the flaming fires arise,
And loud resound the tortured prisoners cries;
Still as their pangs are more or less extreme,
The bitter groan is heard, or sudden scream:
But when their natures failed, and death drew near,
Their screeches faintly sounded in the ear.
Tremendous night of woe beyond compare!
I beg for death, in anguish of despair;
No gleam of hope! no rest my soul could find;
Approaching torture gnawing on my mind;
Until Aurora purpled over the skies,
Then gentle slumber sealed awhile my eyes;
But troubled dreams arising in my head,
My fancy to the scene of battle led;
The fatal wood, my weeping eyes survey,
Where pale in death my slaughtered neighbors lay:
A long adieu, I cried, my brethren slain!
No more to joy my longing soul again!
Who shall protect your wives, with guardian care,
And babes abandoned to the rage of war?
Decrepit parents, with the feeble groan,
Shall wail your fate, their country's, and their own;
While, lost to all, you here unburied lay,
To feast the ravens and the beasts of prey;
Yet, by your slaughter, safe arrived on shore,
The storms of war shall break your peace no more;
Each honest soul your memory shall revere;
And pay the tribute of a tender tear:
O had I too partook your calm repose!
In safe retreat, beyond the power of foes,
I had avoided, by a milder fate,
Dread horrors past! and tortures that await.
Now from this awful region of the dead
To shores unknown, my vagrant fancy led,
Beside a flood profound I seemed to lie,
Whose raging waters were of sable die;
Far on the other shore my Phebe rose,
In garments white as hyperborean snows,
Divinely fair, with looks of melting love,
Her lilly hand she beck'ning seemed to move,
With open arms, and heavenly smiles of face,
As to anticipate the dear embrace.
There smiling nature shone in vernal bloom,
And zephyrs hither wafted sweet perfume,
My spirit wings its flight to yonder shore!
Some friendly shallop thither waft me over!
Methought a rugged hilloc was my bed;
A rocky fragment underneath my head;
A bloody savage crew beside me stood;
Behind me lay a howling desert wood;
There hollow winds, in lamentable strain,
Along the naked wilderness complain;
And waves with dismal roarings never sleep
Along the dreary margin of the deep.
As towered the savages I turn my eye,
My little Nelly slaughtered I espy,
And as the hand is raised my life to take,
With sudden start from slumber I awake.
Is then, I cried, my charming spouse no more?
I come, my love, to yonder peaceful shore!
But shall my child be slain by bloody bands?
And must I thither go through slaught'ring hands?
Assist me heaven to leave this dreary shore,
The fable flood in peace conduct me over.
Thus, while I muse, the tears began to flow;
The friendly current seemed to soothe my woe.
The clamorous drums now unregarded roll;
But soon the savage howlings pierce my soul:
From lethargy of grief I starting rise;
On every side with terror turn my eyes.
So passed each tedious day and watchful night*
My soul exhausted with continual fright;
No sign of safety to abate my fears,
And frequent cries of torture in my ears;
Our naked frames no clothing were allowed,
Musquetoes, gnats, and flies in millions crowd;
By parricides menaced in bitter strain;
And often drenched by sudden showers of rain:
The heaven our canopy; the earth our bed;
Four days and nights, on leaves and roots we fed.
Through famine now all tender feelings fly;
Benevolence forsakes the failing eye;
With hunger wild; by social love forsook;
We from each other turn, with savage look;
At length a scant allowance we obtain;
Our failing strength in part returns again.
Long days and nights, thus wretched, we abide;
By famine pinched; by danger terrified;
Impending torture gnawing on our hearts;
Our prospect still no ray of hope imparts.
Yet often my winged soul excursive flew,
And brought my charming Phebe to my view;
My blooming child, and friends, in fancy rise,
Now ever banished from my longing eyes,
This sighs heartrending, from my bosom drew,
And from my eyes distilled the briny dew.
Now, taught by hunger, wooden spoons I made,
And sold them to the guards for bits of bread;
This failing oftentimes, I sought supply,
By supplication, from he passers by,
Nor can I ever that soldier cease to bless,
Who with me often shared his scanty mefs.
What rests untold I banish from my mind;
In human stripes, and ills of various kind,
While days of woe ^^ng tedious on my soul,
And through the long, long nights, the anxious moments roll.
John continues his narration. The British resign him to torturers. His escape.
His capture by other Indians. Led to their country. Run^ ^he gantlet. Escapes
again.
NOW did the dreadful morn at length arise,
And Sol through mists reluctant climbed the skies,
When savages, for horrid sport prepared,
Demand another prisoner from the guard.
We saw their feared approach, with mortal fright,
Their scalping-knives they sharpened in our sight,
^eside the guard they sat them on the ground,
and viewed, with piercing eyes, the prisoners round;
when a panther grim, with furious eye,
^^rveys the tender lad he dooms to die;
(...) lad beholds him, shivering with affright,
(...) all resistance vain; despairs of flight:
They on me their glaring eye balls roll:
such the feelings of my shudd'ring soul.
^ength one rising seized me by the hand;
^im drawn forth, on trembling knees I stand;
(...) my fellows all a long adieu,
(...) answ'ring grief, my wretched case they view.
They led me bound, along the winding flood,
(...) in the gloomy bosom of the wood,
^^ere (horrid sight!) a prisoner roasted lay,
(...) carving-knife had cut his flesh away.
Against a tree erect I there was bound,
While they regaled themselves upon the ground;
Their shell of spirits went from hand to hand,
Their friends collecting still, a numerous band,
^o passed thy day: What terrors in me reign!
^pplicate for instant death in vain.
^ink upon this breach of nature's laws,
(...) family, my friends, my country's cause;
^und me still collect my bloody foes:
(...) in my mind approaching torture rose;
(...) skeleton in open prospect lay:
(...) of woeful thought employed my wretched day.
(...) on a neighbh^ring green, high jutting over,
^^ere underneath the rapid waters roar,
(...) round a fire, their heaps of fuel rise,
^^urnal shadows thick'ning in the skies,
(...) the fire I tremble at the stake,
(...) numerous herd a spacious circle make;
And as the flames advancing rise in air,
Within the ring my torturers repair;
With whoop, and dance, they tune the deathful song;
Along the margin crowd the sportive throng;
When lo! the failing bank beneath the load,
Broke short and plunged us headlong in the flood:
In transport down the stream my course I made;
With dismal cries resounds the gloomy shade:
The floating stake adhering by a thong,
With nose above the stream I steal along.
Through all the vale a fruitless search they made,
And fearful howlings ^ung along the shade.
When to the camp again their way they steer,
Their distant clamor murmuring in my ear,
Far down the stream, where lies a naked strand,
With shivering limbs, I softly crept to land:
The stake upon the shore I trail'd along;
Then joyfully unbound each fett'ring thong
And for the neighboring road in haste depart;
The hope of freedom dawning in my heart.
Through gloomy thickets far, I grope my way,
And bri'ry heaths, where pines extended lay;
Now thoughts of home my ravished soul delight;
Now distant savage yells my mind affright;
Still I my way with all my power pur^u'd;
Still did the road my anxious search elude.
Long time I grop'd the rough uncertain way,
Through erring course, I wand^r'd far astray,
Nor moon, nor star, would lend a friendly ray;
Then laid me down, dejected and forlorn,
To rest my weary limbs, and wait the morn,
Ever long my leafy couch I there had pre^^d,
Exhausted nature sunk to quiet rest.
Long on the earth, in sleep profound, I lay,
Unknowing of the wished return of day,
Till in my ear loud savage voices sound,
(...) starting, see myself encircled round;
Tremendous sight! all hope now fled in air!
(...) wring my hands in anguish of despair.
They led me over a hill, with friendly face,
And seemed of savages a gentle race.
There at their fire, my dripping locks I drain,
And warm my limbs, benumbed with falling rain.
A chief, who kept me, knew our tongue in part;
With food and gentle speech he soothed my heart.
The night before from camp, this little band,
Were now returning to their native land,
Well pleased a prisoner to conduct me there,
An honorable trophy of the war.
Now western breezes purge the fields on high,
And Sol splendour journies up the sky;
His glad return the silvan chorus sings;
With melody the lonely desert rings;
A shell of spirits, lib'rally they share,
Then pack our burdens, and for march prepare;
Lest I should make escape, my hands they bind,
And he who was my keeper, walked behind.
We traversed spacious, fertile, woody plains;
And streams, and vales, and heaths, where nature reigns:
And deep morasses, thickets, lawns, and hills,
And savage dwellings, glades, and purling rills.
My weary knees, my burden scarce sustain,
And long for rest I supplicate in vain:
My bleeding feet distain the path I go:
And showers of sweat from all my members flow:
My frame before impaired, by hunger, pain and woe.
Though eased from ^^rors of the torturing hand,
^^griev'd at parting from my native land,
To bid adieu to country, spouse, and child;
And live a slave in savage lands exiled.
Now from an airy summit we espy,
The sun descending in the western sky;
His se^ting orb, with gentle radience shone,
Over subject wilds, and regions far unknown;
When they, at length, regard my earnest prayer,
Unload our burdens, and for rest prepare.
The margin of the summit high they chose,
Where underneath a crystal fountain flows,
A sire they build and full repast prepare;
With arms unbound the welcome food I share.
Long they regale themselves upon the ground,
With liberal hand, the shell is given round:
By full repeated draughts they drown their care,
Then to the leafy couch for rest repair.
With left hand firmly to my keeper tied,
I took my quiet lodging at his side;
Where on the verge an oak his branches spread,
And tender boughs of hemlock were our bed;
Exhausted nature, to repose did yield,
And sleep profound my weary eyelids sealed,
Long had I rested on my silvan bed,
When frightful visions labored in my head,
The horrors lately past my dreams renew;
The dreadful stake, and rising flames I view,
And when the tort'rers ply their cruel art,
All trembling I awake with sudden start:
I shivering sat, nor moved my fettered hand,
No fire was seen but one remaining brand,
Nor rose the nightly empress of the sky,
But stars unnumber'd twinkle from on high.
All nature seemed to lie in calm repose,
And now my distant home in fancy rose:
O could I but divide this fett'ring thong,
I Would speed my flight the savage wilds along.
No knife I had, to cut the band away,
But near his head, my keeper's tomax lay;
Its edge obtuse I ply, with anxious pains,
In vain, the sett'ring band uncut remains!
And shall this string, I cried, detain me here,
From native country, friends, and kindred, dear?
The weapon first shall pierce the owner's head:
This blow, at once, shall stretch him with the dead:
Then, by a sudden jerk, my band I Will break,
And down the steep unheard my journey take.
But stay my hand! the fatal stroke forbear!
A moment yet the guiltless victim spare!
Can I thus murder him who spared my breath?
And shall humanity's reward be death?
Shall I, with cruel weapon, pierce his head,
By whose indulgence I partake his bed?
I love my family and country dear;
Their recollection moves this falling tear:
He too may love his wife, and native wild,
And long to meet his little prattling child;
By nature's glimmering light, to good inclined,
Methinks he seems the gentlest of his kind.
I questioned long, then laid the weapon by;
And now the waning moon ascends the sky,
Over eastern hills, serene in brightness smiled,
And glanced along the solitary wild,
Far down the silent vale, in shadows drear,
The owl alone with hooting sound I hear.
I trembling lie, and sleep in vain desire,
But now a savage soon renews the fire,
Warmed by the rising blaze, I quiet lay,
And calmly rested till the dawn of day.
When now Aurora spangled over the skies,
From gentle sleep we hastily arise;
The blazing fire again prepare with haste,
And each again partakes a full repast:
Bright Phoebus climbs, along his morning way;
And darts across the wood his genial ray;
The birds, with songs, awake the sounding plains,
And chant along the hill, melodious strains.
Then on we journey, as the day before,
Fair winding streams, and spacious deserts over,
Nor ever the lengthy, weary journey close,
Till flaming Sol had three times set and rose;
Inflamed by sultry heat each tedious day,
And chilled in open air each night we lay.
Extended swamps we pass, and thickets drear;
And flowery lawns where savage huts appear;
And plains, and heaths, and fertile valleys wide,
Where deep, majestic rivers gentle glide,
Through groves of pine we go, and hemlock shades,
Over bogs, and sable rills, and grassy glades;
Meandring brooks, by willows overhung,
Where little warblers tune the charming song;
And now a path obscure described our way;
And now over trackless heights our journey lay;
At length we from a hill their village spy,
A rising green, delightful to the eye:
An ample lake before in prospect lays,
Beside a silver stream meandring strays,
There spacious fields of corn the eye delight,
And fair extensive meadows charm the sight.
Soon to their dwelling place approaching nigh,
They warned the village by a hideous cry,
Their prisoner, and their plunder, they express,
By shouts significant of their success,
^^eet them, issued forth a numerous train,
(...) meeting long conferred upon the plain,
^^ow with tears their mournful howls arise:
^^ow triumphant shouts ascend the skies!
(...) feathered quiristers had gone to rest;
^^ing day yet dappled over the west;
^ark of dogs was heard resounding far,
^^'er the forest shone the evening star;
(...) they dispersing to their dwellings hied,
(...) the green and up the river side,
(...) we for lodging in the wood remain,
(...) their sacred forms of war ordain.
(...) glad return through all the place was told;
(...) morning they convene both young and old:
(...) and equipt in all their war parade,
^he town a formal entry made,
(...) led me up, triumphing with delight,
(...) all their spoils and trophies of the fight,
(...) the scalps, for these they had their pay,
British agents ever they came away.
(...) end their march, where high upon the green,
^'rous crowd of every age was seen:
(...) ^ary parent bowing down with years,
^other and her tender train appears,
^outhful archer bends his little bow,
^^ortive striplings gambol in the row,
^^ors, and hunters tricked in best array,
^outhful maids their tawny charms display,
^^carlet cloth, rings, beads, and ribbons gay.
^^embled when I to the crowd was brought,
^ake, and flames arising in my thought;
^n my guard approaching to my ear;
(...) confide in him, and nothing fear.
There in a spacious hut, on either hand,
Two lengthy rows with sticks and weapons stand,
Then stripped I was to pass between the rows,
And each inflict at pleasure wounds and blows;
My keeper gently struck, then urged my flight,
Between the ranks I fled with all my might.
As when some farmer blessed with plenteous yield,
His crop of buck-wheat threshes in the field,
The men and boys with flail in hand around,
Clap after clap loud constant clatt'rings sound,
The straws all crushed in broken pieces lie;
The grains around the threshers faces fly:
So as with naked frame I pass along,
Resound the strokes of all the furious throng;
So by their blows my mangled skin in broke.
And so the sputt'ring blood pursues the stroke.
Two female furies at the further end,
Their brother slain in fight, my death intend;
Enraged, they maul with clubs my bleeding head,
And doubtless would ever long have laid me dead,
But quickly did their father interpose,
And then my keeper fended off their blows;
I blessed the thought that once his death withstood;
And checked my hand, when raised to shed his blood.
The aged sire adopts me for his son;
Rejoiced I put the savage habit on;
With honorary paint, in blanket dressed;
I stand installed an Indian with the rest.
The sire in gayest fashion shaved my head,
Then to his home, rejoicing I was led,
They used me tenderly, my wounds they healed,
But deeper wounds within remain concealed;
My wife, my country, friends and blooming child;
Exchanged for captive bands in regions wild;
These thoughts incessant did my bosom rend,
And often did the painful tear descend.
One morning, with Aurora streaked the skies,
By hunger pinched, from slumber I arise;
With musket walking forth, a fawn I slew,
With joy the spotted victim home I drew,
They quickly dress it, and a part they boil,
And all approve my conduct with a smile,
Then when our plentiful repast was over,
By words and signs they bid me seek for more;
I took my gun and crossed the narrow plain,
Determining to not return again,
The down along the grassy bank I go,
Where bending willows fringe the lake below;
I view as on the verdant walk I pass,
The landscape varying in the watery glass.
But now I soon the pleasant walk forsake,
And over the hill my speedy journey take,
Still looking back and trembling still with fear,
In every stump the savages appear.
With eager haste I journey'd all the day;
Hope urged my flight, and terror winged my way:
For should they overtake me in the wood,
I doubted not they there would shed my blood;
I sweat like rain, with burning heat oppressed,
With palpitation heaved my panting breast.
At length departing Sol with milder blaze,
Darts through the wood his horizontal rays;
A porcupine I happened now to slay,
To one with hunger spent, a welcome prey.
Beneath the covert of a woody hill,
Where through the herbage creeps a silent ^ill,
My quiet lodging I prepare to take,
Of barks and broken limbs a fire I make;
With eager haste my bleeding prey I dressed,
Then part I roasted and reserved the rest;
The wholesome meat prepared, I eat my fill,
And drank the water of the neighboring ^ill.
Now gloomy shadows had involved the sky;
On bed prepared of leaves for rest I lie;
The savages pursuit no more I fear,
No sound along the gloomy wood I hear;
The bat in airy circles wings his way;
A while in meditation calm I lay,
The thoughts of home and freedom sweetly rise,
When pleasant slumber seals at length my eyes.
But thinly clad, in dewy damps of night,
I shivering woke before the morning light,
My fuel spent, I grope about for more,
With stiff unweildy limbs and body sore;
With barks and broken limbs again supplied,
I build a fire, and seat me at its side,
And as the genial fire increasing burned,
I musing sat, and warmth again returned;
The lofty branches interweaving spread,
And form a solemn arch above my head,
The foliage rustles in the hollow gale,
The screaming owl is heard along the vale;
In fearful shades remo^e I seem to hear,
The founding torrent ^oaring in my ear;
Lo^d howl the wolves on savage hills afar,
No^ through the wood appears a twinkling star.
^ow awful is, said I^ this lonely spot,
This scene adapted well to serious thought;
As now, may quietude be ever near,
And distant danger only threat my ear,
Enough I Have drank the bitter cup of woe,
May peace attend the future path I go.
I go to lovely wife, and parent land,
Though toils and dangers intervening stand,
I go to tell my friends the horrid tale,
At which their sympathyzing hearts will fail,
Which sires unborn shall utter with a tear,
Their tender offspring weeping stand to hear.
O dread chastisement of a parent's hand!
Her children tortured in their native land!
For standing forth in arms to save our lives!
Our little all! our parents, children, wives!
From death and devastation! by the hands
Of bloody parricides and slaught'ring bands!
But there is a power, that dwells enthroned sublime
Where human comprehension cannot climb,
He eyes the works of all the mortal race,
His presence fills this solitary place!
John's relation continued. His third capture and long servitude in a foreign
wilderness.
THUS while I muse, a rustling noise I hear,
And lo! four rushing savages appear!
A sudden horror thrilled through every vein,
A while in fixed attention they remain,
Somewhat they speak, and seem to wait reply,
Then shortly seizing me, my arms they tie.
They led me groping far along the ^ill,
Then clamber'd to the summit of a hill;
My spirit bid adieu to every joy,
And fears of torture now my soul employ,
For one of these I knew to be the same,
Who tied me to the stake beside the flame,
He knew me not in this my new disguise;
And now their blazing fire directs our eyes;
Their piercing yell runs echoing down the dale,
An answering yell is heard along the gale.
A gazing row around the fire there stood;
The rising flame illumined all the wood:
They with attention mutt'ring viewed me round,
Then by a prisoner sat me on the ground.
This prisoner, who well understood their tongue,
Had often passed the savage tribes among,
This country born, had roved to every part,
Depraved in manners, of ignoble heart.
He said, one ranging fuel to provide,
My glim'ring fire had through the thicket spied.
They dwelt, he said, in the remotest wood,
And took delight in shedding human blood.
And now of my return no hopes remain,
So lately raised, so sadly crushed again!
Adieu, I cry, to every joy of life!
My charming little one, and lovely wife!
May happiness attend my peaceful home,
While I a slave in foreign deserts roam!
Fairwel, my darling friends, my neighbors true,
And every social happiness adieu!
I bow my head, and sink with piercing woe,
While from my eyes the streaming sorrows flow.
My fellow-pris'ner bid me check my woes,
Such conduct might enrage our furious foes;
At his reproof my fruitless tears I dry,
And view the barbarous herd with anxious eye;
For him who took me on the battle day,
My searching eyes the tawny row s^^vey,
For since the fight that generous chief humane,
Through all the savage bands I Would sought in vain.
Now morning saffron'd over the fields of air,
A short repast they hastily prepare,
There fourths remaining of my evening prey,
Which they had not forgot to bear away,
With sundry pheasants, and a duck and teal,
Broiled slightly on the coals supplied their meal,
They greedily devour their tasty fare,
And we partake proportionable share;
With heavy heart I sit me down to eat,
My spirit loathes my necessary meat.
Then with a silver band my arm they graced,
And on my back a weighty burden placed:
When ranged in file, they journey down the hill,
And by their orders we the center fill.
I tread the pathless wilderness once more,
And retrograde my steps the day before;
We traveled on through all the weary day,
At night beside the well known lake we lay,
(...) azure flood I send my wishes over,
And long to tread again its peopled shore,
From these we pass through fertile woods forlorn,
Till Luna filled again her sharp'ned horn;
With pinioned arms, we journey'd through each day,
And bound to trees supine each night we lay,
Confinement hard amid this season warm,
When winged insects round our bodies swarm;
Their food we still in just proportion share,
^recarious food and often scanty fare.
Their language I began to understand,
And now more sociable appeared the band;
^ut thoughts of home lay cank'ring in my breast,
While terrifying dreams disturbed my rest;
And at the frequent yell I still would start,
Still seemed the hateful sound to pierce my heart,
And now a lake to northward we espy;
A boundless prospect opening to the eye,
Extensive meadows stretch along its side,
And grassy banks arrayed in flowery pride,
We found a savage village on the plain,
And fish, and fruits, and corn, and beans obtain;
One night we took our lodging in the place,
They seemed to be a hospitable race.
Then through the wilderness we pass again,
Over spacious valley, hill, and sylvan plain,
Nor cease our weary journey till the fun,
Had six times his diurnal journey run.
Now did a lake again the eye delight,
Its azure surface stretched beyond the sight;
Here too we savage habitations found,
And fields of corn and trees of fruit around;
And sylvan game, and sowl and fish abound.
They lib'rally bestowed their country fare,
But at us prisoners wildly seemed t^^stare;
Three nights we here abode, detained by rain,
Then on we journey over the woody plain;
Over streams, and fertile vales and rugged ways,
Our way pursue, for sev'n long tedious days,
And now declining Phoebus scorched no more,
At eve the chilly blast began to roar,
And driving rains their frequent torrents pour.
Inured to toil; all hopes of freedom flown;
And with their language more acquainted grown;
Unbound* nor as a prisoner now confined,
I strove to cheer again my drooping mind;
Yet often the thought of distant home would rise,
And draw the briny current from my eyes,
At savage dwellings we arrive again;
There resting through a tedious storm of rain;
With consternation here they eyed us over,
The race of white they never had seen before.
They gave us bread of corn, and fruits to eat,
And soup of entrails dried, and stinking meat;
Again through trackless wilds we take our way,
Where uninhabitable deserts lay;
Three days we journey through the dreary waste,
Then at a river's side arrive at last;
Along the rocky stream the current roars,
And foams, and lashes the resounding shores;
Fa^ up the raging stream our journey lies,
Where rugged hills and craggy mountains rise;
Along our path the crimson foliage lay,
For now we journey'd in a beaten way!
The chilling wind across the mountain roars,
Between the hills the rushings torrent pours,
Resounding far along the winding shores.
At length a pleasant vale delights the eye,
Their village on its border we espy;
A rocky summit overlooks the vale,
With piny forests howling in the gale;
A river thence its foamy current pours,
From rock, to rock, loud thundering down it roars;
Beneath, a gentle silver stream displays,
And through the smiling vale meand'ring strays*
Thence winding far along the pleasant fields,
Its tribute to the rapid river yields;
Along this pleasant stream their village lies;
They view their dwelling place with joyful eyes
Their hideous cries are heard resounding shrill*
An answering yell re-echoes from the hill.
And now we to their smoky huts drew nigh
Of form uncouth and wretched to the eye;
A numerous herd came forth upon the plain,
In extacy to see their friends again,
But wildly stare at us with furious eyes;
What terrors in my throbbing bosom rise!
My fellow prisoner ridiculed my woes,
While both of us endured their frequent blows*
But here not long the noisy crowd remain,
For not a man of all their band was slain.
Then on the village-green in form took place,
A convocation of their barbarous race;
When led to the assembly, we behold
A swarm of males and females, young and old;
Their horrid looks and dress my soul affright!
Their grisly aspect dreadful to the fight!
My fellow, blythe and confident of face,
Demanded first to run the painful race;
With dance and caper, shouts and whoopings loud,
He gains the favor of the laughing crowd,
He runs unhurt beneath their numerous hands,
And by a sonless chief adopted stands
Then I direct my flight between the rows,
On either side I scarcely feel their blows;
For me the owner of my band appears,
A bending matron silvered over by years,
Of her domestic cares she gave me trust;
Her family all slumbering in the dust.
With her nine tedious winters I remain,
While melancholy thoughts within me reign;
Often would my home in dear remembrance rise,
And draw the wonted tribute from my eyes
My loat^ some food, my way of life unblessed,
And crawling vermin long disturb my rest,
No book to entertain my lonely day,
No friend to cheer my solitary way;
Had not my fellow prisoner nigh remained,
My native tongue I scarcely had retained.
With him once walking forth at early day,
Over savage hills to hunt the savage prey,
Through craggy ways our leisure walk we take,
Where on the mountain lies a crystal lake;
Loud winds of autumn sweep the dreary skies,
Beneath the blast the raging billows rise,
With broken surge the roaring water toils,
On lonely shores and solitary isles;
The vapors grimly gather in the skies,
Along the wood the snowy tempest flies;
The chilling gale, inclement, loud and strong,
The naked forest lashing howls along;
But we arrayed in savage garments warm,
With ease sustain the sury of the storm.
And now the snowy clouds, o'erblown at last,
Frown in the east before the driving blast;
Serene and mild appears the face of day;
And Sol in splendour journeys on his way.
Then we the mountain's head sublime ascend,
And far over subject wilds our eyes extend;
Here intermingled lakes and deserts lay;
There huge majestic rivers winding stray;
Here smiling plains interminable lie;
And craggy mountains yonder shock the eye;
Stupendous columns, glittering white airse,
High towering in the hyperborean skies;
Along the frozen wild their branches send,
Far as the sight their shining heads extend:
Blue mountains rose to bound my homeward view,
Yet home my winged soul unbounded flew.
And now I asked my fellow pris'ner's mind,
If we for our escape no way could find:
He answered, our returning round the lake,
Were desperate folly now to undertake;
Our Indian guards had took that tedious road,
To see their fiends, and shun the billowy flood;
That should we 'scape their hands the other way,
To death or Britons we must fall a prey.
Beside, he here would marry and remain,
And did not choose his native land again;
Where tight restrictions all our ways control,
And laws and regulations cramp the soul,
Where jails and flagellations are decreed,
For trifling debts and taking what we need;
Where merry fellows still are in disgrace,
And formal hypocrites preferred in place*
Descending then a wolf we chanced to slay,
With it we homeward took our evening way.
And now I thought to flee the savage lands,
And throw myself into the Britons hands;
When I the horrid treatment ponder over,
Which from the British officers I bore;
My pinching hunger while among their bands,
Who yielded me at last to torturing hands;
Of many thousand prisoners beside,
Who in their loathsome ships and prisons died,
For want of food where ample stores abound;
For want of drink where water flowed around;
Forced their own urine for their drink to try,
And eat their brothers or of hunger die:
These dreadful tho'ts my trembling soul affright,
A while I yet suspend my venurous flight,
To wait the issue of the bloody war,
Which now I fondly hoped not distant far;
But, O how tedious did the time appear!
Each day a week! and every month a year!
My ancient matron was accounted sage,
Yet often would yield to petulence of age;
She Would tax the present race with various crimes,
And loud lament the loss of better times;
She Would often relate how in her blooming days,
For dress she bore the noblest palm of praise:
When glit'ring shells and beads were seen in rows,
Extending from the crown to near the toes;
When ornamented face of sooty die,
Attracted forcibly the lover's eye;
When matchless warriors bore to war their bows,
And fed the nation with their slaughtered foes;
Who hewed the flint, the arrow's point to edge,
And for the tomax bore the flinty wedge;
Who tortured many a formidable band
Or captive sung beneath the torturing hand;
When graceful skins their only clothing were,
And flesh uncook'd esteemed the daintiest fare;
Now foolish ways, said she, the age delights,
And many barbarous customs of the whites.
This nation, while I stayed, to battle bred,
To distant wilds their martial forces led;
And by their wily arts and sudden blows,
Harrass'd the nations of their country's foes;
Destroy their dwellings, bear the spoil away,
And captives often by cruel tortures slay.
But of their deeds, my sufferings, woes and fears,
And all that passed in these long tedious years,
Their dreams Their superstitious observance of dreams.
, domestic life, and forms of state,
Some leisure day at large I will relate.
John' s story continued. His final escape. Finds his only child and his friend
in slavery. They return home with him. He ends his narration.
WHEN winter yielded last to vernal rains,
And early verdure clad the silvan plains;
Their youth in military pomp appear;
Far to their southern foes their course they steer;
And on the thirtieth day complete their toils,
Returning home with prisoners and with spoils;
But these their trophies dearly they obtain,
For seven of their bravest youths were slain.
It chanced, in quest of silvan game, that day,
Across the rapid stream I took my way;
Then scrambling fearch'd the craggy hills above,
And till the setting sun successless rove;
Returning now, when first the stream appears,
A horrid cry of howling, strikes my ears;
I guessed the cause, the stream I paddled past,
And to the martial band advanced in haste;
The numerous crowd had chiefly took their way;
But in a spacious hut two prisoners lay,
Designed for torture on the following day,
With wide extended limbs supine they lie;
And guards surround them with attentive eye;
When, by assistance of the rising light,
Surprised I saw that one of them was white;
But O! what pangs through all my vitals thrill!
'Twas honest George who dwells on yonder hill!
In consternation fixed, I trembling stand;
Nor dared approach him amongst the jealous band;
He knew me not in this my strange disguise;
And now at length recov'r^^ my surprise,
Not understood, nor heeded by the foe,
With voice composed, my name I let him know;
Inquired about my family and home,
And by what sad mishap he thither come.
My well known voice, with glad surprise, he hears;
Then feebly answers with a flood of tears;
He tenderly confessed his fond surprise,
To see me ever he closed in death his eyes:
He said my hapless wife, in deep despair,
Believed no more, I breathed the vital air;
The fierce invading foe, with slaught'ring hand,
By frequent inroads, had distressed our land;
That, six years since, they made a bold descent,
And he to reconnoitre them was sent;
That haplessly they took him by a chase;
And devastation spread around the place;
That he was; captive led to regions wild,
With sundry more, and amongst the rest my child,
Who happ'ning at her kinsman's house to stay,
The rest were slain, and she was led away:
That she was yet detained in captive lands;
But lived beneath a gentle master's hands;
That when he left the land, my spouse was well,
Nor harm had to that neighborhood befell;
That perfect peace with Britain now prevailed,
But scalpers still the southern states assailed;
That this his suffering mate, with friendly hand,
Had saved him from a cruel torturing band;
That faithfully he would served him ever since,
And risk'd this fatal fight in his defense;
That with him now his lot must be the same,
A fellow suff'rer at the torturing flame.
While thus his narrative I stand to hear,
With trembling heart, and with attentive ear,
Among the guards, my rifle greets my sight,
Prize once to him who took me in the fight:
My anxious eye then hastily surveys,
The savage captive, by the rising blaze;
In him, with agitation, lo I trace,
The features of that generous warrior's face!
What various grief at once my bosom rends!
My country, consort, child, and suffering friends!
My agitation kindles in my face,
The guard with fury spurn me from the place.
The shades of night had now involved the sky,
I ^o my neighboring hut all trembling fly;
Shall I, I cried, a wretched slave remain?
My child unfoster'd wear the captive chain?
My spouse bewail our fate with wringing hands?
And these, my friends, be slain by torturing bands!
One desperate stratagem, I dare to try,
Retrieve our fortune, or in tortures die.
Adjoining mine a spacious hut there lay,
Where they had stowed their choicest spoils away;
The sides were wood the roof was thatched with hay;
With throbbing bosom, and with trembling hand,
Upon its roof I placed a flaming brand;
With growing force, the curling flames arise;
The savages collect, with wild surprise;
The prisoners safe, the guards assisting came,
To save their precious plunder from the flame.
With nimble hand I cut the prisoners free;
Then running forth, I bade them follow me;
Toward the river, we direct our flight;
The rising flame affords a friendly light;
We quickly reach the rapid river's shore;
Where my canoe I Would fast'ned just before;
A lengthy paddle in its bottom lay;
The knot too tight, we jerk the stake away;
We hurry in, and shoot along the stream;
Our heaving bosoms swell with joy extreme.
The aged chief, in transport of his joys,
Triumphant raised aloud his shouting voice,
Through all the vale the ringing echo flew;
The foe attend, they answer and pursue:
In vain along the shore a search they made:
In vain they shot amid the sable shade;
Along the raging stream we silent steer,
Their distant clamor dying in the ear;
Congratulate each other with delight,
And urge, with every limb, our rapid flight.
The thankful chief caressed me, though unknown;
Then I to him my obligation own;
My gifts and me he recollects with joy,
And mutual gratitude our tongues employ.
Gay shone the starry pavement of the sky,
No other light, as yet, informed the eye:
On either side we just descry the shore,
The precipices seemed high jutting over;
Through all the pass the raging torrent roars,
The stormy current thunders on the shores.
The chief the dangerous pass well understood,
And kept, with artful hand, the middle flood;
While with the paddle he directs our course,
We ply by turns the stake with all our force.
And now, no more the rocky shores arise,
The moon, with ample orb, salutes our eyes;
Along a smoother stream we take our way,
The little billows glittering in the ray.
Our late escape we fondly mention over,
Our sorrows past and better days in store;
Then our adventures we by turns recite,
And pleasing conversation cheers the ^ight*
The lessening hills with joyful eyes I view,
And all the gay creation shines; anew.
Dark woods we pass, and rocks, and dangerous ways,
And isles, through which the winding current strays:
Withal our force we safely urge our way,
Through all the night, and all the following day;
But when the setting sun again appeared,
Into a little creek our course we steered;
A turtle we had caught supplied our food;
We slept securely in the neighboring wood.
But soon as early dawn began to rise,
(Pale Luna fading in the western skies)
We tread the plain, the bending stream forsake,
And through the wood our course directly take.
Five days our toilsome journey we pursue;
A hostile settlement we venture through;
Alternate we would sleep and watch by day,
When night returned again pursue our way;
This danger past, by day our march we plied,
Over pleasant streams and fertile regions wide.
Through toils, through chilly nights, and scanty fare,
The aged chief seemed almost to despair.
At length his home enraptured we espied,
Low on a gentle, murmuring river's side,
A neighboring mead with pleasure we surveyed,
Where beavers once their habitation made;
Here piny plains in ample prospect lie,
Aerial summits there invade the sky.
So lately fled, they all were now returned,
Their village built again, so lately burned.
The fire extended loud his joyful voice:
To hear the well known cry they all rejoice:
With answ'ring shout, they issue on the plain,
Of every age and size, a lengthy train.
With eager joy advanced his aged wife,
Her sannap to behold again in life*
The raptured train advanced with joyful cries,
And tears of joy bedew the senior's eyes.
A while in fond care^ses they remain,
Then silent seat themselves upon the plain.
The chief informed what had befell in brief,
His journey, sufferings, danger, and relief:
Presents me to the crowd with grateful tears,
And magnifies my merit in their ears:
The rising crowd extend the friendly hand;
To meet the kind salute elate I stand,
Though yet at times the dread reflection rose,
That these were once in fight my bloody foes.
Now every one triumphant lifts his voice,
(The hills resound their loud tumultuous joys:)
Then to the village, in procession come,
Elate the sachem leads us to his home.
And now the splendid regent of the day,
Three hours had passed along his evening way;
The earthy table soon was richly stored,
With what the joyful village could afford,
The rage of hunger quickly we appease,
Then on the open green recline at ease.
Yet could my soul no satisfaction find;
But heavy cares depress my troubled mind;
My spirit longed to see again my child,
Who dwelt at distance in a neighboring wild:
My lovely spouse, and friends uncertain fate;
The devastation of my native state;
Fears lest the foe pursuing might once more
Attack this place they would pillaged just before;
My lengthy journey to my native land;
Through many a hostile, bloody, savage band;
These and the like reflections wound my breast;
To George my anxious feelings I confessed;
He answ'red in his wonted cheerful strain,
But sighed to see his native place again.
So passed the day; when shades of night arose,
Within the regal hut we took repose,
While feasts and dance prevail among the throng,
And whoops, and shouts, and yells, their sport prolong.
When rising morn, with fair returning reign,
Had chased the shadows to the western main,
I rose, with anxious thoughts of home possessed,
When thus the chief beneficent addressed;
Now freely ask what ever your soul requires,
My utmost power shall second your desires,
Said I, from misery of the captive chain,
My spirit joys to see you free again;
Released from terrors of the torturing hand,
And safe restored to spouse and native land:
I too, my spouse and native country prize,
And towered them often turn my longing eyes.
Since then, my happiness appears your choice,
Detain me not a moment from my joys;
Assist me to obtain my captive child;
And homeward safely pass the dangerous wild;
Restore again to freedom George, my friend,
And let him home my joyful way attend.
All this I freely grant, the chief replied,
And every necessary aid beside:
I to my neighbor chief, this very day,
Will lead you safe on your desired way:
Just at his door your little daughter dwells,
And ^e for every friendly deed excels:
To him in haste I supplicating go,
For needful aid against the bloody foe.
The (...), employed in necessary cares,
For our departure hastily prepares;
Now, feate^^ on the earth, our fast we break,
A roasted hare we hastily partake;
Then rise; and now the generous chief humane,
Presents to me my well known watch again:
When taking leave we hastily depart:
George quits his bonds in extacy of heart.
Bright Sol o'erlooks the hill, with gentle beams,
Far gleaming on the floods and wandering streams.
Along a beaten path our journey lay;
The aged chieftain led our hasty way;
And first we pass beside their fields of corn;
Then cross a spacious piny wood forlorn:
Nor ceased till splendid Sol, with fervent ray,
From his meridian took his downward way:
Then we beside a fountain stop to dine,
And on its mossy bank a while recline.
An eminence arose on either side,
Where lengthy mounds with wonder I espied;
They seemed the mighty works of ancient days,
Which none, unskilled in arts of war, could raise.
" These," said the chief, "were raised by bands of white,
A barbarous race, inured to cruel fight,
Their spacious kingdom stretched along the flood:
A hairy Indian tribe possessed the wood.
Our numerous fathers, from the unknown west,
The little hairy nation dispossessed;
The feeble swarm was easily exiled,
To distant regions of the frozen wild.
The tribe of white our honest sires oppressed;
Now wronged by art; now rudely dispossessed;
The cruel, slavish race, of prudence void,
Themselves and neighbors wantonly destroyed:
By horrid arms whole floods of gore they drained;
And by huge beasts to human slaughter trained:
Of law and worship great profession made;
Yet turned them both to mean dishonest trade:
For ^oolish pride and wealth, themselves they vexed
With little childish arts, their minds perplexed.
In vain an honest race they long annoyed;
Our sires, at length, the faithless tribe destroyed;
In long and bloody fight, on yonder plain,
The chiefest of their warring bands were slain:
Their lessened army here their arts employed,
But this, their last retreat, our sires destroyed.
" My grandsire's sire, did, in my early years,
Relate this old tradition in my ears;
And had a stone, bright as the solar blaze,
The eye could scarce endure its sparkling rays;
Which down from son to son, through ages came,
In confirmation of this tale of fame,
Worn by a woman, who that nation swayed
And at too dear a price its purchase paid,
She, for this toy, had given a store of grain,
That might her vassal host a moon sustain:
Which stone now buried in the earth does lie,
As void of use and hurtful to the eye.
" And when we heard such bands of white once more,
Advanced their settlements along the shore,
This aged ancestor, a reverend sage,
Through honest prudence of experienced age,
Of all our race with dying accents prays,
To shun their wars and to avoid their ways,
Which you and I may wish they had observed,
These wasting tribes their peace had then preserved,
Great George in vain had wheed^ed us from far,
By gifts and lies, to aid his foolish war."
And now again we took our hasty way;
Again along a path our journey lay;
A tedious plain we tread with toil oppressed,
Till Phoebus low descended in the west;
At length the village greets our longing eyes,
Beside a spacious, fertile mead it lies;
A river winds along the flowery vale,
With bord'ring willows waving in the gale.
As near the town, the pleasant path we go,
Along the shore, with weary steps and slow;
The chief we seek perchance toward us stalks,
And sundry little ones attend his walks;
His stature huge, and as in thought profound,
His jetty eyes were turned toward the ground.
But when he cast his eyes along the shore,
And saw his friend he thought to see no more,
With shouts of joy he leaps along the strand;
With answ'ring joy his friend extends the hand.
Our leader now again relates in brief,
His journey, sufferings, danger, and relief:
And then, his interesting tale to close,
His fellow suff'rer and deliv'rer shows:
The stranger viewed us, with attentive face,
And shook us by the hand, with friendly grace.
I view his little train, with strange surprise,
A girl surpassing fair attracts my eyes;
Her pretty mein, and open vissage mild,
Awoke the dear remembrance of my child;
The scar upon her wrist I then surveyed,
And mark beneath her chin, by nature made;
George to behold my consternation smiled,
Confirming her indeed to be my child,
Through all my soul what melting passions reign!
Paternal fondness glows in every vein;
I seize my lovely child in strict embrace;
With tears of joy bedew her blooming face;
When she by struggles, trembling with surprise,
Escapes my arms, and to the village flies.
The stranger at my conduct seemed to stare:
Our chief informed him of my errand there:
My purposed journey homeward through the wild:
My spouse at home, and this my only child:
Relates my captivation by his hands:
My tedious servitude in foreign lands:
His obligations to me for his life:
And wish to help me to my child and wife.
Then he shall have his child, the chief replied,
And all assistance I can give beside:
Her captivator lives not far away,
To him her ransom I will freely pay.
Now 'parting Phoebus glances over the meads;
The towering chieftain to his cottage leads;
A cake of chestnuts, corn and beans prepared,
And soup of venison and beans we shared.
The following day convened in council sat,
The fathers and the warriors of the state;
With lengthy pipes: in grave extended rows:
The smoky cloud emitted through the nose:
Long they delib'rate; and at length decree,
To aid the aged sire and ^orward me.
In cheerfulness the moments lighter roll,
And dawning happiness revives my soul.
My fearful child I fondly strove to gain,
But every gentle measure tried in vain.
Next morn three warriors came to guard our way,
(...) whom an artful senior bore the sway;
^^gether all partake a full repast,
^^en for departure we arose in haste:
(...) all I now the parting hand extend,
(...) wept at parting with my aged friend.
With tearful eye the venerable man,
^ith air of fond benevolence began:
You Will taste, said he, far hence the joys of life,
(...) native country, friends, and tender wife;
While worn with age and wars, I here remain,
(...) life we never more shall meet again;
Through failing nature, very soon I must
With all my fathers, slumber in the dust:
^ut far in unknown regions of the west,
Whence came our fathers generations past,
^^'er shining mountains towering in the air,
^^ur frames renewed, we shall for rest repair;
^here day and spring uninterrupted run,
^^or every little star is there a sun:
^^or showers, nor stormy rains we there shall know,
^^ut waters pure from living fountains flow;
those who have for their native country died;
Their parents and the poor with food supplied;
Who faithful to their families at home,
With idle feet in mischief never roam,
Who slaughter, many dangerous beasts of prey,
^^nd deer, and buffaloes, and beavers slay:
^^ch, in eternal happiness serene,
^^all dwell in booths of never fading green;
(...) them shall fertile valleys spread around:
^^bacco, corn, and beans and fruits abound;
^^eir groves, and lakes, and rivers richly stored,
^^ll plenteous game, and fowl and fish afford:
Each have his faithful wife and friend again;
And love, and friendship never ending reign;
There every hero shall his own enjoy;
And games, and sports, the happy hours employ;
The bad shall serve as slaves at their command;
Nor hostile deity infest the land,
This happy place your rifle shall restore,
Here you and I shall meet to part no more."
Now George took leave, and now my fearful child,
Refused to leave with us her wonted wild;
To move her all my kind endeavors failed;
Atlength by art my senior guard prevailed.
With joy I from their dwellings turned my eyes,
Yet could I not the artless race despise:
Though they from childhood fortify their hearts,
Their country's foes to slay by horrid arts;
For this their srank benevolence to friends;
And lowly virtues partly make amends:
Amongst their associates, generously inclined,
Chaste, charitable, dutiful and kind,
To avarice estranged, uncurss'd with wealth,
In tranquil peace of mind and vigorous health,
They used the fleeting moments they possessed,
In healthful toil, and necessary rest:
Their governments in awkward dullness free,
Corruption or oppression seldom see;
We many ills avoid, which there prevail,
Yet often our grievous cure exceeds the ail:
Each to the dictates of his mind they leave;
Yet most these general doctrines do receive,
(A creed not only known among their tribes,
But which the world in general subscribes,)
That God unsearchable by human pains,
Over universal nature justly reigns,
Rewarding what we do through good intent,
On bad designs inflicting punishment;
A demon counteracts his gracious will,
Perverting good and working human ill.
Two days we journey'd through a fertile wild,
But traveled slow, in favor of my child;
When weary now, I lead her by the hand;
With frequent tears she left the savage land.
The second day when Sol forsakes our eyes,
Along a little stream our journey lies;
Surrounding lawns and trees for fruit declare,
Some savage tribe did once inhabit there;
A lofty pile of stones engaged our view,
Our guards each one a stone upon it threw:
It seemed a tomb had there of old been reared;
And on a stone of state these lines appeared,
" Beneath this earthy mound, in solemn shade,
The lovliest form of nature's work is laid:
Of open soul, estranged to specious rule:
Of simple manners, learned in nature's school:
Who by the hand of murder lost her breath,
To save a wretched captive slave from death:
" The slave detained in savage wilds unknown,
Through gratitude and love, inscribed this stone;
Dissolved in tears, erects it over her head,
With longings to partake her lowly bed:
Some future bard may weep these lines to read;
And to succeeding ages tell the deed."
Not far from there a cooling fountain flows,
Where we prepare to take our night's repose:
I asked the senior if the cause was known,
Of this huge pile and monumental stone.
" His venerable father, he replied,
A gallant warrior knew these regions wide;
And often said that in his younger days,
A sachem this huge monument did raise:
That when this sachem and his warring band,
Had fought the whites, far in the southern land,
A beauteous youth they captive hither led,
Intent to sacrifice him to their dead:
The sachem's wife was of the christian race;
But took when young and fostered in this place;
Their blooming daughter loved the captive swain,
And tenderly released him from his chain;
Her treachery the warriors quickly found;
And shed her blood in vengeance on the ground:
The warriors took the beauteous youth again;
The chief with cost his respite did obtain:
The lovely virgin in the dust was laid,
And over her head a mound of earth was made;
The captive youth, with many a tear and groan,
Upon her tomb erects this sable stone;
Then leaning over her grave, with flowing tears,
The brother of the warrior slain appears; The warrior slain in the fight in
which he was taken.

The youth beneath his vengeful weapon bled,
And on the tomb reclined his dying head;
The chief the youth beside his daughter laid,
And over them both a common tomb he made;
Then placed the sable stone above her head,
That future ages might revere the dead."
Through pathless woods from here we took our way,
Until the evening of the second day;
When now a narrow lake salutes our eyes,
And fires along its further shore arise;
Across the glossy flood our eyes survey,
The purple west reflects departing day;
Pale Cynthia smiling shows her silver horn,
Far over the western gloomy wood forlorn:
Our lodging here, in usual form, we take,
High on a bank that overlooks the lake.
Next morn over rising ground we took our way;
A savage town in distant prospect lay;
Nor human tracts, nor dwellings more appear,
While through a spacious wilderness we steer:
At length, with inexpressible delight,
We view the habitations of the white.
Our guards departed, from their charge relieved,
With hospitality we were received;
Their little houses palaces appeared;
And dainty fare exhausted nature cheered.
In christian garments they my Nelly clad,
Who seemed abashed, disconsolate and sad;
Unwilling still she left the savage wood;
And but in part our language understood.
Though urged to tarry, on the following day,
Impatient we pursue our homeward way;
Humanely entertained where ever we went,
Their generous favors all our wants prevent.
Of various illnesses we now complained;
A general want of health among us reigned;
Disorders from unwonted lux'ry grew,
That in the savage land we never knew.
We slowly on our journey passed,
And safely at the port arrived at last;
Where, though remote from home and quite unknown,
We readily obtain a sum on loan;
To purchase clothes and charges to defray,
Along our tedious, lengthy, homeward way:
Then we to christian dress and lodging change,
Which yet uncomfortable seems and strange.
For passage we embark, without delay*
On board a little vessel bound this way;
Loud howling tempests inauspicious sweep,
The raging surface of the roaring deep:
Along the coast we plow our foamy way,
Through storms and dangers many a weary day*
But yesterday we safely came on shore;
Elate I view my native hill once more,
George towered his dwelling steered without delay;
With Nelly I pursue my hasty way:
I journey'd on, with thoughts of home possessed,
Till day departing streaked the yellow west:
Unused to walk, new from the liquid plain,
Our weary limbs the journey ill sustain.
At Henry's now my evening way I end;
Henry, my former host, and faithful friend;
The good man welcomed us with joy sincere,
While kind Rebecca dropped a tender tear,
Their numerous children greet my joyful eyes;
And John their son now grown to manly size.
A supper soon prepared they sat to eat;
We cheerfully partake their dainty treat*
Just then two hunting savages came there,
To market journeying with their peltry ware,
And lo! the hindmost of the two appeared,
He who for torture drew me from the guard:
Short nose, projected chin, and baleful eye,
His grisly length of face identify:
What horror labored in my throbbing breast!
I shivering sat, with indignation pressed,
With trembling hand I drop my fork and knife,
Upbraid him with the deed, and threat his life:
Impelled by fury suddenly I rise;
He, with his mate precipitately flies:
In agitation, shaking I remain;
And social joys to relish strive in vain;
But when the moon o'erlook'd the mountain's head,
With one consent, we all retire to bed.
The lonely way betimes this morn we come:
Nor late intelligence had heard from home:
I viewed my dwelling place with joy extreme,
All seemed unreal as a pleasing dream.
John recovers his wife. Conclusion.
THUS while he spoke, a cloud was seen to rise;
Unusual darkness overspread the skies;
Across the gloom the flashy lightenings fly;
Loud thunder growls along the sable sky:
In dumb amazement fixed, they all attend,
Till winds arise, and driving rains descend;
When Charles at once came rushing in amain;
Awed by the storm; and drenched with driving rain.
William proposed that, as their common friend,
He would the rivals to the fair attend,
There fully know the purpose of her mind,
No strife could bend, no arbiter could bind.
They waited long, but still the copious rain,
Incessant pouring did their steps detain;
Nor ceased till Luna, from meridian height,
With ample orb declared the noon of night.
When evening shades involve the fields of air,
They sup'on milk and plainest rural fare;
New rising gayety expands their hearts;
Free conversation social joy imparts;
But Charles in silence sat, as pressed with care,
Nor joined discourse, nor would partake their fare.
Old friends, and various themes their talk invite;
And pleasing questions entertain their night;
But when the watch declared the eleventh hour,
While yet prevailed the unabating shower
(With growing force the stream was heard to roar,
The rising deluge spread along the shore)
They to the several beds retire for rest;
The rivals minds with Phebe's absence pressed:
But ever Aurora did the heaven ascend,
John rose, and hastily awoke his friend:
A solemn calm the value seemed to lu^^:
The bell was heard afar with tinklings dull:
Bright Cynthia smiled across the western wo^^:
White lay the fog along the winding flood:
The dripping herbage glittered in the ray:
Far howled the torrent down its lonely way:
And chanticleer proclaimed the coming day:
William and Charles arose, the (...) they dressed
John for departure with vehemence pressed;
But William roused his family in haste,
Nor would depart till they had broke their fast.
Then on their way they three together steered;
When Sol refulgent over the hi^^ appeared;
They pass the bridge, the river sweeps along,
By fringing willows gayly over-hung,
With silken foliage waving to and fro,
As t^pid gales and gentle zephyrs blow;
Along the winding vale they take their way,
Melodious warblers tune the morning lay.
William the conduct of the war relates,
The present situation of the states;
^^nts that plain industry greatly fails,
(...) pomp, and pedantry, and vice prevails;
(...) simple independence in disgrace,
^^inous extravagance gives place:
(...) wretchedness o'erspreads our land amain,
(...) shake the props of freedom's sacred fane,
(...) and blood by modest heroes laid,
Foreign realms with wondering eyes surveyed!
With nimble step they tread the winding shore;
(...) length arrived, they enter at the door;
^here sadly pen^^^^ drooped the tearful fair,
^et with her Nelly, plied her morning care!
William accosts the child with winning art;
John flies to greet the charmer of his heart:
Thus spoke the dictates of a feeling mind,
While Charles depressed against the door reclined.
" How sad has been your lonely night my fair!
Yet was my soul oppressed with equal care!
My spirit hither flew, while pouring rain,
And rising deluges my steps detain;
When solitary I retired to bed,
What agitations labored in my head!
In tumult bitter long I wakeful laid;
My various grievances of mind surveyed;
Till now in tedious absence doomed to rove,
And now at home, detained from her I love!
My harsh upbraiding tongue, your pangs and tears:
The dreadful nights, your solitude and fears,
To slumber, nature then at length made way,
And long in troubled visions tossed I lay,
Until a dream distinct my fancy dressed,
Methought I suddenly arose from (...),
With soul enamored, dwelt on all your charms,
Nor longer brook'd my absence from your arms.
" I speed my way, by silver Luna's beams,
Over floating bridges, meads, and turbib streams:
The midnight breeze a fearful whispering made,
Through rustling alders in the dreary shade;
The bord'ring pines beside the lonely vale,
With solemn murmurs load the hollow gale;
I trace the river's solitary shore,
The fire directs me through my open door;
In bed my sleeping Nelly I survey;
Prone on the floor my breathless Phebe lay,
In vain, with tears I shake your lifeless clay!
Through all my soul what sudden horrors dart!
I call my fair in anguish of my heart!
A scream ensues! I shudd'ring stand with fears!
Before my eyes your gliding ghost appears;
Though pale and trembling, lovely to my sight,
In winding sheet arrayed, of purest white!
By terror fixed, to move, in vain I tried;
" I come to bid a long farewell," you cried,
" A flash of lightning justly struck me dead,
For having took a rival to your bed;
I well deserved your wrath, that caused my smart,
Nor was your frown unjust that pierced my heart;
Your dear possession is by fate denied,
For which with ever longing soul I sighed;
May every blessing all your days attend,
And guardian powers my tender child befriend;"
Dissolved (...) tears, I cried with grievous smart,
Forgive my cruel rage that wrung your heart;
My constant fair is blameless in my sight!
How can I thus survive my soul's delight?
" Thus while I spoke, you glide to yonder vale;
A tender screech is heard along the gale,
In bitter grief of heart, aloud I weep,
And steeped in briny tears awake from sleep.
With boding fears I trembling rose forlorn,
When chanticleer foretold the coming morn."
" In flood of tears," replies his anxious spouse,
(Nor further utterance her grief allows)
" Though 'scap'd the dreadful night! till morning fair!
What pangs of keen regret my bosom tear!
By thoughts of your descease, beguiled to wed,
Too late, I mourn the honor of my bed:
Nor Charles's grief can I unpitying see;
The heavy (...) he guiltless bears for me!
His tender care! his generous desert!
Have made (...) impression on my heart!
But he returned who most my soul adored!
My ever gentle, ever faithful lord!
Endearing partner of my golden years!
Long mourned with bleeding heart and streaming tears!
And with him too my Nelly, wept in vain!
Our common care, our life, our union chain!
The flame anew through all my bosom glows!
My ravished soul no other passion knows!
And is my faithful John, long sufferings past,
So ill requited by his spouse at last!
And have I thus dishonored his reward!
And marred the future bliss we might have shared?"
Then William thus to Charles: "surpr^se your care;
You hear the language of the tend^^ pair!
John first her lawful husband was for life;
She cleaves to him a fond and faithful wife!
His tragic death we all with sorrow heard,
Of which it seemed sufficient proof appeared,
No doubt remained in her, in you nor me;
Yet, since he lives, her choice is wholly free:
With manly frankness yield the lovely dame!
To ^^foreseen event ascribe the blame."
Charles then responsive, wi^h indignant air:
No longer I Will obstruct the fawning pair;
(...) me her faithless passion to regain
Entreaty low and blandishment were vain!
My ills are unforeseen event in part,
But just resentment rises in my heart:
My hared presence, does but give offense,
And wife, and friend, and rival, (...) ^hence:
My neighboring uncle forth' estate I hold
Has offered yesterday the read^^ (...)
(...) foreign lands, I Will fly my (...)
And never trust (...) fickle wom^^ (...)
And now fulfilling what his tongue declares,
(...) for departure hastily prepares,
Though fortified by rage, he yields to woe;
At (...) tears of silence flow.
His piercing grief! they sympathizing spy,
The pitying tear distills from every eye,
John, holding forth his watch, began to say,
" Accept this humble pledge^ attend your way,
Then let us part renewed in friendship's flame,
Who hapless rivals guiltlessly became!"
Charles with neglect the offered present views,
And silently his hasty way pursues:
Their kind expostulation scorns to hear;
Nor reason's voice would penetrate his ear!
William congratulates the constant pair:
And happiness succeeds their length of care!
THE END.

