THE GARDENER's CALENDAR, FOR SOUTH CAROLINA, GEORGIA, AND NORTH CAROLINA.
CONTAINING

An Account of Work necessary to be done in the KITCHEN and FRUIT GARDENS every
month in the year, with Instructions for performing the same.

Also particular Directions relative to SOIL and SITUATION, adapted to the
different Kinds of Plants and Trees most proper for Cultivation in these States.

By ROBERT SQUIBB, NURSERY AND SEEDSMAN OF CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA.

CHARLESTON: Printed by SAMUEL WRIGHT and Co. for R. SQUIBB, and Recorded in
the SECRETARY OF STATE's Office, agreeable to the Act of Assembly.

[Price Six Shillings.] MDCCLXXXVII.

TO THE HONORABLE THOMAS HEYWARD, ESQUIRE. PRESIDENT; THOMAS PINCKNEY, ESQUIRE.
VICE PRESIDENT; AND TO THE OTHER MEMBERS OF THE SOUTH CAROLINA SOCIETY, FOR
PROMOTING AND IMPROVING AGRICULTURE, AND OTHER RURAL CONCERNS.
GENTLEMEN,
THE* Patronage you have given to the following Sheets, by permitting me to
dedicate them to such Respectable Characters, whose concurrent Exertions, like
the fertilizing Nile, thus happily coincide to promote more diffusively the
real Interests of our Country, will ever be considered by me, with the deepest
sense of gratitude and esteem.

The Art of Agriculture having been the principal part of my Study through
life, as it is my Duty as a Member of your Society, so shall I ever think it
the highest Point of my Ambition to be allowed to throw in my little Mite of
Information, whereby I may, in any Degree, be instrumental in forwarding the
End of your most laudable Institution.

That your Endeavors may prosper, and Agriculture succeed; that Industry may
prevail, and every useful Art flourish throughout these United States, is the
earnest Wish of, Gentlemen,

Your most devoted, and obedient humble Servant, ROBERT SQUIBB.

INTRODUCTION.
GARDENING at the perfection to which it has been advanced, in many parts of
the world, is entitled to a place of considerable rank among the liberal Arts.

As there is no doubt that with care and attention, almost every species of
vegetables may be propagated in this climate to as great perfection as in any
part of the universe; it is to be hoped that every improvement which can
possibly be suggested, in the infant state of Horticulture in this country,
will meet with every possible degree of encouragement; more especially when we
call to mind the many necessaries and conveniences of life which are derived
to us from the produce of the garden; and how superabundantly the assiduous
labourer is here rewarded by the exuberance of vegetation.

Under such persuasion, and from the repeated solicitations of many reputable
characters in this and the adjoining States, R. SQUIBB* has been induced to
submit to the perusal of the Public the following Epitom of GARDENING, which is
founded on experience and observation.

This being his first Essay, he flatters himself that the candid Public will
overlook any trifling mistake or inaccuracy that may possibly occur to their
notice; and the more so, as his attention (since the commencement of the
undertaking) has been greatly diverted, through the urgent application of his
friends, to the pursuit of his manual profession; and his feeble efforts in the
intervals only have been exerted to point out, in a plain, concise and familiar
manner, the most beneficial rules (to the utmost of his practice, knowledge and
abilities) peculiarly adapted to the climate, and most agreeable to the general
system of Horticulture, throughout every mouth in the year -- in doing of which
be heartily acknowledges to have followed, as much as possible, the method and
style of a justly admired European Gardener.

However mysterious some propositions in this work may appear to his readers
respecting foreign seeds, and some other deviations from the usual practice,
which the variation of climate makes necessary; let them be assured, that what
is here laid down, has been the result of much experience, which no theorical
ideas can confute -- he having studied with attention, the soils and seasons,
best calculated for sowing and planting the most useful vegetables, etc.
adapted for, or peculiar to this country.

SUBSCRIBER's NAMES.
A.
WILLIAM Ancrum, esquire William Allston, esquire mr. David Alexander mr. Alexander
Alexander mr. James Atkins mr. Samuel Adams mr. James Askew mr. Martin Alkin
B.
mr. Charles Bradford mr. Luke Breen John Beale, esquire General Barnwell mr.
Patrick Byrne mr. Daniel Burger Thomas Bourke, esquire Peter Bonetheau, esquire mr.
Thomas Bradford Francis Bremar, esquire James Bentham, esquire Joseph Brown, esquire
Charles Brown, esquire mr. John Brunton mr. William Burn mr. J. V. Burd mr.
Charles Brown mr. Stephen Brown mr. James Bonsell mr. Alexander Bethune A.
Buyer, esquire Cornelius Blackstone, esquire mr. Bass mr. Thomas Buckle mr. Samuel
Bleakley mr. Henry Bembridge, Thomas Be, esquire mrs. Eliza Blake Pierce Butler,
esquire Joseph Be, esquire
C.
James Culliatt, esquire David Campbell, esquire mr. Job Colcock mr. William Cunnington
Edward Crook, esquire mr. John Currie Daniel Cannon, esquire mr. John Creighton John E.
Colhoun, esquire mr. Thomas Coram Macartan Campbell, esquire mr. Thomas Cook Dr.
George Carter Dr. Isaac Chandler Gabriel Capers, esquire
D.
Thomas Drayton, sen. esquire John Dupont, esquire John Dawson, esquire mr. James Darby mr.
James Duncan mr. Ralph Dawes John L. Draper, esquire mr. George Denner mr. John
Dorsius mr. Joseph De Palacio^ Hon. Charles Drayton Hon. William Drayton mr.
Lewis Dutarque John Deas, sen. esquire John Deas, jun. esquire mrs. Elizabeth Dewees
mr. John Dewees
E.
John Edwards, jun. esquire. mr. Henry Ellison major Edwards mr. Richard Ellis mr.
William Eales Thomas Elliott, esquire mr. David Evans Thomas O. Elliott, esquire
F.
Peter Freneau, esquire Richard Fitzgerald, esquire Thomas Fuller, jun. esquire Chatles
Ferguson, esquire Edward Fenwick, esquire mr. Charles Ferguson Dr. Peter Fayssoux Dr.
James Fallon Alexander Fraser, esquire
G.
Moses Glover, esquire William Hazell Gibbs, esquire mr. John Gibbons mr. William
Graham mr. John Walter* Gibbs mr. Robert Gibson John Granier, esquire James Graham,
esquire mr. John Glaze Alexander Gillon, esquire John Geyer, esquire Thomas Gadsden, esquire
William Gibbs, esquire John Lewis Gervais, esquire
H.
William Hayne, esquire Major Hambleton Col. David Hopkins mr. Robert Howard mr.
William Holmes Thomas Hall, esquire. Richard J. Houston, esquire James Harrison, esquire
Benjamin Harbinson, esquire John Huger, esquire Col. Richard Hampton Wade Hampton, esquire
Thomas Hutchison, esquire William Huxham, esquire. Hon. Riohard Hutson Hon. Thomas
Heyward George Abbott Hall, esquire Dr. Haig Dr. Tucker Harris General Huger
I.
mr. James mr. Charles Isaacs Andrew Johnston, esquire Ralph Izard, esquire Alexander
Inglis, esquire
K.
Francis Kinloch, esquire
L
mr. Joseph Lafar mr. Francis Ley Aaron Loocock, esquire Daniel Legare, esquire Thomas
Legare, esquire Mrs. Jane Ladson Benjamin Legare, esquire mr. James Lamotte mr. William
Lee George Lord, esquire mr. George Lockey Charles Lining, esquire mr. John Loveday
Jame Ladson, esquire Lambert Lance, esquire Dr. George Logan mr. Lewis Lestergette
THE Gardener's Calendar FOR South Carolina, Georgia, and North Carolina:
JANUARY.
Work to be done in the Kitchen Garden.
BEANS.
IN the beginning of this month, if the weather is open, let some ground be got
ready for a principal crop of broad beans. The best sorts are --

The windsor bean, sandwich bean, toker bean, etc.

The windsor bean is an excellent sort, and may be planted the first week in
this month; also the toker, which is very fine* and a good bearer. Let the rows
be four feet distant from each other; and set the beans either with a blunt
ended dibble, two or three inches deep, or drill them that depth; and about
five or six inches asunder in the rows.

If you have not planted any mazagon and long podded beans before this month;
let some of the two sorts be planted as early as possible -- you may plant the
mazagon, long podded, and windsor beans all at the same time; and they will
succeed each other in bearing.

The mazagon bean should be planted in rows two feet asunder, and four inches
distant in the rows; and the long pods two feet and a half or three feet from
row to row, and six or seven inches in the row.

PEACE.
Let some early hotspur peace be sown the beginning of this month for a full
crop, in a warm piece of ground, to succeed the same sorts sown in the two last
months -- the sorts are --

Charleton, hotspur, golden hotspur, Essex hotspur, etc. but the two first are
the earliest, and the other* is proper to succeed them; sow each sort in rows
four feet asunder; if the ground is rich, and you intend to set sticks for
their support -- but, if you do not intend to give them sticks; three feet will
be sufficient.

At the same time also you may sow the first crop of marrowfat peace, and they
will succeed the hotspur, for they will come into bearing as the others go off.
This pea is much admired in most families* but the dwarf marrowfat is the
properest for sowing at this season; observing, if you intend to set sticks for
those peace to run upon, to sow them in rows five feet distant from each other
-- but, if no sticks are intended, three feet and a half will afford space
enough.

If you have pease and beans, already advanced two or three inches high or
more, take the advantage of a fine day, when the surface of the ground is dry,
and draw some earth up to their stems.

This should not be omitted; for it will strengthen the plants, and protect
them greatly against the frost and wind.

CABBAGES
About the beginning, middle, or any time in this month, you may sow early
York, sugar loaf and drum-head cabbage-seed, to come in for summer use -- for
this purpose, choose a warm border, under a wall or fence -- Dig the ground a
spade deep, throw it up into a bed or beds, sow the seed pretty thick, and rake
the surface even -- should severe weather set in, you may throw a little light
litter or straw over the beds, before or after the plants are up.

If your cabbage-plants, sown in October or November, were not transplanted
last month, let them be put out soon in this. Let the ground be well manured
with good rotten dung, and dig it in a full spade deep, if the land will bear
it. Rake the ground smooth, and plant your drumhead or large cabbage plants two
feet and a half distant from row to row, and the same distance in the
rows....[See December.]

CAULIFLOWERS.
Let every care be taken to protect your cauliflowers from frost -- This may be
done by binding moss or hay bands round the stems, and about one third of the
leaves, and tying the leaves together near the tops.

About the middle of this month, you may transplant the cauliflowers sown in
October, if they are of full size to transplant. Let these plants be put out
into a warm situation, and in a spot of rich soil well manured with good rotten
dung; and plant them about two feet and a half distant from row to row, and two
feet in the rows.

BROCCOLI.
Let your broccoli have frequent hoeings; and let the decayed leaves be taken
away as they fall off, which are no ways pleasing to the eye.

TURNIPS.
About the latter end of this month, sow a few dutch turnips, for an early crop
-- if they succeed they will come in about the beginning of April, and will be
exceeding good.

BEETS.
Sow beets about the latter end of this month, of different sorts, the red beet
for a large root, and the green and white sorts, for their leaves in soup,
stewing, etc.

Beet seed being pretty large it is an eligible method, either to sow it in
drills, in order that it may be more regularly buried in the earth, at an equal
depth; or to dot it in with a blunt ended dibble in rows -- Let the drills be
drawn with a hoe, about an inch and a half deep, and ten or twelve inches
asunder -- Divide the ground into beds five feet wide, put three or four seeds
into each hole, and cover them in as you go on; and after the plants are come
up some time, leave only one of the strongest in each hole.

It will be most proper to sow the red and the other sorts separate; for it is
the root of the red sort only that is used; and the leaves of the white and
green kinds.

CARROTS.
When the weather is mild and dry, at any time in this month, let a warm spot
of ground be prepared for a few early carrots -- Dig the ground a full spade
deep, and break the earth well as you go on.

This is only intended for a few to come in a little before the general crop;
therefore only a small piece of ground should be prepared for this purpose --
Choose a dry mild day to sow the feed; and you may sow a thin sprinkling of
radishes with the carrots; and let them be raked in soon; always observing to
divide the ground into beds from four to five feet in width.

ONIONS.
Let your onions have frequent hoeings; and let the surface of the ground be
constantly kept loose, which will greatly promote their growth.

SPINACH.
On a small spot of ground you may sow a little spinach, to come early in the
spring, at which time it will be very acceptable in most families; the
smooth-leaved or round seeded is the best to sow at this season.

The seed may be sown about the middle or toward the latter end of this month,
either in the broad cast, and raked in; or in broad, flat, shallow drills,
drawn with a hoe flatways, about an inch deep, and a foot asunder; or you may
sow it in drills between rows of early beans and peace.

PARSLEY.
Sow some parsley seed in open weather, about the middle or toward the end of
this month.

There are two kinds of parsley, the common plain, and curl-leaved, but the
latter is greatly to be prefered; the leaves being large, thick, and bushy, and
excellent for culinary uses, and much admired for garnish to dishes. Let
shallow drills be drawn in a dry part of the garden, and sow the seeds therein
pretty thick, and cover them about half an inch deep with earth.

These seeds may be sown in a single drill round the edges of the kitchen
garden quarters, or along the edges of the borders next the paths -- This seed
lies in the ground sometimes a month or six weeks before it makes its
appearance.

LETTUCES.
Transplant some more lettuces from the beds or borders where they stand too
close together -- In doing this, observe to draw the plants out regularly, and
let the strongest remain in the bed or border ten or twelve inches distance;
then loosen the surface of the earth with a hoe, and clear away the weeds and
litter.

The plants which are taken out, should be planted in a warm border of rich
earth, at ten or twelve inches distance each way; and if the weather is dry let
them have a little water.

Cabbage, Silesia, and Dutch brown lettuce may be sown at any time in this
month in a sheltered situation, in a spot of light rich earth, open to the sun.

Pick off all dead and decayed leaves as they appear on the plants, and keep
them perfectly clear of weeds; and if you stir the surface of the earth between
the plants sometimes it will be of service to them.

CELLERY.
When the weather is open take the advantage of a dry day to earth up such
cellery as require it.

Let the earth be well broken and laid up to the plants lightly, that they may
not be crushed down or bruised, raising the earth near to the top of the
plants; should severe frost set in, it will injure part of the tops of the
plants that are above ground; and if much of the plants should be out of ground
in such weather, and be thereby destroyed, it will also occasion a decay of
those parts that are within the ground -- Therefore it may be necessary to
cover the rows with long litter, straw, etc.

ENDIVE.
In dry open weather let some of the full grown endive be prepared for
blanching -- take the opportunity of a fine day, when the plants are quite dry,
and tie the leaves of each plant together; and with a small hoe draw up some
earth round them seperately, to assist their whitening, and to protect them
more effectually from the frost -- They will be blanched for use in a fortnight
proper for sallads, soup, stewing, etc. [For further information see December.]

GARLIC and SHALOTS.
If your garlic or shalots are not already planted, the business should be no
longer omitted. -- [See October.]

RADISHES.
In the beginning, or any time this month when the weather is open and mild,
sow some short top radishes for an early crop, on a warm border that lies well
to the sun, under a wall or fence -- and about the latter end you may sow the
same sort, and some salmon radishes, to succeed them.

You should not mix both sorts together, but let each sort be sown by itself,
for the short top will come in ten or twelve days sooner than the salmon
radishes; and the short top are much more hardy than the salmon --

The surest method is to sow some short top at least twice or oftener in this
month -- therefore if you sow some about the beginning, and again at the
middle, and toward the latter end of the month, in a warm situation you will
seldom fail of success.

There may be mixed and sown with the radishes a sprinkling of carrot seed; for
if the radishes should fail, the carrots may succeed; and if both succeed,
there will be a double advantage -- for when the radishes are drawn off for
use, there remains a crop of carrots, which will come in at an early period;
or, instead of carrots, you may sow a little lettuce seed or round spinnage,
and when the radishes are gone off these will come in.

You should sow your radish seeds pretty thick at this season; for when the
radish seeds begin to appear, if the weather should prove sharp* it will cut
some off, and the birds too will be apt to attack them and destroy many; sow
the seeds regularly over the surface, and throw the ground up into beds, about
four or four feet and a half wide, and rake the surface even, standing in the
alleys -- Should there be any appearance of frost after the seed is sown, it
will be proper to spread some dry straw or litter over the surface, an inch or
two thick; which will keep the surface warm, prevent the injury of the frost,
and greatly forward the germination of the seed --

Likewise when the plants begin to appear, the same precaution will be
necessary to protect them from the frost, by spreading a little straw or litter
over the surface, there to remain till they are fairly up -- and if the weather
proves frosty afterward, cover them with a little straw, or some light ever
green bushes, which may be continued occasionally; by which means the plants
will be greatly forwarded in their growth: for should cold north wet winds
prevail in the day time, the bushes will break the wind, which is almost as
hurtful to them as the frost: but this covering must not by any means be kept
on in mild, but only in severe weather, until the plants are fairly in rough
leaves.

ARTICHOKES.
Where your Artichokes were not dressed and landed up in the last month, let
this work be done now as soon as possible. -- For the method see October.]

ASPARAGUS.
If your Asparagus beds were not dressed in the last month, let this business
be attended to soon in this. -- [See October.]

HORSE RADISH.
This plant is propagated by cuttings, either taken off the top an inch or two
long, or from the old roots cut in pieces of that length -- but the top or
crown of the plant is most preferable. The method is this --

First procure a quantity of proper sets; -- which may be either the small
off-sets that arise from the sides of the main roots, of which take cuttings
off their tops, an inch or two long; or you may use the tops of the crowns of
the old roots, when taken up for use: or in default of a sufficiency of crowns
or tops of either, you may divide a quantity of old knotty roots into cuttings
of two inches long; which, if furnished each with two or three buds or eyes,
will make tolerable sets. When you intend to make a fresh plantation, you
should, during the winter, when you take up the plants for use, reserve all the
best crowns of the main roots for planting. But this latter practice can only
be pursued in private gardens: for where the large roots are for sale, their
tops must not be taken off, which would render them unsaleable in market:
therefore the Market Gardeners reserve the strongest off-sets arising from the
main root.

Being thus furnished with a proper quantity of sets, proceed to prepare the
ground for their reception. And they may either be p^^nted with a dibble, after
the ground is dug; or trenched in, as you proceed in diging the ground.

Choose an open situation, and as light and deep a soil as the Garden affords;
which must be trenched regularly one good spade deep at least; but if the
ground will admit of it, the deeper it is loosened the better.

Then proceed by dibble planting, in the following manner, being provided with
a long dibble, begin at one end of the piece of ground -- range the line
cross-ways; and with the dibble make holes about fifteen inches deep; and be
careful to make them all of an equal depth; which you may readily do by making
a mark upon the dibble. and so thrusting it down to that mark: making the
holes six inches asunder, dropping as you go on, one set or cutting into each
hole, with the crown, etc. upwards; taking care to fill or close the hole
properly with earth -- the rows to be one foot six inches asunder.

The other method of planting, by trenching in the sets, is, to open a trench
at one end, in the common method of trenching, two spades wide and one spade
deep or more; and then having the sets or cuttings provided, plant one row
along the bottom of the trench with the crowns upright, about six inches
asunder; then dig the next trench the same depth and width, turning the earth
into the first trench, over the row of sets; thus proceed, trench after trench,
to the end.

By practicing either of the above methods of planting horseradish, the sets
will put forth perfectly straight-rooted shoots quite to the top; whereby they
will be long and smooth, and swell evenly their whole length, and will
sometimes attain a tolerable perfection the first summer's growth.

When the whole is planted, the ground may be sown with spinach or radishes,
which will come off time enough to give the horse radish full time to grow --
for these will not come up till the first or middle of April, when the spinach
and radishes will be all gathered.

They must be kept weeded for a month of six weeks, after which the leaves will
cover the ground, and prevent the growth of weeds.

In the autumn after planting, or about michaelmas, you may begin to take up
some of the roots, if wanted for use: but it will be advisable to let the
principal part remain, to have another summer's growth, when they will be very
fine and large.

When you take up these roots, it should be done regularly -- not digging up a
stick here and there, as is often practiced in private gardens; but beginning
at the first row, and so proceeding from row to row, according as you want
them: observing to throw out a trench close along the first row of roots, and
as deep as the roots go, but not to loosen the bottom or old set from whence
these proceed, which is called the stool.

Having thus cleared away the earth quite close to the stool or bottom of the
roots, then with a knife out each root off level, close to the stool from
whence it proceeds - for all the stools or bottoms of the roots must be left in
the ground undisturbed; for these will yield a supply of fine roots, the
succeeding year -- and when the roots are dug up, the old stools still
remaining will continue as often as the produce is gathered, to furnish a fresh
supply of roots every succeeding year.

But care must be taken, when digging up the roots, always to clear the old
stool from all straggling or small roots whatever; and in the summer season to
draw up all the small plants rising between the rows.

THE FRUIT GARDEN.
PEACH, NECTARINE, and APRICOT, TREES.
PRUNING may be performed on these Trees any time in this month.

In doing this business, you are to observe, that although the trees were
pruned last summer, there will still remain many branches which ought to be
taken out -- The most irregular and most abundant of them are to be cut away,
and a due supply of the best-placed and most moderate, strong shoots are to be
preserved, in every part, at proper distances -- For these trees produce their
fruit principally from their former summer's shoots.

The old naked branches, having no young shoots on them, should be entirely
taken out: which you will frequently meet with in old standard trees;
particularly in their lower and middle limbs. The cause is chiefly owing to
neglect of pruning, in due season; for the upper branches crowding over the
lower and middle ones, destroy their fertility.

Therefore in pruning these trees, let some of the old naked wood be cut away
in every winter's pruning, to make room for the last summer's shoots; and where
the branches of the trees are too crowded, let them be thined; observing to
take off such as grow most i regularly: and when any branches run across, or
interfere much with any of the others, in an improper direction, let them be
cut out. But a due supply should be left every where, at moderate distances, to
bear fruit the next summer; and all such as are not wanted must be cut away
quite close, leaving only the short spurs.

The weaker shoots, which are now left, must, at the same time, be shortened,
more or less, according to the vigor of the tree, and strength of the
different shoots; which is done in order to procure an effectual supply of new
shoots next year, to bear fruit the year following.

But in shortening the shoots, mind to proportion every one, according to it is
growth, and original length. For instance -- A shoot of about a foot long, may
be shortened to six or seven inches, according to it is strength; and one from
fifteen to eighteen inches, may be shortened to about twelve; and one from two
to three feet, need not be shortened at all, if the strength is in proportion
to it is length. And you will even find sometimes shoots of a foot long that
require no shortening, observing always to leave the strongest and largest
shoots.

The general rule for shortening the shoots of young trees, after the first
year's planting, is, if they are very strong and vigorous, you may shorten them
one fourth; if pretty strong, one third; and if weak, cut off two thirds.
Observe to prune out side branches, that are above an inch long; and leave none
but the main shoots on the trees -- As to the number of the branches, I refer
you to heading down young trees. -- [See March.]

But such peach, nectarine, and apricot trees, as produce strong and vigorous
shoots must be treated accordingly, and must also be shortened less in
proportion; and the stronger the branches are, the more room they should have.
-- When the tree is pruned, the branches should be at least from sixteen to
eighteen inches distant from each other, at the extremity of each shoot; but
indeed some of the most vigorous shoots should not be shortened at all -- This
is the only method of pruning, to bring a vigorous shooting tree in good order,
so as to produce moderate shoots, such as will bear fruit.

For the more wood you cut out, and in proportion as the shoots are shortened,
the more vigorous the trees will become.

By what I have above hinted, the pruner will not be at a loss to know in what
manner peach, nectarine, and apricot trees, according to their different growth
are to be treated. In the article of pruning, the rule here mentioned is always
to be applied to winter prunings.

Another thing is also proper to be observed; that is, where any young shoots,
which are left to bear, have produced only small shoots from their sides, they
must be cut off close to the principal, for those will neither produce good
fruit, nor good wood.

It is proper to direct also, in shortening the shoots, to cut them off as much
as possible at a leaf or wood bud, distinguishable from the blossom buds, by
being long and flat; the others being round and swelling: or otherwise to prune
to a twain blossom bud, that is where two buds arise at the same eye, having a
wood bud between them. Either of these rules are necessary to be observed in
shortening; in order that each may produce a leading shoot next summer, forming
a leader to the main shoots. For where there is a fair leading shoot provided
near the extremity of a bearing branch, such shoot seldom fails to yield a fair
and well flavoured fruit.

It will be also necessary to remark one thing more in pruning of these trees;
particularly the apricot -- In this tree we often perceive in the two year old
branches, some short shoots or spurs, on which are frequently to be seen
several blossom buds: now some people cut these spurs entirely off, but I am
much against such practice; for some of these short natural spurs will produce
handsome fruit, both in apricots, peaches, and nectarines, but especially the
former.

TRANSPLANT FRUIT TREES.
At any time in this month you may with great safety transplant any kinds of
fruit trees. -- [For the work see December.]

Support tall new planted fruit trees with stakes as soon as they are planted,
that they may not be rocked about by the wind, which would greatly retard them
from taking root.

VINES.
Vines may be pruned at any time in this month, if not done in the two former
ones. -- [For the method see December.]

You may still continue to prune apple, pear, plumb, and cherry trees, if not
done in the former month -- [For the work see December.]

PRUNING RASBERRY PLANTS.
Prune rasberries -- In doing this let it be observed, that all the old wood
that produced fruit last summer must now be cut out; for these never bear but
once. -- Therefore a supply of young wood must be left to bear next year;
observe therefore to leave several of the strongest of the last summer's shoots
standing upon every root, to bear the fruit to be expected next year. -- These
being the only proper bearing shoots, they must be allowed room; therefore as
above hinted, let all the old wood be cut close to the ground; and selecting
from three to five of the best young shoots on each root or stool, let all the
rest above that number be cut away close to the surface of the earth; and at
the same time let all straggling roots be destroyed.

Each of the shoots that are left to bear must be shortened -- the rule is
this. -- Take off one third or one fourth or thereabouts of the original length
of each shoot, according to the different growths.

In dressing, observe to take up and clear away all straggling roots between
the rows, and also all such as do not belong to the standing plants; this
digging will strengthen the roots, and the ground will lie clean and neat all
the winter.

PLANT RASBERRIES.
This is a good season to plant rasberries. -- When a new plantation is wanted,
observe that the young shoots or suckers which arise every summer from the old
roots are the most proper plants for the propagation of them: and fresh
plantations of these shrubs should be made in an open situation, where the
ground is good; and if you dig in some dung it will be of advantage to the
plants.

In choosing the plants for this plantation, observe to take such as are well
furnished with roots, for that is a principal article in rasberry plants; and
if there be but one or two or more buds formed on the root for next summer
shoots, such plants are particularly to be chosen.

Having procured the plants, shorten the shoots a little, and leave only one of
the strongest shoots on each root -- Let the ends of the roots be also trimmed;
then put the plants in rows four or five feet distant, and let them be planted
half a yard distant from each other in the rows.

FEBRUARY.
Work to be done in the Kitchen Garden.
BEANS.
PLANT beans of any kind; for all sorts will succeed from this planting.

This is still a proper season for the windsor, toker, and also the long pod
bean, which is a very great bearer. -- Any of the small kind of beans may be
planted in this month.

Some of the most approved sorts of beans should be put into the ground every
fortnight or three weeks; which will afford a regular supply of young beans
during the season for them.

Plant the windsor and toker in rows about three feet and a half, and the long
pods about three feet asunder.

PEACE.
Sow marrowfat, sugar, rounceval, and other sorts of pease once a fortnight or
three weeks; by which means you will have a constant succession of young peace
for the table.

Any other of the large or smaller sorts of peace, as mentioned in the former
months, may be now sown, allowing the distance of three weeks or thereabouts
between each sowing.

Draw drills or trenches for the different kinds of peace, as mentioned in the
former months; and sow them regularly, and cover them over with earth about
three inches deep.

All sorts of pease should be sown in open situations, but by no means under
trees.

Draw the earth to such pease and beans as are now up some height; it will
strengthen the plants greatly, and will encourage their growth.

CABBAGES.
Transplant cabbage plants of all kinds, if not done in the former month, in
the places where they are to remain to cabbage. -- It may be done at any time
in this month; but if the plants be strong and in good order, the sooner it is
done the better: Let them be planted in good ground; allowing about two or two
and a half feet distance for the York and sugar loaf, and two and a half or
three feet for the larger sorts.

This distance is to be understood of such plants as are to remain to grow to
their full size; but such of the forward kinds as are to be cut while young,
may be planted closer; and sixteen or eighteen inches apart will be sufficient.

Plant out also red cabbages, if not done in the last month; allow two feet
distance in the row, and two feet or two feet and a half between row and row.

CAULIFLOWERS.
If your cauliflowers sown in October, were not planted out in the last month,
let it be done soon in this; and plant them in a good rich soil in a warm
situation, in rows at about two feet and a half distance from row to row, and
two feet from each other in the row.

LETTUCES.
Transplant lettuce plants from the beds or borders where they have stood all
the winter, that is, if they stand too close.

The plants which are drawn out should be planted in an open spot of rich
ground, at ten or twelve inches distance each way. -- If the weather be dry let
them be watered. -- [See January.]

Lettuce seeds of different sorts should be sown the beginning of this month,
for a general crop; and to have a regular supply, let some more be sown about
the middle, and again toward the latter end of the month.

The proper sorts of lettuce, to sow at this time, are the white coss, the
green coss, cabbage, Silesia, brown Dutch; or in short any sorts may be now
sown.

Dig, for these seeds, a rich spot of ground, in an open situation; and let the
earth be well broken; sow the seeds on the surface, with an even hand; and rake
them in lightly, taking care not to draw the earth in heaps.

SPINACH.
Sow spinach to succeed that sown in the last month; the sowings should be
repeated every fortnight, or three weeks, or thereabout, to have a regular
supply; for the produce of each will not continue fit for use much longer,
before it will run. -- Let the seed be of the round leaved or smooth seeded
kind; which is the most proper sort to sow at this season; its leaves being
considerably thicker, and every way larger than the prickly spinach.

The seed may at this season be sown either in a spot alone, or with other
crops; particularly, between rows of windsor beans, or between cabbages, or
with radishes, etc. observing that, either alone or with other crops, spinach
seed should be sown pretty thick, and generally in the broad cast -- Let it be
evenly raked. -- Or you may otherwise sow it in broad flat drills, about a foot
wide, near an inch deep, and a foot asunder.

Let it be observed that spinach should not at this season, be sown, in a
situation which is much shaded with trees or bushes; for in such case it is
probable the plants would be drawn up to seed, before they arrive to half their
growth.

Hoe, or hand-weed early crops of spring spinach, thinning the plants at the
same time, to five or six inches distance.

The crops of winter spinach, which were sown last autumn, will be now
advancing to good perfection for use; and should be now kept clean from weeds,
and the earth between the plants stirred with a hoe; and, in gathering the
plants for use, if they stand close you should pull them out clean by the
roots; but if they already stand at wide distances, only crop the larger
outward leaves as wanted, 'till they begin to run; then cut them up clean at
the bottom.

ONIONS AND LEEKS.
I would recommend that onions may be sown this month for a general crop. But I
am well aware that many may be of a different opinion* and may perhaps condemn
me for attempting a matter so contrary to the usual practice. Therefore I hope
that I shall not be rashly accused, before my method is fairly tried.

The beginning of this month, prepare a piece of good rich ground; and let it
be well manured, and dug a full spade deep; and throw the square into beds,
about four feet over; and let the alleys be about one foot wide, and four
inches deep. -- Draw four drills or trenches on each bed, at equal distances,
about half an inch deep; scatter the seed thinly in each trench, and cover it
with the back side of the rake, and then rake it over evenly, standing in the
alleys.

Let your transplanted onions have frequent hoeings, and never suffer the
surface of the earth to be bound, but kept constantly loose. -- Leeks may be
sown and managed in the like manner.

RADISHES.
Sow some radish seeds, to have a fresh supply to succeed those sown in last
month. -- There should be some of the salmon, short top, and turnip radishes
sown at two or three different times in this month; that is -- at the
beginning, middle, and latter end; by which means there will be a due
succession of young radishes for the table. -- Let this seed be now sown in an
open spot, where the ground is good, and rather of a light, pliable nature.

In sowing these seeds observe the method as mentioned in the last month.

Thin the crops of early radishes, as soon as they arrive to the size of a
goose quill; which will greatly promote the growth of the small plants; observe
to keep them free from weeds, and clear from any litter.

In dry weather, let the early crops of radishes be frequently watered;
otherwise they will not swell freely, but will be sticky and hot.

CARROTS AND PARSNIPS.
Sow carrots and parsnips the beginning of this month, for a principal crop;
the carrots sown now will be fit for use in May, June, July, and August. -- In
the latter months you will find them very acceptable.

A spot of light deep ground, in an open situation, should be chosen for
carrots and parsnips; for the roots will thrive best in such soil and situation.

The ground should be trenched one good spade deep at least; or rather double
dig it, if the land will bear it. Observe in digging to take but thin spits;
and be careful to break all the clods, that the roots may have full liberty to
run down straight: for if the earth is not well divided or separated, the roots
will be apt to grow unkindly and forked.

Before you sow your seed, throw up the ground into beds, about four or five
feet wide; and on each bed, draw four drills or trenches, and set the seed thin
in each drill: or you may sow it in the broad cast method; you may also
sprinkle a little radish seed amongst the carrots or parsnips, and rake the
beds evenly, standing in the alleys.

SMALL SALLADING.
Small sallading, such as cresses, mustard, radish, rape, etc. should, when a
constant supply is wanted, be sown once in ten or twelve days, on a warm
border, in drills about three or four inches asunder, let each sort be kept
separate, and cover them over lightly with fine earth.

When the plants begin to come up, if the earth should cake, so that they
cannot rise freely, let it be broken lightly with the hand, or with a small
rake. -- If they should be attacked with frost, let them be watered before the
sun comes on them, which will prevent their turning black, and spoiling.

CHERVIL AND CORIANDER.
Sow chervil and coriander seeds. -- Draw some shallow drills about ten inches
or a foot asunder. -- Sow each sort separate; and cover them about an inch deep
with earth. -- Those plants are all to remain where sown till they come to
perfection, and the chief culture they require is to keep them clear of weeds.

SOWING PARSLEY.
Parsley, if not sown last month, may now be sown, either in beds; or in a
single drill, at the edge of the quarters or borders of the garden; it will
make a useful, and also a neat edging, if not suffered to grow rank, especially
the curled parsley; or if large supplies are wanted for market, it may be sowed
in continued rows, nine inches asunder; or upon the general surface, and raked
in.

SOWING BASIL.
Basil is, in some families, used as a kitchen herb. -- it is propagated by
seed; and the middle or latter end of this month, or early in March, is the
season to sow it; and the plants will be ready for planting out in April.

POT, AND MEDICINAL HERBS.
The seeds of dill, fennel, borage, burnet, bugloss, sorrel, marigold, orach,
and clarey, together with the seeds of all other herbs of the like kinds, may
be sowed any time this month, in a bed or border of common earth, and raked in;
most of which you may let remain where sown, if the plants are properly
thinned; -- or you may transplant them into beds, a foot asunder, in April, or
May. -- plant slips of balm, burnet, tarragow, tansey, pennyroyal, feverfew,
and chamomile.

In taking off the slips of these plants, be careful to preserve some root to
each if possible. -- Plant them nine or ten inches distance from each other, in
beds of rich earth.

Sow hysop, thyme, savory, and sweet marjoram, rather at the beginning; but
they will succeed very well, if sown any time in this month. These seeds should
be sown seperately, in spots of rich light earth, and raked in; or they may
also be sown in shallow drills, along the edges of borders, or beds; covering
them with fine earth, a quarter of an inch deep; and the plants will make neat
and useful edgings.

These plants should remain where sown till October; at which time they should
be thinned to five or six inches distance; and those that are drawn out may be
planted in another spot, six inches asunder: those which are sown for edgings
need not be thinned.

Plant slips of sage, hyssop, thyme, and savory, any time in this month.

Those slips or cuttings should be of the last year's growth, from five to
seven inches long, observing to slip or cut them off close to the place from
whence they arise; but there are sometimes to be found slips or suckers arising
from the bottom of the old plants, which are often furnished with roots: such
slips or suckers should be particularly chosen.

Plant all sorts of these herbs in beds or borders, six or seven inches apart;
they will take root, and become good plants in a short time. -- Water them in
dry weather, and they will be strong and well rooted; when they may be
transplanted, at proper distances, in beds of rich earth.

ROSEMARY, RUE, etc.
Plant slips of rosemary, rue, wormwood, and lavender; let these be planted in
a shady border six inches asunder; they will take root freely if you observe to
water them in dry weather: they may be transplanted into more open situations
about October, when they will be strong and well rooted.

It must be observed also, in propagating the cuttings of these plants, that
the shoots which were produced last year, are to be chosen for that purpose --
They should be from five to seven inches in length, according as you can find
them; observing to slip them off close to the part from whence they proceed.

Put each slip or cutting about two parts out of three into the ground.

But sometimes there are also slips or suckers to be met with, which arise
immediately from the stems of the old plants, near the surface of the ground:
-- These should be prefered, because they are often well furnished with roots.

Now is a good time to make new plantations of Mint.

MINT.
This plant is to be propagated, either by parting the root, or by the slips of
the young plants, taken up with roots or fibers at the bottom; or by the
cuttings of the young stalks next month, or in April, etc. But at this season
the increasing it by slips or parting the roots is most generally practiced --
and the method is this:

Having procured the roots let them be planted in rows about six inches
asunder, and five of six inches distant in the rows; and if the weather is dry
let them have a tolerable watering, to settle the earth about their roots.

In the third or fourth week in this month you may have recourse to such old
beds of mint, as are well stocked with plants; observing to slip or draw them
up by the roots: In doing which, you must draw them up gently, and with the
help of your knife at times, to raise or separate them; by which care, every
plant will rise with good roots.

The method of propogating by roots is this: Having procured a sufficient
quantity of old roots, draw drills with a hoe six inches asunder, extend the
roots or runners along the bottom of the drills; cover them about an inch deep
with the earth, and then make the ground even.

PLANTING ASPARAGUS.
Any time in this month is a very proper season to remove the roots of
asparagus, for the making of new plantations.

In the doing of which, the chief matter to be regarded is the choice of a
proper soil; which should be the best and deepest the garden affords: it must
not be too wet, nor too strong or stubborn; but such as is moderately light and
pliable; so that it will readily fall to pieces in digging, raking, etc. and in
a situation that is open, and enjoys the full sun.

The ground where you intend to make new asparagus beds should be regularly
trenched or dug to a good depth; and a large quantity of rotten dung buried in
each trench, at least ten or twelve inches below the surface of the ground.

The ground being dug and laid level, divide it into beds three feet in width,
with alleys about twenty inches wide between* bed and bed.

Two rows of these roots are to be planted on each bed, allowing about sixteen
or eighteen inches between each plant; and let the rows be about eighteen
inches from row to row.

Next let it be observed that the plants to be chosen must not be more than two
years old; but most good gardeners prefer those that are only one year from the
seed, which are such as I would recommend* as from experience I have found they
have generally taken root more freely, and succeeded every way better than two
year old plants.

The following is the method of planting them:

Strain your line length-ways the beds, about eight inches from the edge; and
then, with a spade, cut out a small trench or drill, close to the line, about
six inches deep; making that side next the line nearly upright; and when one
trench is opened, plant that, before you open another, at the distance before
directed.

In placing the roots observe they must not be horizontally extended or put
flat in the bottom of the trench, as practiced by some people; but they must be
laid nearly upright, against the back of the trench or drill, so that the crown
of the plants may also stand upright, about two to three inches below the
surface of the ground: Let them be all placed at an equal depth, spreading
their roots a little in nearly a direct position against the back of the
trench; and, at the same time, drawing a little earth up against them with the
hand, as you place them; just to fix the plants in their due position. When one
drill is thus planted, immediately with the rake draw the earth into the drill
over the plants; and then open another drill, proceed in the same method till
the whole is planted. Then let the surface of the bed be raked smooth, and
cleared from stones, etc.

At each corner of every bed, let a firm stake be driven into the ground, to
serve as a mark for the alleys.

It is the custom with some people, who are obliged to make the most of every
spot of ground, to sow a thin crop of onions, the first year, on new asparagus
beds; and this should be performed before the beds are raked; sowing the seeds
and raking them lightly in. A crop of onions may thus be obtained, without
hurting the asparagus, provided the onions are not suffered to grow just about
the plants.

The asparagus being planted, the next care is, when the plants come up, which
will be about the end of this month, or the beginning of the next, to keep them
clean from weeds; which must be particularly attended to during the summer
season. -- [For the further management in dressing up the beds, etc. which must
be done this month, see October.]

It will be two years, from the time of planting two year old roots, before the
asparagus will produce handsome buds large enough for use; though sometimes a few
of the largest are cut the second spring after planting. But I do advise to let
it be the third year before you make a general cutting.

A plantation of asparagus, if the beds are properly dressed every year, as
directed, in the spring and autumn months, will continue to produce buds for
twelve or fourteen years.

In making new plantations of asparagus, it is the custom with some gardeners,
instead of putting in your plants as before directed, to sow the seed at once
in the beds, where the plants are to remain: This is not a bad method -- for by
such practice the roots are not disturbed by a removal, and consequently cannot
fail of producing a regular crop. But it must be observed, that if two pieces
of ground are to be laid down the same year with asparagus; supposing one piece
to be planted with young roots, and the other sown with seed, that piece which
was planted will be ready to cut, a year before that sown with seed.

However to such as choose to raise a plantation of asparagus at once from
seed, the method is this:

The beds are to be three feet wide, and prepared as before directed for the
plants; then mark out two lines lengthways on the beds, and allowing these
lines at the distance of sixteen or eighteen inches, dot in a few seeds,
covering them about half an inch deep. When the plants have been up some time,
you must thin them, leaving only one of the strongest in each place, and
carefully clearing them from weeds --

A plantation of asparagus thus raised will produce beds fit to cut the fourth
spring after sowing, but they will be very large and fine the fifth year.

This is now the season to sow asparagus seed, to raise plants to make new
plantations.

This seed should be sown about the beginning or middle of this month, on beds
of rich earth, about four feet wide, Let it be sown in the broad cast, on the
surface; and throw up the alleys about fourteen or sixteen inches wide, and
three inches deep; let the seed be buried about half an inch in the earth, and
let the ground be raked smooth: -- the plants will be up in a month, when they
must be kept very clean from weeds, by a careful hand, weeding them at
different times in the summer.

If the weather be very dry, when the plants come up, it will be proper to
refresh them, now and then, with a little water; which will greatly forward
them in their growth.

They will be fit to plant out for good next spring, agreeable to the method
prescribed.

ARTICHOKES.
Make a general dressing of artichokes, the beginning or middle of this month.

Where the plants have been landed up in the autumn to protect them from frost,
let the ground be now levelled down, especially if the plants have begun to
shoot tolerably strong; observe, as you proceed in levelling down, to dig and
loosen all the earth about the plants; and at the same time, examine the number
of shoots or suckers proceeding from each stool or root; and selecting two or
three of the strongest to remain on every stool or root, you may then readily
get to slip the superabundant shoots off clean from the place whence they
arise; minding, as above directed, to leave two good shoots, but never more
than three, upon each root or stock; closing again and gently pressing the
earth about the roots, and also about the young plants, with your hands.

The shoots that are slipped off will serve to make fresh plantations, where
wanted; for artichokes are generally increased by planting the young shoots;
and this is the season to do it.

When any new plantations of artichokes are intended, let them be planted so
soon in this month as you can procure good plants for that purpose; observing
that those slips or suckers slipped off, in spring dressing, from the largest
plants, as above directed, are the proper sets to be chosen.

There are two sorts of artichokes, the large globe, and the French green or
oval artichoke; but the former is greatly preferable to plant for a general
supply, the head being considerably larger, and the eatable parts more thick
and fleshy.

They should be planted in an open situation, and in good ground; it may be
necessary therefore to spread a quantity of good rotten dung over the piece,
and to dig it in. -- The sets must be planted, with a dibble, in rows of five
feet asunder, and four feet in the row -- give them some water immediately
after they are planted, to settle the earth about the plants.

The above plantation, if kept clear from weeds, and watered now and then in
dry weather, in the beginning of the spring, till they have taken good root,
will not fail to yield artichokes in June.

You may in the spring, when your artichokes are dressed, plant a row of drum
head cabbage plants between them, or sow radishes, spinach and lettuce; as
also, between the rows of your new planted shoots.

A plantation of artichokes will continue to produce good heads six or seven
years, and sometimes longer; but it must be observed, that such person as
desire to have a succession of them for two or three months in the summer,
should make a new plantation every spring; for the old stocks, which have been
planted a year or two, produce heads in May and June; and the slips planted now
produce their heads in June and July.

About the latter end of this month, sow the seed of artichokes; for this
purpose choose a small piece of good ground, in an open situation; throw it up
into a bed, about four feet wide; draw four drills thereon, about nine inches
from each other, and half an inch deep; plant the seeds about six inches
distant in the row; cover the seed over and rake the other ground smooth. The
plants from these seeds will be fit to put out, etc.

IRISH POTATOES.
Irish potatoes may be planted at any time in this month -- these roots thrive
best in a moderate, light, loose soil; and where it is not wet, if you add dung
it will be of great advantage.

For propagating potatoes be careful to procure some good roots; that is, to
pick a quantity of the best kind of potatoes, choosing such as are perfectly
sound, and of a tolerable large size: These are to be prepared for planting, by
cutting or quartering them; that is to say, each root is to be cut into two*
three, or more pieces, minding particularly that each piece be furnished with
at least one or two good buds, which will be sufficient. Being thus prepared,
they are to be planted in rows two feet and a half from each other* and about a
foot in the row, and two inches deep.

As to the method of planting, it is frequently performed with a blunt ended
dibble; but some plant them as they proceed in digging or plowing the ground,
placing them in the trenches or furrows as they go on, and turning the earth
from the next trench or furrow over them; and so on to the end.

Others dig or plough the ground; then draw drills with a hoe, about two or
three inches deep; and so drop the set into the drills and cover them in.

But where people plant large quantities, the most expeditious way is to plow
them in, by placing the potatoes in the furrows; miss two furrows, and plant
one; but you must observe, that your ground must be in good order, clean, and
free from weeds, etc.

TURNIPS.
Early in this month, sow turnips for a full crop -- the best sort to sow now
is the early Dutch. But I observe that few people sow turnips at this season;
and the reason is, I have heard many say, that they will all go to seed. But
the chief cause why they so frequently run to seed is, that it is greatly
degenerated, by being sown too often in the same soil; but you will find that
when your seed is fresh imported from Europe, not one in ten thousand will run.

Let this seed be sown in an open spot of ground moderately thin, and as even
as possible -- lay the ground out in beds from six to ten feet wide; and throw
up alleys eighteen inches wide; let the earth that is taken out of the alleys
be carefully thrown over the beds; and rake the ground as even as possible,
standing in the alleys.

THE FRUIT GARDEN.
PLUMB AND CHERRY TREES.
PRUNE, plumb and cherry trees, at any time in this month, if not done before.

In pruning plumb and cherry trees, either espaliers or standards; observe,
that the same bearers remain many years in a fruitful state. -- Let only any
causual worn out wood, or any irregular crowded branches, and decayed parts be
cut out, together with all the superfluous and ill placed young shoots of last
summer. --

But it must be observed, where a supply of young bearing wood is wanting in
any part of these trees, that some of the best situated shoots of the last
summer's growth must be left in every such place; these shoots are not to be
shortened, but each must be left at full length, without being reduced at any
future pruning, in summer or winter, where there is room for them.

For the shoots, which are now left at full length, and not hereafter
shortened, will, in the second or third year after, begin to produce some thick
short shoots or spurs, about an inch or more in length; and upon these spurs,
and on no other, the fruit of these trees is produced.

But on the contrary, if the shoots which are left in to bear were to be
shortened, as by many is ignorantly practiced, they would not, in that case,
produce any such fruit-bearing spurs; but, in the places where the spurs or
blossom-buds will otherwise appear, would send out numbers of strong and
altogether useless shoots; with which the trees would be continually crowded;
and not one branch would be in a condition to bear, so long as you keep
shortening them: and the trees thus mismanaged would not produce one tenth part
of the fruit as when treated in the method above mentioned. --

Therefore be careful to leave the young shoots as they advance in full length,
without reducing them, unless you should perceive any irregular or
superabundant ones which may require to be taken out, in which case they should
be pruned away close to the mother branches.

This plainly shows, what method is to be taken, in pruning these trees, to
bring them into a condition to bear; it also plainly shows, that neither the
young shoots nor old branches are, in the general course of pruning, to be
shortened.

But in the course of pruning the above trees, the branches in general should
be well examined with a curious eye; and if there are any which are old or worn
out, and not furnished with good bearing spurs, let such as are decayed, or in
an unfruitful state, be taken out, to make room for the more proper bearing
wood and for a supply of young shoots, in a regular manner.

When the old useless wood is cut out, examine the remaining branches, etc. And
where these stand too close let some of them be cut away, observing to prune
out the most unpromising and irregularly grown, and such as can be best spared;
and let no two branches cross each other -- and all the summer shoots which are
not wanted for a supply of wood, must be now cut away quite close, leaving no
spurs but such as are naturally produced.

Let the shoots in general be left at equal distances, at the extremities; and
always observe to leave the middle of the tree open, to admit a free
circulation of air through the branches.

PEACHES, NECTARINES, AND APRICOTS.
If your peaches, nectarines and apricot trees were not pruned in the last
months, let it be done in this; the sooner the better. [For the method see
January.]

PRUNING OLD STANDARD FRUIT TREES.
Standard fruit trees, in the garden or orchard, may be pruned at any time in
this month, where necessary: observing to cut from them all dead wood, and
decayed worn out branches, that do not promise to bear good fruit, or that
crowd others. -- Also where the trees assume a rambling or irregular growth,
and the wood in general is much crowded. Let such be cut away in a regular
manner, so that the principal branches may stand clear of each other.

If any old trees be infested with moss, which sometimes runs over the
branches; let it now be cleared off, if not done before; for it will much
injure both trees and fruit.

VINES.
The vines which were not pruned the former month, should be attended to as
soon as possible in this, -- If the business be delayed much longer, they will
be apt to bleed after pruning; which will greatly injure the plants.

RASBERRIES.
If your rasberries were not pruned, dressed, and planted in the last month,
let this work be done early in this. [For the method see January.]

STRAWBERRIES.
The plantations of strawberries should be now cleaned, and have the spring
dressing. -- First pull or cut off any remaining strings or runners from the
plants, and clear the beds from weeds, litter etc. then loosen the ground
between the plants, and earth them up: this will strengthen them, and make them
flower strongly, and produce large well flavoured fruit.

Strawberries may be planted till the middle of this month; but the best season
is about the latter end of September, or the beginning of October; for, in such
case, they will bear fruit the summer after: indeed those planted now will take
root freely; but will not bear any fruit until the next year. -- Observing that
the proper sets for planting are the young offsets or runners of last summer;
such as I advised to be left in May, which must be now procured from these beds
of old plants that are in full perfection for bearing, taking them up with good
roots, and not disturbing the old stools. Prepare for these plants a piece of
good land, if loomy the better, and let some good rotten dung if you can
procure it, be dug in. Divide the ground into beds four feet wide, with alleys
at least eighteen inches. Plant four rows on each bed, and let them be about
ten inches or a foot distant from each other in the row.

PLANTING FRUIT TREES.
Fruit trees, of all sorts, may be planted any time in this month.

Let every kind be planted at proper distances, so that they may have room to
grow, without interfering with each other; which, in a few years, is often the
case in many gardens and orchards.

Peaches and nectarines should never be planted less than twenty-five feet
distant from each other; and if you plant them thirty, it would be a more
eligible plan; though the distance appears considerable at first, yet, if trees
are grafted or budded upon free growing stocks, they will readily fill up that
place; and bear much better than if confined, so as to require to be often cut
back, and kept within bounds.

Standard apple and pear trees, when planted in an orchard, should be at least
thirty feet distant from each other; and if the land is rich and strong, if
they had forty it would be the better.

The rule, I advise, to plant standard fruit trees in general is, to allow
apple and fruit trees in an orchard, from thirty to forty feet distance, every
way; peaches, nectarines and apricots, from twenty-five to thirty feet
distance; cherries and plumbs, from eighteen to twenty-five; almonds, quinces
and medlars, from sixteen to twenty. Observing, these are the least distances
that should be allowed; but where there is a good scope of ground, you may
allow them five, ten, or even twenty feet more room: for in the end, it will
prove to be of greater advantage, when the trees arrive at their full growth.

In planting trees of any kind, let care be taken that they are not planted too
deep; for that is a more material point than many people imagine.

Open for each tree a hole, wide enough to receive the roots freely, without
pressing them against the sides; then, having the trees ready dug up with good
spreading roots, which you must take care not to injure in the operation, let
the ends of the straggling ones be pruned; and cut off all such as are broken
or bruised: then set the tree in the hole, and see that all the roots spread
freely as they should do, so as the upper roots be rather over than below the
general surface of the ground. -- Break the earth well, and throw it in equally
about the roots; and in so doing shake the tree gently, that the earth may fall
in close between the roots and fibers.

When the earth is all in, tread the surface gently, to fix the tree properly;
and lastly raise a small concave hill round the tree.

Support new planted trees with stakes, as soon as they are planted; that they
may not be rocked about by the wind, which will greatly retard their taking
root.

FIG TREES.
About the middle of this month prune your fig trees.

In the first place observe to cut away or grub up all the suckers at the stock
of the trees; which otherwise would require much nourishment to support them,
and weaken the mother plants; when this is done you must prune out all dead,
decayed and crowded wood; and where any large branch grows in a rambling manner
across the others, let it be also taken out.

Where the branches stand too close, so as not to admit a free circulation of
air through the tree, let some of these be also cut away. -- The keeping the
trees thin, and taking away all irregular and old worn out branches, is the
only way to have large and well tasted fruit, and also handsome and lasting
trees.

The young branches of fig trees must not be shortened, but left at their full
length; for by shortening them you will not only cut away the fruit that would
have appeared, but also, occasion them to run much to wood, and thereby never
to produce half a crop of fruit.

TRANSPLANT ORANGE TREES, etc.
If the weather be open and mild, about the latter end of this month, you may
transplant such orange, lemon and lime trees, as you have an occasion for. --
If you plant the orange trees for a hedge, about ten feet will be a good
distance; but if intended for an orchard or a grove, twenty feet will not be
too much.

N. B. These trees will not thrive well far off from the salt water.

PRUNE ORANGE TREES, etc.
About the middle of this month, you may, with great safety, venture to prune
your orange, lemon and lime trees.

In doing this, observe to cut out all dead and decayed branches from the
middle of the trees, and to take away all cobwebs, dead leaves, etc. that shall
be found on them.

HEADING DOWN YOUNG TREES.
In heading down those trees, it is to be supposed that they were budded or
grafted a year or two before, and have been trimmed up to a small head about
the height of three or four feet, containing four or five small shoots, and an
upright middle one. -- Cut the middle one down close, leaving four or five of
the shoots; thus done, shorten the remaining ones within six or seven eyes from
the main stem, if the tree is in a strong and vigorous state; but if the tree
is weak, the shoots may be shortened to three or four eyes: by your shortening
the branches as above, it contributes much to the growth of the trees the next
summer.

MARCH.
Work to be done in the Kitchen Garden.
BEANS.
YOU may still continue to plant more beans to succeed those sown in the former
months, where a constant succession of young ones are required.

The long podded bean is a proper kind to plant at this season, it being a
remarkable great bearer, excellent when young, and is very profitable for the
use of a family. -- They may be planted at any time in this month, allowing
them the distance of three feet between each row, and about six inches in the
rows. --

The Windsor and Sandwich beans, or any other of the large kinds may yet be
planted -- let these be planted at this season in rows about five feet asunder.
-- Let some earth be drawn up to the stems of such beans as are advanced four
or five inches high, which will greatly promote their growth.

PEACE.
Sow peace to succeed those sown in the former month: where a constant supply is
required, there should be some sown at least every fortnight or three weeks.

The marrowfat and Spanish morotto, being of the large kind, are both fine
eating peace, and great bearers, and are also proper to be sown at this season
-- likewise, the rouncival is a very fine large pea for a late crop; and if
sown at any time this month; will succeed very well. These large kind of peace
should be sown in drills or trenches not less than five feet asunder. The
hotspur, or any other small peace are also proper to be sown now, if required.

Draw earth to such peace as are come up, and advanced to the height of two or
three inches; it will strengthen the plants, and greatly forward their growth.

Set sticks to peace when you intend them for to climb up; this should be done
in due time, when the plants are about four or five inches high; observe to
have sticks of a proper height: for marrowfats and other large peace, they
should be six or seven feet high; but those of four or five feet will be quite
sufficient for the hotspurs, and other sorts of small peace.

CABBAGES.
Now transplant, if not done in February, all the cabbage plants that are
remaining in their winter beds, or as many as you intend to plant out for a
spring crop: this should be done the beginning of the month; and if the weather
proves dry, give your plants now and then a little water till they have taken
good root.

Draw up earth about the stems of forward cabbage plants, as it will greatly
strengthen them and encourage their growth.

If the weather about this time should prove dry, you should frequently give
your young cabbage plants a little water, observing to do it early in the
morning.

SNAP OR RUSH BEANS.
About the latter end of this month, plant snap beans, in a dry and warm
situation.

The best sorts to plant for a first crop are the small negro, and also the
white and yellow dwarfs; they are exceeding good bearers, and will come very
early.

These beans should be planted in rows, about two feet from each other, and, at
this season, about three inches distant from each other in the rows.

ONIONS AND LEEKS.
Where onions and leeks were not sown the last month, this work should be done
early in this. -- You may either sow them in the broad cast, or in trenches,
about nine or ten inches from each other, on beds about four feet wide.

The onions and leeks sown last month will be now above the ground; let them be
hoed as soon as you can properly distinguish the rows: -- for nothing will
promote the growth of onions and leeks so much as frequent hoeings.

Let your transplanted onions be often hoed, and the earth kept always loose
between them; which will greatly promote their growth.

TURNIPS.
If you have not yet sown any turnips, let this business be no longer delayed.
-- [For the method see February.]

Those turnips which were sown the beginning of last month, should be now hoed,
and properly thinned, leaving the strongest plants from six to eight inches
distant from each other; but if they were sown in drills nine or ten inches
apart, they should be also thinned to about six or eight. -- [For particulars
of hoeing turnips see August.]

IRISH POTATOES.
Potatoes may be yet planted, but the sooner the better -- plant them about two
feet and half asunder.

Those planted in the beginning of last month, will be now above the ground;
they should have some earth drawn up close to them -- it will protect them from
the frost, and cold winds, and greatly promote their growth.

CARROTS AND PARSNIPS.
If you have not sowed any carrots or parsnips last month, let some be sown the
beginning of this.

If you do not sow at this season the true orange carrot, the greatest part
will run to seed before they arrive to any degree of perfection: but if you can
procure good seed imported from Europe, and if your land is good, and you
follow the directions of last month, you need not fear of having a fine crop of
carrots and parsnips*: -- However, where a supply of young carrots or parsnips
are required, they ought to be sown almost every month.

RADISHES.
Thin the general crops of radishes where they are too thick -- you may begin
to draw them before they become quite so large as a goose quill, which will
make room for the other plants to grow more freely; observe to keep the crop
clear from weeds.

Radish seed, both the short top and salmon, should be sown at two different
times in this month; by which means a constant supply of young radishes may be
obtained; allowing about fifteen or sixteen days between each sowing; choosing
at this time, an open situation for your seed; -- sow it evenly on the surface,
and rake it well in; the plants will make their appearance in a few days, at
this season.

The crops of early radishes should in dry weather be frequently watered; this
will occasion their swelling freely, and prevent their growing hot and sticky.

Where turnip-rooted radishes, or small round radishes are required, the seed
may be sown at any time in this month. -- It should be sown in an open spot;
and when the plants begin to show their rough leaves, if they are too thick,
they should be thinned to about an inch distance, to make room for the
remaining plants to grow.

The black and white Spanish radish may also be sown at any time in this month.

LETTUCES.
About the beginning, or at any time in this month, transplant lettuces of all
kinds, where they stand too close; both those of the winter standing, and such
as were sown in January, or early in last month.

Choose a good spot of ground for these plants; and if moderately dunged, it
will prove beneficial to their growth: dig the ground regularly one spade deep,
and rake the surface smooth; then plant the lettuces on beds, about four or
four feet and a half wide, divide the beds into four rows, and place your
plants about 12 inches from each other in the rows: if the weather be dry,
water them immediately after planting; and frequently repeat it till they have
taken good root.

Coss, cabbage, Silesia, and brown Dutch lettuce, or any other fort may be sown
at any time in this month -- dig a spot of rich ground for them, in an open
situation; sow the feed equally, but not too thick; rake it in lightly: repeat
the sowing once a fortnight or three weeks, that there may be a regular
succession.

SMALL SALLADING.
Sow small sallading at least once a fortnight, such as mustard, cresses, rape,
etc.

Draw some flat shallow drills for these seeds, where the ground is rich and
light; sow thereon each kind separate, and cover them lightly with earth.

Water them moderately, if the weather be dry; as it will greatly promote their
growth.

If the sallading be attacked with a hoary morning frost, water it off before
the sun comes on it; as it will prevent its becoming black and being spotted.

PARSLEY.
If you sowed no parsley seed in the last month, do it early in this; the
curled sort is best esteemed, it being most proper to garnish dishes, and
equally fit for the kitchen service.

TOMATOES.
About the middle, or toward the latter end of this month, sow tomatoes.

This seed should be sown at this season in a warm situation, and in a light
rich soil; it may be sown either in drills, or in the broad cast, or else
dotted into the earth about three or four inches asunder, and a quarter of an
inch deep.

SOW PEPPERS OF ALL SORTS.
Toward the twentieth of this month, you may sow peppers of different kinds;
they may be sown much in the same manner as the tomatoes, and in a warm border
of light rich earth.

WATER AND MUSK MELONS.
About the middle of this month, you may sow water and musk melons, for the
first crop; the culture of these is so well known, that it needs but little
description. I would only recommend it to those who plant melons at this
season, to raise hills of good light rich earth, from eight inches to a foot
above the surface of the ground; and let the hills be from fourteen to eighteen
inches broad on the top, and let about six or seven seeds be placed in each,
about half an inch deep.

CUCUMBERS.
Sow cucumbers, for a first crop, about the middle of this month; choose a warm
and sheltered situation, raising hills and managing them in every respect as
you would do your melons. -- [For the further method of raising them see April.]

OCRA.
Ocra may also be sown about the middle of this month; it delights in a low,
rich land; and should be sown in rows, about six feet asunder, and the plants
should be left to remain in the rows at least four feet distant.

SQUASHES AND PUMPKINS.
These may be planted about the middle of this month, for the first crop; if
they succeed, they will come in early. -- [For the method see next month.]

RED BEETS.
The beets that were sown in the last month should be now carefully thinned,
leaving only one plant in the place where they were sown, and let the earth be
constantly kept loose; which will greatly strengthen the plants.

Red beets ought by no means to be transplanted; for, if the tap root is once
broken, it will put out many fibers, and will be very short and unseemly.

CELERY.
About the middle of this month, sow celery for a first crop -- prepare a spot
of rich ground for this purpose, and as much in the shade as possible, but not
under trees; and if it be moist it is all the better. -- Sow the seed pretty
thick, and either rake it in lightly, or otherwise cover it over near a quarter
of an inch with fine earth; and, in dry weather, give frequent moderate
waterings, both before and after the seed comes up.

SPINACH.
Sow spinach where required, it will yet succeed, and may be sown any time in
this month. -- Where a constant supply of this plant is wanted, you should sow
some at least every three weeks; observing the round leafed is still the best
sort for this season, which may be sown either in the broad cast and raked in,
or in shallow drills.

Hoe the spinach that was sown in the former month, and thin the plants out to
three or four inches distance.

ASPARAGUS.
Fork or dress your asparagus beds, if not yet done; let these be finished the
first week in this month, for the buds are now in great forwardness. -- Rake
the bed smooth immediately after they are forked.

Asparagus may yet be planted, it will now take root freely; but let this work
be finished by the middle of the month, for the plants will not succeed well if
planted later. -- Let the same method be observed as mentioned in the former
months.

Sow Asparagus seed, if omitted last month, in order to raise plants for a new
plantation the next year, if required.

ARTICHOKES.
Where artichokes were not dressed and slipped last month, they should be now
attended to; for they will have made their spring shoots, which will be up some
height above the ground; let the same method be observed in dressing them as
directed in February.

Plant artichokes where wanted: they will yet succeed; and may bear in the
summer, provided you plant them soon in this month.

Choose a piece of good ground for these plants, in an open situation, and lay
some good rotten dung thereon and dig it in a proper depth -- let the plants be
set in rows five feet asunder, and plant them not less than five feet in the
rows, giving them a good watering.

THE FRUIT GARDEN.
ORANGE TREES, etc.
ABOUT the beginning of this month, you may with great safety transplant
orange, lemon, and lime trees. You must also observe to prune them if not done
before. [See Feb.]

FIG TREES.
About the beginning of this month plant fig trees, if not done in February;
this being a good season for removing them -- they will now take root in a
short time.

These trees should be planted, from twenty to twenty five feet from each
other; for nothing adds more to the flavor of the fruit than a free circulation
of air and the admission of the sun between the trees and branches.

When you plant them examine the plants well; and rub off all the buds that are
likely to break within two feet of the ground; and in particular under the
surface of the earth -- for they are very apt to throw out suckers, which, if
not taken away in due time, will greatly retard the growth of the young trees.

PEACH, NECTARINE, AND APRICOT TREES.
Where peach, nectarine, and apricot trees remain unpruned, let them be
finished the first week in this month at the furthest -- for, if the spring is
forward, these trees are sometimes in full bloom at this time; when it will do
them more hurt than good to prune them in such state -- and the work might have
been much better done in the former months.

In pruning these trees, let the same methods be observed as directed in
February; but as the buds are now swelled it will require the greater caution.

Finish pruning of apples, pears, plumbs, and cherries, and all other fruit
trees; it should not at any rate be delayed longer than the first week in this
month.

PLANTING FRUIT TREES.
If you have been hitherto dilatory, fruit trees may yet be planted with some
hopes of success, but the sooner the better; if the weather be moist, the trees
which are planted now will take root in a short time, and, with the assistance
of a little water in dry weather, will shoot freely.

In planting fruit trees, either espaliers or standards, observe to plant each
kind at the distances mentioned under the head in the month of February.

STRAWBERRIES.
The strawberry beds, which were not dressed in the last month, ought to be
attended to as soon as possible in this; the plants will now begin to push
apace, and the sooner this work is done the better.

Clear the beds from weeds, and the plants from strings, and other litter, and
if the main plants are crowded with young ones, from last year's runners, let
them be thinned accordingly; for it is the best method to keep those plants in
single bunches, and clear of each other, so that there may be room to dig round
them with a narrow spade or trowel. -- The beds being cleared from litter, etc.
loosen the earth between the plants, and let rich earth, or well rotted dung be
put in between them; as it will be the means of strengthening the plants, and
cause them to flower strong, and produce large and good fruit.

Strawberries may now be planted, where required -- observe the same method as
mentioned in October.

It seems to be a common method in Carolina to burn the dead leaves, and
runners of strawberries in the spring; I am much against such practice; for by
burning the dead leaves and runners, you often injure the plants likewise.

APRIL.
Work to be done in the Kitchen Garden.
BEANS.
IN the country, you may yet venture to plant beans the beginning of this
month, for the last crop.

The Windsor and the long podded beans are the best sort to plant at this
season; the sormer should be planted in rows about four feet distant from each
other, and six or eight inches in the row; and the latter, about three feet,
and five or six inches from each other in the rows.

Hoe between the rows of beans that are already up, and draw earth about their
stems.

Observe to top such beans as are in full blossom; it will promote the setting
of the pods. [See February.]

PEACE.
Sow some peace, in order to have a regular supply from the beginning of this
month; let this be your last crop; indeed there is no great prospect of success
even from this; but where young peace are required, and you have plenty of
garden room in the country, you may try to get some peace to come in for use
about June; though it is seldom you see any in Charleston market after May that
are good.

The best sort to sow at this season is the marrowfat, green and white
rouncevil, being fine large sorts; likewise any of the hotspur kinds may be
sown now, and will sometimes produce a good crop.

The larger kinds ought to be planted five feet from row to row, and the
hotspur four feet at least.

Let the earth be now drawn up to the stems of such peace as are above ground,
and keep them clear from weeds; for by this means their growth will be greatly
promoted.

Stick such peace as are advanced to the height of five inches; let it not be
delayed too long, for if they are once beat down by the winds and rain, it will
be troublesome to stick them at all, and they will not readily rise again.

Let hotspurs have sticks about three feet and a half, or four feet high; and
larger sorts sticks of about six feet. [See Feb.]

CABBAGES.
By the beginning of this month your spring sown cabbage plants will be fit to
remove to the beds where you intend them to cabbage.

Plant out the early York and sugar loaf, for they will be the first that will
produce hard heads: they should be also the first made use of, as they will not
stand the heat so well as the larger kind of cabbages.

These plants should be planted in a square of well dunged land, at about two
feet from row to row, and two feet from each other in the row.

Next plant the battersea and drumhead cabbages; allow them two feet and a half
from row to row, and two feet in the row.

Let the cabbage plants, which were set out in February and March, have
frequent hoeings, and draw up earth to the stems of them.

About the middle, or latter end of this month, sow large late cabbages and
savoys for a general autumn crop. -- These seeds should be sown in an open and
airy situation, in beds about four feet wide; the seed ought not to be sown
very thick, nor yet too thin, but moderately and evenly scattered.

The plants which are sown now will be fit to plant out in June.

CAULIFLOWERS AND BROCOLI.
Sow your first crop of cauliflowers and brocoli, at the same time, and much in
the same manner as you do cabbage plants. If you sow them early, they will be
able to stand the sun in the summer much better than those sown in June.

SNAP OR BUSH BEANS.
Now plant full crops of all kinds of snap and bush beans, to succeed those
sown in the last month.

Any of the dwarf kind may be now planted; but the most profitable are the
white, black, and yellow, which are all early kinds, great bearers, and
exceeding good for kitchen use.

There are three or four other kinds more late, but very great bearers; they
are the black speckled, red speckled, large white, and the cream colored
dwarfs. The early and the late sorts may be planted at the same time in this
month, and they will succeed each other in bearing.

The method of planting them is this. -- Dig a square of ground, in an open
situation; and if you can give it a moderate dunging, the better.

Your ground being dug, rake it even; and take away the stones if any; then
with a small hoe draw drills about twenty inches or two feet from each other,
and one inch deep; then drop the beans into the bottom of the drills six inches
apart; cover them over with your hoe, and rake the ground smooth.

Let it be observed, that both the early and late sorts are to be planted in
the same manner; only allow the large kinds a little more room from row to row,
and likewise in the rows.

The white running snap bean is in the highest esteem in Europe; where few
families use dwarfs after these come in. -- They are great bearers, and a fine
delicious vegetable if gathered while young. I have known them to thrive
exceeding well in this state, and am much surprised to see them taken so little
notice of; for they will bear when the dwarfs will not -- I have seen them in
full bearing in July and August.

These beans should be planted in rows about six feet from each other* and from
four to six inches in the rows, and in drills about an inch deep, as was before
observed.

CARROTS AND PARSNIPS.
Your early carrots and parsnips will be now advancing fast in their growth,
and they should be properly encouraged: -- Clear them from weeds, and thin the
plants out to their due distances.

This work may be either done with the hand or hoe; but those who can use the
small hoe will find it to be the most expeditious method of cleaning and
thinning the plants: and besides, by loosening the ground with the hoe, it will
in a great manner promote their growth.

However, at any rate, let the plants be thined out properly, so that they may
have full liberty to grow at the top, and to swell at the bottom. Thin out
therefore the general crops to about seven or eight inches at least, and cut up
all the weeds, for there is nothing like allowing these plants plenty of room;
by which means, if the ground be good, the roots will become long and strait.

The parsnips in particular should be thined out to twelve inches distance;
then the roots will swell to a considerable size, and attain their utmost
perfection.

Such crops of carrots however, as are intended to be drawn for the table when
young, need not to be thined at first, to more than four or five inches apart;
for, by a gradual thining out the larger, for use, the rest will increase in
their growth daily.

But the main crops of carrots, that you intend to grow to a full size, should
be thined properly at once; you should in this case allow them full eight or
nine inches at least; but if they were placed from ten to twelve inches
asunder, it would be the better.

SOWING CARROTS AND PARSNIPS.
About the latter end of this month, sow carrots and parsnips for a general
winter crop.

Various are the opinions about sowing these roots for winter use; therefore I
think it incumbent on me to let no observation escape that may add to the
culture of these valuable vegetables.

In England the culture of carrots has arrived to such perfection, that for my
own credit I refrain from relating real facts; for I am sure, not one in a
thousand would believe me.

It seems to be the general opinion of most people, that if they sow their
winter crops of carrots before June, they will run all to seed; but those ideas
are entirely erroneous; for success depends chiefly on the kind of seed. -- If
it be the true orange carrot, it will not run; -- but if the seed sown in March
or April, be of the pale degenerated sort, they will run to seed by September;
or, as the gardeners express it, they will all be speared to a plant; while the
produce of the true genuine seed imported from Europe, will be in its full
vigor. Besides, it is a very hard matter to get the carrot seed to grow in
June, that month often proving dry, and the weather very hot; therefore people
who have occasion to sow large crops of carrots for the winter use, should take
every precaution to keep the ground as dry as possible*

Let it be laid out in beds about four feet or four feet and half wide;
observing to lay the beds always on the descent, and not to confine the alleys,
but let them be full fifteen inches wide, and not less than six inches deep; by
which means you will be able to draw off the water; for if it is suffered to
lay on the beds or even in the alleys, the intense heat of the sun in July and
August, will scall the roots and rot them.

Having laid out the ground into beds, let the surface be raked smooth; then
draw four drills on each bed at equal distances, about half an inch deep; and
scatter the seeds thin in each drill; cover the seed with your hoe; and rake
the ground even standing in the alleys.

ONIONS AND LEEKS.
The onions that were transplanted in the autumn will now begin to swell, and
many of them will begin to put forth seed heads; -- let those be pulled out as
soon as they appear; for if they are suffered to stay long on the plants they
will not only deform the roots, but will also draw from them great part of the
nourishment; therefore let them be taken out as soon as they appear.

The onions sown in February will be now advancing fast in their growth; let
them be thined out to their proper distances; and leave them in the row about
eight inches from each other, and loosen the ground between and round the
plants, which will greatly forward the growth both of onions and leeks.

SOWING LEEKS.
About the latter end of this month sow leeks for winter use.

These may be sown in a small bed of good earth, pretty thick, from whence you
may transplant them as soon as they are fit.

TURNIPS.
Hoe and thin the turnips that were sown in the last months; cut up all the
weeds and thin the plants regularly; allow eight or nine inches between plant
and plant; if sown broad cast.

This work of thining should always be performed when the rough leaves are
about the size of a shilling.

ASPARAGUS.
Assparagus, you will be now cutting for use; in cutting the buds, or shoots of
these plants, it should be observed that, when they are arrived to about three
or four inches in height they should be gathered. -- But if these five or six
inches high, or in prime order, when permitted to run any higher, the top of
the bud opens, and the shoot does not eat so well as those that are cut when
the head is quite close.

When you cut them, be careful to thrust your knife down close by the side of
the shoot you intend to cut, least you wound, or destroy any of the buds that
are coming up, and do not yet appear, cutting the young shoots off about three
or four inches under the ground.

Let the beds of these plants be now cleared of weeds, which will come up very
thick among them.

Taking therefore an opportunity of a dry day, and with a small hoe cut up all
the weeds clean within the surface, and they will soon die.

IRISH POTATOES.
Potatoes will be now coming forward, and should frequently be hoed, which will
keep them clean of weeds.

Continue still to draw more earth up to the stems of your potatoes, which will
be of great service to them.

RADISHES.
Sow more radishes; the salmon kind is very proper for this sowing; and
likewise the short top and turnip. -- Choose an open situation for sowing these
seeds; and let your ground be dug well, and divided into beds about four feet
wide; sow the seeds (but not too thick at this season) cast a little earth over
the beds, and rake the surface even, standing in the alleys.

It will be proper to sow radishes at two or three different times in this
month, to continue a succession.

In dry weather let your radishes be frequently watered both before and after
they are up, which will prevent their growing hot and stickey.

LETTUCES.
In moist weather transplant lettuces of various kinds, that were sown in the
last month.

Choose a rich spot of land for these plants, in a free and open situation;
such as is not crowded with trees, etc. which will draw the plants up slender,
without forming good heads.

Dig the ground neatly, and throw it up into beds about four feet wide; rake
the surface smooth, and plant four rows on each bed, about nine inches from
each other in the rows.

If the weather be dry, give them frequently a little water till they have
taken good root.

Sow lettuce this month, to succeed the last month's sowing; and where a
constant supply of lettuce is required, this should be sown at least twice in
April.

The best kinds to sow now are, the Silesia cabbage, and brown Dutch: the coss
lettuces are very a^t when sown at this season to run to seed before they
arrive to any degree of perfection.

Sow these seeds in an open situation, very thin; for it is designed that they
should remain where they were sown, till they are fit for use. Let it be
observed, that they will not run to seed as soon as if they were to be
transplanted, and will make much larger and finer heads.

Let those seeds be sown in beds about four feet wide, and throw up good bold
alleys; and you may also sow a sprinkling of radishes amongst the lettuce;
observe not to sow them too thick.

If the weather prove dry let the seed be watered both before and after they
are up.

SMALL SALLADING.
You may still continue to sow mustard, cresses, radish, rape, etc. if they are
required.

Where a constant supply of these small herbs are wanted, there should be some
sown every week.

CELERY.
About the beginning, or at any time in this month, you may sow celery for a
general crop.

Dig a small piece of light, rich earth, and lay the surface even, and throw it
up into beds; then sow the seeds pretty thick, and rake it as light as
possible, with an even hand.

If the weather should prove dry, let the seeds have a little water both before
and after they are come up.

MINT.
Mint may be also planted now, where new beds are wanted.

The sets proper for this purpose are, the young plants which come up from the
old ones, as observe in the former months -- they should be planted in a spot
of rich ground, after being dug, and divided into beds about four feet wide,
and set five rows of plants on each bed, about eight inches from each other in
the rows, and give them a good watering to settle the earth about their roots.

CUCUMBERS AND MELLONS.
Sow cucumbers and melons, about the beginning of this month, for a full crop.
For this purpose, choose a piece of good ground in a sheltered situation; and
if you can procure any good rotten dung, put about half a wheel-barrow full to
each hill, and cover it over with rich earth, about six inches deep, and plant
thereon about six or seven seeds.

SQUASHES AND PUMKINS.
Sow also, about the beginning of this month, squashes and pumkins; for there
is now a fair prospect of their succeeding: let them be sown or planted in the
same manner as cucumbers, etc.

OKRA.
At any time in this month, you may sow or plant okra seeds: but, if you have
not planted any before now, the sooner they are put into the ground the better.

Those seeds should be sown, or planted on ridges or hills, on low ground,
about four or five feet from each other, and three or four feet apart in the
rows.

THINING BEETS.
The beets that were sown in February, will require thining early in this
month, if not done before.

Let all the small plants be taken away, and leave the strong ones about a foot
from each other, in the rows -- then, with a hoe loosen the earth between them,
and about the plants that remain; which will greatly forward their growth.

DESTROY WEEDS.
Weeds will now begin to appear plentifully from seeds, in every part of the
garden; and the utmost diligence should be used to destroy them while young,
before they get a head of the crops.

Pay particular regard to your onions, carrots, parsnips, lettuce, spinach, and
the like; for the weeds grow much quicker than they do; and if they are not
weeded, or hoed in time, the weeds will soon over top the plants, and occasion
much trouble to clear them.

Those who are expert in useing the small hoe, where seeds are sown, either
broad cast or in drills, will dispatch more work in one day, than six will do
at hand weeding in the same time.

Take the opportunity of dry weather, and hoe ground between the beans, pease,
cabbages, and other crops that stand wide, to destroy the weeds, and take care
to tread the ground as little as possible.

A large piece of ground may soon be got over with a hoe, when the weeds are
small; but when they are permitted to grow large, it requires much labor to
destroy them.

FRUIT GARDEN.
VINES.
VINES should be looked over about the middle of this month -- they will by
this time have made some shoots; and the useless ones should be displaced.

In looking over vines, observe, at this time to displace only such shoots as
appear absolutely useless. -- There generally arises many young shoots from the
old wood, and younger branches; but these seldom produce grapes, or wood proper
to bear fruit: therefore, let most of these shoots be rubbed off close, except
in such places where young wood will be wanted next year, which should be
strictly attended to; and leave for the present, all the shoots that are
produced from the last year's wood.

But where two shoots put out from one eye, which often happens, let the most
unlikely be taken away; for if they were both suffered to remain, one would
starve the other, and the fruit of neither will be good.

Let it be observed, that this dressing, or displacing of useless shoots, at
this early time, may be performed with the finger and thumb, rubbing them off
quite close.

The useless shoots being cleared away, the useful ones when of due length,
should be trained along the frame, so that each may enjoy the advantage of the
sun and air, to promote its growth, together with that of the fruit.

By the above early regulating the grape vines, the bunches of grapes will be
large and fine, and will ripen more regularly and sooner then when the vines
are suffered to run into confusion before they are looked over; -- besides by
timely looking over the vines, one may do as much work in one hour, as in six,
when the shoots are suffered to run and mix in a confused and irregular manner.

STRAWBERRY BEDS.
Both the old and new beds of strawberries, should be kept free from weeds; and
the runners produced from these plants, should be constantly taken off as they
come forth; but where new plantations of strawberries are required, some of the
best runners may be suffered to remain till September, to form young plants --
observe always, to stop the runners soon after forming the first plants; and
these are to be planted out in the autumn as there directed.

About the beginning of this month, let the strawberry beds now in fruit, be
frequently watered in dry weather, for they will require it. If they are not
well supplied with water in a dry time, the fruit will be small and ill tasted,
and there will be also but a thin crop.

WATERING NEW PLANTED TREES.
New planted trees, both standards and dwarfs, should, in dry weather, be well
watered at the roots about once a week -- it will also be of service to water
the branches now and then in dry weather, which frequently happens in this and
the two following months.

MAY.
Work to be done in the Kitchen Garden.
SNAP BEANS.
SNAP beans may be planted at any time in this month; but to have a constant
supply they ought to be planted every week.

Choose a piece of good ground in an open situation for them at this season;
and if the ground is dry, you may soak the seed about six or eight hours in
soft water before you plant them.

Having dug your ground, proceed to draw drills, as advised in the former
month; then drop the beans in the drills or trenches, about five or six inches
distant from each other; cover them up with your hoe, and rake the ground
smooth. -- [For further information see last month.]

Let some earth be now drawn up to the stem of such snap or bush beans as
require it; which will strengthen them greatly.

CABBAGES AND SAVOYS.
If your general crop of cabbage plants, for the autumn and winter use, were
not sown last month, let them be sown early in this, that they may have time to
get strength before the hot weather comes in: for I find, by experience, that
people in general seldom sow their cabbage plants before June, and often not
till July. -- If they are not sown before June, the seeds frequently lie in the
ground till the sun destroys them; for June commonly proves the dryest month in
the year; and we have often very heavy rains in July that cripple the plants
before they get strength. -- These and a number of other reasons may be added
in favor of April and May, for sowing winter cabbages.

Let your cabbage plants, which are put out, have frequent hoeings; and draw
earth to the stems of those that require it.

CAULIFLOWERS AND BROCOLI.
About the beginning or the middle of this month, if not sown in the last, sow
your cauliflower and brocoli seed, for a full crop.

Prepare a small piece of land in an open situation for these seeds; dig the
ground, and lay it even; throw it up into beds, and sow your seeds, but not too
thick; and cover them over with a little earth, and rake the ground smooth, for
it is proposed, that these plants should grow to a good size before they are
put out for good.

CARROTS AND PARSNIPS.
If your general crop of carrots and parsnips for autumn and winter use, were
not sown last month, let them be sown early in this, the sooner the better; for
if they are sown the latter end of the month, when the dry weather generally
sets in, you must be constantly watering the ground to get them up, and they
will acquire but little strength before the hot weather comes on, and are
liable to be scalded after every mid-day's shower of rain. -- [For the work see
April.]

LETTUCES.
Sow Silesia, brown Dutch, and cabbage lettuce.

Sow the seed in this season where they are to stand for use, in the most low
and shady part of the garden, but not under trees.

It is of little use to transplant lettuces at any time in this month; for by
so doing they will run to seed, and arrive to no degree of perfection.

SMALL SALLADING.
Sow small sallading at least once a week; such as mustard, cress, rape, etc.
-- Draw some drills about four inches from each other, and sow the seeds pretty
thick, and throw a little earth over them; rake it smooth, and let the ground
be watered as soon as the seeds are sown, if the weather be dry.

RADISHES.
Sow salmon and turnip radishes, at any time in this month; and where a
constant supply of these roots are required, the seed should be sown once a
week or fortnight. -- Sow it at this season, in an open situation, and not too
thick; for the tops of the salmon radishes in this month, will grow to a large
size before the roots are fit to draw. -- A small sprinkling of lettuce may be
sown with the radishes; for when the latter comes off, the former will succeed
them.

SPINACH.
You may yet continue to sow spinach seed, where required.

Prepare a piece of good ground in an open situation; and throw it up into beds
about four feet wide: you may either sow the spinach* seed in broad cast, or in
drills; and were you to sow a sprinkling of radishes with the spinach, it would
not be amiss.

CELERY.
You may sow more celery about the ginning of this month, for a late crop.

Choose a small piece of low ground, in a shady situation, for sowing this seed
now; -- let it be sown pretty thick; and water it in dry weather before and
after it comes up.

The celery plants that were sown in March, will be fit to prick out toward
the middle of this month, into a nursery bed of light, rich earth.

For this purpose, prepare a spot of good ground, and divide it into beds about
three or four feet wide; rake the surface smooth; then thin out a quantity of
the best plants from the seed bed, and let them be planted on these, about
three inches separate from each other; give them a moderate watering, and
repeat it every day in dry weather, till they have taken good root.

The plants should remain in these beds till the middle of July; when they may
be planted out for good, in trenches.

CUCUMBERS, MELONS, SQUASHES, etc.
At any time in this month, you may sow a successional crop of cucumbers,
melons, squashes, etc.

The seeds at this season, should be sown in an open situation; and if the
weather proves dry, give them a little water before they come up; and the
plants should be frequently watered in dry weather, after they are up.

PEPPERS AND TOMATOES.
The peppers and tomatoes that were sown the beginning of last month, will be
by the middle of this, fit to plant out, where they are to stand for good.

For this purpose, choose a piece of good ground in a free and open situation;
draw the earth up in a small ridge, and plant the peppers in rows about two
feet from each other, and from twelve to eighteen inches in the rows.

The tomatoes should be planted in hills about five feet from each other, and
three plants on each hill.

BEETS.
If your beets for winter use, were not sown in last month, let it be done
early in this; that they may get strength before the hot weather comes in. --
[For the method see February.

GATHER SWEET AND POT HERBS.
Toward the later end of this month, gather mint, balm, sage, thyme, hysop,
savory, etc. for drying: provided the plants are nearly at their full growth.

Gather also all such physical herbs as are now in flower.

The latter should be always gathered when they begin to flower; for they are
then in their greatest perfection, and much the best for their several
purposes; nor should they be gathered before that period.

They must be cut in a dry day, and immediately spread or hung up in a dry
room, out of the reach of the sun, where they may gently -- Never lay those
herbs in the sun to dry, for that would exhaust them too much, and render them
useless.

CUT PEPPER-MINT, etc. FOR DISTILLING.
These and other plants that are intended to be distilled, should be gathered
for that purpose when they arrive almost to their full growth, and begin to
flower, as before observed; therefore if they do not begin to flower this
month, defer cutting them till the next.

But be sure to cut them in a fine day, and when the plants are perfectly dry.

DESTROYING WEEDS.
Now let more than common pains be taken to destroy weeds among crops of every
kind, and in every part throughout the garden.

There is no work in the kitchen garden that requires more attention than this:
for weeds are at no time more dangerous to crops than at the present: it should
be therefore the principal care of the gardener to destroy them before they
grow large; for weeds, when permitted to get to much size, not only exhaust the
goodness of the land, and ruin the present crops, but are also a very
disagreeable sight, and require more than double labor to clear the ground of
them.

Let the utmost attention be paid to your small crops that grow pretty close;
and let them be timely cleared.

That is, let the weeds be cleared away and not suffered to overspread the
plants, which they would soon do when they begin to run, and in this case would
do much damage to the crops.

Besides, when the weeds are suffered to grow large among the small crops, so
as to mix and entangle one with another, and with the plants, it renders the
work of hoeing or weeding them extremely tedious, and very troublesome to
perform.

But when weeds appear between the rows of beans, pease, cabbages, and such
crops as stand in wide rows, nothing can be more easy than to stop their
progress; because, there is room between the plants to admit a large hoe -- and
with such an instrument a person may go over a large piece of ground in a
little time; therefore he who would suffer weeds to grow among such crops will
be much to blame.

WATERING NEW PLANTED CROPS.
Watering, in dry weather, is now a very needful work, to all new transplanted
crops; always apply it to such as are conveniently situated; and where the
number of plants are not too great, so as to render the work over laborious and
tedious; repeat the watering till the plants have taken good root. -- A regular
attention to this business will prove very beneficial, in accelerating the
fresh rooting, and setting the plants off in a free growth from the beginning,
which would otherwise be greatly checked or stinted.

FRUIT GARDEN.
THINNING PEACHES, NECTARINES, AND APRICOTS.
THESE trees, in favorable seasons, will set ten times as much fruit as their
roots are capable of supplying with proper nourishment; and if the whole, or
even too many of them were to be left, they would starve one another; and the
fruit in general would be small and ill flavoured.

Besides, where this precaution is not observed and too great a quantity of
these sorts of fruit remain to ripen on the trees, the ill consequence does not
terminate altogether in the badness of the fruit that year, but it extends to
two or three years to come. -- For by suffering the trees to be over burdened
with fruit, the branches are robbed of their due nourishment; and the trees are
so much exhausted that they will not be able to produce shoots capable of
bearing fruit the next, and perhaps subsequent year; -- and it may probably be
the third year before a crop of good fruit can be reasonable expected.

Therefore when the fruit is produced too thick upon the trees, and advanced to
about the size of a nutmeg, or before; let the quantity be reduced; -- and the
sooner the work is done the better it is for the trees, and also for the fruit
that is to remain on them.

This thinning should be performed in a very careful manner, by looking over
the branches regularly one by one; and before you take any off, single out, on
each shoot, the fruit that is proper to leave, and let the most promising and
best shapen remain: -- paying a due regard to those that are best situated on
the branches: -- each kind according to its size must be left at such proper
distances, that every one may have sufficient room to swell and grow freely to
its just bigness every way; and the fruit on the strong shoots should be left
at least nine or ten inches from each other. -- For instance allowing a tree is
in good condition and strength for bearing; -- and supposing the shoots to be
of three different sizes; that is, the strong, the middling, and the weak: the
number of fruit to be on those branches are; upon the stronger, three or four
of the fairest and best placed; upon the middling shoots two or three, and not
more than one on the weak shoots.

Was a due regard to be paid to the above distances, and to the number of fruit
mentioned to be left on the different branches; the thinning them nicely in
this manner, will be the means of bringing your fruit to the utmost perfection.
-- At the same time the trees will shoot freely, and produce a sufficient
quantity of good wood to bear fruit the next year.

This should be the method of thinning the choice kinds of fruits; but the
small and inferior sorts, may be left closer together, and a greater number of
fruit may remain upon the different branches: -- For instance, the early
masculine apricot, the nutmeg peach, and the fair Child's early nectarine are
of the earliest kinds, and by far the smallest; of these there may be left upon
each of the strong shoots, about five fruit; and on the middle size three or
four, and so in proportion on the weaker shoots.

SUMMER PRUNING PEACH, NECTARINE AND APRICOT TREES.
About the beginning of this month, you may look over your peach, nectarine and
apricot trees -- for they will now require your utmost care and attention.

Let these be gone over as quick as possible, while they are making their first
shoots, and clear away all the useless ones; and at the same time let the well
placed and promising shoots be retained.

Likewise let all the luxuriant shoots that generally rise out of the old wood
be taken away; -- these will neither produce good fruit nor kindly wood, and
will also greatly injure the growth of the prime shoots; they are always known
by their rambling and vigorous growth: and as I before observed, in treating of
pruning in a former month, branches shooting out from the middle part of the
tree should be all displaced, unless any should seem necessary in particular
parts, to fill up a vacancy, or to furnish a supply of wood -- but only some
occasional shoots of these kinds should be left, and let all the others be
cleared away quite close.

Notwithstanding, be careful to leave a full sufficiency of the best shoots,
that are of a kind and moderate growth; that is, the shoots that are produced
this summer, to bear fruit next year; therefore it is much the best way to
reserve at this season a sufficient quantity of kindly growing shoots, that
there may be enough to choose from in winter pruning.

Observe not to shorten any of the shoots thus left at this season; but let
them remain at full length* for by topping them, they will produce so many
young shoots, as would crowd the fruit too much.

In the early summer dressing or pruning of these kinds of trees, it is also
requisite to keep the middle part open to admit a free circulation of air among
the branches; which will be very beneficial to the fruit; but, at the same
time, not to cut away too much, so as to leave the fruit altogether exposed to
the sun.

The displacing of these young shoots at this season may be carefully performed
with the finger and thumb; and the fruit may be thinned at the same time as
before directed.

VINES.
The vines will now begin to shoot vigorously; and will produce a great number
of shoots, many of which will be useless, and must now be cut away; and the
sooner the better.

This work should be done before the shoots begin to entangle with each other;
-- for a great advantage attends this early dressing; both in giving an
opportunity of performing the work with more expedition and regularity, and in
affording a greater benefit to the trees and fruit. -- Observe that all the
immediate bearing shoots, which now discover the young bunches of grapes upon
them, must be left, -- and such other shoots as have strength, and are well
situated for the purpose of throwing out bearers next year, must be left in the
places where they are wanted; but all weak and straggling shoots, such
particularly as often arise immediately from the old wood are useless, and must
be cleared away, wherever they are produced; except in such places where
young wood is absolutely needful; -- and even strong shoots that are destitute
of fruit, and arise in places where they are not evidently wanted, should also
be taken off.

When this is done, let all the bearing shoots, and all others that are
necessary, be left in their proper places, in regular order -- and do not stop
any of the shoots now, but let each be left at full length for the present, so
that all the branches, and fruit, may equally enjoy the advantages of sun and
air.

After this dressing, observe, that all shoots that put out in any part of the
vines, must be constantly rubbed off as soon as they appear, and no small
shoots must be suffered to remain, unless it be to fill a vacancy.

STOPPING THE YOUNG SHOOTS OF VINES TO PROMOTE THE GROWTH OF THE FRUIT.
About the beginning, middle, or any time in this month, when your vines are in
full bloom, examine them carefully; and tie in all the shoots that you would
have to bear fruit the next year; -- you will likewise find a great number of
fruit bearing shoots, which cannot be tied to the frame; let these also be
minutely examined; and you will see some of them with one or two, and others
with three branches of young grapes on them; let the tops of these shoots be
taken off near the fruit; and where any small ones appear on the branches let
these be entirely taken away. -- Stopping the shoots in this manner will not
only forward, but also greatly promote the growth of the fruit.

FIG TREES.
In the beginning, or at any time in this month, when you perceive suckers
coming out from the bottom of your fig trees, let them be taken away as soon as
they appear, least they rob both the shoots and fruit of their due nourishment.

Also if any young shoots appear on the old wood let them be cut away; but be
careful not to cut the old wood, which will occasion the tree to bleed.

WATERING NEW PLANTED TREES.
New planted trees should be watered in dry weather; which frequently happens
about the latter end of this month.

This necessary work should be performed at least once a week; and give each
tree about half a large watering pot of water.

JUNE.
Work to be done in the Kitchen Garden.
SNAP BEANS.
YOU may still continue to plant bush or snap beans, to succeed those planted
in the former months.

The best sorts to plant at this season are the early white, black and yellow
dwarfs; -- they may be planted in rows, about twenty inches from each other,
dropping the beans in the drills four inches apart.

It would be very proper, in dry weather, to steep the beans in soft water
about six or eight hours before they are planted. -- They will spring and take
root much sooner and stronger.

You may also plant in this month the white runners; they will stand the heat
better than the dwarfs, and bear more plentifully. -- You must give them proper
sticks for them to run up.

Let the bush beans that were planted last month, be frequently hoed; and let
some earth be drawn up to the stems of those that require it.

CABBAGES AND SAVOYS.
Your cabbage plants, that were sown about the middle of April, will be fit to
plant out early in this month, to the places where they are to cabbage.

For these plants prepare a piece of good ground, in the most open situation of
your garden: -- Dung it well with good rotten dung, if you can procure it; and
dig it in evenly, laying the surface smooth; then mark out the ground for the
plants, in rows about two feet or two feet and a half; and if your plants be of
a very large kind, you may even allow them three feet from row to row, and two
feet and a half from each other in the rows: -- Observe that the distance for
planting cabbage plants depends entirely on the goodness of the land. -- The
surface of the ground being laid even, and your rows all marked out, draw the
earth up into small ridges or beds about six or seven inches high; and let the
top of them be flat, observing at the same time to let these small beds or
ridges range with the descent of the ground, if there be any; for if the water
is suffered to lie in the alleys next month, when the heavy rains set in, the
roots of the plants will be scalded; this is a very material circumstance which
you ought to guard against.

It is very necessary also to observe, that the plants, at this season, should
be planted out as soon after a shower of rain as possible; and if the weather
should prove dry, give them now and then a little water every evening, till
they have taken good root; -- and should the day after planting prove very hot,
which often happens in this month, it would be of great advantage to the plants
to stick a small bush on the south side of them; which would not only protect
the plants from the violence of the sun, but greatly promote their taking root.

You may still continue to sow cabbages and savoys, for winter use.

The seed, at this season, should be sown on beds about four feet wide; and if
the weather proves dry, water them well every evening, both before and after
the plants are come up; and if the beds had a temporary shade made over them,
so as to admit a free circulation of air under it, this would be of great
service to the plants.

CAULIFLOWERS AND BROCOLI.
About the beginning of this month you may sow cauliflowers and brocoli; and if
proper care is taken of them they may succeed very well. -- Let them be managed
much in the same manner as mentioned before of cabbage plants.

The cauliflower and brocoli plants, which were sown the beginning of last
month, will be fit to prick out early in this.

For this purpose, prepare a piece of ground in an open situation; and divide
it into beds about three feet wide; and plant on each bed six rows of the small
plants, that you draw out of the seed beds, about five inches from each other
in the rows. -- Let them be watered in dry weather every evening, till they
have taken good root.

CARROTS AND PARSNIPS.
At any time in this month, you may sow carrots and parsnips, for winter use,
if you did not sow a sufficiency in the two last months.

It would be very necessary, to take the advantage of showery weather, for
sowing the seed at this season.

Prepare for this purpose, a piece of good ground, in an open situation; divide
it into beds about four feet wide, and sow four rows of carrot or parsnip seed
on each bed. -- [See April.]

Let the carrots and parsnips that were sown the last month, and in April, be
frequently hoed, and properly thinned.

This is a work of more consequence than many imagine; for if the plants are
once suffered to remain long crowded together, they will soon stint each other,
therefore let the business be not delayed.

If you design these carrots and parsnips to remain in the ground till November
or December, the carrots should be thinned out at least to eight or nine inches
from each other; and the parsnips to ten or twelve; -- By strictly observing
the above method you need not doubt of raising good roots of each kind. -- [See
April.]

LETTUCES.
You may still continue to sow cabbage, Silesia, and brown Dutch lettuce, where
a constant succession is required.

Prepare a piece of good soil, to sow the seeds at this season, in the lowest
part of your garden; and take particular care to throw it up into high beds
before you sow the seed; and observe that they are not sown too thick; for it
is intended that the plants should remain in the seed beds till they are fit
for use; for they will not bear transplanting at this season.

Let the lettuce plants be hoed and thinned that were sown last month, for they
will now require it.

This work should be performed with a very even hand, cutting up all the small
plants and weeds, and leaving those that are most promising, about seven or
eight inches from each other, in regular order on the beds.

RADISHES.
Sow a succession of radishes -- the short top is the best sort to sow at this
season; having prepared your ground, divide it into beds about four feet wide;
and sow the feed thereon broad cast, but not too thick; and if the weather
proves dry give them a little water both before and after the plants come up.

SMALL SALLADING.
Sow mustard and cresses, at least every ten days or a fortnight, in the most
shady part of your garden.

Sow these seeds in small drills or trenches, about four inches from each
other; and if the weather should be dry, give the seed a little water every
evening till it comes up, and the plants after they are up.

CELERY.
Prick out celery plants if wanted, and not done in the last month; by pricking
out these plants, they will grow strong and stockey, and will be mnah better*
to plant out next month for blaching, than those you would otherwise take out
of the said bed. -- [For the work see May.]

PULL ONIONS.
Examine, toward the middle of this month, the forwardest crop of onions; when
the leaves begin to wither, it is then the proper time to take the roots out of
the gronnd. They must be managed in the following manner, which will serve also
as directions for the same work next month.

These roots must be taken up in dry weather; and as you take them up, pull off
their leaves; only observe to leave about four or five inches of the stalk to
each root. -- They should be spread to harden, upon a clean dry spot of ground,
or upon a scaffold made for that purpose* let them lie ten or twelve days,
remembering to turn them frequently that they may dry and harden regularly.

When they have lain a proper time, they may be gathered up, in a dry day.

Let them be very well cleaned from earth, and all outer loose skins; then
bring them into the house, in dry weather, spread them evenly on the floor, and
let them frequently be turned over the first two or three weeks.

Let the windows of the room be kept constantly open in dry weather; --
observe, when you turn the onions over now and then, to pick out any that are
decayed.

PULL GARLIC AND SHALOTS.
Pull up garlic and shalots, when full grown; this is known by the leaves --
for when the roots are swelled as much as they will, the leaves begin to
wither; let them be managed in the same manner as onions* after they are taken
up.

CUCUMBERS, MELONS, SQUASHES, etc.
You may still continue to sow more cucumbers, melons, squashes, etc. for they
will yet succeed very well.

They should now be sown in an open situation, on hills of good earth, about
twelve feet from each other.

Let the cucumbers, melons and squashes, that were sown last month, be now
properly thinned; and leave not more than three or four plants on each hill.

OKRA.
Early in this month let your okra be properly thinned out; that is, let your
plants be left at least three seet from each other in the rows, where the soil
is rich, -- Let them be frequently hoed; and let the ground be kept constantly
loose about the plants, which will greatly promote their growth.

TOMATOES.
Your tomatoes will now begin to run; they, being of a procumbent growth,
should have sticks to support them; which should not be very high, but strong
and bushy; first let one stick be set in the middle of the hill, then put three
or four more round the outside of the plants, to keep them from falling to the
ground.

FRUIT GARDEN.
PEACH, NECTARINE AND APRICOT TREES.
WHERE the peach, nectarine and apricot trees were not looked over, and put in
proper order last month, due attention should be now paid to them. -- This work
should be attended to early in this month, and followed with the utmost
diligence till the whole is completed; for where these trees are suffered to
remain long in a wild and confused state, which they will naturally fall into
at this season, it would not only prove detrimental, in a great degree, to the
trees, but would also very much retard the growth and ripening of these kinds
of fruit. -- Therefore let these trees be now in general looked over, taking
care to clear away all over grown and ill-placed shoots; particularly such
strong ones as arise from the old wood, which you will often find in the middle
of the trees; the timely displacing such will not only strengthen, but make
more room for the useful shoots; and also admit of a free-circulation of air to
the fruit.

Let these shoots be taken away quite close to the place from whence they are
produced, except such as grow out close to the fruit; which may be cut off
within half an inch of the branch. -- Observe to leave, in every part of these
trees, a sufficient quantity of the best shoots, for the purpose of bearing
fruit the next year; -- leave also a plenty of the more regular and moderate
shoots that are well situated; observing at the same time to keep* the middle
of the tree as open as possible, to admit air among the branches. -- Do not
shorten any of the shoots you intend to leave, for the reason mentioned last
month; but let them stand at full length, both the large and smaller ones; and
take particular care to* leave them in such a manner, that the leaves may
afford a moderate shade to the fruit in intense sunny days: -- for it will
thrive much better under a slight coverture of leaves, than when openly exposed
to the sun; and the fruit will be better flavoured.

THINNING PEACHES, NECTARINES AND APRICOTS.
The peaches, nectarines and apricots, still remaining too close upon the
trees, should now be thinned; let the same rule be observed as that mentioned
in the last month concerning these kinds of fruit.

SUMMER PRUNING ESPALIER TREES OF APPLES, PEARS, PLUMBS AND CHERRIES.
The apple, pear, plumb and cherry trees will now have made strong shoots;
which, if not gone over in May, it is now full time they should be examined and
properly regulated. -- Let these trees be looked over with good attention; and
let them now be properly cleared of all useless and unnecessary shoots of the
year; that is to say, all the luxuriant ones, wherever they appear, must be
taken off close; all foreright shoots must be also cut away; and also such
shoots as are produced in such parts of the trees where they cannot be properly
trained in; and such as are not absolutely wanted to fill up the tree be
displaced: but be careful to retain a moderate supply of the most regular and
well placed shoots to train in, to choose for winter pruning, by the rules here
mentioned, viz.

In ordering these trees, it must be observed, that there is no need to leave a
general supply of young wood, as in peaches, nectarines, etc. which bear their
fruit always upon one year old shoots, and in consequence thereof, require a
peculiar treatment. -- But as the case is otherwise with the trees I am now
speaking of, there is no necessity to leave, every summer, a general supply of
young shoots in every part of the tree; for as to apples, pears, plumbs and
cherries, their branches seldom begin to bear till they are two or three, and
sometimes four or five years old; the branches of plumbs and cherries generally
begin to bear at one and two years, likewise apples sometimes in the lower
parts of these States: while the pears oftener bear from four to five year old
spurs: -- and when the branches of all these kinds have arrived to a fruitful
state, the same bearers continue to produce fruit in more and greater abundance
for many years: so that there is no necessity, after the trees are once
furnished fully with bearing branches, to leave such* a general and constant
supply of young shoots above mentioned, as would be required on different trees
which produce their fruit on shoots of the preceding summer's growth. -- But
notwithstanding it will be proper to leave here and there, in every tree, some
of the best grown and well placed side shoots, together with the leader, to
each branch, if there be sufficient room: this precaution should not on any
account be omitted; for some of those summer shoots will most probably be
wanted, to lay in, to supply some vacant place or other of the tree, in the
winter pruning.

But where there appears to be an absolute want of wood in any part of these
trees, do not fail, in that case, to leave, if possible, some good shoots in
such vacant parts.

It is always the best method to leave the trees pretty full of proper shoots,
at this season; they will be ready, in case they should be wanted, to fill up
any vacancy, or to supply the place of old useless dead or worn out wood, when
you come to prune in the winter; and such shoots as are not wanted may then be
cut away.

Let all the shoots that are now lest be trained at full length, and nailed or
fastened up close to the frame, in a neat and regular manner all the summer.

WATERING.
Water should still be given, in dry weather, to new planted trees; and in
particular to such as are planted late in the spring.

This work should be done at least twice a week in hot and dry weather; and
give each tree one, two, three or four gallons of water in the evening in
proportion to its size, and as its state may seem to require.

JULY.
Work to be done in the Kitchen Garden.
BUSH OR SNAP BEANS.
YOU may, at any time in this month, plant bush or snap beans to succeed those
sown in the last.

The early sorts are preferable for this planting, such as white negro and
yellow dwarfs.

Choose, at this season, a piece of ground in an open situation; and, if you
can give it a moderate dressing, it will be the better; let the ground be well
dug, and laid even; and if the weather is inclinable to be very wet, which
often happens about this time, take precaution to guard against it, otherwise
it may prove destructive to the crop.

Therefore while your land is fresh dug mark out the rows, about one foot eight
inches from each other, and draw the earth with your hoe up into small beds or
ridges, about four inches above the surface; then on these ridges or beds draw
your drills, and plant your beans as directed in the former months.

But, on the other hand, should the weather prove dry, it will be necessary to
steep them in soft water, for six or eight hours, before you plant them; they
will in that case come up much sooner and stronger -- it will be also
requisite, when the ground is very dry, to water the drills, before you plant
the beans.

But let it be observed that steeping the beans is necessary only in dry
weather, and the drawing up the small beds or ridges, in a wet season.

Let the bush beans that were planted the last month be frequently hoed, and
the ground be kept constantly loose between them, which will greatly promote
their growth; and draw earth up to the stems of those that are advanced to the
height of four or five inches, which will support and strengthen them.

CABBAGES.
The plants from cabbage seed, which was sown about the latter end of May, will
be now fit to put out for good.

Make choice of a piece of rich ground in an open situation, and lay some good
rotten dung thereon if it can be procured; dig it in, and lay the surface even;
then mark out the rows, about two feet or two feet and a half from each other;
and with a hoe draw the earth up into small flat beds or ridges, about six
inches above the surface of the ground, and six inches broad on the top; and
set the plants about two feet from each other -- It is to be supposed that the
water tables of the garden are lower than the trenches between the rows, by
which means the water may be the more easily carried off, which would otherwise
greatly injure the plants, if not wholly destroy them.

You may still continue to sow the seeds of cabbages and savoys where required;
if the rain does not cripple them they will be fit to put out in six weeks
after sowing, and will be particularly serviceable in town gardens.

For this purpose prepare a piece of ground, in a shady situation, but let it
not be under trees; throw it up into high beds, and allow them good bold
alleys; that water may not lie between the beds let them range with the descent
of the ground.

CAULIFLOWERS AND BROCOLI.
About the beginning of this month, if not done in the last, transplant your
first crop of cauliflowers and brocoli, where they are to remain till they are
fit for use.

For this crop you should choose one of the best pieces of land your garden
affords; and to have fine cauliflowers and brocoli you must give it a dressing
with good rotten dung -- and let it be spread even over the surface; dig it in,
and lay the ground smooth; then mark out the rows about two feet and a half for
the cauliflowers, and three feet for the brocoli; plant the former at two feet
in the rows, and the latter two feet and a half: the ground being dug in a
proper manner, draw the earth up into small beds or ridges, as before directed
under the head of cabbages; and, if the weather should prove dry after
planting, give them a moderate watering every evening, till they have taken
good root; and if you were to stick a small bush on the south side of each
plant the next morning after they are put out, (the evening being now the best
time for planting) it would be of great service to them, by screening them from
the intense heat of the sun.

You may still sow more cauliflower and brocoli seed, if you have not got a
sufficiency of plants from your former sowings; they may be sown on a bed, as
directed in last month; and should now have a temporary shade erected over
them, which will not only break the violent heat of the sun, but also the heavy
showers of rain which commonly fall, and cripple the young plants at this
season.

If the weather should prove dry, after the sowing of the above seed, give them
a moderate watering every evening till they come up, and every two or three
days after they are up; for the plants at this time ought to be forwarded as
much as possible in their growth, as the season for sowing them is almost spent.

LEEKS.
The leeks that were sown the beginning of last month will be fit, by the
latter end of this, to plant in the places where they are to remain, till
wanted for the use of the kitchen.

For this purpose dig a piece of ground in an open situation, and if you can
give it a little dung* it would be the better; divide it into beds about four
feet wide; then draw some of the largest of the plants out of the seed bed; cut
off the ends of the roots and likewise the leaves; and plant them, on the beds
prepared to receive them, about six or seven inches distant from each other;
and give them a moderate watering every evening till they have taken good root.

ONIONS.
Your spring sown onions will be fit to take up by the beginning of this month;
-- let the utmost attention be paid to this crop; for these are the roots you
are to depend on for winter use; let them be housed as soon as they are quite
dry and in order, and managed as directed in the former month.

CARROTS AND PARSNIPS.
You may still sow carrots and parsnips, if they are required; -- they will yet
succeed pretty well if you can prevent the sun from scalding their roots after
they are come up, and the heavy rains from crippling them.

Clear the weeds, etc. from the ground where you intend to sow the seed; and
give it some dung, if you can procure any -- dig the ground a full spade deep
-- thus done, divide it into beds about four feet broad, and leave good bold
alleys full fifteen inches wide and six inches deep; -- sow four rows of carrot
or parsnip seed on each bed: if the earth be dry when you sow the seeds, give
the drills a moderate watering before you cover up, and then rake the ground
smooth, and take the stones, etc. out of the alley.

Let those carrots and parsnips which were sown in the former month be
constantly hoed, and the earth kept loose between the plants until the tops of
them* cover the ground; and also let those be thinned that require it. -- [See
April and May.]

ENDIVE.
Toward the latter end of this month, you may sow endive seed, for the first
crop.

Dig for this purpose a piece of good ground, in an open place; and divide it
into beds about four feet wide, and sow the seed thereon, but not too thick,
and rake it with an even hand; -- should the weather prove dry, give the seed a
little water till it comes up; and the plants now and then after they are up.

TURNIPS.
About the middle or toward the latter end of this month, if the weather
suits, sow your first crop of turnips.

For sowing this seed, choose an open situation -- dig the ground, and sow the
seed while it is fresh dug -- let great care be taken not to sow the seeds too
thick, but as regular as possible; -- divide the ground into beds from four to
ten feet wide, and allow good bold alleys; and let the beds range with the
declivity of the ground, so as not to suffer any water to lie on the beds, or
even in the alleys.

LETTUCES.
Dig a spot of ground, in an open situation, to sow more lettuce seed -- the
Silesia, and curled coss are the best sorts to sow at this season; and should
be sown at least twice in this month, to have a constant and regular supply.

It is very difficult to raise lettuce to any degree of perfection in town
gardens; they being in general too close and confined: and the heavy rains,
that generally fall in this and the next month, often cripple the plants before
they get strength*

Observe to sow the seed on high beds, about three or four seet in width; and
let the alleys be broad and shelving, so that no water may lie in them.

CELERY.
You may, about the middle of this month, prepare some trenches, to plant out
your first crop of celery.

For this purpose choose a spot of rich ground, and clear it well from weeds;
then mark out the trenches about a foot broad, and allow three or four feet
between the trenches; dig each out at this season about six inches deep,
without shoveling the crumbs out at the bottom; place the earth that comes out
neatly in the spaces between the trenches; observe to lay it equally, and
spread it as even as possible; -- then put in the bottom of each trench some
good rotten dung, and dig it in.

Then take up some of the best plants from the seed bed, if you have not
pricked any out -- choose the strongest you can find, and trim the end of their
roots, and the tops of the straggling leaves -- plant them in a row along the
middle of the trench, setting the plants about five or six inches from each
other, and give them a good watering: -- let this be repeated every evening in
dry weather till the plants have taken good root.

RADISHES.
You may still continue to sow salmon, short top and turnip radishes, where a
constant supply is required: but there is not much prospect of a great crop
from this sowing, owing to the uncertainty of the weather. -- If it sets in
dry, the plants will be burnt up, if not constantly watered; and, on the other
hand, the heavy rains that often fall now are very destructive to the young
plants, together with the intense heat of the sun, which seldom fails
destroying the greatest part of them before they arrive to perfection, unless
they have a temporary shade made over them; which will break the violence of
the rain, and also check the scorching heat of the sun.

For sowing radishes at this season prepare a piece of ground in an open
situation, and divide it into beds about three feet wide; and sow the seeds
evenly* let it be observed that the alleys between the beds ought to be both
deeper and wider in this and the following month than at any other time, in
order to draw off all the superfluous water that may fall at this season.

SMALL SALLADING.
You may now, sow where required, the different sorts of small sallading; such
as mustard, cresses, rape, etc.

Where these small herbs are daily wanted, there should, in order to have a
constant supply of such as are young and good, be some seeds sown at least once
a week.

Prepare a small piece of ground in a shady situation, but not under trees; and
sow the seeds in drills as advised in the former months; and if the weather
should prove dry, let the seed be watered every evening till it comes up, and
the plants also, till they are fit for use.

SPINACH.
Toward the latter end of this month, sow some spinach seed; it will be fit
for use in the autumn.

The best sort to sow at this season, is the round seeded or the broad leaved
kind.

Prepare a piece of good ground in an open situation; let it be well dug, and
the surface laid even; and let it be divided into beds about four feet wide;
and on each bed draw sour drills -- scatter the seeds thin in each -- cover it
lightly over with your hoe, and rake the surface even.

You may likewise sow a few radish seeds with the spinach; the former will come
out before the latter wants hoeing.

Should the weather prove dry, it will be requisite to give the seed a moderate
watering till it comes up; and the plants now and then after they are up.

WATERING.
Watering should, at this time, be duly practiced in dry weather, to all such
plants as have been lately planted out, till they have taken root.

This work should be done always in the evening about two hours before sunset,
that the water may have time enough to soak in before the sun comes on the
plants the next day.

FRUIT GARDEN.
PRUNE PEACH, NECTARINE, AND APRICOT TREES.
IN gardens where these trees have not yet had their summer pruning, that very
needful work should be done early in this month, otherwise the fruit upon such
trees will not only be small and ill formed, but also very bad tasted, in
comparison to the true flavor of this fruit.

And besides retarding the growth, and debasing the taste of the fruit, it is
also detrimental in a very great degree, to both standard and espalier trees,
to neglect summer pruning until this time; and in particular peach, nectarine,
and apricots, and such like trees as produce their fruit principally upon one
year old shoots.

Besides, it causes great perplexity to the operator, to break through and
regulate such a confusion of young shoots; -- it also requires treble pains and
labor, and cannot be executed with half the accuracy as when the work is
commenced early in the summer.

There is a very great advantage in beginning early in the summer to prune,
train and leave the useful shoots in their proper places; and at the same time
to clear the trees from all that are ill-placed and luxuriant: -- For when the
useless ones are timely cut away, and the useful left in a regular manner all
the summer, the sun, air and gentle showers will have a proper access, not only
to promote the growth and improve the flavor of the fruit, but also to harden
and ripen the shoots perfectly, which is absolutely necessary to their
producing good fruit the next year.

But however, where there are standard and espalier trees still remain
unpruned, do not fail to let it be done the beginning of this month.

Do not shorten any of the shoots at this time; but let every one be left at
full length.

Look also again over such espalier trees as were pruned, and tied down the
two* last months; and see if all the proper shoots which were laid in before,
keep firm to their places; -- and where any of them have been displaced, or got
loose, let them be tied, and nailed again close in proper order.

Likewise observe, if there has been any straggling shoots produced since last
month, in places where not wanted, let them be also displaced.

It would also be very necessary to look over again, those trees that were
pruned in April and May; -- you will find on them a great number of useless
shoots that are put out since that time, which should be cut away; in
particular side shoots that have put out this summer's branches -- let these be
cut away also.

AUGUST. Work to be done in the Kitchen Garden.
PEASE.
ABOUT the beginning, or middle of this month, you may sow pease for an autumn
crop.

The best sorts to sow at this season, are the Charleton, or golden hottspur;
-- they being early kinds, will come forward before the winter sets in.

Let a piece of ground be prepared in an open situation; and if the weather is
inclined to be wet, draw the earth up into flat ridges, or small beds, about
four feet from each other: but if the ground be dry it will be proper to steep
the pease in soft water, about eight or ten hours before you sow them.

BUSH OR SNAP BEANS.
About the beginning of this month, plant bush or snap beans for a general fall
crop; -- they will come in at a very good time for pickling: -- Prepare a piece
of good ground in a free and open situation; and if you can refresh it with a
little manure, it would be the better; -- let it be well dug, and the surface
laid even: -- As this season in general proves wet, it will be necessary to
plant the beans on small flat beds, or ridges drawn up with a hoe, about a foot
broad on the top, and five or six inches above the common surface, and draw
some drills thereon about two inches deep, and plant the beans, and cover them
over as directed in the last month.

You may plant any of the dwarf kind at this season, both the early and late;
-- though planted at the same time, you will have a regular succession; as the
former will come in ten or twelve days sooner than the latter.

Let the beans which were planted in the last month, be frequently hoed, as
plants of all kinds require it more now than at any other time, on account of
the heavy rains that generally fall at this season, which wash and harden the
ground much; and while it remains in this state the plants will not thrive
until the earth is loosened.

Draw earth up to the stems of those beans that are advanced to the height of
three or four inches, as they will stand in great need of it.

CABBAGES.
About the beginning, middle, or even at any time in this month, you may sow
early York, sugar loaf, and favoy cabbage seed.

The early cabbages sown at this season, will make handsome heads about the
latter end of November, if managed as directed in the foregoing month.

The above mentioned sorts are well calculated for town gardens: for you may
plant three of these to one of the larger kind of cabbages: neither will they
be half so long on the ground.

Prepare a piece of rich ground in an open situation. -- Having dug it well and
laid your surface even, divide it into beds about three feet, or three feet and
a half wide; remembering always at this season, to leave wide bold alleys, at
least six inches below the surface of the beds, to keep the ground in wet
weather as dry as possible; -- sow the seed, but not too thick -- cast a little
earth over it, and rake the surface even: -- if there was a temporary shade
made of bushes, erected about four feet above the ground, and open on all sides
to admit of a free circulation of air, it would be not only of benefit to the
seed before it comes up, but also to the plants after they are up. -- How often
is the seeds-man abused, in this and the latter month, for disposing of bad
seed, when in reality bad management is too often the cause. There are a number
of indiscreet people that would sow seeds at this season when the ground is
dry, without any shade; when three successive hot days would totally destroy
the germination of all the seeds that are even buried at a proper depth. -- How
cautious then people ought to be of sowing any kind of seeds in hot weather
without shading or watering them.

If you have any good cabbage plants of the large kind, that are now sit to put
out, let a piece of ground be prepared to receive them. -- After the ground is
manured, well dug, and the surface laid even, mark it out in rows about two
feet; or, if you have a plenty of garden room, two feet and a half from each
other; -- then with a hoe draw the earth up into small beds or ridges, about
six inches high, and near a foot broad on the top; and set the plants about two
seet from each other in the rows: -- if the weather be dry, give them some
water, and let it be repeated every evening till they have taken good root.

You may also transplant savoys at any time in this month, if you have plants
and ground to spare -- let it be manured, dug and managed in the same manner as
before observed under the head of cabbages -- only plant the savoy two feet
from row to row, and twenty inches from each other in the rows; and give them a
good watering after planting, if the weather continues dry: -- let it be
repeated every evening till they have taken root.

The plants that are put out at this time, will be handsomely headed in
November and December; and will continue in excellent order to supply the table
till January.

CAULIFLOWERS AND BROCOLI.
Prepare some good ground in the beginning of this month, if not done in the
last, to plant out some brocoli and cauliflowers; an open spot not shaded by
trees, should be preferred; -- and spread some well rotten dung over the piece,
and dig it in -- this will be of great advantage to the plants.

Let them be planted in rows two feet and a half, or three feet asunder, and
near the same distance in the rows; observe to draw the ground up in ridges or
small beds, as described in the last month; and give each plant a little water
should the weather be dry -- this necessary work will forward their growth
before the winter sets in, and will produce fine large heads in the spring.

Let the cauliflowers and brocoli that were put out in the last month, be now
frequently hoed, and draw the earth up to their stems; as it will strengthen
the plants, and greatly promote their growth.

ONIONS.
Toward the latter end of this month, sow onions for the first crop.

They may be sown in a bed very thick, in order to be transplanted out in
October or November; where they are to remain till they are full grown.

CARROTS.
You may also sow carrots* at any time in this month, if you have a piece of
ground vacant, and the weather suits. -- [For the method see the two last
months.]

SPINACH.
Prepare now some good ground (if neglected in the last month) for a general
crop of spinach, to come in for use in November; this may be done any time in
this month; but toward the middle, or near the latter end, is the best season
for a certain crop: but delay it not till the month is out; for where a
constant supply of spinach is required, it is necessary to sow two or three
times between this and October.

Choose a piece of rich ground in an open situation; and after the ground is
dug, and divided into beds about four feet wide, draw four drills on each bed,
and sow the seed thereon; but let care be taken that it be not sown too thick
-- cover it over with your hoe, and rake the surface smooth -- you may sow a
small sprinkling of radish seed with the spinach.

Observe, it is the round seeded sort that is to be sown now; for this bears
large thick and broad leaves, but it is not so hardy as the prickly sort.

TRANSPLANT CELERY.
Transplant more celery: let an open spot be chosen: mark out the trenches, and
prepare in the same manner as directed in last month. Get the plants: cut off
the tops of their leaves, and trim the ends of their roots: plant one row in
each trench about five or six inches from each other. Immediately after they
are planted, let them be watered; and if the weather should continue dry, the
watering must be duly repeated every evening until the plants have taken root.

ENDIVE.
The endive that was sown last month, will be now fit to transplant. -- Choose
for this purpose a small piece of ground in an open situation; and if you can
give it a little manure it would be much the better -- let it be well dug, and
the surface laid even; and divide it into beds about five feet wide, and plant
four rows of the largest plants on each bed. -- It will be also necessary (if
the weather should prove dry) to give the plants a moderate watering every
evening. -- If you have not planted any cabbage or lettuce plants between your
celery, it would be a very proper place for endive.

Let the ground be fresh dug between the rows, about two spades wide, and rake
it smooth; then plant one row of the best plants you can find, on the seed bed,
about ten inches or a foot from each other.

TURNIPS.
Early in this month sow turnips of any kind for autumn or winter use -- but if
you have not sown any before, the early Dutch is the best for the first crop;
as they will come in a fortnight or three weeks sooner than the large sorts,
and are also much sweeter and better for the table.

HOEING TURNIPS.
Your turnips which were sown last month, now want hoeing -- this necessary
work must not be delayed after the leaves of the young plants are arrived to
the size of a copper: -- The business of hoeing turnips is of more consequence
than many are aware of; and must be performed in a very nice manner. -- Prepare
yourself with hoes made for that purpose, viz. For the small early sorts, six
inches will be wide enough; and eight or nine inches for the large kinds. --
Let the edge of your tools be sharp, so as to cut out all the plants that stand
within the width of your hoe; and to leave the strongest plants six or seven
inches from each other, and the larger kinds from nine inches to a foot. -- By
thinning the plants in this manner, it will greatly promote their growth, and
also destroy the young weeds which are now coming up plentifully amongst them:
-- This work should be repeated at least every fortnight (until the leaves
cover the ground) in order to keep the earth constantly loose between them: for
you will find, that after every heavy shower of rain, the earth will be bound
on the surface, and the plants will not thrive well till it is broken.

POTATOES.
Some time about the beginning of this month, plant potatoes for winter use.

For this purpose choose a piece of good ground in an airy situation, and give
it some manure if you have any to spare -- let the land be well dug, and the
surface laid even -- then mark out the rows about two feet and a half from each
other, and draw the earth up into small beds about eight or ten* inches broad
on the top: -- In the middle of these beds plant one row of the sets about ten
inches or a foot one from the other: they may be either planted with a dibble
about two inches deep, or you may draw drills with a hoe, and place the sets in
them: let the part of the root which is cut be put downwards.

LETTUCES.
You may still continue to sow lettuces, to succeed those which were sown in
the former month. -- The seed at this time should be sown in a small piece of
low ground, pretty thick, and watered every evening till it comes up; as it is
intended for transplanting as soon as fit for that purpose.

RADISHES.
You may now sow more radishes; for where these roots are constantly required,
they should be sown every fortnight at least, to have such as are young and
good.

The salmon, short-top, and turnip radishes, are all proper sorts to sow at
this season; and should be sown in beds about three or four feet wide, but not
too thick: should the weather be dry let them be watered till they come up, and
three or four times a week after they are up.

SMALL SALLADING.
You may still sow small sallading where it is wanted; such as mustard, cress,
rape, etc.

Sow the seed in small drills, as directed in the former months; and let the
ground be watered frequently till the plants come up, and in dry weather; and
every other evening at least after they are up.

SEPTEMBER.
Work to be done in the Kitchen Garden.
PEASE.
LET earth be drawn up to the stems of the pease that were sown last month, if
not done before: for they will now require it; and it will strengthen them
greatly.

Set sticks to them when they are arrived to the height of four or five
inches; and let your sticks be from four to five feet high, which will be quite
sufficient at this season.

If you have neglected sowing pease in the former month, you may venture to sow
some early in this: -- but this work should not be delayed: for the sooner they
are planted the better. -- [For the method see last month.]

BUSH BEANS.
Let the bush beans which were planted in August, he frequently hoed; and let
earth be drawn up to their stems, for they stand in need of it.

If you have neglected planting bush or snap beans in the last month, it is not
yet too late: the work should not be delayed, but done immediately. -- [For the
method see August.]

CABBAGES AND SAVOYS.
Toward the latter end of this month, transplant the early York, sugar loaf,
and savoy cabbage plants, sown in the last month: -- Prepare a piece of good
ground in an open part of your garden -- manure it well, and spread it even
over the surface; then dig it in, and plant the early York, about one foot
eight inches from row to row, and eighteen inches in the rows -- the sugar loaf
and savoys will require a little more room: that is, about two feet from row to
row, and one foot eight inches along the rows.

Should the weather prove very wet, it would be necessary to draw the earth up
into small beds or ridges, to protect them from the water; which would
otherwise rot their roots if planted in the level surface.

If you have omitted sowing early York, sugar loaf, and savoy cabbages, in
August, let it be not delayed but done as soon as possible; for the seed even
if sown early in this month will make pretty cabbages by Christmas, if managed
in a proper manner.

Let this seed be sown in beds, on an east or west border, but not in a south
aspect, nor yet too thick -- in dry weather water the seed every evening till
it comes up.

About the latter end of this month, or early in the next, you will not fail to
sow early York, sugar loaf, and drum-head cabbage seed, to come early in the
spring.

The seed that is sown now should be imported from Europe; for if you save it
from the cabbages that are the growth of these States, they will run to seed in
the spring almost to a plant -- while the others are forming fine heads. --
This doctrine though but little known, may be relied on as a fact, as I speak
from experience, which no art or argument can confute -- and however strange it
may appear to some of my readers, I hope they will not (...) me before they
have made a fair (...) I have advanced. -- Similar circumstances are to be met
with in carrots, parsnips and turnips, as before observed.

CAULIFLOWERS AND BROCOLI.
You may still continue to put out the plants of cauliflowers and brocoli, if
you have any that are good, and ground to spare -- they will do very well in
the lower parts of these States from this planting -- the work ought not to be
delayed, but done as soon as possible*

Let the ground be prepared and the plants put out (as advised in the the last
month)

Let the cauliflowers and brocoli that were transplanted before, be hoed as
soon as they have taken good root, for nothing promotes the growth of all
plants of this kind as hoeing them frequently, whether there are any weeds come
up amongst them or not.

Toward the latter end of this month, or early in the next, sow cauliflower
seed -- the plants from this sowing if they come on well; and the winter does
not kill them, will be fit to put out about Christmas; and will come in fit for
use the beginning of May.

TURNIPS.
If you have not sown any turnips before now, let this work be attended to as
soon as possible; and if not delayed too long, you may yet have a tolerable
good crop.

The best sorts to sow at this time are the early Dutch, or red top -- they
will come in at a proper season, and are exceeding good for the table. Sow this
seed much in the same manner as advised in the last month; and let care be
taken not to sow it too thick, but as even as possible. -- Let the turnips that
are now fit for hoeing be duly attended to; and those which were hoed last
month be gone over two or three times in this, as it will add greatly to their
growth.

Choose out one or two of your steadiest hands, to hoe turnips the first time;
and make choice of boys for the second and third hoeings; by which means they
will be improving, and in a short time they will be capable of performing the
work with accuracy and dispatch.

POTATOES.
The potatoes which were planted the last month, will now want hoeing; and,
about the middle of this month let some earth be drawn up to the plants, which
will be of great service to them: -- this work should be repeated every ten or
twelve days till the roots begin to swell, and the tops nearly cover the ground.

ONIONS.
The season is now advancing for the sowing of onions for a general crop --
about the middle of the month is a very proper time to execute this work.

Choose a small piece of good ground in an open part of your garden -- dig it,
and divide the same into beds about three or four feet wide -- sow the seed
thereon pretty thick, and cast a little earth over it, raking the surface of
the beds smooth.

CARROTS.
If you omitted sowing carrots in the former months, it would be necessary
(where these young roots are constantly required) to sow seed early in this
month: if the weather proves mild, they will be fit for use the latter end of
December.

Let those which were sown in the two former months be often hoed; -- let them
also be thinned that stand in need of it, which will forward the plants greatly.

SPINACH.
Spinach may be sown at any time in this month, with the utmost prospect of
success: but if the work has been neglected, the sooner some seed is put into
the ground, the better for a general winter crop.

You may sow the seeds now on the east or west borders of your garden, in
drills about nine inches one from the other -- scatter the seeds thin in each:
cover them, and rake the ground smooth. -- Let the spinach that was sown last
month be hoed as soon as you can plainly discover the rows -- it will greatly
encourage the growth of the young plants.

ENDIVE.
If you have not sown any endive in the former month, let this business be no
longer delayed; for the plants ought to acquire strength before the winter sets
in.

Transplant such endive as is fit to put out: If you have not planted any
cabbages or lettuces between your celery, it will be a very proper place to
receive some endive; and let the plants which were put out last month, either
in beds or between celery, be hoed, at least every week; and the earth always
be kept looose between the plants.

CELERY.
The celery plants which were put out the latter end of July, will now want a
little earth to be drawn toward them; but let the utmost care be taken not to
suffer it to fall into the hearts of the plants, which would choke them, -- You
may put out more celery if you have not a sufficient quantity out already: for
they will do very well if put out by the middle of this month; and will be fit
for use about the latter end of November.

Prepare a piece of good ground in the lowest part of your garden -- dig out
the trenches six or seven inches deep, and about or five feet from each other
-- lay some good rotten dung in the bottom of each trench, and dig it in even
-- then plant one row of the best plants you can procure from your seed bed;
or, if you have pricked any out, you will find them to be the best plants --
cut off the ends of the straggling roots and the long leaves, planting them in
the trenches about five or six inches from each other.

LETTUCES.
Early in this month transplant those lettuce plants that were sown the
beginning of last month. -- For this purpose choose a piece of good ground in
the most airy part of your garden, and let it be manured as well as possible
(for these plants delight in a rich soil and low situation at this season.) --
Let it be dug and the surface laid even -- then divide it into beds four feet
wide -- let the alleys be full six inches deep, and at least fifteen inches in
width -- rake the beds even, drawing all the stones and rubish into the alleys;
and let it be taken away before you proceed to put out the plants.

Draw out of your seed beds some of the strongest plants which are thereon; and
plant four rows of them on each bed, about nine inches from each other.

Having planted your first row, set your line down for the second; and put in
your plants (not opposite) but in the opening between each plant of the first
row, so that every three plants may form a triangle -- by this method they will
completely cover the ground be ore they crowd each other.

The lettuce plants that were put out last month, should be now often hoed,
which will greatly encourage their growth: -- for when you observe the ground
to be bound on the surface, hoeing is always necessary -- for this frequently
happens after very heavy showers of rain; -- and the plants will not thrive
until the earth is loosened. -- Let care be taken not to draw the earth into
the hearts of the plants when you are hoeing them.

You may sow lettuce seed the beginning of this month for a general crop of
sallad after Christmas and the spring.

You may sow any sorts at this time; but the best are the white curled coss, or
Silesia, brown Silesia, cabbage, brown Dutch, green and white coss -- they
should be sown in beds as directed in the former month.

Let your lettuce plants in dry weather be duly supplied with water every
evening; but let care be taken not to suffer it to run or wash the surface of
the ground, as it will materially injure the plants.

RADISHES.
About the beginning or near the middle of this month, sow salmon, short-top,
and turnip radishes, for a general autumn crop, for they will succeed very
well. -- Prepare for this purpose a piece of good ground in the most airy part
of your garden, and let it be well dug and divided into beds four feet wide:
sow the seeds thereon, but not too thick: cast a little earth over it; and if
the weather should continue dry it will be necessary to give the seed a little
water till it comes up, and the plants now and then after they are up -- let
those radishes that were sown in the last month be also watered in dry weather
every evening, which will prevent their growing hot and stickey.

SMALL SALLADING.
You may still continue to sow small sallad where required -- such as mustard,
cress, rape, radishes, etc. -- These seeds may be sown in the east border of
your garden, or, in a bed on any of the squares, in drills, as observed in the
former month -- and in dry weather let them be watered till it comes up, and
the plants sometimes after they appear above ground: -- Remember that the
evening is the best time for watering plants of all kinds at this season.

FRUIT GARDEN. STRAWBERRIES.
NEAR the middle, or toward the latter end of this month, if you have a piece
of vacant ground, and would wish to plant out some strawberries, it may now be
done with great propriety. -- These plants may either be put out in one of the
squares, or on each side of your principal walk in the garden, by way of
borders; and they will make a pretty appearance let them be planted where they
will. The ground should be well manured, dug and divided into beds four feet
wide; and allow full fifteen inches for the alleys, and let them be five or six
inches deep. Let the old strawberry beds be well examined, and take up as many
young plants as you have occasion for, but do not disturb the old stools which
are by no means fit to make a new plantation* for let it be observed that there
were certain runners left in April for this purpose, which may now be taken and
after trimming off the ends of the roots and loose leaves, let them be planted
on the beds prepared to receive them; and if the weather be dry give them a
good watering to settle the earth about the roots of the plants.

There is one great advantage arising from the early planting of strawberries,
and that is, that they will have time to get strength before the winter sets
in; and will be in condition to bear a good crop of fruit the next spring.

OCTOBER.
Work to be done in the Kitchen Garden.
BUSH BEANS.
LET the bush or snap beans that were planted in the last month, be frequently
hoed; and let some earth be drawn up to those that are advanced to the height
of four or five inches.

CABBAGES.
If you have neglected to put out your early York, sugar loaf, and savoy
cabbage plants, in the last month, let the work be no longer delayed, for they
are advancing in their growth, and ought to be planted out for good.

Choose a piece of ground in an open situation, and give it some good rotten
dung if it can possibly be procured: for let it be observed, there is no crop
that requires manure more than cabbages, and the different kinds of cole worts.
As soon as the ground is dunged let it be immediately dug, and the surface laid
even, and raked as smooth as possible -- you need not draw the earth up in
ridges as recommended in the former months (unless the weather proves very wet,
which seldom happens at this time) but let the plants be put out on the level
ground, and the savoys and sugar loafs in rows about two feet wide from each
other from row to row, and one foot eight inches one from another in the row;
and the early York one foot eight by eighteen inches: If the weather proves dry
give them a moderate watering till they have taken good root.

Let cabbage plants of all sorts, that were put out in the two former months,
be frequently hoed; and let some earth be drawn up to those that stand in need
of it; which will strengthen them, and greatly promote their growth. But if you
leave neglected to sow early York. Sugar loaf, and drum-head cabbages in the
last month, let it be no longer delayed: for the time is now advancing when
this seed should be put into the ground. It ought to be sown in beds, in the
same manner as directed in September.

CAULIFLOWERS AND BROCOLI.
If you have any good cauliflower or brocoli plants, that were not planted out
in the last month, they may be put out early in this: -- I have known them
produce very good heads in Charleston from this planting -- but they will not
answer ten miles in the country. -- On the islands near the sea, and in the
towns of Beaufort, and Savannah; or to the southward, they may be transplanted
with some prospect of success, if your ground is rich and in good order. -- Let
these plants be put out at this season, in rows two feet from each other; and
the same distance one from the other in the row.

Let the cauliflowers and brocoli that were transplanted in the former months,
be now frequently hoed; and let the earth be drawn up to their stems as they
advance in growth.

TURNIPS.
Let the turnips which were sown in the former month, be frequently hoed, and
properly thinned; as it will greatly forward the late sown crops, which stand
in much need of it.

ONIONS.
Toward the latter end of this month, the onions that were sown for a first
crop will be ready to transplant out, where they are to remain till they are
fit for use. -- Choose a piece of good ground in an open situation; and lay
some good rotten dung thereon; dig it in even, and rake the surface as smooth
as possible -- then divide the ground into beds about four feet wide -- draw
out of your seed beds some of the largest plants that you can find -- trim off
the ends of their roots, and the tops of their leaves; and let four rows of
these plants be put out on each bed, eight or nine inches* from each other; and
give them a good watering if the ground is dry.

CARROTS.
The carrots which were sown in the former months, if the tops of the plants do
not cover the surface of the ground, let them be hoed at least every fortnight
or three weeks, to keep the earth loose between the rows; -- and let those that
stand too thick, be properly thinned in due time.

SPINACH.
If you have omitted sowing spinach for winter and spring use, let it be
delayed no longer, but done as early in this month as possible. -- The sort I
would recommend for this sowing, is the prickly seeded: and if the east border
of your garden is vacant let it be prepared for this crop -- sow your seed in
drills eight of nine inches (cross-ways the border) from each other, but not
too thick.

Let the spinach that was sown in the former months, be duly hoed and weeded;
and let the early crops be thinned out so as to leave the plants standing
single four or five inches from each other. -- Where this work is executed in
proper time, the plants will always produce broad and thick leaves.

ENDIVE.
Near the middle or toward the latter end of this month, take the advantage of
a dry day to tie up some endive to whiten.

Make choice for this purpose of some plants of the most forward growth: gather
the leaves up evenly in your hand, and let them be tied together a little above
the middle, with a small band of moss or a soft string, so that it may not cut
the outside leaves of the plants.

If you have plenty of endive plants, and have not put as many out as you could
wish, let this business be attended to as early in this month as possible; and
let the plants be put out as directed in the former month; observe, if your
plants are of a large size, to cut off the ends of their roots, and the tops of
their straggling leaves, before you plant them.

Let the endive plants that were put out in the last month, be frequently hoed,
until they are forward in their growth.

CELERY.
Take advantage of a fine day, and earth such celery as require it. -- Let the
earth be well laid up to the plants, and within six or eight inches of the top
of their leaves. -- Let this work be performed with the utmost care; and lay
your earth up gently to the plants least it falls into their hearts and choaks
them. -- This earthing up should be repeated at least three or four times in
this month; as it will not only promote their growth, but their blanching also.

LETTUCES.
Near the middle, or toward the latter end of this month, let the south border
of your garden be got ready to receive some lettuce plants, to come in for use
early in the spring -- supposing the border to be about four feet wide; --
plant thereon four rows of the best plants that you can find on the seed bed,
about nine or ten inches from each other; and if the weather should prove dry,
let them be duly watered till they have taken good root.

Let the plants that were put out in the last month be often hoed, and the
surface of the ground always kept loose between them.

RADISHES.
You may yet sow radishes where required, for winter use; and at this season in
a sheltered situation; in beds about four feet wide, or on a border that is
open to the sun: and in dry weather let the plants be watered in the evenings
till they get strength.

SMALL SALLADING.
Where small sallading is required, you should now sow it on a border open to
the sun, in drills, as directed in the former month.

ARTICHOKES.
Near the middle, or toward the latter end of this month, let your artichokes
be well examined, and give them their winter dressing.

Take away all the earth round the stool, or plant about two feet wide and six
inches deep, clean to the roots: -- This being done, provide yourself with a
hard piece of wood about six inches long, two inches wide, and half an inch
thick; -- make one end of it as sharp as possible; and let all the shoots or
suckers on the old stool be well examined -- then with the wooden instrument
take away all the smaller shoots quite close to the stock from whence they
arise, (which have sprung up since the last dressing) -- except four or five of
the largest that are to be left; and let the loose straggling leaves be cut off
but not close to the stock; then lay on the roots, and crown off the stool
between the remaining suckers or shoots, a wheel-barrow full of good rotten
dung, and spread it even where the earth was taken out -- then let the earth be
put back again on the dung, raising it about the remaining plants full six
inches higher than before the work was begun; and let the utmost care be taken
that the loose earth do not fall into the hearts of the plants, which will
greatly injure them. -- To prevent this it would not be improper to tie the
leaves together of those suckers that you do intend to leave till the work is
executed.

Let it be observed, that the four or five suckers or shoots which are left,
are not all to remain to bear heads the next year -- for three is quite
sufficient for the strongest stool; and the other two are left as a reserve, in
case you should be in want of plants to make a new plantation in the spring.

By this fall dressing it will strengthen the plants greatly that remain; as I
may justly suppose there are four times as many suckers taken away as are
suffered to remain.

ASPARAGUS.
Toward the latter end of this month, let your asparagus beds have their
winter's dressing.

In the first place let all the stalks be cut off quite close to the ground,
and carried away: then let both the alleys and beds be hoed, and the ground
raked as clean as possible; and the weeds and litter if any, be all taken off.

The beds and alleys being now clean, provide yourself with a fork for the
purpose of dressing the asparagus beds -- it should be about ten inches wide,
and contain three tines, each about a foot in length, and an inch and a half
broad; the back part perfectly flat, and the sore side unequal, or a small
rising in the middle of each tine -- let the ends be blunt, so that they may
not wound the crown of the roots. -- Let the beds and alleys be forked up three
or four inches deep, and the earth laid smooth and even -- then with your rake
draw an inch or an inch and a half of the earth off each bed into the alleys --
lay some good rotten dung thereon about four inches thick, spreading it even --
dig out the earth in the middle of the alleys a full spade deep, and fifteen
inches wide, covering the dung with the same (you have before put on the beds)
as even as possible, and rake the surface smooth.

By this management your asparagus beds will lie dry and warm all the winter,
and produce fine large buds in the spring. -- You may plant on these beds some
endive, or early York cabbages; but remember that whatever crop you plant on
your asparagus beds must be taken off by the tenth of February, in order to
give them their spring dressing.

FRUIT GARDEN.
STRAWBERRIES.
EARLY in this month is a good time for making new plantations of strawberries,
as they will soon take root, and will acquire strength to bear fruit in the
next spring. -- The sooner this work is done the better.

You may either plant them in beds on the quarter of your garden, or in the
borders of each side of the principal walk; -- but let them be planted where
they will (if you would wish to have good fruit) the ground must be well
manured. -- Dig your land a full spade deep, and divide it into beds four feet
wide -- then put out four rows of the best young plants you can find on the old
beds. -- If you remember there were some left in April for this purpose, which
will be by this time fine plants; though, to have them strong, and bear good
fruit in the spring, it would be necessary to take them up with small balls of
earth to their roots, and immediately planted on the beds prepared to receive
them -- and if the weather be dry give them a good watering to promote their
growth, as well as to settle the earth about the roots.

RASPBERRIES.
At any time in, this month you may plant out raspberries where wanted.

Choose for these plants the lowest part of your garden; for they delight in
low moist land; observe, never to suffer the water to lay on or between the
beds, either in summer or winter, -- If you would wish to have large, and good
flavoured fruit, it would be proper to give your ground a good dressing with
manure when you put out the plants.

The land being well manured, and dug a full spade deep, repair to the old
beds, and take up some of the best young plants that can be spared,

It would be very imprudent to destroy the old beds the same year you make your
new ones; as they will bear but little for the first and second season: though
the third year they will come into full bearing, and produce fruit plentifully:
-- Therefore, as I observed above, take out only such young plants as can be
best spared, and will not injure your crop, for the ensuing year. -- You will
find many young plants round the outside of the old beds, which (if not taken
up to make new plantations) must be destroyed -- let it be observed that the
old plants which bore fruit the last year, are not proper to be planted out;
for they will not produce fruit more than one season, when they die, and are
succeeded by young shoots every summer: -- It is these and these only, that I
mean should be planted out to form new beds.

Having procured a sufficient number of young plants, trim off the ends of the
straggling roots, and one-third part of the young shoots, and plant them in
rows four or five feet one from another; and about a foot or fifteen inches
from each other.

Let the old raspberry beds be examined, and let all the old branches be taken
out, and the young shoots properly arranged, and the weeds which are now on the
beds be taken away, and the earth loosened between the young plants that are
left -- lay in some good rotten dung betwixt them, and let the alleys be now
dug a full spade deep, and three feet wide, close up to the plants; and as you
are digging between the rows, cast a little earth over the dung: by so doing
the raspberry beds will look neat all the winter, and will be in a fair way of
producing a good crop of fruit next season.

NOVEMBER.
Work to be done in the Kitchen Garden.
PLANTING EARLY BEANS.
NEAR the middle, or the latter end of this month, you may plant some beans to
come early the succeeding spring.

Those which are planted now, if they survive the winter's frost, etc. will be
fit for use early in April.

The Mazagon bean is the best to plant at this season; for they will come up
earlier then any other sort, and are excellent bearers though but of an humble
growth; and they will stand the winter better then the larger kinds.

A warm border under a south wall, is the best situation to plant those beans
at this season.

They should be planted in rows across the border -- that is, provided the
border is five or six feet wide; observing that the rows are to be two feet
asunder, which will be room enough for this sort. -- The beans should be
planted four or five inches from each other in the rows, and near an inch and a
half deep.

You may also plant one row lengthways of the border, within two or three
inches of the wall or fence: these will sometimes outlive the winter, when
those at a greater distance from the wall, etc. are destroyed.

But, if the border is narrow, you had better plant two rows only lengthways;
that is, one row near the wall, and the other about two feet and a half from it.

They may be planted wither with a blunt dibble putting them in about an inch
and a half, or near two inches deep; or you may draw drills that depth, and
drop the beans therein; drawing the earth an equal depth over them, and rake
the ground smooth.

In planting early beans, it often proves successful first to sow them pretty
thick in a bed of rich earth; and when they come up a little height, transplant
them into the borders.

The method is this: -- Dig a bed about three or four feet broad, of good
earth, in a warm corner of your garden.

The ground being dug, draw the earth off about an inch and an half or near two
inches in depth equally from the surface, half to the one side and half to the
other. -- This done, scatter the beans thereon about an inch asunder, and
immediately cover them over with the earth that was drawn off for that purpose:
or you may with your hoe draw broad flat drills cross-way the bed, and scatter
the beans pretty thick, and cover them over with earth equally; and if severe
frost should prevail in their infant slate while remaining altogether in this,
they can readily be protected with a few pine tops till they are fit to
transplant.

When the beans are come up an inch and a half or two inches high, they should
then in mild weather, be transplanted into the above mentioned borders, taking
them carefully out of the seed-bed with their full spreading roots, and as much
earth as will hang about them -- pull the old beans at the bottom, and trim the
end of the perpendicular root, and then plant them in rows in the same manner
and at the same distance as before directed; observing to close the earth well
about every plant -- they will soon take root and grow freely.

One reason for this practice is, the best of gardeners allow, that the beans
which are transplanted, will come in sooner by a week or ten days than those
that are not, though the seed be put in the ground the same day.

SOWING PEASE.
About the middle of this month, sow pease for your first crop -- if they
escape the frost they will come for use early in April.

The early hotspurs are the proper sorts to sow at this time. -- Choose seeds
that are fresh and new.

There are several sorts of the hotspurs, such as the golden, Carleton,
Reading, etc. These I would recommend to sow for the first crop.

A warm south border, under a wall or fence, is the most proper place to sow
them in at this season -- the seed must be sown in drills, either lengthways or
in rows, athwart the border, according to its breadth: where it is but narrow,
draw one drill only lengthways at the distance of one or two feet from the wall
or fence, and scatter the pease therein pretty thick, but as regular as
possible -- cover them up immediately with cath about an inch and a half deep,
and rake the ground even.

Where your border is five or six feet wide, it would be proper to sew the peae
in drills cross-ways the same, about four feet distant from each other: and if
you intend they should run on sticks, you may plant a row of cabbage or lettuce
plants between them.

CABBAGES.
If you have neglected to put out any early or savoy cabbage plants in the
former month, and have good plants and ground to spare, it may be done at any
time in this month, and will make fine heads early in the spring without the
least danger of running to seed, as the large kinds are apt to do. -- If the
ground be good where you have sown your first crop of early peace, you may with
propriety put out a row of these plants between each row of pease, about
sixteen or eighteen inches from each other.

ONIONS.
If you have not put out any onions in the former month, it should be done as
soon as possible in this.

Let a piece of ground be prepared to receive them: and after it is dug and
divided into beds about four feet wide, cut off the ends of the roots as well
as the tops of the long leaves, and plant four rows of them on each bed, about
nine or ten inches one from the other in the rows.

Let the onions which were planted out in the last month, be frequently hoed,
as it will be of infinite service to the young plants.

LETTUCES.
Lettuce plants which are designed to remain in the beds where sown for winter
use, should now be cleared of weeds, and thinned where you find them too close.

Those plants which were sown in September, should now be transplanted into a
warm south border, in order to come out for use early in the spring.

RADISHES.
Some time in this month sow some shorttop radish seed, and if they survive the
frost, they will be fit to draw early in February; and though there is but little
hopes of their succeeding, yet where radishes are desired early, it will not be
improper to sow a few to take their chance.

SOWING PEASE.
Let this seed be sown in a warm border near a walk or fence; observing to sow
it pretty thick, and in a fair, dry day.

SMALL SALADING.
You may sow small salading in a sheltered situation: such as mustard, cresies,
rape, etc. where required.

CELERY.
When the weather is open and dry, you should earth up your celery to blanch.
-- Break the earth well, and lay it up to the plants within six or eight inches
of the tops of their leaves.

In performing this work let care be taken not to lay the earth too hastily to
the plants, as it may be the means of forcing it into the hearts of them, which
would occasion the plants to rot.

ARTICHOKES.
If your artichokes did not get their winter's dressing in October, it should
be no longer postponed; for the sooner the work is performed the better.

The earth should be opened round the roots, and all the useless plants taken
off; leaving four or five of the strongest suckers or shoots on each stock --
lay some good rotten dung round them: when they should be earthed up and
managed in the same manner as recommended in the month of October.

ASPARAGUS.
Where your asparagus beds were not forked and dressed up in the last month,
let it be done early in this.

The stalks should be all cut away quite close to the ground; and the weeds
which are on the beds or in the alleys, be hoed and raked to the ends of the
same; and carried immediately out of the garden: then let them be forked up;
the dung laid on; and the work executed as directed in the former month.

FRUIT GARDEN.
PRUNE LARGE-GROWN APPLE AND PEAR TREES.
TOWARD the latter end of this month, let the apple and pear trees in the
orchard, be well examined; and all dead, decayed, and worn out branches, be cut
away; together with all the suckers and superfluous shoots which often arise
out of the old limbs in the middle of the trees -- and where you find the
bearing wood too thick, and growing together, let it be taken out, in order to
give room to such as you intend to remain to bear fruit, as well as to admit a
free circulation of air among the branches.

The business of pruning old fruit trees is of more consequence than many are
aware of; and require much judgment in performing the work: -- Let the branches
be regularly thinned, and as even as possible.

PRUNING PEACHES, NECTARINES, AND APRICOTS.
This work may be done toward the latter end of this month; though you may
execute it with equal success in the next. -- [See January.]

STRAWBERRIES.
If you have not transplanted any strawberries before now, and would wish to
have them produce a crop of fruit the next season, the work should not be
longer delayed, but put in practice as soon as possible.

Early in this month let the old beds or borders of strawberries be carefully
looked over, and all the dead runners, leaves, etc. be cut off and taken away,
as well as all the useless plants where too thick, be taken out, and the earth
loosened about those which remain. -- Let good rich earth or very rotten dung
be conveyed between the plants, which will not only strengthen them, but enrich
the land so as to look neat all the winter, and produce fine fruit in the
spring.

RASPBERRIES.
If your raspberries were not put out in the former month, the earlier done now
the better; and let them be planted in rows as before directed.

Also let the old raspberry beds be well examined, and the dead branches which
bore fruit the last year taken out; and the young shoots properly thinned --
throw some good rotten dung between them, and dig the alleys as mentioned in
October.

PLANTING FRUIT TREES, etc.
Toward the latter end of this month you may plant our fruit trees; such as
peaches, nectarines, apricots, apples, pears, plumbs, cherries, and grape vines
-- and let the same rules be observed as mentioned in January.

DECEMBER.
Work to be done in the Kitchen Garden.
BEANS.
ABOUT the middle of this month prepare some good ground in a sheltered
situation, for a successional crop of beans.

If you have not planted any before this period, let some of the mazagons be
put in as early in this month as possible.

You may also plant some of the long podded, and Windsor, at the same time; as
they will succeed each other in bearing.

Ler the mazagons be planted in rows, two, or two and a half feet -- the long
podded two and a half, to three feet -- and the Windsor three, or three and a
half feet from row to row, and a proper distance in the rows, viz. -- The first
sort three inches -- the second five inches -- and the latter eight inches from
each other.

If you have any beans that are up about two or three inches above the ground,
let some earth be drawn up to their stems. -- This work should be done in a
mild, fine day, when the surface is perfectly dry: By this method you will not
only preserve your plants in a great measure from the frost, but will support
and strengthen them.

PEASE.
Sow more pease about the middle of this month, to succeed those which were
sown in November; and in order to have a regular supply for the table.

If you neglected to sow any in the last month, do not delay it now; for the
sooner you perform this business the better. -- I would recommend the early
kinds at this season, which will come forward with some prospect of success,
and nearly as soon as those sown in the former month; as they are not so likely
to be injured by the frost, and will probably bear a much greater crop.

Toward the latter end of this month, you may sow in a sheltered situation,
some marrowfats and sugar pease. -- These sorts will require sticking when they
are three or four inches above the ground; and as they run very stately, your
sticks ought to be at least five or six feet high; and your plants five or six
feet from row to row; and not so thick in the rows as the early kinds.

This distance will appear very great at first; but be assured that your crop
will be much the better for it, as it will admit of a free circulation of air
between the rows. -- You may if you think proper, plant cabbage plants between
each row of pease.

Let the pease which was sown last month, have some earth drawn up to their
stems, as it will strengthen them greatly, and prevent the wet weather from
rotting them near the ground. -- If you was to stick a row of pine or any other
ever-green bushes betwixt the rows, it would be of infinite service in breaking
the cold wind, which very often cuts off the early crops of pease.

CABBAGES.
Near the latter end of this month, the cabbage plants that were sown in
October, will be by this time fit to plant out.

Choose a piece of good ground in a sheltered part of the garden; and lay on it
some good rotten dung, and dig it in a full spade deep -- lay the surface even,
and rake the stones away if any; and put out the early York, cabbage plants in
rows, about two feet from each other from row to row, and twenty inches in the
rows; and let the sugar leaves be planted tow feet every way; and allow the
large kinds two feet and half by two feet. -- If this crop is properly managed,
they will make fine heads in April and May.

If you have a plenty of cabbage plants which were raised from English seed
sown in September or October, it would be very advisable to plant some between
the rows of early beans and peace, to out up for use in March, when you will
find greens scarce -- let it be observed that the ground ought to be always
fresh dug before you put out these plants this matter is of more consequence
than many people are aware of.

CAULIFLOWERS.
Toward the latter end of this month, if your cauliflower plants (which were
sown in October) are grown to a good size, let some of them be put out on the
south border of your garden, if it is vacant -- if not, the most warm and
sheltered place that you can conveniently spare -- let it be well manured, and
dug a full spade deep -- rake the ground even, and put out the plants in rows
full two feet from each other.

The cauliflower plants which were put out in May and June last, will now begin
to show their heads -- you should therefore be very careful in protecting them
from the frost. -- For this purpose provide yourself with a number of hay,
straw, or moss bands, well twisted together, binding the same round the stalks
of your plants, beginning at the bottom close to the ground till you come up to
about one third part of the leaves -- let care be taken that you do not wind it
too light round the leaves; but let the band be rather flack so as to afford
the head sufficient room to swell; -- you may tie the leaves together near
their tops; for by this treatment you will not only preserve the cauliflowers
from the frost, but will be the means also of rendering them perfectly white
and beautiful to the eye.

Let the bands that are tied round the leaves be frequently examined; and see
if the head has sufficient room to swell: if you find the band too tight, let
it be loosened that the head may grow free and easy.

BROCOLI.
Let the ground between the last planted crop of brocoli be now hoed for the
last time, and all the leaves which are fallen off between the rows taken away;
and remember to let some earth be drawn up to the stems of those which require
it.

RADISHES.
Toward the latter end of this month, sow some short-top radishes for an early
crop.

Let a good piece of ground be prepared as open to the sun as possible; and if
your south border is not engaged, it would be the most proper place to sow your
seed in at this season.

The border being properly manured and dug, sow the seed broad cast pretty
thick: you may also sow a sprinkling of carrots with your radishes; for if one
should fail the other may come on -- the latter will arrive to perfection and
fit to be drawn before the carrots are got to any size: therefore, should they
both succeed, the growth of the one will be no impediment to the other. -- If
it is not convenient for you to sow carrots, spinach may be sown with an equal
prospect of advantage.

LETTUCES.
Let a small piece of good ground be prepared toward the latter end of this
month, as open to the sun and as sheltered from the cold winds as possible) in
order to sow some lettuce seed.

The best sorts for this sowing, are the brown Silesia cabbage, and brown
Dutch, they being the most hardy kinds.

Let the seed be sown pretty thick and even -- cast a little earth over it and
rake the surface smooth.

Should the weather prove frosty after the plants are up, it would be very
necessary to cover them over while in an infant state, every night with pine,
or other ever-green bushes, which will in a great measure protect them from the
frost, as well as forwarding their growth.

The lettuces which are out in beds or borders, should be now kept perfectly
clean of weeds, and the ground often loosened between them, which will
encourage their progress.

Was you to cover even these with bushes as above, in frosty nights, it may be
the means of saving them frequently from destruction.

SMALL SALADING.
Where small salading is required, you should sow some at least every ten or
twelve days, in a situation that is open to the sun; and in drills as directed
in the former months -- should there be any appearance of a frost, it would not
be amiss to lay straw or bushes lightly over the plants every night, as it will
greatly preserve and cherish them.

SPINACH.
Let the beds and borders of spinach be kept perfectly clean of weeds, and the
earth frequently loosened between the rows.

Where your plants are too thick, let them be properly thinned so as to stand
not less than three or four inches from each other.

In gathering spinach let it be observed, that the large broad leaves should be
cut first; and care ought to be taken that you do not injure the small ones, so
as to destroy the whole at once.

ONIONS.
If you have not already planted out your onions, let it be no longer
neglected; and the earlier the work is attended to in this month the better. --
Let a piece of good ground be prepared for them, and the plants put out as
advised in the two former months.

The earliest planted onions should be now kept free from weeds, and the ground
hoed frequently between them, which will greatly forward your plants.

CARROTS.
If the weather is mild and dry toward the latter end of this month, let a
piece of ground be put in proper order to receive some carrot seed -- the best
sort for this sowing is the early horn or short orange; as they will come in
for use near a month sooner than the long orange.

It would be very necessary to give your ground a moderate dressing with good
rotten dung turned in well, which divide into beds four feet wide, sowing four
rows of carrot seed on each bed, but not too thick -- you may if you choose,
sow a sprinkling of short top radishes with your carrots.

Let it be observed, that it must be the true orange carrot seed that is to be
sown at this season: for if you sow the pale degenerated kind, it will be
running to seed in May -- when the roots from the European seed will be in
their highest perfection.

CELERY.
Make choice of a fine dry day to earth up such celery as stand in need of it.
-- In performing this work great care should be taken that the earth do not
fall into the hearts of the plants, by which it would greatly injure their
growth, if not entirely destroy them.

Should severe weather now set in, let your plants which are in the ground be
carefully protected from the frost, by laying straw or some other covering that
may be most convenient over the rows: -- But if the ground should be very wet
where your celery is planted, let some of the best of it be taken up and put
into a dry, warm border, pretty thick, which you may take up for use whenever
required.

ENDIVE.
Let the beds or borders where your endive was put out, be looked over, and tie
up some of the largest plants.

Gather the leaves up regular in your hand, and tie them together a little
above the middle, as close as possible, with a small moss band, or some strong
bass matting; then with a small hoe draw up the earth close round the plants.

Should the weather prove severe and frosty, it would be very proper to take
some of the plants from the beds that you have tied up; and let them be put
into a south, dry border, in order that they may whiten.

In performing this work, take care that you do not cover the endive wholly
over, but lay them into the earth within an inch of the tops of their leaves --
and if the weather should be very wet, it would be proper to lay a plank over
the plants to protect them from the heavy rains which would otherwise perhaps
cause them to rot.

ARTICHOKES.
If the artichokes were not dressed up and properly managed in the last month,
it should be no longer postponed; for it is now high time this work was done.
-- [See Oct.]

ASPARAGUS.
If your asparagus beds were not forked, dunged and dressed in the last month,
it should be done as soon as possible in this. -- [See October.]

If you recollect I recommended cabbage and lettuce plants to be put out on the
asparagus beds in October last, after they were dressed; but it will now be too
late in the season -- for before your cabbages or lettuces (on these beds)
would arrive to any perfection, they would require their spring dressing.

FRUIT GARDEN.
PRUNE PEACH, NECTARINE AND APRICOT TREES.
AT any time in this month you may prune peach, nectarine and apricot trees,
either dwarfs, espaliers or standards.

Let the trees be well examined, and all the useless shoots taken out, leaving
the prime bearing ones at proper and regular distances; though if the trees be
young and in a weakly state, let the shoots be shortened according to their
strength: but if strong and vigorous, let them be managed as directed in
January.

PRUNING OLD STANDARD APPLE AND PEAR TREES.
If you have omitted pruning the old standard trees in the orchard, let this
business be now attended to; and displace all dead and decayed limbs that you
may find in any of the trees; and let the young branches be properly thinned.

PRUNE PLUMB AND CHERRY TREES.
You may also prune your plumb and cherry trees at any time in this month, if
not done before.

Let it be observed that these trees do not bear their fruit from the last
year's shoots (the morrell cherry excepted) but are produced generally from
short spurs, sometimes two, three and four year's old; which should never be
cut off but in some particular cases: but where these short spurs are forced by
bad management, they will produce strong and vigorous shoots; the most
irregular and unkind of which should be cut away; for the more you stop them,
the more strong the shoots will become; and as long as you continue shortening
the shoots at this season, be assured they will not produce any fruitbearing
spurs.

PRUNING YOUNG VINES THE FIRST YEAR AFTER PLANTING.
The young vines which were planted out in the last season, should be now
looked over; as they will probably have produced some (more or less) young
shoots, the last summer.

These shoots should be all shortened within three eyes of the old wood, in
order to make them put out with more vigor the next year.

PRUNING VINES THE SECOND YEAR AFTER PLANTING.
As these vines were headed down very short the first year after planting, it
is to be supposed that* some of them have made three, four, and perhaps six
fine and strong kindly shoots, eight or ten feet long. -- These shoots, some
over-wise people will lay in. six or eight feet the second year -- but such
practice I by no means approve of: for the running them out so long before the
plants are well established in the ground, will weaken them so much, that with
all the art you are possessed of, it will be three or four years before your
young vines will have acquired sufficient strength to produce good wood,
without which there will be no prospect of fine fruit; therefore let the shoots
be shortened the second year also, to within four or five eyes of the last
year's wood; and the third season they will with proper care cover an arbor
eight feet wide and ten feet high, with fine fruit-bearing shoots. -- By this
treatment your vines will acquire proper strength, and may, probably produce
some fine fruit the next summer.

PRUNING VINES THIRD YEAR AFTER PLANTING.
By this time your vines will have acquired strength, if managed as before
directed; and may have produced on each plant from eight to twelve fine bearing
shoots, which should be also shortened according to their strength, leaving the
strongest of them after pruned, at least five feet; and if very strong, six
feet will not be too much.

Then let them be tied to the frame ten inches or a foot from each other: --
Though this distance may seem great at this season, you will find your arbor
completely shaded in the summer. -- For the further management of these, I
refer you to the next head on pruning old vines.

PRUNING OLD VINES.
If the vines were not pruned last month, let this necessary work be no longer
delayed, but done as soon as possible; it being now a proper time for
performing it.

In the first place let all the last summer's shoots which have sprung out of
the old wood and branches be cut away; except in such particular places where
they are absolutely wanted in the ensuing year: in such a case only they are to
remain; but let them be shortened with two or three good eyes from the old
wood. -- By cutting the shoots so short it will be the means of their producing
strong and kindly ones, which may probably prove fruitful the summer after next.

Observe in the next place, that all the short shoots which were suffered to
remain in the last spring (for the purpose of bearing fruit only) should be now
examined; and the most weakly and ill-placed of them be cut away; leaving the
prosperous and most healthy shoots about ten or twelve inches from each other;
and shortened so as not to have more than one or two good eyes (or as the
gardener's call them spurs) to your vines; which will produce good fruit in the
next season.

Thirdly and lastly, let all the shoots which were laid in the last summer, be
carefully looked over; and all the side shoots from the principal bearing young
branches be cut away quite close from whence they proceed; as they will neither
bear good fruit, nor produce good wood, being always of a rambling and
irregular growth. -- This being done, shorten the shoots which are left,
agreeable to the state and strength of each, as in the following manner.

Your young shoots will now require great attention, and must be shortened
accordingly: -- The most weakly should be cut back within three or four eyes of
the old wood, in order to render them strong and healthy by the ensuing summer;
-- those of a middling strength should be taken off within five or six eyes,
whilst those that are strong and luxuriant may be (where there is sufficient
room) permitted to remain with eight or twelve, and even from twelve to sixteen
eyes; though let it be observed, that this treatment is only intended for old
grown grape vines.

PLANTING OF VINES.
At any time in this month you may plant out young vines where required.

Choose for this purpose some good young plants of one and not more than two
years old. -- If you put them out for an arbor (which is the most approved
method) let holes be dug where you intend your plants to grow, about three feet
wide and eighteen inches deep -- put therein a barrow full of rich earth mixed
with some good rotten dung, planting the young vines near the frame about five
or six feet from each other, and pressing your foot gently round the plant to
fix the earth.

PLANTING FRUIT TREES, VIZ. APPLES, PEARS, PEACHES, NECTARINES, APRICOTS,
PLUMBS AND CHERRIES.
AT any time in this month you may transplant any of the above fruit trees by
way of espaliers, in your garden.

If you plant plumbs or cherries, to train on a frame, they should be put out
about fourteen feet from each other, and near one foot six inches from the walk.

If you was to dig a hole about two feet wide and one foot deep, putting
therein some good rich earth mixed with a little dung, it would be of great
service to the young trees.

But let it be observed, that you do not plant trees of any kind too deep: for
this is of more consequence than many people are possibly aware of.

Should you wish to plant out peach, nectarine or apricot trees, you ought to
plant them at least eighteen feet distant from each other, but not too deep, as
cautioned before.

Apple and pear trees being of a more vigorous and lasting growth, should be
planted twenty foot or more one from the other: this distance may appear very
wide at first, but they will soon extend so as to meet on the frame if your
ground is good and the trees are managed in a proper manner.

RASPBERRIES.
If you have not planted out as many raspberries as you would wish, this
season, you may still do it; though the sooner this work is performed the better:
-- But if it is not convenient for you to execute it early in this month, you
may delay it till the latter end of the next.

If you have not as yet given your old beds of raspberries their winter
dressing, it should be done as soon as possible, as the young plants will
greatly improve and flourish if earthed up in proper season.

STRAWBERRIES.
If you have not put out any strawberries before now, let the work be no longer
delayed; for if the plants are nor put out early in this month, it had better
be postponed till the latter end of January, when they will take root more
freely than about Christmas.

Let the old strawberry beds be well examined if not done in the former months,
and all the dead runners and leaves be cut away and the earth loosened between
the plants, which will strengthen them so as to bear fine fruit the next
spring. -- [See November.

N. B. To prevent any spurious publication of this work, I have hereunto
affixed my name.
ADVERTISEMENT. ROBERT SQUIBB, NURSERY AND SEEDSMAN;
IMPORTS annually from Europe, all the most useful kinds of Garden Grass,
Flower Seeds, Roots and Tools; which he disposes of on the most reasonable
terms, both at his Garden the upper-end of Tradd-street, and at his Nursery
near Rumney Bridge.

He also collects, and puts up (with accuracy and dispatch) all kinds of Forest
Trees, Shrubs, Plants and Seeds, indigencies to the United States of America --
for those who choose to honor him with their orders

Ladies or Gentlemen who would wish to have three or four Negro Boys (from
fourteen to sixteen years of age) instructed in the modern art of Gardening,
may apply as above.

INDEX.
A.
APPLE trees plant, 64. prune, 20, 64, 108, 164, 176.
Apricot trees, plant, 64. prune, 15, 64, 94, 106, 121, 165, 176. the fruit
thin, 91, 108.
April, 66. Artichokes, sow, 41. transplant, 62. spring dressing, 38, 62.
autumn, ditto, 151, 163, 175.
Asparagus, sow, 38, 62. roots, transplant, 34. spring dressing, 61. autumn
ditto, 153, 163, 176. cut, 74
August, 124. Almond trees, plant, 48.
B.
Basil, sow, 30. Baum, sow, 30. transplant, 30.
Beans, plant, 1, 22, 52, 66 157, 166. transplant, 159.
Beets, sow, 5, 60, 88. thin, 60, 79.
Burrage sow. 30. Brocoli, sow, 68, 84, 101, 114. Buglass, sow, 30. Bush beans,
plant, 54, 69, 83, 98, 111, 125, 135. Burnet, sow, 30. transplant, 30.

C.
Cabbages, sow 3, 68, 84, 99, 133, 126, 135, 146, 161. transplant, 4, 23,
54,^7, 99, 113, 127, 135, 146, 168.
Carrots, sow 6, 28, 56, 71, 85, 101, 116, 129, 139, 173. thin, 70, 102, 117,
139, 148.
Cauliflowers, sow, 68, 84, 101, 114. transplant, 4, 24, 114, 128, 130, 137,
147, 169. protect from frost, 4, 170.
Celery, sow, 61, 77, 86. prick out, 87, 104. put out, 118, 140. earth up, 8,
150, 163, 174. protect from frost, 9, 174.
Cherry trees plant, 64. prune, 20, 43, 64, 108, 176.
Cherville, sow, 29. Cucumbers, sow, 60, 78, 87, 105. Coriander, sow, 29.
Clarey, sow, 30. Cammomile plant, 30.
D.
December, 166. Destroy weeds, 79, 89. Dill, sow, 30.
E.
Endive, sow, 117, 130, 140. transplant, 131, 140, 149. tie up, 9, 149, protect
from frost, 175.

F.
February, 22. Fruit garden, 15, 43, 63, 80, 91, 98, 106, 121, 144, 154, 164,
176. Fig trees plant, 63. prune, 50, 97.
Fennil sow, 30. Featherfew, 30. Fruit trees head down, 51. old prune, 46.

G.
Garlic plant, 9. take up, 105.

H.
Herbs, see, savory, hysop, thyme, etc. Hysop sow, 31. transplant, 31. Horse
radish, do. 11. take up, 14.
Herbs gather, 88.
I.
Janurary, 1. June, 98. July, 111.
K.
Kitchen Garden, 1, 22, 52, 66, 83, 98, 111, 124, 134, 145, 157, 166. Kidney
Beans plant, 54, 69, 83, 98, 111, 125, 135.
L.
Leeks sow, 26, 54, 74. transplant, 115. thin, 73.
Lemon trees plant, 63. prune, 63.
Lettuces sow, 24, 58, 76, 85, 102, 117, 133, 142, 162, 171. transplant, 7, 24,
57, 76, 141, 150. protect from frost, 172.
Lime trees plant, 63. prune, 63.
Lavendar plant, 32. Love apples sow, 59. support, 106. transplant, 87.

M.
March, 52. Marjoram, sow, 31. May, 83. Medical Herbs, 30. Medlar trees, plant,
48. Melons sow, 59, 78, 87, 105. Mint transplant, 33, 78. gather, 88. distill,
89.
Marigold, sow, 30.
N.
Nectarine trees, plant, 64. prune, 15, 64, 94, 106, 121, 165, 176. the fruit
thin, 91, 108.
New planted trees, support, 19. November, 157.
O.
October, 145. Okra seeds, plant, 60, 79. plants thin, 105.
Onions sow, 26, 54, 129, 138. transplant, 148, 161, 173. thin, 73. take up,
101, 116.
Orach sow, 30. Orange trees plant, 50, 63. prune, 51, 63.

P.
Peace sow, 2, 22, 52, 66, 124, 134, 160, 167. stick, 53, 66, 134.
Parsley sow, 7, 30, 58, 101. Parsnips sow, 28, 71, 85, 116. thin, 70, 102, 117.
Peach trees plant, 64. prune, 15, 45, 64, 94, 106, 121, 165, 176. the fruit
thin, 91, 108.
Pear trees plant, 64. prune, 20, 64, 108, 164, 176.
Pennyroyal plant, 30 Pumpkin seeds plant, 60. 78. Peppers sow, 59. plant, 87.
Plumb trees plant, 64. prune, 20, 43, 64. 108, 176.
Potatoes Irish, plant, 41, 55, 132. Planting fruit trees, 48, 106, 181.
Q.
Quince trees plant, 48.
R.
Radishes sow, 9, 27, 56, 75, 86, 103, 119, 133, 143, 151, 162, 171. thin, 56.
protect from frost, 11.
Rosemary plant, 32. Rue plant, 32. Raspberries plant, 21, 46, 155, 165, 182.
prune, 20, 46. Winter dressing, 20, 46, 156, 166.

S.
Sage plant, 31. Savory sow, 31. plant, 31.
Savoys sow, 84, 100, 135. plant, 99, 135.
Shallots plant, 9. take up, 105.
Small sallading sow, 29, 58, 77, 85, 103, 120, 134, 143, 151, 162, 172.
protect from frost, 172.
Sorrel sow, 30. Squashes sow, 60, 78, 87, 105. Spinach sow, 6, 25, 61, 86,
120, 129, 139, 148. thin, 61, 149, 173.

(...)
