THE AMERICAN SONGSTER: BEING A SELECT COLLECTION OF THE MOST CELEBRATED
American, English, Scotch and Irish SONGS.

"Music has charms to soothe a savage breast,
"To soften rocks, and bend the knotted oak."
VIR. NEW YORK: Printed for SAMUEL CAMPBELL, No. 44, Hanover Square, and THOMAS
ALLEN, No. 16, Queen Street. M,DCC,LXXXVIII.

TO THE LOVERS of MUSIC, In the UNITED STATES of AMERICA.
LADIES and GENTLEMEN.
IT has been a subject of considerable regret, that a Collection of the best
Modern Songs, not only the production of America, but likewise those of Britain
has never before appeared on this continent.

To remedy which, the Editors have been at considerable labor in collecting
from the most Esteemed Song Books, published in Europe, a compilation, suitable
in some degree to this country.

To this collection the Fair Americans may safely have recourse, without the
the start of a blush upon their cheeks, or offending the most rigid virtue; nor
can the Gentlemen be more pleased by the particular attention shown to the
Ladies, than by the compliment we pay to their good sense, in avoiding all
manner of indecent songs and double entendres.

Here will be found a number of original Songs, the production of the American
Muse: We are only sorry it has not been in our power to collect a greater
number of these at the present time -- But, providing the present volume meets
with encouragement from the Public, the Editors have it in Contemplation to
Publish a Second, when, they flatter themselves, they will be able to exhibit
the most of the Principal Songs wrote in the United States. -- However, if in
this Collection we have put a cheerful and entertaining Companion into the
hands of the Ladies and Gentlemen of America, we trust, on their part, they
will encourage the rising arts of their native country, which will particularly
oblige their very humble servants,

The PUBLISHERS.

INDEX.
A
AT Totterdown hill there dwelt on old pair Page. 18 All in the Downs the fleet
was moored Page. 19 A courting I went to my love Page. 28 As bringing home the
other day Page. 30 A cobbler there was and he lived in a stall Page. 35 As Jamie
Gay, gang'd blyth his way Page. 40 Adieu ye jovial youths who join Page. 47 As
you mean to set sail for the land of delight Page. 64 At the sign of the horse
Page. 65 Amo Amas Page. 71 Adieu ye verdant lawns and bowers Page. 82 As
passing by a shady grove Page. 84 And did you not hear of a jolly young
waterman Page. 85 Adieu ye groves, adieu ye plains Page. 87 All on the pleasant
banks of Tweed Page. 104 As my cow I was milking just now in the vale Page. 110
As down on Banna's banks I strayed Page. 121 A master I have, and I am his man
Page. 131 As in the glowing noon of day Page. 135 A few years ago, in the days
of my grannum Page. 149 As Jockey was trudging the meadows so gay Page. 150 As
the other day milking I sat in the vale Page. 151 A sweet scented beau and a
simp'ring young cit Page. 179 At the close of the day when the hamlet is still
Page. 183 Amidst a rosy bank of flowers Page. 190 As I was ganging over the lee
Page. 194
B
By a murmuring stream, etc. Page. 61 Busy, curious, thirsty fly Page. 47
Beneath a green grove, a lovely young swain Page. 83 Banish sorrow, grief and
folly Page. 96 Believe my sighs, my tears, my dear Page. 120 Behold on the brow
the leaves play Page. 145 By the gay circling glass Page. 152 Blow high, blow
low, let tempests tear Page. 203
C
Come now all ye social powers Page. 31 Come live with me, and be my love Page.
46 Cease rude Boreas blustering railer Page. 58 Come, come, my jolly lads Page.
74 Come ye party jangling swains Page. 128 Cease tyrant of my flaming bosom,
cease Page. 138 Come bustle, bustle, drink about Page. 152 Contented I am, and
contented I Will be Page. 154
D
Down the bourne, and through the mead Page. 63 Dear Kathleen, you no doubt Page.
78 Dear heart! what a terrible life am I led Page. 155 Do you hear, brother
sportsman Page. 193
E
Encompassed in an angel's frame Page. 23 Eliza once, in prospect fair Page.
135
F
From the brook and the willow Page. 80 Friendship to every willing mind Page.
93 From the man that I love Page. 108 From morning till night, and wherever I
go Page. 111 Farewell the smoaky town, adieu Page. 148 * From Scotia's land he
came Page. 153 Fair Hebe I left with a cautious design Page. 187
G
Gallants attend, and hear a friend Page. 6 Guardian angels, now protect me
Page. 21 Gently stir and blow the fire Page. 60 Go tuneful bird that glads the
skies Page. 133 Genteel is my Damon, engaging his air Page. 156
H
Hail Godlike Washington Page. 1 How blessed has my time been Page. 26 How happy
a state does the miller possess Page. 32 How blyth ilk morn, was I to see Page.
44 Here Is to the maid of bashful fifteen Page. 70 How imperfect is expression
Page. 73 * Hyla's the sweetest maid on earth Page. 100 Her sheep had in
clusters crept close to a grove Page. 125 How stands the glass around Page. 126
Hark! hark! sweet lass the trumpet sounds Page. 132 How often beneath yon artless
bower Page. 134 Hark! hark! over the plains Page. 141 How happy were my days
'till now Page. 156 He that will not merry, merry be Page. 192
I
I Have seen the smiling of fortune beguiling Page. 39 I Am a blade both free and
easy Page. 41 I envy not the proud their wealth Page. 48 * In infancy our days
were blessed Page. 49 I envy not the mighty great Page. 51 I once was a maiden as
fresh as a rose Page. 55 In good king Charles golden days Page. 56 In Jacky
Bull when bound for France Page. 70 I Have kissed, and I Have prattled with fifty
fair maids Page. 76 I figh and lament me in vain Page. 84 In a mouldering cave
where the wretched retreat Page. 89 * I Delia's beauties would disclose Page.
97 * I sing the beauties that adorn Page. 99 I Will sing of my lover all night
and all day Page. 109 I dreamt I saw a piteous sight Page. 133 In my pleasant
native plains Page. 157 In winna marry any man but Sandy over the Lee Page. 160
Jolly mortals fill your glasses Page. 179 In all mankind's promiscuous race
Page. 182
L
Leave neighbors your work Page. 14 Let the tempest of war Page. 54 Let grave
divines preach up dull rules Page. 86 Lovely nymph now cease to languish Page.
95 Let the gay ones and great Page. 101 Last Valentine's day, when bright
Phoebus shone clear ib. Lord, sir, you seem mighty uneasy Page. 105 Lord, what
care I for mam and dad Page. 112 Little muses come and cry Page. 144 Loves' a
gentle, generous passion Page. 267 Let rakes and libertines resigned Page. 163
Let poets praise the flowery mead Page. 175 Leave kindred and friends sweet
Betty Page. 196
M
Music how powerful is thy charm Page. 4 Merry may the maid be Page. 37 My days
have been so wondrous free, Page. 38 My Peggy is a young thing Page. 42 My
name's Ted Blarney I Will be bound Page. 55 My Jockey is the blythest lad Page.
106 My Shepherd is gone far away over the plain Page. 107 Maidens let your
lovers languish Page. 109 My temples with clusters of grapes I Will entwine Page.
129 My banks are all furnished with bees Page. 146 My sweet Molly Mog Page. 188
My dearest life were thou my wife Page. 189 My bonny sailor's won my mind Page.
195 My loving friends, I kiss your hands Page. 204
N
No glory I covet, no riches I want Page. 51 * No sheperdess of all the plain
Page. 99 Now Is the time for mirth and glee Page. 162 Now pleasure unbounded
Page. 191
O
On Ettrick banks, in a summer's night Page. 10 Once more I Will tune the vocal
shell Page. 13 One morning very early, etc. Page. 20 One day I heard Mary say
Page. 34 O! the days when I was young Page. 68 Over desert plains, and rushy
meers Page. 81 Of all the fine things that the gay celebrate Page. 124 Oh! what
pleasures will abound Page. 143 One morning young Roger accosted me thus Page.
164 O Sandy why leave thou thy Nelly to mourn Page. 165 Over moorlands and
mountains Page. 200
P
Patie is a lover gay Page. 178
R
Return enraptured hours Page. 77 Shepherds I have lost my love Page. 11 Some
how my spindle I mislaid Page. 22 Sure a lass in her bloom, at the age of
nineteen Page. 53 Since every charm on earth combined Page. 62 Since Kathleen
has proved so untrue Page. 77 Says Plato why should man be vain Page. 94 Since
love is the plan Page. 95 Say little foolish fluttering thing Page. 106 Sweet
sensibility to every charm Page. 123 See the conquering hero comes Page. 130
Since you mean to hire for service Page. 143 Sweet Poll of Plymouth was my dear
Page. 165 Says Damon to Phillis Page. 167
T
The smiling morn the breathing spring Page. 5 The dusky night rides down the
sky Page. 12 To arms, ye brave mortals, to arms Page. 16 'Twas when the seas
were roaring Page. 26 The topsail shivers in the wind Page. 28 The pride of all
nature was sweet Willy O Page. 29 The wealthy fool with gold in store Page. 36
The Lawland lads think they are fine Page. 43 * The spring was advancing Page.
49 'Twas on the morn of sweet May day Page. 52 The echoing horn calls the
sportsman abroad Page. 67 The wandering sailor plows the main Page. 69 The sun
from the east tips the mountains with gold Page. 72 'Twas I learned a pretty
song in France Page. 75 There was an old man, and though it is not common Page. 90
The women all tell me I Am false to my lass Page. 91 The fields were green the
hills were gay Page. 103 Though prudence may press me Page. 113 The summer it was
smiling, nature round was gay Page. 114 'Twas in the dead of night, soon after
Jeanie wed Page. 116 The silver moon's enamored beam Page. 118 That Jenny's my
friend, my delight, and my pride Page. 119 The man who in his breast contains
Page. 143 Thou soft flowing Avon! by thy silver stream Page. 147 Teach me ye
Nine to sing of tea Page. 148 The card invites, in crowds we fly Page. 166 The
last time I came over the moor Page. 168 That I might not be plagued Page. 169
* 'Twas at the break of day we spied Page. 177 'Twas thus by the glare Page.
184 Thou rising sun whose gladsome ray Page. 191 The choice of three lovers I
have to be sure Page. 202 There was a jolly miller once lived on the river Dee
ib
W
Will ye go to the ewe-bughts, Marion Page. 9 When lav'rocks sweet, and yellow
broom Page. 23 What beauties does Flora disclose Page. 24 When trees did bud
and fields were green Page. 33 When Damon languish'd at my feet Page. 36 When
innocence and beauty meet Page. 45 When first this humble roof I knew Page. 61
When wars alarms, etc. ib When summer comes the swains on Tweed Page. 62 When
Delia on the plain appears Page. 79 Why Colin must your Laura mourn Page. 80
Why heaves my fond bosom, ah, what can it mean Page. 81 Were I as poor as
wretch can be Page. 104 Was I a shepherd's maid to keep Page. 107 When the
sheep are in the fauld Page. 113 When first my dear laddie gade to the green
hill Page. 117 Wherever I Am going, and all the day long Page. 122 What a
charming thing's a battle Page. 130 When hope endears a lover's pain Page. 139
When swallows lay their eggs in snow ib What is a poet, sir? you sir? no sir?
Page. 140 Well met jolly fellows, well met Page. 142 When a youth commences
love Page. 158 When Flora over the garden strayed Page. 162 Was Nanny but a
rural maid Page. 170 Water parted from the sea Page. 171 Well, well, sap no
more ib When I was a young one ib With tuneful pipe and merry glee Page. 172
When once I with Phillida strayed Page. 180 When blushes died the cheek of morn
Page. 181 When I wake with painful brow Page. 185 When the hated morning light
Page. 186
Y
Ye fair married dames, etc, Page. 15 Ye sons of Mars attend Page. 88 Ye
sportsmen draw near Page. 102 Ye virgins attend Page. 126 Your ancient bards,
like rustic swains, Page. 136 Ye Fair possessed of every charm Page. 159 Young
Colin once courted Myrtilla the prude ib You tell me I Am handsome Page. 173
You Have sure forgot, dear mother, mine Page. 174 Ye Sylvan powers that rule the
plain Page. 175 Young Thyrsis the pride of the plain Page. 196
N. B. Those marked thus * have never before appeared in print.

THE AMERICAN SONGSTER.
On the BIRTH of his EXCEL. GEORGE WASHINGTON, Esquire
By a Citizen of Virginia.
[ Tune -- "God save the King."]
I.
HAIL godlike Washington!
Fair Freedom's chosen son,
Born to command:
While this great globe shall roll,
Thy deeds from pole to pole,
Shall shake Columbia's soul
With virtuous praise.
CHORUS.
Millions unborn to save,
Freedom to worlds he gave,
Liberty's Chief!
Terrific God of War,
Seated in Vict'ry's car,
Fame hails him from afar,
Virginia's boast.
II.
Flowrets of bliss adorn
The bright auspicious morn,
Breathing delight.
Let the loud cannon roar,
Joyful, from shore to shore;
Phoebus did never explore,
So happy a day:
Chor. Millions, etc.
III.
When Freedom's atmosphere,
Clouded with gloomy care
Washington viewed:
He with heroic pride,
Stemmed dire Oppression's tide,
And made the world deride
Britain's disgrace.
Chor. Millions, etc.
IV.
When How with venal bands,
Deluged our pensive lands,
Britain's weak rod!
Fabius by wise delays,
Liberty's cause to raise,
To his immortal praise,
Trenton subdued
Chor. Millions, etc.
V.
Fayette, the just and good,
Spilt Gallia's noble blood Alluding to his receiving a wound at Brandy-wine.

For the distressed:
May this auspicious day,
Gratitude's tribute pay,
And breathe a joyous lay,
Sacred to him.
Chor. Millions, etc.
VI.
Let us in rapture sing,
Of Louis the patriot King,
Virtue's support:
Who with unshaken zeal,
Aided our common weal,
And fixed friendship's seal
To the New World.
Chor. Millions, etc.
VII.
See gallant Rochambeau!
Tyranny's deadly foe,
Liberty's shield:
Victory draws her sword
To capture the warlike Lord Lord Cornwallis taken at York-Town.

Whom Parliament adored,
Britannia's pride.
Chor. Millions, etc.
VIII.
Now Albion's sons are fled,
Liberty rears her head,
Smiling in scorn.
May her great Hero's name,
Fill the loud trump of Fame,
And ages unborn proclaim,
Great Washington.
Chor. Millions, etc.
IX.
Next in our theme shall be,
Prince of Philosophy,
Franklin the Sage:
Who gave to lightning laws,
Taught from effects the cause,
What fire etherial was:
Of wisdom the Chief.
Chor. Millions, etc.
X.
The Goddess of Peace to come,
Lighting with downy plume
On Freedom's shrine:
She from fell Tyranny,
Wrested fair Liberty,
And bid a world be free,
Through Washington.
Chor. Millions, etc.
XI.
Commerce unfurls her sails,
Wasted by gentle gales,
Over the deep:
And in her smiling train,
Brings in her pleasing gain,
And from the wealthy main
Hails Freedom's gifts.
Chor. Millions, etc.
XII.
Ambition's storm that blows,
Ruffles not his repose,
Blessed in retreat:
Wisdom persuasive flows,
Virtue refulgent glows,
In speech and act he shows
Friendship and truth.
Chor. Millions, etc.
XIII.
Guardian of civil laws.
Savior of Freedom's cause,
Washington stands:
May his light spirit fly,
And claim its native sky,
Free from each earthly sigh,
To HEAVEN ascend.
Chor. Millions, etc.
The power of Music; by Mr. SMITH.
MUSIC, how powerful is thy charm!
That can the fiercest rage disarm,
Calm passions in a human breast,
And lull even jealousy to rest;
With amorous thoughts the soul inspire,
Or kindle up a warlike fire.
So great is music's power.
Amphion, with his tuneful lyre,
Could rocks remove, and stones inspire;
Command a city to arise,
And lofty buildings touch the skies;
While stones, obedient to his call,
Harmonious moved, and formed a wall.
Arion, from his vessel cast,
In safety over the seas he past:
For, mounted like the ocean's god,
Upon a dolphin's back he rode,
Whilst shoals of fishes flocked around,
Well pleased drank in the charming sound.
Sad Orpheus, through hell's dreary coast,
Was seeking for his consort lost,
His music drew the ghosts along,
And furies listened to his song;
His song could Charon's rage disarm,
And Pluto and his consort charm.
Inflamed by music soldiers fight,
Inspired by music poets write;
Music can heal the lover's wounds,
And calm fierce rage by gentle sounds;
Philosophy attempts in vain,
What music can with ease attain.
So great is music's power.
The Birks of Invermay.
THE smiling morn, the breathing spring,
Invite the tuneful birds to sing;
And while they warble from each spray,
Love melts the universal lay:
Let us, Amanda, timely wife,
Like them improve the hour that flies,
And in soft raptures waste the day'
Among the birks of Invermay.
For soon the winter of the year,
And age, life's winter, will appear;
At this thy lively bloom will fade,
As that will strip the verdant shade:
Our taste of pleasure then is over,
The feathered songsters please no more;
And when they droop, and we decays,
Adieu the birks of Invermay.
The lav'rocks now and lintwhites sing,
The rocks around with echoes ring,
The ma^^s and the blackbird vye
In tuneful strains to glad the day;
The woods now wear their summer-su
To mirth all nature now invites;
Let us be blythesome then and gay,
Among the birks of Invermay,
Behold the hil^ and vales around
With lowing herbs and flocks abound;
The wanton kids and frisking lambs
Gambol and dance about their dams;
The busy bees with humming noise,
And all the reptile kind rejoice;
Let us, like them, then sing and play
About the birks of Invermay.
Hark how the waters, as they fall,
Loudly my love to gladness call;
The wanton waves sport in the beams,
And fishes play throughout the streams;
The circling sun does now advance,
And all the planets round him dance;
Let us as jovial be as they
Among the birks of Invermay.
The BATTLE of the KEGS.
By the Hon. F. H. Esquire
[ Tune, -- Maggy Lawder.]
GALLANTS attend, and hear a friend,
Trill forth harmonious ditty:
Strange things I Will tell, which late befell
In Philadelphia city.
'Twas early day, as poets say,
Just when the sun was rising,
A soldier stood, on log of wood,
And saw a sight surprising.
As in a maze, he stood to gaze,
The truth cannot be denied, sir,
He spied a score -- of kegs or more,
Come floating down the tide, sir.
A sailor too, in jerkin blue,
The strange appearance viewing,
First damned his eyes, in great surprise,
Then said -- some mischief's brewing.
These KEGS now hold the rebels bold,
Packed up like pickled herring:
And they are come down t'attack the town,
In this new way of ferrying.
The soldier flew, the sailor too,
And, scared almost to death, sir.
Wore out their shoes, to spread the news,
And ran till out of breath, sir.
Now up and down, throughout the town,
Most frantic scenes were acted;
And some ran here, and some ran there
Like men almost distracted.
Some fire cried, which some denied
But said the earth had quaked;
And girls and boys, with hedious noise,
Ran through the town half naked.
Sir Wm. How,
Sir William he, snug as a flea,
Lay all this time a snoring,
Nor dreamt of harm, as he lay warm
In bed with Mrs. L -- g
Now In a fright, he starts upright,
Awaked by such a clatter:
He rubs both eyes, and boldly cries,
'For God's sake what is the matter?
At his bed side, he then espied
Sir Erskine Sir W. Erskine
at command, sir,
Upon one foot, he had one boot,
And the other in his hand. sir
Arise! Arise! Sir Erskine cites:
The rebels -- more's the pity --
Without a boat, are all on float,
And ranged before the city.
The motly crew, in vessels new,
With Satan for their guide, sir.
Packed up in bags, or wooden KEGS,
Come driving down the tide, sir.
^^^refore prepare for bloody war;
These KEGS must all be routed:
Or surely we despised shall be;
And British courage doubted.
The royal band now ready stand,
All ranged in dread array, sir,
With stomach stout, to see it out,
And make a bloody day, sir.
The cannons roar, from shore to shore;
The small arms make a rattle:
Since wars began, I Am sure no man
Ever saw so strange a battle.
The rebel The British officers were so fond of the word (...), that they often
applied it most absurdly,
vales, the rebel dales,
With rebel trees surrounded,
The distant woods, the hills, and floods,
With rebel echos sounded.
The fish below swam to and fro
Attacked from every quarter:
Why sure, thought they, the dev'l's to pay,
Amongst folks above the water.
The KEGS, it is said, though strongly made,
Of rebel staves and hoops, sir,
Could not oppose their powerful foes,
The conquering British troops, sir,
From morn to night, these men of might
Displayed amazing courage;
And when the sun was fairly down,
Retired to sup their porridge.
An hundred men, with each a pen,
Or more, upon my word, sir,
It is most true, would be too low
Their valor to record, sir.
Such feats did they perform that day
Upon these wicked KEGS, sir,
That years to come, if they get-home,
They Will make their boasts and brags, sir.
EW-Bughts, Marion.
WILL ye go to the ew-bughts, Marion,
And wear in the sheep wi' me,
The sun shines sweet, my Marion,
But nae half sae sweet as thee.
O Marion's a bonny lass,
And the blyth blinks in her e'e;
And fain wad I marry Marion,
Gin Marion wad marry me.
There Is gowd in your garters, Marion,
And silk on your white hause-bane;
Fu' fain wad I kiss my Marion
At 'en when I come hame.
There Is braw lads in Ernslaw, Marion*
Wha gape and glowr with their e'e,
At kirk when they set my Marion;
But nane of them lo'es like me.
I Have nine milk ews, my Marion,
A cow and a brawny quey;
I Will gie them a' to my Marion,
Just on her bridal-day:
And ye's get a green sey apron,
And waistcoat of the London brown,
And vow but ye will be vap'ring,
When'er ye gang to the town,
I Am young and stout, my Marion;
Nane dance like me on the green;
And gin ye forsake me, Marion,
I Will even draw up wi' Jean:
Sae put on your pearlius, Marion,
And kyrtle of the cramasie;
And soon as my chin has nae hair on,
I shall come west and see ye.
Ettrick Banks.
ON Ettrick banks, in a summer's night,
At glowming when the sheep drove hame,
I met my lassie braw and tight,
'Come wading barefoot a' her lane:
My heart grew light, I ran, I flang
My arms about her lily neck,
And kissed and clapped her there fou lang,
My words they were na money feck.
said, My lassie, will you go
To the Highland hills, the Erse to learn?
both gi' thee a cow and ew,
When ye come to the brig of Earn.
At Leith auld meal comes in, never fash,
And herrings at the Broomy-law;
Cheer up your heart, my bonny lass,
There Is gear to win we never saw.
All day when we have wrought enough,
When winter, frosts, and snaw begin;
Soon when the sun gaes west the loch,
At night when ye sit down to spin,
I Will screw my pipes, and play a spring;
And thus the weary night we'll end,
Till the tender kid and lamb-time bring
Our pleasant summer back again.
Syne when the trees are in their bloom,
And growans glent over ilka field,
I Will meet my lass among the broom,
And lead you to my summer shield.
Then far frae a' their scornfu' din.
That make the kindly hearts their sport,
We'll laugh, and kiss, and dance and sing,
And gar the langest day seem short.
The Banks of the Banna.
SHepherds I have lost my love,
Have you seen my Anna?
Pride of every shady grove,
Upon the banks of Banna.
I for her my home forsook,
Near yon misty mountain,
Left my flock, my pipe, my crook,
Greenwood shade and fountain.
Never shall I see them more
Until her returning;
All the joys of life are over.
From gladness changed to mourning.
Whither is my charmer flown!
Shepherds tell me whither!
Ah! woes me, perhaps she is gone
For ever and for ever.
The Dusky Night.
THE dusky night rides down the sky,
And ushers in the morn,
The hounds all join in jovial cry,
The huntsman winds his horn.
And a hunting we will go, etc.
The wife around her husband throws
Her arms to make him stay,
My dear it rains, it hails, it blows,
You cannot hunt today.
Yet a hunting we will go, etc.
Sly Reynard now like lightning flies,
And sweeps across the vale,
But when the hounds too near he spies
He drops his bushy tail.
Then a hunting, etc.
Fond echo seems to like the sport,
And join the jovial cry,
The woods and hills the sound retort,
And music fills the sky,
When a hunting, etc.
At last his strength to faitness worn,
Poor Reynard ceases flight,
Then hungry homeward we return
To feast away the night.
And a drinking. etc.
Ye jovial hunters in the morn
Prepare then for the chase,
Rise at the sounding of the horn,
And health with sport embrace,
When a hunting, etc.
Peggy This song was written in compliment to Mrs. Wossington.
.
ONCE more I Will tune the vocal shell,
To hills and dales my passion tell,
A flame which time can never quell,
That burns for thee, my Peggy:
Yet guittar bards the lyre shall hit,
Or say what subject is more fit,
Than to record the sparkling wit,
And bloom of lovely Peggy.
The sun first rising in the morn.
That paints the dew bespangled thorn,
Does not so much the day adorn,
As does my lovely Peggy:
And when in Thetis lap to rest,
He streaks with gold the ruddy west,
She Is not so beauteous as undrest
Appears my lovely Peggy.
When Zephyr on the vi'let blows,
Or breathes upon the damask rose,
He does not half the sweets disclose
As does my lovely Peggy.
I stole a kiss the other day,
And trust me, naught but truth I say,
The fragrance of the blooming May
Is not so sweet as Peggy.
Were she arrayed in rustic weed,
With her the bleeting flocks I Would fleed,
And pipe upon the oaten reed,
To please my lovely Peggy.
With her a cottage would delight,
All Is happy when she is in my sight;
But when she is gone its endless night --
All Is dark without my Peggy!
While bees from flower to flower shall rove,
And linnets warble through the grove,
Or stately swans the rivers love,
So long shall I love Peggy:
And when death with his pointed dart
Shall strike the blow that rives my heart,
My words shall be, when I depart,
"Adieu, my lovely Peggy!"
The Miller's Wedding.
LEAVE, neighbors, your work, and to sport and to play;
Let the tabor strike up, and the village be gay;
No day through the year shall more cheerful be seen,
For Ralph of the Mill marries Sue of the Green.
CHORUS.
I love Sue, and Sue loves me,
And while the wind blows,
And while the mill goes,
Who Will be so happy, so happy as we!
Let lords and fine folks, who for wealth take a bride,
Be married to day, and tomorrow be cloyed;
My body is stout, and my heart is as sound,
And my love, like my courage, will never give ground.
CHORUS -- I love Sue, etc.
Let ladies of fashion the best jointures wed,
And prudently take the best bidders to bed;
Such signing and sealing's no part of our bliss,
We settle our hearts, and we seal with a kiss.
CHORUS -- I love Sue, etc.
Though Ralph is not courtly, nor none of your beaus,
Nor bounces, nor flatters, nor wears your fine clothes,
In nothing he will follow the folks of high life,
Nor ever turn his back on his friend or his wife.
CHORUS -- I love Sue, etc.
While thus I am able to work at my mill,
While thus thou art kind, and thy tongue but lies still,
Our joys shall continue, and ever be new,
And none be so happy as Ralph and his Sue.
CHORUS -- I love Sue, etc.
SONG.
YE fair married dames, who so often deplore
That a lover once blessed is a lover no more;
Attend to my counsel, nor blush to be taught,
That prudence must cherish what beauty has caught.
The bloom of your cheek, and the glance of your eyes,
Your roses and lilies may make the men sigh;
But roses, and lilies, and sighs pass away,
And passion will die as your beauties decay.
Use the man that you wed like your favorite guittar,
Though music in both, they are both apt to jar;
How tuneful and soft from a delicate touch,
Not handled too roughly, nor played on too much!
The sparrow and linnet will feed from your hand,
Grow tame by your kindness, and come at command;
Exert with your husband the same happy skill,
For hearts, like your birds, may be tamed to your will.
Be gay and good humored, complying and kind,
Turn the chief of your care from your face to your mind;
It Is thus that a wife may her conquest improve,
And Hymen shall rivet the setters of LOVE.
Song in Harlequin's Invasion.
TO arms! ye brave mortals, to arms!
The road to renown lies before you!
The name of King Shakespeare has charms
To rouse you to actions of glory.
Away! ye brave mortals, away!
It Is nature calls on you to save her;
What man but would Nature obey,
And fight for her Shakespeare for ever!
Love is the cause of Mourning.
BY a murmering stream a fair shepherdess lay,
Be so kind, O ye nymphs I oft-times heard her say,
Tell Strephon, I die, if he passes this way,
That Love was the cause of my mourning.
False shepherds, that tell me of beauty and charms,
You deceive me, for Strephon's cold heart never warms;
Yet bring me this Strephon, let me die in his arms?
Oh! Strephon the cause of my mourning.
But first, said she, let me go down to the shades below,
Ere ye let Strephon know that I have loved him so;
Then on my pale cheek no blushes will show
That Love was the cause of my mourning.
Her eyes were scarce closed when Strephon came by,
He thought she would been sleeping, and softly drew nigh,
But finding her breathless, Oh heavens, did he cry,
Ah! Chloris, the cause of my mourning.
Restore me my Chloris, ye nymphs use your art:
They sighing replied, 'Twas yourself shot the dart,
That wounded the tender young shepherdess' heart,
And killed the poor Chloris with mourning.
Ah then is Chloris dead,
Wounded by me! he said;
I Will follow thee, chaste maid,
Down to the silent shade:
Then on her cold snowy breast leaning his head.
Expired the poor Strephon with mourning.
Totterdown hill.
AT Totterdown-hill there dwelt an old pair,
And it may be they dwell there still,
Much riches indeed did not fall to their share,
They kept a small farm and a mill.
But fully content with what they did get,
They knew not of guile or of arts;
One daughter they had, and her name it was Bet,
And she was the pride of their hearts.
Nut-brown were her locks, her shape it was straight,
Her eyes were as black as a sloe:
Her teeth were milk-white, full smart was her gait,
And sleek was her skin as a do:
All thick were the clouds, and the rain it did pour,
No bit of true blue could be spied,
A child, wet and cold, came and knocked at the door,
Its Mam it had lost, and it cried,
Young Bet was as mild as the mornings of May,
The babe she hugged close to her breast;
She chafed him all over, and smiled as he lay,
She kissed him, and lulled him to rest:
But who do you think she had got for her prize?
Why Love, the sly master of arts;
No sooner he waked, but he dropped his disguise,
And showed her his wings and his darts.
Quoth he, I am Love; but, oh, be not afraid
Though all I make shake at my will:
So good and kind have you been, my fair maid,
No harm shall you feel from my skill;
My mother never dealt with such fondness by me,
A friend you shall find in me still;
Take my quiver and shoot, be greater than she,
The Venus of Totterdownhill.
Black eyed Susan.
ALL in the Downs the fleet was moored,
The streamers waving in the wind,
When black-eyed Susan came on board,
Or where shall I my true love find?
Tell me, ye jovial sailors, tell me true,
If my sweet William sails among your crew?
William, who high upon the yard
Rocked by the billows to and fro,
Soon as her well known voice he heard,
He sighed, and cast his eyes below;
The cord glides swiftly through his glowing hands,
And quick as lightning on the deck he stands.
So the sweet lark, high poised in air,
Shirts close his pinions to his breast,
If chance his mates shrill call he hear,
And drops at once into her nest.
The noblest captain in the British fleet
Might envy William's lips those kisses sweet.
O Susan, Susan, lovely dear,
My vows shall ever true remain;
Let me kiss off that falling ^ear;
We only part to meet again.
Change as ye list, ye winds, my heart shall be
The faithful compass that still points to thee.
Believe not what the landmen say,
Who tempt with doubts thy constant mind,
They Will tell the sailors when away
At every port a mistress find.
Yes, yes, believe them when they tell thee so,
For thou art present whereso'er I go.
If to fair India's coast we sail,
Thy eyes are seen in diamonds bright,
Thy breath is Afric's spicy gale,
Thy skin is ivory so white;
Thus every beauteous object that I view
Wakes in my soul some charm of lovely Sue.
Though battle calls me from thy arms,
Let not my pretty Susan mourn;
Though cannons roar, yet, free from harms,
William shall to his dear return:
Love turns aside the balls that round me fly,
Lest precious tears should drop from Susan^s eye.
The boatswain gives the dreadful word,
The sails their swelling bosoms spread;
No longer must she stay on board:
They kissed; she sighed; he hung his head;
Her lessening boat unwilling rows to land;
Adieu! she cries, and waved her lily hand.
SONG.
ONE morning very early, one morning in the spring.
I heard a maid in Bedlam, who mournfully did sing;
Her chains she rattled on her hands, while sweetly thus sung she,
I love my love, because I know my love loves me.
Oh cruel were his parents, who sent my love to sea,
And cruel, cruel was the ship that bore my love from me,
Yet I love his parents, since they are his, although they have ruined me;
And I love my love, because I know my love loves me.
O should it please the pitying powers to call me to the sky,
I Would claim a guardian angel's charge, around my love to fly;
To guard him from all dangers how happy should I be!
For I love my love, because I know my love loves me
I Will make a strawy garland, I Will, make it wondrous fine,
With roses, lilies, daisies, I Will mix the eglantine;
And I Will present it to my love when he returns from sea,
For I love my love, because I know my love loves me.
Oh if I were a little bird to build upon his breast,
Or if I were a nightingale to sing my love to rest!
To gaze upon his lovely eyes all my reward should be;
For I love my love, because I know my love loves me.
Oh if I were an eagle, to sour into the sky!
I Would gaze around with piercing eyes where I my love might spy;
But ah! unhappy maiden, that love you never shall see,
Yet I love my love, because I know my love loves me.
SONG.
GUARDIAN angels, now protect me,
Send me to the swain I love;
Cupid, with thy bow direct me,
Help me, all ye powers above.
Bear him my sighs, ye gentle breezes,
Tell him, I love and I despair;
Tell him, for him I grieve,
Say it is for him I live;
O may the shepherd be sincere!
Through the shadow groves I Will wander,
Silent as the bird of night;
Near the brink of yonder fountain
First Leander blessed my sight.
Witness, ye groves and falls of water,
Echoes, repeats the vows he swore:
Can he forget me,
Will he neglect me,
Shall I never see him more!
Does he love and yet forsake me,
To admire a nymph more fair?
If it is so I Will wear the willow,
And esteem the happy pair.
Some lonely cave I Will make my dwelling,
Never more the cares of life pursue:
The lark and philomel
Only shall hear me tell
What makes me bid the world adieu.
Sung in the Deserter.
SOME how my spindle I mislaid,
And lost it underneath the grass,
Damon advancing, bowed his head,
And said, What seek you, pretty lass?
A little love, but urged with care,
Often leads a heart, and leads it far.
'Twas passing by yon spreading oak
That I my spindle lost just now.
His knife then kindly Damon took,
And from the tree he cut a bough:
A little love, etc.
Thus did the youth his time employ,
While me he tenderly beheld;
He talked of love, I leaped for joy,
For ah! my heart did fondly yield.
A little love, etc.
A favorite Scots Song.
WHEN lav'rocks sweet, and yellow broom
Prefume the banks of Tweed,
Blithe Nancy boasts a sweeter bloom,
Her charms all charms exceed.
Gang over the merry fields of hay,
Cried love sick Jockey, wi' a sigh;
And wha sae saft, sae young, and gay,
Could sic a handsome lad deny?
In Sandy's cheek the white and red,
Like rose and lily joined;
For him each lassie hung her head,
For her each lady pined.
Gang over the merry fields of hay.
Wi' me, my dearest lass, he would cry;
And wha sae saft, sae young, and gay,
Could sic a handsome lad deny?
He gang'd over fields and broomy land,
Till mither 'gan to chide;
Then Sandy pressed her lily hand,
And asked her for his bride:
Then over the merry fields of hay,
Said she, my dearest lad, we'll hie;
For wha sae saft, sae young, and gay.
Could sic a handsome lad deny?
Anna's Urn.
Encompassed in an angel's frame,
An angel's virtues lay;
Too soon did heaven assert its claim,
And called its own away,
My Anna's worth, my Anna's charms,
Can never more return:
What then shall fill these widowed arms,
Ah me! my Anna's urn.
Can I forget that bliss refined,
Which, blessed with her, I knew?
Our hearts, in sacred bonds entwined,
Were bound by love too true.
That rural train which once were used
In festive dance to turn,
So pleased, when Anna they amused,
Now weeping deck her urn.
The soul escaping from its chain,
She clasped me to her breast,
To part with thee is all my pain,
She cried, then sunk to rest.
While memory shall her seat retain,
From beauteous Anna torn,
My heart shall breath its ceaseless strain
Of sorrow over her urn.
There, with the earliest dawn, a dove
Laments her murdered mate;
There Philomela, lost to love,
Tells the pale moon her fate.
With yew and ivy round me spread,
My Anna there I Will mourn;
For all my soul, now she is dead,
Concenters in her urn.
Tweed Side.
WHAT beauties does Flora disclose!
How sweet are her smiles upon Tweed?
But Mary's, still sweeter than those,
Both nature and fancy exceed.
No daisy nor sweet blushing rose,
Nor all the gay flowers of the field,
Nor Tweed gliding gently through those,
Such beauty and pleasure can yield.
The warblers are heard in each grove,
The linent, the lark, and the thrush,
The blackbird, and sweet cooing dove,
With music enchant every bush.
Come let us go forth to the mead.
Let us see how the primroses spring;
We'll lodge in some village on Tweed,
And love while the feathered folks sing.
How does my love pass the long day?
Does Mary not tend a few sheep?
Do they never carelessly stray,
While happily she lies asleep?
Tweed's murmurs should lull her to rest;
Kind nature indulging my bliss,
To relieve the soft pains of my breast
I Would steal an ambrosial kiss.
It Is she does the virgins excel,
No beauty with her can compare;
Love's graces all round her do dwell,
She Is tairest where thousands are fair.
Say, charmer, where do thy flocks stray?
Oh! tell me at noon where they feed:
Shall I seek them on sweet winding Tay,
Or the pleasanter banks of the Tweed?
The Happy Pair.
HOW blessed has my time been? what joys have I known,
Since wedlock's soft bondage made Jessy my own?
So joyful my heart is, so easy a chain,
That freedom is tasteless, and roving my pain.
That Freedom is tasteless, etc.
Through walks grown with woodbines, as often we stray,
Around us our boys and girls frolic and play:
How pleasing their sport is! the wanton ones see.
And borrow their looks from my Jessy and me.
To try her sweet temper, oft-times am I seen
In revels all day with the nymphs on the green:
Though painful my absence, my doubts she beguiles,
And meets me at night with complacence and smiles.
What though on her cheeks the rose loses its hue,
Her wit and good humor blooms all the year through:
Time still as he flies adds increase to her truth,
And gives to her mind what he steals from her youth.
Ye shepherds so gay, who make love to ensnare,
And cheat, with false vows* the too-credulous fair;
In search of true pleasure, how vainly you roam,
To hold it for life, you must find it at home.
SONG.
'TWAS when the seas were roaring
With hollow blasts of wind;
A damsel lay deploring,
All on a rock reclined.
Wide over the foaming billows
She cast a wistful look;
Her head was crowned with willows
That trembled over the brook.
Twelve months are gone and over,
And nine long tedious days:
Why did thou, venurous lover,
Why did thou trust the seas?
Cease, cease, thou cruel ocean,
And let my lover rest:
Ah! what is thy troubled motion
To that within my breast!
The merchant, robbed of treasure,
Views tempests in despair;
But what is the loss of treasure
To losing of my dear!
Should you some coast be laid on,
Where gold and di'monds grow,
You Would find a richer maiden,
But none that loves you so.
How can they say that nature
Has nothing made in vain;
Why then beneath the water
Do hedious rocks remain;
No eyes these rocks discover,
That lurk beneath the deep,
To wreck the wandering lover,
And leave the maid to weep.
All melancholy lying,
Thus wail'd she for her dear;
Repaid each blast with sighing,
Each billow with a tear:
When over the white wave stooping,
His floating corpse she spied:
Then, like a lily, drooping,
She bowed her head, and died.
Humphry Gubbin's Courtship.
A Courting I went to my love,
Who is sweeter than roses in May*
And when I came to her by Jove,
The devil a word could I say,
I walked with her into the garden,
There fully intending to woo her!
But may I be never worth a farthing,
If of love I said any thing to her.
I clasped her hand close to my breast,
While my heart was as light as a feather;
Yet nothing I said, I protest,
But -- Madam, it is very fine weather.
To an arbor I did her attend,
She asked me to come and sit by her;
I crept to the furthermost end.
For I was afraid to come nigh her.
I asked her which way was the wind,
For I thought in some talk we must enter;
Why, Sir, (she answered, and grinn'd)
Have you just sent your wits for a venture?
Then I followed her into the house,
There I vowed I my passion would try;
But there I was still as a mouse: --
Oh! what a dull booby was I!
The Sailor's Farewell.
THE topsail shivers in the wind,
The ship she casts to sea;
But yet my soul, my heart, my mind,
Are, Mary, moored by thee:
For though thy sailor's bound afar,
Still love shall be his leading star.
Should landmen flatter, when we are sailed,
O doubt their artful tales;
No gallant sailor ever failed,
If Cupid filled his sails:
Thou art the compass of my soul,
Which steers my heart from pole to pole.
Sirens in every port we meet,
More fell than rocks and waves;
But sailors of the British fleet
Are lovers and not slaves.
No foes our courage shall subdue,
Although we have left our hearts with you.
These are our cares; but if you're kind,
We'll scorn the dashing main,
The rocks, the billows, and the wind,
The powers of France and Spain.
Now Britain's glory rests with you,
Our sails are full -- sweet girls, adieu!
Sweet Willy O.
THE pride of all nature was sweet Willy O,
The pride of all nature was sweet Willy O;
The first of all swains,
He gladden'd the plains,
None ever was like to the sweet Willy O.
He sung it so rarely did sweet Willy O,
He sung it, etc.
He melted each maid,
So skilful he played,
No shepherd ever pip'd like the sweet Willy O.
All nature obeyed him the sweet Willy O,
All nature, etc.
Wherever he came.
Whatever had name,
Whenever he sung, followed sweet Willy O.
He would be a soldier the sweet Willy O,
He would, etc.
When armed in the field
With sword and with shield,
The laurel was won by the sweet Willy O.
He charmed them while living the sweet Willy O,
He charmed, etc.
And when Willy died,
'Twas nature that sighed,
To part with her all in sweet Willy O.
The Linne^s.
AS bringing home the other day
Two linnets I had taken,
The pretty warblers seemed to pray
For liberty again.
Unheedful of their plaintive notes,
I sang across the mead;
In vain they tuned their downy throats,
And fluttered to be freed.
As passing through the tufted grove
Near which my cottage stood,
I thought I saw the queen of love
When Chlora's charms I viewed.
I gazed, I loved, I pressed her stay
To hear my tender tale,
But all in vain, she fled away,
Nor could my sighs prev^^l.
Soon through the wound that love had made
Came pity to my breast:
And thus I, as compassion bade,
These feathered pair addressed:
"Ye little warblers cheerful be,
Remember not ye flew;
For I, who thought myself so free,
Am far more caught than you."
SONG.
COME, now, all ye social powers,
Shed your infl'ence over us;
Crown with joy our present hours,
Enliven those before us:
Bring the flask, the music bring,
Joy shall quickly find us:
Sport, and dance, and laugh, and sing,
And cast dull Care behind us.
Love, thy godhead I adore,
Source of generous passion:
Nor will we ever bow before
Those idols, Wealth or Fashion.
Bring the flask, etc.
Why the plague should we be sad,
Whilst on earth we moulder;
Rich, or poor, or grave, or mad,
We every day grow older.
Bring the flask, etc.
Friendship! O thy smile's divine,
Bright in every feature;
What but friendship, love, and wine,
Can make us happy creatures.
Bring the flask, etc.
Since the time will steal away,
Spite of all our sorrow,
Let Us be blithe and gay today,
And never mind tomorrow.
Bring the flask, the music bring,
Joy shall quickly find us;
Sport, and dance, and laugh, and sing,
And east dull Care behind us.
The Miller.
HOW happy a state does the miller possess,
Who would be no greater, nor fears to be less?
On his mill and himself he depends for support,
Which is better than servilely cringing at court.
What though he all dusty and whit'n'd does go,
The more he is be powdered, the more like a beau:
A clown in his dress may be honester far,
Than a courtier who struts in his garter and star.
Than a courtier, etc.
Though his hands are so daubed, they are not fit to be seen,
The hands of his betters are not very clean;
A palm more polite may as dirtily deal;
Gold in handling will stick to the fingers like meal.
What if then a pudding for dinner he lacks,
He cribs, without scruple, from other men's sack:
In this of right noble examples he brags,
Who borrow as freely from other men's bags.
Or should he endeavor to heap an estate;
In this too he mimicks the tools of the state,
Whose aim is alone their coffers to fill,
As all his concern's to bring grist to his mill.
He eats when he is hungry, and drinks when he is dry,
And down when he is weary, contented does lie,
Then rises up cheerful to work and to sing.
If so happy a miller, who would be a king?
Down the Burn, Davie.
WHEN trees did bud, and fields were green,
And broom bloomed fair to see,
When Mary was complete fifteen,
And love laughed in her e'e;
Blythe Davie's blinks her heart did move,
To speak her mind thus free,
Gang down the burn, Davie, love,
And I shall follow thee.
Now Davie did each lad surpass,
That dwelt on this burn side,
And Mary was the bonniest lass,
Just meet to be a bride;
Her cheeks were rosy, red and white,
Her even were bonny blue;
Her looks were like Aurora bright,
Her lips like dropping dew.
As down the burn they took their way,
What tender tales they said!
His cheeks to here is he aft did lay,
And with her bosom played;
Till both at length impatient grown,
To be more fully blessed,
In yonder vale they leaned them down;
Love only saw the rest.
What passed, I guess, was harmless play,
And naething sure unmeet;
For ganging hame, I heard them say,
They lik^d a wa'k sae sweet;
And that they aften would return,
Sic pleasure to renew,
Quoth Mary, Love, I like the burn,
And ay shall follow you.
Tune, -- I Will never leave thee.
ONE day I heard Mary say, How shall I leave thee?
Stay, dearest Adonis, stay, why will thou grieve me?
Alas! my fond heart will break, if thou should leave me:
Say, lovely Adonis, say, has Mary deceived thee?
Did ever her young heart betray new love, that is grieved thee?
My constant love never shall stray, thou may believe me.
I Will love thee, lad, night and day, and never leave thee.
Adonis, my charming youth, what can relieve thee?
Can Mary thy anguish soothe? this breast shall receive thee.
My passion can never decay, never deceive thee;
Delight shall drive pain away, pleasure revive thee.
But leave thee, leave thee, lad, how shall I leave thee?
O! that thought makes me sad, I Will never leave thee.
Where would my Adonis fly? why does she grieve me?
Alas! my poor heart will break, if I should leave thee.
The Cobbler.
A Cobbler there was, and he lived in a stall,
Which served him for parlour, for kitchen, and hall,
No coin in his pocket, nor care in his pate,
No ambition had he, nor duns at his gate:
Derry down, down, down, derry down.
Contented he worked, and he thought himself happy
If at night he could purchase a jug of brown happy:
How he would laugh then, and whistle, and sing too most sweet!
Saying, just to a hair I have made both ends to meet:
Derry down, down, etc.
But love, the disturber of high and of low,
That shoots at the peasant as well as the beau;
He shot the poor cobbler quite thorough the heart;
I wish he had hit some more ignoble part:
Derry down, down, etc.
It was from a celler this archer did play,
Where a buxom young damsel continually lay;
Her eyes shone so bright when she rose every day,
That she shot the poor cobbler quite over the way:
Derry down, down, etc.
He sung her love songs as he sat at his work,
But she was as hard as a Jew or a Turk;
Whenever he spoke, she would flounce and would fleer,
Which put the poor cobbler quite into despair:
Derry down, down, etc.
He took up his awl that he had in the world,
And to make away with himself was resolved;
He pierced through his body instead of his sole,
So the cobbler he died, and the bell it did toll.
Derry down, down, etc.
And now, in good will, I advise as a friend,
All cobblers take warning by this cobler's end;
Keep your hearts out of love, for we find by what is past,
That love brings us all to an end at the last.
Derry down, etc.
SONG.
WHEN Damon languish'd at my feet,
And I believed him true.
The moments of delight how sweet!
But ah! how swift they flew!
The funny hill, the flowery vale,
The garden, and the grove,
Have echoed to his ardent tale,
And vows of endless love.
The conquest gained, he left his prize,
He left her to complain;
To talk of joy with weeping eyes,
And measure time by pain.
But Heaven will take the mourner's part.
In pity to despair;
And the last sigh that rends the heart,
Shall wast the spirit there.
Friend and Pitcher.
THE wealthy fool, with gold in store,
Will still desire to grow richer,
Give me but health, I ask no more,
My charming girl, my friend and pitcher,
My friend so rare, my girl so fair,
With such, what mortal can be richer;
Give me but these, a fig for care,
With my sweet girl, my friend and pitcher.
From morning sun I Would never grieve,
To toil a hedger or a ditcher,
If that, when I came home at eve,
I might enjoy my friend and pitcher.
My friend so rare, etc.
Though fortune ever shuns my door,
I know not what can thus bewitch her;
With all my heart can I be poor,
With my sweet girl, my friend and pitcher.
My friend so rare, etc.
Merry may the Maid be.
MERRY may the maid be,
That marries the miller,
For soul day and fair day,
He Is ay bringing till her;
Has ay a penny in his purse
For dinner and for supper;
And, gin she please, a good fat cheese,
And lumps of yellow butter.
When Jamie first did woo me,
I spier'd what was his calling;
Fair maid, says he, O come and see,
You're welcome to my dwelling;
Though I was shy, yet I could spy,
The truth of what he told me.
And that his house was warm and couth,
And room in it to hold me.
Behind the door ^ bag of meal,
And in the kissed was plenty
Of good hard cakes, his mither bakes,
And bannocks were na scanty,
A good fat sow, a sleeky cow
Was standing in the byre;
Whilst lazy puss with mealy mouse,
Was playing at the fire.
Good signs are these, my mither says,
And bids me tak the miller;
For foul day, and fair day,
He Is ay bringing till her;
For meal and malt she does na want,
Nor any thing that is dainty:
And now and then a keckling hen,
To lay her eggs in plenty.
SONG.
MY days have been so wondrous free,
The little birds that fly
With careless case from tree to tree,
Were but as blessed as I.
Ask gliding waters, if a tear
Of mine increased their stream?
Or ask the flying gales, if ever
I lent a sigh to them?
But now my former days retire,
And I Am by beauty caught;
The tender chains of sweet desire
Are six'd upon my thought.
An eager hope within my breast
Does every doubt control;
And lonely Nancy stands confessed
The favorite of my soul.
Ye nightingales, ye twisting pines,
Ye swains that haunt the grove,
Ye gentle echoes, breezy winds!
Ye close retreats of love!
With all of nature, all of art,
Assist the dear design;
O teach a young unpracticed heart
To make her ever mine.
The very thought of change I hate,
As much as of despair;
Nor ever covet to be great,
Unless it be for her.
It Is true, the passion in my mind
Is mixed with soft distress,
Yet while the fair I love is kind,
I cannot wish it less.
The Flowers of the Forest.
I HAVE seen the smiling of fortune beguiling,
I Have felt its favors, and found its decay;
Sweet was its blessing, kind its caressing,
But now it is fled -- fled far away!
I Have seen the forest adorned the foremost,
With flowers of the fairest, most pleasant and gay,
Sae bonny their blooming, their scent the air persuming;
But now they are withered and weeded away.
I Have seen the morning with gold the hills adorning,
And loud tempests storming before the midday;
I Have seen Tweed's silver streams shinning in the funny beams
Grow drumly and dark as he rowed on his way.
O! fickle Fortune, why this cruel sporting?
O! why still perplex us poor sons of a day?
Nae mair your smiles can cheer me -- nae mair your frowns can fear me,
For the flowers of the forest are withered away.
Jamie Gay.
AS Jamie Gay gang'd blyth his way,
Along the banks of Tweed,
A bonny lass, as ever was seen,
Came tripping over the mead;
The hearty swain, untaught to fain,
The buxom nymph surveyed,
And full of glee, as lad could be,
Bespoke the pretty maid.
Dear lassie tell, why by thine sell
Thou hast'ly wand'rest here.
My ewes, she cried, are straying wide,
Can tell me, laddie, where?
To town I hye, he made reply,
Some meikle sport to see;
But you are so sweet, so trim and neat,
I Will seek the ewes with thee.
She gave her hand, nor made a stand,
But liked the youth's intent;
Over hill and dale, over plain and vale,
Right merrily they went;
The birds sang sweet, the pair to greet,
And flowers bloomed all around;
And as they walked, of love they talked,
And joys which lovers crowned.
And now the sun had rose to noon,
The zenith of his power,
When to a shade their steps they made,
To pass the midday hour.
The bonny lad rowed in his played
The lass, who scorned to frown:
She soon forgot the ewes she sought,
And he to gang to town.
Easy John.
I AM a blade both free and easy,
Not a vulgar country clown;
I will do my best to please ye,
And my name is easy John.
Let the world go as it will
I am free and easy still.
Free and easy,
Free and easy,
I am free and easy still.
Ladies view my person over,
If my lesson right I con;
Search Newcastle, London, Dover,
You Will not find an easier John.
Now a lady I could fancy,
Aye, but could she fancy me;
I would marry lovely Nancy,
She Is so easy and so free.
Gentlemen a brother greets ye,
Happy may you ever be;
And whenever a brother meets you,
May you easy be and free.
Worthy friends, this blessed occasion
Fills my panting heart with glee;
To possess your approbation,
Makes me happy, easy, free.
Let the world, etc.
The Wauking of the Faulds.
MY Peggy is a young thing,
Just entered in her teens,
Fair as the day, and sweet as May,
Fair as the day and always gay.
My Peggy is a young thing,
And I Am not very auld
Yet well I like to meet her at
The wauking of the fauld.
My Peggy speaks sae sweetly,
Whenever we meet alane,
I wish nae mair to lay my care,
I wish nae mair of a^ that is rare.
My ^eggy speaks sae sweetly,
To a' the lave I^m cauld,
But she gars a' my spirits glow,
At wauking of the fauld.
My Peggy smiles sae kindly,
Whenever I whisper love.
That I look dowr on a' the town,
That I look down upon a ^own.
My Peggy smiles sae kindly,
It makes me blyth and bauld,
And naething gi'es me sic delight,
As wauking of the fauld.
My Peggy sings sae sattly,
When on my pipe I play,
By a' the rest it is confessed,
By a' the rest that she sings best.
My Peggy sings sae fastly,
And in her sangs are tald,
With innocence the wale of sense,
At wauking of the fauld.
Highland L^ddie.
THE lawland lads think they are fine;
But O! they are rain and idly gaudy!
How much unlike that graceful mein,
And manly looks of my highland laddie!
O my bonny, bonny highland laddie,
My handsorne charming highland laddie;
May heaven still guard, and love reward
Our lawland lass and her highland laddie.
If I were free at will to choose,
To be the wealthiest lawland lady,
I Would take young Donald without trews,
With bonnet blew, and belted plaidy.
O my bonny, etc.
The brawest beau in borrows-town,
In a' his airs, which art made ready,
Compared to him he is but a clown?
He Is finer far in's tartan plaidy.
O my bonny, etc.
Over benty hill with him I Will run,
And leave my lawland kin and daddy,
Frae winter's cauld, and summer's sun,
He Will screen me with his highland plaidy.
O my bonny, etc.
A painted room, and silken bed.
May please a lawland lord and lady:
But I can kiss and be as glad.
Behind a bush in's highland plaidy,
O my bonny, etc.
Few compliments between us pass.
I ca' him my dear highland laddie,
And he ca^s me his lawland lass,
Syne rows me in beneath his plaidy.
O my bonny, etc.
Nae greater joy I Will ever pretend.
Than that his love prove true and steady,
Like mine to him, which never shall end,
While heaven preserves my highland laddie.
O my bonny. etc.
Broom of Cowdenknows.
HOW blyth ilk morn, was I to see
My swain come over the hill!
He skipt the burn, and slew to me;
I met him wi' good will.
O the broom, the bonny bonny broom,
The broom of Cowdenknows;
I wish I were wi' my dear swain,
W' his pipe and my ewes.
I neither wanted ewe nor lamb,
While his flock near me lay:
He gathered in my sheep at night,
And cheered me a' the day,
O the broom, etc.
He tuned his pipe and reed sae sweet,
The birds stood listening by;
Even the dull cattle stood and gazed,
Charm^d wi^ his melody.
O the broom, etc.
While thus we spent our time, by turns
Betwixt our flocks and play,
I envied not the fairest dame,
Though never so rich and gay.
O the broom, etc.
Hard fate! that I should banished be,
Gang heavily and mourn,
Because I loved the kindest swain
That ever yet was born.
O the broom, etc.
He did oblige me every hour:
Could I but faithful be?
He slaw my heart; could I refuse
Whatever he asked of me?
O the broom, etc.
My doggie and my little kit,
That held my we soup whey,
My plaidy, broach, and crooked stick,
May now lie useless by.
O the broom, etc.
Adieu, ye Cowdenknows, adieu,
Farewell a' pleasures there:
Ye gods, restore me to my swain,
Is a' I crave, or care,
O the broom, etc.
On young Olinda.
WHEN innocence and beauty meet,
To add to lovely female grace,
Ah, how beyond expression sweet,
Is every feature of the face!
By virtue ripened from the bud,
The flower angelic odours breeds;
The fragrant charms of being good
Makes gaudy vice to smell like weeds.
Oh, sacred Virtue! tune my voice,
With thy inspiring harmony;
Then I shall sing of rapturous joys,
Which fill my soul with love of thee.
To lasting brightness be refined,
When this vain shadow flies away;
The eternal beauties of the mind
Will last when all things else decay.
The passionate Shepherd to his Lover.
COME live with me, and be my love,
And we will all the pleasures prove
That valleys, groves, or hills and fields,
And all the sleepy mountain yields.
And we will sit upon the rocks*
Seeing the shepherds feed their flocks,
By shallow rivers, to whose falls
Melodious birds sing madrigals.
And I will make thee beds of roses,
And a thousand fragrant posies,
A cap of flowers, and a kirtle
Embroidered with leaves of myrtle.
A gown made of the finest wool,
Which from out pretty lambs we pull;
Fair lined slippers for the cold,
With buckles of the purest gold.
A belt of straw, and ivy buds,
With coral clasps and amber studs:
And if these pleasure may thee move,
Come live with me, and be my love.
The shepherd swains shall dance and sing,
For thy delight each May morning:
If these delights thy mind may move.
Then live with me, and be my love.
SONG.
BUSY, curious thirsty fly.
Drink with me, and drink as I:
Freely welcome to my cup,
Could ^ou sip and sip it up.
Make the most of life you may,
Life is short, and wears away.
Both alike are mine and thine.
Hastening quick to their decline:
Thine's a summer, mine no more,
Though repeated to threescore;
Threescore summers, when they are gone,
Will appear as short as one.
SONG.
ADIEU, ye jovial youths, who join
To plunge old Care in floods of wine;
And, as your dazzled eye balls roll,
Discern him struggling in the bowl.
Not yet is hope so wholly flown,
Not yet is thought so tedious grown,
^ut limpid stream and shady tree
Retain, as yet, some sweet for me.
And see, through yonder silent grove,
See yonder does my Daphne rove:
With pride her footsteps I pursue,
And bid your frantic joys adieu.
The sole confusion I admire,
Is that my Daphne's eyes inspire:
I scorn the madness you approve,
And value reason next to love.
Retirement.
I ENVY not the proud their wealth,
Their equipage and state:
Give me but innocence and health,
I ask not to be great.
I in this sweet retirement find
A joy unknown to kings,
For sceptres to a virtuous mind,
Seem vain and empty things.
Great Cincinnatus at his plough
With brighter luster shone,
Than guilty Caesar ever could show,
Though seated on a throne.
Tumultuous days, and restless nights,
Ambition ever knows,
A stranger to the calm delights
Of study and repose.
Then free from envy, care, and strife,
Keep me, ye powers divine!
And pleased, when ye demand my life,
May I that life resign!
SONG.
* Supposed to be wrote by Francis Hopkinson, Esquire of Philadelphia.
To the Tune of Infancy.
IN infancy our days were blessed,
With peace and liberty;
Our gardens and our fields were dressed
In sweet Simplicity!
No hostile foe had we to dread,
No enemy to fear;
But now, alas! those joys are fled,
And danger does appear.
Our seas with Britain's navy swarm,
Our trade and commerce droop;
Our cities robbed and left forlorn,
Shall we to slavery stoop,
Ah! no, Ah! no, you shall be free,
Liberty's goddess said;
Britannia's flag shall strike to thee,
And droop its haughty head.
The BANKS of KENTUCKE.
Tune, -- Banks of the Dee.
THE spring was advancing, and birds were beginning
To sing on the boughs over each purling brook;
On the early green herbage at leisure reclining,
I was carelessly viewing the banks of Kentucke.
Hail stranger to song! hail deep-channel'd river,
Thy prominent cliffs shall be famous forever;
Thy high-swelling floods henceforward shall never,
Obscurely roll down through the banks of Kentucky.
Disgusted with idle, romantic pretensions,
The populous city I lonely forsook;
Delighting in nature with fond apprehensions,
I eagerly came to the banks of Kentucke.
O, never did art so much beauty discover,
To reward the long search of its most raptured lover,
As nature's luxuriant fancy spreads over
The gay fertile soil on the banks of Kentucke.
Here genius shall rove with an endless desire,
Improvements to make without learning or book:
While virtue and truth shall forever conspire,
To bless those that dwell on the banks of Kentucke.
Here, far from tyrannical power removed,
The spirit of freedom shall hap'ly be proved;
The patriot shall by his country be loved,
And live without guile on the banks of Kentucke.
Her^ (...) ^y never shall raise its foul banner,
The ba^ (...) joy through all ages it shook;
The young and the aged in more happy manner
Than those shall improve on the banks of Kentucke.
In honest industry their time still employing,
With heart-cheering mirth all their meetings enjoying,
With the blessings of friendship, and love never cloying,
All ranks shall unite on the banks of Kentucke.
Rich plenty and health, with visage all glowing,
Invite and allure us with promising look;
Never more to regret other rivers long flowing,
Not such as glide down through, the banks of Kentucke.
Pale sickness does pass through the land as a stranger,
No dreadful distemper here frightens the ranger,
As he passes through canebrakes and waters, no danger
Expecting to meet on the banks of Kentucke.
SONG.
I ENVY not the mighty great,
Those powerful rulers of the state,
Who settle nations as they please,
And govern at the expense of ease.
Far happier the shepherd^s swain,
Who daily drudges on the plain,
And nightly in some humble shed
On rushy pillows lays his head.
No cursed ambition breaks his rest,
No factious wars divide his breast;
His flock, his pipe, and artless fair,
Are all his hope, and all his care.
SONG.
NO glory I covet, no riches I want,
Ambition is nothing to me,
The one thing I beg of kind heaven to grant,
Is a mind independent and free.
With passions unruffled, untainted with pride,
by reason my life let me square;
The wants of my nature are cheaply supplied,
And the rest are but folly and care.
The blessings which Providence freely has lent,
I Will justly and gratefully prize;
Whilst sweet meditation and cheerful content,
Shall make me both healthful and wise.
In the pleasures the great man's possessions display,
Unenvied I Will challange my part;
For every fair object my eyes can survey
Contributes to gladden my heart.
How vainly, through infinite trouble and strife,
The many their labors employ!
Since all that is truly delightful in life
Is what all, if they please, may enjoy.
Jockey to the Fair.
'TWAS on the morn of sweet May day,
When nature painted all things gay,
Taught birds to sing, and lambs to play,
And gild the meadows rare:
Young Jockey early in the dawn,
Arose, and tript it over the lawn;
His Sunday's coat the youth put on,
For Jenny had vowed away to run
With Jockey to the fair.
Jenny had vowed, etc.
The cheerful parish bells had rung,
With eager steps he trudged along,
With flowery garlands round him hung,
Which shepherds used to wear:
He tapt the window -- Haste my dear,
Jenny impatient, cried, who is there?
It Is I, my love, and no one near;
Step gently down, you have naught to sear
With Jockey to the fair.
My dad and mammy's fast asleep,
My brother's up, and with the sheep;
And will you still your promise keep,
Which I have heard you swear?
And will you ever constant prove?
I will by all the powers of love,
And never deceive my charming dove:
Dispel these doubts, and haste, my love,
With Jockey to the fair.
Behold the ring, the shepherd cried,
Will Jenny be my charming bride?
Let cupid be our happy guide,
And hymen meet us there.
Then Jockey did his vows renew,
He would be constant, would be true:
His word was pledged -- away she flew
With cowslips, tipped with balmy dew,
With Jockey to the fair.
In raptures meet the joyful throng,
Their gay companions blithe and young:
Each join the dance, each join the song,
And hail the happy pair:
In turns there is none so fond as they,
They blessed the kind propitious day,
The smiling morn of blooming May,
When lovely Jenny run away
With Jockey to the fair.
The Nun.
SURE a lass in her bloom, at the age of nineteen,
Was never so distressed as of late I have been;
I know not, I vow, any harm I have done,
But mother often tells me, she will have me a nun.
But mother, etc.
Don't you think it a pity, a girl such as I,
Should be sentenced to pray, and to fast, and to cry;
With ways so devout I Am not like to be won,
And my heart it loves frolic too well for a nun.
To hear the men flatter, and promise, and swear,
Is a thousand times better to me, I declare;
I can keep my self chaste nor by wiles be undone;
Nay, besides, I Am too handsome, I think, for a nun.
Not to love or be loved, oh, I never can bear,
Nor yield to be sent to -- one cannot tell where;
To live or to die, in this case were all one:
Nay, I sooner would die, than be reckoned a nun.
Perhaps, but to teaze me, she threatens me so,
I Am sure we are she me she would stoutly say no;
But if she is in earnest, I from her will run,
And be married in spite, that I may not be a nun.
The Tempest of War.
LET the tempest of war
Be heard from afar,
With trumpets' and cannons' alarms:
Let the brave, if they will,
By their valor and skill,
Seek honor and conquest in arms.
To live safe, and retire,
Is what I desire,
Of my flocks and my Chloe possessed;
For in them I obtain
True peace without pain,
And the lasting enjoyment of rest.
In some cottage or cell,
Like a shepherd to dwell,
From all interruption at case;
In a peaceable life,
To be blessed with a wife,
Who will study her husband to please.
Vauxhall Watch.
MY name's Ted Blarney I Will be bound,
And man and boy upon this ground,
Full twenty years I Have beat my round,
Crying, Vauxhall watch.
And as the time's a little short
With some small folks that here resort,
To be sure I have not had some sport,
Crying, Vauxhall watch.
Oh! of pretty wenches dressed so tight,
And macaronies -- what a sight,
Of a moonlight morn I Have bid good night,
Crying, Vauxhall watch.
The cheerful Wi^e.
I ONCE was a maiden as fresh as a rose,
And as fickle as April weather,
I laid down without care, and I waked with repose,
With a heart as light as a feather.
With a heart, etc.
I worked with the girls, and played with the men,
I always was romping or spinning;
And what if they pilfer'd a kiss now and then,
I hope 'twas not very great sinning,
I hope, etc.
I wedded a husband as young as myself,
And for every frolic as willing,
Together we laughed when we had any pelf,
And we laughed when we had not a shilling.
And we, etc.
He Is gone to the wars -- heaven send him a prize,
For his pains he is welcome to spend it:
My example I know is more merry than wise,
Lord help me -- I never shall mend it.
Lord help, etc.
The Vicar of Bray.
IN good King Charles's golden days,
When loyalty no harm meant,
A zealous high-church man I was,
And so I got preferment;
To teach my flock I never missed,
Kings are by God appointed,
And damned are those that do resist,
Or touch the Lord's anointed.
And this is law I will maintain
Until my dying day, Sir,
That whatsoever King shall reign,
I Will be the vicar of Bray, Sir.
When royal James obtained the crown,
And popery came in fashion,
To penal laws I hooted down,
And read the declaration:
The church of Rome I found would fit
Full well my constitution;
And had become a Jesuit,
But for the revolution.
And this is law, etc.
When William was our King declared,
To ease the nation's grievance;
With this new wind about I steered,
And swore to him allegiance;
Old principles I did revoke,
Set conscience at a distance;
Passive obedience was a joke,
And jest was non-resistance.
And this is law, etc.
When gracious Anne became our Queen,
The church of England's glory,
Another face of things was seen,
And I became a tory;
Occasional conformists base,
I damned their moderation;
And thought the church in danger was
By such prevarication.
And this is law, etc.
When George in pudding-time came over,
And moderate men looked big, Sir,
I turned a cat-in-pan once more,
And so became a whig, Sir;
And thus preferment I procured
From our new faith's defender;
And almost every day abjured
The Pope and the Pretender.
And this is law, etc.
The illustrious house of Hanover,
And Protestant succession;
To these I do allegiance swear --
While they can keep possession:
For in my faith and loyalty
I never more will faulter,
And George my lawful King shall be --
Until the times do alter.
And this is law I will maintain
Until my dying day, Sir,
That whatsoever King shall reign,
I Will be the vicar of Bray, Sir.
The Storm.
CEASE, rude Boreas, blustering railer!
List, ye landsmen, all to me!
Messmates, hear a brother sailor
Sing the dangers of the sea;
From bounding billows, first in motion,
When the distant whirlwinds rise,
To the tempest troubled ocean,
Where the seas contend with skies!
Hark! the boatswain hoarsely bawling,
By topsail sheets, and haulyards stand!
Down top-gallants quick be hauling
Down your stay sails, hand, boys, hand!
Now it freshens, set the braces,
The topsail sheets now let go!
Luff, boys, luff! don't make wry faces,
Up your topsails nimbly clew.
Now all you on down beds sporting,
Fondly locked in beauty's arm^;
Fresh enjoyments, wanton courting,
Safe from all but love's alarms;
Round us roars the tempest louder;
Think what fears our minds enthrall;
Harder yet, it yet blows harder,
Now again the boatswain calls!
The topsa^l yards point to the wind, boys,
See all clear to reef each course;
Let the fore sheet go, don't mind; boys,
Though the weather should be worse.
Fore and aft the sprit-sail yard get,
Reef the mizen, see all clear,
Hands up, each preventure brace set,
Man the fore yard, cheer, lads, cheer!
Now the dreadful thunder's roaring,
P^^l on peal contending clash,
On our heads fierce rain falls pouring,
In our eyes blue lightnings flash,
One wide water all around us,
All above us one black sky,
Different deaths at once surround us,
Hark! what means that dreadful cry?
The foremast's gone, cries every tongue out,
Over the lee, twelve feet 'bove deck:
A leak beneath the chest tree's sprung out,
Call all hands to clear the wreck.
Quick the lanyards cut to pieces,
Come, my hearts, be stout and bold;
Plumb the well -- the leak increases,
Four feet water in the hold.
While over the ship wild waves are beating,
We for wives or children mourn;
Alas! from hence there is no retreating,
Alas! to them there^s no return.
Still the leak is gaining on us;
Both chain pumps are choked below.
Heaven have mercy here upon us!
For only that can save us now.
Over the lee-beam is the land, boys,
Let the guns o'erboard be thrown;
To the pump come every hand, boys,
See! our mizen mast is gone.
The leak we^ve found it cannot pour fast,
We Have lightened her a foot or more;
Up, and rig a jury foremast,
She rights, she rights, boys, we are off shore.
Now once more on joys we are thinking,
Since kind Heaven has saved our lives;
Come, the can, boys! let us be drinking
To our sweethearts and our wives,
Fill it up, about ship wheel it,
Close to our lips a brimmer join,
Where Is the tempest now, who feels it?
None -- the dangers drowned in wine.
SONG.
GENTLY stir and blow the fire,
Lay the mutton down to roast,
Dress it quickly, I desire.
In the dripping put a toast,
That I hunger may remove;
Mutton is the meat I love.
On the dresser see it lie,
O! the charming white and red!
Finer meat never met my eye,
On the sweetest grass it fed;
Let the jack go swiftly round.
Let me have it nicely brown'd.
On the table spread the cloth,
Let the knives be sharp and clean:
Pickles get, and sallad both,
Let them each be fresh and green:
With small beer, good ale, and wine,
O ye gods! how I shall dine!
All of Life is Love.
WHEN first this humble roof I knew,
With various cares I strove,
My grain was scarce, my sheep were few,
My all of life was love.
By mutual toil our board was dressed,
The spring our drink bestowed;
But when her lip the brim had pressed,
The cup with nectar flowed.
Content and peace the dwelling shared,
No other guest came nigh,
In them was given (though gold was spared)
What gold could never buy.
No value has a splendid lot,
But as the means to prove
That from the castle to the cot,
The all of life is love.
When War's Alarms.
WHEN war's alarms enticed my Willy from me,
My poor heart with grief did sigh;
Each fond remembrance brought fresh sorrow on me,
'Woke ere yet the morn was nigh:
No other could delight him;
Ah! why did I ever slight him,
Coldly answ'ring his fond tale,
Which drove him far amid the rage of war,
And lest silly me thus to bewail.
But I no longer, though a maid forsaken,
Thus will mourn like yonder dove,
For ere the lark to morrow shall awaken,
I will seek my absent love:
The hostile country over
I Will fly to seek my lover,
Scorning every threatening fear;
Nor distant shore,
Nor cannons roar,
Shall longer keep me from my dear.
Charms of Liberty.
SINCE every charm on earth combined,
In Chloe's face, in Chloe's mind,
Why was I born, ye gods, to see
What robs me of my liberty?
Until that fatal hapless day,
My heart was lively, blithe and gay,
Could sport with ev^ry nymph but she
Who robs me of my liberty.
Think then, dear Chloe, ere to late,
That death must be my hapless fate,
If love and you do not agree,
To set me at my liberty.
Now to the darksome woods I rove,
Reflecting on the pains of love,
And envy every clown I see
Enjoy the sweets of liberty.
We'll follow Hymen's happy train,
And every idle care disdain;
We'll live in sweet tranquillity,
Nor wish for greater liberty.
Cowden Knows.
WHEN summer comes, the swains on Tweed,
Sing their successful loves,
Around the ewes and lambkins feed,
And music fills the groves:
But my loved song is then the broom,
So fair on Cowden Knows;
For sure so sweet, so fair a bloom,
Elsewhere there never grows.
There Colin tuned his oaten reed,
And won my yielding heart;
No shepherd ever that dwelt on Tweed,
Could play with half such art:
He sung of ^ay, of Forth and Clyde,
The hills and dales all round
Of Leader-haughs, and Leader-side;
O how I bless the sound!
Yet more delightful is the broom
So fair on Cowden Knows,
For sure so fresh so bright a bloom,
Elsewhere there never grows:
Not Tiviot brae^ so green and gay,
May with t^^ broom compare;
Not Yarrow Banks in flowery May,
Nor bush Aboon Traquair.
More pleasing far are Cowden Knows,
My peaceful happy home,
Where I was wont to milk my ewes,
At eve amongst the broom:
Ye powers that haunt the woods and plains,
Where Tweed and Tiviot flows,
Convey me to the best of swain,
And my loved Cowden Knows!
Johnny and Mary.
DOWN the bourne and through the mead,
His golden locks waved over his brow,
Johnny lilting tuned his reed,
And Mary wip^d her bonny mou.
Dear she loo'd the well known song,
While her Johnny, blithe and bonny,
Sung her praise the whole day long.
Down the bourne, etc.
Costly claithes she had but few,
Of rings and jewels nae great store,
Her face was fair, her love was true,
And Johnny wisely wished no more;
Love's the pearl the shepherd's prize,
Over the mountain, rear the fountain,
Love delights the shepherd's eyes.
Down the bourne, etc.
Gold and titles give not health,
And Johnny could nae these impart;
Youthful Mary's greatest wealth
Was still her faithful Johnny's heart:
Sweet the joys the lovers find?
Great the treasure, sweet the pleasure,
Where the heart is always kind.
Down the bourne, etc.
The Sailor's Advice.
AS you mean to set sail for the land of delight,
And in wedlock's soft hammocks to swing every night,
If you hope that your voyage successful should prove,
Fill your sails with affection, your cabin with love.
Fill your sails, etc.
Let your hearts like the mainmast, be ever upright,
And the union you boast, like our tackle be tight;
Of the shoals of Indiff'rence be sure to keep clear,
And the quicksands of Jealousy never come near.
And the qnicksands, etc.
If husband's ever hope to live peaceable lives,
They must reckon themselves, give the helm to their wives,
For the evener we go, boys, the better we sail,
And on shipboard the helm is still ruled by the tail.
And an shipboard, etc.
Then list to your pilot, my boy, and be wise;
If my precepts you scorn, and my maxims despise,
A brace of proud antlers your brows may adorn,
And a hundred to one but you double Cape Horn.
And a hundred, etc.
The Vicar and Moses.
AT the sign of the horse old Spintext of course,
Each night took his pipe and his pot.
Over a jorum of nappy, quite pleasant and happy,
Was placed this canonical sot.
Tol derol, derol, tidol, didol.
The evening was dark, when in came the clerk,
With reverence due, and submission;
First strok'd his cravat, next twirl'd round his hat,
And, bowing, preferred his petition.
I Am come, Sir, says he, to beg, do you see,
Of your reverend worship and glory,
To inter a poor baby with as much speed as may be,
And I Will walk with a lanthorn before you.
The body we'll bury, but pray where is the hurry?
Why, Lord, Sir, the corpse it does stay:
You fool, hold your peace -- since miracles cease,
A corpse, Moses, cannot run away.
Then Moses he smiled, says, Sir, a small child
Cannot long delay your intentions;
Why that is true, by St. Paul, a child that is small
Can never enlarge its dimensions.
Bring Moses some beer, and bring me some, do you hear;
I hate to be called from my liquor:
Come, Moses -- the King! -- it is a scandalous thing
Such a subject should be but a vicar.
Then Moses he spoke, Sir, it is past twelve o'clock,
Besides there is a terrible shower;
Why Moses, you elf, since the clock has struck twelve,
I Am sure it can never strike more.
Besides, my dear friend, this lesson attend,
Which to say and to swear I Will be bold,
That the corpse, snow or rain, cannot endanger that is plain,
But, perhaps, you or I may take cold.
Then Moses went on -- Sir, the clock has struck one;
Pray, master, look up at the hand:
Why it never can strike less -- it is a folly to press
A man for to go that cannot stand,
At length, hat and cloak old orthodox took,
But first crammed his jaw with a quid;
Each tipped off a gill for fear they should chill,
And then staggered away side by side.
When come to the grave the clerk humm'd a stave,
While the surplice was wrapped round the priest;
Where so droll was the figure of Moses and vicar,
That the parish still talk of the jest.
Good people let us pray -- put the corpse the other way,
Or, perchance, I shall over it stumble;
It Is best to take care; though the sages declare
A mortuum caput cannot tremble.
Woman that is born of man -- that is wrong -- the leaf^s torn;
Oh! -- man that is born of a woman
Cannot continue an hour, but is cut down like a flower --
You see, Moses, death spares no man.
Here, Moses, do look, what a confounded book!
Sure the letters are turn^d upside down! --
Such a scandalous print -- sure the devil is in it,
That this Strahan should print for the crown.
Prithee, Moses, you read, for I cannot proceed,
And bury the corpse in my stead.
(Amen, Amen.)
Why, Moses, you're wrong! -- pray hold still your tongue --
You Have taken the tail for the head.
O where is thy sting, death! -- put the corpse in the earth,
For, believe me, it is terrible weather:
So the corpse was interred without praying a word,
And away they both staggered together.
Singing tol derol etc.
The Echoing Horn.
THE echoing horn calls the sportsmen abroad,
To horse, my brave boys, and away;
The morning is up, and the cry of the hounds
Upbraids our too tedious delay.
What pleasure we find in pursuing the fox!
Over hill and over valley he flies;
Then follow, we'll soon overtake him -- huzza!
The traitor is seized on and dies.
Triumphant, returning at night with the spoil,
Like Bacchanals, shouting and gay,
How sweet with the bottle and lass to refresh,
And lose the fatigues of the day!
With sport, love, and wine, fickle fortune defy:
Dull wisdom all happiness sours:
Since life is no more than a passage at best,
Let Us strew the way over with flowers.
O the Days when I was Young.
O THE days when I was young,
When I laugh^d in fortune's spite,
Talked of love the whole day long,
And with nectar crowned the night;
Then it was, old father Care,
Little reck'd I of thy frown,
Half thy malice youth could bear,
And the rest a bumper drown.
O the days, etc.
Truth, they say, lies in a well,
Why, I vow, I never could see;
Let the water drinkers tell --
There it always lay for me:
For when sparkling wine went round,
Never saw I falshood's mask;
But still the honest truth I found
In the bottom of each flask.
O the days, etc.
True, at length my vigour's flown,
I have years to bring decay;
Few the locks that now I own,
And the few I have are gray;
Yet, old Jerome, thou may boast,
While thy spirits do not tire;
Still beneath thy age's frost
Glows a spark of youthful fire.
O the days, etc.
The wandering Sailor.
THE wandering sailor ploughs the main,
A competence in life to gain,
Undaunted braves the stormy seas,
To find, at last, content and ease:
In hopes, when toil and danger's over,
To anchor on his native shore.
When winds blow hard, and mountains roll,
And thunders shake from pole to pole,
Though dreadful waves surrounding foam,
Still flattering fancy wafts him home;
In hopes, when toil and danger's over,
To anchor on his native shore.
When round the bowl, the jovial crew
The early scenes of youth renew,
Though each his favorite fair will boast,
This is the universal toast --
May we, when toil and danger's over,
Cast anchor on our native shore!
The general Toast.
Here Is to the maid of bashful fifteen,
Likewise to the widow of fifty;
Here Is to the bold and extravagant queen,
And here is to the housewife that is thrifty:
Let the toast pass,
Drink to the lass,
I warrant she will prove an excuse for the glass.
Here Is to the maiden whose dimples we prize,
And likewise to her that has none Sir*
Here Is to the maid with a pair of blue eyes,
And here is to her that is but one, Sir,
Let the toast pass, etc.
Here Is to the maid with a bosom of snow,
And to her that is as brown as a berry;
And here is to the wife with a face full of woe,
And here is to the girl that is merry.
Let the toast pass, etc.
Let her be clumsy, or let her be slim,
Young or ancient I care not a feather;
So fill the pint bumper quite up to the brim,
And even let us toast them together.
Let the toast pass,
Drink to the lass,
I warrant she will prove an excuse for the glass.
Jacky Bull from France.
IN Jacky Bull, when bound for France,
The gosling you discover;
But taught to ride, to fence and dance,
A finished goose comes over.
With his tierce and carte -- sa! sa!
And his cotillion so smart -- ha! ha!
He charms each female heart -- oh, la!
As Jacky returns from Dover.
For cocks and dogs, see 'squire at home*
The prince of country ^onies;
Return^d from Paris, Spa, or Rome,
Our 'squire's a nice Adonis.
With his tierce and carte -- sa! sa!
And his cotillion so smart -- ha! ha!
He charms the female heart -- oh, la!
The pink of macaronies.
Amo Amos.
AMO amas,
I love a lass,
As a cedar tall and slender:
Sweet Cowslip's grace
Is her nom'tive case.
And she is of the feminine gender.
CHORUS.
Rorum little,
Sunt divorum,
Harum scarum!
Divo! --
Tag rag, merry derry, perriwig and hat-band,
Hic, hoc, horum, genitivo!
Can I decline
A nymph divine?
Her voice as a flute is dulcis;
Her oculis bright,
Her manus white,
And soft, when I tacto, her pulse is.
Rorum, little, etc.
Oh, how bella
My puella!
I Will kiss, secula seculorum:
If I Have luck, Sir,
She Is my uxor;
O dies benedictorum!
Rorum, little, etc.
A hunting Song.
THE sun from the east tips the mountains with gold,
And the mead was all spangled with drew-drops behold:
The larks early mattin proclaims the new day,
And the horn's cheerful summons rebukes our delay:
With the sports of the field there is no pleasures can vie,
While jocund we follow the hounds in full cry.
Let the drudge of the town make riches his sport,
And the slaves of the state hunt the smiles of the court:
No care nor ambition (...) ^ience annoy,
But innocence still (...) a z^st to our joy.
With the sports of the field, etc.
Mankind are all hunters in various degrees; --
The priest hunts a living, the lawyer a fee;
The doctor a patient, the courtier a place --
Though often, like us, they are flung out with disgrace.
With the sports of the field, etc.
The cit hunts a plumb, the soldier hunts fame;
The poet a dinner, the patriot a name;
And the artful coquette, though she seems to refuse,
Yet, in spite of her airs, she her lover pursues.
With the sports of the field, etc.
Let the bold and the busy hunt glory and wealth --
All the blessing we ask, is the blessing of health:
With hounds and with horns, through the woodlands we roam,
And when tired abroad, find contentment at home.
With the sports of the field there is no pleasures can vie,
While jocund we follow the hounds in full cry.
How imperfect is Expression.
HOW imperfect is expression,
Some emotions to impart,
When we mean a soft confession,
And yet seek to hide the heart!
When our bosoms, all complying,
With delicious tumults swell,
And beat, what broken, falt'ring, dying,
Language would, but cannot tell!
Deep confusion's rosy terror,
Quite expressive, paints my cheek:
Ask no more -- behold your error --
Blushes eloquently speak.
What, though silent is my anguish,
Or breathed only to the air,
Mark my eyes, and as they langu^sh,
Read what yours have written there.
O that you could once conceive ^e!
Once my soul's strong feeling view!
Love has naught more fond, be^ieve me;
Friendship nothing half so ^rue.
From you, I am wild, despairing;
With you, speechless as I touch!
This is all that bears declaring,
And, perhaps, declares too much.
Jovial Companion.
COME, come my jolly lads;
The wind's ab^ft;
Brisk gales our sails shall crowd: --
Come, bustle, bustle, bustle, boys,
Haul the boat;
The boatswain pipe's aloud:
The ship^s unmoor'd,
All hands on board;
The rising gale
Fills every sail;
The ship's well manned and stored;
Then sling the flowing bowl --
Fond hopes arise --
The girls we prize
Shall bless each jovial soul:
The cann, boys, bring --
We'll drink and sing,
While foaming billows roll.
Though to the Spanish coast
We Are bound to steer,
Well still our rights maintain;
Then bear a hand, be steady, boys,
Soon we'll see
Old England once again:
From shore to shore,
While cannons roar,
Our ^ars shall show
The ^aughty foe
Britannia rul^ the main.
Then sli^^ the flowing bowl, etc.
Fall de ral Tit.
'TWAS I learned a pretty song in France,
And I brought it over the sea by chance:
And when in Wapping I did dance,
O the like was never seen;
For I made the music loud for to play,
All for to pass the dull hours away;
And when I had nothing left to say
Then I sung fall de ral tit, etc.
As I was walking down Thames' street
A ship-mate of mine I chanced for to meet,
And I was resolved him for to treat
With a can of grog, gillio!
A can of grog they brought us straight,
All for to pleasure my ship mate,
And satisfaction gave him straight;
Then I sung fall de ral tit, etc.
The macaronies next came in,
All dressed so neat, and looked so trim,
And thinking for to strike me dumb --
Some were short, and some were tall;
But it is very well known I licked them all,
For I dous'd their heads against the wall,
Then I sung fall de ral tit, etc.
The landlord then aloud did say
As how he wished I would go away,
And if I 'tempted him for to stay
As how he would take the law:
Lord d -- me says I, you may do your worst,
For I Have not scarcely quenched my thirst;
All this I said, and nothing worse;
Then I sung fall de ral tit, etc.
Its when I have crossed the raging main,
And be come back to Old England again,
Of grog I Will drink galore;
With a pretty girl to sit by my side,
And for her costly robes I Will provide,
So that she shall be quite satisfied,
Then I Will sing fall de ral tit, etc.
The Maid of the Mill.
WILLIAM.
I HAVE kissed and I Have prattled with fifty fair maids,
And chang^d them as often do you see;
But of all the fair maidens that dance on the green
The maid of the mill for me.
PHOEBE.
There Is fifty young men have told me fine tales,
And called me the fairest she;
But of all the gay youths that sport on the green,
Young Harry's the lad for me.
WILLIAM.
Her eyes are as black as the sloe in the hedge,
Her face like the blossoms in May,
Her teeth are as white as the new shorn flock,
Her breath like the new-made hay.
PHOEBE.
He Is tall and he is straight as the poplar tree,
His cheeks are as fresh as a rose;
He looks like a squire of high degree
When dressed in his Sunday's clothes.
Return, enraptured Love. Wrote by the unfortunate Major Andre, while in
confinement.

RETURN, enraptured hours,
When Delia's heart was mine;
When she with wreaths of flowers
My temples did entwine!
My jealousy nor care
Corroded in my breast,
And visions light as air
Presided over my rest.
Since I Am removed from state,
And bid adieu to time,
At my unhappy fate
Let Delia not repine;
But may the mighty Jove
Her crown with happiness!
This grant ye powers above!
And take my soul to bliss!
Now, nightly round my bed,
No airy visions play;
Nor flowerets deck my head,
Each vernal holiday:
But far from these sad plains
The lovely Delia flies,
While racked with jealous pains
Her wretched Andre dies.
Darby, the Beau.
SINCE Kathleen has proved so untrue,
Poor Darby! ah! what can you do?
No longer I Will stay here a clown,
But sell off, and gallop to town;
I Will dress, and I Will strut with an air;
The barber shall frizzle my hair.
In town I shall cut a great dash;
But how for to compass the cash?
At gaming, perhaps, I may win;
With cards I can take the flats in;
Or trundle false dice, and they are nicked;
If found out, I shall only be kicked.
But first, for to get a great name,
A duel will establish my fame;
To my man then a challenge I Will write --
But first I Will be sure he will not fight;
We'll swear not to part till we fall;
Then shoot without powder, and the devil a ball.
Good Morrow to your Nightcap.
DEAR Kathleen, you, no doubt,
Find sleep how very sweet it is;
Dogs bark, and cocks have crow'd out;
You never dream how late it is.
This morning gay
I post away,
To have with you in bit of play:
On two legs rid
Along, to bid
Good Morrow to your nightcap.
Last night a little bowsy
With whisky, ale, and cider,
I asked young Betty Blowzy
To let me sit beside her:
Her anger rose,
And sour as sloes,
The little gypsy cocked her nose:
Yet here I Have rid
Along, to bid
Good Morrow to your nightcap.
Beneath the honey suckle,
The daisy and the violet
Compose so sweet a truckle,
They Will tempt you sure to spoil it.
Sweet Sal and Bell
I Have pleased so well --
But hold, I must'nt kiss and tell:
So here I Have rid
Along, to bid
Good Morrow to your nightcap.
Delia.
WHEN Delia on the plain appears,
Awed by a thousand tender fears;
I would approach, but dare not move;
Tell me, my heart, if this be love?
When'er she speaks, my tavish'd ear
No other voice but here is can hear;
No other wit but here is approve;
Tell me my heart, if this be love?
If she some other swain commend,
Though I was once his fondest friend,
His instant enemy I prove;
Tell me my heart, if this be love?
When she is absent, I no more
Delight in all that pleased before,
The clearest spring, the shadiest grove;
Tell me my heart, if this be love?
When fond of power, of beauty vain,
Her net she spread for every swain,
I strove to hate, but vainly strove;
Tell me my heart, if this be love?
Colin and Laura.
WHY Collin, must your Laura mourn,
Or longer wait your wished return?
O quickly come, and bring with thee
Glad joy to all, but love to me.
No more the tenants of the grove
In concert tune their tales of love;
And nature ceases to be gay
When ever my shepherd keeps away.
No longer fly the peaceful shade,
But haste to meet your constant maid;
O quickly come, and bring with thee
Glad joy to all, but love to me.
Eloisa's Complaint.
FROM the brook and the willow forsaking the plain,
Eloisa came mournfully telling her pain;
On her trembling hand she reclined her sad head,
Nor pressed her ^ale cheek, for the color was fled;
Her languid eyes raised, after many a groan,
And thus she began in a faultering tone.
Soft zephyrs and willow, kind brook, lend your aid,
Regard the complaint of an unhappy maid;
If the man whom I love should here chance to rove,
In murmuring sounds let the brook thus reprove:
The maid by persuasion and you, led astray,
Came to relate her sad story, one day.
For you every shepherd she used with disdain,
And pitched upon you for her favorite swain;
But when her fond heart you possessed, you forbore
The respect she had always commanded before:
For the sake of the nymph whom you did ensnare,
Add a tear to this brook, and a sigh to this tear.
SONG.
WHY heaves my fond bosom, ah! what can it means,
Why flutters my heart that was once so serene?
Why this sighing and trembling when Daphne is near,
Or why, when she is absent, this sorrow and fear?
Why this sighing and trembling when Daphne is near,
Or why, when she is absent, this sorrow and fear?
Methinks I for ever with wonder could trace,
The thousand soft charms that embellish thy face:
Each moment I view thee, new beauties I find;
With thy face I am charmed, but enslaved by thy mind.
Each moment, etc.
Untainted with folly, unfully'd with pride,
There native good humor and virtue reside:
Pray heaven that virtue thy soul may supply
With compassion for him, who without thee must die.
Pray heaven, etc.
The desert Plains.
OVER desert plains and rushy meers,
And withered heaths I rove,
Where tree, nor spire, nor cot appears,
I pass to meet my love;
But though my paths were damask'd over
With beauties ever so fine,
My busy thoughts would fly before
To fix on thee alone.
Over desert plains, etc.
No fir crowned hill could give delight,
No palace please my eye;
No pyramids aerial height,
Where mouldering monarchs lie;
Over desert plains, etc.
Unmoved should eastern Kings advance,
Could I the pageant see,
Splendor might catch one scornful glance,
Nor steal one glance from thee.
Over desert plains and rushy meers, etc.
SONG.
ADIEU! ye verdant lawns and bowers,
Adieu, my peace is over;
Adieu, ye sweetest shrubs and flowers,
Since Delia breaths no mor
Adieu ye hills, adieu ye vales,
Adieu ye streams and floods;
Adieu sweet echo's plaintive tales
Adieu ye meads and woods.
Adieu ye flocks, ye fleecy care,
Adieu yon pleasing plain!
Adieu thou beauteous blooming ^ir,
We never shall meet again.
The Braes of Balendine.
BENEATH a green grove, a lovely young swain
One evening reclined, to discover his pain;
So sad, yet so sweetly he warbled his woe,
The winds ceased to breathe, and the fountains to flow:
Rude winds with compassion could hear him complain,
But Cloe less gentle, was deaf to his strain.
How happy, he cried, my moments once flew!
When Cloe's bright charms first flushed in my view;
Those eyes then with pleasure the dawn could survey;
Nor smiled the fair morning more cheerful than they:
Now scenes of distress alone meet my sight,
I Am tortured in pleasure, and languish in light.
Then changes in vain for relief I pursue,
All else but conspire my grief to renew:
From sunshine to zephyrs, and shades we repair,
To sunshine we fly from too piercing an air:
But love's ardent fever burns always the same,
No winter can cool it, no summer inflame.
But see the pale moon all clouded retire,
The breezes grow dull, not Strephon's desire!
I fly from the danger of tempest and wind,
Yet nourish the madness that preys on the mind;
Ah wretch! how can life be worthy thy care?
To lengthen its moments, but lengthens despair!
The Linnet.
AS passing by a shady grove,
I heard a linnet sing,
Whose sweetly plaintive voice of love,
Proclaimed the cheerful spring.
His pretty accents seemed to flow,
As if he knew no pain,
His downy throat he tuned so sweet,
It echoed over the plain.
Ah! happy warbler, (I replied)
Contented thus to be;
It Is only harmony and love,
Can be compared to thee,
Thus perched upon the spray you stand,
The monarch of the shade;
And even sip ambrosial sweets,
That glow from every glade.
Did man possess but half thy bliss,
How joyful might he be!
But man was never formed for this,
It Is only joy for thee.
Then farewell, pretty bird, (I said)
Pursue thy plaintive tale,
And let thy tuneful accents spread
All over the fragrant vale.
Queen Mary's Lamentation.
I SIGH and lament me in vain,
These walls can but echo my moan;
Alas! it increases my pain,
When I think on the days that are gone.
Through the grate of my prison I see,
The birds as they wanton in air;
My heart, how it pants to be free,
My looks they are wild with despair!
Above, though oppressed by my fate,
I burn with contempt for my foes;
Though fortune has altered my state,
She never can subdue me to those.
False woman! in ages to come,
Thy malice detested shall be;
And when we are cold in the tomb,
Some hearts still shall sorrow for me.
Ye roofs where cold damps and dismay,
With silence and solitude dwell;
How comfortless passes the day!
How sad tolls the evening bell!
The owls from the battlements cry;
Hollow winds seem to murmur around;
O Mary! prepare thee to die!
My blood it runs cold at the sound!
The Jolly Waterman.
AND did you not hear of a jolly young waterman
Who at Blackfriars bridge used for to ply?
He feathered his oars with such skill and dexterity,
Winning each heart, and delighting each eye;
He looked so neat, and he rowed so steadily;
The maidens all flocked to his boat so readily;
And he eyed the young rogues with so charming an air,
That this waterman never was in want of a fair.
What sights of fine folks he often rowed in his wherry;
'Twas cleaned out so neat, and painted withal;
He was always first oars, when the fine city ladies
In a party to Ranelagh went, or Vauxhall:
And oftentimes would they be giggling and leering,
But 'twas all one to Tom, their gibing or jeering;
For loving, or liking, he little did care,
For this waterman never was in want of a fair.
And yet but to see how strangely things happen --
As he rowed along thinking of nothing at all,
He was plied by a damsel, so lovely and charming,
That she smiled, and so straightway in love he did fall:
And would this young damsel but banish his sorrow,
He Would wed her tonight, before it was morrow;
Then how should this waterman ever know care,
When he is married, and never in want of a fair?
Father Paul.
LET grave divines preach up dull rules,
And moral wit define.
The precepts taught in Roman schools
We friars here devine.
CHORUS.
Here Is a health to Father Paul!
For flowing bowls
Inspire the souls
Of jolly friars all.
When in the convent we are met
We laugh, we joke, and sing;
All worldly cares we there forget,
For Father Paul's our king.
Chorus, Here Is a health, etc.
No absolution we will give,
Ye blue eyed nuns so fair;
No benediction here receive,
But banish all your care.
Chorus, Here Is a health, etc.
With beads and cross, not held divine,
We pray with fervent zeal,
To rosy Bacchus, god of wine,
Who does each joy reveal.
Chorus, Here Is a health, etc.
May every friar please his nun!
Each nun her friar please!
And each alike enjoy the fun,
With freedom and with ease.
Chorus, Here Is a health, etc.
Then fill your bumpers, sons of mirth,
Let friars be the toast;
Long may they all exist on earth,
And nuns their order boast!
Chorus, Here Is a health, etc.
The Timely Adviser.
ADIEU, ye groves, adieu ye plains!
All nature mourning lies;
See gloomy clouds, and thick'ning rains,
Obscure the laboring skies:
See from afar the impending storm,
With sullen haste appears;
See winter comes, a dreary form,
To rule the falling years.
No more ye lambs with gamesom bound,
Rejoice the gladden'd light;
No more the gay enameled ground,
Of Sylvan scenes delight:
Thus, Zephalinda, much loved maid,
Thy early charms shall fail;
The rose must droop, the lilly fade,
And winter soon prevail.
Again the lark, sweet bird of May,
May rise on active wing:
Again the sportive herds may play,
And hail reviving spring.
But youth, my fair, sees no return;
The pleasing bubble over,
In vain its fleeting joys you mourn,
They fall to bloom no more.
Haste then, dear girl, the time improve,
Which art can never regain,
In blissful scenes of mutual love,
With some distinguished swain;
So shall life's spring, like jocund May,
Pass smiling and serene;
Though Summer, Autumn glide away,
And Winter close the scene.
The Dauphin.
YE sons of Mars, attend,
Come join the festive throng,
In loftiest strains exult,
For Jove approves the song.
Let gladness every heart expand,
Let gratitude inspire
Each patriot's breast with joy unfeigned
To hail the royal Sire!
A Dauphin's born, let cannons loud
Bid echo rend the sky;
Long life to Callia's king,
Columbia's great ally.
Hark, hark! a feu de joye --
Makes trembling ether ring,
While shouting armies hail
A Prince, a future King;
On whom may heaven with liberal hand,
Its choicest gifts bestow:
May peace and wisdom bless his reign,
And laurels grace his brow.
A Dauphins' born, etc.
To visit earth once more,
Lo, lo! Astrea deigns;
The golden age returns,
Now truth and justice reigns,
See, proud oppression hides its head,
Fell tyranny expires,
For independence, heaven's fair gift,
Lights freedom's sacred fires.
A Dauphin's born, etc.
The Death of General WOLF.
IN a mouldring cave, where the wretched retreat,
Britannia sat wasted with care;
She wept for her WOLF, then exclaimed against fate;
And gave herself up to despair,
The walls of her cell were insculptur'd around
With the exploits of her favorite son;
And even the dust as it lay on the ground,
Was engraved with the deeds he had done.
The Sire of the gods, from his chrystiline throne,
Beheld this disconsolate dame;
And moved with her fate he sent Mercury down,
And these were the tidings that came.
Britannia forbear, not a sigh, nor a tear,
For thy Wolf so deservedly loved;
Your grief shall be changed into triumphs of joy,
For thy Wolf is not dead, but removed.
The sons of the earth, the proud giants of old,
Have broke from their darksome abodes,
And such is the news as in heaven it is told,
They are marching to war with the gods;
A council was held in the chamber of Jove,
Where they came to this final decree,
That Wolf should be called to the armies above,
And the charge was entrusted to me.
To the plains of Qu^^ec with these orders I flew:
He begged for a moment^s delay,
He cried, Oh! forbear, let me victory hear,
And then thy commands I Will obey;
With a dark'ning film I encompassed his eyes,
And conveyed him away in an urn;
Lest the fondness he bore for his own native shore
Should persuade him again to return.
The Wonderful OLD MAN.
THERE was an old man, and though it is not common
Yet, if he said true, he was born of a woman:
And though it is incredible, yet I Have been told,
He was once a mere infant, but age made him old.
When ever he was hungry, he longed for some meat
And if he could get it, 'twas said, he would eat;
When thrifty, he would drink, if you gave him a pot,
And his liquor most commonly ran down his throat.
He seldom or ever could see without light,
And yet I Have been told, he could hear in the night;
(...) has often been awake in the day time, 'tie said,
and has fallen fast asleep as he lay in his bed.
It Is reported his tongue always moved when he talked,
And stirred both his arms and legs when he walked;
And his gait was so odd, had you seen him, you would burst,
For one leg or the other would always go first.
His face was the oddest that ever was seen,
For if 'twere not washed, it was seldom quite clean;
He showed his teeth most when he happened to grin,
And his mouth stood across 'twixt his nose and his chin.
'Midst other strange things that befell this good yeoman,
He was married, poor soul, and his wife was a woman;
If not by that liar, Miss Fame, we are beguiled,
We may roundly affirm, he was never with child.
At last he fell sick, as old chronicles tell,
And then as folks said, he was not very well;
But what is more strange, in so weak a condition,
As he could not give fees, could get no physician.
What pity he died; yet, it is said, that his death
Was caused at last by the want of his breath.
But peace to his bones, which in ashes now moulder,
Had he lived a day longer, he would been a day older;
The Tipler's Defense.
THE women all tell me I Am false to my lass,
That I quit my poor Chloe, and stick to my glass!
But to you men of reason, my reasons I Will own,
And if you don't like 'em, why let them alone.
Although I have left her the truth I Will declare,
I believe she was good, and I am sure she was fair;
But such goodness and charms in a bumper I see,
That makes it as good and as charming as she.
My Chloe had dimples and smiles I must own;
But though she could smile, yet in truth she could frown;
But tell me, ye lovers of liquor (...),
Did you ever see a frown in a bum^^r of wine?
Her li^es and roses were just in th^^r prime,
But li^es and roses are conquered ^ time;
But wi^e, from its age such a (...) flows*
That I like it the better the o^ (...) grows.
They tell me in time that my love will be cloyed,
And that beauty is insipid when once it is enjoyed:
But in wine, I both time and enjoyment defy,
For the longer I drink the more thirsty am I.
Perhaps like their sex ever false to their word,
She had left me, to get an estate or a lord:
But my bottle regardless of titles or pelf,
Will stand by me when I cannot stand by myself.
She too might have poisoned the joys of my life
With nurses and children, and squalling and strife:
But my wine neither nurses nor babes can brings,
For a big-belly'd bottle's mighty fine thing.
Then let my dear Chloe no longer complain
She Is rid of her lover, and I of my pain;
For wine, mighty wine, many comforts I spy;
Should you doubt what I say, take a bumper and try.
^^^^^^ship.
FRIEN^^^^^ to every willing mind
O (...) ^nly treasure:
Ther^ (...) of sorrow find
So (...) of (...) pleasure.
See wh^ employments men pursue,
Then (...) will own my words are true*
Friend^^^p alo^^ (...)
Sources of real pleasure,
Poor are the joys which fools esteem,
Fading and transitory:
Mirth is as fleeting as a dream,
Or a delusive story:
Luxury leaves a sting behind,
Wounding the body and the mind:
Only in Friendship can we find
Pleasure and solid glory.
Beauty, with all its gaudy shows,
Is but a painted bubble:
Short is the triumph, wit bestows,
Full of deceit and trouble:
Fame, like a shadow, flees away,
Titles and dignities decay:
Nothing but Friendship can display
Joys, that are free from trouble.
Learning (that boasted glittering thing)
Scarcely is worth possessing:
Riches, for ever on the wing,
^ Cannot be called a blessing:
^^nsual pleasures swell desire,
(...) as the fuel seeds the fire:
Friendship can real bliss inspire,
Bliss that is worth possessing.
Happy the man, who has a friend
Formed by the God of nature;
Well may he feel and recommend
Friendship for his Creator.
Then as our hands in Friendship join,
So let our social powers combine,
Ruled by a passion most divine,
Friendship with our Creator.
Plato.
SAYS Plato why should man be vain?
Since bounteous Heaven has made him great!
Why looks he with insolent disdain
On those undeck'd with wealth or state!
Can splendid robes or beds of down,
Or costly gems that deck the fair?
Can all the glories of a crown,
Give health, or ease the brow of care?
The sceptered king, the burdened slave,
The humble and the haughty die;
The rich, the poor, the base, the brave,
In dust without distinction lie.
Go, search the tombs where monarch's rest,
Who once the greatest titles bore:
The wealth and glory they possessed,
And all their honors are no more.
So glides the meteor through the sky,
And spreads along a gilded train:
But, when its short lived beauties die,
Dissolves to common air again.
So it is with us, my jovial souls,
Let Friendship reign white here stay,
Let Us crown our joys with flowing bowls,
When Jove commands we must away.
SONG. Sung by Mrs. Morris in the Poor Soldier.

SINCE love is the plan,
I Will love if I can,
But first let me tell you what sort of a man:
In address how complete,
In his dress spruce and neat,
No matter how tall so he is over five feet.
Then this is my fancy,
Such a man can I see,
I Am his if he is mine,
Until then I am free.
Though gentle he be,
His man he shall see,
Yet never be conquered by any but me;
In a dance bear a bob,
In a glass hob-a-nob,
Yet drink of his reason his noddle never rob.
Then this is my fancy, etc.
Lovely Nymph.
LOVELY nymph now cease to languish,
Yield not thus thy mind to woe;
Look behind the cloud of anguish,
Chearing beams of comfort blow,
Chearing beams of comfort blow.
Let enlivening hope elate thee,
Hope that points to fairer skies;
Think the transient ills that wait thee,
Are but blessings in disguise.
Are but, etc.
Be not by distress dejected:
Shrink not from affliction's hand;
Falsehood is from truth detected,
By the kind enchantress wand.
By the kind, etc.
Sage instructress, she shall train thee;
Steady virtue teach thy heart;
Short, but short lived, pains await thee,
Endless blessings to impart,
Endless blessings to impart.
Wisdom's Favorite.
BANISH sorrow grief and folly,
Thoughts unbend the wrinkling brow;
Hence dull cares and melancholy,
Wine and mirth unite us now.
Bacchus opens all his treasure,
Comus brings us wit and song;
Follow, follow, follow, follow pleasure,
And let us join the jovial song.
Life is short, its but a season;
Time is ever on the wing;
Left the present moment seize on,
Who knows what the rest may bring?
All my time I now will measure,
All cares I now despise,
Fellow, follow, follow, follow pleasure,
To be happy's to be wis^.
Wherefore should we thus perplex us,
Why should we not merry be;
Since there is nothing here to vex us;
Drinking sets our hearts all free.
Let Us have drinking without measure,
Let Us have mirth, what time we have;
Follow, follow, follow, follow pleasure,
There Is no drinking in the grave.
Delia.
I DELIA's beauties would disclose,
More blooming than the blushing rose,
And sweeter than the spring:
She fairest is of all the fair,
To every grove I Will this declare,
Of Beauty's queen I sing.
Aid then my song each smiling Muse,
Your melody you cannot refuse
To celebrate her charms;
Inspire to praise in purest rhyme
Her -- whose mild beauties are divine,
And all my breast alarm.
Steal silent by ye murmuring streams,
Let echo swell the tender themes,
The themes her praise rehearse:
Her praise shall employ my breath,
And naught but all-devouring Death
Shall end the pleasing verse.
To paint the luster of her eyes,
An azure stolen from the skies,
Would need a Sapho's tongue:
Her share, her tuneful voice that thrills,
And all the soul with rapture fills,
These must remain unsung.
Her gentle sympathetic heart,
Fond to assuage Affliction's smart,
Can drop the crystal tear;
Like gracious Heaven she wears a smile
That would the fiercest pains beguile,
And soften rigid care.
Good sense and virtue, hand in hand,
The graces all, a genial band,
Upon her steps attend:
From charms so striking to the sight,
So pregnant with sincere delight,
What can the heart defend?
Her modest worth, no wily art,
Engaged my captivated heart
To cherish fond desires;
'Twas Beauty taught me to admire,
But Virtue's bloom that did inspire
These firm undying fires,
Supremely blessed in Delia's love,
From her embrace I Would never remove,
Nor ever inconstant stray;
But spending life in tranquil ease,
Make it my study how to please,
And blithsome pass each day.
Could we our joys and sorrows share,
Double each bliss, dissolve each care,
It Would sure transporting prove:
Together glide the sea of life,
Avoid ambition, banish strife,
And seek immortal love.
Cloe: Singing.
NO shepherdess of all the plain
Like Cloe tunes her charming song;
I hear transported every strain,
To Cloe sure the sweetest sounds belong.
Hark! how the warblings of her voice
Tremble throughout the silent grove;
Melodious echoes round rejoice,
Melting my soul to strong impatient love.
Hark! -- Philomel has ceased his lays
To listen to her softer song;
The distant swains, attentive, praise
The thrilling accents of her tuneful tongue.
Enchanting Music! thou have power
To warm the shepherd's gentle breast,
And, when the toiling day is over,
Give joy and rapture to his ev'ning's rest.
Belinda Blushing.
I Sing the beauties that adorn
Belinda's lovely face,
Her blushes emulate the morn,
And give enchanting grace.
It Is Virtue paints an opening rose
Upon her blooming cheek;
It Is Virtue would the charms disclose
That real worth bespeak.
Her modest beauties all are pure;
And sweetest joys impart:
No tinsil can like these insure
The captivated heart.
Pleasing angelic Modesty!
Thy blooms resistless prove;
Chaste Innocence attends on thee,
And Constancy and Love!
Tear of Compassion.
HYLA's the sweetest maid on earth,
No one could charm me so;
The tear proclaims her heavenly birth,
She weeps for others woe.
No gem, that glads the gaudy fair,
And sparkles to the sight,
Can with that crystal drop compare,
Productive of delight.
Compassion hail! enchanting power,
To soften Care you are gi'ven;
Sweet soother of the sadden'd hour,
Blessed attribute of Heaven.
Fond Nature, with a kind intent
To cheer the drooping soul,
This sweet, amongst the dregs, has sent
Of Life's distasteful bowl.
Offspring of universal Love,
Spark of etherial fire,
Thy melting ardours, hearts improve,
And generous thoughts inspire.
My passions let thy influence bind
To emulate my fair,
For soft and pleasing pains attend
The sympathetic tear!
SONG.
LET the gay ones and great
Make the most of their fate,
From pleasure to pleasure they run,
Well, who cares a jot?
I envy them not,
While I have my dog and my gun.
For exercise, air,
To the fields I repair,
With spirits unclouded and light;
The blisses I find,
No stings leave behind,
But health and diversion unite.
SONG.
LAST Valentine's day when bright Phoebus shone clear,
I had not been hunting for more than a year:
I mounted black Sloven, over the road made him bound.
For I heard the hounds challenge, and horns sweetly sound,
Taleo taleo taleo taleo taleo taleo taleo.
Hallo into cover, old Anthony cries,
No sooner he spoke, but the fox, sir, he 'spies;
This being the signal, he then cracked his whip;
Taleo was the word, and away we did leap.
Taleo, etc.
Then up rides Dick Dawson, who cared not a pin,
He sprang at the drain, but his horse tumbled in;
And as he crept out, why he spied old Ren',
With his tongue hanging out stealing home to his den.
Taleo, etc.
Our hounds and our horses were always as good
As ever broke covert, or dashed through the wood;
Old Reynard runs hard, but must certainly die,
Have at you, old Tony, Dick Dawson did cry.
Taleo, etc.
The hounds they had run twenty miles now or more.
Old Anthony fretted, he cursed too and swore,
But Reynard being spent soon must give up the ghost,
Which will heighten our joys when we come to each toast.
Taleo, etc.
The day's sport being over the horns we will sound,
To the jolly fox hunters let echo resound,
So fill up your glasses, and cheerfully drink,
To the honest true sportsman who never will shrink.
Taleo, etc.
SONG.
YE sportsmen draw near, and ye sportswomen too,
Who delight in the joys of the field;
Mankind, though they blame, are all eager a^ (...),
And no one the contest will yield.
His lordship, his worship, his honor, his grace,
A hunting continually go;
All ranks and degrees are engaged in the chase,
Hark forward, huzza, tally ho.
The lawyer will rise with the first of the morn,
To hunt for a mortgage or deed;
The husband gets up, at the sound of the horn,
And rides to the commons full speed;
The patriot is thrown in pursuit of his game,
The poet, too, often lays low,
Who, mounted on Pegasus, flies after fame,
With hark forward, huzza, tally ho.
While fearless over hills and over woodlands we sweep,
Though prudes on our pastime may frown,
How often do they decency's bounds over leap,
And the fences of virtue break down.
Thus, public or private, for pension, for place.
For amusement, for passion, for show,
All ranks and degrees are engaged in the chase,
With hark forward, huzza, tally ho.
Young Colin.
THE fields were green, the hills were gay,
And birds were singing on each spray,
When Colin met me in the grove,
And told me tender tales of love:
Was ever swain so blythe as he,
So kind, so faithful, and so free,
In spite of all my friends can say,
Young Colin stole my heart away.
Whenever he trips the mead along,
He sweetly joins the wood-lark's song;
And when he dances on the green,
There Is none so blythe as Colin seen:
If he is but-by, I nothing fear,
For I alone am all his care;
Then spite of all my friends can say,
He Is stole my tender heart away.
My mother chides whenever I roam,
And seems surpised I quit my home;
But she would not wonder that I rove,
Did she but feel how much I love;
Full well I know the generous swain
Will never give my bosom pain;
Then spite of all my friends can say,
He Is stole my tender heart away.
SONG.
WHERE I as poor as wretch can be,
As great as any monarch he,
Ere on such terms I Would mount his throne,
I Would work my fingers to the bone.
Grant me, ye powers (I ask not wealth)
Grant me but innocence and health;
Ah! what is grandeur linked to vice?
It Is only virtue gives it price.
SONG.
ALL on the pleasant banks of Tweed
Young Jocky won my heart;
None tuned so sweet his oaten reed,
None sung with so much art,
His skilful tale
Did soon prevail,
To make me fondly love him;
But now he flies,
Nor hears my cries,
I would I never had seen him.
When first we met, the bonny swain
Of naught but love could say:
Oh! give, he cried, my heart again,
You Have stole my heart away:
Or else incline,
To give me thine,
And I Will together join 'em,
My faithful heart
Will never part,
Ah! why did I believe him.
Not now my slighted face he knows,
His soon forgotten dear;
To wealthier lass o'erjoy'd he goes,
To breath his falsehood there:
Mistaken Kate,
The swain's a cheat,
Not for a moment trust him:
For shining gold,
He Is bought and sold:
I would I had not seen him.
Then all ye maidens sly the swain,
His wily stories shun;
Else you like me must soon complain,
Like me will be undone;
But peace my breast,
Nor break my rest;
I try clean to forget him;
I soon shall see
As good as he;
I wish I never had seen him.
SONG.
LORD! Sir, you seem mighty uneasy
But I the refusal can bear;
I warrant I shall not run crazy,
Nor die in a fit of despair.
If so you suppose, you're mistaken;
For, Sir, for to let you to know,
I Am not such a maiden forsaken,
But I hvae two strings to my bow.
SONG.
SAY, little foolish, fluttering thing,
Whither, ah! whither would you wing
Your airy flight?
Stay here, and sing
Your mistress to delight.
No, no, no,
Sweet Robin, you shall not go,
Where you wanton, could you be
Half so happy as with me.
SONG.
MY Jockey is the blithest lad,
That ever maiden wooed:
When he appears my heart is glad,
For he is kind and good.
He talks of love, whenever we meet,
His words with rapture flow;
Then tunes his pipe, and sings so sweet,
I have no power to go.
All other lasses he forsakes,
And flies to me alone;
At every fair, and all the wakes,
I hear them making moan:
He buys me toys, and sweetmeats too,
And ribbands for my hair;
No swain was ever half so true,
Or half so kind and fair.
Wherever I go I nothing fear
If Jockey is but by,
For I alone am all his care
When any danger's nigh,
He vows to wed next Witsunday,
And make me blessed for life;
Can I refuse, ye maidens, say,
To be young Jockey's wife?
SONG.
WAS I a shepherd's maid, to keep
On yonder plains a flock of sheep,
Well pleased I Would watch the live-long day,
My ewes at feed, my lambs at play.
Or would some bird, that pity brings,
But for a moment lend its wings,
My parents then might rave and scold,
My guardian strive my will to hold:
Their words are harsh, his walls are high;
But spite of all away I Would fly.
SONG.
MY shepherd is gone far away over the plain,
While in sorrow behind him I Am forced to remain;
Though blue-bells and vi'lets the hedges adorn,
Though trees are in blossom, and sweet blows the thorn;
No pleasure they give me, in vain they look gay,
There Is nothing can please now my Jockey's away;
Forlorn I sit singing, and this is my strain,
Haste, haste, to my arms, my dear Jockey, again.
Haste, haste, etc.
When lads and their lasses are on the green met,
They dance and they sing, they laugh and they chat,
Contented and happy, with hearts full of glee,
I cannot without envy their merriment see;
Those pleasures offend me, my shepherd's not there,
No pleasure I relish that Jockey don't share;
It makes me to sigh, I from tears scarce refrain,
I wish my dear Jockey returned back again.
But hope shall sustain me, nor will I despair,
He promised he would in a fortnight be here;
On fond expectation my wishes I Will feast,
For love my dear Jockey to Jenny will haste:
Then farewell each care, adieu each vain sigh!
Who Will then be so blessed, or so happy as I?
I Will sing on the meadows, and alter my strain,
When Jockey returns to my arms back again.
SONG.
FROM the man that I love, though my heart I disguise,
I will freely describe the wretch I despise;
And if he has sense but to balance a straw,
He will sure take the hint from the picture I draw.
And if he has sense, etc.
A wit without sense, without fury a beau;
Like a parrot he chatters, and struts like a crow;
A peacock in pride, in grimace a baboon;
In courage a hind, in conceit a gascoon.
A peacock, etc.
As a vulture rapacious, in falsehood a fox;
Inconstant as waves, and unfeeling as rocks;
As a tiger ferocious, perverse as a hog;
In mischief an ape, and in fawning a dog.
As a tiger, etc.
In a word, to sum up all his talents together,
His heart is of lead, and his brain is of feather:
Yet if he has sense but to balance a straw,
He will sure take a hint from the picture I draw.
Yet if he has sense, etc.
SONG.
MAIDENS, let your lovers languish,
If you would have them constant prove;
Doubts and fears, and sigh and anguish,
Are the chains that fasten love.
Jockey wooed, and I consented,
Soon as ever I heard his tale,
He with conquest quite contented,
Boasting, roved around the vale.
Maidens, let your lovers, etc.
Now he doats on scornful Molly,
Who rejects him with disdain;
Love's a strange bewitching folly,
Never pleased without some pain.
Maidens, let your lovers, etc.
SONG.
I WILL sing of my lover all night and all day,
He Is ever good natured, and frolic, and gay,
His voice is as sweet as the nightingale's lay,
And well on his bagpipe my shepherd can play,
And a bonny young lad is my Jockey,
And a bonny, etc.
He says that he loves me, I Am witty and fair,
And praises my eyes, and my lips, and my hair;
Rose, vi'let nor lilly with me can compare:
If this be to flatter, it is pretty I swear:
And a bonny, etc.
He kneeled at my feet, and with many a sigh
He cried, O my dear will you never comply?
If you mean to destroy me, why do it, I Will die.
I trembled all over, and answered, Not I:
And a bonny, etc.
Around the tall may pole he dances so neat,
And sonnets of love the dear boy can repeat;
He Is constant, he is valiant, he is wise and discreet,
His looks are so kind, and his kisses so sweet:
And a bonny, etc.
At eve, when the sun seeks repose in the west,
And May's tuneful chorists all skim to their nest,
When I meet on the green the dear boy I love best,
My heart is just ready to burst from my breast:
And a bonny, etc.
But see how the meadows are moistened with dew,
Come, come, my dear shepherd, I wait but for you:
We live for each other, but constant and true,
And taste the soft raptures no monarch ever knew:
And a bonny, etc.
SONG.
AS my cow I was milking just now in the vale,
Young Alexis advanced and told a fond tale;
Such a tale, gentle maidens, believe what I say,
I with pleasure could wait for to hear it all day?
I with pleasure could wait,
I with pleasure could wait,
I with pleasure could wait for to hear it all day?
Hail Florella he cried, now I Am happy I vow,
For to see you, believe me, I came from the plough.
Will thou have me Florella, my dearest now say?
I with frowns soon replied I Will not hear you today.
Pray, Alexis, I said -- for to try him I strove,
Never come near me more, for I Am sure you don't love;
Not detered by rough speeches, nor all I could say,
Still he answered, with smiles, make me happy today.
Now, with blushes I tell, I no longer said no,
But Alexis and I unto church soon did go;
Ye lasses, then hear me, oh hear me I pray,
Never wait for tomorrow, catch hold on today.
SONG.
FROM morning till night, and wherever I go,
Young Colin pursues me, though still I say No,
Ye matrons experienced inform me, I pray,
In a point that is so critical, what shall I say?
Ye matrons experienced inform me, I pray,
In a point that is so critical, what shall I say?
Soft sonnets he makes on my beauty and wit,
Such praises a bosom that is tender must hit;
He vows that he will love me for ever and aye;
In points that is so critical, what can I say?
He brought me a garland, the sweetest ever seen,
And saluting me, called me his heart's little queen:
In my breast, like a bird, I found something play,
Instruct a young virgin then what she must say.
But vain my petition, you heed not my call,
But leave me unguarded to stand or to fall;
No more I Will solicit, no longer I Will pray,
Let prudence inform me in what I shall say.
When next he approaches, with care in his eye,
If he asks me to wed I vow I Will comply,
At church he may take me for ever and aye,
And I warrant you then I shall know what to say.
SONG,
LORD, what care I for mam and dad?
Why let 'em scold and bellow,
For while I live I Will love my lad,
He Is such a charming fellow.
The last fair day on Gander green,
The youth he danc^d so well-o.
So spruce a lad was never seen,
As my sweet charming fellow.
The fair was over, night was come,
The lad was somewhat mellow;
Says he my dear, I Will see you home --
I thanked the charming fellow.
We trudged along, the moon shone bright,
Says he, if you will not tell o,
I Will kiss you here, by this good light --
Lord what charming fellow.
You rogue, says I, you have stopped my breath,
Ye bells ring out my knell o,
Again I Would die so sweet a death,
With such a charming fellow.
SONG.
THOUGH prudence may press me,
And dut^ distress me,
Against inclina^^^n, ah! what can they do?
No longer a rover,
His follies are over,
My heart, my fond heart, says, my Henry is true.
The be thus as changing,
From sweet to sweet ranging,
A rose should he light on never wishes to stray;
With rapture possessing
In one every blessing,
Till torn from her bosom never flies far away.
Auld Robin Gray.
WHEN the sheep are in the fauld, and a' the kye at hame,
And a' the weary world to sleep is gane;
The waes of my heart fall in showers fra' my e'e
While my good man sleeps sound by me.
Young Jamie loved me weel, and asked me for his bride,
But saving a crown he had naithing else beside.
To make the crown a pound my Jamie went to sea,
And the crown and the pound were both for me.
He had na been awa a week but only two,
When my faither brake his arm, and our cow was stole awa,
My mither she fell sick, and my Jamie at the sea,
When Auld Robin Gray came a courting to me.
My faither could na work, and my mither could na spin,
I toiled day and night but their bread I could na win,
Auld Robin fed 'em both, and wi' tears in his e'e,
Said, Jeanie, for their sakes, oh marry me:
My heart it said na, and I looked for Jamie back,
But the wind it blew hard, and his ship was a wreck,
His ship was a wreck, why did na Jamie die,
And why was he spared to cry wae is me?
My faither urged me sair, but my mither did na speak,
But she looked in my face till my heart was like to break;
So they gied him my hand, though my heart was at sea,
And auld Robin Gray was a good man to me:
I had na been a wife, weeks but only four,
When sitting so dowie, ae day at the door.
I saw my Jamie's ghaist, but I could na think it he,
Till he said, I Am came hame love, to marry thee.
Sair, sair did we greet, and mickle did we say,
We took but a kiss, and we tore ourselves away,
I wish I were dead, but I Am no like to die,
Oh, why was I born to say, wae is me?
I gang like a ghaist, and I dinna like to spin,
I dare not think on Jamie, for that would be a sin;
So I Will do the best I can a guide wife to be,
For Auld Robin Gray is so kind to me:
The Death of Robin Gray.
THE summer it was smiling, nature round was gay,
When Jeanie was attending on Auld Robin Gray;
For he was sick at heart, and had na friend beside,
But only me, poor Jeanie, who newly was his bride.
Ah Jeanie! I shall die, he cried, as sure as I had birth,
Then see my poor auld banes, pray, laid into the earth,
And be a widow for my sake a twelvemonth and a day,
And I will leave whatev'er belongs to Auld Robin Gray.
I laid poor Robin in the earth, as decent as I could,
And shed a tear upon his grave, for he was very good,
I took my rock all in my hand, and in my cot I sighed
Ah wae is me what shall I do since poor Auld Robin died:
Search every part through out the land there^s none like me forlorn;
I Am ready even to ban the day, that ever I was born,
For Jamie all I loved on earth; ah! he is gone away;
My faither and my mither's dead and eke Auld Robin Gray.
I rose up with the morning sun and spun till setting day
And one whole year of widowhood I mourned for Robin Gray;
I did the duty of a wife both kind and constant too
Let every one example take and Jeanie's plan pursue.
I thought that Jamie he was dead or he to me was lost,
And all my fond and youthful love entirely was crossed.
I tried to sing, I tried to laugh, and pass the time away,
For I had not a friend alive since died Auld Robin Gray.
At length the merry bells rung round, I could na guess the cause,
Yet Rodney was the man they said who got so much applause;
I doubted if the tale was true, till Jamie came to me*
And showed a purse of golden ore, and said it is for thee,
Auld Robin Gray I find is dead, and still your heart is true,
Then take me Jeanie to your arms, and I will be so too.
Mess John shall join us at the kirk and we'll be blithe and gay,
I blushed, consented, and replied, adieu to Robin Gray.
The Ghaist of Robin Gray.
'TWAS in the dead of night, soon after Jeanie wed,
And wi' her faithful Jamie was sleeping in her bed,
A hollow voice she heard which called her to awake,
And listen to the wards would be uttered for her sake,
She started from her sleep, her bosom beat with fear,
When the ghaist of Robin Gray before her did appear,
He waved his shadowy hand, and thus to her did say,
Ah Jeanie! list awhile, to your Auld Robin Gray.
I do not come, dear Jean, your conduct to reprove,
Or interrupt the joys you share in Jamie's love,
His honest heart deserves whatever he can receive,
Since he has fought sa nobly, and would not you deceive;
Still let his courage rise, his country's foes to quell,
To you he safe shall come again, the fates now bid me tell,
With How as well as Rodney his valor he will display
If you will but believe the ghaist of Robin Gray.
And Jeanie must submit, your virtue is your guard,
For fortune has in store for you a high and rich reward;
The haughty Dons subdued, with Holland and with France,
Your Jamie with fresh laurels crowned will to your wish advance.
Then let him haste wi' all his speed to join a noble fleet,
Though danger does appear in view no harm shall Jamie meet,
But joyful shall return again upon a future day,
And you may sure believe the ghaist of Robin Gray.
SONG.
WHEN first my dear laddie gade to the green hill,
And I at ewe milking first showed my young skill;
To bear the milk bowie nae pain gave to me,
So at eve I was blessed with thy piping and thee,
For aye as I milk'd, and aye as I sang,
My yellow hair^d laddie shall be my good man.
When corn riggs waved yellow, and blue hither bells
Bloomed bonny on moorland, or sweet rising fells;
Nae birns, briars, or brakens gave trouble to me,
So I eat the sweet berries when gathered by thee;
For aye as I walked, and aye as I sang,
My yallow-hair'd laddie shall be my good man.
When you ran, or you wrestled, or putted the st^ne,
And came off the victor, my heart was aye fain,
Give me still these pleasures, my study shall be,
To make myself better and sweeter for thee;
For aye as I wedded, and aye as I sang,
My yallow-hair'd laddie shall be my good man.
SONG.
THE silver moon's enamored beam
Steals softly through the night,
To wanton with the winding stream,
And kiss reflected light:
To courts be gone, heart-soothing sleep,
Where you have so seldom been,
While I May's wakeful vigil keep
With Kate of Aberdeen.
The nymphs and swains expectant wait,
In primrose chaplets gay,
Till morn unbars her golden gate,
And gives the promised May:
The nymphs and swains shall all declare
The promised May when seen,
Not half so fragrant, half so fair,
As Kate of Aberdeen.
I Will tune my pipe to playful notes,
And rouse yon nodding grove,
Till new-wak'd birds distend their throats,
And hail the maid I love:
At her approach the lark mistakes,
And quits the new dressed green:
Fond birds, it is not the morning breaks,
It Is Kate of Aberdeen.
Now blithsome over the dewy mead,
Where elves desportive play,
The festal dance young shepherds lead,
Or sing their lov'd-tun'd lay,
Till May in morning robe draws nigh,
And claims a virgin queen;
The nymphs and swains exulting cry,
"Here Is Kate of Aberdeen."
SONG.
THAT Jenny's my friend, my delight and my pride
I always have boasted, and seek not to hide:
I dwell on her praises wherever I go;
They say I Am in love, but I answer, No, no;
They say, etc.
At evening oft-times, with what pleasure I see
A note from her hand, "I Will be with you at tea!"
My heart how it bounds when I hear her below!
But say not it is love, for I answer, No, no;
But say, etc.
She sings me a song, and I echo its strain;
Again I cry Jenny, sweet Jenny again:
I kiss her sweet lips, as if their I could grow;
But say not it is love, for I answer, No, no;
But say, etc.
She tells me her faults as she sits on my knee;
I chide her, and swear she is an angel to me:
My shoulder she taps, and still bids me think so:
Who knows but she loves, though she answers, No, no.
Who knows, etc.
From beauty and wit, and good humor, how I
Should prudence advise, and compel me to sly:
Thy bounty, O fortune, make haste to bestow;
And let me deserve her, or still I Will say, No;
And let me, etc.
SONG.
BELIEVE my sighs, my tears, my dear,
Believe the heart you have won:
Believe my vows to you sincere,
Or, Peggy, I Am undone.
You say I Am false, and apt to change
At every face that is new:
Of all the girls I ever saw,
I never loved one but you.
My heart was like a flake of ice,
Till warmed by your bright eyes,
And then it kindled in a trice,
A flame that never dies.
Then take and try me, you shall find
That I Have a heart that is true:
Of all the girls I ever saw,
I never loved one like you.
SONG.
LET the tempest of war
Be heard from a far,
With trumpets' and cannons' alarms:
Let the brave, if they will,
By their valor or skill,
Seek honor and conquest in arms.
To live safe, and retire,
Is what I desire,
Of my flocks and my Chloe possessed
For in them I obtain
True peace without pain,
And the lasting enjoyment of rest:
In some cottage or cell,
Like a shepherd to dwell,
From all interruption at ease;
In a peaceable life,
To be blessed with a wife,
Who will study her husband to please.
GRAMACHREE.
AS down on Banna's banks I strayed,
One evening in May,
The little birds, in blithest notes,
Made vocal every spray;
They sung their little tales of love,
They sung them over and over,
Ah! gramachree, ma cholleenouge,
Ma Molly ashtore!
The daisy py'd, and all the sweets,
The dawn of nature yields,
The primrose pale, and vi^let blue,
Lay scattered over the fields;
Such fragrance in the bosom lies,
Of her whom I adore.
Ah! gramachree, etc.
I laid me down upon a bank,
Bewailing my sad fate,
That doomed me thus the slave of love,
And cruel Molly's hate;
How can she break the honest heart,
That wears her in its core?
Ah! gramachree, etc.
You said you loved me, Molly dear,
Ah! why did I believe?
Yet who could think such tender words,
Were meant but to deceive?
That love was all I asked on earth,
Nay, Heaven could give no more.
Ah! gramachree, etc.
O! had I all the flocks that graze
On yonder yellow hill,
Or lowed for me the (...) ^us herds
That yon gree^ ^ure fill;
With her I love, I Would gladly share,
My kine and fleecy store.
Ah! gramachree, etc.
Two turtle doves above my head,
Sat courting on a bough,
I envied them their happiness,
To see them bill and coo;
Such fondness once for me she showed,
But now, alas! it is over.
Ah! gramachree, etc.
Then fare thee well, my Molly dear,
Thy loss I ever shall all mourn;
While life remains in Strephon's heart,
'Twill beat for thee alone;
Though thou art false, may Heaven on thee
Its choicest blessings pour.
Ah! gramachre, etc.
Balinamora Ora.
WHEREVER, I Am going and all the day long,
Abroad or at home, or alone in a throng,
I find that my passion's so lively and strong,
That your name, when I Am silent, runs still in my song
Sing Balinamone Ora, Balinamone Ora,
A kiss of your sweet lips for me.
Since the first time I saw you I take no repose;
I sleep all the day to forget half my woes:
So hot is the flame in my bosom which glows,
By St. Patrick I fear it will burn through my clothes.
Sing Balinamone Ora, Balinamone Ora,
Your pretty black hair for me.
In my conscience; I fear I shall die in my grave,
Unless you comply, and poor Phelim will shave,
And grant the petition your lover does crave,
Who never was free till you made him your slave:
Sing Balinamone Ora, Balinamone Ora,
Your pretty black eyes for me.
On that happy day, when I make you my bride,
With a swinging long sword, how I Will strut and I Will stride
In a coach and six horses with honey I Will ride,
As before you I walk to the church by your side.
Sing Balinamone Ora, Balinamone Ora,
Your little white fist for me.
Sensibility.
SWEET Sensibility! to every charm
It Is thou can added energy impart;
It Is thou inspir'st the all-awakened glow;
The moral polish of the feeling heart.
In vain may Beauty boast the finished form;
Her eyes but with unmeaning brightness roll:
Till thou bestow'st the finely-pointed charm,
That sinks resistless to the yielding soul.
Thus vulgar artists with unheeded care,
May form and coloring to a portrait give:
But such fine tints as speak the master's hand,
Add grace, expression, bid the canvas live.
The Joys of Sleighing.
OF all the fine things that the gay celebrate,
And the many odd fancies that come from each pate,
Sure its matter of wonder that none ever resound
The circle of joys that in sleighing abound.
There are some who in pheaton glory to roll,
Whilst others in chariots expand the whole soul,
To bestride prancing horses full many may please;
But the pleasures of sleighing are greater than these.
Musidora, Miss Mira, and all the gay throng
In exchange for a sleighing will give you a song;
They will leave a dear ball, concerto or play,
And vow that no music's as sweet as a sleigh.
Then strike a bold stroke, gain their hearts while you can;
The greater galant, the more favorite man.
It Is not whining nor pining that carries the day:
So away with such nonesense, and out with the sleigh!
Corydon and Phillis.
HER sheep had in clusters crept close to a grove,
To hide from the heat of the day;
And Phillis herself, in a woodbine alcove,
Among the sweet violets lays
A young lambkin, it seems, had been stolen from its dam
('Twixt Cupid and Hymen a plot)
That Corydon might, as he searched for his lamb,
Arrive at the critical spot.
As through the green hedge for his lambkin he peeps
He saw the fair nymph with surprise;
Ye gods, if so killing, he cried, while she sleeps,
I Am lost if she opens her eyes;
To tarry much longer would hazard my heart,
I Will homeward my lambkin to trace
But in vain honest Corydon strove to depart,
For love held him fast to the place.
Cease, cease pretty birds, what a chirping yon keep,
I think you too loud on the spray;
Don't you see, foolish lark, that the charmer's asleep
You Will wake her as sure as it is day*
How dare that fond butterfly touch the sweet maid,
Her cheeks he mistakes for the rose,
I Would put him to death, if I was not afraid
My boldness would break her repose.
Then Phillis looked up with a languishing smile,
Kind shepherd, said she, you mistake;
I laid myself down for to rest me awhile,
But trust we I Have long been awake.
The shepherd took courage, advanced with a bow,
He placed himself down by her side;
And managed the matter I cannot tell how,
But yesterday made her his bride.
Soldier's Song.
HOW stands the glass around?
For shame, ye take no care, my boys,
How stands the glass around?
Let mirth and wine abound.
The trumpets sound,
The colors they are flying, boys,
To fight, kill, or wound;
May we still be found,
Content with our hard fate, my boys,
On the cold ground.
Why, soldiers, why;
Should we be melancholy, boys?
Why soldiers, why,
Whose business it is to die?
What sighing, fie!
Drown fear, drink on be jolly, boys,
It Is he, you, or I!
Cold, hot, wet or dry,
We Are always bound to follow, boys,
And scorn to fly.
It Is but in vain,
I mean not to upbraid ye, boys;
It Is but in vain
For soldiers to complain;
Should next campaign
Send us to Him who made us, boys,
We Are free from pain!
But if we remain.
A bottle and kind landlady
Cure all again.
SONG.
YE virgins attend,
Believe me your friend,
And with prudence adhere to my plan;
Never let it be said,
There goes an old maid,
But get married as fast as you can.
As soon as you find
Your hearts are inclined
To beat quick at the sight of a man;
Then choose out a youth
With honor and truth,
And get married as fast as you can.
For age, like a cloud,
Your charms soon will shroud,
And this whimsical life's but a span;
Then, maids, make your hay,
While Sol darts his ray,
And get married as fast as you can.
The treacherous rake
Will artfully take
Every method poor girls to trepan;
But baffle their snare,
Make virtue your care,
And get married as fast as you can.
And when Hymen's bands
Have joined both your hands,
The bright flame still continue to fan;
Never harbor the stings
That jealousy brings,
But be constant, and blessed while you can.
SONG.
OH! the days when I was young!
When I laughed in fortune's spite,
Talked of love the ^hole day long:
And with nect^^ crowned the night.
Then it was, old father Care,
Little reck'd I of thy frown;
Half thy malice youth could ^ear,
And the rest a bumper drown.
Oh! the days, etc,
Truth, they say, lies in a well,
Why I vow I never could see;
Let the water drinkers tell,
There it always lay for me:
For when sparkling wine went round,
Never saw I falshood's mask;
But still honest truth I found,
In the bottom of each flask!
Oh! the days, etc.
True at length my vigour's flown,
I have years to bring decay;
Few the locks that now I own,
And the few I have are gray;
Yet, old Jerome, thou may boast,
While thy spirits do not tire,
Still beneath thy age's frost
Glows a spark of youthful fire.
Oh! the days, etc.
SONG.
COME, ye party jangling swains,
Leave your flocks and quit the plains,
Friends to country* friends to court,
Nothing here shall spoil your sport.
Ever welcome to our feast,
Welcome every friendly guest!
Sprightly widows come away,
Laughing dames and virgins gay,
Little gaudy, fluttering misses,
Smiling hopes of future blisses.
Ever welcome, etc.
All that ripening sun can bring,
Beauteous summer, beauteous spring,
In one varying scene we show
The green, the ripe, the bud, the blow,
Ever welcome, etc.
Comus jesting, music charming,
Wine inspiring, beauty warming,
Rage and party malice dies.
Peace returns, and discord flies.
Ever welcome to our feast,
Welcome every friendly guest!
SONG,
MY temples with clusters of grapes I Will entwine,
And barter all joy for a goblet of wine;
In search of a Venus no longer I Will run,
But stop and forget her at Bacchus's tun.
Yet why this resolve to relinquish the fair?
It Is a folly with spirits like mine to despair;
For what mighty charms can be found in a glass,
If not filled to the health of some favorite lass?
It Is woman whose charms every rapture impart,
And lend a new spring to the pulse of the heart:
The miser himself (so supreme is her sway)
Grows convert to love, and resigns her his key.
At the sound of her voice, sorrow lifts up her head,
And poverty listens, well pleased, from her shed;
While age, in an ecstasy, hobbling along,
Beats time with his crutch to the tune of her song.
Then bring me a goblet from Bacchus's hoard,
The largest and deepest that stands on the board;
I Will fill up a brimmer, and drink to the fair;
It Is the toast of a lover, and pledge me who dare.
SONG.
SEE the conquering hero comes,
Sound the trumpets, beat the drums;
Sports prepare, the laurel bring,
Songs of triumph to him sing.
See the godlike youth advance,
Breathe the flutes, and lead the dance;
Myrtles wreathe and roses twine,
To deck the hero's brow divine.
SONG.
WHAT a charming thing's a battle!
Trumpets sounding, drums a beating;
Crack crick, crack, the cannons rattle,
Every heart with joy elating.
With what pleasure we are spying,
From the front and from the rear,
Round us in the smoaky air,
Heads, and lim^s, and bullets flying!
Then the groans of soldiers dying,
Just like sparrows, as it were.
At each pop,
Hundreds drop;
While the muskets prittle prattle:
Killed and wounded,
Lie confounded.
What a charming thing's a battle!
But the pleasant joke of all,
Is when to close attack we fall;
Like mad bulls each other butting,
Shooting, stabbing, maiming, cutting;
Horse and foot,
All go to it,
Kill's the word, both men and cattle;
Then to plunder.
Blood and thunder,
What a charming thing's a battle.
SONG.
A Master I have, and I am his man,
Galloping dreary dun,
And he will get a wife as fast as he can.
With a haily, gaily,
Gambo raily,
Giggling,
Niggling,
Galloping galloway, draggle tail dreary dun.
I saddled his steed, so fine and so gay,
Galloping dreary dun:
I mounted my mule, and we rode away,
With our haily, etc.
We canter'd along until it grew dark,
Galloping dreary dun;
The nightingale sung instead of the lark,
With her haily, etc.
We met with a friar, and asked him our way,
Galloping dreary dun;
By the lord, says the friar, you are both astray,
With your haily, etc.
Our journey, I fear will do us no good,
Galloping dreary dun:
We wander alone, like the babes in the wood,
With our haily, etc.
My master is fighting and I Will take a peep,
Galloping dreary dun;
But now I think on it -- I Would better go sleep,
With my haily, etc.
SONG.
HARK! hark! sweet Lass, the trumpet sounds,
It Is honor calls to war;
Now love I leave, perhaps for wounds --
And beauty for a fear.
But, ah? suppress those rising sighs;
Ah? check that falling tear:
Lest soft distress, from lovely eyes,
Create a newborn fear.
My life to fame devoted was,
Before my fair I knew,
And, if I now desert her cause,
Shall I be worthy you?
It is not fame alone invites,
Though fame this bosom warms:
My country's violated rights
Impel my soul to arms.
SONG.
GO! tuneful bird, that glads the skies,
To Daphny's window speed thy way,
And there on tremb'ling pinions rise,
And there thy vocal art display:
And if she deign thy notes to hear,
And if she praise thy matin song,
Tell her, the sound that sooths her ear,
To Damon's native plains belong.
Tell her in livelier plumes arrayed,
The birds from India's groves may shine,
But ask the lovely, partial maid,
What are hi^ notes compared with thine?
Then bid her treat yon witless beau,
And all his flaunting race with scorn,
And lend an ear to Damon's woe,
Who sings her praise, but sings forlorn.
SONG.
I DREAMT I saw a piteous sight,
Young Cupid weeping lay,
Until his pretty stars of light,
Had wept themselves away.
Methought I asked him why he wept,
More pity led me on:
He deeply sighed and then replied,
Alas! I am undone.
As I beneath yon myrtle lay,
Close by Diana's springs,
Amintor stole my bow away,
And pinioned both my wings.
Alas! said I where is then thy bow,
Wherewith he wounded me;
Thou art a god, and such a blow,
Could come from none but thee.
But If thou will revenged be
On that ambitious swain,
I Will set thy wings at liberty,
And thou shall fly again:
And all the service on my part
That I require of thee,
Is that you would wound Amintor's heart,
And make him die for me.
The silken fetters I untied,
And the gay wings displayed,
He mounting gently fanned and cried
Adieu, fond foolish maid!
At that I blushed and angry grew,
I should the god believe;
But waking found my dream too true,
Alas! I was a slave.
SONG.
HOW often, beneath yon artless bower,
Have I with Phoebe sat,
And spent a sweet, a harmless hour,
In gay, endearing chat!
Often would the sportive wren alight,
And chirp from vine to vine;
Peace! little vagrant, thy delight
Could not compare with mine.
While at the evening's mild decay,
We Have sought our much loved grove,
The Robin's soft, melodious lay,
Would harmonize our love.
Ah! Colin leave the flattering theme,
Nor drop the unmanly tear;
Thy pleasures vanish like a dream,
Since Phoebe's insincere.
Disappointed Affection.
ELIZA, once in prospect fair,
I deemed thee mine alone:
That prospect now more light than air,
With every comforts gone!
Joys, that is flown on rapid wings,
Have left sad care behind,
Empoison fierce affliction's stings,
And deeper wound the mind.
To me how dull the sky appears,
Though Sol in triumph reigns;
Denied the sad resource of tears,
How racking are my pains!
Our souls in one congenial mould,
Received their early form;
With thee through life though thunders rolled,
Well pleased I Would brave the storm.
Our little bark* till danger over,
Would shun the boisterous wave,
And keep along the peaceful shore*
That gentle waters lave.
Alas! how fair would fancy dress
The visionary lay:
But all in vain, for woes oppress,
And drive sweet hope away.
Those hearts that never with pity melt,
(As dew impearls the thorn,)
Will smile at pangs they have not felt,
And treat my grief with scorn:
But sure the mind, where sense can gain
Her pleasing mild abode.
Will own we reach contentment's fane,
Through love's delightful road.
Kitty, the Toast.
YOUR ancient bards, like rustic swains,
Attun'd their harps to worthless strains,
Well suiting rural grots and plains
And artless lovers fires:
Of modest nymphs, disdaining art,
Whose simple sweetness charms the heart,
The blush that edges Cupid's dart,
And faithful love inspires.
Of virgins like the Cyprian Queen,
With sweet porportion, air and mein,
Where simple dignity is seen,
In manners and in dress:
Of Queens and Nymphs divinely fair,
Who garbs of their own weaving wear,
Nor blush to tend their fleecy care,
Despising idleness.
To Dorcas, type of modern race,
Ye ancient queens and nymphs give place;
With her ye bards your lyrics grace,
Your melting strains give over!
In present times, refined in arts,
My fair excels in winning hearts,
No mortal wounds attend her darts,
None languish as of yore?
She Is boisterous in her air and mien,
On her no rising blush is seen,
Her color fixed like Gallia's queen,
With art before the glass Alluding to the picture of the Queen of France
pres^^ted to Congress by Louis XVI.
;
In martial confidence of face,
Vivacity attends grimace; --
There modest nature finds no place,
And masculine her dress.
If dress more feminine she would wear,
Her artificial folds of hair,
Majestic, huge beyond compare,
What fancy could detail!
My trembling muse then shuns the weight
Her wondrous head, to delineate --
Her barbar better can relate
The interesting tale.
Love's globes fictitious, neatly placed;
With cork well formed in newest taste,
Her hips are formidably graced,
And of the amplest size:
Large hoops her petticoats adorn;
Her dress from either India borne,
Domestic fabrics are her scorn,
And plainness shocks her eyes!
As moves the elephant to war,
Thus widely spreads my Dorcas fair,
All symmetry displayed with care,
To charm the gazing swains!
When stately thus she heaves in sight,
Pale, dastard Cupid, in affright,
With Cytherea, wing their flight
To rural grots and plains.
Hopeless Love.
CEASE, tyrant of my flaming bosom, cease,
Nor force the gentle slumbers from my eyes,
Ah! but again restore my youthful peace,
And from my breast erase desponding sighs.
May fate relent, nor let me languish here,
While by her eyes I Am chained to gloomy care;
Still for the transient rose I shed a tear,
And over her blushes weep with wild despair.
Impetuous transport pierces while I gaze,
Corrosive anguish preys upon my mind;
I stand condemned to pass unhappy days
And leave content and flattering hope behind.
I grieve in silence, and I grieve in vain,
Her eyes resistless snatch me to my doom;
Fain would I rove, to ease this lingering pain,
But that will follow to the dusky tomb.
Fly hope, thou soother, from my wretched breast
Revive no more, nor bring thy gentle aid;
I mourn, I wander, and I weep unblest,
Enslaved, rejected by a beautuous maid.
SONG.
WHEN hope endears a lover's pain,
And sooths his tortured hea^^,
When beauty smiles to hear the strain,
How pleasing is the smart?
But if despair the sting increase,
And every hope remove;
If beauty beam no ray of peace,
How dreadful it is to love.
SONG.
WHEN swallows lay their eggs in snow,
And geese in wheat-ears build their nests;
When roasted crabs a hunting go,
And cats can laugh at gossip's jests;
When law and conscience are akin,
And pigs are learnt by note to squeak;
Your worship then shall stroke your chin,
And teach an owl to whistle Greek.
Till when let your wisdom be dumb;
For say man of Gotham,
What is this world?
A tetotum,
By the finger of folly twirl'd;
With a hey go up, and about we come;
While the sun a good post-horse is found,
So merrily we'll run round.
The Nest.
AS in the glowing noon of day,
Stretched careless on the ground,
Beneath the breezy pines I lay,
Lulled by their murmuring sound.
A little nest aloft I spied,
Of feathers white as snow,
With strong, though slender, cordage tied
Fast to the topmost bough.
With eager joy. I seized the prize,
And found a beauteous pair --
Love, yet unfiedg'd, with friendship lies,
Together nestling there.
Delia, my captive, love detains
In Hymen's silken clue;
Friendship, Myrtilla, yet remains
An offering fit for you.
SONG.
WHAT is a poet, Sir? you, Sir? no Sir! --
It Is this, Sir, I Would have you to know --
Constantly writing, Sir,
And his nails biting, Sir,
Oh, he is a wondrous fellow!
Now in the garret, Sir -- high, Sir -- high, Sir!
Now in the cellar below;
Sunshine and vapor, Sir --
Pen, ink, and paper, Sir.
Oh, he is a wondrous fellow!
His pockets to fill, Sir -- still, Sir -- still, Sir --
His noddle he empties -- O ho!
Scribbling and scrawling, Sir,
Starting and bawling,
Oh, he is a wondrous fellow!
SONG.
COLIN.
HARK! hark! over the plains what glad tumults we hear!
How gay all the nymphs and the shepherds appear!
With myrtles and roses new decked are the bowers,
And every bush bears a garland of flowers,
I cannot for my life what it means understand:
There Is some rural festival surely at hand
Not harvest, nor sheep-shearing, now can take place;
But Phillis will tell me the truth of the case.
PHILLIS.
The truth honest l^d! -- why surely you know
What rites are prepared in the village below,
Where gallant young Thyrsis, so famed and adored,
Wed Daphne* the sister of Corin our lord;
That Daphne, whose beauty, good nature, and ease,
All fancies can strike, and all judgments can please;
That Gorin -- but praise must be the matter give over;
You know what he is -- and I need say no more.
COLIN.
Young Thyrsis too claims all that honor can lend,
His countrymens' glory, their champion and friend,
Though such slight memorials scarce speak his deserts,
And trust me, his name is engraved on their hearts
PHILLIS.
But hence to the bridal* behold how they throng,
Each shepherd conducting his sweetheart along;
The joyous occasion all nature inspires
With tender affection and cheerful desires.
DUETTO.
Ye powers, that over conjugal union preside,
All gracious look down on the bridegroom and bride,
That beauty, and virtue, and valor may shine
In a race like themselves, with no end to the line:
Let honor and glory, and riches and praise,
Unceasing attend them through numerous days;
And, while in a palace fate fixes their lot,
O! may they live easy as those in a cot!
SONG.
WELL met, jolly fellows, well met;
By this bowel you're all welcome, I swear;
See where on the table it is set,
And designed for the grave of our care.
From this social convention,
'Twill drive all contention,
Save only who longest can drink;
Then fill up your glasses
And drink to your lasses,
The head ach take him that shall shrink.
Do but look at this glass! here boys, hand it around:
Why it sparkles like Phillis's eyes;
But it is better by far, boys; for when her eyes wound,
This balm to the wound will supply;
Then a fig for this thinking:
Fill, fill, and be drinking:
Let us drown all our cares and our sorrows:
Come, the toast, boys, the toast!
There Is no time to be lost,
For our cares will return with tomorrow.
SONG.
OH! what pleasures will abound,
When my wife is laid in ground,
Let earth cover her,
We'll dance over her,
When my wife is laid in ground.
Oh! how happy should I be,
Would little Nysa pig with me,
How I Would mumble her,
Touze and tumble her,
Would little Nysa pig with me.
SONG,
SINCE you mean to hire for service,
Come with me you jolly dog;
You can help to bring home harvest,
Tend the sheep and feed the hogs.
With three crowns, your standing wages,
You shall daintily be fed;
Bacon, beans, salt beef, cabbages,
Butter-milk, and oaten bread.
Come, strike hands, you will live in clover,
When we get you once at home,
And when daily labor's over,
We'll dance to your hum strum
SONG.
THE man who in his breast contains,
A heart which no base art arraigns,
Enchanting pleasure's ground may tread,
Where love and youthful fancy lead;
May toy and laugh, may dance and sing,
While jocund lite is in her spring.
When cynics ^ail, and pedants frown,
Their rigid maxims I disown:
I smile to see their angry brow,
And hate the gloomy selfish crew.
In their despite I Will laugh and sing,
While jocund life is in her spring,
Be mine the social joys of life,
And let good nature vanquish strife,
So innocence with me reside.
And honor reigns each action's guide:
I Will toy and laugh, and dance and sing,
While jocund life is in her spring.
Then Phillis come, and share those joys
Which no interap'rate use destroys;
While you remain as kind as fair,
My heart defies each anxious care;
With thee I Will toy, and laugh and sing,
While jocund life is in her spring.
SONG.
LITTLE muses come and cry,
Put your finger in your eye;
Join the macaroni kind,
Demn the weather, demn the wind.
Winds that rumple powdered hair,
Winds that fright the feathered fair,
Winds that blow our hats away,
And rudely with our ruffles play,
Winds, that crown the gentle note,
Fritter'd through a gentle threat;
Winds that clouds around us throw,
And spoil the giltter of our show.
Damn the winds that us have stirred,
On Friday June the twenty-third,
To plague the macaroni kind:
Damn the rain, and damn the wind.
SONG.
BEHOLD on the brow the leaves play in the breeze,
While cattle calm feed in the vale;
The church spires tapering, points through the trees,
As lord of the hill and the dale.
The playful colts skips after lambs to the brook,
The brook slow and silent glides:
The surface so smooth and so clear, if you look
It reflects the gay green on its side.
By his feathered seraglio in farm-yard caressed,
The king of the walk dares to crow,
No nabob nor Nimrod enslaving the east,
Such prowess with beauty can show.
Beneath the still cow, Nancy presses the teat,
Her face like the ruddy faced morn:
Loud strokes in the barn the strong threshers repeat,
Or winnow for market the corn.
Industrious the wives, at the doors of their cots,
Sit spinning, dressed neatly, though coarse,
To their babes, while unheeding the traveller trots,
They show the fine man and the horse.
At the heels of the steed bark the base village whelps,
Each puppy rude echo bestirs;
But the horse too high bred, bounds away from their yelps
Disregarding the clamor of curs.
Illiberal railers thus envy betray,
When merit above them they view;
But genius disdains to turn out of his way,
Or afford a reply to the crew.
To contempt and despair such insanes we commit;
But to generous rivals, a toast --
May rich men reward honest fellows of wit --
Here Is a health to those dunces hate most.
SONG.
MY banks are all furnished with bees,
Whose murmur invites one to sleep;
My grottoes are shaded with trees,
And my hills are white over with sheep:
I seldom have met with a loss,
Such health do my fountains bestow;
My fountains all bordered with moss,
Where the hare bells and violets grow,
Where the hare-bells and violets grow.
I have found out a gift for my fair,
I have found where the wood pigeons breed;
But let me that plunder forbear,
She Will say 'twas a barbarous deed:
For he never could be true, she averred,
Who could rob a poor bird of its young:
I loved her the more when I heard
Such tenderness fall from her tongue,
Such tenderness, etc.
But where does my Phillida stray?
And where are her grots and her bowers?
Are the groves and the valleys as gay,
And the shepherds as gentle, as ours?
The groves may perhaps be as fair,
And the face of the valleys as fine;
The swains may in manners compare,
But their love is not equal to mine,
But their love is not equal to mine.
SONG.
THOU soft flowing Avon! by thy silver stream,
Of subjects immortal thy Shakspear would dream:
The fairies by moonlight dance round his green bed
For hallowed the turf is that pillows his head.
Here swains shall be famed for their love and their truth,
And cheerful old age feel the transports of youth:
For the raptures of fancy here poets shall tread,
For hollowed the turf is that pillows his head.
The love stricken maiden, the sighing young swain,
Here rove without danger and toy without pain:
The sweet bud of beauty no blight shall here dread,
For hollowed the turf is that pillows his head,
Flow on, silver Avon, in song ever flow,
Be the swans on thy bosom still whiter than snow,
Ever full be thy stream like his fame may it spread.
And the turf ever hallowed that pillows his head.
SONG.
TEACH me, ye nine, to sing of tea,
Of grateful green, of black bohea;
Hark! the kettle softly singing,
How again it bubbles over:
Quick John, Black Susan, bring in,
Water in the tea pot pour.
The bread and butter thinly slice,
Oh! spread it delicately nice:
Let the toast be crisp and crumpling,
The rolls as doughty as a dumpling:
Then eating, sipping, snuffing up the steam,
We chat, and 'midst a motley chaos seem
Of cups and saucers, butter, bread, and cream.
SONG.
FAREWELL, the smoaky town, adieu,
Each rude and sensual joy:
Gay, fleeting pleasures, all untrue,
That in possession cloy.
Far from the garnished scene I Will fly,
Where folly keeps her court,
To wholesome sound philosophy,
And harmless rural sport.
How happy is the humble cell,
How blessed the deep retreat,
Where sorrows billows never swell,
Nor passion's tempests beat!
But safely through the sea of life,
Calm reason wafts us over,
Free from ambition, noise, and strife,
To death's eternal shore.
SONG.
A Few years ago, in the days of my Grannum,
(A worthy good woman as ever broke bread)
What lectures she gave! in the morning began 'em,
Nor ceased till she laid herself down on her bed;
She never declined what she once undertook;
But twisted,
Persisted,
Now flattered,
Now spatter'd
And always succeeded, by hook or by crook.
Said she, Child, whatever your fate is hereafter,
If married, if single, if old, or if young,
In madness, in sadness, in tears, or in laughter,
But follow my maxims, you cannot do wrong:
Each passion, each temper, I always could brook;
When scolded,
I molded,
When heated,
Retreated,
And managed my matters, by hook or by crook.
Ensnared by her counsels, I ventured to marry,
And fancied a wife, by my grandmother's rules,
Might be taught like a spaniel to fetch and to carry,
But soon I found out that we both had been fools:
In vain, I showed madam the wonderful book;
I coax'd her,
I box'd her;
But truly,
Unruly
Wives cannot be governed by hook or by crook.
SONG.
AS Jockey was trudging the meadows so gay,
So blithe and so bonny his air,
He met a young lass who was going his way,
Her face all so clouded with care:
He asked her what made her so moping and sad?
'Twas pity if she were in pain:
She signed "I have lost the very best lad,
"And I never shall see him again!"
Is he gone to the wars for full many a year,
Quoth Jockey, who troubles you so?
Or else where on earth he can never appear,
Where you and I surely must go?
"No, he is fled (she replied with another fond she,
"Though to me he was plighted for aye,
"Over the mountains he is gone with another from me,
"And therefore I cannot be gay."
If that is all, quoth Jockey, your wailing give over,
He Is a loon, who is not worth your pain;
Let him go, since he is changed, be you wretched no more,
Nor think of a false-hearted swain:
But take, if you will, for the lad of your heart,
Whom fortune has thrown in your way,
I Will soothe all your grief, and I Will banish your smart,
Here I Am ready to do as I say.
Then he wiped her bright eyes, and he sung her a song,
Her face looked no longer despair;
He whispered of love as they saunter'd along,
And she thought him a lad worth her care:
She smiled and looked pleas^d late a stranger to joy,
And Jockey, perceiving her kind,
More pressing was grown, and the lass was less coy,
So he drove the false loon from her mind.
SONG.
AS the other day milking I sat in the vale,
Young Damon came up to address his soft tale,
So sudden, I started, and gave him a frown,
For he frighted my cow, and my milk was kicked down.
Lord bless me! says I, what a-deuce can you mean,
To come thus upon me, unthought of, unseen!
I never will approve of the love you pretend,
For, as mischief began, perhaps mischief may end.
I little thought now he would his passion advance,
But pretty excuses made up the mischance:
He begged a kind kiss, which I gave him, I vow,
And I laid my own self, all the fault on the cow.
How many ways love can the bosom invade!
His bait proved too strong, alas! for a maid:
He hinted that wedlock was what he would be at,
But I thought it was best to say nothing of that.
I flutter all over whenever he comes nigh,
For if he should press, I should surely comply;
And never shall be angry, my heart itself tells,
Though he flings down my milk, or does any thing else.
SONG.
BY the gayly circling glass
We can see how minutes pass;
By the hollow casks are told
How the waning night grows old,
How the waning night grows old.
Soon, too soon, the busy day
Drives us from our sport and play:
What have we with day to do.
Sons of care, 'twas made for you,
Sons of care, 'twas made for you.
SONG.
COME bustle, bustle, drink about,
And let us merry be,
Our can is full, we'll pump it out,
And then all hands to sea.
And a sailing we will go.
Fine miss at dancing-school is taught
The minuet to tread;
But we go better when we have brought
The fore-tack to cat head.
The jockey's called to horse, to horse,
And swiftly rides the race;
But swifter far we shape our course,
When we are giving chase.
When horns and shouts the forest rend,
His pack the huntsman cheers;
As loud we hollow when we send,
A broadside to Monsieurs.
The what's-their names, at uproar squall,
With music fine and soft:
But better sounds our boatswain's call,
All hands, all hands aloft!
With gold and silver streamers fine
The ladies rigging show!
But English ships more grander shine,
When prizes home we tow.
What Is got at sea we spend on shore,
With sweethearts, or our wives;
And then, my boys, hoist sail for more!
Thus pass the sailor's lives.
And a sailing we will go.
SONG. To the Memory of Mr. JAMES BREMNER, late Musician and Companion to
Governor PENN.
Tune -- "The Lass of Patie's Mill."
FROM Scotia's land he came,
And brought the pleasing art,
To raise the sacred flame
That warms a feeling heart:
The magic power of sounds,
Obeyed at his command,
And spread sweet influence round,
Wrought by his skilful hand.
Oh sanctify the ground,
The ground where he is laid!
Plant roses all around,
Nor let those roses fade,
Let none his tomb pass by
Without a generous tear,
Oh sigh! and let that sigh
Be like himself sincere.
RECITATIVE.
Sing to his shade a solemn strain,
Let music's sweetest notes complain!
Let echo tell from shore to shore,
The swan of Schuylkill is no more.
SONG.
CONTENTED I am, and contented I Will be,
For what can this world more afford,
Than a girl that will sociably sit on my knee,
And a cellar that a plentiful stored?
My brave boys, etc.
My vault-door is opened, descend every guest,
Tap that cask, ay, that wine we will try,
It Is as sweet as the lips of your love to the taste,
And as bright as her cheeks to the eye.
In a piece of slit hoop I my candle have stuck,
'Twill light us each bottle to hand;
The foot of my glass for the purpose I broke,
For I hate that a bumper should stand.
A stride on a butt, as a butt should be strod,
I sit my companions among,
Like grape blessing Bacchus, the good fellow's god,
And a sentiment give, or a song.
We are dry where we sit, though the oozings drops seem
The moist walls with wet pearls to emboss,
From the arch moldy cobwebs in Gothic taste stream,
Like stucco work cut out of moss.
My cellar's my camp, my soldiers my flasks,
All gloriously ranged in review;
When I cast my eyes round, I consider my casks
As kingdoms I Have yet to subdue.
I charge glass in hand, and my empire maintain,
No ancient more patriot like bled;
Each drop in defense of delight I will drain,
And myself for my bucks I ll drink dead.
Sound that pipe -- it is in tune, and those bins are well filled,
View the heap of Champaigne in your rear;
Yon bottles are Burgundy, see how they are pil'd,
Like artillery, tier over tier!
It Is my will, when I die not a tear shall be shed,
No Hic jacet be grav^d on ray stone;
But pour over my coffin a bottle of red,
And write, that His drinking is done.
SONG. Sung by Mungo, in the Padlock.
DEAR heart! what a terrible life am I led!
A dog has better, that is sheltered and fed;
Night and day it is the same,
My pain is dear game;
Me wish to de Lord me was dead.
Whate'er's to be done,
Poor Blacky must run;
Mungo here, Mungo dear,
Mungo every where.
Above or below,
Sirrah, come, sirrah, go;
Do so, and do so,
Oh! Oh!
Me wish to de Lord me was dead.
SONG.
HOW happy were my days till now!
I never did sorrow feel;
With joy I rose to milk my cow,
Or take my spinning-wheel.
My heart was lighter than a fly,
Like any bird I sung,
Till he pretended love, and I
Believed his flattering tongue.
O the fool, the silly, silly fool,
That trusts what man may be!
I wish I was a maid again,
And in my own country.
SONG.
GENTEEL is my Damon, engaging his air,
His face, like the morn, is both ruddy and fair;
Soft love sits enthroned in the beam of his eyes,
He Is manly, yet tender, he is fond and yet wise.
He Is ever good-humored, he is generous and gay,
His presence can always drive sorrow away:
No vanity sways him, no folly is seen,
But open his temper, and noble his mein.
By virtue illumined his actions appear,
His passions are calm, and his reason is clear:
An affable sweetness attends on his speech,
He Is willing to learn, though he is able to teach.
He has promised to love me -- his word I Will believe,
For his heart is too honest to let him deceive;
Then blame me, ye fair ones, if justly you can,
Since the picture I Have drawn is exactly the man.
SONG.
IN my pleasant native plains,
Winged with bliss each moment slew;
Nature there inspired the strains,
Simple as the joys I knew;
Jocund morn and evening gay
Claimed the merry roundelay.
Fields and flocks, and fragrant flowers,
All that health and joy impart;
Called for artless music's powers,
Faithful echoes to the heart!
Happy hours, for ever gay,
Claimed the merry roundelay.
But the breath of genial spring
Walked the warblers of the grove:
Who, sweet birds that heard you sing,
Would not join the song of love?
Your sweet notes and chaunting gay
Claimed the merry roundelay.
The Young Lover.
WHEN a youth commences love,
And his passions first discover
Charms that fire his soul all over,
In some blooming virtuous fair;
How his eyes betray his passion!
How his tongue but mocks expression,
When he makes the declaration,
And prefers his humble prayer!
And prefers, etc
While his fate is here depending,
What suspense his heart is rending,
What keen misery impending,
Lest his charmer cruel prove?
How he counts the moments flying,
Wishing, hoping fearing sighing,
Till the lovely lass complying
Blushes, and reveals her love?
Blushes, etc.
When the dubious scene is over,
Joys immense inspire the lover,
Till his glowing cheeks discover
What sensation fill his breast:
Raptures now his bosom firing,
Every thought to bliss aspiring,
Virtue, love, and fate conspiring;
All their cares are lulled to rest.
All their, etc.
Time their mutual love improving,
All their cares in concert moving,
To complete their heaven in loving,
Hymen makes and binds them one.
Now in solid bliss abounding*
Tears and cares in Lethe drowning;
Love proclaims to all surrounding,
They are blessed, and they alone,
They are blessed, and they alone.
Ye Fair Possessed.
YE fair possessed of every charm,
To captivate the will,
Whose smiles can rage itself disarm,
Whose frowns at once can kill:
Say will you deign the verse to hear,
Where flattery bears no part;
And honest verse, that flows sincere,
And candid from the heart.
Great is your power; but greater yet,
Mankind it might engage:
If, as ye all can make a net,
Ye all could make a cage.
Each nymph a thousand hearts may take;
For who is to beauty blind?
But to what end a prisoner make,
Unless you have strength to bind?
Attend the council often told,
Too often told in vain.
Learn that best art, the art to hold,
And lock the lover's chain.
Gamesters to little purpose win,
Who lose again as fast;
Though beauty may the charm begin,
It Is sweetness makes it last
The Happy Warning.
YOUNG Colin once courted Myrtilla the prude,
If he sighed or looked tender she cried he was rude:
Though he begs with devotion, some ease for his pain,
The shepherd got nothing but frowns and disdain;
Fatigued with his folly, his suit he gave over,
And vowed that no female should fetter him more.
He strove with all caution to escape from the net;
But Chloe soon caught him, a finished coquette,
She glanced to his glances, she sighed to his sighs,
And flattered his hopes in the language of eyes,
Alas! for poor Colin, when put to the test,
Himself and his passion proved all but a jest.
By the critical third he was caught in the snare,
By Fanny, gay, young, unaffected, and fair;
When she sound he had merit, and love took his part,
She dally'd no longer, hut yielded her heart,
With joy they submitted to Hymen's decree,
And now are as happy as happy can be.
As the rose bud of beauty soon sickens and fades,
The prude and coquette are two slighted old maids,
Now their sweets are all wasted, too late they repent,
For transport untasted, for moments misspent;
Ye virgins, take warning, improve by my plan,
And fix the fond youth when you prudently can.
Sandy over the Lee.
I Winna marry any mon but Sandy over the lee;
I winna ha the Domince, for geud he canna be;
But I will ha my Sandy lad, my Sandy over the lee*
For he is aye a kissing, kissing, aye a kissing me.
I will not have the minister, for all his godly looks,
Nor yet will I the lawyer have, for all his wily crooks:
I will not have the plowman lad, nor yet will I the miller;
But I will have Sandy lad, without one penny siller.
For he is aye a kissing, etc.
I will not have the soldier lad, for he gangs to the war;
I will not have the sailor lad, because he smells of tar:
I will not have the lord nor lord, for all their mickle gear:
But I will have my Sandy lad, my Sandy over the meir.
For he is aye a kissing, etc.
SONG.
LOVE's a gentle, generous passion,
Source of all sublime delights;
Which with mutual inclination,
Two fond hearts in one unites.
What are titles, pomp, or riches.
If compared with true content?
That false joy which now bewitches,
When obtained we may repent.
Lawless passion brings vexation,
But a chaste and constant love
Is a glorious emulation
Of the blissful state above.
SONG.
Now Is the time for mirth and glee,
Sing, and love, and laugh with me;
Cupid if my theme of story:
It Is his godship's fame and glory,
How all yield unto his law!
Ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! ha! ha!
Over the grave, and over the gay,
Cupid takes his share of play:
He makes heroes quit their glory:
He Is the god most famed in story;
Bending them unto his law!
Ha! ha! etc.
Sly the urchin deals his darts,
Without pity -- piercing hearts:
Cupid triumphs over passions,
Not regarding modes or fashions.
Firmly fixed is Cupid's law!
Ha! ha! etc.
Some may think these lines not true,
But they are facts -- 'twixt me and you:
Then, ye maids and men, be wary,
How you meet before you marry:
Cupid's will is solely law.
Ha! ha! etc.
Flora and the Rose. -- A Cantata.
WHEN Flora over the garden strayed,
And every blooming sweet surveyed,
As over the dew dipped flowers she hung,
Thus wrapped in joy she fondly sung;
The early snow-drop, primrose pale,
The tulip gay, the lilly fair,
Each flower that loads the scented gale
Deserves their Flora's tender care,
Deserves their Flora's tender care.
But none of Summer's gaudy pride,
Such sweetness breath, or charms disclose,
As that dear flower that blooms beside,
No^e pleases like the blushing rose,
As that dear flower, etc.
The bal my zephyrs round thee play,
And golden suns exert their power
To bring thy beauty's to the day,
And make thee Flora's favorite flower,
And make thee Flora's favorite flower.
A garland gay the nymphs and swains
May make from every sweet that grows,
And meaner things may please the plains,
But thou art mine, thou lovely Rose,
And meaner things, etc.
SONG.
LET rakes and libertines, resigned
To sensual pleasures, range:
Here all the sex's charms I find,
And never can cool or change.
Let vain coquettes and prudes conceal
What most their hearts desire:
With pride my passion I reveal;
Oh! may it never expire.
The sun shall cease to spread its light,
The stars their orbits leave,
And fair creation sink in night
When I my dear (...)
SONG.
ONE morning young Roger accosted me thus --
Come here, pretty maiden, and give me a buss,
Lord! fellow, said I, mind your plough and your cart;
Yes, I thank you for nothing, thank you for nothing, thank you for nothing,
with all my heart.
Well, then, to be sure, he grew civil enough,
He gave me a box, with a paper of snuff:
I took it, I own, yet had still so much art,
To cry, thank you for nothing with all my heart.
He said, if so be he might make me his wife --
Good Lord! I was never so dashed in my life;
Yet could not help laughing to see the fool start,
When I thanked him for nothing with all my heart.
Soon after, however, he gained my consent,
And with him, on Sunday, to chapel I went;
But said, 'twas my goodness more than his desert,
Not to thank him for nothing with all my heart.
The parson cried, child, you must after me say,
And then talked of honor, and love, and obey;
But faith, when his reverence came to that part,
There I thanked him for nothing with all my heart.
At night our brisk neighbors the stocking would throw, --
I must not tell tales, but I know what I know;
Young Roger confesses I cured all his smart,
And I thanked him for something with all my heart.
SONG.
O Sandy, why leave thou thy Nelly to mourn?
Thy presence could ease me,
When neathing can please me;
Now dowie I sigh on the banks of the burn,
Or through the wood, laddie, until thou return.
Though woods now are bonny, and mornings are clear,
While lav'rocks are singing,
And primroses springing
Yet nane of them pleases mine eye or mine car,
When through the wood, laddie, ye dinna appear.
That I am forsaken, some spare not to tell;
I am fash'd wi' their scorning,
Both evening and morning,
Their jeering gaes aft to my heart wi' a knell,
When through the wood, laddie, I wander mysell.
Then stay, my dear Sandy, nae longer away;
But quick as an arrow,
Haste here to thy marrow,
Wha's living in languor till that happy day,
When through the wood, laddie, we'll dance, sing, and play.
SONG.
SWEET Poll of Plymouth was my dear;
When forced from her to go,
Down her cheeks rained many a tear,
My heart was fraught with woe:
Our anchor weighed for sea we stood,
The land we left behind:
Her tears then swelled the briny flood,
My sighs increased the wind.
We plowed the deep, and now between
Us lay the ocean wide;
For five long years I had not seen
My sweet, my bonny bride;
That time I sailed the world around,
All for my true love's sake;
But pressed as we were homeward bound,
I thought my heart would break.
The press-gang bold I asked in vain
To let me once on shore;
I longed to see my Poll again,
But saw my Poll no more.
And have they torn my love away!
And is he gone! she cried,
My Polly, sweetest flower of May!
She languish'd drooped, and died.
SONG.
THE card invites, in crowds we fly
To join the jovial rout full cry;
What joy -- from cares and plagues all day,
To hie to the midnight hark-away!
Nor want, nor pain, nor grief, nor care,
Nor dronish husbands enter there;
The brisk, the bold, the young, the gay,
All hie to the midnight hark-away.
Uncounted strikes the morning clock,
And drowsy watchmen idly knock;
'Till daylight peeps we sport and play,
And roar to the jolly hark-away.
When tired with sport, to bed we creep,
And kill the tedious day with sleep;
Tomorrow's welcome call obey,
And again to midnight hark-away.
SONG.
SAYS Damon to Phillis, suppose my fond eyes
Reveal with what ardour I glow?
Reveal with what ardour I glow?
Well, what if they do? there is no harm sure, she cries;
I can but deny you, you know, you know,
I can but deny you, you know.
Suppose I should ask of those lips a sweet kiss,
Say would you the favor bestow?
Say would you the favor bestow?
Lord bless me! said she, what a question is this?
I can but deny you, you know, you know;
I can but deny you, you know.
Suppose not contented, I still ask for more?
For pleasure from pleasure will grow,
For pleasure from pleasure will grow,
Suppose what you will, she replied as before,
I can but deny you, you know, you know,
I can but deny you, you know.
Come then, my dear love, to the wood let us repair,
Cried Damon, and offered to go,
Cry^d Damon, and offered to go:
No, no, with a blush, answered Phillis, for there
I could not deny you you know, you know,
I could not deny you, you know.
SONG.
THE last time I came over the moor,
I left my love behind me;
Ye powers! what pain do I endure,
When soft ideas mind me?
Soon as the ruddy morn displayed
The beaming day ensuing,
I met betimes my lovely maid
In fit retreat for wooing.
Beneath the cooling shade we lay,
Gazing and chastely sporting:
We kissed and promised time away,
Till night spread her black curtain.
I pitied all beneath the skies,
Even kings, when she was nigh me:
In raptures I beheld her eyes,
Which could but ill deny me.
Should I be called where cannons roar,
Where mortal steel may wound me:
Or cast upon some foreign shore,
Where dangers may surround me:
Yet hopes again to see my love,
To feast on glowing kisses,
Shall make my cares at distance move,
In prospect of such blisses.
In all my soul there is not one place
To let a rival enter:
Since she excels in every grace,
In her my love shall center.
Sooner the seas shall cease to flow,
Their waves the Alps shall cover;
On Greenland's ice shall roses grow,
Before I cease to love her.
The next time I go over the moor,
She shall a lover find me;
And that my faith is firm and pure,
Though I left her behind me:
Then Hymen's sacred bonds shall chain
My heart to her fair bosom;
There, while my being does remain,
My love more fresh shall blossom.
SONG.
THAT I might not be plagued with the nonsense of men,
I promised my mother, again and again,
To say as she bids me wherever I go,
And to all that they ask, or would have, tell 'em No.
I really believe I have frightened a score;
They Will want to be with me, I warrant, no more;
And I own I Am not sorry for serving them so;
Were the same thing to do, I again should say No.
For a shepherd I like with more courage and art,
Who will not let me alone, though I bid him depart,
Such questions he puts, since I answer him so,
That he makes me mean yes, though my words are still No.
He asked, did I hate him, or think him too plain?
(Let me die if he is not a clever young swain)
If he ventured a kiss, if I from him would go,
Then he pressed my young lips, while I blushed, and said No.
He asked if my heart to another was gone?
If I Would have him to leave me, or cease to love on?
If I meant my life long to answer him so?
I faulter'd, and sighed, and replied to him, No.
This morning an end to his courtship he made;
Will Phillis live longer a virgin? he said;
If I press you to church, will you scruple to go
In a hearty good humor I answered, No, no.
SONG.
WAS Nanny but a rural maid,
And I her only swain,
To tend her flocks in fertile mead,
And on her verdant plain;
Oh! how I Would pipe upon my reed,
To please my lovely maid;
While of all sense of care we are freed,
Beneath an oaken shade.
When lambkins under hedges bleat,
And rain seems in the sky,
Then to our oaken, safe retreat,
We'd both together hie!
There I Would repeat my vows of love
Unto my charming fair,
Whilst her dear fluttering heart would prove,
A mind like mine sincere.
Let others fancy courtly joys,
I Would live in rural ease;
Then grandeur, bustle, pride, and noise
Could never my fancy please!
In Nanny every joy combines,
With grace, and blooming youth;
Sincerity and virtue shines,
With modesty and truth.
SONG.
WATER parted from the sea,
May increase the river's tide,
To the bubbling fount may flee,
Or through fertile valleys glide.
Though, in search of lost repose,
Through the land it is free to roam,
Still it murmurs as it flows,
Till it reach its native home.
SONG.
WELL, well, sap no more;
Sure you told me before;
I know the full length of my tether.
Do you think I Am a fool,
That I need go to school?
I can spell you, and put you together.
A word to the wise
Will always suffice:
Addsniggers to talk to your parrot.
I Am not such an elf,
Tho'f I say it myself,
But I know a sheep's head from a carrot.
SONG.
WHEN I was a young one, what girl was like me?
So wanton, so airy, and brisk as a be;
I tattled, I rambled, I laughed, and wherever
A fiddle was heard -- to be sure I was there.
To all that came near I had something to say;
'Twas This, Sir, and That, Sir, -- but scarce ever Nay:
And, Sundays, dressed out in my silks and my lace
I warrant I stood by the best in the place.
At twenty I got me a husband -- poor man!
Well, rest him -- we are all as good as we can;
Yet he was so peevish, he would quarrel for straws,
And jealous -- though truly I gave him some cause.
He snubb'd me, and huff'd me -- but let me alone,
Egad! I Have a tongue, and I paid him his own:
Ye wives, take the hint, and when spouse is untowr'd,
Stand firm to your charter, and have the last word.
But now I Am quite altered, the more to my woe;
I Am not what I was forty summers ago:
This time's a fore foe, there is no shunning his dart,
Howeve^ I keep up a pretty good heart.
Grow (...) I hate to be fitting mum chance;
I still love a tune, though unable to dance;
And books of devotion laid by on my shelf,
I teach that to others I once did myself.
SONG.
WITH tuneful pipe and merry glee,
Young Jockey won my heart;
A bonnier lad you never could sees
All beauty without art.
In Aberdeen there never was seen,
A lad so blithe and gay;
His glancing even and comely mein,
Has stole my heart away.
Young Jemmy courts with artful song,
But vain is a' his love;
My Jockey blithe has loved me long,
To him I Will constant prove.
In Aberdeen, etc.
No more shall I of sorrow know,
Nor ever more complain,
Nor fear my mammy's threats, I trow,
Now Jockey is mine ain.
In Aberdeen, etc.
SONG.
YOU tell me I Am handsome, (I know not how true)
And easy, and chatty, and good-humored too;
That my lips are as red as the rose bud in June,
And my voice, like the nightingale's, sweetly in tune:
All this had been told me by twenty before;
But he that would win me must flatter me more,
But he that would win me must flatter me more.
If beauty from virtue receive no supply,
Or prattle from prudence how wanting am I!
My ease and good humor short raptures will bring,
My voice, like the nightingale's, knows but a spring:
For charms such as these, then your praises give over,
To love me for life, you must love me still more,
To love me, etc.
Then talk ^^t to me of a shape, or an air,
For Chloe the wanton can rival me there;
It Is virtue alone that makes beauty look gay,
And brightens good humor, as sunshine the day.
For that if you love me, your flame may be true,
And I, in my turn, may be taught to love too,
And I, in my turn, may be taught to love too.
SONG.
YOU HAVE sure forgot, dear mother mine,
When you was once as blithe as me;
When vows were offered at your shrine,
And lovers dropped on bended knee:
When you could sing, and dance, and play;
Alas! December treads on May.
Behold dame Nature's favorite blow,
The rich jonquil, the blushing rose,
How short a date their beauties know,
Surrounded by a thousand foes!
Till time decrees their full decay,
And harsh December treads on May.
The whole creation own this truth,
Then why should wrinkled brows exact.
The mode severe on blooming youth,
By which themselves could ever act?
The blood that is warm will have its way,
Too soon December treads on May.
Then swains, with tabor, pipe, and glee,
Let Us, whilst we are here, grim care deride;
Come, sport and frolic free with me,
In spite of age, and prudish pride;
The laws of love all should obey,
Before December treads on May.
Molly of the Mill.
LET poets praise the flowery mead,
The moss-clad hill, the dale;
The shepherd piping on his reed,
The maid with milking pail:
The lark that soars on pinions high:
Or sweetly purling rill,
While I breathe forth a tender sigh
For Molly of the Mill.
In vain to sing her charms I try.
And all her beauties trace;
Such brilliancy informs her eye,
Such excellence her face;
Her easy shape, engaging air,
My breast with transports fill,
No nymph so pleasing, or so fair
As Molly of the Mill.
It Is not her person charms alone,
The beauties of her mind;
Wit, sense, and sentiment, we own,
In her are all combined;
Such is the nymph who sways my heart,
And makes my bosom thrill,
Adorned by nature more than art,
Sweet Molly of the Mill.
SONG.
YE Sylvan powers that rule the plain,
Where sweetly winding Forth do glide,
Conduct me to those banks again,
Since there my charming Molly bides.
These banks that breathe their vernal sweets,
Where every smiling beauty meets:
Where Molly's charms adorn the plain,
And cheer the heart of every swain.
Thrice happy were the golden days,
When I, amidst the rural throng.
On Fortha's meadows breathed my lays,
And Molly's charms were all my song.
While she was present all were gay,
No sorrow did our mirth allay;
We sung of pleasure sung of love,
And music breathed in every grove.
O then I was the happiest swain!
No adverse fortune marred my joy;
The shepherds sighed for me in vain,
On me she siml'd, to them was coy.
Over Fortha's mazy banks we strayed:
I wooed, I loved the beauteous maid;
The beauteous maid my love ^eturn'd,
And both with equal ardour burned.
Once on the mossy bank reclined,
Where Forth ran by in murmurs deep,
It was my happy chance to find
The charming Molly lulled asleep:
My heart then leaped with inward bliss,
I softly stooped and stole a kiss:
She waked, she blushed, and faintly blamed,
Why, Damon are you not ashamed?
Often in the thick embow'ring groves,
Where birds their music chirp'd aloud,
Alternately we sung our loves,
And Fortha's fair meanders viewed,
The meadows wore a general smile,
Love was our banquet all the while:
The lovely prospect charmed the eye,
To where the ocean met the sky.
Ye sylvan powers and rural gods,
To whom we swains our cares impart,
Restore me to these blessed abodes,
And ease, oh ease! my lovesick heart:
These happy days again restore,
When Moll and I shall part no more:
When she shall fill these longing arms,
And crown my bliss with all her charms.
SONG.
Tune -- Top sails shivers in the wind.
'TWAS at the break of day we spied
The signal to unmoor,
Which sleepless Caroline descried,
Sweet maid! from New-York's shore;
The fresh'ning gale at length arose,
Her heart began to swell
Nor could cold fear the thought oppose,
Of bidding me farewell!
In open boat the maid of worth,
Soon reached our vessel's free,
Soon too she found her William's birth,
But sought me not to chide:
'Go,' the exclaimed, 'For Fame's a cause
'A female should approve,
'For who that is true to Honor's laws
'Is ever false to Love!
'My heart is loyal, scorns to fear,
'Nor will it even fail,
'Tho' war's unequal wild career,
'Should William's life assail;
Though Death against thee exert his sway,
'Oh, trust me, but the dart
'That wounds thee, will find its way
'To Caroline's true heart.
'Should Conquest in fair form arrayed,
'Thy loyal efforts crown,
'In New York will be found a maid,
'That lives for thee alone.'
May girls with hearts so firm and true,
To love and glory's cause,
Meet the reward they have in view,
The meed of free applause.
SONG.
PATIE is a lover gay,
His brow is never cloudy,
His breath is sweeter that new hay,
His face is fair and ruddy:
Shape is handsome, middle size,
He Is stately in his walking,
The shining of his even surprise,
It Is heaven to hear him talking.
Lest night I met him on the bawk,
Where yellow corn was growing,
There many a kindly word he spoke,
That set my heart a glowing:
He kissed, and vowed he would be mine,
And loved me best of any,
That gars me like to sing sinsine,
O corn rigs are bonny.
Let maidens of a silly mind
Refuse what may they are wanting,
Since we for yielding are designed,
We chastely should be granting.
Then I Will comply and marry Pate,
And from (...) cockernony,
He Is free to ^^wzle air or late,
Where corn rigs are bonny.
SONG.
A Sweet scented beau and a simp'ring young cit,
An artful attorney, a rake and a wit,
Set out on the chase in pursuit of her heart,
Whilst Chloe disdainfully laughed at their art,
And roused by the hounds to meet the sweet morn,
Tantivy, she followed the echoing horn.
Wit swore by his fancy, the beau by his face,
The lawyer with quibble set out on the chase,
The cit, with exactness made up his account,
The rake told his conquests, how vast the amount;
She laughed at the follies, and blithe as the morn,
Tantivy, she followed the echoing horn.
Their clamorous noise roused a jolly young swain,
Hark forward, he cried, then bounc'd over the plain,
He distanc'd the wit, the cit, quibble and beau,
And won the fair nymph with hollo hillio;
Now together they sing a sweet hymn to the morn,
Tantivy, they follow the echoing horn.
SONG.
JOLLY mortals, fill your glasses,
Noble deeds are done by wine;
Scorn the nymph and all her graces,
Who'd for love or beauty pine?
Look within the bowl that is flowing,
And a thousand charms you will find,
More than Phillis has, though going
In the moment to be kind.
Alexander hated thinking,
Drank about at council board:
He subdued the world by drinking
More than by his conquering sword.
SONG.
WHEN once I with Phillida strayed,
Where rivers run murmuring by,
And heard the soft vows that she made,
What swain was so happy as I?
My breast was a stranger to care,
For my wealth by her kisses I told;
I thought myself richer, by far,
Than he that had mountains of gold.
But now I am poor and undone
Her vows have proved empty and vain;
The kisses I once thought my own,
Are bestowed on a happier swain:
But cease, gentle shepherd, to deem
Her vows shall be constant and true;
They Are false as a midsummer dream,
As fickle as midsummer dew.
O Phillis, so fickle and fair,
Why did you my love then approve?
Had you frowned on my suit, through despair,
I soon had forgotten to love:
You smiled, and your smiles were so sweet,
You spoke, and your words were so kind,
I could not suspect the deceit.
But gave my loose sails to the wind.
When tempests the ocean deform,
And billows so mountainous roar,
The pilot, secured from the storm,
Never ventures his bark from the shore,
A soon as soft breezes arise,
And smiles the false face of the sea,
His art he, too credulous, tries,
And, sailing, is shipwrecked, like me.
SONG.
WHEN blushes died the cheek of morn,
And dew drops glisten'd on the thorn;
When sky-larks tuned their carrols sweet,
To hail the god of light and heat;
Philander, from his downy bed,
To fair Lisetta's chamber sped,
Crying -- Awake sweet love of mine,
I Am come to be thy Valentine.
Soft love that balmy sleep denies,
Had long unveil^d her brilliant eyes,
Which (that a kiss she might obtain)
She artfully had closed again:
He sunk, thus caught in beauty's trap,
Like Phoebus into Thetis' lap,
And near forgot that his design
Was but to be her Valentine.
She, starting, cried -- I am undone;
Philander, charming youth, begone!
For this time, to your vows sincere,
Make virtue, not your love, appear:
No sleep has closed these watchful eyes
(Forgive the simple fond disguise)
To generous thoughts your heart incline,
And be my faithful Valentine.
The brutal passion sudden fled,
Fair honor governed in its stead,
And both agreed, ere setting sun,
To join two virtuous hearts in one:
Their beauteous offspring soon did prove
The sweet effects of mutual love;
And, from that hour to life's decline,
She blessed the day of Valentine.
SONG.
IN all mankind's promiscuous race,
The sons of error urge their chase,
The wondrous to pursue:
And, both in country and in town,
The curious courtier, cit, and clown,
Solicit something new.
The poets still from nature take,
And what is ready made they make;
Historians must be true;
How therefore shall we find a road,
Through dissertation, song, or ode,
To give you something new?
They say virginity is scarce
As any thing in prose or verse,
And so is honor too:
The papers of the day imply,
No more than that we live and die,
And pay for something new.
We see alike, the woeful dearth.
In melancholy, or in mirth;
What then shall ladies do?
Seek virtue as the immortal prize:
In fine, be honest, and be wise,
For that is something new.
The Hermit.
AT the close of the day, when the Hamlet it still,
And mortals the sweet of forgetfulness prove,
When naught but the torrent i^ heard on the hill,
And naught but the nightingale's song in the grove:
'Twas thus, by the cave of the mountain afar,
While his harp rung symphonious, a Hermit began:
No more with himself or with nature at war,
He thought as a sage, though he felt as a man.
Ah why, all abandoned to darkness and woe,
Why, alone Philomela, that languishing fall?
For spring shall return, and a lover bestow,
And sorrow no longer thy bosom enthral.
But, if pity inspire thee, renew the sad lay.
Mourn sweetest complainer, man calls thee to mourn;
O soothe him, whose pleasures like thine pass away,
Full quickly they pass -- but they never return.
Now gliding remote, on the verge of the sky,
The moon half extinguished her cresent displays,
But lately I marked, when majestic on high,
She shone, and the planets were lost in her blaze.
Roll on, thou fair orb, and with gladness pursue
The path that conducts thee to splendour again,
But man's faded glory what change shall renew!
Ah fool! to exult in a glory so vain!
It Is night, and the landscape is lovely no more;
I mourn, but ye woodlands, I mourn not for you:
For morn is approaching your charms to restore:
Perfumed with fresh fragrance and glittering with dew.
Nor yet for the ravage of winter I mourn;
Kind nature the embryo blossom will save:
But when shall spring visit the mouldering urn!
O when shall it dawn on the night of the grave!
A Continuation of the Hermit.
'TWAS thus, by the glare of false science betrayed,
That leads, to bewilder, and dazzle to blind:
My thoughts wont to roam, from shade onward to shade,
Destruction before me, and sorrow behind.
O pity great Father of light, then I cried,
Thy creature who fain would not wander from thee!
Lo, humbled in dust, I relinquish my pride:
From doubt and from darkness thou only can free.
And darkness and doubt are now flying away,
No longer I roam in conjecture forlorn,
So breaks on the traveller, faint and astray,
The bright and the balmy effulgence of morn.
See truth, love, and mercy, in triumph descending,
And nature all glowing in Eden's first bloom,
On the cold cheek of death smiles and roses are budding,
And beauty immortal awake from the tomb.
And beauty, etc.
The Crying and Laughing Song.
WHEN I wake with painful brow,
Ere the cock begins to crow,
Tossing, tumbling in my bed,
Aching heart, and aching head,
Pond'ring over human ills,
Cruel bailiffs, tailors bills,
Flush and pam thrown up at loo,
When those sorrows strike my view,
I cry --
And to stop the gushing tear,
Wipe it with the pillow bear.
But when sportive evening comes,
Routs, ridottos, balls, and drums,
Casinos here, festinos there,
Mirth and pastime every where.
Seated by a sprightly lass,
Smiling with the smiling glass;
When these pleasures are my lot,
Tailors, bailiffs, all forgot,
I laugh, --
Careless what may then befall,
Thus I shake my sides at all.
Then again when I peruse,
Over my tea the morning news,
Dismal tales of plundered houses,
Wanton wives and cuckold spouses;
When I read of money lent,
At sixteen and half per cent.
I cry, --
But if ever the muffin's gone,
Simp'ring enters honest John,
'Sir, Miss Lucy's at the door,
'Waiting in a chaise and four,"
Instant vanish all my cares,
Swift I scamper down the stairs,
And laugh, --
So may this indulgent throng,
Who now smiling grace my song,
Never more cry oh! oh! la!
But join with me in ha! ha! ha!
The Crying and Laughing Song.
WHEN the hated morning's light,
Peeping in, offends my sight,
Tossing to and fro in bed.
Aching heart, and aching head;
Counting over my various ills,
Fickle lovers, mercers bills;
All the sums I Have lost at dice,
When these in my mind arise,
I cry, --
But if it is Pantheon night,
Or that Ranelagh invite,
Chicheratas here, Macheratas there,
Or to Vauxhall I repair;
If I meet my Lord Perfume,
Or dear Col'nel Thunder Bomb;
When such pleasures are my lot,
Fickle lovers all forgot,
Dice and mercers bills forgot --
I laugh, --
Then, if in the Morning Post,
I read reputations lost,
Sly intrigues, and cuckold spouses,
Great debates in both the houses;
When I Am told that dissipation,
Folly, lux'ry, rule the nation;
That the rich, the young and wise,
To true pleasure shut their eyes;
I cry, --
But, if ever my tears are gone,
Simp'ring enters honest John,
'Ma'am, Sir Jehu's at the door,
'In his phaeton and four:"
Instant all my sorrows cease,
Out I run, and take my place;
With such joys the moments glide
By my dear Sir Jehu's side;
I laugh, --
Fair Hebe.
FAIR Hebe I left with a cautious design.
To escape from her charms, and to drown 'em in wine:
I tried, but found, when I came to depart,
The wine in my head, and still love in my heart.
I repaired to my reason, entreated her aid,
Who paused on my case, and each circumstance weighed,
Then gravely pronounced in return to my prayer,
That Hebe was fairest of all that was fair.
That Is a truth, replied I, I have no need to be taught,
I came for your council to find out a fault;
If that is all, quoth Reason, return as you came,
To find fault with Hebe would forfeit my name.
What hopes then, alas! of relief from my pain,
While like lightning she darts through each throbing vein,
My senses confirms me a slave to her charms.
SONG.
ADIEU the verdant lawns and bowers,
Adieu, my peace is over;
Adieu the sweetest shrubs and flowers,
Since Delia breathes no more.
Adieu ye hills, adieu ye vales,
Adieu ye streams and floods,
Adieu sweet echo's plaintive tales,
Adieu ye meads and woods.
Adieu ye flocks, ye fleecy care,
Adieu yon pleasing plain:
Adieu thou beauteous blooming fair,
We never shall meet again.
SONG.
MY sweet pretty Mog, you're as soft as a bog,
And wild as a kitten, and wild as a kitten,
Those eyes in your face -- (O pity my case)
Poor Dermot has smitten, poor Dermot has smitten.
For softer than silk, and as fair as new milk,
Your lilly white hand is, your lilly white hand is:
Your shape's like a pail, from your head to your tail,
You're strait as a wand is, you're strait as a wand is.
Your lips red as cherries, and your curling hair is
As black as the devil, as black as the devil:
Your breath is as sweet too as any patotoe,
Or orange from Seville, or orange from Seville.
When dressed in your boddice, you trip like a goddess,
So nimbly, so frisky; so nimbly, so frisky:
A kiss on your cheek, it is so soft and so sleek,
Would warm me like whisky, would warm me like whisky;
I grunt and I pine, and sob like a swine,
Because you're so cruel, because you're so cruel:
No rest can I take, and asleep or awake
I dream of my jewel, I dream of my jewel.
Your hate then give over, nor Dermot your lover,
So cruelly handle, so cruelly handle!
Or Dermot must die, like a pig in a stye,
Or snuff of a candle, or snuff of a candle,
The Chaise Marine.
MY dearest life, were thou my wife,
How happy should I be!
And all my care in peace and war,
Should be to pleasure thee.
When up and down from town to town,
We jolly soldiers rove;
Then you, my queen, in chaise-marine,
Shall move like queen of love.
Your love I Would prize beyond the skies,
Beyond the spoils of war;
Would thou agree to follow me,
In humble baggage car,
For happiness, though in distress,
In soldiers wives is seen:
And pride in coach has more reproach;
Than love, in chaise-marine.
Oh! do not hold your love in gold,
Nor set your heart on gain;
Behold the great, with all their state,
Their lives are care and pain.
In house of tent, I pay no rent,
Nor care nor trouble see:
But every day I get my pay,
And spend it merrily.
Love not the knaves, great fortune's slaves,
Who lead ignoble lives:
Nor deign to smile on men so vile,
Who fight none but their wives.
For Britain's right and you we fight,
And every ill defy:
Should but the fair reward our care,
With love and constancy.
If sighs, nor groans, nor tender moans,
Can win your hardened heart;
Let love in arms, with all his charms,
Then take a soldier's part.
With fife and drum the soldiers come,
And all the pomp of war;
Then don't think mean of Chaise-marine,
It Is Love's triumphant car.
SONG.
AMIDST a rosy bank of flowers,
Young Damon mourned his forlorn fate;
In sighs he spent his languid hours,
And breathed his woes in lonely state.
Gay joy no more shall cheer his mind,
No wanting sports can soothe his care,
Since sweet Amanda proved unkind,
And left him full of black despair.
His looks they were as fresh as morn,
Can now no longer smiles impart;
His pensive soul on sadness born,
Is racked and torn by Cupid's dart.
Turn, fair Amanda! cheer your swain,
Unshroud him from his veil of woe;
Range every charm to ease his pain,
That in his tortured breast does grow.
The joys of Harvest.
NOW pleasure unbounded resounds over the plains,
And brightens the smiles of the damsels and swains,
As they follow the last team of harvest along:
And end all their toils with a dance and a song,
Possessed of the plenty that blesses the year,
And when tempests rattle and hurricanes roar,
Bleak Winter's approach they behold without fear,
Enjoy what they have, and never languish for more.
Dear Chloe from them let us learn to be wise,
And use every moment of life as it flies;
Gay youth is the Springtime which all must improve
For Summer to ripen and Harvest to love:
Our hearts then a provident care should engage,
To lay friendship in store for the Winter of rage;
Whose frowns shall disarm even Chloe's bright eye,
Damp the flame in my bosom, and pale every joy.
A Lapland Love-Song.
THOU rising sun whose gladsome ray,
Invites my fair to rural play,
Dispel the mist and clear the skies,
And bring my Orra to my eyes.
Oh! were I sure my dear to view,
I Would climb the pine-tree's topmost bough,
Aloft in air that quivering plays,
And round and round for ever gaze.
My Orra Moor, where art thou laid?
What woods conceal my sleeping maid?
Up by the roots enraged I Will tear
The trees that hide my promised fair.
O could I ride on clouds and skies,
Or on the raven's pinions rise!
Ye storks, ye swans, a moment stay,
And waft a lover on his way.
My bliss too long my bride denies,
Apace the wasting summer flies;
Nor yet the wint'ry blasts I fear,
Not storms or nights shall keep me here.
What may for strength with steel compare?
Oh! love has stronger fetters far^
By bolts of steel are limbs confined,
But cruel love enchains the mind
No longer then perplex the breast:
When thoughts perplex, the first are best:
It Is mad to go, it is death to stay:
Away to Orra, haste away,
SONG.
HE that will not merry merry be
With a generous bowl and a toast,
May he in Bridwell be shut up,
And fast bound to a post.
Let him be merry, merry there,
And we'll be merry, here:
For who can know where we shall go
To be merry another year?
Let him be merry, etc.
He that will not merry, merry be,
And take his glass in course,
May he be obliged to drink small beer,
With never a penny in his purse,
Let him be merry, etc.
He that will not merry, merry be,
With a comp'ny of jolly boys,
May he be plagued with a scolding wife,
To confound him with her noise.
Let him be merry, etc.
He that will not merry, merry be
With his mistress in his bed,
Let him be buried in the church yard,
And me put in his stead.
Let him be merry, etc.
SONG.
DO you hear, brother sportsmen, the sound of the horn,
And yet the sweet pleasure decline?
For shame, rouse your senses, and, ere it is morn,
With me the sweet melody join.
Through the wood and the valley the traitor well rally,
Nor quit him till panting he lies;
While hounds, in full cry, through hedges shall fly,
And chase the swift hare till he dies.
Then saddle your steed, to the meadows and fields
Both willing and joyous repair;
No pastime in life greater happiness yields
Then chacing the fox and the hare.
For such comforts, my friend, on the sportsman attend,
No pleasure like hunting is found,
For when it is over, as brisk as before,
Next morning we spurn up the ground.
Kiss my bonny Mou'.
AS I was ganging over the lee,
I chanced to look behind,
And wha right glancing should I see
But woodland Joe the hind.
When he had gang'd the braes a while,
He said to me my dew,
May I not sit upon this style
And kiss your bonny mou'.
Kind sir, ye are a we mista'en,
For I am nane of these,
I hope ye some more breeding ken,
Than ruffle lasses claiths.
The lad was checked, and vowed to seek
Young Jane wi' blithsome brow,
She Would let him clasp her round the neck,
And kiss her bonny mou'.
I ca'd him then proud hearted swain,
And laith to be in said nay:
A sous^y thought he started then,
And named the wedding day.
He Is braw and blithe, I liked him we^^,
Nor frown upon him now,
Though bolder grown, his vows to seal,
He kissed my bonny mou'.
The Bonny Sailor.
MY bonny sailor's won my mind,
My heart is now with him at sea;
I hope the summer's western breeze
Will bring him safely back to me:
I wish to hear what glorious toils,
What dangers he has undergone,
What forts he is stormed, how great the spoils,
From France and Spain my sailor's won.
A thousand terrors chilled my breast,
When fancy brought the foe in view,
And day and night I Have had no rest,
Lest every gale a tempest blew;
Bring, gentle gales, my sailor home;
His ship at anchor may I see;
Three years are sure enough to roam,
Too long for one that loves like me.
His face by sultry climes is wan,
His eyes by watching shines less bright;
But still I Will own my charming man,
And run to meet him when in sight:
His honest heart is what I prize,
No weather can make that look old:
Though altered were his face and eyes,
I Will love my jolly sailor bold.
SONG.
LEAVE kindred and friends sweet Betty,
Leave kindred and friends for me,
Assured thy servant is steady,
To love, to honor, and thee:
The gifts of nature and fortune,
May fly by chance as they came,
They Are grounds the destinies sport on,
But virtue is ever the same.
Although my fancy were roving,
Thy charms so heavenly appear,
That other beauties disproving,
I Would worship thee only, my dear:
And should life's sorrows embitter,
The pleasure we promised our loves,
To share them together is fitter,
Than moan asunder like doves.
Oh! were I but once so blessed,
To grasp my love in my arms,
By thee to be grasp^d, and kissed,
And live on thy heaven of charms.
I Would laugh at fortune's caprices,
Should fortune capricious prove,
Though death should tear me to pieces,
I Would die a martyr to love.
The Days of love.
SOLICITATION.
YOUNG Thyrsis, the pride of the plain,
Cleora had often addressed,
Truth and honor were found in the swain
And the nymph was the brightest confessed,
Yet still to his passion unkind,
Unheeded she heard his fond tale,
With the pangs of despair in his mind,
He sorrowful sighed through the vale,
He sorrowful sighed through the vale.
Impelled by the fondest regard,
He sought the dear maid once again,
From his constancy hoped a reward
For there never was a more faithful swain;
With her flocks as she strayed in the grove,
The language of love he essayed;
He begged she would his passion approve,
And a smile beamed at last from the maid:
And a smile, etc.
O smile my Cleora again,
The cares of my bosom relieve,
Nor treat me with frowns or disdain,
For your Thyrsis will never deceive;
More softened Cleora replied,
I pity the pangs in your breast,
Complain then no more of my pride,
And Thyrsis may hope for the best.
And Thyrsis, etc.
HOPE.
VAIN sorrows and cares shall no l^nger molest,
While hope, pleasing hope, reigns (...) Thyrsis' fond breast,
While hope, pleasing hope, etc.
Cleora, dear charmer at length has proved kind,
And banished suspicions and doubts from my mind
And banished suspicions, etc.
Her smiles gave a rapture I cannot declare,
And proved that the nymph is as kind as she is fair:
Her smiles, etc.
Ye moments, ye hours, and ye days swiftly fly,
Till the maid with my utmost request shall comply;
Still shade her, ye trees, from the heat of the day,
And near her ye lambkins still frolic and play,
She taught me to hope, and dispelled my despair,
Which proves that the nymph is as kind as she is fair.
Sweet hope, thou attendant of fondest desire,
From a lover like Thyrsis you never shall retire,
But sooth his fond passion from morning to night,
And comfort his mind with the thought of delight,
Cleora at last has dispelled my despair,
Which proves that the nymph is as kind as she is fair!
CONSENT.
IN the woodbines pleasing shade,
There I pressed the lovely made,
Fondly told again my love,
Fondly told etc.
While the linnets sung above.
While the linnets, etc.
Turtles round were heard to coo,
Whilst in softest words I woo;
Fair Cleora now incline,
Fair Cleora, etc.
Let me take this hand of thine:
Let me take, etc.
Does she then consent at last!
Every anxious doubt is past;
Blushing does she yield her hand,
Owning nature's fond command,
Catch ye winds the pleasing sound,
And convey the news around,
Fair Cleora does incline,
Now with me her hand to join:
Now with me, etc.
CELEBRATION.
How sweetly the merry bells ring,
How sweetly the merry bells ring,
How gay is each nymph and each swain,
As blithe as the lark in the spring,
The tabor sounds over the plain:
The tabor, etc.
From the church comes the bridegroom and bride,
Young Thyrsis Cleora has wed;
The virgins all dressed by her side,
With blushes their cheeks overspread:
With blushes, etc.
So rises the morn from the east,
All nature to cherish below,
With charms which cannot be expressed,
And blessings on all to bestow;
How happy is Thyrsis to prove,
The sweets which on Hymen attend,
The raptures of virtue and love,
The mistress, the wife, and the friend.
Ye swains like young Thyrsis be true,
Ye nymphs like Cleora be kind,
Keep virtue and prudence in view,
And sweets you will certainly find.
Then the village for you shall be gay,
The bells and the tabor resound,
And pleasure prolong the glad day,
When Hymen your wishes has crowned,
SONG.
OVER moorlands and mountains rude, barren, and bare,
As wearied and wilder'd I roam,
A gentle young shepherdess sees my despair,
And leads me over lawns to her home:
And leads me, etc.
Yellow sheafs from rich Ceres her cottage had crowned,
Green rushes were strewn on the floor,
Her casements sweet woodbines crept wantonly round,
And decked the sod seat at her door.
And decked, etc.
We sat ourselves down to a cooling repast,
Fresh fruit, and she culled me the best,
Whilst thrown from my guard by some glances she cast,
Love slily stole into my breast.
I told my soft wishes, she sweetly replied,
(Ye virgins her voice was divine)
I have rich ones rejected, and great ones denied,
Yet take me, fond shepherd, I Am thine.
Her air was so modest, her aspect so meek,
So simple though sweet were her charms*
I kissed the ripe roses that glowed on her cheek,
And locked the loved maid in my arms.
Now jocund together we tend a few sheep,
And if on tbe banks by the stream,
Reclined on her bosom I sink into sleep,
Her image still softens my dream.
Together we range over the slow rising hills,
Delighted with pastoral views,
Or rest on rocks where streamlet distills,
And marks out new themes for my muse:
To pomp or proud titles she never could aspire,
The damsel's of humble descent;
The cottager Peace is well known for her fire,
The shepherd's have named her Content.
The Sailor's Adieu.
DISTRESS me with those tears no more,
One kiss my love and then adieu;
The last boat destined for the shore,
Waits dearest girl alone for you:
Soon, soon before the light wind borne,
Shall I be severed from your sight;
You left the lonely hours to mourn,
And weep through many a stormy night.
When far along the restless deep,
In trim array the ship shall steer,
Your form, remembrance still shall keep,
Your worth, affection still revere:
And with the distance from your eyes,
My love for you shall be increased,
As to the pole the needle lies,
And farthest off, still varies least.
While round the bowl the cheerful crew,
Shall sing of triumphs on the main,
My thoughts shall fondly turn to you,
Of you alone shall be my strain:
And when we have bowed the leaguing foe,
Revengeful for our country's wrong,
Returning home my heart shall show
No fiction graced my artless song.
The Choice of Three Lovers.
THE choice of three lovers I have to be sure,
One is rich, one is handsome, and one very poor;
This is old -- this is young -- the other half way;
One is wise, one is witty, and one is yea nay.
Love lives not with poverty, often I Have been told,
Nor can it with age, though surrounded with gold;
The handsome and witty are each fond of self,
So I Will neither choose poverty, beauty, nor pelf.
But give me the man who is blessed with good sense,
The raptures of life are still flowing from thence,
Though plain in his person, not rich, nor yet poor,
I Will give him my hand, still to love and adore.
I Will dress me in smiles, and good humor each day,
Or grieve, when he grieves, and be gay, when he is gay;
With the fondest affection attend him through life,
And prove by example what is a good wife.
The Jolly Miller.
THERE was a jolly miller once lived on the river Dee;
He danced and he sung from morn till night, no lark so blithe as he.
And this the burden of his song for ever used to be,
I care for nobody, no, not I, if no body cares for me.
I live by my mill, God bless her! she is kindred, child, and wife;
I would not change my station for any other in life.
No lawyer, surgeon, or doctor, ever had a groat from me.
I care for nobody, no, not I, if nobody cares for me.
When spring begins its merry career, oh! how his heart grows gay!
No summer's drouth alarms his fears, no winter's sad decay,
No foresight marrs the miller's joy, who is wont to sing and say,
Let others toil from year to year, I live from day to day.
Thus, like the miller bold and free, let us rejoice and sing;
The days of youth are made for glee, and time is on the wing.
This song shall pass from me to thee, long this jovial ring.
Let heart and voice and all agree to say long live the king.
Blow high, blow low.
BLOW high, blow low, let tempests tear
The mainmast by the board,
My heart with thoughts of thee my dear,
And love well stored,
Shall brave all danger, scorn all fear,
The roaring winds, the raging seas
In hopes on shore,
To be once more
Safe moored with thee.
Aloft, while mountains high we go,
The whistling winds that scud along,
And the surge roaring from below,
Shall my signal be to think on thee,
(...) all my signal be
To think on thee.
And this shall be my song,
Blow (...), etc.
And on that night when all the crew
The memory of their former lives
Over flowing cans of flip renew,
And drink their sweethearts and their wives,
I Will heave a sigh, I Will heave a sigh
And think on thee;
And as the ship rolls through the sea,
The burden of my song shall be.
Blow high, etc.
Good Night, and Joy be wi' you.
HOW happy's he, whoever he be
That in his life meets one true friend,
Who cordially does sympathise
In words, in action, heart and mind.
My kind respects do not neglect
Although my wealth or state be small
With a melting heart and a mournful eye
I beg the Lord be with you all.
My loving friends, I kiss your hands,
For time invites me for to move;
On your poor servant lay commands,
Who is ambitious of your love.
He -- whose power and might, both day and night,
Governs the depths, makes rain to fall,
To sun and moon gives course of light,
Direct, protect, defend you all.
I do protest, within my breast.
Your memory I Will not neglect;
On that record I Will lay arrest,
Hell's fury shall not alter it.
All I desire of earthly bliss,
Is to be freed from guilt or thrall;
I hope my God will grant me this:
Good night, and joy be with you all.
F^NIS.

