THE CHARMS of MELODY: OR, A CHOICE COLLECTION OF THE MOST APPROVED SONGS,
CATCHES, DUETS, etc.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY M. CAREY, For THOMAS SEDDON, MARKET-STREET.
M.DCC.LXXXVIII.

INDEX
A rose tree in full bearing, 6 As I went to the wake that is held on the
green, 55 As down on Banna's banks I strayed, 85 As you mean to set sail for
the land of delight, 77 Ask if yon damask rose is sweet, 50 A bumper of good
liquor, 55 Ah! sure a pair was never seen, 13 Attend, ye nymphs, while I
impart, 56 By the gaily circling glass, 77 By him we love offended, 59 Blessed as
the immortal gods is he, 75 Believe my sighs, my tears, my dear, 78 Blow, blow,
thou winter's wind, 58 Cease, gay seducers, pride to take, 32 Come, haste to
the wedding, 7 Come, jolly Bacchus, god of wine, 15 Come, now, all ye social
powers, 28 Come, live with me, and be my love, 51 Could I her faults remember,
54 Contented I am, and contented I Will be, 63 Dear Tom, this brown jug, 6 Down
the burn and through the mead, 26 Dear heart! what a terrible life I am led! 66
Dear Chloe, come, give me sweet kisses, 87 Encompassed in an angel's frame, 11
Farewell to Lochaber, and farewell, my Jean, 30 Farewell ye green fields, and
sweet groves, 66 Fill your glasses: banish grief: 44 Give Isaac the nymph who
no beauty can boast 35 Give me but a wife, I expect not to find, 35 Guardian
angels, now protect me, 40 Go, rose, my Chloe's bosom grace, 59 Had I a heart
for falsehood framed, 31 Here Is to the maiden of bashful fifteen, 53 Hope! thou
nurse of young desire, 36 How blessed the maid whose bosom, 37 How imperfect is
expression, ibid How happy were my days till now? 50 How blithe was I each morn
to see, 92 How blessed has my time been! 93 How often, Louisa, have thou said, 25
If over the cruel tyrant, love, 89 In the social enjoyments of life let me
live, 90 In penance for past folly, 60 In love there should meet a fond pair,
82 If love's a sweet passion, how can it torment, 79 I wanna marry any man but
Sandy over the lee, 80 I have seriously weighed it, and find it but just, 57 I
am married, and happy. With wonder hear this, 42 I locked up all my treasure,
65 Jolly mortals, fill your glasses, 41 Let masonry from pole to pole, 13 Let
rakes and libertines, resigned, 32 Let Us be jovial -- fill your glasses, 42
Leave off this idle prating, 38 Lovely nymph, assuage my anguish, 81 My banks
are all furnished with bees, 43 My lodging is on the cold ground, 12 My heart's
my own, my will is free, 27 My temples with clusters of grapes I Will entwine, 16
My Sandy is the sweetest swain, 81 My Nancy quits the rural train, 85 O bonny
lass will you lie in a garret? 17 O the days when I was young! 14 O Sandy, why
leave thou thy Nelly to mourn, 8 O Nelly, no longer thy Sandy now mourns, 9
Oh! had I been by fate decreed, 43 Push about the brisk bowl: 'twill enliven
the heart, 67 Rail no more ye learned asses, 83 Shepherds, I have lost my love,
25 Since laws are made for every degree, 96 Since wedlock's in vogue, 90 Sleep
on, sleep on, my Kathleen dear, 5 The wealthy fool, with gold in store, 5 The
wandering sailor ploughs the main, 10 The wanton god, who pierces hearts, 23
The silver moon's enamored beam, 29 The world, my dear Myra, is sull of
deceit, 31 The soldier, tired of war's alarms, 33 The pride of all nature was
sweet Willy O, 48 The bird, that hears her nestlings cry, ibid The lowland lads
think they are fine, 62 The heavy hours are almost past, 65 The modes of the
court so common are grown, 73 The virgin, when softened by May, 74 The sun from
the east tips the mountains with gold, 88 Though prudence may press me, 33 To
ease his heart and own his flame, 23 To heal the smart a be had made, 83 There
was a jolly miller once, 18 There was once, it is said, 69 'Twas summer, and
softly the breezes were blowing, 49 Vows of love should ever bind, 82 When
war's alarms had hurried Willy from me, 34 When trees did bud, and fields were
green, 39 When all the Attic fire was sled, 54 When the trees are all bare, not
a leaf to be seen, 62 When innocent pastime our pleasures did crown, 84 When
late I wandered over the plain, 94 While the lads of the village shall merrily,
ah! 24 What bard, O time, discover, 27 What shepherd, or nymph of the grove, 75
Was I a shepherd's maid, to keep, 84 Water parted from the sea, 82 Would you
taste the noontide air, 77 With woman and wine I defy every care, 16 With
tuneful pipe, and merry glee, 51 Well met, pretty nymph, says a jolly young
swain, 68 Ye sportsmen draw near, and ye sportswomen too, 95 Ye belles, and ye
flirts, and ye pert little things, 45 Ye virgins, attend, 47 Ye fair married
dames who so often deplore, 20 Ye fair, possessed of every charm, ibid Ye fair
who shine throughout this land, 21 Young Jamie loo'd me weel, and asked me for
his bride, 52 You tell me I Am handsome, 95
THE CHARMS of MELODY.
SONG 1. Poor Soldier.
SLEEP on, sleep on, my Kathleen dear,
May peace possess thy breast;
Yet do thou dream thy true love's here,
Deprived of peace and rest?
The birds sing sweet, the morning breaks,
Those joys are none to me;
'Tho' sleep is fled, poor Dermot wakes
To none, but love and thee!
SONG 2. Poor Soldier.
THE wealthy sool, with gold in store,
Will still desire to grow richer;
Give me but health, I ask no more,
My little girl, my friend, and pither.
My friend so rare,
My girl so fair;
With such, what mortal can be richer?
Give (...) but these, a fig for care,
With my sweet girl, my friend, and pitcher.
Though fortune ever shuns my door,
(I know not what can thus bewitch her)
With all my heart: can I be poor,
With my sweet girl, my friend, and pitcher?
My friend so rare,
My girl so fair, etc.
SONG 3. Poor Soldier.
DUET.
HE. A Rose tree in full bearing,
Had sweet flowers fair to see;
One rose beyond comparing,
For beauty attracted me.
Though eager then to win it,
Lovely, blooming, fresh, and gay;
I find a canker in it,
And now throw it far away.

SHE. How fine this morning early,
All sunshiny, clear, and bright!
So late I loved you dearly,
Though lost now each fond delight.
The clouds seem big with showers,
Sunny beams no more are seen;
Farewell ye fleeting hours,
Your falsehood has changed the scene.

SONG 4. Poor Soldier.
DEAR Tom, this brown jug, that now foam with mild ale,
Out of which I now drink to sweet Nan of the vale,
Was once Toby Philpot, a thirsty old soul,
As ever cracked a bottle, or fathomed a bowl.
In boozing about, 'twas his praise to excel,
And among jolly topers he bore off the bell.
It chanced in the dog days, as he sat at his ease,
In his flow'r-woven arbor, as gay as you please,
With a friend and a pipe, puffing sorrow away,
And with honest old stingo was soaking his clay,
His breath-doors of life on a sudden were shut,
And he died full as big as a Dorchester but.
His body, when long in the ground it had lain,
And time, into clay, had dissolved it again,
A potter found out in it is covert so snug,
And with part of fat Toby he formed this brown jug,
Now sacred to friendship, and mirth, and mild ale:
So here is to my lovely sweet Nan of the vale.
SONG 5. The Country Wedding.
COME haste to the wedding, ye friends and ye neighbors,
The lovers their bliss can no longer delay:
Forget all your sorrows, your cares, and your labors,
And let every heart beat with rapture to day.
Come, come, one and all,
Attend to my call,
And revel in pleasures that never can cloy;
Come see
Rural felicity,
Which love and innocence ever enjoy.
Come see, etc.
Let envy and pride, let hate and ambition,
Still crowd to, and bias the breasts of the great;
To such wretched passions we give no admission,
But leave them alone to the wise ones of state,
We boast of no wealth,
But contentment and health;
In mirth and in friendship our moments employ.
Come see, etc.
With reason we taste of each heart-stirring pleasure;
With reason, we drink of the full-flowing bowl,
Are jocund and gay, but all within measure,
For fatal excess but enslaves the free soul.
Come, come at our bidding,
To this happy wedding,
No care shall obtrude here, our bliss to annoy.
Come see, etc.
SONG 6. Through the Wood, Laddie.
O Sandy, why leave thou thy Nelly to mourn?
Thy presence could ease me,
When naething can please me:
Thy presence could ease me,
Now dowie I sigh, on the banks of the burn,
Or through the wood, laddie, until thou return.
Through the wood, laddie, through the wood, laddie,
Through the wood, through the wood,
Through the wood, laddie;
Now dowie I sigh, etc.
Though woods now are bonny, and mornings are clear,
While lav'rocks are singing,
And primroses springing;
Yet nane of them pleases my eye or my ear,
When through the wood, laddie, ye dinna appear.
Through the wood, etc.
That I am forsaken, some spare not tell:
I am fash'd wi' their scorning,
Both evening and morning;
Their jeering gaes aft to my heart wi' a knell,
When through the wood, laddie, I wander mysell.
Through the wood, etc.
Then stay, my dear Sandy, nae langer away,
But quick as an arrow,
Haste here to thy marrow,
Wha's living in languor till that happy day,
When through the wood, laddie, we'll dance, sing, and play.
SONG 7.
O Nelly! no longer thy Sandy now mourns,
Let music and pleasure
Abound without measure,
Let music and pleasure, etc.
Over hillocks, or mountains, or low in the burn,
Or, through the wood, lassie, until thou return.
Through the wood, lassie, through the wood, lassie,
Through the wood, through the wood,
Through the wood, lassie;
Over hillocks, or mountains, etc.
Since I have been absent from thee, my dear Nell,
No content, no delight,
Have I known day or night;
The murmuring stream, and the hill's echo tell,
How through the wood, lassie, I breathed my sad knell,
Through the wood, etc.
And now to all sorrow I Will bid full adieu,
And, with joy, like a dove,
I Will return to my love:
The maxim of loving, in truth let us know,
Then through the wood, lassie, we'll bonnily go,
Through the wood, etc.
Come lads, and come lassies, be blithsome and gay,
Let your hearts merry be,
And both full of glee:
The highlands shall ring with the joy of the day,
When through the wood, happy, we'll dance, sing and play.
Thro'the wood, etc.
SONG 8. The wandering sailor.
THE wandering sailor ploughs the main,
A competence in life to gain;
Undaunted, braves the stormy seas,
To find at last content and ease;
In hopes, when toil and danger's over,
To anchor on his native shore.
When winds blow hard, and mountain roll,
And thunders shake from pole to pole;
Though dearthful waves surrounding foam,
Still flattering fancy wafts him home;
In hopes, when toil and danger's over,
To anchor on his native shore.
When round the bowl the jovial crew
The early-scenes of youth renew;
Though each his favorite fair will boast,
This is the universal toast,
May we, when toil and danger's over,
Cast anchor on our native shore!
SONG 9. Anna's urn.
ENCOMPASSED in an angel's frame.
An angel's virtue lay:
Too soon did heaven assert its claim,
And called its own away.
My Anna's worth, my Anna's charms,
Can never more return;
What then shall fill these widowed arms?
Ah me! my Anna's urn.
Can I forget that bliss refined,
Which, blessed with her, I knew?
Our hearts in sacred bonds entwined,
Were bound by love most true.
That rural train which once were used
In festive dance to turn,
So pleased when Anna they amused,
Now, weeping, deck her urn.
The soul escaping from its chain,
She clasped me to her breast,
To part with thee is all my pain,
She cried, then sunk to rest.
While memory shall her seat retain,
From beauteous Anna torn,
My heart shall breathe its mournful strain,
Of sorrow over her urn.
There with the earliest dawn, a dove
Laments her murdered mate;
There Philomela, lost to love,
Tells the pale moon her fate.
With yew and ivy round me spread,
My Anna there I Will mourn;
For all my soul, now she is dead,
Concenters in her urn.
SONG 10. A favorite mad song.
MY lodging is on the cold ground,
And very hard is my fate;
But that which grieves me more, love,
Is the coldness of my dear:
Yet still she cried, turn love,
I pray thee love turn to me;
For thou art the only girl, love,
That is adored by me.
With a garland of straw I will crown thee, love,
I Will marry you with a rush ring:
Thy frozen heart shall melt with love,
So merrily I shall sing.
Yet still, etc.
But if you will harden your heart, love,
And be deaf to my pitiful moan:
Oh! I must endure the smart, love,
And tumble in straw all alone.
Yet still, etc.
SONG 11.
From the Duenna.
AH! sure a pair was never seen,
So justly formed to meet by nature;
The youth excelling so in meir,
The maid in every graceful feature:
CHORUS.
O how happy are such lovers,
When kindred beauties each discovers!
For surely she was made for thee,
And thou to bless this charming creature.
So mild your looks, your children thence,
Will early learn the task of duty:
The boys with all their father's sense;
The girls with all their mother's beauty.
CHORUS.
O how charming to inherit,
At once such graces and such spirit!
Thus while you live may fortune give,
Each blessing equal to your merit.
SONG 12. On free masonry
LET masonry from pole to pole,
Her secret laws expand;
Far as the mighty waters roll,
To wash remotest land!
That virtue has not left mankind,
Her social maxims prove;
For stamped upon the mason's mind
Are unity and love.
Ascending to her native sky,
Let masonry increase;
A glorious pillar raised on high,
Integrity its base.
Peace adds to olive-boughs entwined,
An emblematic dove:
As stamped upon the mason's mind
Are unity and love.
SONG 13.
Duenna.
CHORUS.
O The days when I was young,
When I laughed at fortune's spite,
Talked of love the whole day long,
And with nectar crowned the night.
Then it was old father, care,
Little reck'd I of thy frown;
Half thy malice youth could bear,
And the rest a bumper drown,
O! the days, etc.
Truth, they say, lives in a well,
Why, I vow, I never could see;
Let the water-drinkers tell,
There it lay always for me.
O! the days, etc.
For, when sparkling wine went round,
Never saw I falshood's mask;
But still honest truth I found
At the bottom of each flask.
O! the days, etc.
True, at length my vigour's flown,
I have years to bring decay;
Few the locks that now I own,
And the few I have are gray.
O! the days, etc.
Yet, old Jerome, thou may boast,
While thy spirits do not tire,
Still beneath thy age's frost,
Glow's a spark of useful fire.
O! the days, etc.
SONG 14.
Tune, Charles of Sweden.
COME, jolly Bacchus, god of wine,
Crown this night with pleasure:
Let none at cares of life repine,
To destroy our pleasure:
Fill up the mighty sparkling bowl,
That every true and loyal soul
May drink and sing without control,
To supp^^^ (...) pleasure.
Thus, mighty Bacchus, shall thou be
Guardian to our pleasure,
That under thy protection we
May enjoy new pleasure;
(...) as the hours glide away.
We'll in thy name invoke their stay,
And sing thy praises, that we may
Live and die with pleasure.
SONG 15.
MY temples with clusters of grapes I Will entwine,
And barter all joys for a goblet of wine:
In search of a Venus no longer I Will run,
But stop and forget her at Bacchus's ton.
Yet why this resolve to relinquish the fair?
It Is a folly, with spirits like mine, to despair,
For what mighty charms can be found in a glass,
If not filled to the health of some favorite lass?
It Is woman whose charms every rapture impart,
And lend a new spring to the pulse of the heart:
The miser himself (so supreme is her sway)
Grows convert to love, and resigns his key.
At the sound of her voice, Sorrow lifts up his head,
And Poverty listens well pleased from his shed;
While Age, in an ecstacy, hobbling along,
Beats time with his crutch to the tune of her song.
Then bring me a goblet from Bacchus's hoard,
The largest and deepest that stands on the board:
I Will fill up a brimmer, and drink to the fair;
It Is the thirst of a lover, and pledge me who dare.
SONG 16. The union of love and wine.
WITH woman and wine I defy every care,
For life without these is a bubble of air
For life without these, etc.
Each helping the other, in pleasure I roll.
And a new flow of spirits enlivens my soul;
Each helping the other, etc.
Let grave sober mortals my maxims condemn,
I never shall alter my conduct for them;
I care not how much they my measures decline,
Let 'em have their own humor and I will have mine.
Wine prudently used will our senses improve,
It Is the springtide of life, and the fuel of love:
And Venus never looked with a smile so divine,
As when Mars bound his head with a branch from the vine.
Then come, my dear charmer, thou nymph half divine,
First pledge me with kisses, next pledge me with wine;
Then giving and taking, in mutual return,
The torch of our love shall eternally burn.
But should thou my passion for wine disapprove,
My bumper I Will quit to be blessed with thy love:
For rather than forfeit the joys of my lass,
My bottle I Will break, and demolish my glass.
SONG 17.
O BONNY lass, will you lie in a barrack,
And marry a soger, and carry his wallet?
Yes I will go, and think no more on it,
I Will marry my Harry, and carry his wallet:
I Will neither ask leave of my minnie or daddie,
But off and away with my soger laddie.
O bonny lass, will you go a campaigning?
Will you suffer the hardships of battle and famine?
When fainting and bleeding, O could you draw near me,
And kindly support me, and tenderly cheer me?
O yes, I will go through those evils you mention,
And twenty times more, if you had the invention;
Neither hunger, nor cold, nor danger alarms me,
While I have my soger, my dearest, to charm me.
SONG 18. The jolly miller.
THERE was a jolly miller once,
Lived on the river Dee;
He worked, and sung, from morn till night,
No lark more blithe than he;
And this the burden of his song,
And ever used to be,
I care for nobody, no, not I,
If nobody cares for me.
A noble lord, that lived hard by,
Sent for this miller one day,
And asked him various questions,
And amongst the rest did say,
How comes it, miller, that, every day,
You sing so full of glee?
Quoth Ralph, I care for nobody,
If nobody cares for me.
Are you always thus contented?
To him the lord did say:
Ay, that I am, more happy, Quoth Ralph,
Than folks that live more gay;
No worldly cares disturb my breast,
My wife and I agree;
I care for nobody, etc.
The reason of your happiness
I would be glad to know:
Quoth Ralph, I Will tell your lordship
Part of it before you go;
I pay my rent at quarter-day,
My mind is ever free;
I care for nobody, etc.
Thrice happy thou, who thus content
Can ever merry be;
My whole estate I Would freely give
To be as content as thee.
Ralph, smiling, shook his head, and said,
My lord, that cannot be,
Your lordship cares for somebody,
And somebody cares for thee.
How can you say so, good miller,
I pray there tell to me,
And if you rightly me instruct,
Ten thousand shall be your fee:
This sum I Will give, as sure's I live,
Immediately unto thee,
When I can say, oh! happy day,
I care for nobody.
Quoth Ralph, your lordship must refrain,
Where flattering knaves resort,
Where base deceit and treach'ry reign,
I mean that place, the court.
Leave pomp and pageantry aside,
Be from ambition free;
And then your lordship soon may sing,
I care for nobody.
SONG 19.
YE fair married dames, who so often deplore,
That a lover once blessed, is a lover no more,
Attend to my counsel; nor blush to be taught,
That prudence must cherish what beauty has caught.
The bloom of your cheeks, and the glance of your eye,
Your roses and lillies may make the men sigh:
But roses, and lillies, and sighs pass away;
And passion will die, as your beauties decay.
Use the man whom you wed, like your favorite guitar:
Though music in both, they are both apt to jar:
How tuneful and soft, from a delicate touch,
Not handled too roughly, or played on too much!
The sparrow and linnet will feed from your hand;
Grow tame by your kindness; and come at command.
Exert with your husband, the same happy skill:
For hearts, like your birds, may be tamed to your will.
Be gay and good-natured, complying and kind;
Turn the chief of your care from your face to your mind:
It Is there that a wife may her conquests improve,
And Hymen shall rivet the fetters of love.
SONG 20.
YE fair, possessed of every charm
To captivate the will,
Whose smiles can rage itself disarm,
Whose frowns at once can kill --
Say, will ye deign the verse to hear.
Where flattery bears no part --
An honest verse, that flows sincere,
And candid from the heart?
Great is your power: but greater yet
Mankind it might engage,
If, as ye all can make a net,
Ye all could make a cage,
Each nymph a thousand hearts may take:
For who is to beauty blind?
But to what end a prisoner make,
Unless we have strength to bind?
Attend the counsel, often told,
Too often told in vain!
Learn that best art, the art to hold,
And lock the lover's chain,
Gamesters to little purpose win,
Who lose again as fast:
Though beauty may the charm begin,
It Is sweetness makes it last.
SONG 21.
YE fair, who shine throughout this land,
And triumph over the heart,
Awhile, I pray, to advice attend,
Which artless lays impart.
Would you obtain the youth you love,
The precepts of a friend approve,
And learn the way to keep him.
As soon as nature has decreed
The bloom of eighteen years,
And Isabel from school is freed,
Then beauty's force appears:
The youthful blood begins to flow;
She hopes for man; and longs to know
The surest way to keep him.
When first the pleasing pain is felt
Within the lover's breast --
And you by strange persuasion melt --
Each wishing to be blessed --
Be not too bold, nor yet too coy,
With prudence lure the happy boy;
And that is the way to keep him.
At court, at park, at ball, or play,
Assume a modest pride;
And, lest your tongue your mind betray,
In fewer words confide.
The maid, who thinks to gain a mate
By giddy chat, will find, too late,
That Is not the way to keep him.
In dressing, never the hours kill,
That bane to all the sex!
Nor let the arts of dear spadille
Your innocence perplex.
Be always decent as a bride,
By virtuous rules your conduct guide:
For that is the way to keep him.
But when the nuptial knot is fast,
And both its blessings share,
To make those joys for ever last,
Of jealousy beware.
His love with kind compliance meet,
Let constancy the work complete,
And you will be sure to keep him.
SONG 22.
THE wanton god, who pierces hearts,
Dips in gall his pointed darts:
But the nymph disdains to pine,
Who bathes the wound with rosy wine,
Rosy wine, rosy wine,
Who bathes the wound with rosy wine.
Farewell lovers, when they are cloyed,
If I Am scorned because enjoyed --
Sure the squeamish fops are free
To rid me of dull company:
Sure they are free, sure they are free
To rid me of dull company.
They have charms whilst mine can please;
I love them much, but more my ease:
No jealous fears my love molest,
Nor faithless vows shall break my rest --
Break my rest, break my rest,
Nor faithless vows shall break my rest.
Why should they ever give me pain,
Who to give me joy disdain?
All I hope of mortal man,
Is to love me while he can --
While he can, while he can,
Is to love me while he can.
SONG 23.
TO ease his heart, and own his flame,
Blithe Jockey to young Jenny came:
But though she loved him passing well,
She careless turned her spinning wheel.
Her milk-white hand he did extol;
And praised her fingers long and small:
Unusual joy her heart did feel:
But still she turned her spinning wheel.
Then round about her slender waist
He clasped his arms, and her embraced.
To kiss her hand he down did kneel:
But yet she turned her spinning wheel.
With gentle voice she bid him rise:
He blessed her neck, her lips, her eyes.
Her fondness she could scarce conceal:
Yet still she turned her spinning wheel.
Till, bolder grown, so close he pressed,
His wanton thoughts she quickly guessed;
Then pushed him from her rock and reel,
And angry turned her spinning wheel.
At length, when she began to chide,
He swore he meant her for his bride:
''I'was then her love she did reveal,
And threw aside her spinning wheel.
SONG 24. Quaker.
WHILE the lads of the village shall merrily, ah!
Sound the tabors, I Will hand thee along;
And I say unto thee, that verily, ah!
Thou and I will be first in the throng.
While the lads, etc.
Just then, when the swain who last year won the dower,
With his mates shall the sports have begun,
When the gay voice of gladness resounds from each bower,
And thou long'st in thy heart to make one.
While the lads, etc.
Those joys which are harmless, what mortal can blame;
It Is my maxim, that youth should be free?
And to prove that my words and my deeds are the same,
Believe me, thou wilt presently see.
While the lads, etc.
SONG 25.
SHEPHERDS, I have lost my love,
Have you seen my Anna!
Pride of every shady grove
Upon the banks of Banna.
I for her my home forsook,
Near yon misty mountain;
Left my flock, my pipe, my crook,
Greenwood shade, and fountain.
Never shall I see them more,
Until her returning;
All the joys of life are over,
From gladness changed to mourning.
Whither is my charmer flown?
Shepherds, tell me whither?
Ah! woe is me, perhaps she is gone
For ever, and for ever.
SONG 26.
Duenna.
HOW often, Louisa, have thou said,
(Nor will thou the fond boast disown)
Thou would not lose Anthonio's love,
To reign the partner of a throne?
And by hose lips that spoke so kind!
And by that hand I pressed to mine!
To gain a subject nation's love,
I swear I would not part with thine.
Then how, my soul, can we be poor,
Who own what kingdoms could not buy!
Of this true heart thou shall be queen,
And, serving thee, a monarch I.
Thus uncontrolled in mutual bliss,
And rich in love's exhaustless mine,
Do thou snatch treasures from my lips,
And I Will take kingdoms back from thine.
SONG 27. Johnny and Mary.
DOWN the burn, and through the mead,
His golden locks waved over his brow,
Johnny lilting tuned his reed,
And Mary wiped her bonny mou'.
Dear she loo'd the well known song,
While her Johnny, blithe and bonny,
Sung her praise the whole day long.
Down the burn, and through the mead,
His golden locks waved over his brow,
Johnny lilting tuned his reed,
And Mary wiped her bonny mou'.
Costly claiths she had but few:
Of rings and jewels nae great store;
Her face was fair, her love was true,
And Johnny wisely wished nae mair:
Love's the pearl, the shepherd's prize,
Over the mountain, near the fountain,
Love delights the shepherd's eyes.
Down the burn, etc.
Gold and titles give not health,
And Johnny could nae these impart;
Youthsu' Mary's greatest wealth
Was still her faithsu' Johnny's heart:
Sweet the joys the lovers find,
Great the treasure, sweet the pleasure,
Where the heart is always kind.
Down the burn, etc.
SONG 28.
MY heart's my own, my will is free:
And so shall be my voice.
No mortal man shall wed with me,
'Till first he is made my choice.
Let parents rule, cry nature's laws,
And children still obey.
But is there then no saving clause
Against tyrannic sway?
SONG 29.
WHAT bard, O time, discover,
With wings first made thee move?
Ah! sure he was some lover,
Who never had left his love!
For who, that once did prove
The pangs which absence brings,
Though but a day,
He were away,
Could picture thee with wings?
What bard, etc.
SONG 30
COME now, all ye social powers,
Shed your influence over us:
Crown with joy the present hours,
Enliven those before us,
Fill the flask, the music bring,
Joy shall quickly find us;
Drink, and dance, and laugh and sing,
And drive dull care behind us.
Friendship, with thy power divine,
Brighten all our features:
What but friendship, love, and wine,
Can make us happy creatures?
Fill the flask, etc.
Love, thy godhead I adore,
Source of generous passion;
But will never bow down before
Those idols, wealth or fashion.
Fill the flask, etc.
Why the deuce should we be sad,
Since to earth we moulder?
Whether we are grave, or gay, or glad,
We every day grow older.
Fill the flask, etc.
Then, since time will steal away,
Spite of all our sorrow,
Brighten every joy today,
And never mind tomorrow.
Fill the flask, etc.
SONG 31.
THE silver moon's enamored beam
Steals softly through the night,
To wanton with the winding stream,
And kiss reflected light:
To courts begone! heart-soothing sleep,
Where you have so seldom been,
Whilst I May's wakeful vigil keep,
With Kate of Aderdeen.
The nymphs and swains expectant wait,
In primrose chaplets gay,
Till morn unbars her golden gate,
And gives the promised May.
The nymphs and swains shall all declare
The promised May, when seen,
Not half so fragrant, half so fair,
As Kate of Aberdeen.
I Will tune my pipe to playful notes,
And rouse yon nodding grove,
Till new-wak'd birds distend their throats,
And hail the maid I love.
At her approach, the lark mistakes,
And quits the new-drest green.
Fond bird! it is not the morning breaks:
It Is Kate of Aberdeen.
Now, blithsome, over the dewy mead,
Where elves disportive play,
The festal dance young shepherds lead,
Or sing their love-tun'd lay --
Till May, in morning robe, draws nigh,
And claims a virgin queen:
The nymphs and swains exulting cry,
Here Is Kate of Aberdeen.
SONG 33.
FAREWELL to Lochaber, and farewell, my Jean,
Where heartsome with thee I Have many days been:
For Lochaber no more, Lochaber no more,
We'll may be return to Lochaber no more.
Those tears that I shed, they are a' for my dear,
And no for the danger attending on weir,
Though borne on rough seas to some far bloody shore,
May be to return to Lochaber no more.
Though hurricanes rise, and though rise every wind,
They Will never make a tempest like that in my mind:
Though loudest of thunder, or louder waves roar,
That Is nothing like leaving my love on the shore.
To leave thee behind me, my heart is fair pained,
By ease that is inglorious no same can be gained:
And beauty and love's the reward of the brave;
And I must deserve it, before I can crave.
Then glory, my Jean, maun plead my excuse:
Since honor commands me, how can I refuse?
Without it, I never can have merit for thee:
And, without thy favor, I Would better not be!
I gae then, my lass, to win honor and fame:
And if I should luck to come gloriously hame,
I Will bring a heart to thee, with love running over,
And then I will leave thee and Lochaber no more.
SONG 34.
THE world, my dear Myra, is full of deceit:
And friendship's a jewel we seldom can meet.
How strange does it seem, that in searching around,
This source of content is so rare to be found!
O friendship! thou balm and rich sweetner of life,
Kind parent of ease, and composer of strife!
Without thee, alas! what are riches and power,
But empty delusions, the joys of an hour!
How much to be prized and esteemed is a friend,
On whom we may always with safety depend!
Our joys, when extended, will always increase:
And griefs, when divided, are hushed into peace.
When fortune is smiling, what crowds will appear,
Their kindness to offer, and friendship sincere!
Yet change but the prospect, and point out distress,
No longer to court you they eagerly press.
SONG 35.
HAD I a heart for shood framed,
I never could injure you:
For though your tongue no promise claimed,
Your charms would make me true.
To you no soul shall bear deceit,
No stranger offer wrong:
But friends in all the aged you will meet,
And lovers in the young.
But when they learn, that you have blessed
Another with your heart,
They Will bid aspiring passion rest,
And act a lover's part.
Then, lady, dread not here deceit;
Nor fear to suffer wrong:
For friends in all the aged you will meet,
And brothers in the young.
SONG 36.
CEASE, gay seducers, pride to take
In triumphs over the fair,
Since clowns as well can act the rake,
As those in higher sphere.
Where, then, to shun a shameful fate,
Shall hapless beauty go?
In every station, every state,
Poor woman finds a foe.
SONG 37.
DUET.
HE. LET rakes and libertines, resigned
To sensual pleasures, range.
Here all the sex's charms I find;
And never can cool or change.

SHE. Let vain coquettes and prudes conceal
What most their hearts desire.
With pride my passion I reveal:
Oh! may it never expire!

BOTH. The sun shall cease to spread his light,
The stars their orbits leave,
And fair creation sink in night,
Ere I my dear deceive.

SONG 38.
THE soldier, tired of war's alarms,
Forswears the clang of hostile arms,
And scorns the spear and shield.
But if the brazen trumpet sound,
He burns with conquest to be crowned,
And dares again the tented field.
SONG 39.
THOUGH prudence may press me,
And duty distress me,
Against inclination, O what can they do!
No longer a rover,
His follies are over,
My heart, my fond heart says, my Henry is true.
The be, thus, as changing,
From sweet to sweet ranging,
A rose should he light on, never wishes to stray:
What raptures! possessing
In one every blessing,
Till, torn from her bosom, he flies far away.
SONG 40.
WHEN war's alarms enticed my Willy from me,
My poor heart with grief did sigh:
Each fond remembrance brought fresh sorrow on me:
I 'woke ere yet the morn was nigh.
No other could delight him:
Ah! why did I ever flight him,
Coldly answering his fond tale?
Which drove him far
Amid the rage of war,
And left silly me thus to bewail.
But I no longer, though a maid forsaken,
Thus will mourn, like yonder dove:
For ere the lark tomorrow shall awaken,
I will seek my absent love.
The hostile country over,
I Will fly to meet my lover,
Scorning every threatening fear;
Nor distant shore,
Nor cannon's roar,
Shall keep me from my dear.
SONG 41.
COULD I her faults remember,
Forgetting every charm,
Soon would impartial reason
The tyrant, love, disarm.
But when, enraged, I number
Each failing of her mind,
Love still suggests her beauty,
And sees -- while reason's blind.
SONG 42.
GIVE Isaac the nymph, who no beauty can boast,
But health and good humor to make her his toast:
If straight, I don't mind whether slender or fat,
And six feet or four -- we'll never quarrel for that.
Whatever her complexion, I vow I don't care:
If brown, it is lasting; more pleasing, if fair:
And though in her cheeks I no dimples should see,
Let her smile -- and each dell is a dimple to me.
Let her locks be the reddest that ever were seen:
And her eyes -- may be even any color -- but green:
For in eyes, though so various the luster and hue,
I swear I Have no choice -- only let her have two.
It Is true, I Would dispense with a throne on her back:
And white teeth, I own, are genteeler than black:
A little round chin too's a beauty I Have heard:
But I only desire -- she may not have a beard.
SONG 43.
GIVE me but a wife, I expect not to find
Each virtue and grace in one female combined.
No goddess for me: it is a woman I prize:
And he that seeks more, is more curious than wife.
Be she young, she is not stubborn, but easy to mould:
Or the claims my respect for her age, if she is old.
Thus either can please me: since woman I prize:
And he that seeks more, is more curious than wife.
Like Venus she ogles, if squinting her eye.
If blind, she the roving of mine cannot spy.
Thus either is lovely: for woman I prize:
And he that seeks more, is more curious than wife.
If rich be my bride, she brings tokens of love:
If poor, then the farther from pride my remove.
Thus either contents me: for woman I prize:
And he that seeks more, is more curious than wife.
I never shall want converse, if tongue she possess:
And if mute, still the rarity pleases no less.
I Am suited to either: for woman I prize:
And he that seeks more, is more curious tnan wife.
Then cease, ye profane, on the fair to descant:
If you have wit to discern, of charms they have no scant.
Each fair can make happy, if woman we prize:
And he that seeks more, is more curious than wife.
SONG 44.
DUET.
HE. HOPE! thou nurse of young desire!
Fairy promiser of joy,
Painted vapor, glowworm fire,
Temperate sweet, that never can cloy!

SHE. Hope! thou earnest of delight,
Softest soother of the mind,
Balmy cordial, prospect bright,
Surest friend the wretched find!

BOTH. Kind deceiver, flatter still,
Deal out pleasures unposses'd:
With thy dreams my fancy fill,
And in wishes make me blessed.

SONG 45.
HOW blessed the maid, whose bosom
No headstrong passion knows!
Her days in joys she passes,
Her nights in calm repose.
Wherever her fancy leads her,
No pain, no fear invades her:
But pleasure,
Without measure,
From every object flows.
SONG 46.
HOW imperfect is expression,
Some emotions to impart --
When we mean a fond confession,
And yet seek to hide the heart!
When our bosoms, all-complying,
With delicious tumults swell,
And beat what broken, falt'ring, dying
Language would, but cannot tell.
Deep confusion's rosy terror
Quite expressive paints my cheek:
Ask no more: behold your error!
Blushes eloquently speak.
What! though silent is my anguish,
Or breathed only to the air --
Mark my eyes -- see how they languish --
Read what yours have written there.
Oh! that you could once conceive me
Once my soul's strong feelings view!
Love has naught more fond, believe me,
Friendship nothing half so true.
From you, I am wild, despairing;
With you, speechless as I touch:
This is all that bears declaring,
And perhaps declares too much.
SONG 47.
LEAVE off this idle prating,
Talk no more of whig and tory;
But fill your glass,
Round let it pass,
The bottle stands before ye.
Fill it up to the top,
Let this night with mirth be crowned,
Drink about,
See it out,
Love and friendship still go round.
We gain both life and pleasure
By love and hearty drinking:
While statesmen plod,
And wink and nod,
To kill themselves with thinking.
Fill it, etc.
If any are so zealous,
To be a party's minion,
Let them drink like me,
They Will soon agree,
And be of one opinion.
Fill it, etc.
If claret be a blessing,
This night devote to pleasure,
Let state affairs,
And worldly cares,
Attend us more at leisure.
Fill it, etc.
SONG 48.
WHEN trees did bud, and fields were green,
And broom bloomed fair to see --
When Mary was complete fifteen,
And love laughed in her eye --
Blithe Davy's blinks her heart did move
To speak her mind thus free:
Gang down the burn, Davy, love,
And I will follow thee.
Now Davy did each lad surpass,
That dwelt on the burn side,
And Mary was the bonniest lass,
Just meet to be a bride:
Till both at length impatient grown,
To be mair fully blessed,
In yonder vale they leaned them down,
Love only saw the rest.
What passed, I guess, was harmless play,
And naething sure unmeet:
For ganging hame I heard them say,
They liked a wa'k sae sweet;
And that they aften should return
Sic pleasure to renew.
Quoth Mary, love, I like the burn,
And aye shall follow you.
As fate had dealt to him a routh,
Strait to the kirk he led her,
There plighted her his faith and truth,
And a bonny bride he made her;
No more ashamed to own her love,
Or speak her mind thus free:
Cang down the burn, Davy, love,
And I will follow thee.
SONG 50.
JOLLY mortals, fill your glasses:
Noble deeds are done by wine.
Scorn the nymph and all her graces:
Who'd for love or beauty pine?
Look within the bowl that is flowing,
And a thousand charms you will find,
More than Phillis has, though going
In the moment to be kind.
Alexander hated thinking;
Drank about at council board:
He subdued the world by drinking,
More than by his conquering sword.
(...) with wonder near this,
(...) rakes of the age,
Who laugh at the mention of conjugal bliss,
And whom only loose pleasures engage.
You may laugh: but, believe me, you're all in the wrong,
When you merrily marriage deride:
For to marriage the permanent pleasures belong,
And in them we can only confide.
The joys, which from lawless connections arise,
Are fugitive -- never sincere --
Often stolen with haste -- or snatched by surprise --
Interrupted by doubts and by fear.
But those, which in legal attachments we find,
When the heart is with innocence pure,
Are from every embitt'ring reflection refined,
And to life's latest hour will endure.
The love, which ye boast of, deserves not that name:
'True love is with sentiment joined:
But yours is a passion -- a feverish flame --
Raised without the consent of the mind.
When, dreading confinement, ye mistresses hire,
With this and with that ye are cloyed:
Ye are led, and misled, by a flattering false fire;
And are often by that fire destroyed.
If you ask me, from whence my felicity flows?
My answer is short -- From a wife,
Whom for cheerfulness, sense, and good nature I chose,
Which are beauties that charm us for life.
To make home the seat of perpetual delight,
Every hour each studies to seize:
And we find ourselves happy from morning to night,
By our mutual endeavors to please.
SONG 53.
OH! had I been by fate decreed
Some humble cottage swain,
In fair Rosetta's sight to feed
My sheep upon the plain!
What bliss had I been born to taste,
Which now I never (...) know!
Ye envious powers! why have ye placed
My fair one's lot so low?
SONG 54.
MY banks are all furnished with bees,
Whose murmur invites one to sleep:
My grottoes are shaded with trees,
And my hills are white over with sheep.
I seldom have met with a loss,
Such health do my fountains bestow:
My founts are all bordered with moss,
Where the hare-bells and violets grow,
Where the hare-bells and violets grow.
I have found out a gift for my fair --
I have found where the wood-pigeons breed.
But let me that plunder forbear:
She Will say, 'twas a barbarous deed.
For he never could be true, she averred,
Who could rob a poor bird of its young.
And I loved her the more, when I heard
Such tenderness fall from her tongue,
Such tenderness, etc.
But where does my Phillida stray,
And where are her grots and her bowers?
Are the groves and the valleys as gay,
And the shepherds as gentle as ours?
The groves may perhaps be as fair,
And the face of the valleys as fine:
The swains may in manners compare:
But their love is not equal to mine,
But their love is not equal to mine.
SONG 55.
FILL your glasses: banish grief:
Laugh, and worldly care despise.
Sorrow never can bring relief:
Joy from drinking will arise.
Why should we with wrinkled care,
Change what nature made so fair?
Drink, and set your hearts at rest:
Of a bad bargain make the best.
Some pursue the winged wealth:
Some to honor do aspire.
Give me freedom, give me health --
There Is the sum of my desire.
What the world can more present,
Will not add to my content.
Drink, and set your hearts at rest:
Peace of mind is always best.
Busy brains, we know, alas!
With imaginations run,
Like the sand in the hourglass,
Turned, and turned, and still runs on;
Never knowing where to stay,
But uneasy every way.
Drink, and set your hearts at rest:
Peace of mind is always best.
Mirth, when mingled with our wine,
Makes the heart alert and free:
Let it rain, or snow, or shine,
Still the same thing it is to me.
There Is no fence against our fate:
Changes daily on us wait.
Drink, and set your hearts at rest:
Of a bad bargain make the best.
SONG 56.
YE belles, and ye flirts, and ye pert little things,
Who trip in this frolicsome round,
Pray tell me from whence this indecency springs,
The sexes at once to confound?
What means the cocked hat, and the masculine air,
With each motion designed to perplex?
Bright eyes were intended to languish, not stare --
And softness the test of your sex -- dear girls,
And softness the test of your sex.
The girl, who on beauty depends for support,
May call every art to her aid,
The bosom displayed, and the petticoat short,
Are samples she gives of her trade.
But you, on whom fortune indulgently shines,
And whom pride has preserved from the snare,
Should siily attack us with coyness and wiles,
Not with open and insolent air -- brave girls,
Not with open and insolent air.
The Venus, whose statue delights all mankind,
Shrinks modestly back from the view:
And kindly should seem, by the artist designed,
To serve as a model for you.
Then learn, with her beauties, to copy her air:
Nor venture too much to reveal.
Our fancies will paint what you cover with care,
And double each charm you conceal -- sweet girls,
And double each charm you conceal.
The blushes of morn, and the mildness of May,
Are charms, which no art can procure:
Oh! be but yourselves, and our homage we'll pay,
And your empire is solid and sure.
But if, Amazon-like, you attack your gallants,
And put us in fear of our lives,
You may do very well for sisters and aunts,
But, believe me, you will never be wives -- poor girls,
But, believe me, you will never be wives.
SONG 57.
YE virgins, attend,
Believe me your friend,
And with prudence attend to my plan:
Never let it be said,
There goes an old maid:
But get married as fast as you can.
As soon as you find
Your hearts are inclined
To beat quick at the sight of a man,
Then choose out a youth,
With honor and truth,
And get married as fast as you can.
For age, like a cloud,
Your charms will soon shroud:
And this whimsical life's but a span:
Then, maids, make your hay,
While Sol darts his ray,
And get married as fast as you can.
The treacherous rake
Will artfully take
Every method poor girls to trepan.
But baffle the snare,
Make virtue your care,
And get married as fast as you can.
And when Hymen's bands
Have joined both your hands,
The bright flame still continue to fan.
Never harbor the stings,
That jealousy brings:
But be constant and blessed while you can.
SONG 58.
THE pride of all nature was sweet Willy O.
The first of all swains,
He gladden'd the plains:
None ever was like to the sweet Willy O.
He sung it so rarely did sweet Willy O,
He melted each maid,
So skilful he played:
No shepherd ever pip'd like the sweet Willy O.
All nature obeyed him, this sweet Willy O:
Wherever he came,
Whatever had a name,
Whenever he sung, followed sweet Willy O.
He would be a soldier, the sweet Willy O:
When armed in the field,
With sword and with shield,
The laurel was won by the sweet Willy O.
He charmed 'em when living, the sweet Willy O:
And when Willy died,
'Twas nature that sighed,
To part with her all in her sweet. Willy O.
SONG 59.
THE bird, that hears her nestlings cry,
And flies abroad for food,
Returns impatient through the sky,
To nurse her callow brood;
The tender mother knows no joy,
But bodes a thousand harms;
And sickens for her darling boy,
When absent from her arms.
Such fondness, with impatience joined,
My faithful bosom fires --
Now forced to leave my fair behind,
The queen of my desires.
The powers of verse too languid prove,
All similes are vain,
To show how ardently I love,
Or to relieve my pain.
The saint with fervent zeal inspired
For heaven and joy divine --
The saint is not with rapture fired,
More pure, more warm than mine.
I take what liberty I dare:
'Twere impious to say more.
Convey my longings to the fair,
The goddess I adore.
SONG 60. Banks of the Dee.
-- Tune, Langolee.
'TWAS summer, and softly the breezes were blowing,
And sweetly the nightingale sung from the tree,
Ar the foot of a rock, where the river was flowing,
I sat myself down on the banks of the Dee.
Flow on, lovely Dee, flow on, thou sweet river;
Thy banks' purest streams shall be dear to me ever;
For there I first gained the affection and favor
Of Jamie, the glory and pride of the Dee.
But now he is gone from me, and left me thus mourning,
To quell the proud en'my, for valiant is he;
And ah! there is no hope of his speedy returning,
To wander again on the banks of the Dee.
He Is gone, hapless youth! over the rude roaring billows;
The kindest and sweetest of all the gay fellows;
And left me to stray among the once loved willows,
The loneliest maid on the banks of the Dee.
But time and my prayers may perhaps yet restore him;
Blessed peace may return my dear shepherd to me,
And when he returns, with care I Will watch over him;
He never shall leave the sweet banks of the Dee.
The Dee then shall flow, all its beauties displaying;
The lambs on its banks shall again be seen playing,
While I with my Jamie are carelessly straying,
And tasting again all the sweets of the Dee.
SONG 61.
HOW happy were my days till now!
I never did sorrow feel;
I rose with joy to milk my cow,
Or turn my spinning-wheel.
My heart was lighter than a fly;
Like any bird I sung.
Till he pretended love, and I
Believed his flattering tongue.
Oh! the fool, the silly, silly fool,
Who trusts what man may be!
I wish I was a maid again,
And in my own country.
SONG 62.
By Shakespeare.
COME, live with me, and be my love,
And we will all the pleasures prove
That hills and valleys, dales and fields,
And all the craggy mountain yields;
There will we sit upon the rocks,
And see the shepherds feed their flocks,
Near shallow rivers, by whose falls
Melodious birds sing madrigals.
There will I make thee beds of roses,
With a thousand fragrant posies;
A cap of flowers, with a girdle
Embroidered all with leaves of myrtle;
A gown made of the finest wool,
Which from our pretty lambs we pull.
If these delights thy mind may move,
Come, live with me, and be my love.
Fur-lined slippers for the cold,
With buckles of the purest gold;
A belt of straw with ivy buds,
And coral clasps, and silver studs:
The shepherd swains shall dance and sing,
For thy delight each May morning.
if these delights thy mind may move,
Then live with me, and be my love;
SONG 63.
WITH tuneful pipe and merry glee,
Young Jockie won my heart;
A bonnier lad you never could see,
All beauty without art.
In Abenleen there never was seen,
A lad so blithe and gay;
His glancing even and comely mein,
Have stole my heart away.
Young Jemmy courts with artful song,
But vain is a' his love;
My Jockie blithe has loved me long,
To him I Will constant prove.
In Aberdeen, etc.
No more shall I of sorrow know,
Nor ever more complain,
Nor fear my mammy's threats, I trow,
Now Jockey is mine ain.
In Aberdeen, etc.
SONG 64.
YOUNG Jamie loo'd me weel, and asked me for his bride;
But saving a crown, he had naithing else beside;
To make the crown a pound, my Jamie went to sea,
And the crown and the pound were both for me.
He had nae been gane a year and a day,
When my father Irake his arm, and our cow was stole away,
My mither she fell sick, and Jammie at the sea,
And auld Robin Gray came a courting to me.
My father cou'dna wark, my mither cou'dna spin.
I toiled day and night, but their bread cou'dna win;
And Rob maintained 'em both, and, with tears in his e'e,
Said, Janie for their sakes, oh marry me:
My heart it said nay, for I looked for jamie back,
But the wind it blew hard, and his ship was a wrack,
His ship it was a wrack, why didna Janie die,
And why was she spared, to cry waes me?
My father urged me fair, my mither didna speak,
But she looked in my face till my heart was like to break;
They gi'ed him my hand, though my heart was at sea;
So auld Robin Gray is a good man to me:
I had na been a wife a we kbut only four,
When sitting so mournfully out at my door,
I saw my Jamie's wraith, for I cou'dna think it he,
Till he said, I Am come hame, love, to marry thee.
Sair, sair did we greet, and mickle did we say,
We tuk but a kiss, and tare ourselves away;
I wish I were dead, but I am na lik to die,
Oh, why was I born to say waes me!
I gang like a ghaist, and I care not to spin,
I dare na think on Jamie, for that would be a sin;
So I will do my best a good wise to be,
For auld Robin Gray's so kind to me.
SONG 65.
Here Is to the maiden of bashful fifteen,
Here Is to the widow of fifty;
Here Is to the bold and extravagant queen,
And here is to the housewife that is thristy.
Let the toast pass,
Drink to the lass,
I warrant she will prove an excuse for the glass.
Here Is to the maiden whose dimples we prize,
Likewise to her that has none, sir;
Here Is to the maid with a pair of blue eyes,
And here is to her that is but one, sir.
Let the toast pass, etc.
Here Is to the maid with a bosom of snow,
And to her that is as brown as a berry;
Here Is to the wise with a face full of woe,
Aiul here is to the girl that is merry,
Let the toast pass, etc.
Let her be clumsy, or let her be slim,
Young or ancient, I care not a feather;
So fill a pint bumper quite up to the brim,
And even let us toast them together.
Let the toast pass, etc.
SONG 66.
WHEN all the Attic fire was fled,
And all the Roman virtue dead,
Poor freedom lost her seat.
The gothic mantle spread a night,
That damped fair virtue's fading light:
The muses lost their mate.
Where should they wander? what new shore
Has yet a laurel left n store?
To this blessed land they steer.
Soon the Parnassian choir was heard --
Soon virtue's sacred form appeared,
And freedom soon was here.
The lazy monk has left his cell:
Religion rings her hallowed bell;
She calls thee now by me.
Hark! her sweet voice all plaintive sounds:
See, she receives a thousand wounds,
If shielded nor by thee.
SONG 67.
A Bumper of good liquor
Will end a contest quicker,
Than justice, judge, or vicar;
So fill a cheerful glass,
And let good humor pass.
But if more deep the quarrel,
Why sooner drain the barrel,
Than be that hateful fellow,
That Is crabbed when he is mellow,
A bumber, etc.
SONG 68.
AS I went to the wake that is held on the green,
I met with young Phoebe as blithe as a queen:
A form so divine might an anchoret move:
And I found, though a clown, I was smitton with love.
So I asked for a kiss: but she, blushing, replied,
Indeed gentle shepherd, you must be denied.
Lovely Phoebe, I cried, don't affect to be shy
I vow I will kiss you -- here is nobody by.
No matter for that, she replied; (...)
For know, silly (...)
So pray let me go. I shall (...)
Besides, I Am resolved, that I will not (...)
Lord bless me! I cried, I Am surpised you refuse.
A few harmless kisses but serve to amuse.
The month it is May -- and the season for love --
So come, my dear girl, to the wake let us rove.
No, Damon, she said, I must first be your wife:
You then shall be welcome to kiss me for life.
Well, come then, I cried, to the church let us go:
But after, dear Phoebe must never say no.
Do you prove but true, she replied -- you shall find,
I Will ever be constant, good-humored, and kind.
So I kiss when I plese: for she never says she will not:
And I kiss her so much, that I wonder she don't.
SONG 69.
ASK if yon damask rose is sweet,
That scents the ambient air?
Then ask each shepherd that you meet,
If dear Susannah is fair?
Say, will the vulture quit his prey,
And warble through the grove?
Bid wanton linnets quit the spray:
Then doubt thy shepherd's love.
The spoils of war let heroes share:
Let pride in splendour shine.
Ye bards, unenvied laurels wear:
Be fair Susannah mine.
SONG 70.
ATTEND, ye nymphs, while I impart
The secret wishes of my heart;
And tell what swain, if one there be,
Whom fate designs for love and me,
Let reason over his thoughts preside:
Let honor all his acions guide.
Steadfast in virtue let him be,
The swain designed for love and me.
Let solid sense inform his mind,
With pure good nature sweetly joined:
Sure friend to modest merit be
The swain designd for love and me.
Where sorrow prompts the pensive sigh --
Where grief bedews the drooping eye --
Melting in sympathy, I see
The swain designed for love and me.
Let sordid avarice claim no part
Within his tender, generous heart.
Oh! be that heart from falsehood free,
Devoted all to love and me.
SONG 71.
I Have seriously weighed it, and find it but just,
That a wife makes a man either blessed or cursed.
I declare I will marry, ah! can I but find,
Mark me well, ye young lasses, the maid to my mind.
Not the pert little miss, who advice will despise,
Nor the girl, who is so foolish to think herself wise,
Nor she who to all men alike would prove kind,
Not one of these three is the maid to my mind.
Not the prude, who in public will never be free,
Yet in private a toying for ever would be,
Nor coquette that is too forward, nor jilt that is unkind,
No one of these three is the maid to my mind.
Nor she who for pleasure her husband will flight,
Nor the positive dame, who thinks always she is right,
Nor she, who a dupe to the fashion's inclined,
Not one of these three is the maid to my mind.
But the fair with good nature and carriage genteel,
Who her husband can love, and no secrets reveal,
In whose breast I may virtue and modesty find,
This, this, and this only's the maid to my mind.
SONG 72.
BLOW, blow, thou winter's wind,
Thou art not so unkind,
Thou art not so unkind,
As man's ingratitude:
Thy tooth is not so keen,
Because thou art not seen:
Thy tooth is not so keen,
Bccause thou art not seen,
Although thy breath be rude,
Although thy breath be rude.
Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky:
Thou do not bite so nigh,
Thou do not bite so nigh,
As benefits forgot.
Though thou the waters warp,
Thy sting is not so sharp,
Though thou the waters warp,
Thy sting is not so sharp,
As friends remembered not,
As friends remembered not.
SONG 73.
BY him we love offended,
How soon our anger flies!
One day apart, it is ended,
Behold him, and it dies!
Last night, your roving brother,
Enraged, I bade depart,
And sure his rude presumption
Deserved to lose my heart.
Yet were he now before me,
In spite of injured pride,
I fear my eyes would pardon,
Before my tongue could chide.
By him we love, etc.
With truth, the bold deceiver
To me thus often said,
"In vain would Clara flight me,
"In vain would she upbraid!
"No scorn those lips discover,
"Where dimples laugh the while.
"No frown appears resentful,
"Where heaven has stamped a smile!"
SONG 74.
Go, rose, my Chloe's bosom grace,
My Chloe's bosom grace:
How happy should I prove,
How happy should I prove,
Might I supply that envied place
With never fading love,
With never fading love,
There, phoenix like, beneath her eye,
Involved in fragrance, burn and die.
Know, hapless flower, that thou shall find
More fragrant roses there,
More fragrant roses there;
I see thy withering head reclined
With envy and despair,
With envy and despair:
One common fate we both must prove,
You die with envy, I with love,
You die, etc.
SONG 73.
IN penance for past folly,
A pilgrim blithe and jolly,
Sworn so to melancholy,
Set out strange lands to see;
With cockle shells on hat brim,
Staffs, beads, and scrip, in that trim,
Befitting of a pilgrim,
Begging for charity.
With unshod feet he traces
His way through wilds and chaces,
And sundry dismal places,
In hopes some roof to see;
But when that he could find no
House nor hut to go to,
Was ever pilgrim put so
To it for charity!
But now, when most dejected,
Kind heaven, when least expected,
A maiden's steps directed,
Whence come you, sir? says she.
Full many a weary step, sweet,
And all with these poor bare feet,
O could I by your help, meet
Lodging for charity.
With courteous voice and accent,
Says she, I see you're quite spent,
Yet what I say is well meant,
Pray lodge tonight with me.
This favor is excessive:
No speeches, sir; while I live,
If I have aught I can give,
It Is given in charity.
He eyed her charms whilst eating,
And called her love and sweeting,
And many a tender greeting,
So kind a heart had he.
Kind sir, says she, you're tired,
It Is time you were retired,
Nor beds nor rooms are hired,
But lent in charity.
My tenement is brittle,
And is, I fear, too little.
It fits me to a tittle,
So in at once went he.
Through many a town and city
I Have been, and O! the pity,
Never met a room so pretty,
Nor so much charity.
Nine days he past in clover,
So well he played the lover:
She thought it too soon over,
And will you go? said she.
But, gentle pilgrim, should you
Return, you know I would do
As much as woman could do,
To show my charity.
SONG 76.
THE lowland lads think they are fine,
But O they are vain and idly gaudy;
How much unlike the graceful mein,
And manly looks of my highland laddie!
O my bonny highland laddie,
My handsome charming laddie
May heaven still guard, and love reward
The lowland lass and her highland laddie.
If I were free at will to choose
To be the wealthiest lowland lady;
I Would take young Donald in his trews,
With bonnet blue and belted plaiddie.
O my bonny, etc.
No greater joy I Will ever pretend,
Than that his love prove true and steady;
Like mine to him, which never shall end,
While heaven preserves my highland laddie.
O my bonny, etc.
SONG 76.
WHEN the trees are all bare, not a leaf to be seen,
And the meadows their beauties have lost;
When nature's disrobed of her mantle of green,
And the streams are fast bound with the frost:
While the peasant, inactive, stands shivering with cold,
As bleak the winds northerly blow;
And the innocent flocks run for ease to their fold.
With their faces besprinkled with snow.
In the yard when the cattle are fodder'd with straw;
And they send forth their breath like a steam;
And the neat looking dairy maid sees she must thaw
Flakes of ice that she finds in the cream:
When the sweet country maiden, as fresh as a rose,
As she carelessly trips, often sldes;
And the rustics laugh loud, if, by falling, she shows
All the charms that her modesty hides.
When the lads and the lasses, for company joined,
In a cro^d round the embers are met;
Talk of faries and witches, that ride on the wind,
And of ghosts 'till they are all in a sweat:
When the birds to the barn come hovering for food,
Or they silently sit on the spray;
And the poor timid hare in vain seeks the wood,
Left her footsteps her course should betray.
Heaven grant in this season it may prove by lot,
With the nymph whom I love and admire,
While the icicles hang from the eves of my cot,
I may thither in safety retire!
Where in neatness and quiet, and free from surprise,
We may live, and no hardships endure;
Nor feel any turbulent passions arise,
But such as each other may cure.
SONG 76
CONTENTED I am and contented I Will be:
For what more can this world afford,
Than a girl who will sociably sit on me,
And a cellar that is plenteously stored?
My brave boys, etc.
My vault-door is open. Descend every guest:
Tap that cask: ay, that wine we will try:
It Is as sweet as the lips of your love to the taste,
And as bright as her cheeks to the eye.
In a piece of slit hoop, I my candle have stuck,
'Twill light us each bottle to hand.
The foot of my glass for the purpose I broke,
For I hate that a bumper should stand.
Astride on a but, as a but should be strod,
I fit my companions among,
Like grape-blessing Bacchus, the good-fellow's god,
And a sentiment give, or a song.
We are dry where we sit, though the oozing drops seem
The moist walls with wet pearls to emboss.
From the arch, moldy cobwebs in gothic taste stream,
Like stucco-work cut out of moss.
My cellar's my camp; my soldier my flasks,
All gloriously ranged in review.
When I cast my eyes round, I consider my casks,
As kingdoms I Have yet to subdue.
I charge glass in hand, and my empire maintain,
No ancient more patriot-like bled;
Each drop in desence of delight I will drain,
And myself for my bucks I Will drink dead,
Sound that pipe, it is in tune, and those bins are well filled,
View the heap of champaigne in your rear;
Yon bottles are burgundy, see how they are pil'd,
Like artillery, tier over tier.
It Is my will, when I die, not a tear shall be shed:
No "Hic jacet" be engraved on my stone:
But pour over my coffin a bumper of red,
And write that "His drinking is done."
SONG 77.
THE heavy hours are almost past,
That part my love and me;
My longing eyes may hope, at last,
Their only wish to see.
But how, my Delia, will you meet
The man you have lost so long?
Will love in all your pulses beat,
And tremble on your tongue?
Will you in every look declare,
Your heart is still the same,
And heal each idle, anxious care
Our fears in absence frame?
Thus, Delia, thus I paint the scene,
When shortly we shall meet,
And try, what yet remains between
Of loit'ring time to cheat.
But if the dream, that soothes my mind,
Shall false and groundless prove --
If I am doomed at length to find,
That you have forgot to love --
All I of Venus ask, is this,
No more to let us join:
But grant me here the flattering bliss,
To die, and think you mine.
SONG 78.
I Locked up all my treasure,
I journey'd many a mile:
And by my grief did measure
The passing time the while.
My business done and over,
I hastened back amain,
Like an expecting lover,
To view it once again.
But this delight was stifled,
As it began to dawn:
I found the casket rifled,
And all my treasure gone.
SONG 79.
DEAR heart! what a terrible life I am led!
A dog has a better, that is sheltered and fed.
Night and day it is the same:
My pain is dear game.
Me wish to de Lord me was dead.
Whate'er's to be done,
Poor Blacky must run.
Mungo here -- Mungo dear --
Mungoevery where.
Above or below,
Sirrah, come, sirrah, go:
Do so, and do so:
Oh! oh!
Me wish to de Lord me was dead!
SONG 80.
FAREWELL, ye green fields, and sweet groves,
Where Phillis engaged my sond heart --
Where nightingales warble their loves.
And nature is dressed without art.
No pleasure ye now can afford,
Nor music can lull me to rest:
For Phillis proves false to her word,
And Strephon can never be blessed.
Often times, by the side of a spring,
Where roses and lillies appear,
Gay Phillis of Strephon would sing:
For Strephon was all she held dear.
But as soon as she found, by my eyes,
The passion that glowed in my breast,
She then, to my grief and surprise,
Proved all she had said was a jest.
Too late, to my sorrow, I find,
The beauties alone that will last,
Are those that are fixed in the mind,
Which envy or time cannot blast.
Beware, then, beware how ye trust
Coquettes, who to love make pretense;
For Phillis to me had been just,
If nature had blese'd her with sense,
SONG 81.
PUSH about the brisk bowl: 'twill enliven the heart,
While thus we sit round on the grass:
The lover, who talks of his sufferings and smart,
Deserves to be reckoned an ass, an ass,
Deserves to be reckoned an ass.
The wretch, who sits watching his ill-gotten pelf,
And wishes to add to the mass,
Whatever the curmudgeon may think of himself,
Deserves to be reckoned an ass,
Deserves, etc.
The beau, who, so smart with his well powdered hair,
An angel beholds in his glass,
And thinks with grimace to subdue all the fair,
Deserves to be reckoned an ass,
Deserves, etc.
The merchant from climate to climate will roam,
Of Croesus the wealth to surpass:
And often, while he is wandering, my lady at home
Claps the horns of an ox on the ass,
Claps the horns, etc.
The lawyer so grave, when he puts in his plea,
With forehead well fronted with brass,
Though he talks to no purpose, he pockets your fee;
There you, my good friend, are an ass,
There you, etc.
The formal physician, who knows every ill,
Shall last be produced in this class;
The sick man a while may confide in his skill,
But death proves the doctor an ass,
But death, etc.
Then let us, companions, be jovial and gay,
By turns take our bottle and lass;
For he who his pleasure puts off for a day,
Deserves to be reckoned an ass, an ass,
Deserves to be reckoned an ass.
SONG 82.
WELL met, pretty nymph, says a jolly young swain,
To a lovely young shepherdess crossing the plain;
I Why so much in have? (now the month it was May)
Shall I venture to ask you, fair maiden, which way?
Then straight to this question the nymph did reply,
With a smile in her look, and a leer in her eye,
I came from the village, and homeward I go;
And now, gentle shepherd, pray why would you know?
I hope, pretty maid, you will not take it amiss,
If I tell you the reason of asking you this;
I would see you safe home (the swain was in love)
Of such a companion if you would approve.
Your offer, kind shepherd, is civil, I own,
But I see no great danger in going alone;
Nor yet can I hinder, the road being free
For one as another, for you as for me.
No danger in going alone, it is true,
But yet a companion is pleasanter too;
And if you would like (now the swain he took heart)
Such a sweetheart as me, we never would part.
Oh! that is, a long word, said the shepherdess then;
I Have often heard say, there is no minding you men;
You Will say and unsay, and you will flatter, it is true;
Then leave a young maiden the first thing you do.
Oh! judge not so harshly, the shepherd replied;
To prove what I say, I will make you my bride;
To morrow the parson (well said, little swain)
Shall join both our hands, and make one, of us twain.
Then what the nymph answered to this is not said;
The very next morn to be sure they were wed:
Sing hey diddle, ho diddle, hey diddle down;
Now when shall we see such a wedding in town?
SONG 83.
THERE was once -- it is said,
When -- it is out of my head; --
Aye, and where too -- yet true is my tale;
That a round-belly'd vicar,
Bepimpled with liquor,
Could stick to no text like good ale,
Tol derol, lol derol lol, etc.
He one night 'gan to dose,
For, under the rose,
The priest was that night non se ipse;
Non se ipse, you will say,
What is that to the lay? --
In plain English then, parson was tipsey.
When the clerk coming in,
With his band-bobbing chin,
As solemn and sniv'ling as may be,
The vicar he gaped,
His clerk hemmed and scraped,
Saying -- Please, sir, to baby.
Now our author supposes
The clerk's name was Moses,
Who looked at his master so rosy;
He blink'd with one eye,
And with wig all awry,
He hiccup'd out -- How cheers it, Mozy?
A child, sir, is carried,
For you, to be buried; --
Bury me, Moses! -- no, that will not do, --
Lord, sir, says the clerk,
You are all in the dark,
It Is a child to be buried, not you.
Well, Moses, don't hurry --
The infant we'll bury; --
But, master, the corpse cannot stay: --
What! -- cannot it? -- but why?
For once, then, we'll try
If a corpse, Moses, can run away.
But Moses replied,
The parish will chide,
For keeping them out in cold weather:
Then, Mozy, quoth he,
Pray tell'em from me,
I Will bury them warm, all together.
But, sir, it rains hard,
Pray have some regard; --
Regard, Moses! that makes me stay;
For no corpse, young or old,
In the rain can catch cold,
But, Moses, faith, you or I may.
Moses begged to be gone,
Saying, sir, the rain's done;
Please to rise, and I Will lend you my hand; --
It Is hard, quoth the vicar,
To leave thus my liquor,
And go -- when I Am sure I cannot stand.
At length, though sore troubled,
To churchyard he hobbled,
Lamenting the length of the way;
For, Moses, quoth he,
Were I bishop, do you see,
I neither need walk, preach, nor pray.
When he came to the grave,
Says he, Moses -- a stave; --
Lord, where is my tobacco box hid?
I protest this fast walking
Prevents me from talking;
So, Moses (...) give me a quid.
Then he opened his book,
And therein seemed to look,
Whilst over the page only he squinted;
Crying, Moses, I Am vexed,
For I cannot see the text,
This book is so damnably printed.
Woman of a man born --
No -- that is wrong -- the leaf's torn; --
Upon woman the natural sweil is;
Were men got with child
The world would run wild,
You and I, Moses, might have big bellies.
Our guts would be pressed hard
Were we got with bastard;
How wonderful are our supposes! --
What midwife would do it?
He Would be hardly put to it,
Lord bless us, to lay me and Moses.
So, Moses, come forth,
Put the child into earth,
And dust to dust, dust it away;
For, Moses I trust,
We should soon turn to dust,
If we were not to moister our clay,
Moses, hear what I say,
When it is night, it is not day.
Now in former times, saints could work miracles
And raise from the dead
There Is no more to be said --
For, Moses, I Have dropped down my spectacles.
Moses -- mind what I say; --
Life's, alas! but a day --
Nay, sometimes it is over at noon; --
Man is but a flower,
Cut down in an hour,
It Is strong ale, Moses, does it soon.
So one pot, and then; --
Moses answered, amen! --
And thus far we have carried the farce on;
It Is the vice of the times
To relish those rhymes,
Where the ridicule runs on a parson.
But satire detests
Immorality's jests,
All profane or immodest expression;
So now we'll conclude,
And drink, as we should,
To the good folks of every profession,
Tol derol, lol derol lol, etc.
SONG 84.
THE modes of the court so common are grown.
That a true friend can hardly be met;
Friendship for interest is but a loan,
Which they let out for what they can get,
It Is true, you find
Some friends so kind,
Who will give you good counsel themselves to
In sorrowful, ditty,
They promise, they pity;
But shift you for money from friend to (...)
SONG 85.
THE virgin, when softened by May,
Attend; to the villager's vows,
The birds fondly bill on the spray,
And poplars embrace with their boughs:
On Ida bright Venus may reign,
Adored for her beauty above;
We shepherds, that dwell on the plain,
Hail May as the mother of love.
From the west as it wantonly blows
Fond zephyr caresles the vine;
The be steals a kiss from the rose,
And willows and woodbines entwine:
The pinks by the rivulet's side,
That border the vernal alcove,
Bend downward, and kiss the soft tide,
For May is the mother of love.
May tinges the butterfly's wing,
He flutters in bridal array;
If the larks and the linnets row sing,
Their music is taught them by May:
The stock-dove, recluse with her mate,
Conceals her fond bliss in the grove,
And murmuring seems to repeat,
That May is the mother of love.
(...)oddess will visit ye soon,
(...)irgins, be sportive and gay;
(...) pipes, O ye shepherds, in tune,
(...) must welcome the May:
(...) Phillis prove kind,
(...) anguish remove,
(...) tales, and he will find,
(...) mother of love.
SONG 86.
BLESSED as the immortal gods is he,
The youth who fondly sits by thee,
And hears and sees thee all the while,
Softly speak, and sweetly smile!
So spoke the lovely eastern maid;
(Like thine, seraphic were her charms)
That in Circassia's vineyard strayed,
And blessed the wisest monarch's arms.
A thousand fair, of high desert,
Strove to enchant the amorous king;
But the Circassian gained his heart,
And taught the royal bard to sing.
Clarinda thus our song inspires,
And claims the smooth and softest lays:
But while each charm our bosom fires,
Words seem too few to found her praise.
Her mind, in every grace complete,
To paint, surpasses human skill:
Her majesty, mixed with the sweet,
Let seraphs sing her, if they will.
Whilst wandering, with a ravished eye,
We all that is perfect in her view,
Viewing a sister of the sky,
To whom an adoration's due.
SONG 87.
WHAT shepherd, or nymph of the grove,
Can blame me for dropping a tear,
Or lamenting aloud, as I rove,
Since Phoebe no longer is here?
My flocks, if at random they stray,
What wonder, if she is from the plains?
Her hand they wore wont to obey;
She ruled both the sheep and the swains.
Can I ever forget how we strayed
To the foot of yon neighboring hill,
To the bower we had built in the shade,
Or the river that runs by the mill?
There, sweet by my side as she lay,
And heard the fond stories I told,
How sweet was the thrush from the spray,
Or the bleathing of lambs from the fold!
How often would I spy out a charm,
Which before had been hid from my view!
And, while arm was enolded in arm,
My lips to her lips how they grew!
How long the sweet contest would last,
Till the hours of retirement and rest,
What pleasures and pain each had past,
Who longest had loved, and who best.
No changes of place, or of time,
I felt when my fair one was near;
Alike was each weather and clime,
Each season that checkered the year:
In winter's rude lap did we freeze,
Did we melt on the bosom of May --
Each morn brought contentment and ease,
If we rose up to work or to play.
She was all my fond wishes could ask;
She had all the kind gods could impart;
She was nature's most beautiful task,
The despair, and the envy of art:
There all that is worthy to prize,
In all that was lovely was dressed;
For the graces were throned in her eyes,
And the virtues all lodged in her breast.
SONG 88.
WOULD you taste the noontide air,
To you fragrant bower repair,
Where woven with the poplar bough,
The mantling vine will shelter you.
The mantling vine will shelter you.
Down each side a fountain flows,
Tinkling, murmuring, as it goes,
Lightly over the mossy ground,
Lightly over the mossy ground,
Sultry Phoebus scorching round,
Sultry Phoebus scorching round.
Round, the languid herds and sheep,
Stretched on funny hillocks sleep --
While on the hyacinth and rose,
The fair does all alone repose --
The fair does all alone repose --
All alone -- yet in her arms
Your breast shall beat to love's alarms --
Till, blessed and blessing, you shall own,
The joys of love are joys alone,
The joys of love are joys alone.
SONG 89.
AS you mean to set fail for the land of delight,
And in wedlock's soft hammock to swing every night --
If you hope that your voyage successful should prove,
Fill your sails with affection, your cabin with love.
Fill your sails with affeftion, etc,
Let your heart, like the mainmast, be ever upright,
And the union vou boast, like our tackle, be tight:
Of the shoals of indiff'rence be sure to keep clear,
And the quicksands of jealousy never come near,
And the quicksands, etc.
If husbands ever hope to live peaceable lives,
They must reckon themselves, give the helm to their wives:
For the evener we go, the better we sail,
And on shipboard, the helm is still ruled by the tail,
And on shipboard, etc.
Then list to your pilot, my boy, and be wise:
If my precepts you scorn, and my maxims despise,
A brace of broad antlers your brows may adorn,
And a hundred to one but you double Cape Horn.
SONG 90.
BELIEVE my sighs, my tears, my dear,
Believe the heart you have won;
Believe my vows to you sincere,
Or, Peggy, I Am undone.
You say I Am false, and apt to change
At every face that is new:
Of all the girls I ever saw,
I never loved one but you,
My heart was like a lump of ice,
Till warmed by your bright eye,
And then it kindled in a trice,
A flame that never can die.
Then take and try me -- you shall find
That I Have a heart that is true:
Of all the girls I ever saw,
1 never loved one like you.
SONG 91.
BY the gayly-circling glass
We can see how minutes pass;
By the hollow cask; are told
How the waning night grows old,
How the waning night grows old.
Soon, too soon, the busy day
Drives us from our sport and play:
What have we with day to do?
Sons of care, 'twas made for you;
Sons of care, 'twas made for you.
SONG 92.
IF love's a sweet passion, how can it torment?
If bitter, O tell me whence comes my content?
Since I suffer with pleasure why should I complain,
Or grieve at my fate, since I know it is in vain?
Yet so pleasing the pain is, so soft is the dart,
That at once it both wounds me and tickles my heart.
I grasp her hand gently, look languishing down,
And by passionate silence, I make my love known:
But oh! how I Am blessed when so kind she does prove,
By some willing mistake to discover her love;
When, in striving to hide, she reveals all her flame,
And our eyes tell each other what neither dare name!
How pleasing is beauty! how sweet are her charms!
How delightful embraces! how peaceful her arms!
Sure there is nothing so easy as learning to love;
It Is taught us on earth, and by all things above:
And to beauty's bright standard all heroes must yield;
For it is beauty that conquers and keeps the fair field.
SONG 93.
I Winna marry any mon bat Sandy over the lee;
I winna ha the Dominee, for geud he canna be;
But I will ha my Sandy lad, my Sandy over the Ice.
For he is aye a kissing, kissing, aye a kissing me.
I will not have the minister, for all his godly looks;
Nor yet will I the lawyer have, for all his wily crooks;
I will not have the ploughman lad, nor yet will I the miller;
But I will have my Sandy lad, without one penny filler.
For he is aye a kissing, etc.
I will not have the soldier lad, for he gangs to the war;
I will not have the sailor lad, because he smells of tar:
I will not have the lord nor lord, for all their mickle gear;
But I will have my Sandy lad, my Sandy over the meir.
For he is aye a kissing, etc.
SONG 93.
LOVELY nymph, assuage my anguish.
At your feet a tender swain
Prays you will not let him languish;
One kind look would ease his pain.
Did you know the lad that courts
You, he not long need sue in vain;
Prince of song, of dance, of sports,
You scarce will meet his like again.
SONG 94.
MY Sandy is the sweetest swain,
That ever pip'd on Tay,
He tends his sheep on verdant plains.
And chears me all the day:
For oh! he is so blithe a lad,
A blither canna be;
Whenever he is nigh, my heart is glad,
For dearly he loves me.
As on a mossy bank we sat,
Beneath a fragrant shade,
The youth he charmed me with his chat,
And on his bagpipe played:
For oh! he is, etc.
He calls me his dear life and care,
And calls me his Peggy too;
He vows by all that is good and fair,
To me he will prove true.
For oh! he is, etc.
So I will prize my lovely swain.
And yield to be his wife;
Then bid adieu to care and pain,
And so be blessed for life.
For oh! he is, etc.
SONG 95.
VOWS of love should ever bind
Men who are to honor true;
The must have a savage mind,
Who refuse the fair their due.
Scorned and hated may they be,
Who from constancy do swerve!
So may every nymph agree
All such faithless swains to serve!
SONG 96.
WATER parted from the sea,
May increase the river's tide,
To the bubbling fount may flee,
Or through fertile valleys glide.
Though, in search of lost repose,
Through the land it is free to roam,
Still it murmurs as it flows,
Till it reach its native home.
SONG 97.
IN love should there meet a fond pair,
Untutored by fashion or art,
Whose wishes are warm and sincere,
Whose words are the excess of the heart;
If aught of substantial delight
On this side the stars can be found,
It Is sure, when that couple unite,
And Cupid by Hymen is crowned.
SONG 98.
RAIL no more, ye learned asses,
Against the joys the bowl supplies;
Sound its depth, and fill your glasses,
Wisdom at the bottom lies:
Fill'em higher still, and higher,
Shallow draughts perplex the brain;
Sipping quenches all our fire,
Bumpers light it up again.
Draw the scene for wit and pleasure,
Enter jollity and joy:
We for thinking have no leisure,
Manly mirth is our employ:
Since in life there is nothing certain,
We'll the present hour engage;
And, when death shall drop the curtain,
With applause we'll quit the stage.
SONG 99.
TO heal the smart a be had made
Upon my Chloe's face,
Honey upon her cheek she laid,
And bid me kiss the place.
Pleased I obeyed, and from the wound
Imbibed both sweet and smart;
Honey on my lips I found,
The sting within my heart.
SONG 100.
WAS I a shepherd's maid, to keep
On yonder plains a flock of sheep.
Well pleased I Would watch, the live long day,
My ewes at feed, my lambs at play.
Or would some bird, that pity brings,
But for a moment lend its wings,
My parents then might rave and scold.
My guardian strive my will to hold:
Their words are harsh, his walls are high,
But spite of all, away I Would fly.
SONG 101.
WHEN innocent pastime our pleasure did crown,
Upon a green meadow or under a tree,
Ere Nanny became a fine lady in town,
How lovely and loving and bonny was she!
Rouse up thy reason, my beautiful Nanny,
Let no new whim take thy fancy from me,
Oh! as thou art bonny, be faithful as any,
Favor thy Jemmy, favor thy Jemmy,
Favor thy Jemmy, who doats upon thee.
Can the death of a linnet give Nanny the spleen,
Can losing of thifles a heart aching be,
Can lap dogs and monkies draw tears from those even,
That look with indiff'rence on poor dying me?
Rouse up thy reason, my beautiful Nanny,
Scorn to prefer a vile parrot to me,
Oh! as thou art bonny, be faithful as any,
Think on thy Jemmy, think on thy Jemmy,
Think on thy Jemmy, who doats upon thee.
Oh! think, my dear charmer on every sweet hour
That slid away softly between thee and me;
Ere squirrels and beaux and their fopp'ry had power
To rival my love and impose upon thee.
Rouse up thy reason, my beautiful Nanny,
Let thy desires be all centered in me.
Oh! as thou art bonny, be prudent as any,
Love thy own Jemmy, love thy own Jemmy,
Love thy own Jemmy who doats upon thee.
SONG 102.
MY Nancy quits the rural train,
A camp distress to prove;
All other ill she can sustain,
But living from her love.
But, dearest, though your soldier's there,
Will not your spirits fail,
To mark the hardships you must share,
Dear Nancy of the dale?
Or should your love each danger scorn,
Ah! how shall I secure
Your health, 'midst toils which you were born
To sooth, but not endure?
A thousand perils I mnst view,
A thousand ills assail,
Nor must I tremble even for you,
Dear Nancy of the dale.
SONG 103.
AS down on Banna's banks I strayed, one evening May,
The little birds, in blithest notes, made vocal every spray:
They sung their little tales of love, they sung them over and over,
Ah! gramachree, ma cholleenouge, ma Molly asthore!
The daisy py'd, and all the sweets the dawn of nature yields,
The primrose pale, and vi'let blue, lay scattered over the fields;
Such fragrance in the bosom lies of her whom I adore
Ah! gramachree, etc.
I laid me down upon a bank, bewailing my sad fate,
That doomed me thus the slave of love, and cruel Molly's hate;
How can she break the honest heart that wears her in its core?
Ah! gramachree, etc.
You said you loved me, Molly dear: ah! why did I believe?
Yet who could think such tender words were meant but to deceive?
That love was all I asked on earth, may, heaven could give no more.
Ah! gramachree, etc.
O! had I all the flocks that graze on yonder yellow hill,
Or lowed for me the nun'rous herds that yon green pasture fill;
With her I love, I Would gladly share my kine and fleecy store,
Ah! gramachree, etc.
Two turtle-doves, above my head, fat courting on a bough,
I envied them their happiness, to see them bill and coo;
Such fondness once for me was showed, but now, alas! it is over.
Ah! gramachree, etc.
Then fare thee well, my Molly dear, thy loss I ever shall moan;
While life remains in Strephon's heart, 'twill beat for thee alone;
Though thou art false, may heaven no thee its choicest blessings pour.
Ah! gramachree, ma cholleenouge, ma Molly asthore
SONG 104.
DEAR Chloe, come give me sweet kisses,
For sweeter no girl ever gave;
But why, in the midst of my blisses,
Do you ask me how many I Would have?
I am not to be stinted in pleasure,
Then prithee, dear Chloe be kind;
For since I love thee beyond measure,
To numbers I Will never be confined.
Count the bees that on Hybla are playing,
Count the flowers that enamel the fields;
Count the flocks that on Tempe are straying,
Or the grain that rich Sicily yields;
Count how many stars are in heaven,
Go number the sands on the shore,
And when so many kisses you have given,
I still shall be asking for more.
To a heart full love let me hold thee,
A heart which, dear Chloe, is thine;
In my arms I Would for ever enfold thee,
And twist round thy neck like a vine:
What joy can be greater than this is!
My life on thy lips shall be spent:
But the wretch who can number his kisses,
Will always with few be content.
SONG 105
THE fun from the east tips the mountains with gold,
And the meadows all spangled with dew-drops behold;
How the lark's early matin proclaims the new day,
And the horn's cheerful summons rebukes our delay!
With the sports of the field there is no pleasure can vie,
While jocund we follow, follow, follow, follow,
follow, follow, follow, follow, follow, follow,
follow, follow, follow, follow, follow, follow,
follow, follow, follow, the hounds in full cry.
Let the drudge of the town make riches his sport,
And the slave of the state hunt the smiles of the court;
No care nor ambition our patience annoy,
But innocence still gives a zest to our joy.
With the sports of the field, etc.
Mankind are all hunters in various degree,
The priest hunts a living, the lawyer a fee;
The doctor a patient, the courtier a place,
Though often, like us, they are slung out with disgrace.
With the sports of the field, etc.
The ^it hents a plumb, the soldier honts fame,
The poet a dinner, the patriot a name;
And the artful coquette, though she seems to refuse,
Yet, in spite of her airs, she her lover pursues.
With the sports of the field, etc.
Let the hold and the busy hunt glory and wealth,
All the blessings we ask is the blessing of health;
With hounds and with horns through the woodlands to roam,
And when tired abroad, find contentment at home.
With the sports of the field there is no pleasure can vie,
While jocund we follow, follow, follow, follow,
follow, follow, follow, etc.
SONG 106.
IF over the cruel tyrant, love,
A conquest I believed,
The flattering error cease to prove;
O! let me be deceived!
Forbear to fan the gentle flame,
Which love did first create;
What was my pride, is now my shame,
And must be turned to hate.
And call not to my wavering mind
The weakness of my heart,
Which, ah! I feel too much inclined
To take a traitor's part.
SONG 107.
IN the social amusements of life let me live,
Prove every delight love and friendship can give;
Where easy goodnature gives converse a zest,
Where sense in the light robe of humor is dressed;
Where harmony, beauty, and reason combine,
Our souls to improve, and our tempers resine.
At the festival board, where my Phoebe can share
The jest -- which her pureness unsullied may hear,
Unblathing enjoy, unrepining approve,
While Damon toasts freely to friendship and love;
While harmony, beauty, and reason combine
Our souls to improve, and our tempers resine.
Time was meant for a blessing, not dealt for a curse;
The troubles of life are by pining made worse;
The sullen recluse may disrelish my plan,
But I Will live, and I Will love, and I Will laugh while I can.
While harmony, beauty, and reason combine,
Our souls to improve, and our tempers refine.
SONG 108.
SINCE wedlock's in vogue, and stale virgins despised,
To all bachelors greeting, these lines are premised:
I Am a maid that would marry -- ah! could I but find
(I care not for fortune) a man to my mind,
(I care not for fortune) a man to my mind.
Not the fair weathered sop, fond of fashion and dress;
Nor the squire who can relish no joys but the chase;
Nor the free-thinking rake whom no morals can bind;
Neither this, that, nor t'ohter's the man to my mind,
Neither this, etc.
Not the ruby-fac'd sot, who topes, world without end;
Nor the drone who cannot relish his bottle and friend;
Nor the fool that is too fond, nor the churl that'unkind;
Neither this, that, nor t'other's the man to my mind,
Neither this, etc.
Not the rich, with full bags, without breeding on merit;
Nor the flash, that is all fury, without any spirit;
Nor the fine master Fribble, the scorn of mankind;
Neither this, that, nor t'other's the man to my mind,
Neither this, etc.
But the youth whom good sense and goodnature inspire,
Whom the brave must esteem, and the fair should admire;
In whose heart love and truth are with honor conjoined;
This, this, and no other's the man to my mind,
This, this, and no other's the man to mv mind.
SONG 109.
HOW blithe was I each morn to see
My swain come over the hill!
He leaped the brook, and flew to me;
I met him with good will:
I neither wanted ewe nor lamb,
When his flocks near me lay;
He gathered in my sheep at night,
And cheered me all the day.
Oh! the broom, the bonny broom,
Where lost was my repose
I wish I was with my dear swain,
With his pipe and my ewes.
He tuned his pipe and reed so sweet,
The birds stood listening by;
The fleecy flock stood still and gazed,
Charmed with his melody:
While thus we spent our time, by turns,
Betwixt our flocks and play,
I envied not the fairest dame,
Though ever so rich and gay.
Oh! the broom, etc.
He did oblige me every hour:
Could I but faithful be?
He stole my heart -- could I refuse
Whatever he asked of me?
Hard fate! that I must banished be
Gang heavily and mourn,
Because I loved the kindest swain
That ever yet was born.
Oh! the broom, etc.
SONG 110
HOW bles has my time been! what days have I known,
Since wedlock's fost bondage made Jessy my own!
So joyful my heart is, so easy my chain,
That freedom is tasteless, and roving a pain,
That freedom, etc.
Through walks grown with woodbines, as often we stray,
Around us our boys and girls frolic and play;
How pleasing their sport is, the wanton ones see,
And borrow their looks form my jessy and me:
And borrow, etc.
To try her sweet temper often times am I seen
In revels all day with the nymphs of the green;
Though painful my absence, my doubts she beguiles,
And meets me at night with compliance and smiles;
And meets, etc.
What though on her cheeks the rose loses its hue,
Her case and good humor bloom all the year through:
Time still, as he flies, adds increase to her truth,
And gives to her mind what he steals from her youth,
And gives, etc.
Ye shepherds so gay, who make love to ensnare.
And cheat with false vows the too credulous fair,
In search of true pleasure, how vainly you roam!
To hold it for life, you must find it at home,
To hold it. etc.
SONG 111.
WHEN late I wandered over the plain,
From nymph to nymph, I strove in vain,
My wild desires to rally;
But now they are of themselves come home,
And, strange! no longer seek to roam,
They center all in Sally.
Yet sne, unkind one, damps my joy,
And cries, I court but to destroy:
Can love with ruin tally?
By those dear lips, those eyes, I swear,
I would all deaths, all torments bear,
Rather than injure Sally.
Can the weak taper's seeble rays,
Or lamps, transmit the fun's bright blaze;
Oh! no -- then say how shall I
In words, be able to express
My love? -- it burns to such excess
I almost die for Sally.
Come then, oh! come, thou sweeter far
Than jessamine and roses are,
Or lillies of the valley;
O follow love, and quit your fear,
He Will guide you to these arms, my dear,
And make me blessed in Sally.
SONG 112.
YE sportsmen draw near, and ye sportswomen too,
Who delight in the joys of die field;
Mankind, though they blame, are all eager as you,
And no one the contest will yield:
His lordship, his worship, his honor, his grace,
A hunting continua'ly go;
All ranks and degrees are engaged in the chase,
With hark forward! huzza! tally-ho!
The lawyer will rise with the first of the morn,
To hunt for a mortgage or deed;
The husband gets up, to the sound of the horn,
And rides to the commons full speed;
The patriot is thrown in pursuit of his game,
The poet, too, often lies low,
Who, mounted on Pegasus, flies after fame,
With hark forward! huzza! tally-ho!
While fearless over hills and over woodlands we sweep,
Though prudes on our pastime may srown;
How often do they decency's bounds overleap,
And the fences of virtue break down?
Thus public, or private, for pension, for place,
For amusement, for passion, for show;
All ranks and degrees are engaged in the chase,
With hark forward! huzza! tally-ho!
SONG 113.
YOU tell me I Am handsome, (I know not how true)
And easy, and chatty, and good-humored too;
That my lips are as red as the rose-bud in June,
And my voice, like the nightingale's, sweetly in tune:
All this has been told me by twenty before;
But he that would win me, must flatter me more,
But he that would win me, must flatter me more,
If beauty from virtue receive no supply,
Or prattle from prudence, how wanting am I!
My ease and good humor short raptures will bring;
My voice, like the nightingale's, knows but a spring:
For charms such as these, then, your praises give over;
To love me for life, you must love me still more,
To love me, etc.
Then talk not to me of a shape, or an air;
For Chloe the wanton can rival me there:
It Is virtue alone that makes beauty look gay,
And brightens good humor, as sunshine the day.
For that, if you love me, your flame may be true.
And I, in my turn, may be taught to love, too,
And I, in my turn, may be taught to love, too.
SONG 114.
SINCE laws are made for every degree,
To curb vice in others, as well as in me,
I wonder we have not better company
Upon Tyburn tree!
But gold from law can take out the sting;
And if rich men like us were to swing.
'Twould thin the land, such numbers to string
Upon Tyburn tree!
FINIS

