AN ESSAY ON OUTWARD CHRISTIAN BAPTISM.

BY TIMOTHY ALLEN, A. M. Pastor of the CHURCH in CHESTERFIELD. HAMPSHIRE COUNTY.

NORTHAMPTON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM BUTLER. M,DCC,LXXXVIII.

PREFACE.
THE occasion of the following Essay, as represented in general terms, in the
beginning of it, did, in the view of the Church affected by it, call for very
serious and deliberate consideration; that they might be clear to discharge
themselves, as the nature and importance of the case required; and so as they
might be acquitted in the day of account.

They considered the two persons referred to, as practicing contempt of the
sacred ordinance of baptism in their childhood; which baptism is certainly
vindicable from the scriptures; whether the following Essay shall be considered
as having done it, or not. They considered them also, as violating their solemn
faederal connection with this Church, to submission to which, they were holden,
as well as to union with it. Also, those persons appeared to look down on the
various lenient measures of the Church toward them, contemptuously. But as
they alleged conscience for what they did, so the Church considered the case,
as wholly out of their power. Yet viewed the persons as going a stray, and that
the end would be bitterness, when all disguises shall be removed. The Church
therefore were at a plunge, being sharply pinched, between sympathetic feelings
for their old friends, and a pressing sense of duty lying on them, to do
something. Of course, considering the evidence they had, that Baptists proceed
in an unscriptural way, and the possibility that pertinent light might tend to
extricate those persons from their present embarrassments, and be of use to
others in like temptation; and at the same time be a discharge of duty for
themselves; they determined to exhibit as clear an account as they could, of
the nature of the baptism which was used by John the Baptist, under the law; as
also of the baptism appointed to be used under the gospel. And they were
disposed to desire their Pastor to prepare those exhibitions for public view.
He was sensible of his insufficiency to do honor to those important topics,
together with his daily avocations and encumbrances, would necessarily confine
him to the very shortest method of treating those points. And when he
considered the people, whose benefit he had in view, were not able or disposed
to comprehend large treatises, he judged it was best for them to give as short
sketches on each head, as could consist with some measure of light, in the
nature of it. However, he foresaw some disadvantages in so brief a manner of
treating the scriptural doctrines of baptism; both because many interesting
points could not be, in that way, so distinctly illustrated or proved; and
because the class of people, to whom he would feign communicate some light, are
as apt to harp on a supposed defect, as they are averse to feel and yield to a
fair demonstration. On the whole, as the Church held themselves disqualified to
pass censure, for the reason already given; though they know that no conscience
ever dictated, what is not scriptural, either materially or in made of
management. Of course they held, that the case before them must be refered to
the Lord of all consciences; and that they who charge to conscience any other
kind of influence, or prepossession, must answer it.

And the Church were equally barred from approving the said two persons, in
their conduct, either by neglect, indifference or silence; because in either
they would injure known truth; so they held, themselves confined to the present
method.

The writer of the following Essay is sensible, that the general representation
he has given of the covenant of grace, is not exactly agreeable to the
sentiments of those who conceive of a covenant of redemption, between the
Father and the Son, distinct from the covenant of grace; and who conceive man a
party in the covenant of grace. He rather thinks, with many others, who see no
necessity of understanding a distinct covenant of redemption; but that Jesus
Christ, as the second Adam, undertook the salvation of the elect from eternity;
was sole party contractor for them, without any actual pardon or justification
granted to them, as not yet existing, till faith and repentance should open a
door, for the consistent display of such acts of grace upon them. Other
sentiments in the Essay, may be charged to the writer's account; but he hopes
none offensive to the generation of God's children, whose hearts are found in
his statutes, nor unsupportable by the scriptures.

The writer found it nearly impossible for him to avoid saying the same things,
in some parts of the Essay, which have been said by others on the same subject;
however, he has been dictated by the scriptures, and the nature of the argument.

He begs leave to insist on two points, from every reader of the following
Essay, viz. to read attentively every article, with the evidence adduced to
support it: and to suspend censure till be is sure of the sentiment; for if the
sentiments are contained in truth, they claim all this as due; but if not,
censure is a just reward.

N. B. The said Church also thought it a proper part of the following
testimony, to add a number of marks of a wrong sort of religious spirit, in
whomsoever they are found. As 1st. To be insensible of the sacred nature of
religious covenants. 2d. To refuse visible communion with such as are allowed
to be real Christians. 3d. To prefer any temporal consideration to the
observance of sacred bonds. 4th, To support a profession of says, without
endeavors to keep the commandments. 5th. To hold a confidence of good moral
slate, on the foot of any outward action whatever. 6th. To suppose any outward
action of his own, commends a person to divine favor. 7th. To hold one
Christian better that another, in God's esteem, by any outward action
whatsoever. 8th. To hold any outward action of his (...), to be any mean of
justifying righteousness to any person. 9th. To hold any branch of
sanctification, to be a wear of justification in the sight of God. 10th. To
feel preferable to other Christians in the sight of God, by doing any duty
whatever. 11th. To prefer ^^^^selves to other Christians, on any account. 12th.
To treat any visible Christians contemptuously. 13th. To indicate a divisive
propensity toward visible Christians. 14th. To be inclinded to say, "Stand by
thyself, I am holier than thou." 15th. To suppose divine favor as partial to
us, as our own. 16th. To hold ourselves excused from any private duty, merely
by performance of any public duty. 17th. To be void of that union to all
Christians, which is the mark of Christ's disciples. 18th. To break Christian
union, rather than practice selfdenial. 19th. To hold a spirit of self
justification. 20th. To have more religious confidence, than scriptural
evidence. 21st. To support a religious hope, by what is not certainly
scriptural. 22d. To supply the want of clear scriptural evidence, by mere
suppositions. 23d. To be more apt to believe in our own favor, than divine
authority will support. 24th. To be deaf to reason and scripture, when they
don't favor our own opinion. 25th. To regard the word of God, just as it
appears, to suit ourselves. 26th. To make our own principles our rule, for
understanding scripture. 27th. To support any religious principles, by
rejecting fair scriptural consequences. 28th. To make a merit of differing from
other Christians. 29th. To hold the favor of God, engrossed by any sect
whatsoever. 30th. To feel a little more happy, by dividing from any visible
Christians.


An ESSAY ON OUTWARD CHRISTIAN BAPTISM. In two PARTS.
The first PART, on the BAPTISM used under the Law.
THE judgment of a Church in Hampshire county, in the case of two persons, who
have heretofore professed the christian faith, and submitted to the government,
watch and care of said Church, and so became divinely bound to keep the unity
of the spirit in the bond of peace with it.

And yet paying no regard to those sacred bonds, have of late, in a disorderly
manner, withdrawn themselves from all connection with said Church, not only
without its council and concurrence, but contrary to its painful labors and
faithful remonstrances, and united themselves to what is called a Baptist
Church.

And now said Church, still meaning to practice fidelity to Jesus Christ and
them; in consideration of the premises; in consideration also of the noted
habit of the people called Baptists, to criminate all opposition to their bias,
with the style of persecution; and lastly, in consideration of the utter
inconsistency of their scheme, with that of the bible; the said Church holds
itself called to exhibit scriptural light to the said two persons, and to
whomsoever else it may concern; in considence, that when their minds are
disentangled from the bondage of error, as they certainly will be in this
case, they will then know we have treated them in consistency with our stable
profession: and then we shall leave the said two persons entirely to the Judge
of right.

Now as the people called Baptists, hold it a necessary part of obedience and
following Christ, to be buried in water, as they say he was in baptisin: We
therefore are bound to testify and prove,

I. That Christ's baptism, was not christian baptism.

1. Because christian baptism is a seal of christianity; but the christian
dispensation was not in being when Jesus Christ was baptized, and so there was
no such thing to be sealed at that time; and then it must be a seal to nothing,
which is no seal at all. Therefore the baptism of Jesus Christ was not the
christian baptism.

2. Because Jesus Christ's baptism was under the law; but no ordinance under
the law, could at the same time be under the gospel; and if not under the
gospel, it could not be a christian ordinance: therefore Christ's baptism was
not christian baptism.

3. Because Christ's baptism was part of that law-righteousness, which he came
to fulfill, and which must be finished before the gospel dispensation could
begin; as justification must be finished before sanctification can begin:
therefore Christ's baptism could not be christian baptism,

4. Because as every thing done to fulfill the law was legal, and as Christ's
baptism was confessedly done to fulfill the law; Matt. iii. 15, -- therefore
Christ's baptism was legal, not christian baptism.

5. Because to be baptized in obedience to the legal dispensation, must be
legal obedience; but Christ was so baptzied: therefore his baptism was legal,
not gospel obedience.

6. Because what Christ came to do was to fulfill the righteousness of the law,
Matt. v. 17. But that was law-work, not gospel-work: therefore Christ's baptism
was legal, not evangelical.

7. Ordinances of the law, and of the gospel, are different; but Christ's
baptism was an ordinance of the law, as the next argument will show: therefore
Christ's baptism was not a gospel or christian ordinance.

Objection. But the Lord's supper was instituted under the law also.

Answer. True; but it was the very night in which he was betrayed, so it must
be then or never, I. Cor. xi. 23. Whereas Christ was baptized several years
before. Beside, he commanded the future constant use of the Lord's supper; but
no such command about his baptism, because that was part of his perfect law,
righteousness, which none ever could do but himself.

Nay further, Jesus Christ knew that he was appointed by the Father to be
faithful in all God's house, the church, as Moses was, -- Heb. iii. 2 But Moses
appointed the Paschal feast, as a constant token of divine presence and favor,
and a mean of communion with him, which Paschal feast was to cease the moment
Christ died. Therefore he must appoint the gospel feast, the Lord's supper,
before he died, or else he would not be as faithful in God's house, as Moses
was; but would leave it quite destitute of this chiesmean of visible connection
and communion with God; which would show he had not finished his work, and be a
blot on him and his kingdom forever.

II. The baptism of Jesus Christ, was the appointed mean of entering on his
publie ministry, which he must fulfill, both as it was a part of the law, which
he was to obey perfectly, and also, because otherwise he could not claim that
priesthood all to himself.

1. Legal priests were always inducted to their public ministry, by washing or
being baptized with water; therefore it was commanded for Aaron, his sons and
all his successors, to be washed, or baptized with water, when they went into
their public ministry, -- Exodus xxix. 4, xl. 12. -- Exodus 30.18. -- 20. So
Christ, who knew the whole law, when he was going into his public discharge of
the legal priesthood, knew he must be washed or baptized with water; and as no
legal priest could enter that public ministry, till thirty years of age, --
Number. iv. 3, 47, -- so Jesus Christ, when he arrived to that age -- Luke iii. 23
-- knowing it was the appointed mean of entering the ministry of the law, was
obedient in that, as in every thing: therefore Christ's baptism was wholly
legal, not christian.

2. This is exactly the reason which Jesus Christ gives to John, when he come
to be washed or baptized by him; "thus it becomes us to fulfill all
rightousness." Importing I cannot fulfill all righteousness, viz. of the law,
unless I submit to it; nor you do your duty unless you administer it; for this
was the reason why John was sent to baptize -- And as this was a noted part of
obedience to the law, so all righteousness could not be fulfiled without it:
therefore Christ's baptism was not christian baptism.

3. It is declared, John i. 31, etc. that the very reason why John was sent to
baptize, was, that he might by that ordinance make Christ manifest to Israel,
viz. to be their promised high priest; and he was made manisest by public
baptism, according to law, by the heaven's visibly opening at the same time; by
the descent of the holy spirit on Christ, and by the voice from heaven
approving him. Therefore as soon as the necessary trials of forty days in the
wilderness were out, he began to preach. Matt. iv. 17. Therefore Christ's
baptism was altogether legal, not christian.

III. The baptism of Jusus Christ was no part of christian obedience. For,

1. Then it must be obedience to himself; for Jesus Christ is the head of all
christian matters. He came to do the will of God, Psalm. xl. 8, not to do his
own will, John vi. 38. But the will of God by Jesus Christ, primarily, was his
fulfiling the law, and his baptism was part of that work, as he told John at
the time: therefore Christ's baptism was obedience to the law, not to
christianity.

2. To be christian obedience, it must be under christianity, not under the
law; but it was under the law, not under the gospel: therefore the baptism of
Jesus Christ was wholly legal obedience, not christian.

3. Not only the fact was under the law, but the view and design of it was to
fulfill what the law already required, and to be a lawful qualification for his
public ministry while under the law; the last act of which ministry and
priesthood, was his offering up himself in death, Heb. viii. 3, 7, 27.
Therefore the design of Christ's baptism was altogether legal, and peculiar to
himself; which was implied, when he said, "suffer it to be so now," Matt. iii.
15, as the only instance of it in the world.

IV. Christ's baptism could not be a pattern for his people's obedience. For,

1. Obedience to the law for justification, never can be a part of his people's
obedience: But Christ's baptism was a part of his obedience to the law, for the
justification of sinners: therefore no pattern for his people's obedience.

2. If Christ's baptism was pattern for his people to copy, then there must be
a law in christianity for his people to be baptized as he was; but there is no
such law: therefore Christ's baptism was not a pattern for them to follow.

3. Therefore there is no more reason to follow Christ in this action, than in
all the actions of his obedience to the holy law.

Question. What was John's baptism?

Answer. John's baptism was a rite which divine wisdom designed and proclaimed
by Malachy of old, Mal. iii. 1, which was to serve three purposes.

1. John was a pioneer and herald, sent before his General, and the following
christian army, to remove impediments; and as sin was the chief impediment, so
John's work was to witness against it, and require repentance of it; and then
to baptize, or wash with water, all who complied, as a badge of their clearness
from it; just as Jews always did to proselytes and priests, under the law, as
token of their purity. But now John did this to all penitents, both because God
ordered him so, and because the holy christian kingdom was then coming, in
three or four years: so it was called the baptism of repentance. 2. As John's
ministry was all under the law, so it was a type, like other religious actions,
under the law; to be a picture of that holiness, which was to be characteristic
of approaching christianity; that every body might see in that symbol, what
they must be and what Christ could make them, viz. all over holy: But no use
for types when the substance is come, except among Jews. 3. As Christ could not
enter on his public ministry without baptism, and it could not be administered
without a qualified officer; so, John i. 31, tells us the very reason why John
was qualified, was that he might introduce Jesus Christ to his public ministry
under the law, by the baptism of that dispensation.
And with this testimony we refer the said two persons to God the righteous
Judge. Only adding, that we shall as clearly delineate what is true christian
baptism, with its nature and evidence, when you, or any in your behalf, shall
desire it.

The Second PART, on CHRISTIAN BAPTISM.
AS all goods derive from God to men through the channel of the covenant of
grace, so I shall, 1st. Open the nature of the covenant of grace. 2d. Prove
that this was the covenant established with Abraham. 3d. Show what were the
contents of it, in that establishment. 4th. Show what provision God has made
for the propagation of those contents.


I. I shall very briefly open the nature of that covenant of grace, through
which all goods as such, derive to man. But,

1st. If all men are sinners, then divine justice forbids all favors to them,
except on supposition of equal atonement; but all men are sinners, and
therefore the justice of God forbids all favor to them, except on supposition
of equal atonement. Romans iii. 23. "All have sinned and come short of the glory
of God," and Jer. v. 25, "Your sins have withholden good things from you." But
since mercy and truth have found atonement, and "righteousness is come down
from heaven, the Lord will give that which is good," Psalm. lxxxv. 10, 11, 12.

2d. But the man Christ Jesus, could not consistently undertake the work of
atonement, without express security to be preserved through, accepted and
sufficiently rewarded; therefore when the determination of the Father, was to
give his son "a covenant of the people," Isa. xlix. 8. Jesus Christ replied,
"Lo I come, I delight to do thy will, O my God," Psalm. xl. 7, 8. And for his
security, God said, Isa. xlii. 6, "I have called thee in righteousness, and
will hold thine hand and will keep thee. And promised "he should see his seed,
and the ends of the earth should see his salvation; that he should say to the
prisoners, go forth," etc. Isa. xlix. 6, 9: So that there was a complete
stipulation or contract, between the Father and Son, with reference to the
elect of God.

This contract is commonly styled the covenant of grace. On which remark, 1st.
This covenant is called, covenant of grace, or mere favor, because the heart
of the parties contracting first gave spring to the scheme of it, Cant. vi. 12.
2d. Because their object, lost sinners, deserved no favor at all. "They had
destroyed themselves, but in God was their help," Hos. xiii. 9. 3d. Because it
contains all grace, for time and eternity, without money or price, Isa. lii. 3.
4th. Because the parties contracting, knew they never could need any thing from
the creatures. God said "I am God, I will take no bullock of thee, etc. but
will show the salvation of God, Psalm. l. 7, 9, 23. 5th. As nothing can be new
to God, so it is evident this covenant was made from eternity, Tit. i. 2, "It
was promised, viz. in Christ, before the world began." 6th. The parties
contracting were God the Father, of the one part, and God the Son, as accepting
the human nature God provided, on the other; and without which it was
impossible he should make atonement. Psalm. xl. 6. Heb. x. 5. "This council of
peace was between them both," Zech. vi. 13. 7th. Therefore the covenant of
grace, is as necessarily (by divine appointment) infallible, unchangeable and
eternal, as God himself is. "'It Is the covenant which God always remembers; the
word which he has commanded to a thousand generations," Psalm. cv. 8.


And this gives us light in several texts of scripture, as Psalm. lxxxix. 3, "I
have made a covenant with my chosen. And, II. Tim. i. 9, This was his own
purpose and grace, given us in Christ, before the world began. So also, Psalm.
xxv. 14, "The secret of the Lord, i. e. his free love and favor, is with them
who fear him, and he will make them know his covenant." For Abraham, as having
the secret of the Lord with him eminently, had this covenant notably
established with him, Genesis xvii. 7. On the same account, God made Isaac know
his covenant, Genesis xvii. 19. And in the same way it was revealed to Jacob, I.
Chron. xvi. 15, 16, 17. And God has to this day made all know his covenant, who
were governed by its principle, for "his secret is always with the righteous,
Prove. iii. 32.

Question. When God says, "I give thee for a covenant of the people," must we
understand that Jesus Christ is himself the covenant of grace?

Answer. By no means. It Is as absurd to hold Jesus Christ himself to be the
covenant of grace, as to hold a treasurer to be the treasury itself. Or a
testator to be his own testament. Or, an administrator to be the administration
itself. The whole nature of the two parties to whom the covenant of grace has
respect, is in Christ, and he has full power of sole administration of it. For
"in his hand was the pleasure of the Lord to prosper," Isa. liii. 10. It Is
therefore amazing! that any man endowed with common sense, and privileged with
the bible, should ever imagine, that the covenant of grace is not from
eternity; or that it is possibly subject to intermission or failure, in whole
or in any part, touching any of its subjects, in any respect whatever.

Q. But don't the covenant of works interfere with the covenant of grace?

A. Not at all. Their agreements and differences are as follows: 1st. They
agree, in that their preceptive part containing all the laws of the bible; and
their promissory part, including all the goods of promises; and their penal
part, containing all the executions against sin, are the same in both. And they
agree also that perfect conformity to the precept, is the only qualification
for the promise; and that the want of it, induces the execution of the curse.
They both run through all ages, just as do the seed of the woman, and the seed
of the serpent. And all human persons in the world, are now subject to the one
or the other. But, 2d. Those two covenants essentially differ, in the following
respects. 1st. The covenant of grace is coeval with God, and the other is
coeval with men. 2d. They differ essentially in their several headships. For in
the covenant of works, the first Adam was foederal head. Therefore in Adam, all
die, I. Cor. xv. 22. But Jesus Christ is sole head in the covenant of grace:
therefore "in him all its subjects are made alive, I. Cor. xv. 22. 3d. The
parties contracting in each are different; for in the covenant of works, Adam
contracted for all his posterity. So Romans v. 19, says, "By his disobedience
many were made sinners" But in the covenant of grace, Jesus Christ contracted
for all the elect; so "grace reigns through righteousness to them all." Rom v. 17
to 21. 4th. They differ as to the ground of claims on the promise; for in the
covenant of works, each candidate claims on the foot of his own performance of
the precept: But never so in the covenant of grace. For there every claim is
made on account of Jesus Christ's performance of all the precepts. It Is "for
his righteousness sake only, God is well pleased," Isa. xlii. 21. 5th. Though
neither of these covenants admit any plea, but perfect righteousness; yet the
covenant of grace admits those to use it successfully who have no righteousness
at all personally. In this way, "he who has no money may come, buy and eat,
Isai. lv. 1.



Q. Does not this doctrine injure morality, by encouraging neglect of duty?

A. Right the reverse; it discourages proud arrogance; but gives infinite
encouragement to humble duty and obedience. Romans iii. 31, "Do we then make void
the law, through faith, God forbid, yea we establish the law."

II. I am next to prove, that this was the covenant established with Abraham.
This indeed is evident from what has been already said. But,

1st. If Abraham's seed, named in the covenant made with him, implies
christians, then that covenant was the covenant of grace: But seed in Abraham's
covenant, implies christians: therefore the covenant made with Abraham, was the
covenant of grace. For God himself has told us, Gal. iii. 29, "If ye are
Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed." And speaking of the same covenant, God
assures his people in all ages, Isa. live. 9, 10, "It never should be removed
from them."

2d. If by righteousness of faith, Romans iv. 11, is meant the covenant of grace,
then the covenant with Abraham was the covenant of grace; but righteousness of
faith, in Romans iv. 11, does as evidently mean the covenant of grace, as that
saving faith, and its perfect righteousness, are the peculiars of that
covenant. But then it is just so certain that the covenant with Abraham was the
covenant of grace: For it was Abraham who received circumcision, as the
initiating sign and confirming seal of the covenant made with him; which as it
contained the sum of all grace, I will be thy God," etc. must be that covenant
through which only grace flows to men.

3d. If the mere mercy of God is equally the source and fountain of the
covenant of grace, and the covenant with Abraham; then the covenant with
Abraham was the covenant of grace: but it is as certain to be so, as that both
covenants contained good things for the unworthy; and that there is no other
fountain, whence to derive them. Of course, the covenant with Abraham was the
covenant of grace.

4th. Gal. iii. 6, says, "The promises of the bible were made to Abraham and
his seed. But the promises of the bible contain all grace revealed; either
therefore, the covenant with Abraham was the covenant of grace, or there is no
such covenant.

5th. The scriptures never speak of more than one covenant of grace; but a
covenant of grace was certainly made with Abraham and his seed. Genesis xvii. 7,
"I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, for
an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee and thy seed after thee."
Therefore the covenant with Abraham, was the one only covenant of grace, which
runs through the whole bible.

6th. If Jesus Christ was the very seed of Abraham's covenant, as Gal. iii. 16,
says, "and to thy seed which is Christ," then the covenant with Abraham was the
covenant of grace.

Objection. The covenant with Abraham was to secure temporal things, as a
numerous posterity, and the possession of the land of Canaan.

Answer. These things were examples and shadows of heavenly things, Heb. viii.
5. His numerous posterity, represented that multitude which no man could
number, Rev. vii. 9. For they who are Christ's are Abraham's seed, Gal. iii.
29. And the earthly Canaan, represented that better country, even the heavenly,
which they desired. Heb. xi. 14, 15, 16. But if the antitypes of those
temporary figures, were most gracious things: then the covenant by which they
were secured, was the covenant of grace, by which all good things are secured
to its subjects.

7th. If God never published but one system of gracious promises, and these
Abraham received, Heb. xi. 17. Gal. iii. 16, then it is certain that the
covenant which contains all gracious promises, was the covenant made with
Abraham.

8th. If no person has justification and salvation, but through the covenant of
grace; and yet Abraham had justification and salvation through the covenant
made with him; Gal. iii. 18, "For God gave the inheritance to Abraham by
promise;" then the covenant with Abraham was the same covenant, by which
justification and salvation are received by all who are saved.

9th. If the words promise, promises, etc. very often used in the inspired
writings, generally mean Abraham's covenant, then Abraham's covenant is the
covenant of grace. But those words generally mean Abraham's covenant. For
instance, Romans iv. 13, 14, "For the promise was not to Abraham, or to his seed,
through the law, but through the righteousness of faith. So Gal. iii. 18, If
the inheritance be of the law, it is no more of promise, but God gave it to
Abraham by promise. Also Heb. vi. 13, when God made promise to Abraham, he
swear by himself, saying, blessing I will bless thee," etc. which are the very
words of Abraham's covenant. Genesis xxii. 16, 17, 18. Therefore the covenant with
Abraham was the covenant of grace.

10th. If heirship, often mentioned in the new testament, as predicable equally
of Abraham, and of all christians, implies title to the covenant of grace, then
the covenant with Abraham was the covenant of grace; but heirship in the new
testament implies title to the covenant of grace; therefore the covenant with
Abraham was the covenant of grace. For Romans iv. 13, says, "Abraham became heir
of the world;" i. e. not only entitled to Canaan, but a father to all who
believe every where, "through the righteousness of faith;" i. e. through the
covenant of grace. So Gal. iii. 29, "If ye are Christ's, then are ye Abraham's
seed, and heirs according to the promise;" i. e. according to the covenant made
with Abraham. So also Heb. xi. 9, "By faith Abraham so journed with Isaac and
Jacob, heirs with him of the same promise," or covenant of grace.

11th. If inheritance, in the sense of the bible, implies interest in the
covenant of grace, then the covenant with Abraham and his seed, was the
covenant of grace; but inheritance, in the sense of the bible, implies interest
in the covenant of grace, I. Pet. i. 4, He has begotten us to an inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away." And yet such inherritance
God gave to Abraham, in the covenant made with him. Gal. iii. 18, "God gave the
inheritance to Abraham by promise." Therefore the covenant with Abraham was the
covenant of grace.

12th. If there is no salvation but through the covenant of grace, then the
covenant with Abraham was the covenant of grace; but there is no salvation
except through the covenant of grace. Acts iv. 12, "There is no other name
under heaven, whereby ye can be saved." Yet Abraham had salvation, for the
beggar was carried to Abraham's bosom; Luke xvi. 22. Therefore the covenant
with Abraham was the covenant of grace.

13th. If saving faith is always grounded on the covenant of grace, and yet
Abraham had such faith, then the covenant with Abraham was the covenant of
grace.

14th. If the people of God were all saved for two thousand years, viz. from
Abraham to Christ, in the faith of Abraham's covenant, then Abraham's covenant
was the covenant of grace, the only standing way of salvation; but the people
of God for two thousand years, viz. from Abraham to Christ, were saved through
faith in Abraham's covenant; it was by such says "the elders obtained a good
report," Heb. xi. 2. And the 13th verse says, "These all died in faith, not
having received the promises," i. e. not living to the outward establishment of
christianity. Yet "God was not ashamed to be called their covenant God, -- and
prepared for them a city. So surely, therefore, was the covenant with Abraham,
the covenant of grace.

15. If Christ did not receive christian baptism, previous to his instituting
and receiving the Lord's supper, it must be because the initiating seal of the
covenant of grace, was already on him in circumcision; but Jesus Christ did not
receive christian baptism, previous to his instituting and receiving the Lord's
supper -- which is thus proved: 1. Because the dispensation to which christian
baptism belongs, was not in being. 2. Because to receive christian baptism, is
an instance of christian obedience; but, it was inconsistent for Jesus Christ
to perform any act of christian obedience for his people, till he had finished
a righteousness for their justification. 3. Because the baptism, then in use
was John's baptism, which was legal not christian.


The consequence is, that as Jesus Christ had the witnessing seal of the
covenant of grace upon him, in circumcision, so he was as well qualified for
access to the Lord's supper, as any can be now by christian baptism. But then
it is just so certain, that the covenant with Abraham, which contained
circumcision was the covenant of grace.

Quest. 1. Why did not Jesus Christ himself baptize, but his disciples only?

Ans. 1. The baptism with which his disciples baptized, was John's baptism; of
which before.

Ans. 2. As John's baptism was tipical of christian purity; so for Christ to
practice it, would be bearing witness to himself; contrary to his own maxim.
Jon. v. 31

Ans. 3. The work of Jesus Christ was to obey the Law; now though the law
required him to be baptized, as the induction to his public priesthood; yet no
precept or prophet of the law, ever said he should baptize with water; so he
had no such work to do.

Quest. 2. What is christian baptism?

Ans. 1. Christian baptism is being so enriched, and endowed, with the special
gifts, and graces, of the holy spirit, as is in scripture called, baptized with
the holy ghost. Matt. iii. 11. "He shall baptize you with the holy ghost and
with fire." Where fire is explanatory of this baptism; for it is purifying as
fire.

Ans. 2. But as nature abounds with speaking emblems of spiritual things; so it
pleased God to appoint outward resemblances of inward and spiritual things. And
the outward signal, and representation of christian baptism, is that external
application of water, in the name of the Godhead, which is called baptism, from
its resemblance to true baptism. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 25.

Ans. 3. But then the sign must always tally with the thing signified. And
therefore as no person is totally subject to true baptism; for we are
sanctified but in part; so to apply the outward sign to the whole body, does
not agree to the thing signified, in any case, in this world.

Quest. 3. Why was circumcision appointed a seal of the covenant of grace?

Ans. 1. It Is a prerogative of every royalty to choose and appoint his own seal.

Ans. 2. A seal of the Covenant of grace should always suit with the present
dispensation of that covenant. When it was established with Noah, and his seed;
the universal terror, was fear of another flood, and so the rainbow was a sign
and seal of the covenant of grace, exactly suited to those times. Genesis ix. 9.
to 17. But in the gentle reign of Jesus Christ, when blood has virtue enough,
to answer all the purposes of cleansing our sins; then the cleansing medium of
water baptism, becomes the proper seal of the covenant of grace. Whereas for
two thousand years before, viz. from Abraham to Christ, the business of all
that time, was to give assurance that their little bloods would certainly
issue, in the allsufficient blood of the Messiah; for which purpose nothing
could be more suitable, than for all families to be constantly shedding blood
in circumcision; so that was appointed, the witness and seal of the covenant of
grace. Genesis xvii. 10, 11. The bloody ordinance of circumcision, with all the
burdensome rites of that dispensation, excited desires, and prayers for
Christ's coming, and gave constant assurance of it.

Quest. 4. When was the form of the seal of the covenant changed?

Ans. When the dispensation was changed, from that of the law, to Christianity.
When the dispensation was changed, it was proper its witnessing seal should in
its outward form be altered. Heb. x. 9. "He took away the first that he might
establish the second."

Quest. 5. When did the christian dispensation begin?

Ans. 1. Exactly when that of the law ended. But neither could the first cease,
or the second begin, till John's ministry was finished; for he generally spoke
of Christ as coming after him. Mark i. 7. Matt. iii. 11. He preached "the
kingdom of heaven is at hand." So then it was near, but not come.

Ans. 2. The christian dispensation could not begin before the death of Christ.

1. Because many legal types could not be fulfilled till that event. Heb. ix.
7, to 16.

2. Because Christ's legal priesthood, which must be finished, before the
gospel dispensation could begin, was completed by his offering himself in
death. Heb. viii. 3, 7, 27, ix. 26, x. 12.

3. Because as the doctrine of Christ's kingdom was to be peace on earth. Luke
ii. 14. And that peace is founded in the blood of the cross, Col. i. 20. So the
gospel dispensation could not be set up, till that blood was shed.

Ans. 3. The christian dispensation could not begin till after Christ's
resurrection.

1. Because his finishing the atonement must be proved, by his resurrection
from the dead. But when God raised him, it was proof of his work fully done,
and that justice was satisfied. Acts ii. 24.

2. Pardon of sin, the privilege of the gospel dispensation, could not be
boldly affirmed; till Christ's rising had proved the meritorious cause
complete. Heb. ix. 26.

3. It was impossible to believe, without doubting, in what Christ had done,
till he was proved to be the Son of God with power, by his resurrection from
the dead. Romans i. 4. Therefore his dispensation could not begin till this proof
was given.

Ans. 4. The christian dispensation could not begin till the day of Pentecost.

1. Because as Pentecost was the fiftieth day from the second day of the
passover; so such as are learned in scripture chronology allege, that was the
day, in which the Church was established, and her law given from Sinai of old.
And the institution of her christian form, must answer ancient types; but then
it must be on the day of Pentecost, according to Acts ii. 1, which says "when
the day of Pentecost was fully come." The inspired words are, "en too symplee
rousthai," as importing, it must be at that juncture, neither sooner, nor later.

2. Because it was proper, that the religious privileges of this world, should
commence in presence of witnesses from every nation under heaven; which was the
case then, Acts ii. 5. to 12.

3. Because the circumstances of that day, indicate that the great institution
was upon it. As

1. That God might not surprise his people, with such important events, without
previous notice. He gave them these days, from Christ's resurrection, to the
said fiftieth day, to digest the evidence of what they had seen, that they
might be prepared for this establishment, ten days after his ascension.

2. The gospel dispensation was to be managed by twelve apostles, as the old
one had been by twelve patriarchs; but these apostles were not all appointed
till after Christ's resurrection. And they were directed to bear witness of
Christ, etc. after the Holy Ghost was come on them, Acts i. 8; but this was not
till Pentecost: Therefore the gospel dispensation did not begin till that day.

3. Tongues were a needful mean for propagating the gospel; but these were not
given till Pentecost. Therefore this dispensation did not begin till that day.

4. The gospel is the holy spirit's instrument, in gracious operations; but he
did not come to possess and use it till Pentecost, Acts ii. 2, 3. Therefore his
dispensation did not begin till that day.

5. Special divine power was essentially necessary for the management of this
dispensation, but the apostles, the instruments of that work, were commanded to
tarry at Jerusalem, till they should be endowed with power from on high: that
is, till the promise of the Father, which was the holy spirit, should come on
them, Luke xxiv. 49. Acts i. 4. But this was not done till Pentecost; therefore
the dispensation did not begin till that day.

6. The apostles were not endowed for casting out devils, taking up serpents,
and being proof against poison, etc. which infernal malice against the gospel
would give occasion for, till Pentecost, Mark xvi. 18, 19, 20. -- Luke xxiv.
49. And so their dispensation did not begin till that day.

7. Whenever the christian dispensation begun, it may be expected such
providence would soon follow, as should witness it is divine nature. But such
events took place at Pentecost.

1. The Holy Ghost took possession of gospel truth, as the mean of his gracious
operation then.

2. Then did the sacred symbal of it is nature and effects appear in fiery
tongues.

3. Then did cloven tongues indicate Gentiles, as well as Jews, to be its
designed objects.

4. Then did their fiery appearance, foretell, the thoroughly purifying effect of
the gospel.

5. Then were all the world together, to witness the advent of the universal
religion.

6. Then was a most distinguished day for miracles and devils malice charging
all to drunkenness. Acts ii. 13.

7. Then was a day the most crowned with gospel success, having three thousands
converted at once.

Quest. 6. Where is authority for the institution of outward baptism?

Ans. 1. In the nature of the case. For, as God has been pleased, in various
dispensations of the covenant of grace, to appoint an outward sign and seal of
it; it is therefore certain, that it was right and reasonable, that the covenant
of grace should have an outward sign and seal; but the nature of the case
determines, it is as right and reasonable now as ever it was; therefore, as
there is no pretense, to any other outward initiating sign and seal to the
covenant of grace now but outward baptism; therefore that ought in all reason,
to be held the initiating sign and seal of the covenant of grace now.

Ans. 2. In the institution of circumcision. For it is certain God appointed
circumcision, Genesis xvii. 10. and called it "a seal of the righteousness of
faith." Romans iv. 11. And as there is no pretense of any thing to succeed
circumcision, as a seal of the covenant of grace but outward baptism; therefore
either circumcision is still of force, as a seal of the covenant; or else
outward baptism has taken its place: But we are forbidden to use the ordinances
of that dispensation, Col. ii. 20, 21, "Touch not, taste not, handle not, for
they are all to perish in the using." Therefore outward baptism is the visible
seal of the covenant of grace.

Ans. 3. In divine institution, Matt. xxviii. 18, 19, "All power is given to me
in heaven and earth; go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them."
And as this is an express command, there is equal authority for baptism, as for
any thing in christianity.

Quest. 7. Is there any further evidence that baptism comes in place of
circumcision?

Ans. 1. There is; For since circumcision did confessedly, terminate with the
legal dispensation, if baptism does not succeed to it, then the dispensation of
the gospel, cannot be much more glorious than that of the law; but it is in its
outward circumstances much more glorious. II. Cor. iii. 8, 9, 10, 11. Therefore
this must have an outward initiating seal, as well as that; and as there can be
no pretense of any other, it must be baptism. And this exceeds circumcision, as
there is nothing bloody in it, and as it admits females, and lastly, as it
expresses what we need, viz. cleansing by the blood of Christ, more clearly.

Ans. 2. The maxim of christianity is, "give no offense in any thing, to Jew or
Gentile." I. Cor. x. 32. II. Cor. vi. 3. But to stop circumcision, and not
replace it by some other form of a seal to the covenant of grace, would have
been an inappeasible offense to all Jews; especially the most serious and godly
of them. And it would have been offensive to Gentiles, to call them under a
covenant not so well endowed, as that by which they knew the Jews had ever been
dignified. So it is contrary to an established rule of the bible, to suppose
circumcision abrogated, and baptism not instituted in its place.

3. If baptism does not take the place of circumcision, then the church is not
so complete in her outward privileges, under Christ, as she was under Moses;
but divine testimony affirms, the church is "complete in Christ." Col. ii. 10.
Therefore baptism takes the place of circumcision; and you find, in the 11th
verse, baptism is called christian circumcision, or the circumcision of Christ,
and in the 12th verse this circumcision is expressly called baptism.

4. If baptism imports the same things, and is of the same use now, as
circumcision under, the law then as it is certain circumcision has ceased,
baptism takes its place.

But, 1. Baptism imports the same things; for as none might cat the passover,
till circumcised, Exodus xii. 49. So the apostles divinely guided, always
baptized their converts, as their visible qualification for church state, and
privileges. As Acts ii. 41. Also circumcision was then a seal of the covenant
of grace. Romans iv. 11. And it has been proved that baptism is so now. And when,
I. Pet. iii. 21, says, "baptism does now save us." He implies, it is a visible
witness of the salvation, which is in the covenant of grace, for its subjects.

2. Baptism is of the same use to us, as circumcision was to them. For as
circumcision was the ordinance of admission into the visible church then; so is
baptism now; therefore the apostles baptized those they taught, as set apart
for God. And they whom Peter baptized, were added to the Church. Acts ii. 41,
47. Circumcision was the visible badge of relation to God, and his Church; so
is baptism now. Gal. iii. 27. "As many as are baptized have put on Christ."
Therefore baptism answering the same purposes, succeeds to circumcision.

5. Jesus Christ could not be faithful in God's House, the Church, as Moses
was, if when he put an end to circumcision, he did not institute baptism in its
place; but he was faithful in the house of God, as Moses was. Heb. iii. 2.
Therefore he appointed baptism, as certainly as Moses appointed circumcision.

Obj. 1. The baptism of the bible, is called a being buried with Christ, and so
means plunging.

Ans. 1. Romans vi. 4, says, "buried with him, by baptism into death." But there
is but one sort of Baptism in the bible, or in the world, that is into death;
and that is spiritual baptism, or sanctification; which is to the death of sin
only. Therefore buried with Christ in baptism, is not true of any baptism at
all, by water.

Ans. 2. Col. ii. 15. say, "buried with him in baptism." And it says also,
"risen with him," in the same baptism. But there is no baptism in the world,
which implies death and resurrection too, but baptism by the holy spirit. And
the certain effect of this spiritual baptism is, union to, and not separation
from real christians. I. Cor. xii. 13. "For by one spirit, we are all baptized
into one body, and have been all made to drink into one spirit."

Obj. 2. But there is no command in the bible for baptizing children.

Ans. 1. It is a reproach common to baptists, that they will not allow of fair
scriptural consequences. But we believe fair scriptural consequences, are good
scriptural authority. As

1. If God did once command his people to dedicate their children to him; and
his mind has never changed; then it is the mind of God now, that his people
should dedicate their children to him; but if he has abrogated circumcision, as
has been proved; and instituted baptism in place of it, as has been proved;
then we know it is the mind of God now, that his people should dedicate their
children in baptism. Now he has told us, his mind always was, that circumcision
should cease in the using. Col. ii. 21.22. And that baptism should succeed to
it, as has been proved, so that this alteration, shows no change in the mind of
God, about it. And now the fair consequence is, that his visible people must
dedicate their children to him in baptism, or sink into the character of
unbelievers, and disobedient.

2. It Is a command of God, "If thou know not, go thy way forth by the footsteps
of the flock." Cant. i. 8. But we know that the flock of God, for two thousand
years before Christ always dedicated their children to God, with acceptance, it
being according to his express command. And there is reason to judge, that when
Christ commanded his followers to baptize all nations, he meant they should
baptize children; both because they are a great part of all nations; and
because they had been always used to dedicate children of professing parents;
and he makes no exception about it. And when Peter directed the multitude of
his hearers, to be baptized, every one of them. Acts ii. 38, 39. And instead of
saying, but not your children, he adds, as a reason taken from divine
commandment, "For the promise," meaning Abraham's covenant, "is to you and your
children." And he implies, that the same establishment extended to the
Gentiles, as those afar off, as fast as they should receive the same faith. And
the fair consequence of all this is, that believers ought to give up their
children in baptism. Nor will it help the cause of such as dislike this
conclusion, to wish there was a little alteration of the bible on this head,

Beside, as we have reason to judge the apostles practiced infant baptism,
because they tell us they baptized whole households, of which children are
generally a part. And they had always used a like practice; and never gave a
word of caution against admitting the children of christians, with their
parents, as they certainly would, if 'twas wrong. So we historically know, that
many nations have practiced it, and do still, viz. all who are called
christians, in Asia and Africa, and diverse nations in Europe. So that it is easy
to see what it is to follow the footsteps of the flock, in this case; and what
they must expect, who disregard this commandment, with its evidence.

Ans. 2. Baptists seem to suppose that the bible favors their peculiar notions
of baptism, which don't lie in baptizing professing adults who were not
baptized in infancy for that is our constant practice. But what is peculiar to
baptists, is, first, to deny baptism to young children, even of professing
parents; for which there is not one word in the bible. And Secondly, to baptize
adults, who have already been baptized in infancy; and the bible knows as
little of this as the other. Now till these their two peculiar points become
scriptural, which it is certain they never will, baptists should be very sparing
in boasting of favor from the bible.

3. I am now according to the methods proposed to show what were the contents
of the covenant of grace as established with Abraham. And I shall take notice
only of two things contained in that covenant, and consider them together.

1. The infant children of believing parents, are there declared to be in the
covenant of grace, with their parents. And, 2. The seal of that covenant is
there ordered by God to be applied to them. But it is necessary to set some
things, relative to these points, in their true light, before I proceed to the
points themselves, as Baptists do not seem to notice them rightly.
Quest. 1. How can any, either parents or children, be in the covenant of
grace, without saving faith?

Ans. 1. It Is certain some infants have been sanctified from the womb. As Jer.
i. 5. Also John the baptist. Luke i. 15. And what has been of that kind,
certainly may be again, and there is reason to think, some are so still. I know
the word sanctified, is sometimes used only for sequestration to divine use.
But other expressions, in the case of Jeremiah, as well as the concurrent sense
of interpreters, make it evident enough, that Jeremiah had gracious
sanctification; and of course, infants are certainly capable of saving faith.
And whoever knows, that the gift of faith, is totally a work of God; and that
the difference of adult years, from infancy, in respect to the bestowment of
saving faith, is that it increases opposition, and never furnishes any
concurrence; will doubtless allow that a state of infancy, in itself, is of no
weight at all, against saving faith being wrought.

Ans. 2. Being in the covenant of grace, does not always imply saving faith, or
any other saving grace. The covenant of grace has its outward court, just as
the holy temple had, I. Kings, viii. 64, and many texts. And just as the
godhead in Christ had the outward court of flesh and blood, in his manhood; in
which, though it was holy, was no divinity at all. So it is common for rich
palaces, to have court-yards round them, containing things belonging to the
palace, but not fit to be bestowed in its interior apartments. So has the
covenant of grace its outward court, and to this belongs the unsanctified
children, houses, cattle, fields, etc. of all the believers. Now I will prove
that the covenant of grace, has such outward court.

1. Every understanding christian in the world, holds his house, cattle, all he
has, are in the covenant of grace; how else should he take hold of the truth
and faithfulness of God, in prayer about them; but these can only be in such
outward court of that covenant.

2. This doctrine of an outward court to the covenant of grace, gives light
about many scriptures. As John xv. 2. "Every branch in me, that bears not
fruit, will be finally burned." But there are no such branches in Christ, but
these who are in this outward court of the covenant of grace, who are in Christ
only by outward appearance, visible standing, or mere profession. So also Matt.
xv. 3. "these are the plants which God has not planted," viz. in the inward
spirit and grace of his covenant, and so "they must be rooted up." Therefore
many may be in the covenant, without saving grace.

3. You know God often calls the children of Israel his people, as Exodus iii.
7, 10, and vii. 4, which necessarily implies, they were in the covenant of
grace; and yet you know they were not in the special grace of that covenant
generally. For they were a rebellious people, and God often threatens to cast
them off utterly. So it appears, they were only in this porch, or outward court
of the covenant. But then the consequence is, that persons may be in the
covenant of grace, without any saving grace.

4. It Is in this sense God claims and owns the children of his covenant people,
when they were generally fallen to idolatry; but not yet visibly cast off. As
Ezekiel. xvi. 20.21, and xxiii. 37. "Ye have taken your sons and daughters, which
ye did bear unto me, and have slain my children, by causing them to pass
through the fire." viz. to Moloch. And the margin of the text refers to Genesis
xvii. 7.11. where the covenant of grace was established with Abraham and his
infant seed; to show the wickedness of this conduct. But these children, and
indeed their parents too, were in God's covenant claim, only as they were in
this outward court of the covenant of grace. Therefore parents and children may
be in the covenant of grace without any saving grace; which was to be proved.

Quest. 2. What are the privileges of young children in the covenant of grace?

Ans. 1. God knows they are his creatures, and that he has required his people
to dedicate them to him in his appointed way, and "he is ever mindful of his
covenant." Psalm. iii. 5. And the psalmist draws the consequence. Psalm. cxv. 12,
13. "The Lord has been mindful of us, and will bless us. He will bless them
that fear him, the small with the great." So the Hebrew is. And if God's
blessing small children, as well as parents, is allowed to be a privilege, then
the question will be allowed to be answered, by all who duly regard the word of
God.

Ans. 2. The psalmist held the privilege of a child in the covenant of grace,
very great, when he said, Psalm. lxxxvi. 16. "Oh turn to me, and have mercy on
me, and save the son of thine handmaid!" Importing, "my mother was in covenant
with thee, she gave me to thee, in thine own way." Now I pray grant me the
privileges of that covenant, in which I was given up to thee at eight days old.
Again he says. Psalm. cxvi. 16. "Oh Lord I am thy servant, I am thy servant, the
son of thine handmaiden!" Importing, I am doubly bound to fidelity in thy
service; viz. by my own covenant obligations, and by the early dedication of my
pious parent. Those then who love the obligations of the covenant of grace,
will hold it a privilege to be under them. Bathsheba also, as became a pious
penitent, urges on King Lemuel, his duty, from the consideration of the vows,
by which she had dedicated him to God, in his own way. And such as hold urgent
arguments to holiness, a privilege, will allow their children privilege by that
holy covenant in which they have been vowed to God. Samuel's piety and honors
were his privilege, in consequence of an early and pious dedication to God, in
the covenant of grace. I. Sam. i. 11.

Ans. 3. Godly parents have advantage to plead the covenant of grace for their
children, given up in a covenant way. And if it is allowed to be a great
privilege for children to have such prayers made for them, which is peculiar to
such as have given up their children to God, in his own covenant way; then this
is another answer to the question.

Ans. 4. Children given to God in his own covenant way, may always plead their
outward covenant relation to God, for deliverance in any distress: As David
did, Psalm. cxix. 94. "I am thine, save me." Such as are not addicted to plead
promises, will hold this answer very light. All others will allow the weight of
it.

Obj. But God hears no prayers but such as proceed from saving faith.

Ans. This objection proceeds from an antinomian principle; and indicates
ignorance of the scriptures, and of the power of God. Prayer is first of all
the language of nature in distress; and the God of nature hears it. For it is an
aphorism of the kind bible. Isa. xxv. 4. "He is a strength to the needy in his
distress." And he hears the cry of the ravens. Psalm. cxlvii. 9. The God of
nature, hears the voice of nature in man and beast.

Ans. 5. The Church of God holds itself bound, to exercise watchfulness, and
careful inspection, over the lives and manners, of such as having been
dedicated to God, are become the children of the church. As Psalm. xxxiv. 11.
"Come ye children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord." For
it is a maxim with the church of God, "the things that are revealed belong to
us, and to our children forever." Deuteronomy. xxix. 29. Therefore it is said of
Christ, the great head and patron of his Church, Isa. xl. 11. "He shall feed
his flock like a shepherd, He shall gather the lambs, with his arm, and carry
them (...) bosom." And therefore Christ forbids his people to (...) little
children from coming to him, and intimated, they were under the watch and
government of his church, by saying, " for of such is the kingdom of heaven.
Matt. xix. 14. Accordingly when Christ gave order to Peter how to treat his
sheep, he especially charges him to feed his lambs. John xxi. 15. The inspired
words are. "boske ta arnia mou." Which allude to the case of children in a
natural family, where oversight and government, belong to feeding. And all such
as choose to have their children inspected and well regulated, will certainly
hold this a great privilege. And to this all children publicly dedicated, are
of right always subject.

Ans. 6. The consideration of such solemn dedication to God, has a tendency to
solemnize and restrain the spirit and manners of such children. And surely all
advantage this way is a privilege. And for this reason, children should be
taught the nature of such dedication.

Ans. 7. The obligation arising to christian parents, from such solemn
dedication is Ephesians. vi. 4, "bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord." And every faithful parent esteems his obligation this way a privilege,
which centers in covenanted children.

Ques. 3. What is it that is sealed by a sealing ordinance?

Ans. 1. Never the immediate object. Persons or children are no more sealed in
baptism, than the cloud was, in which was the rainbow, which was a seal of the
covenant of grace in Noah's time. Genesis ix. 13, 14, 15. The immediate subject of
baptism, is not at all morally or spiritually affected by that ordinance. The
spirit of God may bestow quickening, comfort, blessing, at the same time, to a
believing parent, or a believing adult at the time of the adminstration; as he
sometimes does in a clap of thunder: An earthquake; or a sudden death. When the
apostle says "Baptism does now save us." I. Pet. iii. 20, 21. He tells us it is
as Noah's ark saved him. The ark was a sensible mean of security from the
flood: And especially speaking signal of future salvation by Christ. So baptism
is a sure evidence of pardon and salvation to be had; but baptism itself gives
none of it. And so the apostle explains himself, when he says, "not the putting
away of the Filth of the flesh; but the answer," or correspondence, "of a good
conscience:" in the covenanting agent. And this derives not all from the
ordinance itself; but from the holy spirit of grace.

Ans. 2. The only thing actually sealed in baptism is the covenant of grace.
Baptism is like every thing else in christianity, "a witness to the truth."
John xviii. 37. And so serves the same purpose as circumcision did; which God
himself has told us was a seal of the righteousness of faith. Romans iv. 11. It
gives a certain present witness of the truth of christianity. And so reminds
every believer, of the certainty of the ground of his hope; and of the matter
of his faith. And so by the frequency and believing use of it, christians may
hold fast their confidence, and the rejoicing of their hope firm unto the end.
Heb. iii. 6. Baptism is also a declarative seal, witness, and monitor, to the
beholding world, as far as they are instructed enough to understand its
speaking import; it bespeaks a certainly, in all the materials of the gospel,
and true religion. And so the gospel kingdom of Jesus Christ as antitype to
that of David, "is established forever as the Moon, and as a faithful witness
in Heaven, Selah." Psalm. lxxxix. 37. And so by this ordinance, as a picture of
his blood he witnesses also on the earth. According to, I. John, v. 8.

Now let us return to what was proposed; viz. To show that the contents of the
covenant, with Abraham were, that infant children of believers, were declared
to be in the covenant of grace, with their parents; and accordingly the seal of
the covenant was ordered by God himself to be outwardly applied to them. And
the first evidence I shall give of this affair is the letter of the text.

1. If the bible says, that God declared the children of believers to be in the
covenant of grace, with their parents; and that God accordingly ordered the
seal of that covenant to be applied to them; then such children are in that
covenant, and the seal of it must be outwardly applied to them: But the bible
does say so; therefore such children are in that covenant, and must have its
seal applied to them. For Genesis xvii. 7. etc. says, "I will establish my
covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations,
for an everlasting covenant, to be a God to thee, and thy seed after thee. And
God said unto Abraham thou shall keep my covenant therefore, thou and thy seed
after thee, in their generations. This is my covenant which ye shall keep,
between me and you, and thy seed after thee, every man child among you shall be
circumcised. And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall
be a token of the covenant between me and you. And he that is eight days old,
shall be circumcised among you, every man child in your generations; he that is
born in the house, or bought with money of any stranger, which is not of thy
seed, he that is born in the house, and he that is bought with thy money, must
needs be circumcised, and my covenant, shall be in your flesh for an
everlasting covenant; and the uncircumcised manchild, whose flesh of his
foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people, he
has broken my covenant."

Now, Romans xv. 4. says "whatever things were written aforetime;" viz. as long
ago as Abraham, were written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the scriptures might have hope." And to prove that this text refers
to this establishment with Abraham; the 8th verse adds, "Now this I say, that
Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision, for the truth of God." But
then the covenant of circumcision, was the truth of God; to be continued down
to us Gentiles. And to prove it, the apostle adds, "to confirm the promises,
made to the fathers." Pointing to this covenant with Abraham. And then gives
the reason; "that the Gentiles might rejoice with his people," viz. in the
enjoyment of the establishment with Abraham. Now all who believe the bible must
confess, that children were taken into the covenant of grace, with their
parents, and that the seal of it was applied to them. And in the said 15th
chap. of Romans, the apostle proves, that these things were not ordered for
Jews only; but especially for Gentiles; for the time of the New Testament; i.
e. for us. But the holy spirit who guided the apostle, knew that circumcision,
in its jewish form, was never to take place with us: but that baptism, which is
the christian circumcision, was to be in use now, as has been proved. The
consequence is, that the children of believing parents, are in the covenant of
grace, with such parents, and by them to be given up to God in baptism.

2. If the plainest sense of Act. ii. 39. "be baptized for the promise is to
you and your children," is, that children are under the outward administration
of the covenant of grace, if their parents are in the spirit and grace of that
covenant; and that therefore the seal of it, is to be outwardly applied to
them; then this is good authority for our practice; for scripture ought always
to be understood in the plainest sense that is consistent with the whole. But
that this is the plainest consistent sense of the text; I shall now prove.

1. It Is exactly agreeable to the letter of the text, as all may see, if they
read impartially.

2. It Is exactly agreeable to the practice of all God's people, for two
thousand years before that time.

3. As Peter knew the Jews were tenacious of their religious rites; so you may
see, if you please, that Peter who perfectly knew what his hearers were used
to; would not give them offense at the new christian religion; by cutting off
their children from their usual privilege; but lets them know in this first
christian sermon, that this new religion extended privilege to them and to
their children just as the bible always did.

4. Peter knew the will of God, was "give no offense to Jew or Gentile, or the
church of God." He knew also that the moment he gave the least suspicion, that
this new religion, was so much narrower, and less glorious in outward
privileges, than what they had always been subject to, as to exclude all their
children, from covenant privilege; they would immediately renounce it, and
conceive offense not to be removed. And as he knew there was no ground for this
offense; but that they were all under the same covenant, to which they were
always subject; He therefore addresses them in language they had always heard;
importing "you and your children stand related to God, and his covenant, just
as you, and they always did; God is not altered, the covenant is the same, the
promise is to you and to your children, just as it always was. And it is evident
they understood him so; and so all proceeded, without one word of objection.

5. To construe this text as baptists do, is to set aside the plain literal
sense of the text, although it perfectly consists with the whole bible; it also
implies that the mind of God is altered since Abraham's time, which is
atheistical. It implies also that the covenant with Abraham was not the
covenant of grace, contrary to the above demonstrations. If then we would avoid
such sentiments, let us allow the text to speak honestly its own meaning; and
then we shall adopt the mind of God, plainly expressed in it.

6. Peter had now a fine advantage to have taught his hearers otherwise; viz.
to have told them, "you are now under another dispensation, and must not expect
any old Jewish matter to be continued to you" etc. It was a fine opportunity to
advance the baptists notion of this text; for his hearers were soft and
ductile, fit to receive any thing from their spiritual father; it was also a
time for new things to take place. Beside, he was divinely bound to speak the
thing, as it was. And doubtless, but two reasons can be devised, why he
delivered himself as he did, viz. because it was true, and because the reverse
was not true. But indeed the apostle was not so far advanced in the light of
modern times, as to see reason to correct a gross error in divine conduct, in
putting such subjects into his holy covenant, as were no way fit for that
situation.

3. Mark x. 13. 14, says, They brought young children to Christ; be sure not to
be baptized; for he baptized not. John iv. 2. Reasons for which have been given
above. But Matt. xix. 13. says, "that he should put his hands on them and
pray." Mark x. 13, says, "that he should touch them" and the 16th verse shows
they meant that he should bless them; which he did. But this blessing must come
from the treasury of the covenant of grace. But we are sure, a blessing from
the covenant of grace, could not be bestowed on such as were not in that
covenant. For a divine rule is, "give not that which is holy to dogs." Matt.
vii. 6. But then it is evident these children of his covenant people, were in the
covenant of grace. And though he did not baptize them, he required them to be
brought to him, to receive a covenant blessing. And if there is no way for his
people to copy out this instruction visibly now, but by baptismal dedication,
according to the revealed mind of him who changes not; then it is their duty,
so to dedicate them. And though there were some even then, who opposed this
practice of bringing children to Christ for a covenant blessing; yet it was
done; and received great encouragement by Chrst's being much displeased with
those who opposed it; and also by his command, equally binding now as then.
"Suffer little children to come unto me and forbid them not." And his reason
for it is of force now, "for of such is the kingdom of heaven." And it is of no
importance in the case, whether by "kingdom of heaven." is designed the church
militant or triumphant; since they are both of one nature. And if children
belong to either, they are entitled at least, to the privileges of the former.
And if Jesus Christ now owns little children to belong to the kingdom of
heaven; if you are not sure of their salvation, you are the more sure they
belong to the visible church. Therefore who is he that shall dare deny them?

4. If the principle of forbidding a dedication of children in baptism, tends
to prevent the millennium, or glorious state of the church in this world, in
which the prophecies of scripture so generally center; then it is an
unscriptural principle; but it has such a palpable tendency. For in the
millennium all nations are to flow into the church of God; Isa. ii. 2. But
children are a great part of all nations; and the hope of the people, both for
church and state. And to exclude them all from so much as the outward court of
the church of God, is to shut them all up visibly in the devil's kingdom: for
all who are not of the visible church, are, as to their visible standing, in
the kingdom of the devil. And to place all children there has a direct tendency
to prevent all nations ever to become, entirely the kingdom of Christ. Whereas
if they were dedicated to him, according to his own plan; and so put in his
way; he would be holden by his covenant to take care of them; for he is ever
mindful of his covenant. Psalm. iii. 5. They would be in the way of religious
inspection and regulation, instruction, prayers, every mean, private and
public, appointed to ripen them for divine service. But to exclude them from
all those, has an awful tendency to keep them out of God's appointed way, and
to prevent the designs of his grace in this world. And so is an unscriptural
and antiscriptural principle. I am sensible antinomians who are hearty enemies
to the laws and regulations of God's house, will easily harden themselves
against this reasoning; for at bottom, they hate a religion which confronts
their loose and licentious spirit. But the people of God may comfort
themselves, such unhappy people are more against God and the bible than against
any of his people. And we may be sure, divine truth will have weight, with all
whose hearts are found in God's statutes.

5. Children were in the covenant of grace, and so in the outward court of the
church, under the former dispensation, by God's own order; this has been proved
and cannot be denied. But the same covenant of grace still stands, and God is of
the same mind; therefore in right, they are there now.

Obj 1. But the same word of God says "believe and be baptized." Whereas
children cannot believe; and therefore ought not to be baptized.

Ans. 1. It has been proved, that children have believed, and of course may be
often made believers

Ans. 2. This is no more a bar to their dedication in baptism, than it was in
case of circumcision, little children are as able to believe now, as they were
when God declared them to be in the covenant of grace of old. It Is no mark of
one being taught of God, to be disposed to dictate his maker; or dispute his
revealed will.

Ans. 3. When little children are denied baptism, on this principle, that they
cannot believe. It looks like an evidence of unregeneracy; for it seems to imply
that an adult, can contribute something toward getting true faith; but an
infant cannot, for want of abilities, which shows ignorance of the nature of
human depravity, and of the power of God For faith is solely the gift of God
Ephesians. ii. 8. And infants certainly have not so strong opposition to this work;
and adults as certainly never concur in it. Rom viii. 7

Ans. 4. God knew the state of infants with respect to believing when he
connected circumcision with faith; for Abraham believed before circumcision was
commanded. Genesis xv. 6. And all parents of his progeny believed the great
doctrines of revealed religion, in those days. And so dedicated their children
in circumcision. And this fully explains the doctrine of "believe and be
baptized." The command lies on the agent, not the infant subject.

Ans. 5. We insist on the principle "believe and be baptized," as strictly as
any; but we insist on it only where God originally required it; viz. in the
agent, who is bound by the command, and who can obey, and accordingly desires
baptism, for his child, if he is a parent; as a part of himself, and as what
God requires of him, as his own, and to be rendered to him in his own way. We
therefore keep his commandment exactly according to the original state of it.
Whereas baptists insist on it, where it never was required, in the original
establishment of the covenant to which all these things belong. For God said
not a word of faith in the infant subject of circumcision; but in the agent,
the parent, or actor in the affair; who feels the bond of duty, and who being
himself dedicated to God, means to dedicate these branches of himself also,
viz. his children.

Obj 2. But little children know nothing of what whey are doing; have no sense
of the affair.

Ans. They do nothing in the affair, and have nothing to do. They are not the
subjects of command about it; nor have any duty to do in it. But they have full
as much sense about the matter now, as those had who were circumcised in
infancy, when this covenant and its seal were established of old. And the
author of the whole scheme, knew full as much about it at first, as any body
does now. He knew how this test of allegiance would operate through all
generations. But as he did order it; so we mean to obey his revealed will
without disputing it with him; without charging him with error, or absurdity in
it; or substituting our own imagination about it. For we know "the things that
are revealed belong to us and to our children forever, that we may do all the
words of this law." Deuteronomy. xxix. 29.

6. If the letter of the apostolic commission, does not exclude children, as
it certainly would if it was the mind of God to exclude them; but includes them
with their parents; then we ought to include them, and allow them to be the
subjects of that witnessing ordinance, which God has appointed for them; but
that commission does naturally include them; therefore we must include them,
and apply the ordinance of baptism to them, as God has directed. The words of
that commission are "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them."
Now if it is certain and well known that children are always a great part of all
nations; then they are not excluded, when the command says all nations, but
necessarily included; since there is no exception at all made. Beside if the
command had been "circumcise all nations," the admission of children, could not
have been doubted; and be sure it is as evident they are to be admitted now. For
the institutor, and his authority are the same; the covenant is the same; and
baptism is exactly in place of circumcision, as has been proved. Therefore the
children of visible christans, are in the covenant of grace with their parents;
and by divine direction the seal of that covenant is to be applied to them.

7. The last evidence I shall adduce for the point, is the evident import of
Romans xi. 17. "If some of the Jews, were broken off from the former state of the
church and gentiles were grafted in their place, and so gentiles under the
gospel, partake with such jews as believed, and so were not broken off, in the
root and fatness of that former state of the church, etc. Then the following
things are certainly true, viz.

1. That by olive tree, in the close of this text, is meant the church of God,
in which those Jews who believed, and so were not still broken off, still
remained. 2. That when gentiles were converted under the gospel, they were
grafted into the same church state, with those Jews who stood by faith, and
were never broken off. 3. And so the believing gentiles, did with those Jews,
who were never broken off, equally partake of the root, i. e. of the church
privileges derived from Abraham, or the institution established with him; and
of the fatness, i. e. the promises, ordinances, and blessings, of that good
olive tree, the church of God. All which may be reduced to the two following
heads. 1. That all gentile christians, are grafted in, and belong to that
church which was first founded on the covenant made with Abraham, and which was
commanded to use circumcision, as the visible seal of the covenant. And so all
gentile christians came to be entitled to all the ordinances and privileges of
the church, down from Abraham. But circumcision of children was one of them.
Therefore, since God has only altered the form of this ordinance, which also
the apostle knew, when he wrote this text; gentile christians, being now in the
same church, are equally bound to dedicate children in baptism, as Gods people
of old were in circumcision. 2. As this insertion of all gentile believers,
into the same church, is called grafting; so it implies that their children are
set in with them; just as the buds of a cyon are set into the stock, with the
cyon, as parts of itself. And as the cyon, with its buds all partake of the sap
of their stock; so christians with their children partake in the same privilege
of religious dedication by baptism, as the people of God, did of old by
circumcision. It Is certain, God never had, or designed to have, more than one
church. There never was more than one such good olive tree. The lamb never had,
or will have more than one wife, Rev. xxi. 9. The covenant of grace, is her
only charter of privileges; and baptism is her only initiating seal; the first
public witness of the truth, durableness, and certainty, of her grand charter.
And as circumcision of their children was part of the fatness of that state of
the good olive tree; we being grafted into the same olive tree, have this
branch of her fatness, in christian baptism. And such as daily attend to, and
regard this word of God, may be fully satisfied in the conclusion.

4. And this brings me in the last place, to show what provision God has made
for the propagation of these contents.

1. Baptismal dedication is one mean to propagate and distinguish the visible
church, and so to attain the end and design of the covenant of grace in this
world. As circumcision was an ingredient in the wall of separation, between the
church of God, of old, and the heathen world, so is baptism now; for all who
are not baptized, are heathen in their visible standing. When the apostle Peter
had declared. Act. ii. 39. That baptism belonged to believers and their
children; just as circumcision did, from Abraham down to that very day, in
which he delivered this doctrine; he afterward compares baptism to Noah's ark,
so that as the ark was a mean and pledge of safety to Noah and his family; just
so he says, baptism does now save us. I. Pet. iii. 21. But intimates at the
same time, it is not the mere formal action, that does it, any more that Noah
and his family were saved from the flood, merely by the ark, which if God had
not upheld and kept, must have foundered by the weather and the flood. But
baptismal dedication, is like the ark, a mean and pledge of safety and
preservation to the church of God. It Is of God's own appointing; and by it, his
visible church is distinguished, from all who do not practically own the true
God. And as he owns and honors his own appointments; so this ordinance, as the
witnessing seal of his covenant, and mark of his people, is evidence of his
promissed-fidelity, in watching over them, and preserving them, as his people
and church, from final ruin in this world. Even the gates of hell, cannot
prevail to that effect. Mat. vi. 18. Nay the church which is faithful in these
observances "shall be established forever as the moon, and as a faithful
witness in heaven, Selah Psalm. lxxxix. 37.

2. Another mean of divine appointment, for perpetuating the designs of the
covenant of grace, in this world, is family instruction, and government.
Therefore Deuteronomy. vi. 7. After referring to the establishment with Abraham in
several points, says, "Thou shall teach them diligently to thy children." And
to fix a solemn engagement on them, to do so, adds 15th verse. Lest the anger
of the Lord thy God, be kindled against thee, and be destroy thee from off the
face of the earth". Which implies that if they were faithful in this duty of
family instruction, it should be a mean of their preservation, as a church, and
people of God, on the face of the earth. To which the apostle, long since,
refers Ephesians vi. 4. " Bring them, your children up in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord. Nay the wisdom of God has determined both means and end. Prove.
xxii. 6. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old, he will
not depart from it And God has added the christian confirmation. II. Tim iii.
15. "From a child thou have known the holy scriptures, which are able to make
thee wise unto salvation" And the holy spirit in giving laws for the church's
health and preservation, says Prove. xxix. 15. "The rod and reproof give wisdom;
but a child left to himself, brings his mother to shame." Therefore, 17th
verse adds "correct thy son." And the same divine council says, "he that
spares the rod, hates his son". Prove. xiii. 24. And, be sure, the want of
such measures ruined Eli's House I. Sam. ii. 13. As surely then, as "the
reproofs of instruction are the way of life," Prove. vi. 23. So surely, family
instruction and government, are a mean appointed by God, to preserve and
perpetuate his church upon earth.

3. Another mean for accomplishing the design of the covenant of grace, and the
last I shall name is ecclesiastical discipline. For as family discipline is for
the members of the family; so church discipline is for all the members of the
church.

1. If then the children of professing christians, are in the outward court of
the covenant of grace; and so under its outward administration; then they are
within the pale of the visible church. The former has been proved, and the
latter follows of course. The common objection is, then they ought to partake
of all ordinances; but it is not so. An infant heir at law, has right to an
estate; or a crown; but he cannot inherit, and possess it, 'till of lawful age.
So a baptized infant member of the church, cannot actually enjoy full communion
'till evidence of knowledge, faith, and holiness, qualifies him according to
the laws of the visible church. II. Cor. xiii. 5. Examine yourselves, whether
ye be in the faith, prove your own selves." And all who can do this, may eat
and drink I. Cor. xi. 28. It Is certain that all circumcised children of old,
were of the visible church. For in the first institution of that ordinance, God
gave a rule to run through all ages of the law -- "The uncircumcised manchild,
shall be cut off from his people" Genesis xvii. 14. But he could not be cut off
from the church by want of circumcision, unless circumcision constituted
membership. And the Psalmist who knew the nature of church state, in those
days, says Psalm. cii. 28. "The children of thy servants shall continue, and
their seed shall be established before thee." But as God is the same, his mind
the same, the church the same, and the covenant on which it stands the same; so
of course children are in the outward court of the church now. And to this
purpose, the apostle is quite full. "The blessing of Abraham" Part of which was
circumcision of his seed, and their consequent privileges; "is come on the
gentiles;" that is on us now; "through Jesus Christ" Gal. iii. 14. The apostle
Peter therefore had good reason to preach to visible christians. The promise is
to you and to your children. Act. ii. 39.

2. As all baptized children are in the outward court of the church; so of
right, they are under the care, oversight and discipline of the church; just as
children of a private family, are, as to their Parents. And as it is of
dangerous consequence, for Parents to neglect this duty; so it is for a church
to neglect the discipline of her baptized members. This kind of conduct ruined
Eli's house. Jesus Christ sat an example for his church, when in giving Peter
charge about his fold, he especially commands him to feed his lambs; but
feeding implies government. Yea, Christ himself took young children in his
arms. Mar. x. 16. And as the out door members of his church, bestowed a
covenant blessing on them, and was much displeased with those who opposed, 14th
verse. -- As certainly therefore, as jewish children, were within the pale of
the church, and under its government; as has been proved; so certainly are
baptized children now. So Act. iii. 25, tells us, "ye are the children of the
covenant, God made with the fathers, saying to ABRAHAM, in thy seed, shall all
the kingdoms of the earth be blessed;"

3. If God claims the children of his people, as his children and servants;
then they are jubject to the discipline, which he has instituted in his church;
but he does so claim them. For he says, Ezekiel. xvi. 21. " Thou have caused my
children to pass through the fire, viz. to Molock, thy sons and thy daughters
which thou have born to me." 20th verse. And in Lev. xxv. 41, 42. "They are my
servants." Also, Psalm. cxxv. 3 "Children are the heritage of the Lord." But
heritage, is character for the church. Joel iii. 2. Therefore they are as
surely subject to the discipline of God's House, the church; as that there is
any discipline there. Or as children and servants are under discipline in a
family.

4. If God owns the same relation to children in the church, as to their
parents there; then they are equally under discipline there; but he does own
the same relation; Ezekiel. xviii. 4. "All souls are mine, as the soul of the
father, so also the soul of the son is mine." And the following words inflict
punishment equally on both, in cases of disobedience. -- Therefore the children
of the church, are equally subject to discipline, as parents there.

5. All persons, in the visible church are, as to their standing in the kingdom
of Christ; but as the branch and the stock belong together; so it is absurd to
suppose their children, given to God in baptism, are in the kingdom of satan,
as to their outward relative standing; yet it is evident, the kingdom of Christ,
and that of satan include all. Therefore children given to God in baptism, and
so being of the Church, as to their relative standing, are of course under the
inspection and discipline of the church.

6. If baptized children are not of the church, and so under discipline, the
church will not be able to give account according to Heb. ii. 13. "Behold I and
the children which God hat given me."

7. If the known and allowed distinction, of visible and invisible church, is
founded on matter of fact, then there are those truly of the church who are not
of it, as a spiritual and invisible body. And as the bible teaches, and it has
been proved, that baptized children are of the church; so these are of it as
visible in distinction from the spiritual and invisible state of that
corporation; and of course such children are objects of the care and government
of the church as a spiritual and truly christian corporation.

8. If all disciples are of the church, and subject to discipline, then
baptized children are so; Act. xv. 10, calls those disciples who actually
endured circumcision; but in general, only children were circumcised from
Abraham to the apostles; and we have proved baptism, to be in place of
circumcision. As therefore circumcised children were disciples then; it is
equally evident that baptized ones are so now; and of course, they are of the
church, and under its inspection and discipline. For it is the claim of all
corporations, to govern and regulate their own subjects.

9. If the church in both states of it, had one and the same lord and head; and
he changes not, Mal. iii. 6, but is of one mind, and none can turn him. Job
xxiii. 13. Then as evidently as we find circumcised children, under the
oversight and discipline of his church formerly; so certainly baptized ones,
are equally under inspection and government of the church now. But the apostle
ascribes the calling and forming of both states of his church to the same head
and lord. Romans ix. 24: Therefore subjects of the christian circumcision are
equally under the inspection and discipline of the church now.

10. If Abraham, the father of believers did "command his children and
household after him, to keep the way of the Lord." Then it is the duty of a
christian church, as consisting of his children, to copy the example of that
patriarch. But he did do so; and God approved him in it. Genesis xviii. 19.
Therefore a christian church, as Abraham's children, ought to follow his steps.

11. If for baptized children to be under discipline in the church, is one mean
to form them for succession in the christian church, and other useful offices;
then it is the will of God, and the duty of the church, to exercise it; but it is
as evidently one mean for those ends; as training up a child in the way he
should go, is a mean of his walking in it afterward. According to Prove. xxii. 6.

12. If when God said, " I will be a God to thee and thy seed. Genesis xvii. 7.
Heb. viii. 10. He did at least secure all outward blessings and privileges, to
the children of the faithful; then, if the oversight and regulation of a
christian church, in the government of their children, is a blessing and
privilege; it was the design of God originally, and of course, the duty of the
church, so to treat their baptized children. But the former is true, and so of
course must be the latter.

13. If such care and government, is implied in God's being the God of
Abraham's seed, which includes believers children; then they are under such
care and government in the church; for be sure, God has government (...) all
that are in covenant with him. And it is as sure, that a church under that
government, and who mean to be followers of God as dear children, must, in
fidelity exercise it over all baptized subjects of the same covenant.

14. If training up a child in the way he should go, implies discipline, and
the church are bound by this command, (...) a law on every parent, then the
church must exercise discipline, on all their baptized children, or be
disobedient

15. If baptized children, are under the bound of the covenant of grace, as has
been proved; then they must (...) the rod of discipline; but they are under the
bond of the covenant, both as given up to God; and as he calls them his own
children; therefore they must pass under the rod of discipline. For God has
connected these together. (...) xx. 37.

16. The church is God's family, Ephesians. iii. 15. There is therefore equal reason
for discipline over all that belong to it; as in any natural family.

17. If discipline in a natural family is a privilege; then in the church it is
part of that fatness, which every, christian church derives from the olive tree
into which it is grafted. Romans xi. 17.

18. As "there is one body," the church, one Lord, one faith, one God and
father of all" churches, in all ages, who is above all," and so has right
exclusively to order every thing, "and is through all" from the beginning of
the world, to the end of it; "and in all" his people and churches; Ephesians. iv. 4,
5.6. And as this one God, is of one unalterable mind, and has seen fit in his
wisdom, to establish a church in the world; and calls it his family; and has
appointed its rules, and internal government; and gave the sum of these to
Abraham, and gave assurance to us all, that he should never depart from that
plan; but maintain it for substance, through all ages to the end of the world;
and as the public dedication of children, and their being subject to christian
oversight, and discipline in his church, are parts of that plan which
unchangeable uniformity has prescribed, and determined shall continue, and be
observed by his people, in all times and places; so it is certainly safer, and
more honorable as well as peaceful, for us, to be subject to his pleasure; and
in every thing learn to say "thy will be done."

The END.

