THE TRIUMPH OF INFIDELITY: A POEM.

PRINTED IN THE WORLD; M, DCC, LXXXVIII.

To Mons. de Voltaire.
SIR,
YOUR Creator endued you with shining talents, and cast your lot in a field of
action, where they might be most happily employed: In the progress of a long
and industrious life, you devoted them to a single purpose, the elevation of
your character above his. For the accomplishment of this purpose, with a
diligence and uniformity which would have adorned the most virtuous pursuits,
you opposed truth, religion, and their authors, with sophistry, contempt, and
obloquy; and taught, as far as your example or sentiments extended their
influence, that the chief end of man was, to slander his God, and abuse him
forever. To whom could such an effort as the following be dedicated, with more
propriety, than to you. The subject it celebrates is the most pointed attack
upon your old enemies; an attack more happily devised, at least, than any of
yours; as yours were more advantageously concerted than the efforts of any of
your predecessors. Reasoning is an unhappy engine to be employed against
christianity; as, like elephants in ancient war, it usually, in this case,
turns upon those who employ it. Ridicule is a more convenient weapon, as you
have successfully evinced; but ingenious misinterpretation is a still more sure
and effectual annoyance; for the sword and javelin, however keen, may be
dreaded and shunned, while the secret and deadly dirk is plunged to the heart
of unsuspecting friendship, unhappily trusting the smooth-faced assassin.
Accept then, as due, this tribute of acknowledgment from the

WRITER OF THIS POEM.

Audies, and veniet manes haec fama sub imos.
THE TRIUMPH OF INFIDELITY.
ERE yet the Briton left our happy shore,
Or war's alarming clarion ceased to roar,
What time the morn illum'd her purple flame,
Through air's dread wilds the prince of darkness came.
A cloud his gloomy car; his path around,
Attendant whirlwinds gave a fearful sound,
Before him dragons wound their bloody spires;
Far shot behind him death's Tartarean fires:
To image heaven's high state, he proudly rode,
Nor seemed he less than hell's terrific God.
While, full before him, dressed in beauteous day,
The realms of freedom, peace, and virtue lay;
The realms, where heaven, ere Time's great empire fall,
Shall bid new Edens dress this dreary ball;
He frowned; the world grew dark; the mountains shook,
And nature shudder'd as the spirit spoke.
What wasted years, with angry voice he cries,
I wage vain wars with yonder hated skies?
Still, as I walk the unmeasured round of things,
From deepest ill what good perpetual springs;
What order shines, where blessed confusion lay,
And from the night of death, what splendid day?
How State of infidelity at the birth of --
near me seemed, ere Bethelehem's wonder rose,
The final victory over my struggling foes;
All nations won to ignorance, and sin,
Without the Gentile, and the Jew within?
How near, when crossed, he met the accursed doom,
Or lay, extinguished in the mortal tomb?
Yet then, even whilst I felt my pinions rise
Above the arches of a thousand skies,
Even then, deep plunged beneath the lowest hell,
As erst when hurled from heaven, my kingdom fell.
And Injuries done to infidelity, by Peter, Paul, and others.
oh, by what foul means! An angel I,
A god, the rival of yon haughty sky!
They the last sweepings of the clay-born kind,
The dunghill's offspring, and the reptile's mind.
Yet their creating voice, with startling sound,
From death and darkness waked the world's wide round;
Before it crumbled, mid my groans and tears,
The Pagan fabric of a thousand years;
The spells, the rites, the pomp, the victims fled,
The fanes all desert, and the lares dead.
In vain fierce persecution hedged their way;
In vain dread power's huge weight incumbent lay;
As sand-built domes dissolve before the stream,
As visions fleet upon the awakening beam,
The structure fled; while hell was racked to save,
And all my heaven-bright glories sought the grave.
Amazed, Progress of infidelity after the death of Constantine the Great.
awhile, I saw the ruin spread,
My hopes, my efforts, with my kingdom, dead.
But soon I bade the floods of vengeance roll,
Soon roused anew my mightiness of soul,
With arts my own, the opposer's power withstood,
And reigned once more the universal God;
Mine, by all poisoning wealth, his sons I made,
And Satan preached, while proud Messiah fled.
Surpised, Infidels injured unwittingly by their friends, the northern
barbarians.
enraged, to see his wiles outdone,
His power all vanquished, and his kingdom gone,
From the stern North, he hailed my darling host,
A whelming ocean, spread to every coast;
My Goths, my Huns, the cultured world o'er-ran,
And darkness buried all the pride of man.
On dozing realms he poured his vengeance dread,
On putrid bishops, and on priests half dead;
Blotted, at one great stroke, the work he drew,
And saw his gospel bid mankind adieu.
The New progress of infidelity, under the papal hierarchy.
happy hour I seized; the world my own:
Full in his church I fixed my glorious throne;
Thrice crowned, I fate a God, and more than God;
Bade all earth's nations shiver at my nod;
Dispensed to men the code of Satan's laws,
And made my priests the columns of my cause.
In their blessed hands the gospel I concealed,
And newfound doctrines, in it is stead, revealed;
Of gloomy visions drew a fearful round,
Names of dire look, and words of killing sound,
Where, meaning lost, terrific doctrines lay,
Mazed the dim soul, and frightened truth away;
Where noise for truth, for virtue pomp was given,
Myself the God promulg'd, and hell the heaven.
To this blessed scheme I forced the struggling mind;
Faith sunk beneath me; sense her light resigned;
Before rebellious conscience clank'd the chain;
The rack, the wheel, unbosomed all their pain;
The dungeon yawn'd; uprose the faggot pvre,
And, fierce with vengeance, twined the livid fire.
These woes I formed on earth; beyond the tomb,
Of dreams, I built the purgatorial doom;
Hurled round all realms the interdictive peal;
Shut kings from heaven, and nations scourged to hell;
All crimes forgave; those crimes indulged again;
Disclosed the right divine to every sin;
To certain ecstasies the faithful led;
Damned Doubt, when living; double damned, when dead;
Over bold Inquiry bade all horrors roll,
And to its native nothing shrunk the soul.
Thus, round the Gothic wild, my kingdom lay,
A night, soon clouded over a winter's day.
But Injuries done to infidelity by Luther, Calvin, and others.
oh, by what fell fate, to be entombed
Are bright ambition's brightest glories doomed?
While now my rival every hope forsook,
His arts, his counsels, and his scepter broke,
This vast machine, so wondrous, so refined,
First, fairest offspring even of Satan's mind,
This building, over all buildings proudly great,
Than Heaven more noble, and more fixed than fate,
This glorious empire fell; the world grew pale,
And the skies trembled, at the dreadful tale.
In vain my arm, in vain my sword, I barred;
In vain my angels over example dared,
My priests, high-fed on all the spoils of man,
Outran belief and even my hopes outran;
Hell hoped, and toiled in vain: Through all her coast,
A general sigh declared her kingdom lost.
Blush, Satan, blush, thou sovereign of mankind,
When, what thy reptile foes, thou call'st to mind.
New fishermen, mechanic worms, anew
The unfolded gospel from any kingdom drew.
From earth's wide realms, beneath the deluge bare,
As suns reviving bade the spring appear,
So, at their startling voice, from shore to shore,
A moral spring my winter covered over,
The mind new sprang; rebudding virtue grew,
And trembling nations rose from death anew.
From them rolled on, to bless this earth's cold clime,
A brighter season, and more vernal prime,
Where, long by wintry suns denied to rise,
Fair Right and Freedom opened on the skies,
Virtue, and Truth, and joy, in nobler bloom,
Called earth and heaven to taste the sweet perfume,
Pleased, to the scene increasing millions ran,
And threatened Satan with the loss of man.
These Progress of infidelity, under the auspicious influence of Charles II.
and his cotemporaries.
ills to ward I trained my arts anew;
Over truths fair form the webs of sophism drew;
Virtue new chilled, in growing beauties gay,
Withered her bloom, and puffed her sweets away.
Against her friends I armed new bands of foes;
First, highest, all-subduing Fashion rose.
From courts to cottages, her sovereign sway,
With force resistless, bade the world obey.
She molded faith, and science, with a nod;
Now there was not, and now there was, a God,
"Let black be white," she said, and white it seemed,
"Hume a philosopher;" and straight he dreamed
Most philosophically. At her call,
Opinions, doctrines, learned to rise, and fall;
Before Phil. ii, 10, 11.
her, bent the universal knee,
And owned her sovereign, to the praise of me.
With The doctrine that ridicule is a test of truth cannot, even on the scheme
of infidels justify their application of it. Wherever any object, or if you
please, proposition, when seen clearly and certainly in all its nature, parts,
and relations, is evidently absurd, and ridiculous, it may be an objection
against its reality, or truth. But a man, in his natural and proper appearance,
may be a beautiful object; and a proposition, in its real nature, and necessary
consequences, may contain a truth important and noble, although when a sign-post
painter shall have drawn one with a pair of horns and a tail, and an infidel
annexed his own dreams as appendages to the other, all the fraternity of
blockheads will laugh at both. Anon.


her, brave Ridicule, 'twixt ill and good,
Falsehood and truth, satanic umpire stood.
He, Hogarth like, with hues and features new,
The form of providence, persuasive drew:
Round its fair face bade hells black colors rise.
Its limbs distorted, blear'd its heaven-bright eyes.
At the maimed image gazed, and grinn'd aloud --
"Yon frightful hag's no semblance of a god."
Mean See the host of infidel writers, during the last age.

Such advantages does Infidelity enjoy over Revelation, that both sides of
moral questions will equally support that, and weaken this. Thus one Infidel
will overthrow Revelation by proving that there is not one honest man living;
another will as successfully attack it by asserting, and the assertions of
Infidels are always to be taken for proofs, that there are honest men of all
religions and opinions. One sees intuitively that God never did, nor can,
reveal his pleasure to mankind. Another finds the Koran and Shahstan in the
list of Revelations. Plato's devotion of himself to a courtizan, and Socrate's
to Alcibiades were the effusions of honest, virtuous hearts; but Paul's
dedication of his life to the Redeemer was a reverse of enthusiasm. God also,
though dishonored by adoration, presented to him in the character of a holy
sin-hating God, and incapable of being pleased, when invoked in the name of
Jesus Christ, is yet glorified, when honest votaries address him, in the
elevated character of an ox, an onion, or a snake, and is highly delighted with
invocations, when offered in the pleasing and prevailing name of the devil.

Happy, happy, happy cause!
None but the wise,
None but the wise,
Have such sharp eyes,
Or tell such lies. Morgan. (Morgan) An unhappy man, who went to bed one night,
and dreamed he was a great man, and a moral philosopher, which so turned his
brain with surprise, that he never knew himself in the glass afterward; but
thought he was a moral philosopher, to the day of his death. SCRIBLERUS.

The Devil's Feast, or the power of falsehood. An ode, by the very same Laureat,
who wrote another, on the death of David Home, Esquire. in which, out of compassion
to the Lord Jesus Christ, he forbears to tell how effectually said Hume has
overthrown him.


time my friends, the veterans of my cause,
Racked every nerve, and gained all hell's applause,
Through realms of cheat and doubt, and darkness, ran,
New-made creation, uncreated man,
Taught, and retaught, asserted and denied,
As pampered pleasure, or as bolster'd pride.
Now, groping man in death's dim darkness trod,
Now, all things kenn'd, with eyelids of a god.
Now, miracles, not God himself could spell;
Now, every monk could grunt them from his cell.
Priests now were dullest, last, of mortal things;
Now outflew Satan's self, on cunning's wings.
No system here, of truth, to man is given;
There my own doctrines speak the voice of heaven;
While God, with smiling eyes, alike surveys
The pagan mysteries, and the christian praise.
While here on earth no virtuous man was found,
There saints, like pismires, swarmed the molehill round;
Like maggots, crawled Caffraria's entrail'd sorts;
Or mushroom'd over Europa's putrid courts;
To deist clubs familiar dared retire,
Or howled, and powaw'd, round the Indian fire,
Such feats my sons achieved, such honors won;
The shores, the blocking, of the infernal throne!
And though yon haughty world their worth deny,
Their names shall glitter in the nether sky.
But ah their wisdom, wit, and toils were vain,
A balm first soothing, then increasing pain.
Through Names of a few silly men, whose minds were too small to comprehend the
nature and evidences of Infidelity.

COLLINS.


nature's fields while cloud-borne Bacon ran,
Doubtful his mind, an angel, or a man;
While high-soul'd Newton, winged by Heaven abroad,
Explained alike the works, and word, of God;
While patient Lock illum'd with newborn ray,
The path of reason, and the laws of sway;
While Berkley, bursting like the morning sun,
Looked round all parching from his lofty throne,
In all events, and in all beings showed
The present, living, acting, speaking God,
Or cast resistless beams, the gospel over,
Union supreme of wisdom, love, and power!
Pained, shrivill'd, gasping, from the forceful ray
How crept my mite Philosophers away?
In vain my Methodist, brave Herbert, cried,
And whin'd, and wrote, pretended, prayed, and lied See Lord Cherburg's
Cock-Lane-Ghost Tale of Thunder's answer to Prayer. SCRIBLERUS.
,
In vain my Shaftsbury, to his master true,
Dread The characteristics of which insect are, busily to bustle about with a
great show of stateliness and mock majesty, with a noisy, solemn hum, that
sounds much, and means nothing, to be forever poring over flowers, but never to
gather, or yield, any honey.

Linnaeus -- properties of humble bees.


Humble be! over burrs and thistles flew;
Incupped, and ravished with the fussful noise,
To praise the wondrous flowers, he raised his voice,
Of nature, beauty, dreamed and humm'd again,
And sung himself, and buzzed at truth, in vain.
Ah Bolingbroke, how well thy tattered robe,
Poor, Bedlam king of learning's little globe!
Amused thy fancy? He, with glory fired,
Myself in miniature! to heaven aspired
For same, his heaven, through falshood's realms he ran,
And wished, and watched, and toiled, and hoped, in vain,
Misread, miswrote, misquoted, misapplied,
Yet failed of fame, and missed the skies, beside.
In views, in pride, in fate, conjoined with me,
Even Satan's self shall drop a tear for thee.
My leaders these; yet Satan boasts his subs,
His Tolands, Tindals, Collinses, and Chubbs,
Morgans and Woolstons, names of lighter worth,
That stand, on falshood's list, for etc.
That sworn to me, to vice and folly given,
At truth and virtue growl'd, and bark dat heaven.
Not men, it is true, yet manlings often they won,
Against their God helped blockheads often to fun,
Helped fops to folly, and helped rakes to sin,
And The same principles, which support or destroy christianity, alike support
or destroy political order and government. So manifest is this, that Lord
Bolingbroke, when contending against those whom he esteems enemies of the
British government, treats them unwittingly, I presume, as enemies also to
christianity, and loads them, for their combined folly and perverseness, with
many epithets of supreme contempt.
marred all sway, by mocking sway divine.
My list of authors too they helped to count,
As ciphers eke the decimal amount.
As writers too they profer'd useful aid
Believed unseen, and reverenced though unread.
Against their foe no proof my sons desire,
No reasoning canvass and no sense require.
Enough, the Bible is by wits arraigned,
Genteel men doubt it, smart men say it is feigned,
Onward my powdered beaux and boobies throng;
As puppies float the kennel's stream along.
But their defects to varnish; and, in spite
Of pride and dignity, resolved to write,
I seized the work myself, Straight, in a cloud
Of night involved, to Scotia's (...) rode.
There, in the cobwebs of a college room,
I found my best Amanuensis (...)
And (...) in his breath On dreams afloat,
The (...) soared high, and, as I prompted, wrote.
Sublimest nonsense there I taught mankind
Pure, genuine dross, from gold (...)
From realm to realm the (...)
And thus the sage, and thus his teacher, (...)
All things roll on, by fixed eternal (...)
Yet no effect depends upon a (...)
Hence every law (...) by (...),
Parent most fit of order, and design!
Earth was (...) earth,
All beings happen, by most stated birth^.
Each thing miraculous yet strange (...),
Not God himself can show miracle.
Mean time, lest these great things, the vulgar mind,
With learning vast, and deep research, should blind,
Lest dull to read, and duller still when known,
My favorite scheme should mould, and sleep, alone;
To Satan seems guilty of an anachronism here, Voltaire being the eldest writer
of the two. SCRIBLERUS.
France I posted, on the wings of air,
And fired the labors of the gay Voltaire.
He, light and gay, over learning's surface flew,
And proved all things at option, false or true.
The gospel's truths he saw were airy dreams,
The shades of nonsense, and the whims of whims.
Before his face no Jew could tell what ^^st;
Or know the right from left, the first from last;
Conjecture where his native Salem stood,
Or (...), if Jordan had a bank, or flood.
The Greeks, and Romans, never truth descried;
But always (when they proved the gospel) lied.
He, he alone, the blessed retreat had smelt,
The It appears, by the testimony of all the ancient historians, that truth
originally lived in a well; but Voltaire was the first geographer, who
discovered where it was dug -- LORD KAIMS's sketches of the weakness of man;
article Voltaire.
Well, where long with frogs, the goddess dwelt;
In China dug, at Chihohamti's The Emperor, who burnt all the ancient records
of his country, and built the great wall to defend it from the Tartars. Quere
-- In which instance did he do his countrymen the most good; if the books, he
burnt, were like those written by them afterward?
call,
And curbed with bricks, the refuse of his wall.
There, mid a realm of cheat, a world of lies,
Where altered nature wears one great disguise,
Where shrunk, misshapen bodies mock the eye,
And shrivelled souls the power of thought deny,
Mid idiot Mandarins, and baby Kings,
And dwarf Philosophers, in leading-strings,
Mid senseless votaries of less senseless Fo, Fo, principal Idol of the Chinese.

Wretches who nothing even seemed to know,
Bonzes, with souls more naked than their skin,
All brute without, and more than brute within,
From Europe's rougher sons the goddess shrunk,
Tripp'd in her iron shoes, and failed her junk.
Nice, pretty, wondrous stories there she told,
Of empires, forty thousand ages old,
Of, Tohi, born with rainbows round his nose, --
Lao's long day -- Ginseng A plant, to which the Chinese ascribe all virtues of
food and medicine, and proved by European scrutiny to be just as remote from
them, as the date of the Chinese empire from 40,000 years. In the same manner,
all Chinese extraordinaries, except a few mechanical ones, when examined,
descend to plain dock and plantain. Yet, when swallowed by Voltaire, they will
help to expel gripes of conscience, as a decoction of Ginseng will those of the
flatulent cholio, full as well as warm water.

GARTH's alphabetical prophecies, article Ginseng.


alchymic dose --
Stories, at which all Behmen's dreams awake,
Start into truth, and sense and virtue speak;
To which, all, lisping children ever began
With, "At a time," or "Once there was a man,"
Is reason, truth, and fact; and sanctioned clear
With heaven's own voice, or proof of eye and ear.
He See Voltair's Candide, the great purpose of which is to prove, that
whatever is, is not right.
too revealed, that candor bade mankind
Believe my haughty rival weak, and blind;
That all things wrong a ruling God denied;
Or a satanic imp that God implied
An imp, per chance of power and skill possessed,
But not with justice, truth, or goodness blessed.
Doctrines divine! would men their force receive.
And live to (...) glory, as believe.
Nor these alone: from every class of man,
I gained new aids to build the (...) plan.
But chief his favorite class, his priest, I won,
To undermine his cause, and (...) my own.
Here Jesuitic art its frauds comman'd.
To draw ten thousand cobwebs over the mind,
In poisoned toils the flutterer to enclose,
And six, with venomed fangs, eternal woes,
On skeptic dross they stamped heavens image bright,
And named their will a wisp, immortal light,
Through moors, and fens, the sightless wandereled,
'Till down he plunged, ingulph'd among the dead.
To life, Great men, if closely examined, will generally be found strongly to
resemble each other. Thus Milton, Horner and Offian were blind. Thus this great
man exceedingly resembled Milton. There was however one or two wisting
circumstances of difference. Milton, for instance, was stone-blind in his bodly
eyes, but had clear and intuitive moral optics. In Socinus the case was exactly
reversed. Milton also rose in his moral conceptions, with no unhappy imitation
of the scriptural sublimity: Socinus, on the contrary, anticlimaxed the
scriptural system down to nothing. SCRIBLERUS,
Socinus here his millions drew,
In ways, the art of Heaven concealed from view,
Undeified the world's almighty trust,
And lowered eternity's great Isai. ix. 6.
fire to dust.
He taught, O first of men! the Son of God,
Who hung the globe, and stretched the heaven abroad,
Spoke into life the sun's (...) fire,
And moved to harmony the flaming choir,
Who in his hand immensity infolds,
And angels, worlds, and suns, and heaven, upholds,
Is -- what? a worm, on far creation's limb,
A minim, in intelligence extreme.
O wondrous gospel, where such doctrines rise!
Discoveries wondrous of most wondrous eyes!
From him, a darling race descended fair,
Even to this day my first and chiefest care,
When pertest Priestly A celebrated philosopher of the present day, who has
carried chemical composition to a higher perfection than any other man living;
for he has advanced so far, (...) to form a whole system of divinity out of
fixed air. SCRIBLERUS,
calls mankind, to see
His own corruptions of christianity.
Mean time, less open friends my cause sustained,
More smoothly tempted and more slily gained;
Taught easier ways to climb the bright abode;
Less pure made virtue, and less perfect God;
Less guilty vice, the atonement less divine,
And paved, with peace and joy, the way to sin.
While Opposition to infidelity by disciples of Peter, Paul, etc. in this
country.
thus by art and perseverance won,
Again the old world seemed almost my own.
In this wild (...), where Albion's lights revive,
New dangers threaten and new evils live.
Here a dread race, my sturdiest foes designed,
Patient of toil, of firm and vigorous mind,
Pinioned with bold research to truth's far coast,
By storms undaunted, nor in oceans lost,
With dire invasion, error's realm assail,
And all my hardy friends before them fail.
But my chief bane, my apostolic foe,
In life, in labors, source of every woe,
From scenes obscure, did heaven his ******* call,
That moral Newton, and that second Paul.
He, in clear view, saw sacred systems roll,
Of reasoning worlds, around their central soul;
Saw love attractive every system bind,
The parent linking to each filial mind;
The end of heaven's high works resistless showed,
Creating glory, and created good;
And, in one little life, the gospel more
Disclosed, than all earth's myriads kenn'd before.
Beneath his standard; lo what number rise,
To dare for truth, and combat for the skies!
Armed at all points, they try the battling field,
With reason's sword and faith's etherial shield.
To ward this fate all irreligion can,
Whatever sustains, or flatters sinning man;
Whatever can conscience of her thorns disarm,
Or calm, at death s approach, the dread alarm;
Whatever like truth, with error cheats mankind;
Whatever, like virtue, taints with vice the mind;
I preachd, I wrote, I argued, prayed, and lied,
What could my friends, or even myself, beside?
But, though with glad successes often crowned,
Unceasing fears my troubled path surround.
While with each toil my friends the cause sustain,
Their toils, their efforts, and their arts are vain.
Even plodding ******* did but little good,
Who See a late American treatise entitled a Philosophical (...) on Matter, in
which this great doctrine is fully proved.
taught, the soul of man was made of mud:
Cold mud was virtue; warmer mud was sin;
And thoughts the angle-worms, that crawled within:
Nor taught alone; but wise, to precept joined
A fair example, in his creeping mind.
In vain through Otherwise called Oracles of Reason.
realms of nonsense ***** ran
The great Clodhopping New name elegantly given to man, in Oracles of Reason.
Anon.

The annotator above mistakes, in calling this epithet a new name. I could
easily show, by a series of learned deductions, that Clodhopper was the very
original name of mankind, when they wore tails, as Lord (...) has most
ingeniously proved they did, at their first creation.

SCRIBLERUS.


oracle of man.
Yet faithful were his toils: What could he more!
In Satan's cause he bustled, bruised, and swore;
And In A -- n's Journal the writer observ^^, (...) he shall be treated, in the
future world as well as other gentlemen of equal merit are treated: A
sentiment, it which all his countrymen will join him. (...).
what the due reward, from me shall know,
For gentlemen of equal worth below.
To vengeance then, my soul, to vengeance rise,
Assert thy glory and assault the skies.
What though dull seers have sung, in dreams sublime,
Thy ruin floats along the verge of time,
Though Dan. ii. 44-45.
without hands the stone from mountains riven,
Alarms my throne, and hastes the ire of heaven;
Though Isai. lii. 7.
bliss' dread heralds earth's far limits round
Pardon, and peace, and joy, ere long shall sound;
How beauteous are their feet! all regions cry,
And one great, natal song salute the sky:
Still, should I sink, a glorious fate I Will find,
And sink amid the ruins of mankind.
But what blessed onset shall I now begin,
To plunge the New World in the gulf of sin?
With sweet declension, down perdition's steep,
How, in one host, her cheated millions sweep?
I hail the glorious project, first, and best,
That ever Satan's bright invention blessed;
That Genesis iii, 4. And the serpent said unto the woman -- Ye shall not (...)
die. etc.
on this world my kingdom first began,
And lost my rival paradise, and man.
Twice fifteen suns are past, since C*******'s mind,
Through doctrines deep, from common sense resin'd,
I led, a nice, mysterious work to frame,
With love of system, and with lust of fame.
Fair in his hand the pleasing wonder grew,
Wrought with deep art, and stored with treasures new:
There the sweet sophism led the soul astray;
There round to heaven soft bent the crooked way:
Saints, he confessed, the shortest rout pursue;
But, scarce behind, my children follow too.
Even Satan's self ere long shall thither hie;
On Magical incantation used formerly by the witches at Salem, when they went
through key holes. SCRIBLERUS.
cap, huzza! and through the door go I!
Now palsied age has dimmed his mental (...)
I Will rouse the sage his master's laws to fight,
The injuries, long he rendered, to repair
And wipe from heaven's fair book his faith and prayer.
To wound the eternal cause with deepest harms,
A cheated gospel proves the surest arms:
Those arms, no hand can, like a preacher's wield;
Ealse friends may stab, when foes must fly the field.
This M***** proves, in whom my utmost skill
Peer'd out no means of mischief, but the will.
He, in hard days, when ribbons gave no bread,
And Spitalfield's brave sons from Tyburn fled,
Scampering from bailiffs, wisely dropped the shuttle,
To preach down truth, and common sense to throttle.
With cunning, often in scrapes and bustles tried,
Tongue at-your-service, in all stories plied,
The dirtiest ridicule of things most holy,
And dirtier flattery of sin and folly,
A mimickry, at which buffoons would blush,
Religion cent-per-cented, at a rush,
Boldness, that dares to make the Bible lie,
And brass, that would a foundery supply,
Mid gathered rogues, and blockheads, often he stood,
And roused to fun the genuine brotherhood;
Scripture, and argument, obliged to yield,
Made learning, sense, and virtue, quit the field,
While fainting decency sunk down to see
The desk of God a puppet-show for me.
This said, invested with the robes of day,
To C*******'s dome he winged his gladsome way,
And spread delightful to his wilder'd sense,
The pride of system, and the increase of pence.
Forth from its cobwebs straight the work he drew,
In mould still precious, and in dust still new.
This darling pet to usher to mankind,
High blown to ecstasy, the sage designed;
And conn'd, with grand-parental love, the day,
When through the world the heir should make its way.
The laughing spirit seized the lucky hour,
And round Columbia bade the Otherwise called Salvation to all men. A treatise,
published as a harbinger to the great one having this motto on the title page
--

I leave you here a little book,
For you to look upon,
That you may learn to lie and swear,
When I am dead and gone. SCRIBLERUS.

trumpet roar,
And thus through all her regions rang the song --
To Otherwise called the field of mischief. SCRIBLERUS.
Pandemonia's plains, ye mortals, throng!
Here shall you, raptured, find there is no hell;
A priest shall teach it, and the gospel tell;
The pleasing truth, so long from earth concealed,
To bless desponding guilt, is now revealed.
Thus rang the thrilling voice the new world round;
Each villain started at the pleasing sound,
Hugged his old crimes, new mischiefs 'gan devise,
And turned his nose up to the threatening skies.
The perjured wretch, who met no honest eye,
But felt his own retreat, his spirit die,
Cleared up his withered front, and true he cried
I Have sometimes been forsworn, and often lied;
But all is a farce; as proves this doctrine new,
For God must help the perjured, as the true.
Up Florio sprang; and with indignant woes,
As thus he cried, his startled bosom rose --
I am the first of men in ways of evil,
The truest, thriftiest servant of the devil,
Born, educated, glory to engross,
And shine confessed, the Devil's Man of Ross.
Here Is three to one, I beat even him in pride;
Two whores already in my chariot ride:
Shall then this wretch? -- forbid it Florio, heaven!
Shall sin's bright laurels to this priest be given?
No, still on Satan's roll shall shine my praise,
As erst on C -- 's lists of yeas and nays.
Half pleased, the honest tar out bolted -- "whew"!
"Good doctrine, Jack" "Aye, too good to be true."
P**** scowling heard, and growl'd -- The day's our own!
I Will now tell two lies, where I told but one.
W****** more hard than flint, in sin grown old,
Clinch'd close his claws, and gripped his bags of gold.
In vain, he cried, their woes let orphans tell;
In vain let widows weep; there is no hell.
Six, six per cent, each month, must now be given,
For pious usury now is the road to heaven.
All who, though fair without, yet black within,
Glued to their lips the choice liqueur of sin,
Whose conscience, often rebuff'd, with snaky power,
Impoison'd still the gay and gleeful hour,
Checked the loose wish, the past enjoyment stung,
And often the alarm of retribution rung,
Thrilled at each nerve, to find their fears were vain,
And swung triumphant caps at future pain.
And now the morn arose; when over the plain
Gathered, from every side, a numerous train;
To quell those fears, that rankled still within,
And gain new strength, and confidence, to sin.
There the half putrid Epicure was seen,
His cheeks of port, and lips with turtle green,
Who hoped a long eternity was given,
To spread good tables, in some eating heaven.
The leacher there his lurid visage showed,
The imp of darkness, and the foe of good;
Who fled his lovely wife's most pure embrace,
To sat on hags, and breed a mongrel race;
A high-fed horse, for others wives who neigh'd;
A cur, who prowl'd around each quiet bed;
A snake, far spreading his impoison'd breath,
And charming innocence to guilt, and death.
Here stood Hypocrisy, in sober brown,
His sabbath face all sorrow'd with a frown.
A dismal tale he told of dismal times,
And this sad world brimful of saddest crimes,
Furrowed his cheeks with tears for others sin,
But closed his eyelids on the hell within.
There smiled the smooth Divine, unused to wound
The sinners heart, with hell's alarming sound.
No terrors on his gentle tongue attend;
No grating truths the nicest ear offend.
That strange new birth, that methodistic grace,
Nor in his heart, nor sermons, found a place.
Plato's fine tales he clumsily retold,
Trite, fireside, moral seasaws, dull as old;
His Christ, and bible, placed at good remove,
Guilt hell-deserving, and forgiving love.
'Twas best, he said, mankind should cease to sin;
Good fame required it; so did peace within:
Their honors, well he knew, would never be driven;
But hoped they still would please to go to heaven.
Each week, he paid his visitation dues;
Coax'd, jested, laughed; rehearsed the private news;
Smoked with each goody, thought her cheese excelled;
Her pipe he lighted, and her baby held.
Or placed in some great town, with lacquer'd shoes,
Trim wig, and trimmer gown, and glistening hose,
He bowed, talked politics, learned manners mild;
Most meekly questioned, and most smoothly smiled;
At rich men's jests laughed loud their stories praised;
Their wives new patterns gazed, and gazed and gazed;
Most daintily on pampered turkies dined;
Nor shrunk with fasting, nor with study pined:
Yet from their churches saw his brethren driven,
Who thundered truth, and spoke the voice of heaven,
Chilled trembling guilt, in Satan's headlong path;
Charmed the feet back, and roused the ear of death.
"Let fools," he cried, "starve on, while prudent I
Snug in my nest shall live, and snug shall die.
There stood the infidel of modern breed,
Blessed vegetation of infernal seed,
Alike no Deist, and no Christian, he;
But from all principle, all virtue, free.
To him all things the same, as good or evil;
Jehovah, Jove, the Lama, or the Devil;
Mohammed's braying, or Isaiah's lays;
The Indian's powaws, or the Christian's praise,
With him all natural desires are good;
His Both justified, as all other crimes are, on the great principle that they
are natural. SCRIBLERUS,
thirst for stews; the Mohawk's thirst for blood:
Made, not to know, or love, the all beauteous mind;
Or wing through heaven his path to bliss resin'd:
But his dear self, choice Dagon! to adore;
To dress, to game, to swear, to drink, to whore;
To race his steeds; or cheat, when others run;
Pit tortured cocks, and swear it is glorious fun:
His soul not clothed with attributes divine;
But a nice watch-spring to that grand machine,
That work more nice than Rittenhouse can plan,
The body; man's chief part; himself, the man;
Man, that illustrious brute of noblest shape,
A swine unbristled, and an untail'd ape:
To couple, eat, and die -- his glorious doom --
The oyster's churchyard, and the capon's tomb.
There ****** grinn'd, his conscience feared anew,
And scarcely wished the doctrine false or true;
Scarce smiled, himself secure from God to know,
So poor the triumph over so weak a foe.
In the deep midnight of his guilty mind,
Where not one solitary virtue shined,
Hardly, at times, his struggling conscience wrought
A few, strange intervals of lucid thought,
Holding her clear and dreadful mirror nigher,
Where villain glowed, in characters of fire.
Those few the tale dispersed: His soul no more
Shall, once a year, the Beelzebub run over;
No more shall J -- n's ghost her infant show,
Saw his hard nerves, and point the hell below;
Fixd in cold death, no more his eyeballs stare,
Nor change to upright thorns his bristly hair.
There Demas smiled, who once the Christian name
Gravely assumed, and wore with sober fame.
Meek, modest, decent, in life's lowly vale,
Pleased he walked on; nor now had graced this tale;
But, borne beyond the Atlantic ferry, he
Saw wondrous things, his schoolmates did not see.
Great houses, and great men, in coaches carried;
Great Ladies, great Lord's wives, though never married;
Fine horses, and fine pictures, and fine plays,
And all the finest things of modern days.
Camelion like, he lost his former hue,
And, mid such great men, grew a great man too;
Entered the round of silly, vain parade;
His hair he power'd, and his bow he made.
Shall powdered heads, he cried, be sent to hell?
Shall men in vain in such fine houses dwell?
There Fuclio -- Ah my Muse, let deepest shame
Blush on thy cheek, at that unhappy name!
Oh write it not, my hand! the name appears
Already written: Wash it out, my tears!
Still, Oh all pitying Savior! let thy love,
Stronger than death, all heights, and heavens above,
That on the accursed tree, in woes severe,
The thief's dire guilt extinguished with a tear,
Yearn over that mind, that, with temptations dire,
Rank appetites, and passions fraught with fire,
By each new call without, each thought within,
Is forced to folly, and is whirled to sin;
In conscience spite, though armed with hissing fears,
Strong pangs of soul, and all his country's tears,
Is charmed to madness by the old serpent's breath,
And hurried swiftly down the steep of death.
Burst, burst, thou charm! wake, trembler wake again,
Nor let thy parent's dying prayers be vain!
The hour arrived, the infernal trumpet blew;
Black from its mouth a cloud sulphurous flew;
The caverns groaned; the startled throng gave way,
And forth the chariot rushed to gloomy day.
On every side, expressive emblems rose,
The man, the scene, the purpose to disclose.
Here wrinkled dotage, like a fondled boy,
Titter'd, and smirk'd its momentary joy:
His crumbs there avarice gripped, with lengthened nails,
And weighed clipped half pence in unequal scales.
Trim vanity her praises laughed aloud,
And snuff'd for incense from the gaping crowd.
While Age an eye of anguish cast around,
His crown of glory prostrate on the ground.
There C******* sat; aloud his voice declared,
Hell is no more, or no more to be feared.
What though the Heavens, in words of flaming fire,
Disclose the vengeance of eternal ire,
Bid anguish over the unrepenting soul,
In waves succeeding waves, forever roll;
The strongest terms each language knows, employ
To teach us endless woe, and endless joy:
It Is all a specious irony, designed
A harmless trifling with the human kind:
Or, not to charge the sacred books with lies,
A wile most needful of the ingenious skies,
On this bad earth their kingdom to maintain,
And curb the rebel, man: but all in vain.
First Origin, then Tillotson, then I
Learned their profoundest cunning to descry,
And showed this truth, though nicely covered over,
That hell's broad path leads round to heavens door.
See How much alike are great men, still say I? The Doctor has found a whole
system of divinity, in three or four Greek adverbs, and prepositions; as Lord
Coke had before discovered, that there is much curious and cunning kind of
learning, in an etc. -- SCRIBLERUS.
kai's and epi's build the glorious and scheme!
And gar's and pro's unfol'd their proof supreme!
But such nice proof, as none but those can know,
Who often have read the sacred volume through,
And read in Greek: but chiefly those, who all
The epistles often have searched of cunning Paul.
He, he alone, the mystery seemed to know,
And none but wizard eyes can peep him through.
Then here, at second hand, receive from me
What in the sacred books you will never see.
For Witness Matthew vii. 13-14 -- Strait is the gate, and narrow the way, that
leads to destruction, and no body there is, who goes in thereat:

Because wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leads unto life, and
all they be, who find it. Murray's new version of the Bible, very proper to be
kept by thieves, whoremongers, idolaters, and all liars; with others, who mean
to go to heaven, via hell.


though the page revealed our cause sustains,
When searched with cunning, and when gloss'd with pains,
Yet our first aids from human passions rise,
Blessed friends to error, and blessed props to lies!
And chief, that ruling principle within,
The love of sweet security in sin:
Beneath whose power all pleasing falsehoods, blind
And steal, with soft conviction, on the mind.
No good more luscious than their truth she knows.
And hence their evidence will never oppose.
Aided by this, she mounts the Eternal Throne,
And makes the universe around her own,
Decides the rights of Godhead with her nod,
And wields for him dominion's mighty rod.
Whatever he ought, or ought not, she descries,
Beholds all infinite relations rise,
The immense of time and space surveys serene,
And tells whatever the bible ought to mean;
Whate'r she wishes, sees him bound to do,
Else is his hand unjust, his word untrue.
Then would you lay your own, or others fears,
Search your own bosoms, or appeal to theirs.
Know, what those bosoms wish Heaven must reveal;
And sure no bosom ever wished a hell.
But, lest sustained by underpinning frail,
Our hopes and wits, our proofs and doctrines fail,
Admit a hell; but from its terrors take
Whatever commands the guilty heart to quake.
Again the purgatorial whim revive,
And bid the soul by stripes and penance live.
And know, with search most deep, and wits most keen,
I Have learned, that hell is but a school for sin:
Which yields, to heaven, the soul from guilt refined,
And, though it mars the devils, mends mankind.
And thus the matter stands. When God makes man,
He makes him here religious, if he can;
If he cannot, he bids him farther go,
And try to be religious, down below;
But as his failure is his fault, ordains
His soul to suffer dire repentance' pains,
Repentance, fearful doom of sinners vile!
The law's whole curse, and nature's highest ill!
If there the wretch repent, the work is done;
If not, he plunges to a lower zone,
A lower still, and still a lower, tries,
'Till with such sinking tired, he longs to rise;
And finding there the fashion to repent,
He joins the throng, and strait to heaven is sent.
Heaven now his own he claims; nor can the sky
Preserve its honor, and its claim deny.
Thus stands the fact; and if the proof should fail,
Let Heaven, next time, some better proof reveal.
I Have done my part; I Have given you here the pith;
The rest, the bark and sap, I leave to *****
Thus spoke the sage: a shout, from all the throng,
Rolled up to heaven, and roared the plains along;
Conscience, a moment, ceased her stings to rear,
And joy excessive whelmed each rising fear.
But soon reflection's glass again she reared,
Spread out fell sin; and all her horrors barred;
There anguish, guilt, remorse, her dreadful train,
Tremendous harbingers of endless pain,
Froze the sad breast, amazed the withering eye,
And forced the soul to doubt the luscious lie.
Yet soon sophistic wishes, fond and vain,
The scheme reviewed, and loved, and hoped again;
Soon, one by one, the flames of hell withdrew;
Less painful conscience, sin less dangerous grew;
Less prized the day, to man for trial given,
Less feared Jehovah, and less valued heaven.
No longer now by conscience' calls unmann'd,
To sin, the wretch put forth a bolder hand;
More freely cheated, lied, defamed, and swore;
Nor wished the night to riot, drink, or whore;
Looked up, and hissed his God; his parent stung,
And sold his friend, and country, for a song.
The new-fledg'd infidel of modern brood
Climbed the next fence, clapped both his wings, and crow'd;
Confessed the doctrines were as just, as new,
And doubted if the bible were not true.
The decent christian threw his mask aside,
And smiled, to see the path of heaven so wide,
To church, the half of each fair sunday, went,
The rest, in visits, sleep, or dining, spent;
To vice and error nobly liberal grew;
Spoke kindly of all doctrines, but the true;
All men, but saints, he hoped to heaven might rise,
And thought all roads, but virtue, reached the skies,
There truth and virtue stood, and sighed to find
New gates of falsehood opened on mankind;
New paths to ruin strewn with flowers divine,
And other aids, and motives, gained to sin.
From a dim cloud, the spirit eyed the scene,
Now proud with triumph, and now vexed with spleen,
Marked all the throng, beheld them all his own,
And to his cause no friend of virtue won:
Surpised, enraged, he winged his sooty flight,
And hid beneath the pall of endless night.

