THE RISE AND PROGRESS OF RELIGION IN THE SOUL. ILLUSTRATED IN A COURSE OF
SERIOUS AND PRACTICAL ADDRESSES. SUITED TO PERSONS OF EVERY CHARACTER AND
CIRCUMSTANCE. WITH A DEVOUT MEDITATION OR PRAYER ADDED TO EACH CHAPTER.

To all which are subjoined, A FUNERAL SERMON, Preached at MAIDWELL,
Northamptonshire,

BY PHILIP DODDRIDGE, D. D.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY R. AITKEN and SON, AND SOLD, AT POPE'S HEAD IN MARKET
STREET. M.DCC.LXXXVIII.

TO THE REVEREND DR. ISAAC WATTS.
REV. AND DEAR SIR,
WITH the most affectionate gratitude and respect, I beg leave to present you a
book, which owes its existence to your request, its copiousness to your plan,
and much of its perspicuity to your review, and to the use I made of your
remarks on that part of it, which your health and leisure would permit you to
examine. I address it to you, not to beg your patronage to it, for of that I am
already well assured; and much less from any ambition of attempting your
character, for which, if I were more, equal to the subject, I should think this
a very improper place: but chiefly, from a secret delight which I find in the
thought of being known to those whom this may reach, as one whom you have
honored, not only with your friendship, but with so much of your esteem and
approbation too, as must substantially appear in your committing a work to me,
which you had yourself projected as one of the most considerable services of
your life.

I have long thought the love of popular applause a meanness, which a
philosophy far inferior to that of our divine Master might have taught us to
conquer; but to be esteemed by eminently great and good men, to whom we are
intimately known, appears to me, not only one of the most solid attestations of
some real worth, but, next to the approbation of God and our own consciences,
one of its most valuable rewards. It will, I doubt not, be found so in that
world, to which spirits like yours are tending, and for which, through divine
grace, you have obtained so uncommon a degree of ripeness. And permit me, Sir,
while I write this, to refresh myself with the hope, that when that union of
hearts, which has so long subsisted between us shall arive to its full maturity
and endearment there, it will be matter of mutual delight to recollect, that
you have assigned me, and that I have in some degree executed a task, which may
perhaps, under the blessing of God, awaken and improve religious sentiments in
the minds of those whom we leave behind us, and of others who may arise after
us in this vain, transitory, ensnaring world.

Such is the improvement you have made of your capacities for service, that I
am fully persuaded heaven has received very few, in these latter ages, who h^^
done so much to serve its interests here below; (...) who have labored in this
best of causes with equal a^^ duity, and equal success. And, therefore, I
cannot bu^ join with all who wish well to the Christian interest among us in
acknowledging the goodness of Providence to you and to the Church of Christ, in
prolonging a life, at once so valuable and so tender, to such an advanced
period. With them, Sir, I rejoice, that God has given you to possess, in so
extraordinary a degree, not only the consciousness of intending great benefit
to the world, but the satisfaction of having effected it, and of seeing such an
harvest already springing up, I hope as an earnest of a much more copious
increase from thence. With multitudes more I bless God, that you are not, in
this evening of so afflicted, and yet so laborious a day, rendered entirely
incapable of serving the public from the press, and from the pulpit; and that
amidst the pain which your active spirit feels, when these pleasing services
suffer long interruptions from bodily weakness, it may be so singularly
refreshed by reflecting on that sphere of extensive usefulness, in which by
your writings you continually move.

I congratulate you, dear Sir, that, while you are in a multitude of families
and schools of the lower class, condescending to the humble, yet important
work, of forming infant-minds to the first rudiments of religious knowledge and
devout impressions, by your various Chatechisms and divine Songs, you are also
daily reading Lectures on Logic, and other branches of philosophy, to studious
youth; and this not only in private academies, but in the most public and
celebrated seats of learning; not merely in Scotland, and in our American
colonies, (where, from some peculiar considerations, it might most naturally be
expected;) but through the amiable candor of some excellent men and
accomplished tutors in our English universities too. I congratulate you, that
you are teaching, no doubt hundreds of ministers, and thousands of private
Christians, by your sermons and other theological writings; so happily
calculated to dif^^^^ through their minds that light of knowledge, and ^^^^gh
their hearts that fervor of piety, which God ^^^en pleased to enkindle in your
own. But, above (...) congratulate you, that, by your sacred poetry, espe^^ally
by your Psalms and your Hymns, you are leading the worship, and, I trust, also
animating the devotion, of myriads, in our public assemblies every sabbath, and
in their families or closets every day. This, Sir, at least, so far as it
relates to the service of the sanctuary, is an unparalleled favor, by which
God has been pleased to distinguish you, I may boldly say it, beyond any of
his servants now upon earth. Well may it be esteemed a glorious equivalent, and
indeed much more than equivalent for all those views of ecclesiastical
preferment, to which such talents, learning, virtues and interest, might have
entitled you in an establishment; and I doubt not, but you joyfully accept it
as such.

Nor is it easy to conceive in what circumstances you could, on any
supposition, have been easier and happier, than in that pious and truly
honorable family, in which as I verily believe, in special indulgence both to
you and it, Providence has been pleased to appoint that you should spend so
considerable a part of your life. It is my earnest prayer, that all the
remainder of it may be serene, useful, and pleasant. And as, to my certain
knowledge, your compositions have been the singular comfort of many excellent
Christians (some of them numbered among my dearest friends) on their dying bed:
for I have heard stanzas of them repeated from the lips of several, who were
doubtless in a few hours to begin the Song of Moses and the Lamb; so I hope and
trust, that when God shall call you to that salvation, for which your faith and
patience has so long been waiting, he will shed around you the choicest beams
of his favor, and gladden your heart with consolations, like those which you
have been the happy instrument of administering to others.

In the meantime, Sir, be assured, that I am not a little animated in the
various labors to which Providence has called me, by reflecting, that I have
such a contemporary, and especially such a friend; whose single presence would
be to me as that of a cloud of witnesses here below, to awaken my alacrity in
the race that is set before me. And, I am persuaded, that whi^^ I say this, I
speak the sentiments of many of my br^^^ren, even of various denominations; a
considera^^^ which, I hope, will do something toward reconcili^^^^^ heart so
generous as yours, to the delay of that exceeding and eternal weight of glory,
which is now so nearly approaching. Yes, my honored Friend, you will, I hope,
cheerfully endure a little longer continuance in life amidst all its
infirmities; from an assurance, that while God is pleased to maintain the
exercise of your reason, it is hardly possible that you should live in vain, to
the world, or yourself. Every day, and every trial, is brightening your crown,
and rendering you still more meet for an inheritance among the saints in light.
Every word that you drop from the pulpit has now, surely, its peculiar weight:
the eyes of many are on their ascending prophet, eagerly intent that they may
catch, if not his mantle, at least some divine sentence from his lips, which
may long guide their ways, and warm their hearts. This solicitude your friends
bring into those happy moments in which they are favored with your converse in
private: and when you are retired from them, your prayers, I doubt not, largely
contribute toward guarding your country, watering the church, and blessing the
world. Long may they continue to answer these great ends! And permit me, Sir,
to conclude, with expressing my cheerful confidence, that in those best moments
you are often particularly mindful of one, who so highly esteems, so greatly
needs, and so warmly returns, that remembrance, as,

Reverend and dear SIR, Your most affectionate Brother, and obliged humble
servant, P. DODDRIDGE.
NORTHAMPTON, Dec. 13, 1744.
PREFACE.
THE several hints given me in the Dedication, and the first chapter of this
Treatise, which contains a ^^^ticular plan of the design, render it unnecessary
to introduce it with a long preface. Some of my readers may perhaps remember,
that, several years ago, I promised this work to the Public, in the preface to
the second edition of my sermons on the power and grace of Christ, etc. My much
honored friend Dr. WATTS had laid the scheme, especially of the former part.
But as those indispositions, with which (to the unspeakable grief of the
churches) God has been pleased to exercise him, had forbid his hopes of being
able to add this to his many labors of love to immortal souls, he was pleased,
in a very affectionate and importunate manner, to urge me to undertake it. And
I bless GOD, with my whole heart, not only that he has carried me through this
delightful task (for such indeed I have found it) but also that he has spared
that worthy and amiable person to see it accomplished, and given him strength
and spirit to review so considerable a part of it. His approbation expressed in
stronger terms than modesty will permit me to repeat, encourages me to hope
that it is executed in such a manner as may, by the divine blessing, render it
of some general service. And I the rather hope it will be so, as it now comes
abroad into the world, not only with my own prayers and his, but also with
those of many other pious friends, which I have been particularly careful to
engage for its success.

Into whatever hands this work may come, I must desire that, before any pass
their judgment, they would please to read it through, that they may discern the
connection between one part of it and another. Which I the rather request,
because I have long observed, that Christians of different parties have been
eagerly laying hold on particular parts of the system of divine truths, and
have been contending about them; as if each had been all; or, as if the
separation of the members from each other, and from the head, were the
preservation of the body instead of its destruction. They have been zealous to
espouse the defense, and to maintain the honor and usefulness of each apart;
whereas their honor as well as usefulness, seems to me to lie much in their
connection: and suspicions have often arisen betwixt the respective defenders
of each, which have a^peared as unreasonable and absurd, as if all the
preparations for securing one part of a ship in a storm were to be censured as
a contrivance to sink the rest. I pray God to give to all his ministers and
people more and more of the spirit of wisdom, and of love, and of a sound mind;
and to remove far from us those mutual jealousies and animosities, which hinder
our acting with that unanimity, which is necessary in order to the successful
carrying on our common warfare against the enemies of Christianity. We may be
sure these enemies will never fail to make their own advantage of our
multiplied divisions and severe contests with each other. But they must
necessarily lose both their ground and their influence, in proportion to the
degree in which the energy of Christian principles is felt, to unite and
transform the hearts of those by whom they are professed.

I take this opportunity of adding, that as this Treatise may be looked upon as
the sequel of my sermons on Regeneration, though in something of a different
method, a second edition of those sermons is now published (in compliance with
the request of many of my friends) in the same form and size with this book. I
have been solicitous to make them both as cheap as possible, that I may fall in
with the charitable designs of those who may purpose to give them away. There
is, however, an edition of this treatise in octavo, for such as rather choose to
have it in a larger character and fairer form.

I have studied the greatest plainness of speech, that the lowest of my readers
may, if possible, be able to understand every word; and, I hope, persons of a
more elegant taste and refined education, will pardon what appeared to me so
necessary a piece of charity. Such a care in practical writers, seems one
important instance of that honoring all men, which our amiable and
condescending religion teaches; and I have been particularly obliged to my
worthy patron, for what he has done to shorten some of the sentences, and to
put my meaning into plainer and more familiar words. Yet, I dare say, the world
will not suspect it of having contracted any impropriety or inelegance of
language by passing through the hands of Dr. WATTS.

I must add one remark here, which I heartily wish (...) not omitted in the
first edition, viz. That though (...) do in this book consider my reader as
successively in a great variety of supposed circumstances, beginning with those
of a thoughtless sinner, and leading him through several stages of conviction,
terror, etc as what may be previous to his sincerely accepting the gospel, and
devoting himself to the service of; yet I would by no means be thought to
insinuate, that every one who is brought to that happy resolution, arrives at
it through those particular steps or feels agitations of mind equal, in any
degree, to those I have described. Some sense of sin, and some serious and
humbling apprehension of our danger and misery in consequence of it, must
indeed be necessary, to dispose us to receive the grace of the gospel, and the
Savior who is there exhibited to our faith: but God is pleased sometimes to
begin the work of his grace on the heart almost from the first dawning of
reason, and to carry it on by such gentle and insensible degrees, that very
excellent persons, who have made the most eminent seize in the divine
life, have been unable to recount any remarkable history of their conversion.
And, so far as I can learn, this is most frequently the case with those of them
who have enjoyed the benefits of a pious education, when it has not been
succeeded by a vi^ious and licentious youth. God forbid, therefore, that any
should be so insensible of their own happiness as to fall into perplexity with
relation to their spiritual state, for want of being able to trace such a rise
of religion in their minds as it was necessary, on my plan, for me to describe
and exemplify here. -- I have spoken my sentiments on this head so fully in the
VIIIth of my sermons on Regeneration, that I think none who has read, and
remembers the general contents of it, can be in danger of mistaking my meaning
here. But as it is very possible this book may fall into the hands of many who
have not read the other, and have no opportunity of consulting it, I thought
proper to insert this caution in the preface to this; and I am much obliged to
that worthy and excellent person who kindly reminded me of the expediency of
doing it.

I conclude, with desiring my friends to forgive the necessary interruption
which this work has given to the third volume of my Family Expositor, which I
am now sending to the press as fast as I can, and hope to publish in less than
a year. To this volume I have referred several additional notes, and the
indexes, which are necessary to render the former volumes complete; having
determined to add nothing to the second edition which should depreciate the
former. I do not think it necessary to trouble my friends with a new
subscription, taking it for granted, that few who were pleased with the other
part of the work, will fail of perfecting the set on the historical books of
the New Testament. When my Exposition on the epistolary part may be completed,
God only knows. I will proceed in it as fast as the other duties of my station
will permit; and I earnestly beg, that if my readers find edification and
advantage by any of my writings, they would in return offer a prayer for me,
that God may carry me on, in that most important labor of my pen, under the
remarkable tokens of his guidance and blessing.

CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
THE introduction to the work, with some general account of its design. Page 1
A prayer for the success of it, in promoting the rise and progress of religion.
Page 9
CHAP. II.
The careless sinner awakened. Page 12 The meditation of a sinner, who was once
thoughtless, but begins to be awakened. Page 20
CHAP. III.
The awakened sinner urged to immediate considederation, and cautioned against
delay. Page 23 A prayer for one who is tempted to delay applying to religion,
though under some convictions of its importance. Page 29
CHAP. IV.
The sinner arraigned and convicted. Page 31 The confession of a sinner,
convinced in general of his guilt. Page 41
CHAP. V.
The sinner stripped of his vain pleas. Page 43 The meditation of a convinced
sinner, giving up his vain pleas before God. Page 52
CHAP. VI.
The sinner sentenced. Page 54 The reflection of a sinner, struck with the
terror of his sentence. Page 61
CHAP. VII.
The helpless state of the sinner under condemnation. Page 6^ The lamentation
of a ^inner in this miserable condition. Page 68
CHAP. VIII.
News of salvation by Christ brought to the convinced and condemned sinner.
Page 70 The sinner's reflection on this good news. Page 76
CHAP. IX.
A more particular account of the way by which this salvation is to be
obtained. Page 77 The sinner deliberating on the expediency of falling in with
this method of salvation. Page 85
CHAP. X.
The sinner seriously urged and entreated to accept of salvation in this way.
Page 87 The sinner yielding to these entreaties, and declaring his acceptance
of salvation by Christ. Page 92
CHAP. XI.
A solemn address to those who will not be persuaded to fall in with the design
of the gospel. Page 94 A compassionate prayer in behalf of the impenitent
sinner. Page 105
CHAP. XII.
An address to a soul overwhelmed with a sense of the greatness of its sins,
that it dares not apply itself to Christ with any hope of salvation. Page 107
Reflection on the encouragements he has to do it, ending in an humble and
earnest application to Christ for mercy. Page 112
CHAP. XIII.
The doubting soul more particularly assisted in its inquiries as to the
sincerity of its faith and repentance. Page 114 The soul submitting to divine
examination, the sincerity of its repentance and faith. Page 119
CHAP. XIV.
A more particular view of the several branches of the Christian temper; by
which the reader may be farther assisted in judging what he is, and what he
should endeavor to be. Page 121 A review of the several branches of this
temper in a scriptural prayer. Page 134
CHAP. XV.
The reader reminded how much he needs the assistance of the Spirit of God to
form him to this temper, and what encouragement he has to expect from it. Page
137 An humble supplication for the influences of divine grace to form and
strengthen religion in the soul. Page 142
CHAP. XVI.
The Christian convert warned of, and animated against, those discouragements
which he must expect to meet, when entering on a religious course. Page 144 The
soul, alarmed by a sense of these difficulties, committing itself to divine
protection. Page 149
CHAP. XVII.
The Christian urged to, and assisted in, an express act of self dedication to
the service of God. Page 150 An example of self-dedication; or, A solemn form
of renewing our covenant with God. Page 153 Together with an abstract of it, to
be used with proper and requisite alterations. Page 158
CHAP. XVIII.
Of entering into church communion, by an attendance upon the Lord's Supper.
Page 160 A prayer for one who desires to attend, yet has some remaining doubts
concerning his right to that solemn ordinance. Page 165
CHAP. XIX.
Some more particular directions for maintaining continual communion with God,
or being in his fear all the day long; in a letter to a pious friend. Page 168
A serious view of death, proper to be taken as we lie down on our beds. Page
181
CHAP. XX.
A serious persuasive to such a method of spending our days. Page 183 A prayer
suited to the state of a soul who longs to attain to such a life. Page 190
CHAP. XXI.
A caution against various temptations, by which the young convert may be drawn
aside from the course before recommended. Page 193 The young convert's prayer
for divine protection from the danger of these snares. Page 201
CHAP. XXII.
The case of a spiritual decay and langour in religion. Page 203 A prayer for
one under spiritual decays. Page 210
CHAP. XXIII.
The sad case of a relapse into known and deliberate sin, after solemn acts of
dedication to God, and some progress made in religion. Page 213 A prayer for
one who has fallen into gross sin, after religious resolutions and engagements.
Page 220
CHAP. XXIV.
The case of the Christian under the hidings of God's face. Page 224 An humble
supplication for one under the hidings of God's face. Page 234
CHAP. XXV.
The Christian struggling under great and heavy afflictions. Page 23^ An
address to God under the pressure of heavy affliction. Page 241
CHAP. XXVI.
The Christian assisted in examining into his growth in grace. Page 244 The
Christian breathing earnestly after growth in grace. Page 252
CHAP. XXVII.
The advanced Christian reminded of the mercies of God, and exhorted to the
exercises of habitual love to him, and joy in him. Page 253 An example of the
genuine workings of this grateful joy in God. Page 259
CHAP. XXVIII.
The established Christian urged to exert himself for purposes of usefulness.
Page 263 The Christian breathing after more extensive usefulness. Page 272
CHAP. XXIX.
The Christian rejoicing in the views of death and judgment. Page 274 The
meditation and prayer of a Christian, whose heart is warmed with these
prospects. Page 282
CHAP. XXX.
The Christian honoring God by his dying behavior. Page 284 A meditation and
prayer suited to the case of a dying Christian. Page 292
THE RISE AND PROGRESS OF RELIGION IN THE SOUL.
CHAP. I. The Introduction to the WORK, with some general Account of its Design.
That true religion is very rare, appears from comparing the nature of it with
the lives and characters of men around us, 1, 2. The want of it is matter of
just lamentation, 3. To remedy this evil is the design of the ensuing treatise,
4. To which, therefore, the author earnestly bespeaks the attention of the
reader, as his own heart is deeply interested in it, 5, 6. A general plan of
the work; of which the fifteen first chapters relate chiefly to the RISE of
Religion, and the remaining chapters to its PROGRESS, 7. -- 12. The chapter
concludes with a prayer for the success of the work.

1. WHEN we look round about us with an attentive eye, and consider the
characters and pursuits of men, we plainly see, that though, in the original
constitution of their natures, they only, of all the creatures that dwell on
the face of the earth, be capable of religion, yet many of them shamefully
neglect it. And whatever different notions people may entertain of what they
call religion, all must agree in owning, that it is very far from being an
universal thing.

2. Religion, in its most general view, is such a sense of God on the soul, and
such a conviction of our obligations to him, and of our dependence upon him, as
shall engage us to make it our great care to conduct ourselves in a manner
which we have reason to believe will be pleasing to him. Now, when we have
given this plain account of religion, it is by no means necessary that we
should search among the savages of the African or American nations, to find
instances of those who are strangers to it. When we view the conduct of the
generality of people at home, in a Christian and Protestant nation, in a nation
whose obligations to God have been singular, almost beyond those of any other
people under Heaven, will any one presume to say, that religion has an
universal reign among us? will any one suppose that it prevails in every life?
that it reigns in every heart? alas! the avowed infidelity, the profanation of
the name and day of God, the drunkenness, the lewdness, the injustice the
falsehood, the pride, the prodigality, the base selfishness, the stupid
insensibility of the spiritual and eternal interests of themselves and others,
which so generally appear among us, loudly proclaim the contrary. So that one
would imagine, upon this view, that thousands and ten thousands thought the
neglect and even the contempt, of religion were a glory rather than a reproach.
And where is the neighborhood, where is the society, where is the happy
family, (consisting of any considerable number,) in which, on a more exact
examination, we find reason to say, "Religion fills even this little circle?"
There is, perhaps, a freedom from any gross and scandalous immoralities, an
external decency of behavior, an attendance on the outward forms of worship in
public, and (here and there) in the family; yet amidst all this, there is
nothing which looks like the genuine actings of the spiritual and divine life.
There is no appearance of love to God, no reverence for his presence, no desire
of his favor as the highest good: there is no cordial belief of the gospel of
salvation; no eager solicitude to escape that condemnation which we have
incurred by sin; no hearty concern to secure that eternal life which Christ has
purchased and secured for his people, and which he freely promises to all who
will receive him. Alas! whatever the love of a friend, or ever of a parent, can
do: whatever inclination there may (...) to hope all things, and believe all
things, the most favorable; evidence to the contrary will force itself upon
the mind, and extort the unwilling conclusion, that, whatever else may be
amiable in this dear friend, in that favorite child, "religion dwells not in
its breast."

3. To a heart that firmly believes the gospel, and views persons and things in
the light of eternity, this is one of the most mournful considerations in the
world. And indeed, to such a one, all the other calamities and evils of human
nature appears trifles when compared with this, the absence of real religion,
and that contrariety to it, which reigns in so many thousands of mankind. Let
this be cured, and all the other evils will easily be borne; nay, good will be
extracted out of them: but if this continue, it "brings forth fruit unto
death Romans vii. 5.
;" and in consequence of it, multitudes, who share the entertainments of an
indulgent Providence with us, and are at least allied to us by the bond of the
same common nature, must, in a few years, be swept away into "utter
destruction," and be plunged beyond redemption "into everlasting burnings."

4. I doubt not but that there are many, under those various forms of religious
profession, which have so unhappily divided us in this nation, who are not only
lamenting this in public, if their office in life calls them to an opportunity
of doing it, but are likewise mourning before God in secret, under a sense of
this sad state of things; and who can appeal to him that searches all hearts,
as to the sincerity of their desires to revive the languishing cause of vital
Christianity and substantial piety, and, among the rest, the author of this
treatise, may with confidence, say, it is this which animates him to the
present attempt, in the midst of so many other cares and labors; for this, he
is willing to lay aside many of those curious amusements in science which might
suit his own private taste, and perhaps open a way to some reputation in the
learned world: for this, he is willing to wave the labored ornaments of
speech, that he may, if possible, descend to the capacity of the lowest part of
mankind: for this, he would endeavor to convince the judgment, and to reach
the heart, of every reader: and in a word, for this, without any dread of the
name of an Enthusiast, whoever may at random throw it out upon the occasion, he
would, as it were, enter with you into your closet from day to day, and with
all plainness and freedom, as well as seriousness, would discourse to you of
the great things which he has learnt from the Christian revelation, and on
which he assuredly knows your everlasting happiness to depend: that if you
hitherto have lived without religion, you may now be awakened to the
consideration of it, and may be instructed in its nature and importance; or
that, if you are already, through divine grace, experimentally acquainted with
it, you may be assisted to make a greater progress.

5. But he earnestly entreats this favor of you, that, as it is plainly a
serious business we are entering upon, you would be pleased to give him a
serious and an attentive hearing. He entreats that these addresses, and these
meditations, may be perused at leisure, and be thought over in retirement; and
that you would do him and yourself the justice to believe the representations
which are here made, and the warnings which are here given, to proceed from
sincerity and love; from an heart which would not designedly give one moment's
unnecessary pain to the meanest creature on the face of the earth, and much
less to any human mind. If he be importunate, it is, because he at least
imagines that there is just reason for it; and fears, least amidst the
multitudes who are undone by the utter neglect of religion, and among those who
are greatly damaged for want of a more resolute and constant attendance to it:
this may be the case of some into whose hands this treatise may fall.

6. He is a barbarian, and deserve, not to be called a man, who can look on the
sorrows of his fellow creatures without drawing out his soul unto them, and
wishing, at least, that it were in the power of his hand to help them. Surely
earth would be in Heaven to that man who could go about from place to place,
scattering happiness wheresoever he came, though it were only the body that he
were capable of relieving, and though he could impart nothing better than the
happiness of a mortal life. But the happiness rises in proportion to the nature
and degree of the good which he imparts. Happy, are we ready to say, were those
honored servants of Christ, who in the early days of his church, were the
benevolent and sympathising instruments of conveying miraculous healing to
those whose cases seemed desperate; who poured in upon the blind and the deaf
the pleasures of light and sound, and called up the dead to the powers of
action and enjoyment. But this is an honor and happiness which it is not fit
for God commonly to bestow on mortal men. Yet there have been in every age,
and, blessed be his name, there still are those, whom he has condescended to
make his instruments in conveying nobler and more lasting blessings than these
to their fellow creatures. Death has long since veiled the eyes and stopped
the ears of those who were the subjects of miraculous healing, and recovered
its empire over those who were once recalled from the grave. But the souls who
were prevailed on to receive the gospel live for ever. God has owned the
labors of his faithful ministers in every age to produce these blessed
effects; and some of them being dead, yet speaks Heb. xi. 4.
with power and success in this important cause. Wonder not then if, living and
dying, I be ambitious of this honor; and if "my mouth be freely opened," where
I can truly say, "My heart is enlarged 2 Cor. vi. 11.
."

7. Informing my general plan, I have been solicitous that this little treatise
might, if possible, be useful to all its readers, and contain something
suitable to each. I will therefore take the man, and the Christian, in a great
variety of circumstances. I will first suppose myself addressing to one of the
vast number of thoughtless creatures, who have hitherto been utterly
unconcerned about religion; and will try what can be done, by all plainness and
earnestness of address, to awaken him from this fatal lethargy, to a care
(chap. 2.) an affectionate and an immediate care about it, (chap. 3.) I will
labor to fix a deep and awful conviction of guilt upon his conscience. (chap.
4.), and to strip him of his vain excuses and his flattering hopes, (chap. 5.)
I will read to him, oh! that I could fix on his heart, that sentence, that
dreadful sentence, which a righteous and an Almighty God has denounced against
him as a sinner, (chap. 6.); and endeavor to show him in how helpless a state
he lies under this condemnation, as to any capacity he has of delivering
himself, (chap. 7.) But I do not mean to leave any in so terrible a situation;
I will joyfully proclaim the glad tidings of pardon and salvation by Christ
Jesus our Lord, which is all the support and confidence of my own soul, (chap.
8.); and then I will give some general view of the way by which this salvation
is to be obtained, (chap. 9.); urging the sinner to accept of it as
affectionately as I can, (chap. 10.); though nothing can be sufficiently
pathetic, where, as in this matter, the life of an immortal soul is in question.

8. Too probable it is, that some will, after all this, remain insensible; and
therefore, that their sad case may not incumber the following articles, I shall
here take a solemn leave of them, (chap. 11.); and then shall turn and address
myself, as compassionately as I can to a most contrary character; I mean to a
soul overwhelmed with a sense of the greatness of its sins, and trembling under
the burden, as if there were no more hope for him in God, (chap. 12.) and that
nothing may be omitted which may give solid peace to the troubled spirit, I
shall endeavor to guide its enquiries as to the evidences of sincere
repentance and faith, (chap. 13.); which will be farther illustrated by a more
particular view of the several branches of the Christian temper, such as may
serve at once to assist the reader in judging what he is, and to show him what
he should labor to be, (chap. 14) This will naturally lead to a view of the
need we have of the influences of the blessed Spirit to assist us in the
important and difficult work of the true Christian; and of the encouragement we
have to hope for these divine assistances, (chap. 15.) In an humble dependence
on which I shall then enter on the consideration of several cases, which often
occur in the Christian life, in which, particular addresses to the conscience
may be requisite and useful.

9. As some peculiar difficulties and discouragements attend the first entrance
on a religious course, it will here be our first care to animate the young
convert against them, (chap. 16.) And that it may be done more effectually, I
shall urge a solemn dedication of himself to God, (chap. 17.); to be confirmed
by entering into the full communion of the church by an approach to the sacred
table, (chap. 18.) That these engagements may be more happily fulfilled, we
shall endeavor to draw a more particular plan of that devout, regular, and
accurate course, which ought daily to be attended to, (chap. 19.); and because
the idea will probably rise so much higher than what is the general practice,
even of good men, we shall endeavor to persuade the reader to make the
attempt, hard as it may seem, (chap. 20.); and shall caution him against
various temptations, which might otherwise draw him aside to negligence and
sin, (chap. 21.)

10. Happy will it be for the reader, if these exhortations and cautions to be
attended to with becoming regard: but as it is, alas! too probable, that,
notwithstanding all, the infirmities of nature will sometimes prevail, we shall
consider the case of deadness and langour in religion, which often steals upon
us by insensible degrees, (chap. 22.); from whence there is too easy a passage
to that terrible one of a return unto known and deliberate sin, (chap. 23.) And
as the one or the other of these tends, in a proportionable degree, to provoke
the blessed God to hide his face, and his injured Spirit to withdraw, that
melancholy condition will be taken into a particular survey, (chap. 24.) I
shall then take notice also of the case of great and heavy afflictions in life,
(chap. 25.) a discipline which the best of men have reason to expect,
especially when they backslide from God, and yield to their spiritual enemies.

11. Instances of this kind will, I fear, be too frequent; yet, I trust, there
will be many others, whose path, like the dawning light," will shine more and
more unto the perfect day Prove. iv. 18.
. And therefore we shall endeavor, in the best manner we can, to assist the
Christian in passing a true judgment on the growth of grace in his heart,
(chap. 26.) as we had done before in judging of its sincerity. And as nothing
conduces more to the advancement of grace than the lively exercise of love to
God, a holy joy in him, we shall here remind the real Christian of those
mercies which tend to excite that love and joy (chap. 27.) and, in the views of
them, to animate him to those vigorous efforts of usefulness in life which so
well becomes his character, and will have so happy an efficacy on brightening
his crown, (chap. 28.) Supposing him to act accordingly, we shall then labor
to illustrate and assist the delight with which he may look forward to the
awful solemnities of death and judgment, (chap. 29.): and shall close the scene
by accompanying him, as it were, to the nearest confines of that dark valley,
through which he is to pass to glory; giving him such directions as may seem
most subservient to his honoring God, and adorning religion, by his dying
behavior, (chap. 30.) Nor am I without a pleasing hope, that, through the
divine blessing and grace, I may be, in some instances, so successful as to
leave those triumphing in the views of judgment and eternity, and glorifying
God by a truly Christian life and death, whom I found trembling in the
apprehensions of future misery; or, perhaps, in a much more dangerous and
miserable circumstance than that; I mean, entirely forgetting the prospect, and
sunk into the most stupid insensibility of those things, for an attendance to
which the human mind was formed, and in comparison of which all the pursuits of
this transitory life are emptier than wind, and lighter than a feather.

12. Such a variety of heads must, to be sure, be handled but briefly, as we
intend to bring them within the bulk of a moderate volume. I shall not,
therefore, discuss them, as a preacher might properly do in sermons, in which
the truths of religion are professedly to be explained and taught, defended and
improved, in a wide variety, and long detail of propositions, arguments,
objections, replies, and inferences, marshalled, and numbered under their
distinct generals. I shall here speak in a looser and freer manner, as a friend
to a friend; just as I would do if I were to be in person admitted to a private
audience by one whom I tenderly loved, and whose circumstance and character I
knew to be like that which the title of one chapter or another of this treatise
describes. And when I have discoursed with him a little while, which will
seldom be so long as half an hour, I shall, as it were, step aside, and leave
him to meditate on what be has heard, or endeavor to assist him in such
servent addresses to God as it may be proper to mingle with those meditations.
In the mean time, I will here take the liberty to pray over my reader and my
work, and to commend it solemnly to the divine blessing, in token of my deep
conviction of an entire dependence upon it.. And I am well persuaded, that
sentiments like these are common, in the general, to every faithful minister,
to every real Christian.

A PRAYER for the Success, of this work, in promoting the Rise and Progress of
Religion.
OH thou great eternal Original, and Author of all created being and happiness!
I adore thee, who have made man a creature capable of religion, and have
bestowed this dignity and felicity upon our nature, that it may be taught to
say, Where is "God our Maker Job. xxxv. 10.
?" I lament that degeneracy spread over the whole human race which has "turned
our glory into shame, Hos. iv. 7.
," and has rendered the forgetfulness of God, unnatural as it is,) so common,
and so universal a disease. Holy Father, we know, it is thy presence, and thy
teaching alone, that can reclaim thy wandering children; can impress a sense of
divine things on the heart, and render that sense lasting and effectual. From
thee proceed all good purposes and desires; and this desire above all, of
diffusing wisdom, piety, and happiness in this world, which, (though sunk in
such deep apostasy,) thine infinite mercy has not utterly forsaken.

Thou know, O Lord, the hearts of the children of men 2 Chronicles. vi. 30.
; and an upright soul, in the midst of all the censures and suspicions it may
meet with, rejoices in thine intimate knowledge of its most secret sentiments
and principles of action. Thou know the sincerity and fervency with which
thine unworthy servant desires to spread the knowledge of thy name, and the
favor of thy gospel, among all to whom this work may reach. Thou know, that
had thou given him an abundance of this world, is would have been, in his
esteem, the noblest pleasure that abundance could have afforded to have been
thine almoner, in distributing thy bounties to the indigent and necessitous,
and so causing the sorrowful heart to rejoice in thy goodness dispensed through
his hands. Thou know, that had thou given him, either by ordinary or
extraordinary methods, the gift of healing, it would have been his daily
delight to relieve the pains, the maladies, and the infirmities, of men's
bodies; to have seen the languishing countenance brightened by returning health
and cheerfulness; and much more, to have beheld the roving distracted mind
reduced to calmness and serenity in the exercise of its rational faculties. Yet
happier, far happier, will he think himself, in those humble circumstances in
which thy Providence has placed him, if thou vouchsafe to honor these his
feeble endeavors as the means of relieving and enriching men's minds; of
recovering them from the madness of a sinful state, and bringing back thy
reasonable creatures to the knowledge, the service, and the enjoyment of their
God; or of improving those who are already reduced.

O may it have that blessed influence on the person, whosoever he be, that is
now reading these lines, and on all who may read or hear them! Let not my Lord
be angry, if I presume to ask, that however weak and contemptible this work may
seem in the eyes of the children of this world, and however imperfect it really
be, as well as the author of it unworthy, it may, nevertheless, live before
thee; and, through a divine power, be mighty to produce the rise and progress
of religion in the minds of multitudes, in distant places, and in generations
yet to come! Impute it not, O God, as a culpable ambition, if I desire, that
whatever becomes of my name, about which I would not lose one thought before
thee, that work, to which I am now applying myself in thy strength, may be
completed, and pr^pogated far abroad; that it may reach to those that are yet
unborn, and teach them thy name and thy praise, when the author has long dwelt
in the dust: that so, when he shall appear before thee in the great day of
final account, his joy may be increased, and his crown brightened, by numbers
before unknown to each other, and to him! But if this petition be too great to
be granted to one who pretends no claim, but thy sovereign grace, to hope for
being favored with the least, give him to be, in thine Almighty hand, the
blessed instrument, of converting and saving one soul: and, if it be but one,
and that the weakest and meanest of those who are capable of receiving this
address, it shall be most thankfully accepted as a rich recompense for all the
thought and labor it may cost; and though it should be amidst a thousand
disappointments with respect to others, yet it shall be the subject of immortal
songs of praise to thee, Oh, blessed God, for and by every soul, whom, through
the blood of Jesus, and the grace of thy Holy Spirit, thou have saved: and
everlasting honors shall be ascribed to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Spirit, by the innumerable company of angels, and by the general assembly
and church of the firstborn in heaven. Amen.

CHAP. II. The careless Sinner awakened.
It is too supposeable a case that this treatise may come into such hands, 1,
2. Since many, not grossly vicious, fall under that character, 3, 4. A more
particular illustration of this case, with an appeal to the reader whether it
be not his own, 5, 6. Expostulation with such, 7, 9; more particularly, (1)
From acknowledged principles, relating to the nature of God, his universal
presence, agency, and perfections, 10, 12, (2.) From a view of personal
obligations to him, 13, (3.) From the danger of this neglect, when considered
in its aspect on a future state, 14. An appeal to the conscience, as already
convinced, 15. Transition to the subject of the next chapter, 16. The
meditation of a sinner, who, having been long thoughtless, begins to be
awakened.

1. SHAMEFULLY and fatally as religion is neglected in the world, yet, blessed
be God, it has some sincere disciples; children of Wisdom, by whom, even in
this foolish and degenerate age, it "is justified Matthew. xi. 19.
;" who having, by divine grace, been brought to the knowledge of God in Christ,
have faithfully devoted their hearts to him, and, by a natural consequence, are
devoting their lives to his service. Could I be sure this treatise would fall
into no other hands but theirs, my work would be shorter, easier, and
pleasanter.

2. But, among the thousands that neglect religion, it is more than possible
that some of my readers may be included; and I am so deeply affected with their
unhappy case, that the temper of my heart, as well as the proper method of my
subject, ^^ds me, in the first place, to address myself to such; to apply to
every one of them: and therefore, to you, O reader, whoever you are, who may
come under the denomination of a careless sinner.

3. Be not, I beseech you, angry at the name. The physicians of souls must
speak plainly, or they may murder those whom they should cure. I would make no
harsh and ^nreasonable supposition. I would charge you with nothing more than
is absolutely necessary to convince you that you are the person to whom I
speak. I will not, therefore, imagine you to be a profane and abandoned
profligate. I will not suppose that you allow yourself to blaspheme God, to
dishonor his name by customary swearing, or grossly to violate the sabbath, or
commonly to neglect the solemnities of his public worship: I will not imagine
that you have injured your neighbors in their lives, their chastity, or their
possessions, either by violence, or by fraud; or that you have scandalously
debased the rational nature of man by that vile intemperance which transforms
us into the worst kind of brutes, or something beneath them.

4. In opposition to all this, I will suppose that you believe the existence
and providence of God, and the truth of Christianity as a revelation from him:
of which, if you have any doubt, I must desire that you would immediately seek
your satisfaction elsewhere In such a case, I beg leave to refer the reader to
my three sermons on the Evidence of Christianity; the last of the ten on the
Power and Grace of Christ: in which he may see the hitherto unshaken
foundations of my own faith, in a short, and, I hope, a clear view.
. I say, immediately: because not to believe it, is, in effect, to disbelieve
it; and will make your ruin equally certain, though, perhaps, it may leave it
less aggravated, than if contempt and opposition had been added to suspicion
and neglect. But, supposing you to be a nominal Christian, and not a Deist or a
Skeptic; I will also suppose your conduct among men to be not only blameless,
but amiable; and that they who know you most intimately, must acknowledge that
you are just and sober, humane and courteous, compassionate and liberal; yet,
with all this, you may "lack that one thing Mark. x. 21.
," on which your eternal happiness depends.

5. I beseech you, reader, whoever you are, that you would look seriously into
your own heart, and ask it this one plain question, "Am I truly religious?" Is
the love of God the governing principle (...) my life? Do I walk under a sense
of his presence? Do I converse with him from day to day, in the exercise of
prayer and praise? And am I, on the whole, making his service my business and
my delight, regarding him as my Master and my Father?

6. It is my present business only to address myself to the person whose
conscience answers in the negative. And I would address with equal plainness,
and equal freedom, to high and low, to rich and poor: to you who (as the
Scripture, with a dreadful propriety, expresses it) "live without God in the
world Ephesians. ii. 12.
;" and while, in words and forms, you "own God, deny him in your actions Tit.
i. 16.
," and behave yourselves in the main, (a few external ceremonies only
excepted,) just as you would do if you believed, and were sure, there was no
God. Unhappy creature, whoever you are! your own heart condemns you
immediately; and how much more that God who is greater than your heart, and
knows all things 1 John iii. 20.
. He is "in secret Matthew. iv. 6.
," as well as in public; and words cannot express the delight with which his
children converse with him alone: but in secret you acknowledge him not; you
neither pray to him, nor praise him in your retirements. Accounts,
correspondencies, studies, may often bring you into your closet; but if nothing
but devotion were to be transacted there, it would be to you quite an
unfrequented place. And thus you go on from day to day, in a continual
forgetfulness of God; and are as thoughtless about religion, as if you had long
since demonstrated it to yourself that it was a mere dream. If, indeed, you are
sick, you will perhaps cry to God for health; in any extreme danger you will
lift up your eyes and voice for deliverance; but as for the pardon of sin, and
the other blessings of the gospel, you are not at all inwardly solicitous about
them, though you profess to believe that the gospel is divine, and the
blessings of it eternal. All your thoughts, and all your hours, are divided
between the business and amusements of life: and if, now and then, an awful
providence, or a serious sermon or book, awakens you, it is but a few days, or
it may be, a few hours, and you are the same careless creature you ever were
before. On the whole, you act as if you were resolved to put it to the venture,
and, at your own expense, to make the experiment, whether the consequences of
neglecting religion be indeed as terrible as its ministers and friends have
represented. Their remonstrances do, indeed, sometimes force themselves upon
you, as (considering the age and country in which you live) it is hardly
possible entirely to avoid them; but you have, it may be, found out the art of
Isaiah's people, Hearing to hear, and not understand; and seeing to see, and
not perceive; your heart is waxed gross, your eyes are closed, and your ears
heavy Isa. vi. 9, 10.
. Under the very ordinances of worship, your thoughts "are at the ends of the
earth Prove. xvii. 24.
." Every amusement of the imagination is welcome, if it may but lead away your
mind from so insipid and so disagreeable a subject as religion. And, probably,
the very last time you were in a worshipping assembly, you managed just as you
would have done if you had thought God know nothing of your behavior; or as if
you did not think it worth one single care whether he were pleased or
displeased with it.

7. Alas! is it then come to this, with all your belief of God, and providence
and scripture! that religion is not worth a thought! that it is not worth one
hour's serious consideration and reflection, what God and Christ are, and what
you yourself are, and what you must hereafter be? Where then are all your
rational faculties? How are they employed; or rather, how are they stupefied
and benumbed?

8. The certainty and importance of the things of which I speak are so evident,
from the principles which you yourselves grant, that one might almost set a
child or an idiot to reason upon them; and yet they are neglected by those who
are grown up to understanding, and; perhaps, some of them to such refinement of
understanding, that they would think themselves greatly injured if they were
not to be reckoned among the politer and the more learned part of mankind.

9. But it is not your neglect, Sirs, that can destroy the being or importance
of such things as these. It may indeed destroy you, but it cannot in the least
affect them. Permit me, therefore, having been myself awakened, to come to each
of you, and say, as the mariners did to Jo^^h, while asleep in the midst of a
much less dangerous storm, "What "meanest thou, O s^eeper? Arise, and call upon
"thy God Jonah i. 6.
Acts xvii. 28.
." Do you doubt as to the reasonableness, or necessity, of doing it? I will
demand, and answer me Job xxxviii. 3.
: Answer me to your own conscience, as one that must, ere long, render another
kind of account.

10. You own that there is a God, and well you may; for you cannot open your
eyes but you must see the evident proofs of his being, his presence, and his
agency You behold him around you in every object: you feel him within you, if I
may so speak, in every vein, and in every nerve: you see, and you feel, not
only that he has formed you with an exquisite wisdom, which no mortal man
could ever fully explain or comprehend; but that he is continually near you,
wherever you are, and however you are employed, by day, or by night; "in him
you live, and move, and have your being Job xxxviii. 3.
." Common sense will tell you, that it is not your own wisdom, and power, and
attention, that causes your heart to beat, and your blood to circulate; that
draws in, and sends out, that breath of life, that precarious breath of a most
uncertain life, "that is in your nostrils Isa. ii. 22.
." These things are done when you sleep as well as in those waking moments,
when you think not of the circulation of the blood, nor of the necessity of
breathing, nor, so much as recollect that you have a heart and lungs. Now, what
is this but the hand of God perpetually supporting and actuating those curious
machines that he has made?

11. Nor is this his care limited to you; but, if you look all around you, far
as your views can reach, you see it extending itself on every side; and, oh,
how much farther than you can trace it! Reflect on the light and heat which the
sun every where disperses? on the air which surrounds all our globe, on the
right temperature of which the life of the whole human race depends, and that
of all the inferior creatures which dwell on the earth. Think of the suitable
and plentiful provision made for man and beast: the grass the grain, the
variety of fruits, and herbs, and flowers; every thing that nourishes us, every
thing that delight us; and say, whether it do not speak plainly and loudly that
our almighty Maker is near, and that he is careful of us, and kind to us. And
while all these things proclaim his goodness, do they not also proclaim his
power? For what power has any thing comparable to that which furnishes out
these gifts of royal bounty; and which, unwearied and unchanged, produces
continually, from day to day, and from age to age, such astonishing and
magnificent effects over the face of the whole earth, and through all the
regions of heaven?

12. It is then evident, that God is present, present with you at this moment;
even God, your Creator and preserver, God, the Creator and Preserver of the
whole visible and invisible world. And is he not present as a most observant
and attentive Being? He that formed the eye, shall not he see? He that planted
the ear, shall not he hear? He that teaches man knowledge, that gives him his
rational faculties, and pours in on his opening mind all the light it receives
by them, "shall not he know Psalm xciv. 9, 10.
?" He who sees all the necessities of his creatures, so seasonably to provide
for them, shall he not see their actions too; and seeing, shall he not judge of
them? Has he given us a sense and discernment of what is good and evil, of what
is true and false, of what is fair and deformed in temper and conduct? and has
he himself no discernment of these things? Trifle not with your conscience,
which tells you at once, that he judges of it, and approves or condemns, as it
is decent or indecent, reasonable or unreasonable; and that the judgment which
he passes is of infinite importance to all his creatures.

13. And now, to apply all this to your own case, let me seriously a^ you, Is
it a decent and reasonable thing that this great and glorious Benefactor should
be neglected by his rational creatures? By those that are capable of attaining
to some knowledge of him, and presenting to him some homage? Is it decent and
reasonable that he should he forgotten and neglected by you? Are you alone, of
all the works of his hands, forgotten and neglected by him? Oh sinner,
thoughtless as you are, you cannot dare to say that, or even to think it. You
need not go back to the helpless days of your infancy and childhood to convince
you of the contrary; you need not, in order to this, to recollect the
remarkable deliverances which, perhaps, were wrought out for you many years
ago: the repose of the last night, the refreshment and comfort you have
received this day; yea, the mercies you are receiving this very moment, bear
witness to him; and yet you regard him not. Ungrateful creature that you are!
could you have treated any human benefactor thus? Could you have borne to
neglect a kind parent, or any generous friend that had but for a few months
acted the part of a parent to you? to have taken no notice of him, while in his
presence; to have returned him no thanks; to have had no contrivances to make
some little acknowledgment for all his goodness? Human nature, bad as it is, is
not fallen so low; nay, the brutal nature is not so low as this. Surely every
domestic animal around you, must shame such ingratitude. If you do but for a
few days take a little kind notice of a dog, and feed him with the refuse of
your table, he will wait upon you, and love to be near you; he will be eager to
follow you from place to place? and when after a little absence, you return
home, will try, by a thousand fond transported motions, to tell you how much he
rejoices to see you again. Nay brutes, far less sagacious and apprehensive,
have some sense of our kindness, and express it after their way; as the blessed
God condescends to observe, in this very view in which I mention it, the dull
ox knows his owner, and the stupid ass his master's crib Isa. i. 3.
: what lamentable degeneracy therefore is it that you do not know, that you,
who have been numbered among God's professed people, do not, and, will not,
consider your numberless obligations to him?

14. Surely, if you have any ingenuity of temper, you must be ashamed and
grieved in the review; but if you have not, give me leave farther to
expostulate with you on this head, by setting it in something of a different
light. Can you think yourselves safe while you are acting a part like this? Do
you not in your conscience believe there will be a future judgment? Do you not
believe there is an invisible and eternal world? As professed Christians, we
all believe it; for it is no controverted point, but displayed in Scripture
with so clear an evidence, that, subtle and ingenious as men are in error,
they have not yet found out a way to evade it. And believing this, do you not
see, that while you are thus wandering from God, destruction and misery are in
your ways Romans iii. 16.
? Will this indolence and negligence of temper, be any security to you? will it
guard you from death? will it excuse you from judgment? You might much more
reasonably expect, that shutting your eyes would be a defense against the rage
of a devouring lion; or that looking another way should secure your body from
being pierced by a bullet or a sword. When God speaks of the extravagant folly
of some thoughtless creatures, who would hearken to no admonition now, he adds,
in a very awful manner, "in the latter day they shall consider it perfectly
Jer. xxiii. 20.
." And is not this applicable to you? Must you not, sooner or later, be brought
to think of these things whether you will or no? And, in the mean time, do you
not certainly know, that timely and serious reflection upon them is, through
divine grace, the only way to prevent your ruin?

15. Yes, sinner, I need not multiply words on a subject like this. Your
conscience is already inwardly convinced, though your pride may be unwilling to
own it. And, to prove it, let me ask you one question more: Would you, upon any
terms and considerations whatever, come to a resolution, absolutely to dismiss
all further thought of religion, and all care about it, from this day and hour,
and to abide by the consequences of that neglect? I believe hardly any man
living would be bold enough to determine upon this; I believe most of my
readers would be ready to tremble at the thought of it.

. 16. But if it be necessary to take these things into consideration at all, it
is necessary to do it quickly; for life itself is not so very long, nor so
certain, that a wise man should risk much upon its continuance. And I hope to
convince you, when I have another hearing, that it is necessary to do it
immediately; and that next to the madness of resolving you will not think of
religion at all, is that of saying you will think of it hereafter. In the mean
time, pause on the hints which have been already given, and they will prepare
you to receive what is to be added on that head.

The MEDITATION of a Sinner, who was once thoughtless, but begins to be
awakened.
AWAKE, oh my forgetful soul, awake from these wandering dreams; turn thee from
this chase of vanity, and for a little while be persuaded, by all these
considerations, to look forward, and to look upwards, at least, for a few
moments. Sufficient are the hours and days given to the labors and amusements
of life; grudge not a short allotment of minutes to view thyself and thine own
more immediate concerns; to reflect who, and what thou art; how it comes to
pass that thou art here, and what thou must quickly be!

It is indeed as thou have now seen it represented. Oh, my soul: thou art the
creature of God, formed and furnished by him, and lodged in a body which he
provided, and which he supports; a body in which he intended thee only a
transitory abo^^. Oh, think how soon "this tabernacle must be dissolved 2 Cor.
v. i.
," and "thou must return to God Eccles. xii. 7.
." And shall He, the one infinite, eternal, ever blessed, and ever glorious
Being, shall He be least of all regarded by thee? Will thou live and die with
this character, saying by every action of every day unto God, Depart from me,
for I desire not the knowledge of thy ways Job. xxi. 14.
? The morning, the day, the evening, the night, every period of time, has its
excuses for this neglect. But, oh my soul, what will these excuses appear when
examined by his penetrating eye! They may delude me, but they cannot impose
upon him.

Oh, thou injured, neglected, provoked Benefactor! when I think but for a
moment or two, of all thy greatness, and of all thy goodness, I am astonished
at this insensibility which has prevailed in my heart, and even still
prevails. I blush, and am confounded to lift up my face before thee Ezra ix. 6.
. On the most transient review, I see that I have played the fool, that I have
erred exceedingly 1 Samuel xxvi. 21.
; and yet this stupid heart of mine would make its having neglected thee so
long, a reason for going on to neglect thee. I own it might justly be expected
that, with regard to thee, every one of thy rational creatures should be all
duty and love; that each heart should be full of a sense of thy presence; and
that a care to please thee should swallow up every other care; yet thou "have
not been in all my thoughts Psalm. x. 4.
;" and religion, the end and glory of my nature, has been so strangely
overlooked, that I have hardly ever seriously asked my own heart what it is. I
know, if matters rest here, I perish; and yet I feel in my perverse nature a
sacred indisposition to pursue these thoughts; a proneness, if not entirely to
dismiss them, yet to lay them aside for the present. My mind is perplexed and
divided; but I am sure thou who made me know what is best for me. I,
therefore, beseech thee, that thou will, for thy name's sake, lead me and guide
me Psalm. xxxi. 3.
. Let me not delay till it is forever too late; "pluck me as a brand out of the
burning Amos iv. 11.
." Oh, break this fatal enchantment that holds down my affections to objects
which my judgment comparatively despises! and let me, at length, come into so
happy a state of mind, that I may not be afraid to think of thee and of myself;
and may not be tempted to wish, that thou had not made me; or that thou
could for ever forget me; that it may not be my best hope to perish like the
brutes.

If what I shall farther read here be agreeable to truth and reason; if it be
calculated to promote my happiness, and is to be regarded as an intimation of
thy will and pleasure to me, oh, God, let me hear and obey; let the words of
thy servant, when pleading thy cause, be like goads to pierce into my mind; and
let me rather feel, and smart, than die! let them be as nails fastened in a
sure place Eccl. xii. 11.
: that whatever mysteries as yet unknown, or whatever difficulties there be in
religion, if it be necessary, I may not finally neglect it; and that if it be
expedient to attend immediately to it, I may no longer delay that attendance:
And, oh, let thy grace teach me the lesson I am so slow to learn, and conquer
that strong opposition which I feel in my heart against the very thought of it!
Hear these broken cries for the sake of thy Son, who has taught and saved many
a creature as untractable as I, and can "out of stones raise up children to
Abraham Matthew. iii, 9.
!" Amen.

CHAP. III. The awakened Sinner urged to immediate Consideration, and cautioned
against Delay.
Sinners when awakened, inclinable to dismiss convictions for the present, 1.
An immediate regard to religion urged, 2. (1.) From the excellency and
pleasures of the thing itself, 3. (2.) From the uncertainty of that future time
on which sinners presume, compared with the sad consequences of being cut off
in sin, 4. (3.) From the immutability of God's present demands, 5. (4.) From
the tendency which delay has to make a compliance with these demands more
difficult than it is at present, 6. (5.) From the danger of God's withdrawing
his Spirit, compared with the dreadful case of a sinner, given up by it, 7.;
which probably is now the case of many, 8. Since, therefore, on the whole,
whatever the event be, delays must prove matter of lamentation, 9. The chapter
concludes with an exhortation against yielding to them, 10.: and a prayer
against temptations of that kind.

1. I HOPE my last address so far awakened the convictions of my reader, as to
bring him to this purpose, That some time or other he would attend to religious
considerations. But give me leave to ask earnestly and punctually, "When that
shall be?" -- Go thy way for this time, and at a more convenient season I will
send for thee, was the language and the ruin of unhappy Felix Acts. xxiv, 25.
, when he trembled under the reasonings and expostulations of the apostle. The
tempter presumed not to urge that he should give up all thoughts of repentance
and reformation; but only that, considering the present hurry of his affairs,
(as no doubt they were many,) he should defer it to a longer day. The artifice
succeeded, and Felix was undone.

2. Will you, reader, dismiss me thus? For your own sake, and out of tender
compassion to your perishing immortal soul, I would not willingly take up with
such a dismission and excuse. No, not though you should fix a time; though you
should determine on the next year, or month, or week, or day. I would turn upon
you, with all the eagerness and tenderness of friendly importunity, and entreat
you to bring the matter to an issue even now; for if you say, I will think on
these things tomorrow, I shall have little hope, and shall conclude, that all
that I have hitherto urged, and all that you have read, has been offered and
viewed in vain.

3. When I invite you to the care and practice of religion, it may seem strange
that it should be necessary for me affectionately to plead the case with you,
in order to your immediate regard and compliance. What I am inviting you to is
so noble and excellent in itself, so well worthy the dignity of our rational
nature, so suitable to it, so manly, and so wise, that one would imagine you
should take fire, as it were at the first hearing of it; yea, that so
delightful a view should presently possess your whole soul with a kind of
indignation against yourself that you pursued it no sooner. May I lift up mine
eyes and my soul to God? may I devote myself to him? may I even now commence a
friendship with him, a friendship which shall last for ever, the security, the
delight, the glory of this immortal nature of mine? And shall I draw back, and
say, Nevertheless, let me not commence this friendship too soon: let me live at
least a few weeks, or a few days longer, without God in the world? Surely it
would be much more reasonable to turn inward, and say, Oh, my soul, on what
vile husks have thou been feeding, while thine heavenly Father has been
forsaken and injured? Shall I desire to multiply the days of my poverty, my
scandal, and my misery? On this principle, surely, an immediate return to God
should, in all reason, be chosen, rather than to play the fool any longer, and
go on a little more to displease God, and thereby to starve and to wound your
own soul, even though your continuance in life were ever so certain, and your
capacity to return to God and your duty ever so entirely in your own power now,
and in every future moment, through scores of years yet to come.

4. But who, or what are you, that you should lay your account for years, or
for months to come? "What is your life?" Is it not "even as a vapor that
appears for a little time, and then vanishes away James iv, 14.
?" And what is your security, or what is your peculiar warrant, that you should
thus depend upon the certainty of its continuance? and that so absolutely a^ to
venture, as it were, to pawn your soul upon it? Why, you will perhaps say, I am
young, and in all my bloom and vigor: I see hundreds about me, who are more
than double my age, and not a few of them who seem to think it too soon to
attend to religion yet. You view the living, and you talk thus: but I beseech
you think of the dead. Return in your thoughts to those graves, in which you
have left some of your young companions and your friends. You saw them a while
ago gay and active; warm with life, and hopes, and schemes; and some of them
would have thought a friend strangely importunate that should have interrupted
them in their business, and their pleasures, with a solemn lecture of death and
eternity: yet they were then on the very borders of both. You have since seen
their corpses, or at least their coffins; and probably carried about with you
the badges of mourning which you received at their funerals. Those once
vigorous, and, perhaps, beautiful bodies of theirs, now lying mouldering in the
dust, as senseless and helpless as the most decripid pieces of human nature
which fourscore years ever brought down to it. And, what is infinitely more to
be regarded, their souls, whether prepared for this great change, or
thoughtless of it, have made their appearance before God, and are, at this
moment, fixed either in heaven or in hell. Now, let me seriously ask you, Would
it be miraculous, or would it be strange, if such an event should befall you?
How are you sure that some fatal disease shall not this day begin to work in
your veins? How are you sure that you shall ever be capable of reading or
thinking any more, if you do not attend to what you now read, and pursue the
thought which is now offering itself to your mind? This sudden alteration may,
at least, possibly happen; and if it does, it will be to you a terrible one
indeed. To be thus surprised into the presence of a forgotten God; to be torn
away, at once, from a world, to which your whole heart and soul has been
rivetted; a world, which has engrossed all your thoughts and cares, all your
desires and pursuits; and be fixed in a state, which you could never be so far
persuaded to think of, as to spend so much as one hour in serious preparation
for it: how must you even shudder at the apprehension of it, and with what
horror must it fill you? It seems matter of wonder, that, in such
circumstances, you are not almost distracted with the thoughts of the
uncertainty of life, and are not even ready to die for fear of death. To trifle
with God any longer, after so solemn an admonition as this, would be a
circumstance of additional provocation, which, after all the rest, might be
fatal: nor is there any thing that you can expect in such a case, but that he
should cut you off immediately, and teach other thoughtless creatures, by your
ruin, what a hazardous experiment they make when they act as you are acting.

. 5. And will you, after all, run this desperate risk? For what imaginable
purpose can you do it? Do you think the business of religion will become less
necessary, or more easy, by your delay? You know that it will not. You know,
that whatever the blessed God demands now, he will also demand twenty or thirty
years hence, if you should live to see the time. God has fixed the method, in
which he will pardon and accept sinners, in his gospel. And, will he ever alter
that method? or, if he will not, Can men alter it? You like not to think of
repenting, and humbling yourself before God, to receive righteousness and life
from his free grace in Christ; and you above all dislike the thought of
returning to God in the ways of holy obedience. But will he ever dispense with
any of these, and publish a new gospel, with promises of life and salvation to
impenitent unbelieving sinners, if they will but call themselves Christians,
and submit to a few external rites? How long do you think you might wait for
such a change in the constitution of things? You know death will come upon you;
and you cannot but know in your own conscience, that a general dissolution will
come upon the world long before God can thus deny himself, and contradict all
his perfections, and all his declarations.

6. Or, if his demand continue the same, as they assuredly will, do you think
any thing, which is now disagreeable to you in them, will be less disagreeable
hereafter than it is at present? Shall you live finless, when it is become more
habitual to you, and when conscience is yet more enfeebled and debauched? If
you are running with the footmen and fainting, shall you be able to contend
with the horsemen Jerem. xii, 5.
? Surely you cannot imagine it. You would not say in any distemper which
threatened your life, I will stay till I grow a little worse, and then I will
apply to a Physician: I will let my disease get a little more rooting in my
vitals, and then I will try what can be done to remove it. No; it is only where
the life of the soul is concerned that men think thus wildly: the life and
health of the body appear too precious to be thus trifled away.

7. If, after such desperate experiments, you are ever recovered, it must be by
an operation of divine grace on your soul, yet more powerful and more
wonderful, in proportion to the increasing inveteracy of your spiritual
maladies. And can you expect that the Holy Spirit should be more ready to
assist you, in consequence of your having so shamefully trifled with him, and
affronted him! he is now, in some measure, moving on your heart: if you feel
any secret relentings in it upon what you read, it is a sign you are not yet
utterly forsaken: but who can tell whether these are not the last touches he
will ever give to a heart so long hardened against him? Who can tell but God
may this day swear in his wrath, that you shall not enter into his rest Heb.
iii, 18.
? I have been telling you that you may immediately die. You own it possibly you
may. And can you think of any thing more terrible? Yes, sinner, I will tell you
of one thing more dreadful than immediate death and immediate damnation. The
blessed God may say, As for that wretched creature, who has so long trifled
with me, and provoked me, let him still live: let him live in the midst of
prosperity and plenty: let him live under the purest and most powerful
ordinances of the gospel too; that he may abuse them, to aggravate his
condemnation, and die under sevenfold guilt, and a sevenfold curse. I will
not give him the grace to think of his ways for one serious moment more; but he
shall go on from bad to worse, filling up the measure of his iniquities, till
death and destruction seize him in an unexpected hour, and wrath come upon him
to the uttermost 1 Thessalonians. ii, 16.
.

8. You think this is an uncommon case; but I fear it is much otherwise. I fear
there are few congregations where the word of God has been faithfully preached,
and where it has been long despised, especially by those whom it had once
awakened, in which the eye of God does not see a number of such wretched souls;
though it is impossible for us to pronounce upon the case who they are.

9. I pretend not to say how he will deal with you, oh reader; whether he will
immediately cut you off or seal you up under final hardness and impenitency of
heart; or whether his grace may, at length, awaken you, to consider your ways,
and to return to him, even when your heart is grown yet more obdurate than it
is at present: for to his almighty grace nothing is hard, nor even to transform
a rock of marble into a man and a saint. But this I will confidently say, That
if you delay any longer, the time will come when you will bitterly repent of
that delay; and either lament it before God in the anguish of your heart here,
or curse your own folly and madness in hell; yea, when you will wish that,
dreadful as hell is, you had rather fallen into it sooner than have lived in
the midst of so many abused mercies, to render the degrees of your punishment
more insupportable, and your sense of it more exquisitely tormenting.

. 10. I do therefore earnestly exhort you, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and by the worth, and, if I may so speak, by the blood of your immortal
and perishing soul, that you delay not a day or an hour longer. Far from giving
sleep to your eyes, or slumber to your eyelids Prove. vi, 4.
, in the continued neglect of this important concern "take with you," even now,
words, and turn unto the Lord Hos. xiv, 2.
; and before you quit the place where you now are, fall upon your knees in his
sacred presence, and pour out your heart in such language, or at least to some
such purpose as this.

A PRAYER for one who is tempted to Delay applying to Religion, though under
some Convictions of its Importance.
OH thou righteous and holy Sovereign of heaven and earth! thou God in whose
hand my breath is, and whose are all my ways Dan. v, 23.
! I confess I have been far from glorifying thee, or conducting myself
according to the intimations, or the declarations of thy will. I have therefore
reason to adore thy forbearance and goodness, that thou have not long since
stopped my breath, and "cut me off from the land of the living." I adore thy
patience, that I have not months and years ago been an inhabitant of hell;
where ten thousand delaying sinners are now lamenting their folly, and will be
lamenting it for ever. But, O God, how possible is it, that this trifling heart
of mine may, at length, betray me into the same ruin! and then, alas, into a
ruin aggravated by all this patience and forbearance of thine! I am convinced
that, sooner or later, religion must be my serious care, or I am undone; and
yet my foolish heart draws back from the yoke: yet I stretch myself upon the
bed of sloth, and cry out for a little more s^e^p, a little more slumber, a
little more fol^ing of the hands to sleep Prove. vi, 10.
. Thus does my corrupt heart plead for its own indulgence against the
convictions of my better judgment What shall I say? O Lord, save me from
myself! save me from the artifices and deceitfulness of sin; save me from the
treachery of this perverse and degenerate nature of mine, and fix upon my mind
what I have now been reading!

O Lord, am I not now instructed in truths which were before quite unknown?
Often have I been warned of the uncertainty of life, and of the greater
uncertainty of the day of salvation: and I have formed some light purposes, and
have begun to take a few irresolute steps in my way toward a return unto thee.
But, alas! I have been only, as it were, fluttering about religion, and have
never fixed upon it. All my resolutions have been scattered like smoke, or
dispersed like a cloudy vapor before the wind. Oh, that thou would now
bring these things home to my heart with a more powerful conviction than it
has ever yet felt! Oh, that thou would pursue me with them, even when I
flee from them, if I should ever grow mad enough to endeavor to escape them
any more! May thy Spirit address me in the language of effectual terror; and
add all the most powerful methods which thou know to be necessary, to awaken
me from this lethargy, which must otherwise be mortal! May the sound of these
things be in mine ears, when I go out, and when I come in, when I lie down, and
when I rise up Deuteronomy. vi, 7.
And if the repose of the night, and the business of the day, be for a while
interrupted by the impression, be it so, O God! if I may but thereby carry on
my business with thee to better purpose, and at length secure a repose in thee,
instead of all that terror which I now find, when "I think upon God, and am
troubled Psalm. lxxvii, 3.
."

O Lord, my flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments
Psalm. cxix, 120.
. I am afraid, lest, even now, that I have begun to think of religion, thou
should cut me off in this critical and important moment, before my thoughts
grow to any ripeness; and blast in eternal death the first buddings and
openings of it in my mind. But, oh, spare me, I earnestly entreat thee; for thy
mercy's sake, spare me a little longer! It may be, through thy grace, I shall
return. It may be, if thou continuest thy patience toward me a while longer,
there may be some better fruit produced by this "cumberer of the ground Luke
xiii, 7.8.
." And may the remembrance of that long forbearance, which thou have already
exercised toward me, prevent my continuing to trifle with thee, and with my
own soul! from this day, O Lord, from this hour, from this moment, may I be
able to date more lasting impressions of religion than have ever yet been made
upon my heart by all that I have ever read, or all that I have heard! Amen.

CHAP. IV. The Sinner arraigned and convicted.
Conviction of guilt necessary, 1. A charge of rebellion against God advanced,
2. Where it is shown, (1.) That all men are born under Gad's law, 3. (2.) That
no man has perfectly kept it. 4. An appeal to the reader's conscience on this
head, that he has not, 5. (3.) That to have broken it is an evil inexpressibly
great, 6.: Illustrated by a more particular view of the aggravations of this
guilt, arising, (1.) From knowledge, 7. (2.) From divine favors received, 8.
(3.) From convictions of conscience overborne, 9. (4.) From the strivings of
God's Spirit resisted, 10. (5.) From vows and resolutions broken, 11. The
charges summed up, and left upon the sinner's conscience, 12. The sinner's
confession under a general conviction of guilt.

1. AS I am attempting to lead you to true religion, and not merely to some
superficial form of it, I am sensible I can do it no otherwise than in the way
of deep humiliation. And therefore, supposing you are persuaded, through the
divine blessing on which you have before read, to take it into consideration, I
would now endeavor, in the first place, with all the seriousness I can, to
make you heartily sensible of your guilt before God. For I well know, that
unless you are convinced of this, and affected with the conviction, all the
provisions of gospel grace will be slighted, and your soul infallibly destroyed
in the midst of the noblest means appointed for its recovery. I am fully
persuaded that thousands live and die in a course of sin, without feeling upon
their hearts any sense that they are sinners; though they cannot, for shame,
but own it in words. And therefore let me deal faithfully with you, though I
may seem to deal roughly; for complaisance is not to give law to addresses in
which the life of your soul is concerned.

2. Permit me, therefore, O sinner, to consider myself at this time as an
advocate for God; as one employed in his name to plead against thee, and to
charge thee with nothing less than being a rebel and a traitor against the
sovereign Majesty of heaven and earth. However thou may he dignified or
distinguished among men; if the noblest blood run in thy veins; if thy seat
were among princes, and thine arm were "the terror of the Mighty in the land of
the living Ezekiel. xxxii, 27.
;" it would be necessary thou should be told, and told plainly, thou have
broken the "laws of the King of kings, and by the breach of it art become
obnoxious to his righteous condemnation.

3. Your conscience tells you, that you were born the natural subject of God:
born under the indispensible obligations of his law. For it is most apparent,
that the constitution of your rational nature, which makes you capable of
receiving law from God, binds you to obey it. And it is equally evident and
certain, that you have not exactly obeyed this law; nay, that you have violated
it in many aggravated instances.

4. Will you dare to deny this! Will you dare to assert your innocence!
Remember, it must be a complete innocence; yes, and a perfect righteousness
too; or it can stand you in no stead, farther than to prove that, though a
condemned sinner, you are not quite so criminal as some others, and will not
have quite so hot a place in hell as they. And when this is considered, will
you plead not guilty to the charge? Search the records of your own conscience,
for God searches them: ask it seriously, "Have you never in your lives sinned
against God?" Solomon declared, that, in his day, there was not a just man upon
earth, who did good, and sinned not Eccl. vii, 20.
:" and the apostle Paul, that "all had sinned and come short of the glory of
God Romans iii, 23.
:" that "both Jews and Gentiles," which, you know, comprehended the whole human
race,) "were all under sin Romans iii, 9.
." And can you pretend any imaginable reason to believe the world is grown so
much better since their days, that any should now plead their own case as an
exception? Or will you, however, presume to arise in the face of the omniscient
Majesty of heaven, and say, "I am the man."

5. Supposing, as before, you have been free from those gross acts of
immorality, which are so perniciou^ to society, that they have generally been
punishable by human laws; can you pretend that you have not, in smaller
instances, violated the rules of piety, of temperance, and of charity? Is there
any one person, who has intimately known you, that would not be able to testify
you had said or done something amiss? Or, if others could not convict you,
would not your own heart do it? Does it not prove you guilty of pride, of
passion, of sensuality, of an excessive fondness for the world and its
enjoyments; of murmuring, or at least of secretly repining against God under
the strokes of an afflictive providence; of mispending a great deal of your
time; of abusing the gifts of God's bounty to vain, if not (in some instances)
to pernicious purposes; of mocking him when you have pretended to engage in his
worship, "drawing near to him with your mouth and your lips, while your heart
has been far from him Isa. xxix, 13.
?" Does not conscience condemn you of some one breach of the law at least: And,
by one breach of it you are, in a sense, a scriptural sense "become guilty of
all James ii, 10.
;" and are as incapable of being justified before God by any obedience of your
own, as if you had committed ten thousand offenses. But, in reality, there are
ten thousand and more chargeable to your account. When you come to reflect on
all your sins of negligence, as well as of those of commission; on all the
instances in which you have failed to do good, when it was in the power of your
hand to do it Prove. iii, 27.
; on all the instances in which acts of devotion have been omitted, especially
in secret; and on all those cases in which you have shown a stupid disregard to
the honor of God, and to the temporal and eternal happiness of your fellow
creatures; when all these, I say, are reviewed, the number will swell beyond
possibility of account, and force you to cry out, Mine iniquities are more than
the hairs of my head Psalm. xl, 12.
. They will appear in such a light before you, that your own heart will charge
you with countless multitudes; and how much more then that God who is greater
than your heart, and knows all things 1 John iii, 20.
!

6. And say, sinner, is it a little thing that you have presumed to set light
by the authority of the God of heaven, and to violate his law, if it had been
by mere carelessness and inattention? how much more heinous, therefore, is the
guilt, when in so many instances you have done it knowingly and wilfully? Give
me leave seriously to ask you, and let me entreat you to ask your own soul,
Against whom have thou magnified thyself? against whom have thou exalted thy
voice 2 Kings xix, 22.
, or lifted up thy rebellious hand! On whose law, oh sinner, have thou presumed
to trample? And whose friendship and whose enmity have thou therefore dared to
affront? Is it a man like thyself that thou have insulted? is it only a
temporal monarch? Only one, who can kill thy body, and then has no more that
he can do Luke xii, 4.
? Nay, sinner, thou would not have dared to treat a temporal prince as thou
have treated the King eternal, immortal, and invisible 1 Timothy i, 17.
. No price could have hired thee to deal by the majesty of an earthly
sovereign, as thou have dealt by thy God before whom the cherubim and seraphim
are continually bowing. Not one opposing or complaining, disputing, or
murmuring word is heard among all the celestial legions when the intimations of
his will are published to them; and who art thou, oh wretched man, who art thou
that thou should oppose him? that thou should oppose and provoke a God of
infinite power and terror, who needs but exert one single act of his sovereign
will, and thou art in a moment stripped of every possession; cut off from every
hope; destroyed and rooted up from existence, if that were his pleasure; or,
what is inconceivably worse, consigned over to the severest and most lasting
agonies? Yet this is the God whom thou have offended; whom thou have affronted
to his face, presuming to violate his express laws in his very presence: this
is the God before whom thou stand as a convicted criminal; convicted, not of
one or two particular offenses, but of thousands and of ten thousands; of a
course and series of rebellions and provocations, in which thou have persisted,
more or less, ever since thou wast born; and the particulars of which have been
attended with almost every conceivable circumstance of aggravation. Reflect on
particulars, and deny the charge if you can.

7. If knowledge be an aggravation of guilt, thy guilt, O sinner, is greatly
aggravated? For thou wast born in Emmanuel's land, and God has "written to
thee the great things of his law, yet thou have accounted them as a strange
thing Hosea viii, 12.
." Thou have "known to do good, and have not done it James iv, 17.
;" and therefore to thee the omission of it has been sin indeed. "Have thou not
known? have thou not heard Isa. xl, 28.
?" wast thou not early taught the will of God in thine infant years? Have thou
not since received repeated lessons, by which it has been inculcated again and
again, in public and in private, by preaching and reading the word of God? nay,
has it not been thy duty, in some instances, so plain, that even without any
instruction at all thine own reason might easily have inferred it? and have
thou not also been warned of the consequences of disobedience? Have thou not
known the righteous judgment of God, that they who commit such things are
worthy of death? yet thou have, perhaps, not only done the same, but have taken
pleasure in those that do them Romans i, 32.
; have chosen them for thy most intimate friends and companions; so as thereby
to strengthen, by the force of example and converse, the hands of each other in
your iniquities.

8 Nay, more, if divine love and mercy be any aggravation of the sins committed
against it, thy crimes, O sinner, are heinously aggravated. Must thou not
acknowledge it, O foolish creature, and unwise? have thou not been "nourished
and brought up by him as his child, "and yet have rebelled against him Isa. i,
2.
?" Did not God, "take you out of the womb Psalm. xxii, 9.
?" did he not watch over you in your infant days, and guard you from a
multitude of dangers, which the most careful parent or nurse could not have
observed or warded off? Has he not given you your rational powers? and is it
not by him you have been favored with every opportunity of improving them? Has
he not every day supplied your wants with an unwearied liberality; and added,
with respect to many who will read this, the delicacies of life to its
necessary supports? Has he not "heard you cry when trouble came upon you Job.
xxvii, 9.
;" and frequently appeared for your deliverance, when in the distresses of
nature you had called upon him for help? Has he not rescued you from ruin, when
it seemed just ready to swallow you up; and healed your diseases, when it
seemed to all about you that the "residue of your days was cut off in the midst
Psalm. cii, 24.
?" Or, if it had not been so, is not this long continued and uninterrupted
health, which you have enjoyed for so many years, to be acknowledged as an
equivalent obligation? Look around upon all your possessions, and say what one
thing have you in the world which his goodness did not give you, and which he
has not thus far preserved to you? Add to all this, the kind notices of his
will which he has sent you; the tender expostulations which he has used with
you to bring you to a wiser and a better temper; and the discoveries and
gracious invitations of his gospel, which you have heard, and which you have
despised: and then say whether your rebellion has not been aggravated by the
vilest ingratitude, and whether that aggravation can be accounted small?

9. Again, if it be any aggravation of sin to be committed against conscience,
thy crimes, O sinner, have been so aggravated. Consult the records of it, and
then dispute the fact if thou can. There is a spirit in man, and the
inspiration of the Almighty gives him understanding Is. xxxviii, 1.
; and then understanding will act, and a secret conviction of being accountable
to its Maker and Preserver is inseparable from the actings of it. It is easy,
to object to human remonstrances, and to give things false colorings before
men; but the heart often condemns, while the tongue excuses. Have you not often
found it so? has not conscience remonstrated against your past conduct; and
have not these remonstrances been very painful too? I have been assured by a
gentleman of undoubted credit, that when he was in the pursuit of all the
gayest sensualities of life, and was reckoned one of the happiest of mankind,
when he has seen a dog come into the room where he was among his merry
companions, he has groaned inwardly, and said, "Oh that I had been that dog!"
And have thou, O sinner, felt nothing like this? has thy conscience been so
stupefied, so seared with a hot iron 1 Timothy iv, 2.
, that it has never cried out of any of the violences which have been done in
it? has it never warned thee of the fatal consequences of what thou have done
in opposition to it? These warnings are, in effect, the voice of God; they are
the admonitions which he gave thee by his vicegerent in thy breast. And when
his sentence for thy evil works is executed upon thee in everlasting death,
thou shall hear that voice speaking to thee again in a louder tone and a
severer accent than before: and thou shall be tormented with its upbraidings
through eternity, because thou would not in time hearken to its admonitions.

10. Let me add farther: If it be any aggravation that sin has been committed
after God has been moving by his Spirit on the mind, surely your sin has been
attended with that aggravation too. Under the Mosaic dispensation, dark and
imperfect as it was, the Spirit strove with the Jews; else Stephen could not
have charged it upon them that, through all their generations, "they had always
resisted him Acts vii, 51.
." (...), surely we may much more reasonably apprehend that he strives with
sinners under the gospel. And have you never experienced any thing of this
kind, even when there has been no external circumstance to awaken you, nor any
pious teacher near you; have you never perceived some secret impulse upon your
mind, leading you to think of religion, urging you to an immediate
consideration of it, sweetly inviting you to make trial of it, and warning you
that you would lament this stupid neglect? O sinner why were not these happy
motions attended to? why did you not, as it were, spread out all the sails of
your soul to catch that heavenly, that favorable breeze? But you have
carelessly neglected it: you have overborne these kind influences: how
reasonably then might the sentence have gone forth in righteous displeasure,
"My Spirit "shall no more strive Genesis vi, 3.
?" And, indeed, who can say that it is not already gone forth? If you feel no
secret agitation of mind, no remorse, no awakening, while you read such a
remonstrance as this, there will be room, great room, to suspect it.

11. There is indeed one aggravation more, which may not attend your guilt, I
mean that of being committed against solemn covenant engagements: a
circumstance which has lain heavy on the consciences of many, who perhaps, in
the mean series of their lives have served God with great integrity. But let me
call you to think to what is this owing? Is it not, that you have never
personally made any solemn profession of devoting yourself to God at all? have
never done any thing which has appeared to your own apprehension an action by
which you made a covenant with him; though you have heard so much of his
covenant, though you have been so solemnly and so tenderly invited to it? And
in this view, how monstrous must this circumstance appear, which at first was
mentioned as some alleviation of guilt! yet I must add, that you are not,
perhaps, altogether so free from guilt on this head as you may a^ first imagine
(...) will not insist on the covenant which your parents ^^de in your name when
they devoted you to God in baptism; though it is really a weights matter, and
by calling yourself a Christian you have professed to own and avow what they
then did; but (...) would remind you of what may have been more personal and
express. Has your heart been, even from your youth, hardened to so uncommon a
degree that you have never cried to God in any season of danger and difficulty?
and did you never mingle vows with those cries? did you never promise, that if
God would hear and help you in that hour of extremity, you would forsake your
sins, and serve him as long as you lived? He heard and helped you, or you had
not been reading these lines; and, by such deliverance did, as it were, bind
down your vows upon you: and therefore your guilt in the violation of them
remains before him, though you are stupid enough to forget them. Nothing is
forgotten, nothing is overlooked by him; and the day will come when the record
shall be laid before you too.

12. And now, O sinner, think seriously with thyself what defense thou will
make to all this! Prepare thine apology, call thy witnesses; make thine appeal
from him whom thou have thus offended to some superior judge, if such there be.
Alas, those apologies are so weak and vain that one of thy fellow-worms may
easily detect and confound them, as I will endeavor presently to show thee.
But thy foreboding conscience already knows the issue. Thou art convicted;
convicted of the most aggravated offenses. Thou "have not humbled thine heart,
but lifted up thyself against the Lord of heaven Dan. v, 22.23.
;" and "thy sentence shall come forth from his presence Ps. xvii, 2.
." "Thou have violated his known laws: thou have despised and abused his
numberless mercies: thou have affronted conscience, his vicegerent in thy soul;
thou have resisted and grieved his Spirit: thou have trifled with him in all
thy pretended submissions; and, in one word, and that his own, thou have done
evil things as thou could Jer. iii, 5.
." Thousands are, no doubt, already in hell, whose guilt never equalled thine;
and, it is astonishing, that God has spared thee to read this representation of
the case, or to make any pause upon it. Oh waste not so precious a moment, but
enter as attentively, and as humbly, as thou can, into those reflections,
which suit a case so lamentable and so terrible as thine!

The CONFESSION of a sinner, convinced in general of his guilt.
OH God! thou injured Sovereign, thou all penetrating and almighty Judge! what
shall I say to this charge? Shall I pretend I am wronged by it, and stand on
the defense in thy presence? I dare not do it; for then know my foolishness,
and none of my sins are hid from thee Psalm. lxix, 5.
. My conscience tells me, that a denial of my crimes would only increase them,
and add new feuel to the fire of thy deserved wrath. If I justify myself, mine
own mouth will condemn me; if I say I am perfect, it will also prove me
perverse Job. ix, 20.
. For "innumerable evils have compassed me about: mine iniquities have taken
hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up: they are, as I have been told
in thy name, "more than the hairs of my head, and "therefore my heart fails
me Psalm xl, 12.
." I am more guilty than it is possible for another to declare or represent. My
heart speaks more than any other accuser. And thou, O Lord, art much greater
than my heart, and know all things 1 John iii, 20.
.

What has my life been but a course of rebellion against thee? It is not this
or that particular action alone I have to lament. Nothing has been right in its
principal views and ends. My whole soul has been disordered; all my thoughts,
my affections, my desires, my pursuits, have been wretchedly alienated from
thee. I have acted as if I had hated thee, who art infinitely the loveliest of
all beings; as if I had been contriving how I might tempt thee to the
uttermost, and weary out thy patience, mavelous as it is. My actions have
been evil; my words yet more evil than they; and, O blessed God, my heart how
much more corrupt than either! What an inexhausted fountain of sin has there
been in it? "a fountain of original corruption," which mingled its bitter
streams with the days of early childhood; and which, alas! flows on even to
this day beyond what actions or words could express. I see this to have been
the case, with regard to what I can particularly survey; but, oh, how many
months and years have I forgotten! concerning which I only know this in the
general, that they are much like those I can remember, except it be that I have
been growing worse and worse, and provoking thy patience more and more, though
every new exercise of it was more and more wonderful.

And how am I astonished that thy forbearance is still continued? It is,
because thou art God, and not man Hos. xi, 9.
. Had I, a sinful worm, been thus injured, I could not have endured it. Had I
been a prince, I had long since done justice on any rebel, whose crimes had
borne but a distant resemblance to mine. Had I been a parent, I had long since
cast off the ungrateful child, who had made me such a return as I have all my
life long been making to thee, O thou Father of my Spirit! The flame of natural
affection would have been extinguished, and his sight, and his very name, would
have become hateful to me. Why then, O Lord, am I not "cast out from thy
presence Jer. lii, 3.
?" why am I not sealed up under an irreversible sentence of destruction! That I
live, I owe to thine indulgence. But, oh, if there be yet any way of
deliverance, if there be yet any hope for so guilty a creature, may it be
opened upon me by thy gospel and thy grace! And if any farther alarm,
humiliation, or terror, be necessary to my security and salvation, may I meet
them, and bear them all; Wound mine heart, O Lord, so that thou will but
afterward heal it; and break it in pieces, if thou will but at length
condescend to bind it up Hos. vi, 1.
!

CHAP. V. The Sinner stripped of his vain Pleas.
The vanity of those pleas, which sinners may secretly confide in, is so
apparent, that they will be ashamed at last to mention them before God, 1. 2.
Such as (1.) That they descended from pious parents, 3. (2.) That they had
attended to the speculative part of religion, 4. (3.) That they had entertained
sound notions, 5. (4.) That they had expressed a zealous regard to religion,
and attended the outward forms of worship with those they apprehended the
purest churches, 6. 7. (5.) That they had been free from gross immoralities, 8.
(6.) That they did not think the consequence of neglecting religion would have
been so fatal, 9. (7.) That they could not do otherwise than they did, 10.
Conclusion, 11 s With the meditation of a convinced sinner, giving up hi vain
pleas before God.

1. MY last discourse left the sinner in a very alarming and a very pitiable
circumstance; a criminal convicted at the bar of God, disarmed of all pretenses
to perfect innocence and sinless obedience, and, consequently obnoxious to the
sentence of a holy law, which can make no allowance for any transgression, no,
not for the least; but pronounces death and a curse against every act of
disobedience: how much more then against those numberless and aggravated acts
of rebellion, of which, O sinner, thy conscience has condemned thee before
God! I would hope some of my readers will ingeniously fall under the
conviction, and not think of making any apology: for, sure I am, that humbly to
plead guilty at the divine bar, is the most decent, and, all things considered,
the most prudent thing that can be done in such an unhappy circumstance. Yet I
know the treachery and the self-flattery of a sinful and a corrupted heart. I
know what excuses it makes; and how, when it is driven from one refuge it flies
to another, to fortify itself against full conviction, and to persuade, not
merely another, but itself, That, if it has been in some instances to blame, it
is not quite so criminal as was represented; that there are at least
considerations that plead in its favor, which, if they cannot justify, will,
in some degree excuse. A secret reserve of this kind, sometimes perhaps scarce
formed into a distinct reflection, breaks the force of conviction, and often
prevents that deep humiliation before God, which is the happiest token of an
approaching deliverance. I will therefore examine into some of these
particulars; and for that purpose would seriously ask thee, O sinner, what thou
have to offer in arrest to judgment what plea thou can urge for thyself why
the sentence of God should not go forth against thee, and why thou should not
fall into the hands of his justice?

2. But this I must premise, That the question is not, how thou would answer
to me, a weak sinful worm like thyself, who am shortly to stand with thee at
the same bar: ( the Lord grant that I may find mercy of the Lord in that day 2 Timothy i, 18.
! but, what will thou reply to thy Judge? What could thou plead if thou wast
now actually before his tribunal; where, to multiply vain words, and to frame
idle apologies, would be but to increase thy guilt and provocation* Surely the
very thought of his presence must supersede a thousand of those trifling
excuses which now sometimes impose on "a generation that are pure in their own
eyes, though they are not washed from their filthiness Prove. xxx, 12.
:" or, while they are conscious of their "own impurities, trust in words than
cannot profit Jer. vii, 8.
," and "lean upon broken reeds Isa. xxxvi, 6.
."

3. You will not, to be sure, in such a circumstance, plead "That you are
descended from pious parents." That was, indeed, your privilege, and "woe be to
you that you have abused it, and forsaken the God of your fathers 2 Chronicles. vii,
22.
. Ishmael was immediately descended from Abraham, the friend of God; and Esau
was the son of Isaac, who was born according to the promise; yet, you know,
they were both c^^ off from the blessing, to which they apprehended they had a
kind of hereditary claim. You may remember that our Lord does not only speak of
one who could call Abraham father. Who was "tormented in flames Luke xvi, 24.
;" but expressly declares, that many of the children of the kingdom shall be
shut out of it; and, when others come from the most distant parts to sit down
in it, shall be distinguished from their companions in misery only by louder
accents of lamentation, and more furious "gnashing of the teeth Matthew. viii,
11.12.
."

4. Nor will you then presume to plead, That you had exercised your thoughts
about the speculative part of religion: for to what end can this serve but to
increase your condemnation? Since you have broken God's law, since you have
contradicted the most obvious and apparent obligations of religion, to have
inquired into it, and argued upon it, is a circumstance that proves your guilt
more audacious. What? did you think religion was merely an exercise of men's
wit, and the amusement of their curiosity? If you argued about it on the
principles of common sense, you must have judged and proved it to be a
practical thing: and, if it was so, why did not you practice accordingly? You
knew the particular branches of it; and why then did you not attend to every
one of them? To have pleaded an unavoidable ignorance would have been the
happiest plea that could have remained for you: nay, an actual, though faulty,
ignorance would have been some little allay of your guilt. But if, by your own
confession, you have "known your Master's will, and have not done it," you bear
witness against yourself, that you deserve to be beaten with many "stripes Luke
xii, 47.
."

5. Nor yet, again, will it suffice to say, That you have had right notions,
both of the doctrines and the precepts of religion. Your advantage for
practicing it was therefore the greater: but understanding and acting right can
never go for the same thing in the judgment of God or of man. In "believing
there is one God." you have done well; but "the devils also believe, and
tremble James ii, 19.
." In acknowledging Christ to be the Son of God, and the Holy One, you have
done well too; but, you know, the unclean spirits made this very orthodox
confession Luke iv, 34.41.
, and yet they are reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day Jude v, 6.
. And will you place any secret confidence in that which might be pleaded by
the infernal spirits as well as by you?

6. But, perhaps, you may think of pleading, That you have actually done
something in religion. Having judged what faith was the soundest, and what
worship the purest, you entered yourselves into those societies where such
articles of faith were professed, and such forms of worship were practiced;
and, amongst these, you have signalized yourselves, by the exactness of your
attendance, by the zeal with which you have espoused their cause, and by the
earnestness with which you have contended for such principles and practices. --
O sinner, I much fear that this zeal of thine about the circumstantials of
religion will swell thine account, rather than be allowed in abatement of it.
He that searches thine heart knows from whence it arose, and how far it
extended. Perhaps he sees that it was all hypocrisy; an artful veil, under
which thou wast carrying on thy mean designs for this world; while the sacred
names of God and Religion were profaned and prostituted in the basest manner;
and, if so, thou art cursed with a distinguished curse for so daring an insult
on the divine omniscience, as well as justice. Or, perhaps, the earnestness
with which you have been "contending for the faith" and worship "which was once
delivered to the saints Jude v, 3.
," or which, it is possible, you may rashly have concluded to be that, might be
mere pride and bitterness of spirit: and all the zeal you have expressed might
possibly arise from a confidence in your own judgment, from an impatience of
contradiction, or from a secret malignity of spirit, which delighted itself in
condemning, and even in worrying others; yea, which, (if I may be allowed the
expression) fiercely preyed upon religion, as the tiger upon the lamb, to turn
it into a nature most contrary to its own. And shall this screen you before the
great tribunal? Shall it not rather awaken the displeasure it is pleading to
avert?

7. But say that this your zeal for notions and forms has been ever so well
intended, and, so far as it has gone, ever so well conducted too; what will
that avail toward vindicating thee in so many instances of negligence and
disobedience as are recorded against thee in the book of God's remembrance?
Were the revealed doctrines of the gospel to be earnestly maintained (as indeed
they ought) and was the great practical purpose for which they were revealed to
be forgot? Was the very mint, and annise, and cummin, to be tithed, and were
"the weightier matters of the law to be omitted Matthew. xxiii, 23.
?" even that love to God, which is its first "and great command Matthew. xxii, 38.
?" Oh, how will thou be able to vindicate even the justest sentence thou have
passed on others for their infidelity or for their disobedience, without being
"condemned out of thine own mouth Luke xix, 22.
!"

8. Will you then plead your fair moral character your works of righteousness
and of mercy? H^^ your obedience to the law of God been complete, the plea
might be allowed as important and valid; but I have supposed and proved above,
that conscience testifies to the contrary; and you will not now dare to
contradict it. I add farther, had these works of your^ which you now urge,
proceeded from a sincere love to God, and a genuine faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ, yo^ would not have thought of pleading them any othe^wise than as an
evidence of your interest in the gospel covenant, and in the blessings of it,
procured by the righteousness and blood of the Redeemer: and that faith, had it
been sincere, would not have been attended with such deep humility, and with
such solemn apprehensions of the divine holiness and glory; that, instead of
pleading any works of your own before God, you would rather have implored his
pardon for the mixture of sinful imperfection attending the very best of them.
Now, as you are a stranger to this humble and sanctifying principle (which
here, in this address, I suppose my reader to be) it is absolutely necessary
you should be plainly and faithfully told, that neither sobriety, nor honesty,
not humanity, will justify you before the tribunal of God, when he lays
judgment to the line, and righteousness to the plummet Isa. xxviii, 17.
, and examines all your actions, and all your thoughts, with the strictest
severity. You have not been a drunkard, an adulterer, or a robber. So far it is
well. You stand before a righteous God, who will do you ample justice; and
therefore will not condemn you for drunkenness, adultery, or robbery. But you
have forgotten him, your Parent and your Benefactor; you have cast off fear,
and restrained prayer before him, Job. xv, 4.
; you have despised the blood of his Son, and all the immortal blessings which
he purchased with it. For this, therefore, you are judged, and condemned. And
as for any thing that has looked like virtue and humanity in your temper and
conduct, the exercise of it has, in a great measure, been its own reward, if
there were any thing more than form and artifice in it; and the various
bounties of divine Providence to you amidst all your numberless provocations,
have been a thousand times more than an equivalent for such defective and
imperfect virtues as these. You remain, therefore chargeable with the guilt of
a thousand offenses, for which you have no excuse at all; though there are some
other instances in which you did not grossly offend. And those good works, in
which you have been so ready to trust, will no more vindicate you in his awful
presence, than a man's kindness to his poor neighbors would be allowed as a
plea in arrest of judgment, when he stood convicted of high treason against his
prince.

9. But you will, perhaps, be ready to say, You did not expect all this: you
did not think the consequences of neglecting religion would have been so fatal.
And why did you not think it? Why did you not examine more attentively and more
impartially? why did you suffer the pride and folly of your vain heart to take
up with such superficial appearances, and trust the light suggestions of your
own prejudiced mind against the express declaration of the word of God? Had you
reflected on his character, as the supreme Governor of the world, you would
have seen the necessity of such a day of retribution as we are now referring
to. Had you regarded the Scripture, the divine authority of which you professed
to believe, every page might have taught you to expect it. "You did not think
of religion?" and of what were you thinking when you forgot or neglected it?
Had you too much employment of another kind? of what kind, I beseech you? What
end could you propose by any thing else of equal moment? Nay, with all your
engagements, conscience will tell you that there have been seasons when, for
want of thought, time and life have been a burden to you: yet you guarded
against thought as against an enemy, and cast up (as it were) an intrenchment
of inconsideration around you on every side, as if it had been to defend you
from the most dangerous invasion. God knew you were thoughtless; and therefore
he sent you line upon line, and precept upon precept Isa. xxviii, 10.
, in such plain language that it needed no genius or study to understand it. He
tried you too with afflictions as well as with mercies, to awaken you out of
your fatal lethargy; and yet, when awakened, you would lie down again upon the
bed of sloth. And now, pleasing as your dreams might be, you must lie down in
sorrow Isa. l, 11.
. Reflection has at last overtaken you, and must be heard as a tormentor, since
it might not be heard as a friend.

10. But some may, perhaps, imagine, that one important apology is yet unheard,
and that there may be room to say, You were, by the necessity of your nature,
impelled to those things which are now charged upon you as crimes; whereas it
was not in your power to have avoided them in the circumstances in which you
were placed. If this will do any thing, it indeed promises to do much; so much,
that it will amount to nothing. If I were disposed to answer you upon the folly
and madness of your own principles, I might say, that the same consideration
which proves it was necessary for you to offend, proves also that it is
necessary for God to punish you: and that, indeed, he cannot but do it: and I
might further say, with an excellent writer of our own age Bishop of Bristol's
Analogy, etc. p. 135. 8vo edit.
, That the same principles which destroy the injustice of sins, destroy the
injustice of punishments too. But, if you cannot admit this, if you should
still reply in spite of principle, That it must be unjust to punish you for an
action utterly and absolutely unavoidable; I really think you would answer
right. But, in that answer you will contradict your own scheme, (as I observed
above): and I leave your conscience to judge what sort of a scheme that must be
which would make all kind of punishment unjust; for the argument will, on the
whole, be the same, whether with regard to human punishment or divine. It is a
scheme full of confusion and horror. You would not, I am sure, take it from a
servant who had robbed you, and then fired your house; you would never inwardly
believe, that he could not have helped it, or think that he had fairly excused
himself by such a plea. And, I am persuaded, you would be so far from presuming
to offer it to God at the great day, that you would not venture to turn it into
a prayer even now. Imagine you saw a malefactor dying with such words as these:
O God, it is true, I did indeed rob and murder my fellow creature; but thou
know that, as my circumstances were ordered, I could not do otherwise: my
will was irresistibly determined by the motives which thou did set before me;
and I could as well have shaken the foundations of the earth, or darkened the
sun in the firmament, as have resisted the impulse which bore me on. I put it
to your conscience whether you would not look on such a speech as this with
detestation, as one enormity added to another. Yet, if the excuse would have
any weight in your mouth, it would have equal weight in his, or would be
equally applicable to any the most shocking occasion. But, indeed, it is so
contrary to the plainest principles of common reason, that I can hardly
persuade myself any one could seriously and thoroughly believe it; and should
imagine my time very ill employed here if I were to set myself to combat those
pretenses to argument, by which the wantonness of human wit has attempted to
varnish it over.

11. You see, then, on the whole, the vanity of all your pleas, and how easily
the most plausible of them might be silenced by a mortal man like yourself; how
much more, then, by Him who searches all hearts, and can, in a moment, flash in
upon the conscience a most powerful and irresistible conviction? What then can
you do while you stand convicted in the presence of God? what should you do but
hold your peace under an inward sense of your inexcusable guilt, and prepare
yourself to hear the sentence which his law pronounces against you? You must
feel the execution of it, if the gospel does not at length deliver you; and you
must feel something of the terror of it before you can be excited to seek to
that gospel for deliverance.

The MEDITATION of a convinced Sinner, giving up his vain Pleas before God.
DEplorable condition to which I am indeed reduced! "I have sinned;" and "what
shall I say unto thee, O thou Preserver of men Job. vii, 20.
?" What shall I dare to say? Fool that I was, to amuse myself with such
trifling excuses as these, and to imagine they could have any weight in thy
tremendous presence; or that I should be able so much as to mention them there!
I cannot presume to do it. I am silent and confounded. My hopes, alas, are
slain, and my soul itself is ready to die too, so far as an immortal soul can
die; and I am almost ready to say, Oh that it could die entirely! I am indeed a
criminal in the hand of Justice, quite disarmed, and stripped of the weapons in
which I trusted. Dissimulation can only add provocation to provocation. I will
therefore plainly and freely own it. I have acted as if I "thought God was
altogether such a one as myself: but," he has said, "I will reprove thee: I
will set thy sins in order before thine eyes Psalm. l, 21.
, will marshal them in battle array." And oh, what a terrible kind of host do
they appear! and how do they surround me beyond all possibility of escape! O my
soul, they have, as it were, taken thee prisoner; and they are bearing thee
away to the divine tribunal.

Thou must appear before it! thou must see the awful eternal Judge, who "tries
the very reins Jer. xvii, 10.
;" and who needs no other evidence, for he has himself been witness Jer. xxix,
23.
to all thy rebellion. Thou must see him, O my soul, sitting in judgment upon
thee; and when he is strict to mark iniquity Psalm cxxx, 3.
," how will thou answer him for one of a thousand Job. ix, 3.
! And if thou can not answer him, in what language will he speak to thee?
Lord, as things at present stand, I can expect no other language than that of
condemnation. And what a condemnation is it! Let me reflect upon it! let me
read my sentence before I hear it finally and irreversibly passed! I know he
has recorded it in his word; and I know in the general that the representation
is made with a gracious design. I know that he would have us alarmed, that we
may not be destroyed. Speak to me, therefore, O God, while thou speak not
for the last time, and in circumstances when thou will hear me no more. Speak
in the language of effectual terror, so that it be not to speak me into final
despair; and let thy word, however painful in its operation, be "quick and
powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword Heb. iv, 12.
." Let me not vainly flatter myself; let me not be left a wretched prey to
those who would prophesy smooth things to me Isa. x,
, till I am sealed up under wrath, and feel thy justice piercing my soul, and
the poison of thine arrows drinking up all my spirits Job. vi, 4.
.

Before I enter upon the particular view, I know, in the general, that it is a
terrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God Heb. x, 31.
. O thou living God, in one sense, I am (already fallen into thine hands. I am
become obnoxious to thy displeasure, justly obnoxious to it; and whatever thy
sentence may be, when it "comes forth from thy presence Psalm xvii, 2.
" I must condemn myself, and justify thee. Thou can not treat me with more
severity than mine iniquities have deserved; and how bitter soever that "cup of
trembling" may be Isa. li, 17.
, which thou shall appoint for me, I give judgment against myself, that I
deserve "to wring out the very dregs of it Psalm lxxv, 8.
."

CHAP. VI. The Sinner sentenced.
The sinner called upon to hear his sentence, 1, 2. Gods's law does now in
general pronounce a curse, 3. It pronounces death, 4. and being turned into
bell, 5. The judgment-day shall come, 6. The solemnity of that grand process
described according to scriptural representations of it, 7, 8. with a
particular illustration of the sentence, Depart accursed, etc. 9. The execution
will certainly and immediately follow, 10. The sinner warned to prepare for
enduring it, 11. The reflection of a sinner struck with the terror of his
sentence.

1. HEAR, O sinner, "and I will speak Job. xlii, 4.
yet once more, as in the name of God; of God, thine almighty Judge, who, if
thou do not attend to his servants, will, ere long, speak unto thee in a more
immediate manner, with an energy and terror which thou shall not be able to
resist.

2. Thou have been convicted as in his presence. Thy pleas have been
overruled, or rather they have been silenced. It appears before God, it
appears to thine own conscience, that thou have nothing more to offer in arrest
of judgment; therefore hear thy sentence, and summon up, if thou can, all the
powers of thy soul to bear the execution of it: It is indeed a very small thing
to be judged of man's judgment; but he that now judges thee is the Lord 1 Cor.
iv, 3.4.
. Hea^ therefore, and tremble, while I tell thee how he will speak to thee; or
rather while I show thee, from express scripture, how he does even now speak,
and what is the authentic and recorded sentence of his word, even of hi^ word
who has said, "Heaven and earth shall pass away; but not "one title of my word
shall ever pass away Matthew. v, 18.
."

3. The law of God speaks, not to thee alone, O sinner, nor to thee by any
particular address; but in a most universal language it speaks to all
transgressors and levels its terrors against all offenses, great or small,
without any exception; and this is its language, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the book of the law to do
them Gal. iii, 10.
. This is its voice to the whole world; and this it speaks to thee. Its awful
contents are thy personal concern, O reader, and thy conscience knows it. Far
from "continuing in all things that are written therein to do them," thou can
not but be sensible, that "innumerable evils have compassed thee about Psalm
xl, 12.
." It is then manifest "thou art the man," whom it condemns; thou art even now,
"cursed with a curse Mal. iii, 9.
," as God emphatically speaks, "with the curse," of the most high God; yea, all
the curses which are written in the book of the law are pointed against thee
Deuteronomy. xxix, 20.
. God may righteously execute any of them upon thee in a moment; and though
thou at present feel none of them, yet, if infinite mercy does not prevent,
it is but a little while, and they will "come into thy bowels like "water,"
till thou art burst asunder with them, and shall penetrate "like oil into thy
bones Psalm cix, 18.
."

4. Thus says the Lord, The soul that sins shall die Ezekiel. xviii, 4.
. But thou have sinned, and therefore thou art under a sentence of death: and,
oh, unhappy creature, of what a death! what will the end of these things be?
That the agonies of dissolving nature shall seize thee; that thy soul shall be
torn away from thy languishing body, and thou return to the dust from whence
thou wast taken Psalm civ, 29.
! This is indeed one awful effect of sin. In these affecting characters has
God, through all nations, and all ages of men, written the awful register and
memorial of his holy abhorrence of it, and righteous displeasure against it.
But alas! all this solemn pomp and horror of dying is but the opening of a
dreadful scene. It is but a rough kind of stroke, by which the fetters are
knocked off, when the criminal is led out to torture and execution.

5. Thus says the Lord, the wicked shall be turned into hell, even all the
nations that forget God Psalm ix, 17.
. Though there be whole nations of them, their multitudes and their power shall
be no defense to them. They shall be driven into hell together; in that flaming
prison which divine vengeance has prepared; into Tophet, which is ordained of
old, even for royal sinners as well as for others, so little can any human
distinction protect. He has made it deep and large, the pile thereof is fire
and much wood; the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone shall kindle
it Isa. xxx, 33.
; and the flaming torrent shall flow in upon it so fast, that it shall be
turned into a sea of liquid fire; or, as the Scripture also express it, A lake
burning with fire and brimstone for ever and ever Rev. xxi, 8.
; this is the second death, and the death to which thou, O sinner, by the word
of God are doomed.

6. And shall this sentence stand upon record in vain? shall the law speak it,
and the gospel speak it? and shall it never be pronounced more audibly? and
will God never require and execute the punishment? He will, O sinner, require
it, and he will execute it, though he may seem for a while to delay. For well
do thou know that he has appointed a day in the which he will judge the
whole world in righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained, of which he
has given assurance in having raised him from the dead Acts xvii, 31.
. And when God judges the world, O reader, whoever thou art, he will judge
thee: and while I remind thee of it, I would also remember that he will judge
me: and knowing the terror of the Lord 2 Cor. v, 11.
," that I may deliver my own soul Ezekiel. xxxiii, 9.
, I would with all plainness and sincerity labor to deliver thine.

7. I, therefore, repeat the solemn warning: Thou, O sinner, shall "stand
before the judgment seat of Christ 2 Cor. v, 10.
" Thou shall see that pompous appearance, the description of which is grown so
familiar to thee, that the repetition of it makes no impression on thy mind!
but surely, stupid as thou now art, the shrill trumpet of the archangel shall
shake thy very soul; and if nothing else can awaken and alarm thee, the
convulsions and flames of a disolving world shall do it.

8. Do thou really think that the intent of Christ's final appearance is only
to recover his people from the grave, and to raise them to glory and happiness?
Whatever assurance thou have that there shall be a resurrection of the just,
thou have the same that there shall also be a resurrection of the unjust Acts
xxiv, 15.
; that he shall separate the rising dead one from another, as a shepherd
divides the sheep from the goats Matthew. xxv, 32.
, with equal certainty, and with infinitely greater ease. Or can you imagine
that he will only make an example of some flagrant and notorious sinners, when
it is said, that all the deal, both small and great, shall stand before God
Rev. xx, 12.
; and that even he who knew not his master's will, and, consequently, seems of
all others to have had the fairest excuse for his omission to obey it, yet even
he, for that very omission, shall be beaten, though with fewer stripes Luke
xii, 48.
? Or can you think that a sentence to be delivered with so much pomp and
majesty, a sentence by which the righteous judgment of God is to be revealed,
and to have its most conspicuous and final triumph, will be inconsiderable, or
the punishment to which it shall consign the sinner be flight or tolerable?
There would have been little reason to apprehend that, even if we had been left
barely to our own conjectures, what that sentence should be: but this is far
from being the case. Our Lord Jesus Christ, in his infinite condescension and
compassion, has been pleased to give us a copy of the sentence, and, no doubt,
a most exact copy; and the words which contain it are worthy of being inscribed
on every heart. The King, amidst all the splendor and dignity, in which he
shall then appear, shall say unto those on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of
my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world Matthew. xxv, 54.
; and where the word of a King is, there is power indeed Eccles. viii, 4.
. And these words have a power which may justly animate the heart of the humble
Christian under the most overwhelming sorrow, and may fill him with "joy
unspeakable and full of glory 1 Pet. i, 8.
." To be pronounced the blessed of the Lord? to be called to a kingdom! to the
immediate, the everlasting inheritance of it! and of such a kingdom! so well
prepared, so glorious, so complete, so exquisitely fitted for the delight and
entertainment of such creatures so formed and so renewed, that it shall appear
worthy the eternal counsels of God to have contrived it, worthy his eternal
love to have prepared it, and to have delighted himself with the views of
bestowing it upon his people! Behold, a blessed hope indeed! a lively glorious
hope, to which we are begotten again by the resurrection of Christ from the
dead 1 Pet. i, ^.
, and formed by the sanctifying influence of the Spirit of God upon our minds!
But it is a hope, from which thou, O sinner, art at present excluded: and
methinks that might be grievous, to reflect, These gracious words shall Christ
speak to some, to multitudes, but not to me; on me there is no blessedness
pronounced: for me there is no kingdom prepared. But is that all? Alas! sinner,
our Lord has given thee a dreadful counterpart to this: he has told us what he
will say to thee, if thou continuest what thou art; to thee, and all the
nations of the impenitent and unbelieving world, be they ever so numerous, be
the rank of particular criminals ever so great. He shall say to the kings of
the earth, who have been rebels against him, to the great and rich men, and the
chief captains, and the mighty men, as well as to every bondsman, and every
freeman of inferior rank Rev. vi, 15.
, DEPART FROM ME, YE CURSED, INTO EVERLASTING FIRE, PREPARED FOR THE DEVIL AND
HIS ANGELS Matthew. xxv, 41.
. Oh, pause upon these weighty words, that thou may enter into something of
the importance of them!

9. He will say, Depart; you shall be driven from his presence with disgrace
and infamy; from Him, the source of life and blessedness, in a nearness to whom
all the inhabitants of heaven continually rejoice: you shall depart accursed;
you have broken God's law, and its curse falls upon you; and you are and shall
be under that curse, that abiding curse; from that day forward you shall be
regarded by God, and all his creatures, as an accursed and abominable thing; as
the most detestable and the most miserable part of the creation: you shall go
into fire; and, oh, consider into what fire! Is it merely into one fierce
blaze, which shall consume you in a moment, though with exquisite pain? that
were terrible: but, oh, such terrors are not to be named with these: thine,
sinner, is everlasting fire; it is that which our Lord has in such awful terms
described as prevailing there, "where their worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched;" and then says it a second time, "Where their worm dies not, and the
fire is not quenched;" and again, in wonderful compassion, a third time, Where
their worm dies not and the fire is not quenched Mark ix, 44.46.48.
. Nor was it originally prepared, or principally intended for you; it was
prepared for the devil and his angels; for those first grand rebels who were,
immediately upon their fall, doomed to it; and since you have taken part with
them in their apostasy, you must sink with them in that flaming ruin; and sink
so much the deeper as you have despised a Savior who was never offered to
them, These must be your companions, and your tormentors, with whom you must
dwell for ever. And is it I that say this? or says not the law and the gospel
the same? Does not the Lord Jesus Christ expressly say it, who is the faithful
and true witness Rev. iii, 14.
; even he who himself is to pronounce the sentence.

10. And when it is thus pronounced, and pronounced by him, shall it not also
be executed? Who could imagine the contrary? who could imagine there should be
all this pompous declaration to fill the mind only with vain terror, and that
this sentence should vanish into smoke? You may easily apprehend that this
would be a greater reproach to the divine administration than if sentence were
never to be passed; and therefore, we might easily have inferred the execution
of it from the process of preceding judgment. But least the treacherous heart
of a sinner should deceive him with so vain a hope, the assurance of that
execution is immediately added in very memorable terms: It shall be done; it
shall immediately be done. Then, on that very day, while the sound of it is yet
in their ears, the wicked shall go away into everlasting punishment Matthew. xxv,
46.
and thou, O reader, whoever thou art, being found in their number, shall go
away with them; shall be driven on among all these wretched multitudes, and
plunged with them into eternal ruin. The wide gates of hell shall be open to
receive thee; they shall be shut upon thee for ever to enclose thee, and be
fast barred by the almighty hand of divine justice, to prevent all hope, all
possibility of escape, for ever.

11. And now prepare thyself to meet the Lord thy God Amos iv, 12.
: summon up all the resolution of thy mind to endure such a sentence, such an
execution as this: for "he will not meet thee as a man Is. xlvii, 3.
," whose heart may sometimes fail him, when about to exert a needful act of
severity, so that compassion may prevail against reason and justice. No, he
will meet thee as a God, whose schemes and purposes are all immovable as his
throne. I therefore, testify to thee in his name this day, that, if God be
true, he will thus speak; and that, if he be able, he will thus act. And, on
supposition of thy continuance in thine impenitency and unbelief, thou art
brought into this miserable case, that if God be not either false or weak, thou
art undone, thou art eternally undone.

The REFLECTION of a Sinner struck with the Terror of his Sentence.
WRETCH that I am! what shall I do? or whither shall I flee? I am weighed in
the balance, and am found wanting Dan. v, 27.
. This is, indeed my doom, the doom I am to expect from the mouth of Christ
himself, from the mouth of him that died for the salvation and redemption of
men. Dreadful sentence! and so much more dreadful when considered in that view!
To what shall I look to save me from it! To whom shall I call! Shall I say to
the rocks, Fall upon me, and to the hills, Cover me Luke xxiii, 30.
? What should I gain by that? Were I indeed overwhelmed with rocks and
mountains, they could not conceal me from the notice of his eye; and his hand
could reach me with as much ease there as any where else.

Wretch indeed that I am! Oh that I had never been born! Oh that I had never
known the dignity and prerogative of the rational nature! Fatal prerogative,
indeed, that renders me obnoxious to condemnation and wrath! Oh that I had
never been instructed in the will of God at all, rather than that, being thus
instructed, I should have disregarded and transgressed it! Would to God I had
been allied to the meanest of the human race, to them that come nearest to the
state of the brutes, rather than that I should have had my lot in cultivated
life, amidst so many of the improvements of reason, and (dreadful reflection!)
amidst so many of the advantages of religion too! and thus to have perverted
all to my own destruction! -- Oh that God would take away this rational soul!
But, alas! it will live for ever, will live to feel the agonies of eternal
death. -- Why have I seen the beauties and glories of a world like this, to
exchange it for that flaming prison! why have I tasted so many of my Creator's
bounties, to wring out at last the dregs of his wrath! why have I known the
delights of social life and friendly converse, to exchange them for the horrid
company of devils and damned spirits in Tophet! Oh, who can dwell with them in
devouring flames! who can lie down with them in everlasting, everlasting,
everlasting burnings Isa. xxxiii, 14.
!

But whom have I to blame in all this but myself? what have I to accuse but my
own stupid incorrigible folly? On what is all this terrible ruin to be charged,
but on this one fatal cursed cause, that, having broken God's law, I rejected
his gospel too?

Yet stay, O my soul, in the midst of all these doleful, foreboding complaints.
Can I say that I have finally rejected the gospel? Am I not, to this day, under
the sound of it! The sentence is not yet gone forth against me in so
determinate a manner, as to be utterly irreversible. Through all this gloomy
prospect one ray of hope breaks in, and it is possible I may yet be delivered.

Reviving thought! rejoice in it, O my soul, though it be with trembling; and
turn immediately to that God who, though provoked by ten thousand offenses, has
not yet "sworn in his wrath, that thou shall never" be permitted to hold
farther intercourse with him, or to "enter into his rest Ps. xcv, 11.
."

I do then, O blessed Lord, prostrate myself in the dust before thee. I own I
am a condemned and miserable creature; but my language is that of the humble
Publican, "God be merciful to me a sinner Luke xviii, 1^.
!" Some general and confused apprehensions I have of a way by which I may
possibly escape. O God, whatever that way is, show it me, I beseech thee! Point
it out so plainly, that I may not be able to mistake i^. And, o^, reconcile my
heart to it, be it ever so humbling, be it ever so painful!

Surely, Lord, I have much to learn; but be thou my teacher! Stay for a little
thine uplifted hand; and, in thine infinite compassion, delay the stroke, till
I inquire a little farther how I may finally avoid it!

CHAP. VII. The helpless State of the Sinner under Condemnation.
The sinner urged to consider how he can be saved from this impending ruin, 1,
2. (1.) Not by any thing he can offer, 3. (2.) Nor by any thing he can endure,
4. (3.) Nor by any thing he can do in the course of future duty, 5. (4.) Nor by
any alliance with fellow-sinners on earth, or in hell, 6 -- 8. (5.) Nor by any
interposition or intercession of angels or saints in his favor, 9. Hint of the
only method, to be afterward more largely explained, ib. The lamentation of a
sinner in this miserable condition.

1. SINNER, thou have heard the sentence of God, as it stands upon record in
his sacred and immutable word. And will thou lie down under it in everlasting
despair? will thou make no attempt to be delivered from it, when it speaks
nothing less than eternal death to thy soul? If a criminal, condemned by human
laws, has but the least shadow of hope that he may possibly escape, he is all
attention to it. If there be a friend who he thinks can help him, with what
strong importunity does he entreat the interposition of that friend? And, even
while he is before the judge, how difficult is it often to force him away from
the bar, while the cry of Mercy, mercy, mercy, may be heard, though it be never
so unreasonable? A mere possibility that it may make some impression makes him
eager in it, and unwilling to be silenced and removed.

2. Will thou not then, O sinner, ere yet execution is done, that execution
which may, perhaps, be done this very day, will thou not cast about in thy
thoughts what measures may be taken for deliverance? Yet what measures can be
taken? Consider attentively; for it is an affair of moment. Thy wisdom, thy
power, thy eloquence, or thine interest, can never be exerted on a greater
occasion. If thou can help thyself, do. If thou have any secret source of
relief, go not out of thyself for other assistance. If thou have any sacrifice
to offer, if thou have any strength to exert, yea if thou have any allies on
earth, or in the invisible world, who can defend and deliver thee, take thine
own way, so that thou may but be delivered at all, and we may not see thy
ruin. But say, O sinner, in the presence of God, what sacrifice thou will
present, what strength thou will exert, what allies thou will have recourse to,
on so urgent, so hopeless an occasion: for, hopeless I must indeed pronounce
it, if such methods are taken.

3. The justice of God is injured: have thou any atonement to make to it? If
thou wast brought to an inquiry and proposal, like that of the awakened sinner,
Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before the high God?
Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old? Will
the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of
oil Micah vi, 6.7.
? Alas! were thou as great a prince as Solomon himself, and could thou indeed
purchase such sacrifices as these, there would be no room to mention them,
Lebanon would not be sufficient to burn, nor all the beasts thereof for a burnt
offering Isa. xl, 16.
. Even under that dispensation, which admitted and required sacrifices in some
cases, the blood of bulls and of goats, though it exempted the offender from
farther temporal punishment, could not take away sin Heb. x, 4.
, nor prevail by any means to purge the conscience in the sight of God. And
that soul that had done ought presumptuously, was not allowed to bring any
sin-offering, or trepass offering at all, but was condemned to die without
mercy Number. xv, 30.
. Now God and thine own conscience know that thine offenses have not been
merely the errors of ignorance and inadvertency, but that thou have sinned with
an high hand, in repeated aggravated instances, as thou have acknowledged
already. -- Should thou add, with the wretched sinner described above, Shall
I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fr^^t of my body for the sin of
my soul Micah vi, 7.
? What could the blood of a beloved child do in such a case, but dye thy crimes
so much the deeper, and add a yet unknown horror to them? Thou have offended a
Being of infinite Majesty; and if that offense is to be expiated by blood, it
must be by another kind of blood than that which flows in the veins of thy
children, or in thine own.

4. Will thou then suffer thyself, till thou have made full satisfaction? But
how shall that satisfaction be made? Shall it be by any calamities to be
endured in this mortal momentary life? Is the justice of God, then, esteemed so
little a thing, that the sorrows of a few days should suffice to answer its
demands? Or do thou think of future sufferings in the invisible world? If
thou do, that is not deliverance: and, with regard to that, I may venture to
say, When thou have made full satisfaction, thou will be released: when thou
have paid the utmost farthing of that debt, thy prison-doors shall be opened.
In the mean time, thou must "make thy bed in hell Ps. cxxxix, 8.
:" and, O unhappy man? will thou lie down there with a secret hope that the
moment will come when the rigor of divine justice will not be able to inflict
any thing more than thou have endured, and when thou may claim thy discharge
as a matter of right? It would indeed be well for thee if thou could carry
down with thee such a hope, false and flattering as it is: but, alas! thou will
see things in so just a light, that to have no comfort but this will be eternal
despair. That one word of thy sentence, Everlasting fire; that one declaration,
"The worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched;" will be sufficient to
strike such a thought into black confusion, and to overwhelm thee with hopeless
agony and horror.

5. Or do you think that your future reformation and diligence in duty for the
time to come will proc^^^ your discharge from this sentence? Take heed, sinner,
what kind of obedience thou think of offering to a^ holy God. That must be
spotless and complete, which his infinite sanctity can approve and accept, if
he consider thee in thyself alone; there must be no inconstancy, no
forgetfulness, no mixture of sin attending it. And will thou, enfeebled as thou
art, by so much original corruption, and so many sinful habits contracted by
innumerable actual transgressions, undertake to render such an obedience and
that for all the remainder of thy life? In vain would thou attempt it even
for one day. New guilt would immediately plunge thee into new ruin; but if it
did not; if from this moment to the very end of thy life all were as complete
obedience as the law of God required from Adam in Paradise, would that be
sufficient to cancel past guilt? would it discharge an old debt that thou had
not contracted a new one? Offer this to thy neighbor, and see if he will
accept it for payment; and if he will not, will thou presume to offer it to thy
God?

6. But I will not multiply words on so plain a subject. While I speak thus,
time is passing away, death presses on, and judgment is approaching. And what
can save thee from these awful scenes, or what can protect thee in them? Can
the world save thee? that vain delusive idol of thy wishes and pursuits, to
which thou art sacrificing thine eternal hopes? Well do thou know that it
will utterly forsake thee when thou need it most; and that not one of its
enjoyments can be carried along with thee into the invisible state; no, not so
much as a trifle to remember it by, if thou could desire to remember so
inconstant and so treacherous a friend as the world has been.

7. And when you are dead, or when you are dying, can your sinful companion
save you? Is there any one of them, if he were ever so desirous of doing it,
that "can give unto God a ransom for you Psalm xlix, 7.
," to deliver you from going down to the grave, or from going down to hell?
Alas! you will probably be so sensible of this, that when you lie on the border
of the grave, you will be unwilling to see or to converse with those that were
once your favorite companions. They will afflict you rather than relieve you,
even then how much less can they relieve you before the bar of God, when they
are overwhelmed with their own condemnation?

8. As for the powers of darkness, you are sure they will be far from any
ability or inclination to help you. Satan has been watching and laboring for
your destruction, and he will triumph in it. But if there could be any thing of
an amicable confederacy between you, what would that be but an association in
ruin? For the day of judgment of ungodly men will also be the judgment of these
rebellious spirits; and the fire into which thou, O sinner, must depart, is
that which was "prepared for the devil and his angels Matthew. xxv, 41.
."

9. Will the celestial spirits then save thee? will they interpose their power
or their prayers in thy favor? An interposition of power, when sentence is
gone forth against thee, were an act of rebellion against Heaven, which these
holy and excellent creatures would abhor. And when the final pleasure of the
Judge is known, instead of interceding, in vain, for the wretched criminal,
they would rather, with ardent zeal for the glory of their Lord, and cordial
acquiescence in the determination of his wisdom and justice, prepare to execute
it. Yea, difficult as it may at present be to conceive it, it is a certain
truth, that the servants of Christ who now most tenderly love you, and most
affectionately seek your salvation, not excepting those who are allied to you
in the nearest bonds of nature, or of friendship, even they shall put their
Amen to it. Now, indeed their bowels yearn over you, and their eye pours out
tears on your account; now they expostulate with you, and plead with God for
you, if by any means, while yet there is hope, you may be plucked as a
firebrand out of the burning Amos iv, 11.
; but, alas! their remonstrances you will not regard; and as for their prayers,
what should they ask for you? what but this, that you may see yourselves to be
undone? and that, utterly despairing of any help from yourselves, or from any
created power, you may lie before God in humility and brokenness of heart;
that, submitting yourselves, to his righteous judgment, and in an utter
renunciation of all self-dependence, and of all creature dependence, you may
lift up an humble look toward him, as almost from the depths of hell, if
peradventure he may have compassion upon you, and may himself direct you to
that only method of rescue which, while things continue as in present
circumstances they are, neither earth, nor hell, nor heaven, can afford you.

The LAMENTATION of a sinner in this miserable condition.
OH doleful, uncomfortable, helpless state! Oh wretch that I am, to have
reduced myself to it! Poor, empty, miserable, abandoned creature! Where is my
pride, and the haughtiness of my heart? where are my idol deieties, whom I have
loved and served, after whom I have walked, and whom I have sought Jer. viii, 2.
, whilst I have been multiplying my transgressions against the Majesty of
heaven? Is there no heart to have compassion upon me? is there no hand to save
me? Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O my friends; for the hand of God
"has touched me Job. xix, 21.
; has seized me! I feel it pressing me hard, and what shall I do? Perhaps,
they have pity upon me: but, alas, how feeble a compassion! Only if there be
any where in the whole compass of nature any help, tell me where it may be
found! O point it out; direct me toward it; or rather, confounded and
astonished as my mind is, take me by the hand and lead me to it.

O ye ministers of the Lord, whose office it is to guide and comfort dist^^sed
souls, take pity upon me! I fear I am a pattern of many other helpless
creatures, who have the like need of your assistance. Lay aside your other
cares to care for my soul; to care for this precious soul of mine, which lies
as it were bleeding to death, (if that expression may be used,) while you,
perhaps, hardly afford me a look; or, glancing an eye upon me, "pass over to
the other side Luke x, 31.
." Yet, alas! in a case like mine, what can your interposition avail, if it be
alone? "If the Lord do not help me, how can ye help me 2 Kings vi, 27.
?"

Oh "God of the spirits of all flesh Number. xvi, 2.
," I lift up mine eyes unto thee, and "cry unto thee, as out of the belly of
hell Jonah ii, 2.
." I cry unto thee at least from the borders of it. Yet while I lie before thee
in this infinite distress, I know that thine almighty power and boundless grace
can still find out a way for my recovery.

Thou art he whom I have most of all injured and affronted; and yet from thee
alone must I now seek redress. "Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and
done evil in thy sight Psalm li, 4
;" so that thou might be justified when thou speak, and be clear when
thou judge, though thou should this moment adjudge me to eternal misery. And
yet I find something that secretly draws me to thee, as if I might find rescue
there, where I have deserved the most aggravated destruction. Blessed God, I
have destroyed myself; but in thee is my help Hos. xiii, 9.
, if there can be help at all.

I know, in the general, that thy ways are not as our ways, nor thy thoughts as
our thoughts; but are as "high above them as the heavens are above the earth
Isa. lv, 8.9
." "Have mercy" therefore "upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness,
according to the multitude of thy tender mercies Ps. li, 1.
!" Oh point out the path to the city of refuge! Oh lead me thyself "in the way
everlasting Ps. cxxxix, 24.
!" I know, in the general, that thy gospel is the only remedy; O teach thy
servants to administer it! Oh prepare mine heart to receive it! and suffer not,
as in many instances, that malignity which has spread itself through all my
nature to turn that noble medicine into poison!

CHAP. VIII. News of Salvation by Christ, brought to the convinced and
condemned Sinner.
The awful things which have hitherto been said, intended not to grieve, but to
help, 1. After some reflection on the pleasure with which a minister of the
gospel may deliver the message with which he is charged, 2. and some reasons
for the repetition of what is in speculation so generally known, 3. the author
proceeds briefly to declare the substance of these glad tidings: viz. That God
having, in his infinite compassion, sent his Son to die for sinners, is now
reconcilable through him, 4. -- 6.; So that the most heinous transgressions
shall be entirely pardoned to believers, and they made completely and eternally
happy, 7, 8 The sinner's reflection on this good news.

1. MY dear reader! it is the great design of the gospel, and, wherever it is
cordially received, it is the glorious effect of it, to fill the heart with
sentiments of love; to teach us to abhor all unnecessary rigor and severity,
and to delight, not in the grief, but in the happiness of our fellow creatures.
I can hardly apprehend how he can be a Christian who takes pleasure in the
distress which appears even in a brute, much less in that of a human mind; and,
especially, in such distress as the thoughts I have been proposing must give,
if there be any due attention to their weight and energy. I have often felt a
tender regret while I have been representing these things; and I could have
wished from mine heart that it had not been necessary to have placed them in so
severe and so painful a light. But now I am addressing myself to a part of my
work, which I undertake with untterable pleasure; and to that which indeed I
had in view, in all those awful things which I have already been laying before
you. I have been showing you, that, if you hitherto have lived in a state of
impenitence and sin, you are condemned by God's righteous judgment* and have in
yourself no spring of hope and no possibility of deliverance. But I mean not to
leave you under this sad apprehension, to lie down and die in despair,
complaining of that cruel zeal which has "tormented you before the time."
Matthew. viii, 29.

2. Arise, O thou dejected soul, that art prostrate in the dust before God, and
trembling under the terrors of his righteous sentence: for I am commissioned to
tell thee, that though thou have destroyed thyself, in God is thine help, Hosea
13, 9." I bring thee good tidings of great joy, Luke 2, 10, which delight my
own heart while I proclaim them, and will, I hope, reach and revive thine; even
the tidings of salvation by the blood and righteousness of the Redeemer. And I
give it thee, for thy greater security, in the words of a gracious and
forgiving God, that he is in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, and not
imputing to them their trespasses, 2 Cor. 5, 19.

3. This is the best news that ever was heard, the most important message which
God ever sent to his creatures; and though I doubt not at all, but living, as
you have done, in a Christian country, you have heard it often, perhaps a
thousand and a thousand times, I will, with all simplicity and plainness,
repeat it to you again, and repeat it as if you had never heard it before. If
thou, O sinner, should now, for the first time, feel it, then will it be as a
new gospel unto thee, though so familiar to thine ear; nor shall it be grievous
for me to speak what is so common, since to you it is safe and necessary, Phil.
3, 1. They who are most deeply and intimately acquainted with it, instead of
being cloyed and satiated, will hear it with distinguished pleasure; and as for
those who have hitherto slighted it, I am sure they had need to hear it again.
Nor is it absolutely impossible that some one soul, at least, may read these
lines who has never been clearly and fully instructed in this important
doctrine, though his everlasting All depends on knowing and receiving it. I
will therefore take care that such a one shall not have it to plead at the bar
of God, that though he lived in a Christian country, he was never plainly and
faithfully taught the doctrine of salvation by Jesus Christ, the way, the
truth, and the life, by whom alone we come unto the Father, John 14, 6.

4. I do therefore testify unto you this day, that the holy and gracious
Majesty of heaven and earth, foreseeing the fatal apostasy into which the whole
human race would fall, did not determine to deal in a way of strict and
rigorous severity with us, so as to consign us over to universal ruin and
inevitable damnation; but, on the contrary, he determined to enter into a
treaty of peace and reconciliation, and to publish to all, whom the gospel
should reach, the express offers of life and glory, in a certain method, which
his infinite wisdom judged suitable to the purity of his nature, and the honor
of his government. This method was indeed a most astonishing one, which,
familiar, as it is to our thoughts and our tongues, I cannot recollect and
mention without great amazement. He determined to send his own Son into the
world, "the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, Heb.
1, 3. partaker of his own divine perfections and honors, to be not merely a
teacher of righteousness, and a messenger of grace, but also a sacrifice for
the sins of men; and would consent to his saving them on no other condition but
this, that he should not only labor, but die in the cause.

5. Accordingly, at such a period of time as infinite Wisdom saw most
convenient, the Lord Jesus Christ appeared in human flesh; and after he had
gone through incessant and long continued fatigues, and borne all the preceding
injuries which the ingratitude and malice of men could inflict, he voluntarily
submitted himself to death, even the death of the cross; Phil. 2, 8. and having
been delivered for our offenses, was raised again for our justification, Romans
4, 25. After his resurrection he continued long enough on earth to give his
followers most convincing evidences of it, and then "ascended into heaven in
their sight, Acts 1, 9 -- 11;" and sent down his Spirit from thence upon his
apostles, to enable them, in the most persuasive and authoritative manner, to
"preach the gospel, Luke 24, 40:" and he has given it in charge to them, and to
those who, in every age, succeed them in this part of their office, that it
should be published "to every creature, Mark. 16, 15;" that all who believe in
it may be saved, by virtue of its abiding energy, and the immutable power and
grace of its divine author, who is, the same yesterday, today and for ever,
Heb. 13, 8.

6. This gospel do I therefore now preach, and proclaim unto thee, O reader,
with the sincerest desire that, through divine grace, it may this very day be
salvation to thy soul, Luke 19, 9. Know therefore, and consider it, whosoever
thou art, that as surely as these words are now before thine eyes, so sure it
is that the incarnate Son of God "was made a spectacle to the world, and to
"angels, and to men, 1 Cor. 4, 9;" his back torn with scourges, his head with
thorns, his limbs stretched out as on a rack, and nailed to the accursed tree;
and in this miserable condition he was hung up by his hands and his feet, as an
object of public infamy and contempt. Thus did he die, in the midst of all the
taunts and insults of his cruel enemies who thirsted for his blood; and which
was the saddest circumstance of all, in the midst of these agonies with which
he closed the most innocent, perfect, and useful life that ever was spent upon
earth, he had not those supports of the divine presence which sinful men have
often experienced, when they have been suffering for the testimony of their
conscience. They have often burst out into transports of joy and songs of
praise while their executioners have been glutting their hellish malice, and
more than savage barbarity, by making their torments artificially grievous; but
the crucified Jesus cried out, in the distress of his spotless and holy soul,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27, 46.

7. Look upon our dear Redeemer! Look up to this mournful, dreadful, yet, in
one view, delightful spectacle, and then ask thine own heart, Do ye believe
that Jesus suffered and died thus? and why did he suffer and die? Let me answer
in God's own words, He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for
our iniquities, and the chastisement of our peace was upon him, that by his
stripes we might be healed: it pleased the Lord to bruise him, and to put him
to grief, when he made his soul an offering for sin? for, the Lord "laid on him
the iniquity of us all, Isa. 53, 5.6.10. So that I may address you in the words
of the Apostle, Be it known unto you therefore, that through this man is
preached unto you the forgiveness of sin, Acts 13, 38. as it was his command,
just after he arose from the dead, that repentance and remission of his sins
should be preached in his name unto all nations, beginning at Jerusalem, Luke
24, 47; the very place where his blood had so lately been shed in so cruel a
manner. I do therefore testify unto you, in the words of another inspired
writer, that "Christ was made sin," that is, a sin-offering, "for us though he
knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5,
21;" that is, that through the righteousness he has fulfilled, and the
atonement he has made, we might be accepted by God as righteous, and be not
only pardoned, but received into his favor. To you is the word of this
salvation sent, Acts 13, 26; and to you, O reader, are the blessings of it even
now offered by God; sincerely offered; so that, after all I have said under the
former heads, it is not your having broken the law of God that shall prove your
ruin, if you do not also reject his gospel. It is not all those legions of sins
which rise up in battle array against you that shall be able to destroy you, if
unbelief do not lead them on, and final impenitence do not bring up the rear. I
know that guilt is a timorous thing: I will therefore speak in the words of God
himself; nor can any be more comfortable: He that believes on the Son has
everlasting life, John 3, 36; and he shall never come into condemnation, John
5, 24: there is therefore now no condemnation, no kind or degree of it, to
them, to any one of them, who are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8, 1. You have indeed been a very great
sinner, and your offenses have truly been attended with most heinous
aggravations; nevertheless, you may rejoice in the assurance, that where sin
has abounded, there shall grace much more abound, Romans 5, 20; that where sin
has reigned unto death, where it has had its most unlimited sway, and most
unresisted triumph, there shall righteousness reign to eternal life through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 5, 21. That righteousness, to which, on believing
on him, thou will be entitled, shall not only break those chains by which sin
is (as it were) dragging thee at its chariot wheels with a furious pace to
eternal ruin, but it shall clothe thee with the robes of salvation, shall six
thee on a throne of glory, where thou shall live and reign for ever among the
princes of heaven; shall reign in immortal beauty and joy, without one
remaining scar of divine displeasure upon thee, without any single mark by
which it could be known that thou had ever been obnoxious to wrath and a
curse; except it be an anthem of praise, to "the Lamb that was slain, and "has
washed thee from thy sins in his own blood, Rev. 1, 5.

8. Nor is it necessary, in order to thy being released from guilt, and
entitled to this high and complete felicity, that thou should, before thou will venture to apply to Jesus, bring any good works of thine own to recommend
thee to his acceptance. Is it indeed true, that if thy faith be sincere, it
will certainly produce them: but I have the authority of the word of God to
tell thee, that if thou this day sincerely believe in the name of the Son of
God, thou shall this day be taken under his care, and be numbered among those
of his sheep, to whom he has graciously declared that "he will give eternal
life;" and, that they shall "never perish, John 10, 28. Thou have no need
therefore to say, Who shall go up into heaven? or, who shall descend into the
deep" for me? "For the word is nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thine heart,
Romans 10, 6.7.8." With this joyful message I leave thee; with this faithful
saying," indeed worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1, 15; with this gospel, O
sinner, which is my life, and which, if thou do not reject it, will be thine
too.

The Sinner 's REFLECTION on this good News.
OH, my soul, how astonishing is the message which thou have this day received!
I have indeed often heard it before, and it is grown so common to me that the
surprise is not sensible: but reflect, O my soul, what it is thou have heard,
and say, whether the name of the Savior, whose message it is, may not well be
called, "Wonderful Counselor, Isa. 9, 6," when he displays before thee such
wonders of love, and proposes to thee such counsels of peace!

Blessed Jesus, is it indeed thus! Is it not the fiction of the human mind?
surely it is not! What human mind could have invented or conceived it? Is it a
plain certain fact, that thou did leave the magnificence and joy of the
heavenly world in compassion to such a wretch as I? Oh, had thou from that
height of dignity and felicity only looked down upon me for a moment, and sent
some gracious word to me for my direction and comfort even by the least of thy
servants, justly and might I have prostrated myself in grateful admiration, and
have kissed the very footsteps of him that published salvation, Isa. 52, 7. But
did thou condescend to be thyself the messenger! What grace had that been
though thou had but once in person made the declaration, and immediately
returned back to the throne, from whence divine compassion brought thee down?
But this is not all the triumph of thine illustrious grace: it not only brought
thee down to earth, but kept thee here in a frail and wretched tabernacle for
long successive years, and at length it cost thee thy life, and stretched thee
out as a malefactor upon the cross, after thou have borne insult and cruelty,
which it may justly wound my heart so much as to think of: and thus thou have
atoned injured justice, and redeemed me to God with thine own blood, Rev. 5, 9.

What shall I say? Lord I believe, help thou mine unbelief, Mark 9, 24. It
seems to put faith to the stretch to admit what it indeed exceeds the utmost
stretch of imagination to conceive. Blessed, for ever blessed be thy name, O
thou Father of mercies, that thou have contrived the way? Eternal thanks to the
Lamb that was slain, and to that kind Providence that sent the word or this
salvation to me! Oh let me not for ten thousand worlds "receive this grace of
God in vain! 2 Cor. 6, 1." Oh impress this gospel upon my soul, till its saving
virtue be diffused over every faculty! Let it not only be heard, and
acknowledged, and professed, but felt! Make it thy power to my eternal
salvation, Romans 1, 16; and raise me to that humble tender gratitude, to that
active unwearied zeal in thy service, which becomes one to whom so much is
forgiven, Luke 7, 47; and forgiven upon such terms as these!

I feel a sudden glow in mine heart while these tidings are sounding in mine
ears; but, Oh! let it not be a slight superficial transport! Oh let not this
which I would fain call my Christian joy be as that foolish laughter with which
I have been so madly enchanted like the crackling blaze of thorns under a pot!
Eccles. 7, 6. O teach me to secure this mighty blessing, this glorious hope, in
the method which thou have appointed! and preserve me from mistaking the joy of
nature, while it catches a glimpse of its rescue from destruction, for that
consent of grace which embraces and insures the deliverance.

CHAP. IX. A more particular Account of the Way by which this Salvation is to
be obtained.
An inquiry into the way of salvation by Christ being supposed, 1. The sinner
is in general directed to repentance and faith, 2; and urged to give up all
selfdependence, 3; and to seek salvation by free grace, 4. A summary of more
particular directions is proposed, 5. (1.) That the sinner should apply to
Christ, 6. with deep abborrence of his former sins, 7. and a firm resolution of
forsaking them, 8. (2.) That he solemnly commit his soul into the hands of
Christ, the great vital act of faith, 9. which is exemplified at large, 10.
(3.) That he make it in fact the governing care of his future life to obey and
imitate Christ, 11. This is the only method of obtaining gospel salvation, 12.
The sinner deliberating on the expediency of accepting it.

1. I NOW consider you, my dear reader, as coming to me with the enquiry which
the Jews once addressed to our Lord. "What shall we do that we may work the
works of God, John 6, 28?" what method shall I take to secure that redemption
and salvation which I am told Christ has procured for his people? I would
answer it as seriously and carefully as possible, as one that knows of what
importance it is to you to be rightly informed; and that knows also how
strictly he is to answer to God for the sincerity and care with which the reply
is made. May I be enabled to "speak as his oracle, 1 Pet. 4, 11." that is, in
such a manner as faithfully to echo back what the sacred oracles teach!

2. And here, that I may be sure to follow the safest guides, and the fairest
examples, I must preach salvation to you, in the way of repentance toward God,
and of faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 20, 21; that Good old doctrine
which the apostles preached, and which no man can pretend to change, but at the
peril of his own soul and of theirs who attend to him.

3. I suppose that you are by this time convinced of your guilt and
condemnation, and of your own inability to recover yourself. Let me,
nevertheless, urge you to feel that conviction yet more deeply, and to impress
it with yet greater weight upon your soul; that you have "undone yourself," and
that in yourself is not your help found, Hosea 13, 9. Be persuaded, therefore,
expressly and solemnly, and sincerely, to give up all self-dependence, which,
if you do not guard against it, will be ready to return secretly, before it is
observed, and will lead you to attempt building up what you have just been
destroying.

4. Be assured, that if ever you are saved, you must ascribe that salvation
entirely to the free grace of God. If, guilty and miserable as you are, you are
not only accepted but crowned, you must "lay down your crown," with all humble
acknowledgment, before the throne Rev. 4, 10. No flesh must glory in his
presence; but he that glories must glory in the Lord: for of him are we in
Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.29, -- 31. and you must be sensible
you are in such a state, as having none of these in yourself, to need them in
another. You must therefore be sensible that you are ignorant and guilty,
polluted, and enslaved; or, as our Lord expresses it, (with regard to some that
were under a Christian profession,) that, as a sinner, you are wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, Rev. 3, 17.

5. If these views be deeply impressed upon your mind, you will be prepared to
receive what I am now to say. Hear, therefore, in a few words, your duty, your
remedy, and your safety, which consists in this, That you must apply to Christ
with a deep abhorrence of your former sins, and a firm resolution of forsaking
them; forming that resolution in the strength of his grace, and fixing your
dependence on him for your acceptance with God, even while you are purposing to
do your very best; and when you have actually done the best you ever will do in
consequence of that purpose.

6. The first and most important advice that I can give you in the present
circumstances is, That "you look to Christ, and apply yourself to him." And
here, "say not in your heart, Who shall ascend into heaven, to bring him down
to me Romans 10, 6?" or, Who shall raise me up thither to present me before him?
The blessed Jesus, "by whom all things consist Col. 1, 17." by whom the whole
system of them is supported, forgotten as he is by most that bear his name, "is
not far from any of us "Acts 17, 27;" nor could he have promised to have been,
wherever two or three are met together in his name Mat. 18, 20, but in
consequence of those truly divine perfections by which he is every where
present. Would you therefore, O sinner, desire to be saved? go to the Savior:
would you desire to be delivered, look to that great Deliverer; and though you
should be overwhelmed with guilt, and shame, and fear, and horror, that you
should be incapable of speaking to him, fall down in this speechless confusion
at his feet, and behold him, as the Lamb "of God, that takes away the sin of
the world John 1, 29.

7. Behold him therefore with an attentive eye, and say whether the sight does
not touch, and even melt, thy very heart? Do thou not feel what a foolish and
what a wretched creature thou have been, that for the sake of such low and
sordid gratifications and interests as those which thou have been pursuing,
thou should thus kill the Prince of life Acts 3, 15. Behold the deep wounds
which he bore for thee. Look on him whom thou have pierced, and surely thou
must mourn Zech. 12, 10, unless thine heart be hardened into stone. Which of
thy past sins can thou reflect upon, and say, "For this it was worth my while
thus to have injured my Savior, and to have exposed the Son of God to such
sufferings!" And what future temptations can arise so considerable, that thou
should say, For the sake of this I will crucify my Lord again Heb. 6, 6?
Sinner, thou must repent; thou must repent of every sin, and must forsake it;
but if thou do it to any purpose, I well know it must be as at the foot of
the cross. Thou must sacrifice every lust, even the dearest though it should be
like a right hand, or a right eye Mat. 5.29.30; and therefore, that thou
may, if possible, be animated to it, I have led thee to that altar, on which
Christ himself was sacrificed for thee, an offering of a sweet smelling savor
Ephesians. 5, 2. Thou must yield up thyself to God, as one alive from the dead Romans
6, 13; and therefore I have showed thee at what a price he purchased thee: For
thou wast not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, but with
the precious blood of the Son of God, that Lamb without blemish and without
spot 1 Pet. 1, 18.19. And now I would ask thee, as before the Lord, what does
thine own heart say to it? Art thou grieved for thy former offenses? art thou
willing to forsake thy sins? art thou willing to become the cheerful, thankful
servant of him, who has purchased thee with his own blood?

8. I will suppose such a purpose as this rising in thine heart: how
determinate it is, and how effectual it may be, I know not; what different
views may arise hereafter, or how soon the present sense may wear off: but this
I assuredly know, that thou will never see reason to change these views; for
however thou may alter, the Lord Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today,
and forever Heb. 13, 8: and the reasons that now recommend repentance and
faith, as fit and as necessary, will continue invariable, as long as the
perfections of the blessed God are the same, and as long as his Son continues
the same.

9. But while you have these views and these purposes, I must remind you, that
this is not all that is necessary to your salvation. You must not only purpose,
but, as God gives opportunity, you must act as those who are convinced of the
evil of sin, and of the necessity and excellence of holiness: and that you may
be enabled to do so in other instances, you must, in the first place, and as
the first great work of God, (as our Lord himself calls it,) believe in him
whom God has sent John 6, 29. You must confide in him; must commit your soul
into the hands of Christ, to be saved by him in his own appointed method of
salvation. This is the great act of saving faith; and I pray God that you may
experimentally know what it means, so as to be able to say with the apostle
Paul, in the near view of death itself, I know whom I have believed, and am
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him until that
day, 2 Timothy 1, 12; that great decisive day, which, if we are Christians, we
have always in view. To this I would urge you; and oh that I could be so happy
as to engage you to it while I am illustrating it in this and the following
addresses! Be assured you must not apply yourselves immediately to God, as
absolutely or in himself considered, in the neglect of a Mediator. It will
neither be acceptable to him, nor safe for you, to rush into his presence
without any regard to his own Son, whom he has appointed to introduce sinners
to him; and if you com^ otherwise, you come as one who is not a sinner: th^^
very manner of presenting the address will be interpre^ed as a denial of that
guilt with which he knows you are chargeable; and therefore he will not admit
you nor so much as look upon you. And accordingly, o^ Lord, knowing how much
every man living was concerned in this, says in the most universal terms, No
man comes unto the Father but by me, John 14, 6.

10. Apply therefore to this glorious Redeemer, amiable, (as he will appear to
every believing eye,) in the blood which he shed upon the cross, and in the
wounds which he received there. Go to him, O sinner, this day, this moment,
with all thy sins about thee. Go just as thou art; for if thou will never apply
to him till thou art first righteous and holy, thou will never be righteous and
holy at all; nor can be so, on this supposition, unless there were some way
of being so without him, and then there would be no occasion for applying to
him for righteousness and holiness. It were indeed as if it should be said,
that a sick man should defer his application to a physician till his health be
recovered. Let me, therefore, repeat it without offense, go to him just as thou
art, and say, (Oh that thou may this moment be enabled to say it from thy
very soul!) Blessed Jesus, I am surely one of the most sinful, and one of the
most miserable creatures that ever fell prostrate before thee; nevertheless, I
come because I have heard that thou did once say, Come unto me, all ye that
labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Matt. 11, 28. I come
because I have heard that thou did graciously say, Him, that comes unto me,
I will in no wise cast out, John 6, 37. O thou Prince of peace, O thou King of
glory, I am a condemned miserable sinner. I have ruined my own soul, and am
condemned for ever, if thou do not help me and save me. I have broken thy
Father's law and thine, for thou art one with him, John 10, 30. I have deserved
condemnation and wrath, and I am, even at this very moment under a sentence of
everlasting destruction; a destruction which will be aggravated by all the
contempt which I have cast upon thee, O thou bleeding Lamb of God; for I
cannot, and will not, dissemble it before thee, that I have wronged thee, most
basely and ungratefully wronged thee, under the character of a Savior as well
as of a Lord: but now I am willing to submit to thee; and I have brought my
poor trembling soul to lodge it in thine hands, if thou will condescend to
receive it, and if thou do not it must perish. O Lord, I lie at thy feet;
stretch out thy golden scepter that I may live! Esth. 4, 11. yea if it please
the King, let the life of my soul be given me as my petition! Esth. 7, 3. I
have no treasure wherewith to purchase it; I have no equivalent to give thee
for it; but if that compassionate heart of thine can find a pleasure in saving
one of the most distressed creatures under heaven, that pleasure thou may
here find. O Lord, I have foolishly attempted to be mine own savior, but it
will not do: I am sensible the attempt is vain; and therefore I give it over,
and look unto thee. On thee, blessed Jesus, who art sure and steadfast, do I
desire to fix my anchor: on thee, as the only sure foundation, would I build my
eternal hopes: to thy teaching, O thou unerring Prophet of the Lord, would I
submit: be thy doctrines ever so mysterious, it is enough for me that thou
thyself have said it: to thine atonement, obedience and intercession, O thou
holy and ever acceptable High Priest, would I trust: and to thy government, O
thou exalted Sovereign, would I yield a willing, delightful subjection. In
token of reverence and love, I "kiss the Son; Psalm 2, 12." I kiss the ground
before his feet: I admit thee, O my Savior, and welcome thee with unutterable
joy, to the throne in my heart: ascend it, and reign there for ever! subdue
mine enemies, O Lord, for they are thine; and make me thy faithful, thy zealous
servant; faithful to death, and zealous to eternity!"

11. Such as this must be the language of your very heart before the Lord. But
then remember, that in consequence hereof, it must be the language of your life
too. The unmeaning words of the lips would be a vain mockery. The most
affectionate transport of the passions, should it be transient and ineffectual,
would be but like a blaze of straw presented instead of incense at his altar.
With such humility, with such love, with such cordial self dedication and
submission of soul, must thou often prostrate thyself in the presence of
Christ: and then thou must go away, and keep him in thy view; must go away, and
live unto God through him, "denying ungodliness and worldly lusts," and
behaving thyself soberly, righteously, and godly, in this vain ensnaring world,
Tit. 2, 12. You must make it your care to show your love by obedience; by
forming yourself as much as possible according to the temper and manner of
Jesus, in whom you believe. You must make it the great point of your ambition,
(and a nobler view you cannot entertain) to be a living image of Christ; that,
so far as circumstances will allow, even those who have heard and read but
little of him may, by observing you, in some measure see and know what kind of
a life that of the blessed Jesus was. And this must be your constant care, your
prevailing character, as long as you live. You must follow him whithersoever he
leads you; must follow him with a cross on your shoulder, when he commands you
to take it up; Matthew. 16, 24; and so must be faithful even unto death,
expecting the crown of life, Rev. 2, 10.

12. This, so far as I have been able to learn from the word of God, is the way
to safety and glory; the surest, the only way you can take. It is the way which
every faithful minister of Christ has trod, and is treading; and the way to
which, as he tenders the salvation of his own soul, he must direct others. We
cannot, we would not, alter it in favor of ourselves, or of our dearest
friends. It is the way in which alone, so far as we can judge, it becomes the
blessed God to save his apostate creatures. And therefore, reader, I beseech
and entreat you seriously to consider it; and let your own conscience answer,
as in the presence of God, whether you are willing to acquiesce in it or not.
But know, that to reject it is thine eternal death. For as there is no other
name under heaven given among men whereby we can be saved, Acts 4, 12, but this
of Jesus of Nazareth, so there is no other method but this in which Jesus
himself will save us.

The Sinner DELIBERATING on the Expediency of falling in with this Method of
Salvation.
CONSIDER, O my soul, what answer will thou return to such proposals as these?
Surely, if I were to speak the first dictate of this corrupt and degenerate
heart, it would be, This is a hard saying, and who can bear it? John 6, 60. To
be thus humbled, thus mortified, thus subjected? To take such a yoke upon me,
and to carry it as long as I live! To give up every darling lust, though dear to
me as a right eye, and seemingly necessary as a right hand? to submit, not only
my life, but my heart, to the command and discipline of another! To have a
Master there, and such a Master as will control many of its favorite
affections, and direct them quite into another channel! A master, who himself
represents his commands by taking up the cross and following him! To adhere to
the strictest rules of godliness and sobriety, of righteousness and truth; not
departing from them, in any allowed instance, great or small, upon any
temptation, for any advantage, to escape any inconvenience and evil, no, not
even for the preservation of life itself; but, upon a proper call of
providence, to act as if I hated even my own life! Luke xiv, 26. Lord, it is
hard to flesh and blood: and yet I perceive and feel there is one demand yet
harder than this

With all these precautions, with all these mortifications, the pride of my
nature would find some inward resource of pleasure, might I but secretly think
that I had been my own savior; that my own wisdom and my own resolution had
broken the bands and chains of the enemy; and that I had drawn out of my own
treasures the price with which my redemption was purchased. But must I lie down
before another, as guilty and condemned, as weak and helpless? and must the
obligation be multiplied, and must a Mediator have his share too? must I go to
the cross for my salvation, and seek my glory from the infamy of that? must I
be stripped of every pleasing pretense to righteousness, and stand in this
respect upon a level with the vilest of men? stand at the bar among the
greatest criminals, pleading guilty with them, and seeking deliverance by that
very act of grace whereby they have obtained it?

I dare not deliberately say this method is unreasonable. My conscience
testifies that I have sinned, and cannot be justified before God as an innocent
and obedient creature. My conscience tells me that all these humbling
circumstances are fit: that it is fit a convicted criminal should be brought
upon his knees; that a captive rebel should give up the weapons of his
rebellion, and bow before his sovereign, if he expects his life. Yea, my reason
as well as my conscience, tells me, that it is fit and necessary that, if I am
saved at all, I should be saved from the power and love of sin, as well as from
the condemnation of it; and that, if sovereign mercy gives me a new life, after
having deserved eternal death, it is most fit I should yield myself to God as
alive from the dead, Romans 6, 13." But, Oh wretched man that I am, I feel a law
in my members that wars against the law of my mind, Romans 7, 23. 24, and opposes
the conviction of my reason and conscience. Who shall deliver me from this
bondage? who shall make me willing to do that which I know in my own soul to be
most expedient? O Lord subdue my heart, and let it not be drawn so strongly one
way, while the nobler powers of my mind would direct it another! Conquer every
licentious principle within, that it may be my joy to be wisely governed and
restrained! especially subdue my pride, that lordly corruption which so ill
suits an impoverished and condemned creature; that thy way of salvation may be
amiable to me, in proportion to the degree in which it is humbling! I feel a
disposition to linger in Sodom, but, oh, be merciful to me, and pull me out of
it, Genesis 19, 16, before the storms of thy flaming vengeance fall, and there be
no more escaping!

CHAP. X. The Sinner seriously urged and entreated to accept of Salvation in
this way.
Since many, who have been impressed with these things, suffer the impression
to wear off in vain, 1. Strongly as the case speaks for itself, sinners are to
be entreated to accept this salvation, 2. Accordingly the reader is entreated.
(1.) By the Majesty and mercy of God, 3. (2.) By the dying love of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 4. (3.) By the regard due to fellow creatures, 5. (4.) By the
worth of his own immortal soul, 6. The matter is solemnly left with the reader,
as before God, 7. The sinner yielding to these entreaties, and declaring his
acceptance of salvation by Christ.

THUS far have I often known convictions and impressions to arise, (if I might
judge by the strongest appearances,) which, after all, have worn off again,
Some unhappy circumstance of external temptation, ever joined by the inward
reluctance of an unsanctified heart, to this holy and humbling scheme of
redemption, has been the ruin of multitudes. And through the deceitfulness of
sin, they have been hardened, Heb. 3, 13, till they seem to have been utterly
destroyed, and that without remedy, Prove. 29, 1. And therefore, O thou immortal
creature, who art now reading these lines, I beseech thee, that while affairs
are in this critical situation; while there are these balancings of mind
between accepting and rejecting that glorious gospel, which, in the integrity
of my heart, I have now been laying before you, you would once more give me an
attentive audience, while I plead in God's behalf (shall I say?) or rather in
your own; while as an ambassador for Christ, and as though God did beseech you by
me, I pray you in Christ's stead, that you would be reconciled to God, 2 Cor.
5, 20; and would not, after these awakenings, and these inquiries, be a
madness, which it will surely be the doleful business of a miserable eternity
to lament, reject this compassionate counsel of God toward you.

2. One would, indeed, imagine there should be no need of importunity here. One
would conclude, that as soon as perishing sinners are told that an offending
God is ready to be reconciled; that he offers them a full pardon for all their
aggravated sins; yea, that he is willing to adopt them into his family now,
that he may at length admit them to his heavenly presence; all should, with the
utmost readiness and pleasure, embrace so kind a message, and fall at his feet
in speechless transports of astonishment, gratitude and joy. But, alas! we find
it much otherwise. We see multitudes quite unmoved, and the impressions which
are made on many more, are feeble and transient. Lest it should be thus with
you, O reader, let me urge the message with which I have the honor to be
charged: let me entreat you to be reconciled to God, and to accept of pardon
and salvation in the way in which it is so freely offered to you.

3. I entreat you, by the majesty of that God, in whose name I come; whose
voice fills all heaven with reverence and obedience. He speaks not in vain to
legions of angels; but if there could be any contention among those blessed
spirits, it would be, who should be first to execute his commands. O let him
not speak in vain to a wretched mortal! I entreat you by the terrors of his
wrath, who could speak to you in thunder; who could* by one single act of his
will, cut off this precarious life of yours, and send you down to hell. I
beseech you by his mercies, by his tender mercies; by the bowels of his
compassion which still earn over you, as those of a parent over a dear son,
over a tender child, whom, notwithstanding his former ungrateful rebellions,
"he earnestly remembers still, Jer. 31, 20." I beseech and entreat you, by all
this paternal goodness, that you do not (as it were) compel him to lose the
character of the gentle parent in that of the righteous judge; so that (as he
threatens with regard to those whom he had just called his sons and his
daughters) a fire should be kindled in his anger, which should burn unto the
lowest hell, Deuteronomy. 32, 19.22.

4. I beseech you farther, by the name and love of our dying Savior; I beseech
you by all the condescension of his incarnation; by that poverty to which he
voluntarily submitted, that you might be enriched with eternal treasures, 2
Cor. 8, 9; by all the gracious invitations which he gave, which still sound in
his word, and still coming (as it were) warm from his heart are sweeter than
honey, or the honey comb, Ps. 19, 10. I beseech you by all his glorious works
of power and wonder, which were also works of love. I beseech you by the memory
of the most benevolent person, and the most generous friend. I beseech you by
the memory of what he suffered, as well as of what he said and did; by the
agony which he endured in the garden, when his body was covered with a dew of
blood, Luke 22, 44. I beseech you by all that tender distress which he felt,
when his dearest friends forsook him and fled, Matt. 26, 56 and his blood
thirsty enemies dragged him away, like the meanest of slaves, and like the
vilest of criminals. I beseech you by the blows and bruises, by the stripes and
lashes, which this injured Sovereign endured while in their rebellious hands;
by the shame of spitting, from which he hid not that kind and venerable
countenance, Isa. 50, 6. I beseech you by the purple robe, the scepter of reed,
and the crown of thorns, which this King of glory wore, that he might set us
among the princes of heaven, Psalm 113, 8. I beseech you by the heavy burden of
the cross, under which he panted, and toiled, and fainted, in the painful way
to Golgotha, John 19, 17, that he might free us from the burden of our sins. I
beseech you by the remembrance of those rude nails that tore the veins and
arteries, the nerves and tendons, of his sacred hands and feet; and by that
invincible, that triumphant goodness, which, while the iron pierced his flesh,
engaged him to cry out, Father forgive them for they know not what they do,
Luke 22, 34. I beseech you by the unutterable anguish which he bore when lifted
up upon the cross, and extended there as on a rack, for six painful hours, that
you open your heart to those attractive influences, which have drawn to him
thousands and ten thousands, John 13, 32. I beseech you by all that insult and
derision which the Lord of glory bore there, Matt. 27, 29 -- 44; by that
parching thirst, which could hardly obtain the relief of vinegar, John 19,
28.29; by that doleful cry, so astonishing in the mouth of the only begotten of
the Father, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matt. 27, 46. I beseech
you by the grace that subdued and pardoned a dying malefactor, Luke 23, 42.43;
by that compassion for sinners, by that compassion for you, which wrought in
his heart, long as its vital motion continued, and which ended not when he
bowed his head, saying, It is finished, and gave up the ghost, John 19, 30. I
beseech you by the triumphs of that resurrection, by which he was declared to
be the Son of God with power, by the Spirit of holiness, which wrought to
accomplish it, Romans 1, 4; by that gracious tenderness which attempered all
those triumphs, when he said to her out of whom he had cast seven devils,
concerning his disciples who had treated him so basely, Go, tell my brother, I
ascend unto my Father and your Father, unto my God and your God, John 20, 17. I
beseech you by that condescension with which he said to Thomas, when his
unbelief had such an unreasonable demand, Reach hither thy finger and behold my
hands, and reach thither thine hand, and put it into my side; and be not
faithless but believing, John 20, 27. I beseech you by that generous and
faithful care of his people, which he carried up with him to the regions of
glory, and which engaged him to send down his Spirit, in that rich profusion of
miraculous gifts, to spread the progress of his saving word, Acts 2, 33. I
beseech you by that voice of sympathy and power with which he said to Saul,
while injuring his church, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Acts 9, 4. by
that generous goodness which spared that prostrate enemy, when he lay trembling
at his feet, and raised him to such a dignity as to be not inferior to the very
chiefest apostles, 2 Cor. 12, 11. I beseech you by the memory of all that
Christ has already done, by the expectation of all he will farther do, for his
people. I beseech you at once, by the scepter of his grace, and by that sword
of his justice, with which all his incorrigible enemies shall be "slain before
him, Luke 19, 27," that you do not "trifle away these precious moments while
his Spirit is thus breathing upon you, that you do not lose an opportunity
which may never return, and on the improvement of which your eternity depends.

5. I beseech you by all the bowels of compassion which you owe to the faithful
ministers of Christ, who are studying and laboring, preaching and praying,
wearing out their time, exhausting their strength, and, very probably,
shortening their lives, for the salvation of your soul, and of souls like
yours. I beseech you by the affection with which all that love our Lord Jesus
Christ in sincerity, long to see you brought back to him. I beseech you by the
friendship of the living, and by the memory of the dead; by the ruin of those
who have trifled away their days, and are perished in their sins, and by the
happiness of those who have embraced the gospel, and are saved by it. I beseech
you by the great expectation of that important day, when the Lord Jesus shall
be revealed from heaven, 2 Thessalonians. 1, 7; by "the terrors of a dissolving world 2
Pet. 3, 10;" by "the sound of the arch-angel's trumpet," and of that infinitely
more awful sentence, "Come ye, blessed," and "Depart, ye cursed," with which
that grand solemnity shall close, Matt. 25, 34.41.

6. I beseech you, finally, by your own precious, and immortal soul; by the
sure prospect of a dying bed or a sudden surprise into the invisible state; and
as you would feel one sparkle of comfort in your departing spirit, when "your
flesh and your heart are failing." I beseech you by your own personal
appearance before the tribunal of Christ, (for a personal appearance it must
be, even to them who now sit on thrones of their own;) by all the transports of
the blessed, and by all the agonies of the damned, the one or the other, of
which must be your everlasting portion. I affectionately entreat and beseech
you, in the strength of all these united considerations, as you will answer it
to me, who may, in that day, be summoned to testify against you; and, which is
unspeakably more, as you will answer it to your own conscience, as you will
answer it to the eternal Judge: that you dismiss not these thoughts, these
meditations, and these cares, till you have brought matters to a happy issue;
till you have made a resolute choice of Christ, and his appointed way of
salvation, and till you have solemnly devoted yourself to God in the bonds of
an everlasting covenant.

7. And thus I leave the matter before you, and before the Lord. I have told
you my errand, I have discharged my embassy. Stronger arguments I cannot use;
more endearing and more awful considerations I cannot suggest. Choose,
therefore, whether you will go out (as it were) clothed in sackcloth, to cast
yourself at the feet of him who now sends you these equitable and gracious
terms of peace and pardon, or, whether you will hold it out till he appears,
sword in hand, to reckon with you for your treasons and your crimes, and for
this neglected embassy among the rest of them? Fain would I hope the best; nor
can I believe that this labor of love shall be so entirely unsuccessful, that
not one soul shall be brought to the foot of Christ in cordial submission and
humble faith. Take with you, therefore, words, and turn unto the Lord, Hos. 14,
2;, and, on that those which follow might, in effect at least, be the genuine
language of every one that reads them.

The Sinner YIELDING to these ^^reaties, and declaring his acceptance of
Salvation by Christ.
BLESSED Lord, it is enough! it is too much! Surely there needs not this
variety of arguments, this importunity of persuasion, to court me to be happy,
to prevail upon me to accept of pardon, of life, of eternal glory.
Compassionate Savior, my soul is subdued; so that, I trust, the language of
thy grief is become that of my penitence, and I may say, My heart is melted
like wax in the midst of my bowels, Ps. 22, 14.

O gracious Redeemer! I have already neglected thee too long. I have too often
injured thee; have crucified thee afresh by my guilt and impenitence, as if I
had taken pleasure in putting thee to an open shame, Heb. 6, 6; but my heart
now bows itself before thee in humble unfeigned submission. I desire to make no
terms with thee but these, -- that I may be entirely thine. I cheerfully
present thee with a blank, entreating thee that thou will do me the honor to
signify upon it what is thy pleasure. Teach me, O Lord, "what thou would have
me to do!" For I desire to learn the lesson, and to learn it that I may
practice it. If it be more than my feeble powers can answer, thou will, I hope,
give me more strength; and in that strength I will serve thee. Oh receive a
soul which thou have made willing to be thine!

No more, O blessed Jesus! no more is it necessary to beseech and entreat me.
Permit me rather to address myself to thee, with all the importunity o^ a
perishing sinner, that, at length, sees and knows there is salvation in no
other! Permit me now, Lord, to come and throw myself at thy feet, like a
helpless outcast, that has no shelter but in thy generous compassion! like one
"pursued by the avenger of blood," and seeking earnestly an admittance "into
the city of refuge!"

I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait; and in thy word do I hope. Ps. 130, 5.
that thou will receive me graciously, Hos. 14, 2. My soul confides in thy
goodness, and adores it, I adore the patience which has borne with me so long,
and the grace that now makes me heartily willing to be thine on thine own
terms, thine on any terms. Oh secure this treacherous heart to thyself! Oh,
unite me to thee in such inseparable bonds, that none of the allurements of
flesh and blood, none of the vanities of an insnaring world, none of the
solicitations of ^^^ful companions, may draw me back from thee, and pl^^^^^ me
into new guilt and ruin! Be surety, O Lord, ^^r thy servant for good, Psalm
119, 1, 2; that I (...) still keep my hold on thee, and so on eternal life;
'till at length I know more fully, by joyful and everlasting experience, how
complete a Savior thou art! Amen.

CHAP. XI. A solemn Address to those who will not be persuaded to fall in with
the Design of the Gospel.
Universal success not to be expected, 1.; yet, as unwilling absolutely to give
up any, the author addresses; (1.) To those who doubt of the truth of
Christianity, urging an inquiry into its evidences, and directing to proper
methods for that purpose, 2, -- 4. (2.) To those who determine to give it up
without further examination, 5. and presume to set themselves to oppose it, 6.
(3.) To those who speculatively assent to Christianity as true, and yet will
sit down without any practical regard to its most important and acknowledged
truths. Such are dismissed with a representation of the absurdity of their
conduct on their own principles, 7, 8; with a solemn warning of its fatal
consequences, 9, 10; and a compassionate prayer, (introduced, 11.) which
concludes the chapter, and this part of the work.

1. I WOULD humbly hope that the preceding chapters will be the means of
awakening some stupid and insensible sinners; the means of convincing them of
their need of gospel salvation, and of engaging some cordially to accept it.
Yet I cannot flatter myself so far as to hope this should be the case with
regard to all into whose hands this book shall come. What am I, alas, better
than my fathers, 1 Kings 19, 4, or better than my brethren, who have, in all
ages, been repeating their complaints, with regard to multitudes, that they
have stretched out their hands all the day long to a disobedient a^^ gainsaying
people? Romans 10, 21. Many such may perhaps, be found in the number of my
readers; many, of whom neither considerations of terror nor of love will make
any deep and lasting impression; many who, as our Lord learned by experience to
express it, when we pipe to them, will not dance, and when we mourn unto them,
will not lament, Matthew. 11, 17. I can say no more to persuade them, if they
make light of what I have already said. Here, therefore, we must part; in this
chapter I must take my leave of them; and, oh, that I could do it in such a
manner as to fix, at parting, some convictions upon their hearts; that, though
I seem to leave them for a little while, and send them back to review again the
former chapters, as those in which alone they have any present concern, they
might soon, as it were, overtake me again, and find a suitableness in the
remaining part of this discourse, which at present they cannot possibly find.
Unhappy creatures! I quit you, as a physician quits a patient whom he loves,
and is just about to give over as incurable; he returns again and again, and
re-examines the several symptoms, to observe whether there be not some one of
them more favorable than the rest, which may encourage a renewed application.

2. So would I once more return to you. You do not find in yourself any
disposition to embrace the gospel, to apply yourself to Christ, to give
yourself up to the service of God, and to make religion the business of your
life. But, if I cannot prevail upon you to do this, let me engage you at least
to answer me, or rather to answer your own conscience, Why you will not do it?
Is it owing to any secret disbelief of the great principles of religion? If it
be, the case is different from what I have yet considered, and the cure must be
different. This is not a place to combat with the scruples of infidelity.
Nevertheless, I would desire you seriously to inquire how far those scruples
extend. Do they affect only some particular doctrines of the gospel on which my
argument has turned? or do they affect the whole Christian revelation? or do
they reach yet farther, and extend themselves to natural religion as well as
revealed, so that it should be a doubt with you whether there be any God, and
Providence, and future state, or not? As these cases are all different, so it
will be of great importance to distinguish the one from the other, that you may
know on what principle to build as certain, in the examination of those
concerning which you are yet in doubt. But, whatever these doubts are, I would
farther ask you, How long have they continued, and what method have you taken
to get them resolved? Do you imagine that in matters of such moment, it will be
an allowable case for you to trifle on, neglecting to inquire into the evidence
of these things, and then plead your not being satisfied in that evidence, as
an excuse for not acting according to them? Must not the principles of common
sense assure you that, if these things be true, (as when you talk of doubting
about them, you acknowledge it, at least possibly they may,) they are of
infinitely greater importance than any of the affairs of life, whether of
business or pleasure, for the sake of which you neglect them? Why then do you
continue indolent and unconcerned, from week to week, and from month to month,
which, probably, conscience tells you is the case?

3. Do you ask what method you should take to be resolved? It is no hard
question. Open your eyes; set yourself to think: let conscience speak, and
verily do I believe that, if it be not feared in an uncommon degree, you will
find shrewd forebodings of the certainty both of natural and revealed religion,
and of the absolute necessity of repentance, faith, and holiness, to a life of
future felicity. If you are a person of any learning, you cannot but know by
what writers, and in what treatises, these great truths are defended. And, if
you are not, you may find, in almost every town and neighborhood, persons
capable of informing you in the main evidences of Christianity, and of
answering such scruples against it as unlearned minds may have met with. Set
yourself then, in the name of God, immediately to consider the matter. If you
study at all, bend your studies close this way; and trifle not with
mathematics, or poetry, or history, or law, or physic, (which are all,
comparatively light as a feather,) while you neglect this. Study the argument
as for your life; for much more than life depends on it. See how far you are
satisfied, and why that satisfaction reaches no farther. Compare evidences on
both sides. And, above all, consider the design and tendency of the New
Testament, to what it would lead you, and all them that cordially obey it; and
then say whether it be not good. And consider how naturally its truth is
connected with its goodness. Trace the character and sentiments of its authors,
whose living image, (if I may be allowed the expression) is still preserved in
their writings; and then ask your own heart, Can you think this was a forgery?
an impious cruel forgery? For such it must have been if it were a forgery at
all, a scheme to mock God, and to ruin men, even the best of men, such as
reverenced conscience and would abide all extremeties for what they apprehended
to be truth. Put the question to your own heart, Can I in my conscience believe
it to be such an imposture? Can I look up to an omniscient God, and say, O
Lord, thou know that it is in reverence to thee, and in love to truth and
virtue, that I reject this book, and the method to happiness here laid down?

4. But there are difficulties in the way. -- And what then? Have those
difficulties never been cleared? Go to the living advocates for Christianity,
to those of whose abilities, candor, and piety, you have the best opinion, if
your prejudices will give you leave to have a good opinion of any such: tell
them your difficulties; hear their solutions; weigh them seriously, as those
who know they must answer it to God; and, while doubts continue, follow the
truth as far as it will lead you, and take heed that you do not imprison it in
unrighteousness, Romans 1, 18.

Nothing appears more inconsistent and absurd than for a man solemnly to
pretend dissatisfaction in the evidences of the gospel, as a reason why he
cannot in conscience be a thorough Christian; when yet at the same time he
violates the most apparent dictates of reason and conscience, and lives in
vices condemned even by the Heathens. Oh sirs! Christ has judged concerning
such, and judged most righteously and most wisely; They do evil, and therefore
they hate the light, neither come they to the light, lest their deeds should be
made manifest, and be reproved, John 3, 20. But there is a light that will make
manifest and reprove their works, to which they shall be compelled to come, and
the painful scrutiny of which they shall be forced to abide.

5. In the mean time, if you are determined to inquire no farther into the
matter now, give me leave at least, from a sincere concern, that you may not
heap upon your head more aggravated ruin, to entreat you that you would be
cautious how you expose yourself to get greater danger by what you must
yourself own to be unnecessary, I mean attempts to pervert others from
believing the truth of the gospel. Leave them, for God's sake, and for your
own, in possession of those pleasures, and those hopes, which nothing but
Christianity can give them, and act not as if you were solicitous to add to the
guilt of an infidel the tenfold damnation, which they who have been the
perverters and destroyers of the souls of others must expect to meet, if that
gospel, which they have so adventurously opposed, should prove, as it certainly
will, a serious, and to them a dreadful truth.

6. If I cannot prevail here, but the pride of displaying a superiority of
understanding should bear on such a reader, even in opposition to his own
favorite maxims of the innocence of terror, and the equality of all religions
consistent with social virtue, to do his utmost to trample down the gospel with
contempt, I would, however, dismiss him with one proposal, which I think the
importance of the affair may fully justify. If you have done with your
examination into Christianity, and determine to live and conduct yourself as if
it were assuredly false, sit down then and make a memorandum of that
determination. Write it down: On such a day of such a year, I deliberately
resolved that I would live and die rejecting Christianity myself, and doing all
I could to overthrow it. This day I determined not only to renounce all
subjection to, and expectation from Jesus of Nazareth, but also to make it a
serious part of the business of my life to destroy, as far as I possibly can,
all regard to him in the minds of others, and to exert my most vigorous efforts
in the way of reasoning, or of ridicule, to sink the credit of his religion,
and if it be possibly, to root it out of the world; in calm steady defiance of
that day, when his followers say, He shall appear in so much majesty and
terror, to execute the vengeance threatened to his enemies. Dare you write this
and sign it? I firmly believe that many a man, who would be thought a Deist,
and endeavors to increase the number, would not: and if you in particular dare
not to do it, whence does that small remainder of caution arise? the cause is
plain. There is in your conscience some secret apprehension that this rejected,
this opposed, this derided gospel may, after all prove true; and if there be
such an apprehension, then let conscience do its office, and convict you of the
impious madness of acting as if it were most certainly and demonstrably false.
Let it tell you at large how possible it is that happily you may be found
fighting against God, Act. 5, 39: that, bold as you are, in defying the terrors
of the Lord, you may possibly fall into his hands, may chance to hear that
despised sentence, which, when you hear it from the mouth of the eternal Judge,
you will not be able to despise: I will repeat it again in spite of all your
scorn, you may hear the King say to you, Depart accursed, into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels, Matthew. 25, 41. And now go and
pervert and burlesque the scripture, go and lampoon the character of its
heroes, and ridicule the sublime discourses of its prophets and its apostles,
as some have done who have left little behind them but the short-lived
monuments of their ignorance, their profaneness, and their malice: go and
spread like them the banners of Infidelity, and pride thyself in the number of
credulous creatures listed under them. But take heed lest the insulted Galilean
direct a secret arrow to thine heart, and stop thy licentious breath before it
has finished the next sentence thou would utter against him.

7. I will now turn myself from the Deist or the Skeptic, and direct my address
to the nominal Christian; if he may upon any terms be called a Christian, who
feels not, after all I have pleaded, a disposition to subject himself to the
government and the grace of that Savior whose name he bears. O sinner, thou
art turning away from my Lord, in whose cause I speak; but let me earnestly
entreat thee seriously to consider why thou art turning away, and to whom thou will go from him, whom thou acknowledgest to have the words of eternal life,
John 6.68. You call yourself a Christian, and yet will not by any means be
persuaded to seek salvation in good earnest from and through Jesus Christ, whom
you call your Master and your Lord. How do you for a moment excuse this
negligence to your own conscience? If I had urged you on any controverted
point, it might have altered the case. If I had labored hard to make you the
disciple of any particular party of Christians, your delay might have been more
reasonable: nay, perhaps, your refusing to acquiesce might have been an act of
apprehended duty to our common Master. But is it matter of controversy among
Christians, whether there be a great, holy, and righteous God; and whether such
a being, whom we agree to own, should be reverenced and loved, or neglected and
dishonored? Is it matter of controversy whether a sinner should deeply and
seriously repent of his sins, or whether he should go on in them? Is it a
disputed point amongst us whether Jesus became incarnate, and died upon the
cross for the redemption of sinners or no? And if it be not, can it be disputed
by them who believe him to be the Son of God, and the Savior of men, whether a
sinner should seek to him or neglect him? or whether one who professes to be a
christian should depart from iniquity, or give himself up to the practice of
it? Are the precepts of our great Master written obscurely in his word, and
there should be room seriously to question whether he require a devout, holy,
humble, spiritual, watchful, self-denying life, or whether he allow the
contrary? Has Christ, after all his pretensions of bringing life and imortality
to light, left it more uncertain than he found it, whether there be any future
state of happiness and misery, or for whom these states are respectively
intended? Is it matter of controversy whether God will or will not bring every
work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it
be evil Eccl. 12, 14? or whether at the conclusion of that judgment, the wicked
shall go away into everlasting punishment, and the righteous into life eternal
Matt. 25, 46? You will not, I am sure, for very shame pretend any doubt about
those things, and yet call yourself a Christian. Why then will you not be
persuaded to lay them to heart, and to act as duty and interest so evidently
require? Oh sinner, the cause is too obvious; a cause indeed quite unworthy of
being called a reason. It is because thou art blinded and bespotted with thy
vanities and thy lusts. It is because thou have some perishing trifle, which
charms thy imagination and thy senses, so that it is dearer to thee than God
and Christ, than thy own soul and its salvation. It is, in a word, because thou
art still under the influence of that carnal mind, which, whatever pious forms
it may sometimes admit and pretend, is enmity against God, and is not subject
to the law of God, neither indeed can be Romans 8, 7. And therefore thou art in
the very case of those wretches, concerning whom our Lord said, in the days of
his flesh, Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life John 5, 40; and
therefore "ye shall die in your sins John 8, 24."

8. In this case I see not what can signify to renew those expostulations and
addresses, which I have made in the former chapters. As our blessed Redeemer
says of those who rejected his gospel, Ye have both seen and hated both me and
my Father John 15, 24; so may I truly say with regard to you. I have
endeavored to show you in the plainest and clearest words, both Christ and the
Father; I have urged the obligations you are under to both; I have laid before
you your guilt, and your condemnation; I have pointed out the only remedy; I
have pointed out the Rock on which I have built my own eternal hopes, and the
way in which alone I expect salvation; I have recommended those things to you,
which, if God gives me an opportunity, I will, with my dying breath, earnestly
and affectionately recommend to my own children, and to all the dearest friends
that I have upon earth who may then be near me; esteeming it the highest token
of my friendship, the surest proof of my love to them: and if believing the
gospel to be true, you resolve to reject it, I have nothing farther to say, but
that you must abide by the consequence -- Yet as Moses, when he went out from
the presence of Pharaoh for the last time, finding his heart yet more hardened
by all the judgments and deliverances with which he had formerly been
exercised, denounced upon him God's passing through the land in terror to smite
the firstborn with death, and warned him of that great and lamentable cry
which the sword of the destroying angel should raise throughout all his realm
Exodus 9, 4, -- 6; so will I, sinner, now when I am quitting thee, speak to thee
yet again, whether thou will hear or whether thou will forbear Ez. 2, 7; and
denounce that much more terrible judgment, which the sword of divine vengeance,
already whetted and drawn and bathed as it were in heaven Isa. 34, 5. is
preparing against thee; which shall end in a much more doleful cry, though thou
were greater and more obstinate than that haughty monarch. Yes, sinner, that I
may, with the Apostle Paul, when "turning to others," who are more like to hear
me, shake my raiment, and say, I am pure from your blood Acts 18, 6; I will
once more tell you what the end of these things will be; And, oh, that I could
speak to purpose! Oh that I could thunder in thine ear such a peal of terror as
might awaken thee, and be too loud to be drowned in all the noise of carnal
mirth, or to be deadened by those dangerous opiates, with which thou art
contriving to stupify thy conscience!

9. Seek what amusements and entertainments thou will, O sinner I tell thee, if
thou were equal in dignity, and power, and magnificence, to the great monarch
of Babylon, thy pomp shall be brought down to the grave, and all the sound of
thy viols; the worm shall be spread under thee, and the worm shall cover thee
Isa. 14, 11. Yes sinner, the end of these things is death Romans 6, 21; death in
its most terrible sense to thee, if this continue thy governing temper. Thou
can not avoid it; (...) if it be possible for any thing that I can say to
preve^^ ^ou shall not forget it. Your strength is not the strength of stones,
nor is your flesh of brass Job. (...) 12. You are accessible to diseases as
well as others and if some sudden accident do not prevent it, we shall soon see
how heroically you will behave yourself on a dying bed, and in the near views
of eternity. You that now despise Christ, and trifle with his gospel, we shall
see you droop and languish; shall see all your relish for your carnal
recreations, and your vain companions, lost. And if perhaps one and another of
them bolt in upon you, and is brutish and desperate enough to attempt to
entertain a dying man with a gay story, or a profane jest, we shall see how you
will relish it. We shall see what comfort you will have in reflecting on what
is past, or what hope in looking forward to what is to come. Perhaps, trembling
and astonished, you will then be inquiring, in a wild kind of consternation,
what you shall do to be saved; calling for the ministers of Christ, whom you
now despise for the earnestness with which they would labor to save your soul;
and, it may be, falling into a dilirium, or dying convulsions, before they can
come. Or perhaps we may see you flattering yourselves, through a long lingering
illness, that you shall still recover, and putting off any serious reflection
and conversation, for fear it should overset your spirits; and the cruel
kindness of friends and physicians, as if they were in league with Satan to
make the destruction of your soul as sure as possible, may perhaps abet this
fatal deceit.

10. And if any of these probable cases happen, that is, in short, unless a
miracle of grace snatch you "as a brand out of the burning," when the flames
have as it were already taken hold of you, all these gloomy circumstances,
which pass in the chambers of illness, and the bed of death, are but the
forerunners, of infinitely more dreadful things, Oh, who can describe them!
who can imagine them! when surviving friends are tenderly mourning over the
breathless corpse, and taking a fond farewell of it before it is laid to
consume away in the dark and silent grave, into what hands, O sinner, will thy
soul be fallen! what scenes will open upon thy separate spirit, even before thy
deserted flesh be cold, or thy sightless eyes are closed! it shall then know
what it is to return to God to be rejected (...) him, as having rejected his
gospel and his Son, and despised ^^e only treaty of reconciliation; and that
such a one so amazingly condescending and gracious. Thou shall know what it is
to be disowned by Christ, whom thou have refused to entertain; and what it is,
as the certain and immediate consequence of that, to be left in the hands of
the malignant spirits of hell. There will be no more friendship then; none to
comfort, none to aleviate thy agony and distress; but, on the contrary, all
around thee laboring to aggravate and increase them. Thou shall pass away the
intermediate years of the separate state in dreadful expectation, and bitter
outcries of horror and remorse; and then thou shall hear the trumpet of the
archangel, in whatever cavern of that gloomy world thou art lodged. Its sound
shall penetrate thy prison, where, doleful and horrible as it is, thou shall
nevertheless wish that thou might still be allowed to hide thy guilty head,
rather than show it before the face of that awful Judge, before whom heaven and
earth are flying away Rev. 20, 11. But thou must come forth, and be reunited to
a body, now formed for ever to endure agonies, which in this mortal state would
have dissolved it in a moment. You would not be persuaded to come to Christ
before; you would stupidly neglect him, in spite of reason, in spite of
conscience, in spite of all the tenderest solicitations of the gospel, and the
repeated admonitions of its most faithful ministers: but now, sinner, you shall
have an interview with him; if that may be called an interview, in which you
will not dare to lift up your head to view the face of your tremendous and
inexorable Judge. There, at least, how distant soever the time of our life, and
the place of our abode, may have been, there shall we see how courageously your
hearts will endure, and how, strong your hands will be, when the Lord does
this, Exek. 22, 14. There shall I see thee, O reader, whoever thou art that
go on in thine impenitency, among thousands and ten thousands of despairing
wretches, trembling and confounded. There shall I hear thy cries among the
rest, rending the (...) ^^avens in vain. The Judge will rise from the tribu^^
with majestic composure, and leave the (...) be hur^^^ down to those
everlasting burnings to which his righteous vengeance has doomed thee, because
thou would not be saved from them. He^ shall shut its mouth upon thee for
ever, and the sad echo of thy groans and outcries shall be lost amidst the
hallelujahs of heaven to all that find mercy of the Lord in that day.

11. This will most assuredly be the end of these things; and thou, as a
Christian, professest to know and to believe it. It moves my heart at least, if
it moves not thine. I firmly believe that every one, who himself obtains
salvation and glory, will bear so much of his Savior's image in wisdom and
goodness, in zeal for God, and a steady regard to the happiness of the whole
creaation, that he will behold this sad scene with calm approbation, and
without any painful commotion of mind. But as yet I am flesh and blood; and
therefore my bowels are troubled, and mine eyes often overflow with grief, to
think that wretched sinners will have no more compassion upon their own souls;
to think, that in spite of all admonition, they will obstinately run upon
final everlasting destruction. It would signify nothing to add a prayer here,
or a meditation for your use. Poor creature! you will not meditate! you will
not pray! Yet, as I have often poured out my heart in prayer over a dying
friend, when the force of his distemper has rendered him incapable of joining
with me, so will I now apply myself to God for you, O unhappy creature! And if
you disdain so much as to read what my compassion dictates, yet I hope they who
have felt the power of the gospel on their own souls, as they cannot but pity
such as you, will join with me in such cordial, though broken petitions as
these:

A PRAYER in behalf of an impenitent Sinner, in the Case described above.
ALMIGHTY God! with thee all things are possible Matthew, 19, 26; to thee
therefore do I humbly apply myself in behalf of this dear immortal soul, which
thou here see perishing in its sins, and hardening itself against that
everlasting gospel, which has been the power of God to the salvation of so many
thousands and millions. Thou art witness, O blessed God, thou art witness to
the plainness and seriousness with which the message has been delivered. It is
in thy presence that these awful words have been written; and in thy presence
have they been read. Be pleased therefore to record it in the book of thy
remembrance, that so, if this wicked man dies in his iniquity, after the
warning has been so plainly and so solemnly given him, his blood may not be
required at my hand Ezekiel. 33, 8.9. nor at the hand of that Christian friend,
whoever he is, by whom this book has been put into his, with a sincere desire
for the salvation of his soul. Be witness, O blessed Jesus, in the day in which
thou shall judge the secrets of all hearts Romans 2, 16, that thy gospel has
been preached to this hardened wretch, and salvation by thy blood has been
offered him, though (...) continue to despise it. And may thine unworthy
mesenger be unto God a sweet savor in Christ, in this very soul, even though
it should at last perish 2 Cor. 2, 15.

But, oh that, after all his hardness and impenitence thou would still be
pleased, by the sovereign power (...) thine efficacious grace, to awaken and
convert him. Well do we know, oh thou Lord of universal nature, that he who
made the soul can cause the sword of conviction to come near and enter into it.
Oh that, in thine infinite wisdom and love, thou would find out a way to
interpose, and save this sinner from death, from eternal death! Oh that, if it
be thy blessed will, thou would immediately do it! Thou know, O God, he is
a dying creature: thou know that if any thing be done for him, it must be
done quickly: thou see, in the book of thy wise and gracious decrees, a
moment marked, which must seal him up in an unchangeable state: oh that thou
would lay hold on him, while he is yet "joined to the living," and "has hope
Eccles. 9, 4!" Thy immutable laws, in the dispensation of grace, forbid that a
soul should be converted and renewed after its entrance on the invisible world:
oh let thy sacred Spirit work, while he is yet as it were within the sphere of
his operations! Work, O God, by whatever method thou please, only have mercy
upon him! O Lord, have mercy upon him! that he sink not into those depths of
damnation and ruin, on the very brink of which he so evidently appears! Oh that
thou would bring him, if that be necessary, and seem to thee most expedient,
into any depths of calamity and distress! Oh that, with Monasseh, he may be
taken in the thorns, and laden with the fetters of affliction, if that may but
cause him to seek the God of his fathers. 2 Cor. 33, 11.12.

But I prescribe not to thine infinite wisdom. Thou have displayed thy power in
glorious and astonishing instances; which I thank thee that I have so
circumstantially known, and by the knowledge of them have been fortified
against the rash confidence of those who weakly and arrogantly pronounce that
to be impossible which is actually done. Thou have, I know, done that by a
single thought in retirement, when the happy man reclaimed by it has been far
from means, and far from ordinances; which neither the most awful admonitions,
nor the most tender entreaties, nor the most terrible afflictions, nor the most
wonderful deliverances, had been able to effect.

Glorify thy name, O Lord, and glorify thy grace, in the method which to thine
infinite wisdom shall seem most expedient! Only grant, I beseech thee, with all
humble submission to thy will, that this sinner may be saved! or if not, that
the labor of this part may not be altogether in vain; but that, if some reject
it to their aggravated ruin, others may hearken and live! That those thy
servants, who have labored for their deliverance and happiness, may view them
in the regions of glory, as the spoils which thou have honored them as the
instruments of recovering; and may join with them in the hallelujahs of heaven,
to him, who has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and
has made us of condemned rebels, and accursed polluted sinners, kings and
priests unto God; to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen, Rev. 1,
5.6.

CHAP. XII. An Address to a Soul so overwhelmed with a Sense of the greatness
of its Sins, that it dares not apply itself to Christ with any Hope of
Salvation.
The case described at large, 1. -- 4s as it frequently occurs, 5. Granting all
that the dejected soul charges on itself, 6. The invitations and promises of
Christ give hope, 7. The reader urged, under all his burdens and fears, to an
humble application to him, 8: Which i^ accordingly exemplified in the
concluding reflection and prayer.

1. I HAVE now done with those unhappy creatures who despise the gospel, and
with those who neglect it. With pleasure do I now turn myself to those who will
hear me with more regard. Among the various cases which now present themselves
to my thoughts and demand my tender, affectionate, respectful ca^^, there is
none more worthy of compassion than that which I have mentioned in the title of
this chapter; no^^ which requires a more immediate attempt of relief.

2. It is very possible, some afflicted creature maybe ready to cry out, It is
enough: aggravate my grief and my distress no more. The sentence you have been
so awfully describing, as what shall be passed and executed on the impenitent
and unbelieving, is my sentence; and the terrors of it, are my terrors. For
mine iniquities are gone up unto the heavens Rev. 18, 5, and my transgressions
have reached unto the clouds. My case is quite singular. Surely there never was
so great a sinner as I. I have received so many mercies, I have enjoyed so many
advantages, I have heard so many invitations of gospel grace; and yet my heart
has been so hard, and my nature is so exceeding sinful, and the number and
aggravating circumstances of my provocations have been such, that I dare not
hope. It is enough that God has supported me thus long; it is enough that,
after so many years of wickedness, I am yet out of hell. Every day's reprieve
is a mercy at which I am astonished. I lie down and wonder, that death and
damnation have not seized me in my walks the day past. I arise and wonder that
my bed has not been my grave; wonder, that my soul is not separated from
flesh, and surrounded with devils and damned spirits.

3. I have indeed heard the message of salvation; but alas, it seems no message
of salvation to me. There are happy souls that have hope; and their hope is
^^deed in Christ, and the grace of God manifested in (...) But then they feel
in their hearts an encouragement (...) apply to him; whereas I dare not do it.
Christ and grace are things in which I fear I have no part, and must expect
none. There are exceeding rich and precious promises in the word of God; but
they are to me as a sealed book, and are hid from me as to any personal use. I
know Christ is able to save; I know he is willing to save some; but that he
should be willing to save me, such a poluted, such a provoking creature, as,
God knows, and as conscience knows, I have been, and to this day am; this I
know not how to believe; and the utmost that I can do toward believing it is
to acknowledge that it is not absolutely impossible, and that I do not yet lie
down in complete despair; though, alas! I seem upon the very borders of it, and
expect every day and hour to fall into it.

4. I should not, perhaps, have entered so fully into this case if I had not
seen many in it; and I will add, reader, for your encouragement, if it be your
case, several who are now in the number of the most established, cheerful, and
useful Christians. And I hope divine grace will add you to the rest, if "out of
these depths" you be enabled to "cry unto God Psalm. 130, 1;" and though, like
Jonah, you may seem to be "cast out from his presence," yet still, with Jonah,
you "look toward his holy temple Jonah 2, 4."

5. Let it not be imagined that it is in any neglect of that blessed Spirit,
whose office it is to be the great Comforter, that I now attempt to reason you
out of this disconsolate frame; for it is as the great source of reason that he
deals with rational creatures, and it is in the use of rational means and
considerations that he may most justly be expected to operate. Give me leave,
therefore to address myself calmly to you, and to ask you what reason you have
for all these passionate complaints and accusations against yourself? what
reason have you to suggest that your case is singular, when so many have told
you they have felt the same? what reason have you to conclude so hardly against
yourself, when the gospel speaks in such favorable terms? or what reason to
imagine that the gracious things it says are not intended for you? You know
indeed more of the corruptions of your own heart than you know of the hearts of
others; and you make a thousand charitable excuses for their visible failings
and infirmities which you make not for your own; and it may be some of those,
whom you admire as eminent saints when compared with you, are, on their part,
humbling themselves in the dust as unworthy to be numbered among the least of
God's people, and wishing themselves like you, in whom they think they see much
more good, and much less of evil than in themselves.

6. But to suppose the worst? what if they were really the vilest sinner that
ever lived upon the face of the earth? what if your iniquities had gone up unto
the heavens Rev. 18, 5. every day, and your transgressions had reached unto the
clouds, reached thither with such horrid aggravations, that earth and heaven
should have had reason to detest you as a monster of impiety? Admitting all
this, is any thing too hard for the Lord Genesis 18, 14? are any sins of which a
sinner can repent of so deep a dye that the blood of Christ cannot wash them
away? Nay though it would be daring wickedness and monstrous folly for any "to
sin that grace might abound Romans 6, 1," yet had you indeed raised your account
beyond all that divine grace has ever yet pardoned, who should limit the holy
One of Israel Psalm. 78, 41? or who should pretend to say that it was impossible
that God might, for your very wretchedness choose you out from others, to make
you a monument of mercy, and a trophy of hitherto unparalleled grace? The
Apostle Paul strongly intimates this to have been the case with regard to
himself; and why might not you likewise, if indeed the chief of sinners obtain
mercy, that in you, as the Chief, Jesus Christ might show forth all long
suffering, for a pattern to them who shall hereafter believe 1 Timothy 1, 15.16?

7. Gloomy as your apprehensions are, I would ask you plainly, Do you in your
conscience think that Christ is not able to save you? What, is he not able to
save, even to the uttermost, them that come unto God by him Heb. 7, 25. Yes you
will say, abundantly able to do it; but I dare not imagine that he will do it.
And how do you know that he will not? He has helped the very greatest sinners
of all, that have yet applied themselves to him; and he has made thee offers of
grace and salvation in the most engaging and encouraging terms: if any man
thirst, let him come unto me and drink John 7, 37: Let him that is a thirst
come; and whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely Rev. 22, 17:
Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest
Mat. 9, 28:" and, once more, "Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast
out John 6, 39. True, you will say, none that are given him by the Father:
could I know I were of that number I could then apply cheerfully to him. But
dear reader, let me entreat you to look into the text itself, and see whether
that limitation be expressly added there. Do you there read, None of them whom
the Father has given me shall he cast out? The words are in a much more
encouraging form: and why should you frustrate his wisdom and goodness by such
an addition of your own? add not to his words, lest he reprove thee Prove. 30,
6: take them as they stand, and drink in the consolation of them. Our Lord knew
into what perplexity some serious minds might possibly be thrown by what he had
before been saying, "All that the Father has given me shall come unto me;" and
therefore as it were on purpose to balance it, he adds those gracious words,
Him that comes unto me, I will in no wife, by no means on no consideration
whatever, "cast out."

8. If therefore you are already discouraged and terrified at the greatness of
your sins, do not add to their weight and number that one greater and worse
than all the rest, a distrust of the faithfulness and grace of the blessed
Redeemer. Do not, so far as in you lies, oppose all the purposes of his love to
you. O distressed soul, whom do thou dread? to whom do thou tremble to
approach? Is there any thing so terrible in a crucified Redeemer, in "the Lamb
that was slain?" If thou carriest thy soul, almost sinking under the burden of
its guilt, to lay it down at his feet, what do thou offer him but the spoil
which he bled and died to recover and poss^^! and did he purchase it so dearly
that he might reject it with disdain? Go to him directly, and fall down in his
presence, and plead that misery of thine which thou have now been pleading in a
contrary view, as an engagement to your own soul to make the application, and
as an argument with the compassionate Savior to receive you: go, and be
assured, that where sin has abounded, there grace shall much more abound Rom,
5, 20. Be assured, that if one sinner can promise himself a more certain
welcome than another, it is not he that is least guilty and miserable, but he
that is most deeply humbled before God under a sense of that misery and guilt,
and lies the lowest in the apprehension of it.

REFLECTION on these encouragements, ending in an humble and earnest
Application to Christ for mercy.
O MY soul, what say thou to these things? Is there not at least a
possibility of help from Christ? and is there a possibility of help any other
way? Is any other name given under heaven whereby we may be saved Acts 4, 12? I
know there is none. I must then say, like the lepers of Israel 2 Kings 7, 4. If
I sit here I perish, and if I make my application in vain, I can but die. But
peradventure he may save my soul alive. I will therefore arise, and go unto
him; or rather, believing him here by his spiritual presence, sinful and
miserable as I am, I will this moment fall down on my face before him, and pour
out my soul unto him.

Blessed Jesus, I present myself unto thee as a wretched creature, driven
indeed by necessity to do it. For, surely were not that necessity urgent and
absolute, I should not dare for very shame to appear in thine holy and majestic
presence. I am fully convinced that my sins and my follies have been
inexcusably great, more than I can express, more than I can conceive. I feel a
source of sin in my corrupt and degenerate nature, which pours out iniquity as
a fountain sends out its water, and makes me a burden and a terror to myself.
Such aggravations have attended my transgressions, that it looks like
presumption so much as to ask ^^^don of them; and yet would it not be greater
presumption to say, that they exceed thy mercy, and the efficacy of thy blood?
to say that thou have power and grace enough to pardon and save only sinners of
a lower order, while such as I lie out of thy reach? Preserve me from that
blasphemous imagination! preserve me from that unreasonable suspicion! Lord,
thou can do all things, neither is there any thought of mine heart withholden
from thee Job. 42, 2. Thou art indeed as thy word declares, able to save unto
the uttermost Heb. 7, 25; and therefore, breaking through all the oppositions
of shame and fear that would keep me from thee, I come and lie down as in the
dust before thee. Thou know, O Lord, all my sins, and all my follies Ps. 69,
5. I cannot, and, I hope I may say, I would not, disguise them before thee, or
set myself to find out plausible excuses. Accuse me Lord, as thou please; and
I will ingeniously plead guilty to all thine accusations. I will own myself as
great a sinner as thou call me; but I am still a sinner that comes unto thee
for pardon. If I must die, it shall be submitting, and owning the justice of
the fatal stroke. If I perish, it shall be laying hold, as it were on the horns
of the altar; laying myself down at thy footstool, though I have been such a
rebel against thy throne. Many have received a full pardon there, have met with
favor even beyond their hopes. And are all thy compassions, O blessed Jesus,
exhausted? and will thou now begin to reject an humble creature who flies to
thee for life, and pleads nothing but mercy and free grace? "Have mercy upon
me." O most gracious Redeemer, have mercy upon me, and let my life be precious
in thy sight 2 Kings 1, 14! Oh, do not resolve to send me down to that state of
final misery and despair, from which it was thy gracious purpose to deliver and
save so many!

Spurn me not away, O Lord, from thy presence, not be offended when I presume
to lay hold on thy royal robe, and say that I cannot and "will not let thee go"
till my suit is granted Genesis 32, 26!" Oh, remember, that my eternity is at
stake! Remember, O Lord, that all my hopes of obtaining eternal happiness, and
avoiding everlasting, helpless, hopeless destruction, are anchored upon thee:
they hang upon thy smiles, or drop at thy frown. Oh, have mercy upon me, for
the sake of this immortal soul of mine! or, if not for the sake of mine alone,
for the sake of many others, who may, on the one hand, be encouraged by thy
mercy to me, or on the other, may be greatly wounded and discou^aged by my
helpless despair! I beseech thee, O Lord, for thine own sake, and for the
display of thy Father's rich and sovereign grace; I beseech thee by the blood
thou did shed on the cross; I beseech thee by the covenant of grace and
peace, into which the Father did enter with thee for the salvation of believing
and repenting sinners; save me! Save me, O Lord, who earnestly desire to repent
and believe! I am indeed a sinner, in whose final and everlasting destruction
thy justice might be greatly glorified: but, oh, if thou will pardon me, it
will be a monument raised to the honor of thy grace, and the efficacy of thy
blood, in proportion to the degree in which the wretch, to whom thy mercy is
extended, was mean and miserable without it. Speak, Lord, Lord, by thy blessed
Spirit, and banish my fears! Look unto me with love and grace in thy
countenance, and say to me, as in the days of thy flesh thou did to many an
humble supplicant, Thy sins are forgiven thee, go in peace!

CHAP. XIII. The doubting Soul more particularly assisted in its Inquiries as
to the Sincerity of its Faith and Repentance.
Transient impressions liable to be mistaken for conversion, which would be a
fatal error, 1. General scheme for self-examination, Particular inquiries; (1.)
What views there have been of sin? 3. (2) What views there have been of Christ?
4. as to the need the soul has of him, 5. and its willingness to receive him
with a due surrender of heart to his service, 6. Nothing short of this
sufficient, 7. The soul submitting to divine examination, the sincerity of its
faith and repentance.

1. IN consequence of all the serious things which have been said in the former
chapters, I hope it will be no false presumption to imagine that so^^^
religious impressions may be made on hearts which (...) never felt them before;
or may be revived where they have formerly grown cold and languid. Yet I (...)
very sensible, and I desire that you may be so, ho^^ great danger there is of
self-flattery on this important head; and how necessary is it to caution men
against too hasty a conclusion that they are really converted, because they
have felt some warm emotion on their minds, and have reformed the gross
irregularities of their former conduct. A mistake here might be infinitely
fatal; it may prove the occasion of that false peace, which shall lead a man to
bless himself in his own heart, and to conclude himself secure, while all the
threatenings and curses of God's law are sounding in his ears, and lie indeed
directly against him Deuteronomy. 29, 19.20; while, in the mean time he applies to
himself a thousand promises, in which he has no share; which may prove
therefore, like generous wine to a man in an high fever, or strong opiates to
one in a lethargy. The stony ground received the word with joy, and a promising
harvest seemed to be springing up; yet it soon withered away Matthew. 13, 5.6,
and no reaper filled his arms with it. Now, that this may not be the case with
you, that all my labors and yours hitherto may not be lost, and that a vain
dream of security and happiness may not plunge you deeper in misery and ruin,
give me leave to lead you into a serious inquiry into your own heart; that so
you may be better able to judge of your case, and to distinguish between what
is at most being only near the kingdom of heaven, and becoming indeed a member
of it.

2. Now this depends upon the sincerity of your faith in Christ, when faith is
taken in its largest extent, as explained above; that is as comprehending
repentance, and that steady purpose of new and universal obedience of which,
wherever it is real, faith will assuredly be the vital principle. Therefore to
assist you in judging of your state, give me leave to ask you, or rather to
entreat you to ask yourself, What views you have had, and now have of sin, and
of Christ? and what your future purposes are with regard to your conduct in the
remainder of life that may lie before you? I shall not reason largely upon the
several particulars I suggest under these heads, but rather refer you to your
own reading and observation, to judge how agreeable they are to the word of
God, the great rule by which our characters must quickly be tried, and our
eternal state unalterably determined.

3. Inquire seriously, in the first place, what views you have had of sin, and,
what sentiments you have felt in your soul with regard to it. There was a time
when it wore a flattering aspect, and made a fair enchanting appearance, so
that all your heart was charmed with it, and it was the very business of your
life to practice it. But you have since been undeceived: you have felt it bite
like a serpent, and sting like an adder Prove. 23, 32: you have beheld it with
an abhorrence far greater than the delight which it ever gave you. So far it is
well. It is thus with every true penitent, and with some I fear who are not of
that number. Let me, therefore inquire farther, whence arose this abhorrence?
Was it merely from a principle of self love? was it merely because you had been
wounded by it; was it merely because you had thereby brought condemnation and
ruin upon your own soul? Was there no sense of its deformity, of its baseness,
of its malignity, as committed against the blessed God, considered as a
glorious, a bountiful, and a merciful being? Were you never pierced by an
apprehension of its vile ingratitude? And as for those purposes which have
arisen in your heart against it, let me beseech you to reflect how they have
been formed, and how they have hitherto been executed. Have they been
universal? have they been resolute? and yet, amidst all that resolution, have
they been humble? When you declared war with sin, was it with every sin? and is
it an irreconcilable war which you determine by divine grace to push on, till
you have entirely conquered it, or die in the attempt? And are you accordingly
active in your endeavors to subdue and destroy it? If so, what are the fruits
worthy or repentance which you bring forth Luke 3, 8? It does not, I hope, all
flow away in floods of grief: have you ceased to do evil? are you learning to
do well Isa. 1, 16.17? Does your reformation show that you repent of your sins;
or do your renewed relapses into sin prove that you repent even of what you
call your repentance? Have you an inward abhorrence of all sin, and an
unseigned zeal against it? And does that produce a care to guard against the
occasions of it, and temptation, to it! Do you watch against the circumstances
that have ensnared you? and do you particularly double your guard against that
sin which does most easily beset you Heb. 12, 1: Is that laid aside, that the
Christian race may be run: laid aside with a firm determination that you will
return to it no more, that you will hold no more parley with it, that you will
never take another step toward it?

4. Permit me also further to inquire, what your views of Christ have been?
what you think of him, and of your concern with him? have you been fully
convinced that there must be a correspondence settled between him and your
soul; and do you see and feel, that you are not only to pay him a kind of
distant homage, and transient compliment, as a very wise, benevolent, and
excellent person, whose name and memory, you have a reverence for; but that, as
he lives and reigns, as he is ever near you, and always observing you, so you
must look to him, must approach him, must humbly transact business with him,
and that, business of the highest importance, on which your salvation depends?

5. You have been brought to inquire, Wherewith shall I come before the Lord,
and bow myself before the most high God Micah. 6, 6? And once perhaps, you are
thinking of sacrifices, which your own stores might have been sufficient to
furnish out. Are you now convinced they will not suffice; and that you must
have recourse to the Lamb which God has provided? Have you had a view of
Jesus, as taking away the sin of the world John 1, 29? as made a sin-offering
for us, though he knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him 2 Cor. 5, 21? Have you viewed him as perfectly righteous in himself; and
despairing of being justified by any righteousness of your own, have you
"submitted to the righteousness of God Romans 10, 3?" Has your heart ever been
brought to a deep conviction of this important truth, that if ever your are
saved at all, it must be through Christ; that if ever God extend mercy to you
at all, it must be for his sake; that if ever you are fixed in the temple of
God above, you must stand there as an everlasting trophy of that victory which
Christ has gained over the powers of hell, who would otherwise have triumphed
over you?

6. Our Lord says, Look unto me, and be ye saved Isa. 45, 22." he says, "If I
be lifted up, I shall draw all men unto me John 12, 32. Have (...) looked to
him as the only Savior? have you been drawn unto him by that sacred magnet,
the attractive influence of his dying love? Do you know what it is to come to
Christ as a poor, weary, and heavy laden sinner, that you may find rest Matthew.
9, 28? do you know what it is in a spiritual sense to eat the flesh and drink
the blood of the Son of man John ^, 53; that is, to look upon Christ crucified
as the great support of your soul, and to feel a desire after him, earnest as
the appetite of Nature after its necessary food? Have you known what it is
cordially to surrender yourself to Christ, as a poor creature whom love has
made his property? Have you committed your immortal soul to him, that he man
purify and save it; that he may govern it by the dictates of his word, and the
influences of his Spirit; that he may use it for his glory; that he may appoint
it to what exercise and discipline he pleases while it dwells here on flesh?
and that he may receive it at death, and fix it among those spirits, who with
perpetual songs of praise surround his throne, and are his servants for ever!
Have you heartily consented to this? and do you, on this account of the matter,
renew your consent? do you renew it deliberately and determinately, and feel
your whole soul, as it were, saying, Amen, while you read this? If this be the
case, then I can with great pleasure give you (as it were) the right hand of
fellowship, and salute and embrace you as a sincere disciple of the Lord Jesus
Christ, as one who is delivered from the power of darkness, and is translated
into the kingdom of the Son of God Col. 1, 13. I can then salute you in the
Lord, as one to whom, as a minister of Jesus, I am commissioned and charged to
speak comfortably, and to tell you, not that I absolve you from your sins, for
it is a small matter to be judged of man's judgment, but that the blessed God
himself absolveth you; that you are one to whom he has said in his gospel, and
is continually saying, "Your sins are forgiven you Luke 7, 48;" therefore go in
peace, and take the comfort of it.

7. But if you are a stranger to these experiences, and to this temper which I
have now described, the great work (...) yet undone; you are an impenitent and
unbelieving sinner, and the wrath of God abides on you John 3, 30. However you
may have been awakened and alarmed, whatever resolutions you may have formed
for amending your life, how right soever your notions may be, how pure soever
your forms of worship, how ardent soever your zeal, how severe soever your
mortification, how humane soever your temper, how inoffensive soever your life
may be, I can speak no comfort to you. Vain are all your religious hopes, if
there has not been a cordial humiliation before the presence of God for all
your sins; if there has not been this avowed war declared against every thing
displeasing to God; if there has not been this sense of your need of Christ,
and of your ruin without him; if there has not been this earnest application to
him, this surrender of your soul into his hands by faith; this renunciation of
yourself, that you might fix on him the anchor of your hope; if there has not
been this unreserved dedication of yourself to be at all times, and in all
respects, the faithful servant of God through him; and if you do not with all
this acknowledge, that you are an unprofitable servant, who have no other
expectation of acceptance or of pardon, but only through his righteousness and
blood, and through the riches of divine grace in him; I repeat it again, that
all your hopes are vain, and you are building on the sand Matthew. 7, 26. The
house you have already raised must be thrown down to the the ground, and the
foundation be removed and laid anew, or you and all your hopes will shortly be
swept away with it, and buried under it in everlasting ruin.

The Soul submitting to divine Examination, the Sincerity of its Repentance and
Faith.
O Lord God, thou searchest all hearts, and trieft the reins of the children of
men Jer. 17, 10. Search me, O Lord, and know my heart; try me, and know my
thoughts; and see if there he an^ wicked way in me, and lead me in the way
everlasting Psalm. 139, 23.24. Does not my conscience, O Lord, testify in thy
presence, that my repentance and faith are such as have been described, or at
least, that it is my earnest prayer that they may be so? Come, therefore, O
thou blessed Spirit, who art the Author of all grace and consolation, and work
this temper more fully in my soul? Oh represent sin to mine eyes in all its
most odious colors, that I may feel a mortal and irreconcilable hatred to it?
Oh represent the majesty and mercy of the blessed God in such a manner, that my
heart may be alarmed, and that it may be melted! Smite the rock, that the
waters may flow Ps. 77, 20; waters of genuine, undissembled, and filial
repentance? "Convince me," O thou blessed Spirit, of sin, of righteousness, and
of judgment John 16, 8! Show me, that I have undone myself; but that my help is
found in God alone Hos. 13, 9, in God through Christ, in whom alone he will
extend compassion and help to me! According to thy peculiar office, "take of
Christ, and show it unto me John 16, 15!" Show me "his power to save!" Show me
his willingness to exert that power! Teach my faith to behold him, as extended
on the cross, with open arms, and with a pierced bleeding side; and so telling
me, in the most forcible language, what room there is in his very heart for me!
may I know what it is to have my whole heart subdued by love; so subdued, as to
be crucified with him Romans 6, 6; to be "dead to sin," and dead to the world,
"but alive unto God through Jesus Christ Romans 6, 11!" In his power and love may
I confide! To him may I without any reserve, commit my spirit! His image may I
bear! his laws may I observe; his service may I pursue! and may I remain
through time and eternity, a monument of the efficacy of his gospel, and trophy
of his victorious grace!

Oh, blessed God! if there be any thing wanting toward constituting me a
sincere Christian, discover it to me, and work it in me! Beat down, I beseech
th^^ every false and presumptuous hope, how costly soever that building may
have been which is thus laid in ruins, and how proud soever I may have been of
its vain ornaments! Let me know the worst of my case, be that knowledge ever so
distressful; and if there be remaining danger, oh let my heart be fully
sensible of it, sensible while yet there is remedy!

If there be any secret sin yet lurking in my soul, which I have not sincerely
renounced, discover it to me, and rend it out of my heart, though it should
have shot its roots ever so deep, and should have wrapped them all around it,
so that every nerve should be pained by the separation! Tear it away, O Lord,
by a hand graciously severe! and by degrees, yea Lord, by speedy advances, go
on, I beseech thee, to perfect what is still lacking in my faith 1 Thessalonians. 3,
10! Accomplish in me "all the good pleasure of thy goodness 2 Thessalonians. 1, 11:"
Enrich me, O heavenly Father, with all the graces of thy Spirit; form me to the
complete image of thy dear Son: and then, for his sake, come unto me, and
manifest thy gracious presence in my soul John 14, 21.23, till it is ripened
for that state of glory, for which all these operations are intended to prepare
it! Amen.

CHAP. XIV. A more particular view of the several branches of the Christian
temper; by which the reader may be farther assisted in judging what he is, and
what he should endeavor to be N. B. This chapter is almost an abridgment of
that excellent book of Dr. Evans, entitled, The Christian Temper, so far as it
relates to the description of it. For particular arguments, to enforce each
part of this temper, I must refer the reader to the book itself.
.
The importance of the case engages a more particular survey, what manner of
spirit we are of, 1, 2. Accordingly the Christian temper is described, (1.) By
some general views of it; as a new and divine temper, 3; As resembling that of
Christ, 4; And as engaging us to he spiritually-minded, and to walk by faith,
5. A plan of the remainder, 6; in which the Christian temper is more
particularly considered. (2.) With regard to the blessed God; as including
fear, affection and obedience, 7.; Faith and love to Christ, 8, 9; Joy in him,
10.; And a proper temper toward the holy Spirit, particularly as a spirit of
adoption, and of courage, 11 -- 13. (3.) With regard to ourselves; as including
preference of the soul to the body, humility, purity, 14. temperance, 15.
contentment, 16. and patience, 17. (4) With regard to our fellow creatures; as
concluding love, 18. meekness, 19. peaceableness, 20. mercy, 21. truth, 22. and
candor in judging, 23. (5.) General qualifications of each branch, 24; such as
sincerity, 25. constancy, 26. tenderness, 27. zeal, 28. and prudence, 29. These
things should frequently be recollected, 30. A review of all in a spiritual
prayer.

1. WHEN I consider the infinite importance of eternity, I find it exceedingly
difficult to satisfy myself in any thing which I can say to men, where their
eternal interests are concerned. I have given you a view, I hope I may truly
say, a just as well as faithful view, of a truly Christian temper already. Yet,
for your farther assistance, I would offer it to your consideration in various
points of light, that you may be assisted in judging of what you are, and of
what you ought to be. And in this I aim, not only at your conviction, if you
are yet a stranger to real religion, but at your farther edification, if by the
grace of God you are by this time experimentally acquainted with it. Happy will
you be, happy beyond expression, if, as you go on from one article to another,
you can say, This is my temper and character. Happy in no inconsiderable
degree, if you can say, This is what I desire, what I pray for, and what I
pursue, in preference to every opposite view, though it be not what I have as
yet attained.

2. Search then, and try, what manner of spi^^^ you are of Luke 9, 55. And may
He that sea^^^eth all hearts" direct the inquiry; and enable (...) so to judge
yourself, that you may not be ^^^dem^^^ of the Lord 1 Cor. 11, 31.32!

3. Know in the general, that if you are a Christian indeed, you have been
renewed in the spirit of your minds Ephesians. 4, 23; so renewed as to be regenerate,
"and born again." It is not enough to have assumed a new name, to have been
brought under some new restraints, or to have made a partial change in some
particulars of your conduct. The change must be great and universal. Inquire,
then, whether you have entertained new apprehensions of things, have formed a
practical judgment different from what you formerly did: whether the ends you
purpose, the affections, which you feel working in your heart, and the course
of action to which, by those affections, you are directed, be on the whole new
or old The reader may see these thoughts illustrated at large in the three
first of my sermons on Regeneration.
? -- Again, If you are a Christian indeed, you are partaker of a divine nature
2 Pet. 1, 4, divine in its original, its tendency, and its resemblance. Inquire
therefore whether God has implanted a principle in your heart which tends to
him, and which makes you like him. Search your soul attentively, to see if you
have really the image there of God's moral perfections, of his holiness and
righteousness, his goodness and fidelity; for the new man is after God created
in righteousness and true holiness Ephesians. 4, 24," and "is renewed in knowledge
after the image of him that created him Col. 3, 10.

4. For your farther assistance, inquire whether the same mind be in you which
was also in Christ Phil 2, 5, whether you bear the image of God's incarnate
Son, the brightest and the fairest resemblance of the Father, which earth or
heaven has ever beheld? The blessed Jesus designed himself to be a model for
all his followers; and he is certainly a model most fit for our imitation; an
example in our nature, and in circumstances adapted to general use; an example
recommended to us at once by its spotless perfection, and by the endearing
relation in which he stands to us, as our Master, our friend, and our head, as
the person by whom our everlasting state is to be fixed, and in a resemblance
to whom our final happiness is to consist, if ever we are happy at all. Look
then into the lift and temper of Christ, as described and illustrated in the
gospel, and search whether you can find any thing like it in your own life.
Have you any thing of his devotion, love, and resignation to God? Any thing of
his humility, meekness, and benevolence to men? Any thing of his purity and
wisdom, his contempt of the world, his patience, his fortitude his zeal? And
indeed, all the other branches of the Christian temper, which do not imply
previous guilt in the person, by whom they are exercised, may be called in to
illustrate and assist your inquiries under this head.

5. Let me add, If you are a Christian, you are in the main "spiritually
minded, as knowing that is life and peace; whereas to be carnally minded is
death Romans 8, 6. Though you live in the flesh, you will not war after it 2 Cor.
10, 3; you will not take your orders and your commands from it. You will indeed
attend to its necessary interests as matter of duty, but it will still be with
regard to another and a nobler interest, that of the rational and immortal
spirit. Your thoughts, your affections, your pursuits, your choice, will be
determined by a regard to things spiritual rather than carnal. -- In a word,
you will walk by faith, and not by sight 2 Cor 5, 7. Future, invisible, and, in
some degree, incomprehensible objects, will take up your mind. Your faith will
act on the being of God, his perfections, his providence, his precepts, his
threatenings, and his promises. It will act upon Christ, "whom having not seen,
you will love," and honor 1 Pet. 1, 8. It will act on that unseen world, which
it knows to be eternal, and therefore infinitely more worthy of your
affectionate regard, than any of those things which are seen, and are temporal
2 Cor. 4, 18.

6. These are general views of the Christian temper, on which I would entreat
you to examine yourself. And now I would go on to lead you into a survey of the
gr^^ branches of it, as relating to God, our neighbors and ourselves: and of
those qualifications which (...) each of these branches; such as sincerity,
con^^^^cy, tenderness, zeal and prudence. And I beg y^^ (...) attention, while
I lay before you a few hints with regard to each, by which you may judge the
better both of your state and of your duty.

7. Examine then, I entreat you the temper of your heart, with regard to the
blessed God. Do you find there a reverential fear, and a supreme love and
veneration for his incomparable excellencies, a desire after him as the highest
good, and a cordial gratitude toward him as your supreme benefactor? Can you
trust his care? Can you credit his testimony? Do you desire to pay an
unreserved obedience to all that he commands, and an humble submission to all
the disposals of his providence? Do you design his glory as your noblest end,
and make it the great business of your life to approve yourself to him? Is it
your governing care to imitate him, and to serve him in spirit and in truth
John 4, 24?

8. Faith in Christ I have already described at large; and therefore shall say
nothing farther, either of that persuasion of his power and grace, which is the
great foundation of it; or of that acceptance of Christ under all his
characters or that surrender of the soul into his hands, in which its peculiar
and distinguishing nature consists.

9. If this faith in Christ be sincere, it will undoubtedly produce a love to
him; which will express itself in affectionate thoughts of him; in strict
fidelity to him; in a careful observation of his charge; in a regard to his
Spirit, to his friends, and to his interests; in a reverence to the memorials
of his dying love, which he has instituted; and in an ardent desire after that
heavenly world where he dwells, and where he will at length have all his people
to dwell with him John 17, 24

10. I may add, agreeably to the word of God, that thus believing in Christ,
and loving him, you will also rejoice in him; in his glorious design, and in
his complete fitness to accomplish it; in the promises of his word, and in the
privileges of his people. It will be matter of joy to you that such a Redeemer
has appeared in this world of ours; and your joy for yourselves will be
proportionable to the degree of clearness with which you discern your interest
in him, and relation to him.

11. Let me farther lead you into some reflections on the temper of your heart
toward the blessed Spirit. If we have not the Spirit, of Christ, we are none
of his Romans 8, 9. If we are not led by the Spirit of God, we are not the
children of God Romans 8, 14. You will then, if you are a real Christian, desire
that you may "be filled with the Spirit Ephesians. 5, 18;" that you may have every
power of your soul subject to his authority; that his agency on your heart may
be more constant, more operative, and more delightful. And to cherish these
sacred influences, you will often have recourse to serious consideration and
meditation: you will abstain from those sins which tend to grieve him: you will
improve the tender seasons in which he seems to breathe upon your soul; you
will strive earnestly with God in prayer, that you may have him shed on you
still more abundantly through Jesus Christ Tit. 3, 6: and you will be desirous
to fall in with the great end of his mission, which was to glorify Christ John
16, 14, and to establish his kingdom. You will desire his influence, as the
Spirit of adoption, to render your acts of worship free and affectionate; your
sorrow for sin overflowing and tender; your resignation meek, and your love
ardent: in a word, to carry you through life and death with the temper of a
child who delights in his father, and who longs for his more immediate presence.

12. Once more. If you are a Christian indeed, you will be desirous to obtain
the spirit of courage. Amidst all that humility of soul to which you will be
formed, you will wish to commence a hero in the cause of Christ, opposing with
a vigorous resolution, the strongest efforts of the power of darkness, the
inward corruption of your own heart, and all the outward difficulties you may
meet with in the way of your duty, while in the cause and in the strength of
Christ you go on "conquering and to conquer."

13. All these things may be considered a^ branches of godliness; of that
godliness which is profitable for all things, and has the promise of the life
which now is, and of that which is to come. 1 Timothy 4, 8.

14. Let me now farther lay before you some branches of the Christian temper,
which relate more immediately to ourselves. And here, if you are a Christian
indeed, you will undoubtedly "prefer the soul to the body, and things eternal
to those things that are temporal. Conscious of the dignity and value of your
immortal part, you will come to a firm resolution to secure its happiness,
whatever is to be resigned, whatever is to be endured in that view. If you are
a real Christian, you will be also clothed with humility 1 Pet. 5, 5. You will
have a deep sense of your own imperfections, both natural and moral; of the
short extent of our knowledge, of the uncertainty and weakness of your
resolutions, and of your continual dependence upon God, and upon almost every
thing about you. And especially, you will be deeply sensible of your guilt; the
remembrance of which will fill you with shame and confusion, even when you have
some reason to hope it is forgiven. This will forbid all haughtiness and
insolence in your behavior to your fellow creatures. It will teach you under
afflictive providence, with all holy submission, to bear the indignation of
the Lord," as those that know they have sinned against him Micah 7, 9. --
Again, if you are a Christian indeed, you will labor after purity of soul, and
maintain a fixed abhorrence of all prohibited sensual indulgence. A
recollection of past impurities will fill you with shame and grief; and you
will endeavor for the future to guard your thoughts and desires, as well as
your words and actions, and to abstain not only from the commission of evil,
but from the distant appearance and probable occasions of it 1 These. 5, 22; as
conscious of the perfect holiness of that God with whom you converse, and of
the purifying nature of that hope 1 John 3, 3, which, by has gospel, he has
taught you to entertain.

15. With this is nearly allied that amiable virtue of temperance, which will
teach you to guard against such a use of meats and drinks as indisposes the
body for the service of the soul; or such an indulgence in either, as will rob
you of that precious jewel, your time, or occasion an expense beyond what your
circumstances will admit, and beyond what will consist with those liberalities
to the poor, which your relation and theirs to God and each other will require.
In short, you will guard against whatever has a tendency to increase a sensual
disposition; against whatever would alienate the soul from communion with God,
and would diminish its zeal and activity in his service.

16. The divine philosophy of the blessed JESUS will also teach you "a
contented temper." It will moderate your desires of those wordly enjoyments,
after which many feel such an insatiable thirst, ever growing with indulgence
and success. You will guard against an immoderate care about those things which
would lead you into a forgetfulness of your heavenly inheritance. If Providence
disappoint your undertaking, you will submit. If others be more prosperous, you
will not envy them; but rather will be thankful for what God is pleased to
bestow upon them, as well as for what he gives you. No unlawful methods will be
used to alter your present condition; and whatever it is, you will endeavor to
make the best of it; remembering it is what infinite Wisdom and Goodness have
appointed you, and that it is beyond all comparison better than you have
deserved; yea, that the very deficiencies and inconveniences of it may conduce
to the improvement of your future and complete happiness.

17. With contentment, if you are a disciple of Christ, you will join patience
too, and in patience will possess your soul Luke 21, 19. You cannot indeed be
quite insensible either of afflictions or of injuries; but your mind will be
calm and composed under them, and steady in the prosecution of proper duty,
though afflictions press, and though your hopes, your dearest hopes and
prospects be delayed. Patience will prevent hasty and rash conclusions, and
fortify you against seeking irregular methods of relief; disposing you, in the
mean time, till God shall be pleased to appear for you, to go on steadily in
the way of your duty; committing yourself to him in well-doing 1 Pet. 4, 19.
You will also be careful, that patience may have its perfect work James 1, 4,
and prevail in proportion to those circumstances which demand its peculiar
exercise. For instance, When the successions of evil are long and various, so
that deep calls to deep, and all God's waves and billows seem to be going over
you one after another Ps. 42, 7; when God touches you in the most tender part;
when the reasons of his conduct to you are quite unaccountable; when your
natural spirits are weak and decayed, when unlawful methods of redress seem
near and easy; still your reverence for the will of your heavenly Father will
carry it against all, and keep you waiting quietly for deliverance in his own
time and way.

N. B. If this chapter seem too long, it may properly be divided here.

18. I have thus led you into a brief review of the Christian temper, with
respect to God and ourselves: permit me now to add, That the gospel will teach
you another set of very important lessons with respect to your
fellow creatures. They are all summed up in this, "Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thyself, Romans 13, 9;" and "whatsoever thou would" (that is,
whatsoever thou could in an exchange of circumstances fairly and reasonably
desire,) "that others should do unto thee, do "thou likewise the same unto them
Matthew. 7, 12." The religion of the blessed Jesus, when it triumphs in your
soul, will conquer the predominancy of an irregular self-love, and will teach
you heartily and tenderly to look upon your neighbor as another self. As you
are sensible of your own rights, you will be sensible of his; as you support
your own character, you will support his. You will desire his welfare, and be
ready to relieve his necessity, as you would have your own consulted by
another. You will put the kindest construction upon his most dubious words and
actions: you will take pleasure in his happiness you ^^ill feel his distress,
in some measure as your own. A^^ (...) happy will you be, when this obvious
rule is (...) to your mind, when this golden law is written upon your heart;
and when it is habitually and impartially consulted by you upon every occasion,
whether great or small.

19. The gospel will also teach you, to put on meekness Col. 3, 12, not only
with respect to God, submitting to the authority of his word, and the disposal
of his Providence, as was urged before, but also with regard to your brethren
of mankind. Its gentle instructions will form you to calmness, of temper under
injuries and provocations, so that you may not be angry without or beyond just
cause. It will engage you to guard your words, lest you provoke and exasperate
those you should rather study by love to gain, and by tenderness to heal.
Meekness will render you slow in using any rough and violent methods, if they
can by any means be lawfully avoided; and ready to admit, and even to propose,
a reconciliation, after they have been entered into, if there yet may be hope
of succeeding. So far as this ^^^^ch of the Christian temper prevails in your
heart, you will take care to avoid every thing which might give unnecessary
offense to others; you will behave yourself in a modest manner, according to
your station; and it will work, both with regard to superiors and inferiors;
teaching you duly to honor the one, and not (...) overbear or oppress the
other. And in religion itself, i^ will restrain all immoderate sallies and
harsh censures and will command down that wrath of man, which, instead of
working, so often oppresses the righteousness o^ God James 1, 20, and shames
and wounds that good cause in which it is boisterously and furiously engaged.

20. With this is naturally connected a peaceful^ disposition. If you are a
Christian indeed, you wi^ have such a value and esteem for peace, as to
endeavou^ to obtain and preserve it as much as lies in yo^ Romans 12, 18, as
much as you fairly and honorab^^ can. This will have such an influence upon
your conduc^ as to make you not only cautious of giving offense, an^ slow in
taking it, but earnestly desirous to regain peac^ as soon as may be, when it is
in any measure broken; that (...) ^ound may be healed while it is green, and
before ^t begins to rankle and fester. And more especially this disposition
will engage you to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace Ephesians. 4, 3,
with all that in every place call on the name of the Lord Jesus Christ 1 Cor.
1, 2; whom, if you truly love, you will also love all those whom you have
reason to believe to be his disciples and servants.

21. If you be yourselves indeed of that number, "you will also "put on bowels
of mercy Col. 3, 12." The mercies of God, and those of the blessed Redeemer,
will work on your heart, to mould it to sentiments of compassion and
generosity, so that you will feel the wants and sorrows of others; you will
desire to relieve their necessities, and, as you have opportunity, you will do
good both to their bodies and their souls; expressing your kind affections and
suitable actions, which may both evidence their sincerity, and render them
effectual.

22. As a Christian, you will also maintain truth inviolable, not only in your
solemn testimonies, when confirmed by an oath, but likewise in common
conversation. You will remember, too, that your promises bring an obligation
upon you, which you are by no means at liberty to break through. On the whole,
you will be careful to keep a strict correspondence between your words and your
actions, in such a manner as becomes a servant of the God of truth.

23. Once more, as amidst the strictest care to observe all the divine precepts
you will still find many imperfections, on account of which you will be obliged
to pray, that God would not enter into strict judgment with you, as well
knowing that in his sight you cannot be justified Psalm. 143, 2: you will be
careful not to judge others in such a manner as should awaken the severity of
his judgment against yourself Matthew. 7, 1.2. You will not, therefore, judge
them ^ragmatically, that is, when you have nothing to do with their actions;
nor rashly, without inquiring into circumstances; nor partially, without
weighing them attentively and fairly; nor uncharitably, putting the worst
construction upon things in their own nature dubious, deciding upon intentions
as evil farther than they certainly appear to be so, pronouncing on the state
of men, or on the whole of their character, from any particular action, and
involving the innocent with the guilty. There is a moderation contrary to all
these extremes, which the gospel recommends; and if you receive the gospel in
good earnest into your heart, it will lay the ax to the root of such evils as
these.

24. Having thus briefly illustrated the principle branches of the Christian
temper and character, I shall conclude the representation with reminding you of
some general qualifications, which must be mingled with all, and give a
tincture to each of them; such as sincerity, constancy, tenderness, zeal and
prudence.

25. Always remember, that sincerity is the very soul of true religion. A
single intention to please God, and to approve ourselves to him must animate
and govern all that we do in it. Under the influence of this principle you will
impartially inquire into every intimation of duty, and apply to the practice of
it so far as it is known to you. Your heart will be engaged in all you do. Your
conduct in private and in secret will be agreeable to your most public
behavior. A sense of the divine authority will teach you to esteem all God's
precepts concerning all things to be right, and to hate every false way Psalm.
119, 128.

26. Thus are you in simplicity and godly sincerity to have your conversation
in the world 2 Cor. 1, 12. And you are also to charge it upon your soul to be
"steadfast and immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord 1 Cor. 15,
58. There must not only be some sudden fits and starts of devotion, or of
something which looks like it, but religion must be an habitual and permanent
thing. There must be a purpose to adhere to it at all times. It must be made
the stated and ordinary business of life. Deliberate and presumptuous sin^ must
be carefully avoided; a guard must be maintained against the common infirmities
of life; and falls of one kind or of another must be matter of proportionable
humiliation before God, and must occasion renewed resolution for his service.
And thus you are to go on to the end of your life, not discouraged by the
length and difficulty of the way, nor allured on the one hand, or terified on
the other, by all the various temptations which may surround and assault you.
Your soul must be fired on this basis, and you are still to behave yourself as
one who knows he serves an unchangeable God, and who expects from him a kingdom
which cannot be moved Heb. 12, 28.

27. Again, so far as the gospel prevails in your heart, your spirit will be
tender, and the stone will be transformed into flesh. You will desire that your
apprehension of divine things may be quick, your affections ready to take
proper impressions, your conscience always easily touched, and, on the whole,
your resolutions pliant to the divine authority, and cordially willing to be,
and to do, whatever God shall appoint. You will have a tender regard to the
word of God, a tender caution against sin, a tender guard against the snares of
prosperity, a tender submission to God's afflicting hand: in a word, you will
be tender wherever the divine honor is concerned; and careful neither to do
any thing yourself, nor to allow any thing in another, so far as you can
influence, by which God should be offended, or religion reproached.

28. Nay, more than all this, you will, so far as true Christianity governs in
your mind, exert an holy zeal in the service of your Redeemer and your Father.
You will be zealously affected in every good thing Gal. 4, 18. in proportion to
its apprehended goodness and importance. You will be zealous especially to
correct what is irregular in yourselves, and to act to the utmost of your
ability for the cause of God. Nor will you be able to look with an indifferent
eye on the conduct of others in this view; but, so far as charity, meekness,
and prudence will admit, you will testify your disapprobation of every thing in
it which is dishonorable to God and injurious to men. And you will labor not
only to reclaim men from such cour^^s, but to engage them to religion, and to
quicken them in it.

29. And, once more, you will desire to use the prudence which God has given
you, in judging what is, in present circumstances, your duty to God, your
neighbor and yourself; what will be, on the whole, the most acceptable manner
of discharging it, and how far it may be most advantageously pursued; as
remembering, that he is indeed the wisest and the happiest man who, by constant
attention of thought, discovers the greatest opportunities of doing good, and
wi^ ardent and animated resolution breaks through eve^ opposition that he may
improve those opportunities.

30. This is such a view of the Christian temper (...) could conveniently be
thrown within such narrow limi^ and, I hope, it may assist many in the great
and impor^ant work of self-examination. Let your own conscience answer how far
you have already attained it, and how far you desire it; and let the principal
tropics here touched upon be fixed in your memory and in your heart, that you
may be mentioning them before God in your daily addresses to the throne of
grace, in order to receive from him all necessary assistances for bringing them
into practice.

A PRAYER, chiefly in Scripture Language, in which the several Branches of the
Christian Temper are more briefly enumerated, in the Order laid down above.
BLESSED God, I humbly adore thee, as the great Father of lights, and the giver
of every good and every perfect gift Jam. 1, 17. From thee, therefore I seek
every blessing, and especially those which may lead me to thyself, and prepare
me for the eternal enjoyment of thee. I adore thee as the God who searches the
heart, and tries the reins of the children of men Jer. 17, 10. Search me, O
God, and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts: see if there be any
wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting Ps. 139, 23.24. May I know
what manner of spirit I am of Luke 9, 55, and be preserved from mistaking ^here
the error might be infinitely fatal*

May I, O (...), be renewed in the spirit of my mind Ephesians. 4. ^^! A new heart do
thou give me, and a new spirit do thou put within me Ezekiel. 36, 26! Make me
partaker of a divine nature 2 Pet. 1, 4; and as he who has called me is holy,
may I be holy in all manner of conversation 1 Pet. 1, 15! M^ the same mind be
in me that was also in C^^^ Jesus Phil. 2, 5;" may I "so walk even as he wa^ed
1 John 2, 6!" Deliver me from being ^^^rnally minded, which is death;" and make
me spiritually minded, since that is life and peace Romans 8, 6. And may I, while
I pass through this world of sense, walk by faith and not by sight 2 Cor. 5, 7;
and be strong in faith, giving glory to God Romans 4, 20!

May, thy grace, O Lord, which has appeared unto all men, and appeared to me
with such glorious evidence and luster, effectually teach me to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly Tit.
2, 11.12!" Work in mine heart that godliness which is profitable unto all
things 1 Timothy 4, 8; and teach me, by the influences of thy blessed Spirit, to
love thee the Lord my God with all my heart, and with all my soul, and with all
my mind, and with all my strength Mark 12, 30! May I yield myself unto thee as
alive from the dead Romans 6, 13; and present my body a living sacrifice, holy
and acceptable in thy sight, which is my most reasonable service Romans 12, 1.
May I entertain the most faithful and affectionate regards to the blessed
Jesus, thine incarnate Son, the brightness of thy glory, and the express image
of thy person Heb. 1, 3! Though I have not seen him, may I love him; and in
him, though now I see him not, yet believing, may I rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory 1 Pet. 1, 8: And may the life which I live in the
flesh, be daily by the faith of the Son of God Gal. 2, 20! May I be filled with
the Spirit Ephesians. 5, 18; and may I be led by it Romans 8, 14; and so may it be
evident to others, and especially to my own soul, that I am a child of God, and
an heir of glory. May I not receive the spirit of bondage unto fear, but the
spirit of adoption, whereby I may be enabled to cry, Abba, Father Romans 8, 15!
May he work in me as the spirit of love, and of power, and of a sound mind 2 Timothy 1, 7, that so I may add to my faith virtue 2 Pet. 1, 5! May I be strong
and very courageous Josh. 1, 7, and quit myself like a man 1 Cor. 16, 13, and
like a Christian, in the work to which I am called, and in that warfare which I
had in view when (...) listed under the banner of the great Captain of my
salvation!

Teach me, O Lord, seriously to consider the nature of my own soul, and to set
a suitable value upon it May I labor, not only, or chiefly, for the m^^^ that
perishes, but for that which endures to eternal life John 6, 27! May I humble
myself under thy mighty hand, and be clothed with humility 1 Pet. 5, 5.6;
decked with the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which, in the fight of
God, is of great price 1 Pet. 3, 4! May I be pure in heart, that I may see God
Matt. 5, 8; mortifying my members which are on the earth Col. 3, 5, so that if
a right eye offend me, I may pluck it out; and if a right hand offend me, I may
cut it off Matthew. 5, 29.30! May I be temperate in all things 1 Cor. 9, 25,
content with such things as I have Heb. 13, 5, and instructed to be so in
whatsoever state I am Phil. 4, 11! May patience also have its perfect work in
me, that I may be in that respect complete, and wanting nothing James 1, 4!

Form me, O Lord, I beseech, to a proper temper toward my fellow creatures! May
I love my neighbor as myself Gal. 5, 14; and whatsoever I would that others
should do unto me, may I also do the same unto them Matthew. 7, 12! May I put on
meekness Col. 3, 12, under the greatest injuries and provocations; and, if it
be possible, as much as lies in me, may I live peaceably with all men Romans 12,
18! May I be merciful, as my Father in heaven is merciful Luke 6, 36! May I
speak the truth from my heart Psalm. 15, 2; and may I speak it in love Ephesians. 4,
15; guarding against every instance of a censorious and malignant disposition;
and taking care not to judge severely, as I would not be judged Matt. 3, 1,
with a severity, which thou, Lord, know, and which mine own conscience
knows, I should not be able to support!

I entreat thee, O Lord, to work in me all those qualifications of the
Christian temper, which may render it peculiarly acceptable to thee, and may
prove ornamental to my profession in the world. Renew I beseech thee, a right
spirit within me Psalm. 51, 10; make me an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no
^^lowed guile John 1, 47! And while I feast (...) Christ, as my passover
sacrificed for me, may I keep the feast with the unleavened bread of sincerity
and truth 1 Cor. 5, 7. 8! Make me, I beseech thee, O thou Almighty and
unchangeable God, steadfast and immovable, always abounding in thy work, as
knowing my labor in the Lord will not be finally in vain 1 Cor. 15, 58! May my
heart be tender 2 Kings 22, 19, easily impressed with thy word and providence,
touched with an affectionate concern for thy glory, and sensible of every
impulse of thy Spirit! May I be "zealous for my God Number. 25, 13," with a zeal
according to knowledge Romans 10 2, and charity 1 Cor. 16, 14; and teach me in
thy service, to join the wisdom of the serpent Matt. 1, 16, with the boldness
of the lion, and the innocence of the dove! Thus render me, by thy grace, a
shining image of my dear Redeemer; and at length bring me to wear the bright
resemblance of his holiness and his glory in that world where he dwells; that I
may ascribe everlasting honors to him, and to thee, O thou Father of mercies,
whose invaluable gift he is, and to thine Holy Spirit, through whose gracious
influences I would humbly hope I may call thee my Father, and Jesus my Savior!
Amen.

CHAP. XV. The Reader reminded how much he needs the Assistance of the Spirit
of God, to form him to the Temper described above, and what encouragement he
has to expect it.
Forward resolutions may prove ineffectual, 1. Yet religion is not to be given
up in despair, but divine grace sought, 2. A general view of its reality and
necessity, from reason, 3. and Scripture, 4. The Spirit to be sought as the
Spirit of Christ, 5.; and in that view, the great strength of the soul, 6. The
encouragement there is to hope for the communication of it, 7. A concluding
exhortation to pray for it, 8. And an humble address to God pursuant to that
exhortation.

1. I HAVE now laid before you a plan of that temper and character which the
gospel requires, and which, if you are a true Christian, you will desire and
pursue. Surely there is in the very description of it, something which must
powerfully strike every mind, which has any taste for what is truly beautiful
and excellent. And I question not, but you, my dear reader, will feel some
impression of it upon your heart. You will immediately form some lively purpose
of endeavoring after it; and perhaps you may imagine you shall certainly and
quickly attain to it. You see how reasonable it is, and what desirable
consequences necessarily attend it, and the aspect which it bears on your
present enjoyment, and your future happiness; and therefore are determined you
will act accordingly. But give me leave seriously to remind you how many there
have been (would to God that several of the instances had not happened within
the compass of my personal observation!) whose goodness has been like a
morning cloud, and the early dew, which soon passes away Hos. 6, 4. -- There
is not room indeed absolutely to apply the words of Joshua taken in the most
rigorous sense, when he said to Israel, (that he might humble their too hasty
and sanguine resolutions,) "You cannot serve the Lord Josh. 24, 19." But I will
venture to say, you cannot easily do it. Alas! you know not the difficulties
you have to break through; you know not the temptations, which Satan will throw
in your way; you know not how importunate your vain and sinful companions will
be to draw you back into the snare you may attempt to break; and, above all,
you know not the subtle artifices which your own corruptions will practice
upon you, in order to recover their dominion over you. You think the views you
now have of things will be lasting, because the principles and objects to which
they refer are so; but perhaps tomorrow may undeceive you, or rather dece^ you
anew. Tomorrow may present some trifle in (...) new dress, which shall amuse
you into a forgetfulne^^ of all this, nay, perhaps, before you lie down on you^
bed, the impressions you now feel may wear off. T^^ corrupt desires of your own
heart, now perhaps a litt^ charmed down, and lying as if it were dead, may
spring up again with new violence, as if they had slept o^^y to recruit their
vigor; and if you are not supported by a better strength than your own, this
struggle for liberty will only make your future chains the h^^vier, the more
shameful, and the more fatal.

2. What then is to be done, is the convinced sinner to lie down in despair? to
say, I am a helpless captive, and by exerting myself with violence may break my
limbs sooner than my bonds, and increase the evil I would remove. God forbid!
You cannot, I am persuaded, be so little acquainted with Christianity as not to
know, that the doctrine of divine assistances bears a very considerable part in
it. You have often, I doubt not, read of the law of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus, as making us free from the law of sin and death Romans 8, 2; and
have been told that through the Spirit we mortify the deeds of the body Romans 8,
13: you have read of doing all things through Christ who strengthened us Phil.
4, 13; whose grace is sufficient for us, and whose strength is made perfect
through weakness 2 Cor. 12, 9: permit me, therefore, now to call down your
attention to this, as a truth of the clearest evidence, and the utmost
importance.

3. Reason, indeed, as well as the whole tenor of Scripture, agrees with this
See many of those thoughts much more largely illustrated in my seventh sermon
on Regeneration.
. The whole created world has a necessary dependence on God: from him even the
knowledge of the natural things is derived Ps. 94, 10; and skill in them is to
be ascribed to him Exodus 31, 3.6. Much more loudly does so great and so
excellent a work, as the new-forming the human mind, bespeak its divine Author.
When you consider how various the branches of the Christian temper are, and how
contrary many of them also are to that temper which has prevailed in your
heart, and governed your life in time past, you must really see divine
influences as necessary to produce and nourish them, as the influences of the
sun and rain are to call up the variety of plants and flowers, and grain, and
fruits, by which the earth is adorned, and our life supported. You will be yet
m^ sensible of this, if you reflect on the violent oppositi^^ which this happy
work must expect to meet with, (...) which I shall presently warn you more
largely, and which, if you have not already experienced, it must be because you
have but very lately begun to think of religion.

4. Accordingly, if you give yourself leave to consult Scripture on this head,
(and if you would live like a Christian, you must be consulting it every day,
and forming your notions and actions by it,) you will see, that the whole tenor
of it teaches that dependence upon God which I am now recommending. You will
particularly see, that the production of religion in the soul is matter of
divine promise; that when it has been effected, Scripture ascribes it to a
divine agency, and that the increase of grace and piety in the heart of those
who are truly regenerate, is also spoken of as the work of God, who begins and
carrys it on until the day of Jesus Christ Phil. 1, 6.

5. In consequence of all these views, lay it down to yourself as a most
certain principle, that no attempt in religion is to be made in your own
strength. If you forget this, and God purposes finally to save you, he will
humble you by repeated disappointments, till he teach you better. You will be
ashamed of one scheme and effort, and of another, till you settle upon the true
basis. He will also probably show you, not only in the general that your
strength is to be derived from heaven; but particularly, that it is the office
of the blessed Spirit to purify the heart, and to invigorate holy resolutions;
and also, that in all these operations he is to be considered as the Spirit of
Christ, working under his directions, and as a vital communication from him,
under the character of the great head of the church, the grand Treasurer and
Dispenser of these holy and beneficial influences. On which account it is
called the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ Phil. 1, 19, who is exalted at
the right hand of the Father, to give repentance and remission of sins Acts 5,
31: in whose grace alone we can be strong 2 Timothy 2, 17, and of whose fullness we
receive, even grace for grace John 1, 16.

6. Resolve, therefore, strenuously for the service of God, and for the care of
your soul; but resolve modestly and humbly. Even the youths shall faint and be
weary, and the young men utterly fall; but they who wait on the Lord, are the
persons who renew their strength Isa. 40, 30.31. When a soul is almost afraid
to declare in the presence of the Lord, that it will not do this or that which
has formerly offended him; when it is afraid absolutely to promise that it will
perform this or that duty with vigor and constancy; but only expresses its
humble and earnest desire that it may by grace be enabled to avoid the one, or
pursue the other; then, so far as my observation or experience have reached, it
is in the best way to learn the happy art to conquer temptations, and of
discharging duty.

7. On the other hand, let not your dependence upon this spirit, and your sense
of your own weakness and insufficiency for any thing spiritually good without
his continued aid, discourage you from devoting yourself to God, and engaging
in a religious life, considering what abundant reason you have to hope that
these gracious influences will be communicated to you. -- The light of nature
at the same time that it teaches the need we have of help from God in a
virtuous course, may lead us to conclude, that so benevolent a Being, who
bestows on the most unworthy and careless part of mankind so many blessings
will take a peculiar pleasure in communicating to such as humbly ask them,
those gracious assistances which may form their deathless souls into his own
resemblance, and fit them for that happiness to which their rational nature is
suited, and for which it was in its first constitution intended. -- The word of
God will much more abundantly confirm such an hope. You there hear divine
wi^^om crying, even to those who had trifled with her instructions, Turn ye at
my reproof, and I will pour out my spirit upon you Prove. 1, 23. You hear the
Apostle saying, Let us come boldly to the throne of grace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find grace to help in every time of need Heb. 4, 16. Yea, you there
hear our Lord himself urging, in this sweet and convincing manner, If ye, being
evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your
heavenly Father give his holy Sp^^^ unto them that ask him Luke 11, 13? This
gift and promise of the Spirit was given unto Christ, when he ^^cended up on
high, in trust for all his tru^ ^^scipl^^^ God has "shed it abroad abundantly
upon us in him Tit. 3, 6." And I may add, that the very desire you feel after
the farther communication of the Spirit is the result of the first fruits of it
already given; so that you may with peculiar propriety interpret it as a
special call, to open your mouth wide that he may fill it Psalm. 81, 10. You
thirst, and therefore you may cheerfully plead, that Jesus has invited you to
come unto him and drink; with a promise, not only that you shall drink if ye
come unto him, but also that out of your belly shall flow as it were rivers of
living water John 7, 37.38, for the edification and refreshment of others.

8. Go forth, therefore, with humble cheerfulness, to the prosecution of all
the duties of the Christian life. Go, and prosper, "in the strength of the
Lord, making "mention of his righteousness, and of his only Psalm. 71, 16." --
And, as a token of farther communications, may your heart be quickened to the
most earnest desires after the blessings I have now been recommending to your
pursuit! May you be stirred up to pour out your soul before God in such holy
breathings as these! and may they be your daily language in his gracious
presence!

An humble SUPPLICATION for the influences of Divine Grace, to form and
strengthen RELIGION in the SOUL.
BLESSED God! I sincerely acknowledge before thee mine own weakness and
insufficiency for any thing that is spiritually good. I have experienced it a
thousand times and yet my foolish heart would again trust itself Prove. 28, 26,
and form resolutions in its own strength. But let this be the first fruits of
thy gracious influence upon it, to bring it to an humble distrust of itself,
and to a repose on thee!

Abundantly do I rejoice, O Lord, in the kind assurances which thou give me
of thy readiness to bestow liberally and richly so great a benefit. I do
therefore, according to thy condescending invitation, come with boldness to the
throne of grace, that I may find grace to help in every time of need Heb. 4,
16. I mean not, O Lord God, to turn thy grace into wantonness or perverseness
Jude 5, 4. or to make my weakness an excuse for my negligence and sloth. I
confess thou have already given me more strength than I have used; and I charge
it upon myself, and not on thee, that I have not long since received still more
abundant supplies. I desire for the future to be found diligent in the use of
all appointed means; in the neglect of which, I well know, that petitions like
these would be a profane mockery, and might much more probably provoke thee to
take away what I have, than prevail upon thee to impart more: but firmly
resolving to exert myself to the utmost, I earnestly entreat the communications
of thy grace, that I may be enabled to fulfill that resolution.

Be surety, O Lord, unto thy servant for good Ps. 119, 122? Be pleased to shed
abroad thy sanctifying influences on my soul, to form me for every duty thou
requirest! Implant, I beseech thee, every grace and virtue deep in mine heart;
and maintain the happy temper in the midst of those assaults, from within and
from without, to which I am continually liable while I am still in this world,
and carry about with me so many infirmities! Fill my breast, I beseech thee,
with good affections toward thee, my God, and toward my fellow creatures!
Remind me always of thy presence; and may I remember, that every secret
sentiment of my soul is open to thee? May I, therefore guard against the first
risings of sin, and the first approaches to it! and that Satan may not find
room for his evil suggestions. I earnestly beg thou, Lord, would fill my
heart by thine Holy Spirit, and take up thy residence there!" Dwell in me, and
walk with me 2 Cor. 6, 16. and let my body be the temple of the Holy Ghost 1
Cor. 6, 19!

May I be so joined to Christ Jesus my Lord, as to be one spirit with him 1
Cor. 6, 17, and feel his invigorating influences continually bearing me on,
superior to every temptation, and to every corruption! that while the youths
shall faint and be weary, and the young men utterly fall, I may so wait upon
the Lord as to renew my strength Isa. 40, 30.31; and may go on from one degree
of faith and love, and zeal, and holiness, to another, till I appear perfect
before thee in Zion Ps. 84, 7. to drink in immortal vigor and joy from thee,
as the everlasting fountain of both, through Jesus Christ my Lord, in whom I
have righteousness and strength Isa. 45, 24, and to whom I desire ever to
ascribe the praise of all mine improvements in both! Amen.

CHAP. XVI. The Christian convert warned of, and animated against, those
Discouragements which he must expect to meet with, when entering on a religious
Course.
Christ has instructed his disciples to expect opposition and difficulties in
the way to heaven, 1. Therefore, [1.] A more particular view of them is taken,
as arising, (1.) From the remainders of indwelling sin, 2. (2.) From the world,
and especially from former sinful companions, 3. (3.) From the temptations and
suggestions of Satan, 4. [II.] The Christian is animated and encouraged by
various considerations to oppose them; particularly, by -- the presence of God,
-- the aids of Christ, -- the example of others, who though feeble have
conquered, -- and the crown of glory to be expected, 5, 6. Therefore, though
apostasy would be infinitely fatal, the Christian may press on cheerfully, 7.
Accordingly the soul, alarmed by these views, is represented as committing
itself to God, in the prayer which concludes the chapter.

1. WITH the utmost propriety has our divine Master required us to strive to
enter in at the strait gate Luke 13, 24; thereby (as it seems) intimating, not
only that the passage is narrow, but that it is beset with enemies; beset on
the right hand and on the left with enemies cunning and formidable. And be
assured, O reader, that whatever your circumstances in life are, you must meet
and encounter them. It will, therefore, be your prudence to survey them
attentively in your own reflections, that you may see what you are to expect;
and may consider in what armor it is necessary you should be clothed, and with
what weapons you must be furnished to manage the combat. You have often heard
them marshalled as it were, under three great leaders, the flesh, the world,
and the devil; and according to this distribution, I would call you to consider
the forces of each, as setting themselves in array against you. O that you may
be excited to take to yourself the whole armor of God, and to quit yourself
like a man 1 Cor. 16, 13. and a Christian!

2. Let your conscience answer whether you do not carry about with you a
corrupt and a degenerate nature? You will, I doubt not, feel its effects. You
will feel, in the language of the Apostle, (who speaks of it as the case of
Christians themselves,) the flesh lusting against the spirit, so that you will
not be able, in all instances "to do the things that you would Gal. 5, 17." You
brought irregular propensities into the world along with you; and you have so
often indulged those sinful inclinations that you have greatly increased their
strength; and you will find, in consequence of it, that these habits cannot be
broken through without great difficulty. You will, no doubt, often recollect
the strong figures in which the prophet describes a case like yours; and you
will own that it is justly represented by that of an Ethiopian changing his
skin, and the leopard his spots Jer. 13, 23. It is indeed possible that at
first you may find such an edge and eagerness upon your own spirits, as may
lead you to imagine, that all opposition will immediately fall before you; but
alas! I fear, that in a little time these enemies, which seemed to be slain at
your feet, will revive and recover their weapons; and renew the assault in one
form or another. And perhaps your most painful combats may be with such as you
had thought most easy to be vanquished; and your greatest danger may arise from
some of those enemies from whom you apprehended the least; particularly from
pride, and from indolence of spirit; from a secret alienation of heart from
God, and from a^ (...) disposition for conversing with him, through an
immoderate attachment to things seen and temporal, which may be oftentimes
exceeding dangerous to your salvation, though perhaps they be not absolutely
and universally prohibited. In a thousand of these instances you must learn to
deny yourself, or you cannot be Christ's disciple Matt. 16, 24.

3. You must also lay your account to find great difficulties from the world;
from its manners, customs, and examples. The things of the world will hinder
you one way; and the men of the world another. Perhaps you may meet with much
less assistance in religion than you are now ready to expect from good men. The
present generation of them is generally so cautious to avoid every thing that
looks like ostentation, and there seems something so insupportably dreadful in
the chage of enthusiasm, that you will find most of your Christian brethren
studying to conceal their virtue and their piety much more than others study to
conceal their vices and their profaneness. But while, unless your situation be
singularly happy, you meet with very little aid one way, you will, no doubt,
find great opposition another. The enemies of religion will be bold and active
in their assaults, while many of its friends seem unconcerned: and one sinner
will probably exert himself more to corrupt you than ten Christians to secure
and save you. They who have once been your companions in sin will try a
thousand artful methods to allure you back again to their forsaken society:
some of them perhaps with an appearance of tender fondness; and many more by
the almost irrisistible art of banter and ridicule; that boasted test of right
and wrong, as it has been wantonly called, will be tried upon you, perhaps
without any regard to decency, or even to common humanity. You will be derided
and insulted by those whose esteem and affection you naturally desire: and may
find much more propriety than you imagine in the expression of the Apostle,
"The trial of cruel mockings Heb. 11, 36," which some fear more than either
sword or flames. This persecution of the tongue you must expect to go through,
and perhaps may be branded as a lunatic, for no other cause than that you now
begin to exercise your reason to purpose, and will not join with those that are
destroying their own souls in their wild career of folly and madness.

4. And it is not at all improbable, that, in the mean time, Satan may be doing
his utmost to discourage and distress you. He will, no doubt, raise in your
imagination the most tempting idea of the gratifications, the indulgencies, and
the companions, you are obliged to forsake; and give you the most discouraging
and terrifying view of the difficulties, severities and dangers, which are (as
he will persuade you) inseparable from religion. He will not fail to represent
God himself, the fountain of goodness and happiness, an hard master, whom it is
impossible to please. He will perhaps fill you with the most distressful fears,
and with cruel and insolent malice glory over you as his slave, when he knows
you are the Lord's freeman. At one time he will study, by his vile
suggestions, to interrupt you in your duties, as if they gave him an additional
power over you: at another time he will endeavor to weary you of your
devotion, by influencing you to prolong it to an immoderate and tedious length,
lest his power should be exerted upon you when it ceases. In short, this
practiced deceiver has artifices, which it would require whole volumes to
display, with particular cautions against each. And he will follow you with
malicious arts and pursuits to the very end of your pilgrimage; and will leave
no method unattemptd which may be likely to awaken your hands, and to sadden
your heart; that if, through the gracious interposition of God, he cannot
prevent your final happiness, he may at least impair your peace and your
usefulness as you are passing to it.

5. This is what the people of God feel; and what you will feel in some degree
or other, if you have your lot and your portion among them. But, after all, be
not discouraged: Christ is "the Captain of your salvation." Heb. 2, 10. It is
delightful to consider him under this view. When we take a survey of these
hosts of enemies, we may lift up our head amidst them all, and say, More and
greater is he that is with us, than all those that are against us 2 Kings 6,
16. Trust in the Lord, and you will be like Mount Zion, which cannot be moved,
but abides for ever Ps. 125, 2. When your enemies press upon you, remember you
are to "fight in the presence of God Zech. 10, 5." Endeavor therefore to act a
gallant and resolute part: endeavor to resist them steadfastly in the faith 1
Pet. 5, 9. Remember, he can give power to the faint, and increase strength to
them that have no might Isa. 40, 29. He has done it in ten thousa^^ instances
already; and he will do it in ten thousand more. How many striplings have
conquered their gigantic foes in all their most formidable armor, when they
have gone forth against them, though but (as it were) with a staff and a sling,
in the name of the Lord God of Israel 1 Samuel 17, 40.45. How many women and
children have trodden down the force of the enemy, and out of weakness have
been made strong Heb. 11, 34.

6. Amidst all the opposition of earth and hell, look upward, and look forward,
and you will feel your heart animated by the view. Your General is near: he is
near to aid you; he is near to reward you. When you feel the temptation press
the hardest, think of him who endured even the cross itself for your rescue.
View the fortitude of your divine Leader, and endeavor to march on in his
steps. Hearken to his voice, for he proclaims it aloud Behold I come quickly,
and my reward is with me Rev. 22, 12: Be thou faithful unto death, and I will
give thee a crown of life Rev. 2, 10. And, Oh how bright will it shine? and how
long will its luster last! when the gems that adorn the crowns of monarchs, and
pass (instructive thought) from one royal hand to another through succeeding
centuries, are ^^lted down in the last flame, it is a crown of glory which
fades not away 1 Pet. 5, 4.

7. It is indeed true, that such as turn aside to crooked paths will be led
forth with the workers of iniquity Psalm. 125, 5, to that terrible execution,
which the divine justice is preparing for them; and that it would have been
better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than after having
known it to turn aside from the holy commandment 2 Pet. 2, 21." But I would, by
divine grace, "hope better things of you Heb. 6, 9. And I make it my hearty
prayer for you, my reader, that you may be kept by the mighty power of God,
kept as in a garrison, on all sides fortified in the securest manner, through
faith unto salvation 1 Pet. 2, 5.

The SOUL, alarmed by a sense of these Difficulties, committing itself to a
divine Protection.
BLESSED God, it is to thine almighty power that I flee. Behold me surrounded
with difficulties and dangers, and stretch out thine omnipotent arm to save me;
Oh thou that savest by thy right hand them that put their trust in thee, from
those that rise up against them Pal. 17, 7! This day do I solemnly put myself
under thy protection; exert thy power in my favor, and permit me to make the
shadow of thy wings my refuge Psalm. 57, 1! Let thy grace be sufficient for me,
and thy strength be made perfect in my weakness 2 Cor. 12, 9! I dare not say, I
will never forsake thee; I will never deny thee. Mar. 14, 31: but I hope I can
truly say, O Lord, I would not do it, and that, according to my present
apprehension and purpose, death would appear to me much less terrible than in
any wilful and deliberate instance to offend thee. O root out those corruptions
from my heart, which in an hour of pressing temptation, might incline me to
view things in a different light, and so might betray me into the hand of the
enemy! Strengthen my faith, O Lord, and encourage my hope! Inspire me which an
heroic resolution in opposing every thing that lies in my way to heaven; and
let me set my face like a flint Isa. 50, 7, against all the assaults of earth
and hell. If sinners entice me, let me not consent Prove. 1, 10; if they insult
me, let me not regard it; if they threaten me, let me not fear! Rather may a
holy and ardent, yet prudent and well governed zeal take occasion, from that
malignity of heart which they discover, to attempt their conviction and
reformation! At least, let me never be ashamed to plead thy cause against the
most profane deriders of religion! Make me to hear joy and gladness in my soul;
and I will endeavor to teach transgressors thy ways, that sinners may be
converted unto thee Psalm. 51, 8.13! Yes, Lord, while my fears continue, though
I should apprehend myself condemned, I am condemned so righteously for my own
folly, that I would be thine advocate though against myself.

Keep me, O Lord, now, and all times! Never let me think, whatever age or
station I attain, that I am strong enough to maintain the combat without thee!
nor l^^ me imagine myself, even in this infancy of religion in my soul, so
weak, that thou can not support me! Wherever thou leadest me, there let me
follow; and whatever station thou appointest me, there let me labor; there let
me maintain the holy war against all the enemies of my salvation, and rather
fall in it than basely abandon it!

And thou, O glorious Redeemer, the Captain of my salvation, the great author
and finisher of my faith Heb. 12, 2, when I am in danger of denying thee as
Peter did, look upon me with that mixture of majesty and tenderness Luke 22,"
which may either secure me from falling, or may speedily recover me to God and
my duty again! And teach me to take occasion, even from my miscarriages, to
humble myself more deeply for all that has been amiss, and to redouble my
future diligence and caution. Amen.

CHAP. XVII. The Christian urged to, and assisted in, an express act of
Self-dedication to the Service of God.
The advantages of such a surrender are briefly suggested, 1. Advices for the
manner of doing it; that it may be deliberate, cheerful, entire, and perpetual,
2, -- 4; and that it be expressed with some affecting solemnity, 5. A written
instrument to be signed and declared before God at some season of extraordinary
devotion, proposed, 6, 7. The chapter concludes with a specimen of such an
instrument, together with an abstract of it, to be used with proper and
requisite alterations.

1. AS I would hope, that, notwithstanding all the views of opposition which do
or may arise, (...) in consideration of those noble supports and motives which
have been mentioned in the two preceding chapters, you are heartily determined
for the service of God, I would now urge you to make a solemn surrender of
yourself unto it. Do not only form such a purpose in your heart, but expressly
declare it in the divine presence. Such solemnity in the manner of doing it is
certainly very reasonable in the nature of things; and surely it is highly
expedient, for binding to the Lord such a treacherous heart, as we know our own
to be. It will be pleasant to reflect upon it, as done at such and such a time,
with such and such circumstances of place and method, which may serve to strike
the memory and the conscience. The sense of the vows of God which are upon you
will strengthen you in an hour of temptation; and the recollection may also
encourage your humble boldness and freedom in applying to him, under the
character and relation of your covenant God and Father, as future exigencies
may require.

2. Do it therefore, but do it deliberately. Consider what it is you are to do:
and consider how reasonable it is that it should be done, and done cordially
and cheerfully; "and not by constraint but willingly 1 Pet. 5, 2:" for, in this
sense and in every other, "God loves a cheerful giver 2 Cor. 9, 7." Now, surely
there is nothing we should do with greater cheerfulness, or more cordial
consent, than making such a surrender of ourselves to the Lord; to the God who
created us, who brought us into this pleasant and well furnished world, who
supported us in our tender infancy, who guarded us in the thoughtless days of
childhood and youth, who has hitherto continually helped, sustained, and
preserved us. Nothing can be more reasonable than that we should acknowledge
him as our rightful Owner and our sovereign Ruler; than that we should devote
ourselves to him as our most gracious Benefactor, and seek him as our supreme
felicity. Nothing can be more apparently equitable than that we, the product of
his power, and the price of his Son's blood, should be his, and his forever. If
you see the matter in its just view, it will be the grief of yo^^ soul that you
have ever alienated yourself from the blessed God and his service; so far will
you be from wishi^^ to continue in that state of alienation another year, o^
another day. You will rejoice to bring back to him his revolted creature; and
as you have in times past yielded your members, as instruments of
unrighteousness unto sin, you will delight to yield yourselves unto God, as
alive from the dead, and to employ your members as instruments of righteousness
unto God Romans 2, 13.

3. The surrender will also be as entire as it is cheerful and immediate. All
you are, and all you have, and all you can do, your time, your possessions,
your influence over others, will be devoted to him, that for the future it may
be employed entirely for him, and to his glory. You will desire to keep back
nothing from him; but will seriously judge that you are then in the truest and
noblest sense your own when you are most entirely his. You are also, on this
great occasion, to resign all that you have to the disposal of his wise and
gracious Providence, not only owning his power, but consenting to his undoubted
right, to do what he pleases with you, and all that he has given you; and
declaring a hearty approbation of all that he has done, and of all that he may
farther do.

4. Once more, let me remind you, that this surrender must be perpetual. You
must give yourself up to God in such a manner, as never more to pretend to be
your own: for the rights of God are, like his nature, eternal and immutable:
and with regard to his rational creatures, are the same yesterday, today, and
for ever.

5. I would farther advise and urge, that this dedication may be made with all
possible solemnity. Do it in express words. And perhaps it may be in many cases
most expedient, as many pious divines have recommended, to do it in writing.
Set your hand and seal to it, That on such a day of such a month and year, and
at such a place, on full consideration and serious reflection, you came to this
happy resolution, that whatever others might do, you would serve the Lord Josh.
24, 13.

6. Such an instrument you may, if you please, draw up for yourself; or if you
rather choose to have it drawn up to your hand, you may find something of this
nature below, in which you may easily make such alterations as shall suit your
circumstances, where there is any thing peculiar in them. But whatever you use,
weigh it well, meditate attentively upon it, that you may not be rash with your
mouth to utter any thing before God Eccl. 5, 2. And when you determine to
execute this instrument, let this transaction be attended with some more than
ordinary religious retirement. Make it, if you conveniently can, a day of
secret fasting and prayer; and when your heart is prepared with a becoming awe
of the divine majesty, with an humble confidence in his goodness, and an
earnest desire of his favor, then present yourself on your knees before God,
and read it over deliberately and solemnly; and when you have signed it, lay it
bye in some secure place, where you may review it whenever you please; and make
it a rule with yourself to review it, if possible, at certain seasons of the
year, that you may keep the remembrance of it.

7. At least, take this course 'till you see your way clear to the table of the
Lord, where you are to renew the same covenant, and to seal it with more
affecting solemnities. And God grant that you may be enabled to keep it, and,
in the whole of your conversation, to walk according to it! May it ^e an anchor
to your soul in every temptation, and a cordial to it in every affliction! May
the recollection of it embolden your addresses to the throne of grace now, and
give additional strength to your departing spirit, in a consciousness that it
is ascending to your covenant God and Father, and to that gracious Redeemer,
whose power and faithfulness will securely keep what you commit to him until
that day 2 Timothy 1, 12.

An example of SELF-DEDICATION; or, A solemn Form of renewing our Covenant with
God.
"ETERNAL and unchangeable JEHOVAH, thou great Creator of heaven and earth, and
adorable Lord of angels and men! I desire with the deepest h^miliation and
abasement of soul, to fall down at t^^ time in thine awful presence; and
earnestly pray, that thou will penetrate my very heart with a suitable se^^ of
thine unutterable and inconceivable glories?

Trembling may justly take hold upon me Job. 21, 6. when I, a sinful worm,
presume to lift up my head to thee, presume to appear in thy majestic presence
on such an occasion as this. Who am I, O Lord God, or what is my house 2 Samuel
7, 18? what is my nature or descent, my character and desert, that I should
speak of this, and desire that I may be one party in a COVENANT, where thou,
the King of kings, and Lord of lords, art the other? I blush and am confounded,
even to mention it before thee. But, O Lord, great as is thy Majesty, so also
is thy mercy. If thou will hold converse with any of thy creatures, thy
superlatively exalted nature must stoop, must stoop infinitely low. And I know,
that in and through Jesus, the Son of thy love, thou condescendest to visit
sinful mortals, and to allow their approach to thee, and their
covenant-intercourse with thee; nay, I know that the scheme and plan is thine
own; and that thou have graciously sent to propose it to us; as none untaught
by thee would have been able to form it, or inclined to embrace it even when
actually proposed.

"To thee, therefore, do I now come, invited b^ the name of thy Son, and
trusting in his righteousness and grace. Laying myself at thy feet with shame
and confusion of face, and smiting upon my breast, I say, with the humble
Publican, God be merciful to me a sinner Luke 18, 13. I acknowledge, O Lord,
that I have been a great transgressor. My sins have reached unto heaven Rev.
18, 5. and mine iniquities are lifted up unto the skies Jer 51, 9. The
irregular propensities of my corrupted and degenerate nature have, in ten
thousand aggravated instances, wrought to bring forth fruit unto death Romans 7,
5. And if thou should be strict to mark mine offenses, I must be silent under
a load of guilt, and immediately sink into destruction. But thou have
graciously called me to return unto thee, though I have been a wandering sheep,
a prodigal son, a backslinding child Jer. 3, 22. Behold, therefore, O Lord, I
come unto thee. I come, convinced not only of my sin, but of my folly. I come
from my very heart ashamed of myself, and with an acknowledgment in the
sincerity and humility of my soul, that I have played the fool, and have erred
exceedingly 1 Samuel 26, 21. I am confounded myself at the remembrance of these
things: but be thou merciful to my unrighteousness, and do not remember against
me my sins and my transgressions Heb. 8, 12. Permit me, O Lord, to bring back
unto thee those powers and faculties which I have ungratefully and
sacrilegiously alienated from thy service; and receive, I beseech thee, thy
poor revolted creature, who is now convinced of thy right to him, and desires
nothing in the whole world so much as to be thine!

"Blessed God, it is with the utmost solemnity that I make this surrender of
myself unto thee. "Hear, O "heavens, and give ear, O earth; I avouch the Lord
"this day to be my God Deuteronomy. 26, 17; and I avouch and declare myself this day
to be one of his covenant, children and people. Hear, O thou God of heaven, and
record it in the book of thy remembrance Mal. 3, 16. that henceforth I am
thine, entirely thine. I would not merely consecrate unto thee some of my
powers, or some of my possessions; or give thee a certain proportion of my
services, or all I am capable of for a limited time; but I would be wholly
thine, and thine for ever. From this day do I solemnly renounce all the former
lords, which have had dominion over me Isa. 26, 13; every sin, and every lust;
and bid, in thy name, an eternal defiance to the powers of hell, which have
most unjustly usurped the empire over my soul, and to all the corruptions which
their fatal temptations have introduced into it. The whole frame of my nature,
all the faculties of my mind, and all the members of my body, would I present
before thee this day as a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, which
I know to be my most reasonable service Romans 12, 1. To thee I consecrate all my
worldly possessions; in thy service I desire to spend all the remainder of my
time upon earth, and beg thou would instruct and influence me, so that,
whether my abode here be longer or shorter, every year and month, every day and
hour, may be used in such a manner, as shall most effectually promote thine
honor and subserve the schemes of thy wise and gracious providence. And I
earnestly pray, that whatever influence thou give me over others, in any of
the superior relations of life in which I may stand, or in consequence of any
peculiar regard which may be paid to me, thou would give me strength and
courage to exert myself to the utmost for thy glory; resolving, not only that I
will myself do it, but that all others, so far as I can rationally and properly
influence them, shall serve the Lord Josh. 24, 15. In this course, O blessed
God, would I steadily persevere to the very end of my life; earnestly praying,
that every future day of it may supply the deficiencies, and correct the
irregularities of the former; and that I may, by divine grace, be enabled, not
only to hold on in that happy way, but daily to grow more active in it!

"Nor do I only consecrate all that I am, and have, to thy service; but I also
most humbly resign and submit to thine holy and sovereign will, myself, and all
that I can call mine. I leave, O Lord, to thy management and direction, all I
possess, and all I wish; and set every enjoyment and every interest before
thee, to be disposed of as thou please. Continue, or remove, what thou have
given me; bestow or refuse what I imagine I want, as thou, Lord, shall see
good! And though I dare not say I will never repine, yet I hope I may venture
to say that I will labor, not only to submit, but to acquiesce; not only to
bear what thou do in thy most afflictive dispensations, but to consent to
it, and to praise thee for it; contentedly resolving, in all that thou
appointest for me, my will into thine, and looking on myself as nothing, and on
thee, O God, as the great eternal ALL, whose word ought to determine every
thing, and whose government ought to be the joy of the whole rational creation.

"Use me, O Lord, I beseech thee, as the instrument of thy glory, and honor me
so far as, either by doing or suffering what thou shall appoint, to bring some
revenue of praise to thee, and of benefit to the world in which I dwell! And
may it please thee, from this day forward, to number me among thy peculiar
people, that I may no more be a stranger and foreigner, but a fellow citizen
with the saints, and of the household of God Ephesians. 2, 19! Receive, O heavenly
Father, thy returning prodigal! Wash me in the blood of thy dear Son; clothe me
with his perfect righteousness; and sanctify me throughout by the power of thy
Spirit! Destroy, I beseech thee, more and more the power of sin in mine heart!
transform me more into thine own image, and fashion me to the resemblance of
Jesus, whom henceforward I would acknowledge as my teacher and sacrifice; my
intercessor and my Lord! Communicate to me, I beseech thee, all needful
influences of thy purifying, thy chearing, and thy comforting Spirit; and "lift
up that light of thy countenance upon me," which will put the sublimest joy and
gladness into my soul Psalm. 4, 6.7!

"Dispose my affairs, O God, in a manner which may be most subservient to thy
glory, and my own truest happiness; and when I have done and borne thy will
upon earth, call me from hence at what time, and in what manner thou please:
only grant, that in my dying moments, and in the near prospect of eternity, I
may remember these my engagements to thee, and may employ my latest breath in
thy service! and do thou, Lord, when thou feast the agonies of dissolving
nature upon me, remember this covenant too, even though I should then be
incapable of recollecting it! Look down, O my heavenly Father, with a pitying
eye upon thy languishing, thy dying child; place thine everlasting arms
underneath me for my support; put strength and confidence into my departing
spirit; and receive it to the embraces of thine everlasting love! Welcome it to
the abodes of them that sleep in Jesus 1 Thessalonians. 4, 14, to wait with them that
glorious day, when the last of thy promises to thy vovenant people shall be
fulfilled in their triumphant resurrection, and that "abundant entrance," which
shall be "administered to them" into that "everlasting kingdom 2 Pet. 1, 11."
of which thou have assured them by thy covenant, and in the hope of which I now
lay hold on it, desiring to live and die as with mine hand on that hope!

"And when I am thus numbered among the dead, and all the interests of
mortality are over with me for ever, if this solemn memorial should chance to
fall into the hands of any surviving friends, may it be the means of making
serious impressions on their minds! May they read it, not only as my language,
but as their own; and learn to fear the Lord my God, and with me to put their
trust under the shadow of his wings for time and for eternity! And may they
also learn to ad^^^ with me that grace, which inclines our hearts to enter into
the covenant, and condescends to admit us into it when so inclined; ascribing
with me, and with all the nations of the redeemed, to the Father, the Son and
the Holy Ghost, that glory, honor, and praise which is so justly due to each
divine person for the part he bear^ in this illustrious work! Amen."

N. B. For the sake of those who may think the proceeding form of
self-dedication too long to be transcribed, (as it is probable many will,) I
have, at the desire of a much esteemed friend, added the following abridgement
of it, which should by all means be attentively weighed in every clause before
it be executed; and any word or phrase which may seem liable to exception,
changed, that the whole heart may consent to it.

"Eternal and ever-blessed God! I desire to present myself before thee with the
deepest humiliation and abasement of soul; sensible how unworthy such a sinful
worm is to appear before the holy majesty of heaven, "the King of kings, and
Lord of lords," and especially on such an occasion as this, even to enter into
a covenant transaction with thee. But the scheme and plan is thine own. Thine
infinite condescension has offered it by thy Son, and thy grace has inclined
my heart to accept of it.

"I come, therefore, acknowledging myself to have been a great offender;
smiting on my breast, and saying with the humble Publican God be merciful to me
a sinner! I come invited by the name of thy Son, and wholly trusting in his
perfect righteousness; entreating that, for his sake, thou will be merciful to
my unrighteousness, and wilt no more remember my sins. Receive, I beseech thee,
thy revolted creature, who is now convinced of thy right to him, and desires
nothing so much as that he may be thine!

"This day do I, with the utmost solemnity, surrender myself to thee. I
renounce all former lords that have had dominion over me; and I consecrate to
thee all that I am, and all that I have; the faculties of my mind, the members
of my body, my worldly possessions, my time, and my influence over others; to
be all used entirely for thy glory, and resolutely employed in obedience to thy
commands, as long as thou continuest me in life; with an ardent desire and
humble resolution to continue thine through all the endless ages of eternity;
ever holding myself in an attentive posture to observe the first intimations of
thy will, and ready to spring forward, with zeal and joy, to the immediate
execution of it.

"To thy direction also I resign myself, and all I am and have, to be disposed
of by thee in such a manner as thou shall in thine infinite wisdom judge most
subservient to the purposes of thy glory. To thee I leave the management of all
events, and say without reserve, "Not my will, but thine be done!" Rejoicing
with a loyal heart in thine unlimited government, as what ought to be the
delight of the whole rational creation.

"Use me, O Lord, I beseech thee, as an instrument of thy service! Number me
among thy peculiar people! Let me be washed in the blood of thy dear Son! let
me be clothed with his righteousness! let me be sanctified by his Spirit?
Transform me more and more into his image! Impart to me, through him, all
needful influences of thy purifying, chearing, and comforting Spirit! And let
my life be spent under those influences, and in the light of thy gracious
countenance, as my Father and my God! And when the solemn hour of death comes,
may I remember this thy covenant, well ordered in all things and sure, as all
my salvation and all my desire 2 Samuel 23, 5. though every other hope and
enjoyment is perishing! And do thou, O Lord, remember it too! Look down with
pity, O my heavenly Father, on thy languishing, dying child! Embrace me in
thine everlasting arms! Put strength and confidence into my departing spirit!
and receive it to the abodes of them that sleep in Jesus, peacefully and
joyfully to wait the accomplishment of thy great promise to all thy people,
even that of a glorious resurrection, and of eternal happiness in thine
heavenly presence! And if any surviving friend should, when I am in the dust,
meet with this memorial of my solemn transactions with thee, may he make the
engagement his own; and do thou graciously admit him to partake in all the
blessings of thy covenant, through Jesus the great Mediator of it: to whom with
thee, O Father, and the Holy Spirit, be everlasting praises ascribed, by all
the millions who are thus saved by thee, and by all those other celestial
spirits, in whose work and blessedness, thou shall call them to share! Amen."

CHAP. XVIII. Of entering into Church communion, by an Attendance upon the
Lord's Supper.
The reader, being already supposed to have entered into covenant with God, 1.
is urged publicly to seal that engagement at the table of the Lord, 2. (1.)
From a view of the ends for which that ordinance was instituted, 3^ whence its
usefulness is strongly inferred, 4. And, (2.) From the authority of Christ's
appointment; which is solemnly pressed on the conscience, 5. Objections from
apprehensions of an unfitness, 6. Weakness of grace, etc. briefly answered, 7.
At least, serious thoughts on this subject is absolutely insisted upon, 8. The
chapter is closed with a prayer for one who desires to attend, yet finds
himself pressed with remaining doubts.

1. I HOPE this chapter will find you, by a most express consent, become one of
God's vovenant people, solemnly and cordially devoted to his service; and it is
my hearty prayer, that the covenant you have made on earth may be ratified in
heaven. But for your farther instruction and edification, give me leave to
remind you, that our Lord Jesus Christ has appointed a peculiar manner of
expressing our regard to him, and of solemnly renewing his covenant with him,
which, though it does not forbid any other proper way of doing it, must by no
means be set aside or neglected for any human methods, how prudent and
expedient soever they may appear to us.

2. Our Lord has wisely ordained, that the advantages of society should be
brought into religion; and as, by his command, professing Christians assemble
together for other acts of public worship, so he has been pleased to institute
a social ordinance, in which a whole assembly of them is to come to his table,
and there to eat the same bread, and drink the same cup. And this they are to
do as a token of their affectionate remembrance of his dying love, of their
solemn surrender of themselves to God, and of their sincere love to another,
and to all their fellow Christians.

3. That these are indeed the great ends of the Lord's supper, I shall not now
stay to argue at large. -- You need only read what the Apostle St. Paul has
written in the tenth and eleventh chapters of his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, to convince you fully of this. He there expressly tells us, that
our Lord commanded the bread to be eaten, and the wine to be drank in
remembrance of him 1 Cor. 11, 24.25. or as a commemoration or memorial of him:
so that, as often as we attend this institution, we show forth our Lord's
death, which we are to do even until he come again Ver. 26. And it is
particularly asserted, That the cup is the new Testament in his blood Ver. 25;
that is, it is a seal of that covenant which was ratified by his blood. Now, it
is evident that, in consequence of this, we are to approach it with a view to
that covenant, desiring its blessings, and resolving by divine grace to comply
with its demands. On the whole, therefore, as the Apostle speaks, we have
communion in the body and the blood of Christ Cor. 10, 16; and partaking of his
table, and of his cup, we converse with Christ, and join ourselves to him as
his people: as the Heathens had, in their idolatrous rites, communion with
their deities, and joined themselves to them; and the Jews by eating their
sacrifices, conversed with Jehovah, and joined themselves to him. He farther
reminds them, that though many, they were "one bread and one body, being all
partakers of that one bread 1 Cor. 10, 17." and being all made to drink into
one spirit 1 Cor. 12, 13; that is, meeting together as if they were but one
family, and joining in the commemoration of that one blood which was their
common ransom, and of the Lord Jesus their common head. Now, it is evident, all
these reasonings are applicable to Christians in succeeding ages. Permit me,
therefore, by the authority of our divine Master, to press upon you the
observation of this precept.

4. And let me also urge it, from the apparent tendency which it has to promote
your truest advantage. You are setting out in the Christian life; and I have
reminded you at large of the opposition you must expect to meet with in it. It
is the love of Christ which must animate you to break through all. What then
can be more desirable than to bear about with you a lively sense of it? and
what can awaken that sense more than the contemplation of death as there
represented! Who can behold the bread broken, and the wine poured out, and not
reflect how the body of the blessed Jesus was even torn in pieces by his
sufferings, and his sacred blood poured forth like water on the ground? Who can
think of the heart-rending agonies of the Son of God, as the price of our
redemption and salvation, and not feel his soul melted with tenderness, and
inflamed with grateful affection? What an exalted view does it give us of the
blessings of the gospel covenant, when we consider it as "established in the
blood of God's only begotten Son?" and when we make our approach to God, as our
heavenly Father, and give up ourselves to his service in this solemn manner,
what an awful tendency has it to fix the conviction, that we are not our own,
being bought with such a price 1 Cor. 6, 19.20? What a tendency has it to guard
us against every temptation to those sins which we have so solemnly renounced,
and to engage our fidelity to him to whom we have bound our soul^ as with an
oath? Well may our hearts be knit together in mutual love Col. 2, 12. when we
consider ourselves as one in Christ Gal. 3, 28: his blood becomes the cement of
the society, joins us in spirit, not only to each other, but "to all that in
every place call "upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours
1 Cor. 1, 2: and we anticipate, in pleasing hope, that blessed day, when the
assembly shall be complete, and we shall all "be forever with the Lord 1 Thessalonians.
4, 17." Well may these views engage us to "deny ourselves, and to "take up our
cross and follow our crucified Master Matt 26, 24:" well may they engage us to
do our utmost by prayer, and all other suitable endeavors, to serve his
followers and his friends; to serve those who^ he has purchased with his
blood, and who are to be his associates and ours in the glories of an happy
immortality.

5. It is also the express institution and command of our blessed Redeemer,
that the members of such societies should be tenderly solicitous for the
spiritual welfare of each other; and that, on the whose, his churches may be
kept pure and holy, that they should withdraw themselves from every brother
that walks disorderly 2 Thessalonians. 3, 6; that they should mark such as cause
offenses or scandals amongst them, contrary to the doctrine which they have
learned, and avoid them Romans 16, 17; that if any obey not the word of Christ by
his apostles, they should have no fellowship or communion with such, that they
may be ashamed 2 Thessalonians. 2, 14; that they should not eat with such as are
notoriously irregular in their behavior; but, on the contrary, should put away
from among themselves such wicked persons 1 Cor. 5, 11.13. It is evident,
therefore, that the institution of such societies is greatly for the honor of
Christianity, and for the advantage of its particular professors and
consequently, every consideration of obedience to our common Lord, and of
prudent regard to our own benefit, and that of our brethren, will require, that
those who love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity should enter into them, and
assemble among them in these their most solemn and peculiar acts of communion
at his table.

6. I entreat you, therefore, and, if I may presume ^o say it, in his name, and
by his authority, I charge (...) on your conscience, that this precept of our
dying Lo^^ go not as it were, for nothing with you; but that, (...) you indeed
love him, you keep this as well as the rest of his commandments. -- I know you
may be ready ^o fo^^ objections. I have elsewhere debated many of the chi^^ of
them at large, and I hope, not without some good effect See the fourth of my
sermons to young persons; (...) The Young Christian invited to an early
Attendance (...) the Lord's Table.
. The great question is that which relates to your being prepared for a worthy
attendance: and, in conjunction with what has been said before, I think that
may be brought to a very short issue. Have you, so far a you know your own
heart, been sincere in that deliberate surrender of yourself to God through
Christ, which I recommend in the former chapter? If you have, (whether it were
with or without the particular form or manner of doing it there recommended,)
you have certainly taken hold of the covenant, and therefore have a right to
the seal of it. And there is not, and cannot be, any other view of the
ordinance in which you can have any farther objection to it. If you desire to
remember Christ's death, if you desire to renew the dedication of yourself to
God through him, if you would list yourself among his people, if you would love
them, and do them good according to your ability; and, on the whole, would not
allow yourself in the practice of any one known sin, or in the omission of any
one known duty, then I will venture confidently to say, not only that you will
be welcome to the ordinance, but that it was instituted for such as you.

7. As for other objections, a few words may suffice, by way of reply. The
weakness of the religious principle in your soul, if it be really implanted
there, is so far from being an argument against your seeking such a method to
strengthen^t, that it rather strongly inforces the necessity of doing it. --
The neglect of this solemnity, by so many that call themselves Christians,
should rather engage you so much the more to distinguish your ^eal or an
institution, in this respect so much slighted and injured. And as for the fears
of aggravated guilt in case of apostasy, do not indulge them. This may, by the
divine blessing, be an effectual remedy against the evil you fear; and, it is
certain, that after what you must already have known and felt before you could
be brought into your present situation, (on the suppositions I have now been
making,) there can be no room to think of a retreat; no room, even for the
wretched hope of being less miserable than the generality of those that have
perished. Your scheme, therefore, must be to make your salvation as sure, and
to make it as glorious as possible: and I know not any appointment of our
blessed Redeemer which may have a more comfortable aspect upon that blessed end
than this which I am now recommending to you.

8. One thing I would at least insist upon, and I see not with what face it can
be denied, I mean, That you should take this matter into a serious
consideration; that you shall diligently inquire, whether you have reason in
your conscience to believe it is the will of God, you should now approach to
the ordinance, or not: and that you should continue your reflections, your
inquiries, and your ^^^vers, till you find farther encouragement to come, if
that encouragement be hitherto wanting. For of this be assured, that a state in
which you are on the whole unfit to approach this ordinance, is a state in
which you are destitute of the necessary preparations for death and heaven: in
which, therefore, if you would not allow yourselves to slumber on the brink of
destruction, you ought not to rest so much as one single day.

A PRAYER for one who earnestly desires to approach to the Table of the Lord,
yet has some remaining Doubt^ concerning his right to that solemn Ordinance.
BLESSED Lord, I adore thy wise and gracious appointments for the edification
of thy church in holiness and in love. I thank thee that thou have commanded
thy servants to form themselves into societies; and I adore my gracious Savior
who has instituted, as with his dying breath, the holy solemnity of his
supper, to be through all ages a memorial of his dying love, and a bond of that
union, which it is his sovereign pleasure that his people should preserve. I
hope thou, Lord, art witness to the sincerity with which I desire to give
myself up to thee; and that I may call thee to record on my soul, that if I now
hesitate about this particular manner of doing it, it is not because I would
allow myself to break any of thy commands, or to slight any of thy favors. I
trust, thou know, that my present delay arises only from an uncertainty as
to my own duty, and a fear of profaning holy things by an unworthy approach to
them. Yet surely, O Lord, if thou have given me a reverence for thy command, a
desire of communion with thee, and a willingness to devote myself wholly to thy
service, I may regard it as a token for good, that thou art disposed to receive
me, and that I am not wholly unqualified for an ordinance which I so highly
honor, and so earnestly desire, I therefore, make it mine humble request unto
thee, O Lord, this day, that thou would graciously be pleased to instruct me
in my duty, and to teach me the way which I should take! Examine me, O Lord,
and prove me, try my reins and my heart Psalm. 26, 2. Is there any secret sin to
the love and practice of which I would indulge? Is there any of thy precepts,
in the habitual breach of which I would allow myself? I trust I can appeal to
thee as a witness that there is not. Let me not then wrong mine own soul by a
causeless and sinful absence from thy sacred table! But grant, O Lord, I
beseech thee, that thy word, thy providence and thy Spirit, may so concur, as
to make my "way plain before me Prove. 15, 19!" Scatter my remaining doubts, if
thou see they have no just foundation! Fill me with a more assured faith,
with a more ardent love; and plead thine own cause with my heart in such a
manner as that I may not be able any longer to delay that approach, which, if I
am thy servant indeed, is equally my duty and my privilege! in the mean time,
grant that it may never be long out of my thoughts; but that I may give all
diligence, if there be any remaining occasion of doubt, to remove it by a more
affectionate concern to avoid what ever is displeasing to the eyes of thine
holiness, and to practice the full extent of my duty! May the views of Christ
crucified be so familiar (...) my mind, and may a sense of his dying love so
po^^fully constrain my soul, that my own growing experience may put it out of
all question, that I am one of those for whom he intended this feast of love!

And even now, as joined to thy churches in spirit and in love, though not in
so express and intimate a bond as I could wish, would I heartily pray, that thy
blessing may be on all thy people! that thou would feed thine heritage, and
lift them up forever Psalm. 28, 9! May every Christian society flourish in
knowledge, in holiness and in love! May all, thy priests be clothed with
salvation, that by their means thy chosen people may be made joyful Psalm. 132,
16! And may there be a glorious accession to thy churches every where, of those
who may fly to them as a cloud, and as doves to their windows Isa. 60, 8! May
thy table, O Lord, be furnished with guests Matthew. 22, 10; and may all that
love thy salvation say, Let the Lord be magnified, who has pleasure in the
prosperity of his servants Psalm. 35, 27! And I earnestly pray, that all who
profess to have received Christ Jesus the Lord may be duly careful to walk in
him Col. 2, 6; and that we may all be preparing for the general assembly of the
first born, and may join in that nobler and more immediate wo^^^^ where all
these types and shadows shall be laid aside; where even these memorials shall
be no longer necessary, but a living, present redeemer shall be the everlasting
joy of those who here in his absence have delighted to commemorate his death!
Amen.

N. B. I purposed to have added something here concerning a regular approach to
the Lord's table, a proper attendance upon it, and suitable reflections after
it: but I find this Work will swell under my hand beyond what I at first
expected; and therefore, as these articles have been handled by so many
valuable writers, I choose to refer to them, and particularly to Dr. Earle's
Sacramental Exercises, and Dr. Grove's Devotional Exercises, relating to the
Lord's supper: books, which I think remarkably excellent in their kind, and
which may be had at very easy rates. Yet, for the farther assistance of devout
communicants, I have some thoughts of publishing a sm^^^ volume of sacramental
meditations on select text of Scripture, if God spare me to finish my
Exposition on the New Testament and some other pieces which I have now in hand.

CHAP. XIX. Some more particular Directions for maintaining continual Communion
with God, or being in his Fear all the Day long.
A letter to a pious friend on this subject introduced here, 1. A general plan
of directions, 2. [1.] For the beginning of the day, 3. (1.) Lifting up the
heart to God at our first awakening, 4. (2.) Setting ourselve to the secret
devotions of the morning; with respect (...) which particular advices are
given, 5, -- 10. [II.] For the progress of the day, 11. Directions are give
concerning, (1.) Seriousness in devotion, 12. (2.) Diligence in business, 13.
(3.) Prudence in recreations, 14, (4.) Observation of providence, 15. (5.)
Watchfulness against temptations, 16. (6.) Dependence on divine influences, 17.
(7.) Government of the thoughts when in solitude, 18. (8.) Management of
discourse in company, 19. [III.] For the conclusion of the day, 20. (1.) With
the secret devotions of the evening, 21. Directions for self-examination at
large, 22, 23. (2.) Laying down with a proper temper, 24. Conclusion of the
letter, 25. and of the chapter, 26. With a serious view of death, proper to be
taken at the close of the day.

1. I WOULD hope that upon, serious consideration, self-examination, and
prayer, the reader may by this time be come to a resolution to attend the table
of the Lord, and to seal his vows there. I will now suppose that solemn
transaction to be over, or some other deliberate act to have passed, by which
he has given himself up to the service of God; and that his concern now is to
inquire how he may act according to the vo^^^ of God which are upon him. Now,
for his farther assistance here, besides the general view I have already given
of the Christian temper and character, I will propose some more particular
directions relating to maintaining that devout, spiritual and heavenly
character, which may in the language of Scripture, be called A daily walking
with God; or, Being in his fear all the day long Prove. 23, 17. And I know not
how I can express the idea and plan which I have formed of this in a more clear
and distinct manner than I did in a letter, which I wrote many years ago N. B.
It was in the year, 1727.
to a young person of eminent piety, with whom I had then an intimate
friendship; and who, to the great grief of all that knew him, died a few months
after he received it. Yet (...) he lived long enough to reduce the directions
(...) practice, which I wish and pray that every reader may do, so far as they
may properly suit his capacities and circumstances in life, considering it as
if addressed to himself. -- I say, (and desire it may be observed) that I wish
my reader may act on these directions so far as they may properly suit his
capacities and circumstances in life; for I would be far from laying down the
following particulars as universal rules for all, or for any one person in the
world at all times. Let them be practiced by those that are able and when they
have leisure; and when you cannot reach them all, come as near the most
important of them as you conveniently can. -- With this precaution I proceed to
the letter, which I would hope, after this previous care to guard against the
danger of mistaking it, will not discourage any the weakest Christian. Let us
humbly and cheerfully do our best, and rejoice that we have so gracious a
Father who knows all our infirmities, and compassionate an High Priest to
recommend to divine acceptance the feeblest efforts of sincere duty and love!

MY DEAR FRIEND,
SINCE you desire my thoughts in writing, and at large on the subject of our
late conversation, viz. "By what particular methods, in our daily conduct, a
life of devotion and usefulness may be most happily maintained and secured?" I
set myself with cheerfulness to recollect and digest the hints which I then
gave you, hoping it may be of some service to you in your most important
interests, and may also fix on my own mind a deeper sense of my obligations to
govern my own life by the rules I offer to others. I esteem attempts of this
kind among the pleasantest fruits, and the surest cements of friendship; and,
as I hope ours will last for ever, I am persuaded a mutual care to cherish
sentiments of this kind will add everlasting endearments to it.

2. The directions you will expect from me on this occasion naturally divide
themselves into three heads. -- How we are to regard God -- in the beginning
^^^he progress -- and the close of the day. I will open (...) heart freely to
you with regard to each, and will leave, you to judge how far these hints may
suit your circumstances; aiming at least to keep between the extremes of a
superstitious strictness in trifles, and of an indolent remissness, which, if
admitted in little things, may draw after it criminal neglects, and at length
yet more criminal indulgencies.

3. [I.] In the beginning of the day, it should certainly be our care, -- to
lift up our hearts to God as soon as we awake, and while we are rising, -- and
then, to set ourselves seriously and immediately to the secret devotions of the
morning.

4. For the first of these, it seems exceedingly natural. There are so many
things that may suggest a great variety of pious reflections and ejaculations,
which are so obvious, that one would think a serious mind could hardly miss
them. The ease and cheerfulness of our mind at our first awakening; the
refreshment we find from sleep; the security we have enjoyed in that
defenseless state; the provision of warm and decent apparel; the cheerful light
of the returning sun; or (what is not unfit to mention to you,) the
contrivances of Art, taught and furnished by the great author of all our
conveniences, to supply us with many useful hours of life in the absence of
the sun; the hope of returning to the dear society of our friends; the prospect
of spending another day in the service of God, and the improvement of our own
minds; and, above all, the lively hope of a joyful resurrection to an eternal
day of happiness and glory. Any of these particulars, and many more, which I do
not mention, may furnish us with matter of pleasing reflection, and cheerful
praise, while we are rising. And, for our farther assistance, when we are alone
at this time, it may not be improper to speak sometimes to ourselves, and
sometimes to our heavenly Father, in the natural expressions of joy and
thankfulness. Permit me, Sir, to add, that if we find our hearts in such a
frame at our first awakening, even that is just matter of praise, and the
rather, as perhaps it is an answer to the prayer with which we lay down.

5. For the exercise of secret devotion in a morning, which I hope will
generally be our first work, I cannot prescribe an exact method to another. You
must, my dear friend, consult your own taste in some measure. The constituent
parts of the service are, in the general, plain. Were I to propose a particular
model for those, who have half, or three quarters of an hour at command,
(which, with prudent conduct, I suppose most may have) it should be this:

6. To begin the stated devotions of the day with a solemn act of praise,
offered to God on our knees, and generally with a low, yet distinct voice;
acknowledging the mercies we had been reflecting on while rising; never
forgetting to mention Christ, as the great foundation of all our enjoyments and
our hopes, or to return thanks for the influences of the blessed Spirit, which
have led our hearts to God, or are then engaging us to seek him. This, as well
as other offices of devotion afterward mentioned, must be done attentively and
sincerely; for, not to offer our praises heartily, is in the sight of God, not
to praise him at all. This address of praise may properly be concluded with an
express renewal of our covenant with God, declaring our continued repeated
resolution of being devoted to him, and particularly of living to his glory the
ensuing day.

7. It may be proper, after this, to take a prospect of the day before us, so
far as we can probably foresee, in the general, where and how it may be spent;
and seriously to reflect, "How shall I employ myself for God this day? What
business is to be done, and in what order? What opportunities may I expect,
either of doing or of receiving good? What temptations am I like to be
assaulted with, in any place, company, or circumstance, which may probably
occur? In what instances have I lately failed? and how shall I be safest now?"

8. After this review, it will be proper to offer up a short prayer, begging,
that God would quicken us to each of these foreseen duties; that he would
fortify us against each of these apprehended dangers; that he would grant us
success in such or such a business undertaken for his glory; and also that he
would help us to discover and improve unforeseen opportunities, to resist
unexpected temptations, and to bear patiently and religiously any afflictions
which may surprise us in the day on which we are entering.

9. I would advise you after this to read some portion of scripture; not a
great deal, nor the whole Bible in its course; but some select lessons out of
its most useful parts; perhaps ten or twelve verses; nor troubling yourself
much about the exact connection, or other critical niceties which may occur,
(though at other times I would recommend them to your inquiry, as you have
ability and opportunity;) but considering them merely in a devotional and a
practical view. Here take such instructions as readily present themselves to
your thoughts, repeat them over to your own conscience, and charge your heart
religiously to observe them, and act upon them under a sense of the divine
authority which attends them. And if you pray over the substance of this
Scripture, with your Bible open before you, it may impress your memory and your
heart yet more deeply, and may form you to a copiousness and variety both of
thought and expression in prayer.

10. It might be proper to close these devotions with a psalm or hymn; and I
rejoice with you, that through the pious care of Dr. WATTS, and some other
sacred poets, we are provided with so rich a variety for the assistance of the
closet and family on these occasions, as well as for the service of the
sanctuary.

11. [II.] The most material directions which have occurred to me, relating to
the progress of the day, are these: -- That we be serious in the devotions of
the day: -- that we delight in the business of it, that is, in the prosecution
of our worldly callings: -- that we be temperate and prudent in the recreations
of it: -- that we carefully mark the providence of the day: -- that we
cautiously guard against the temptations of it: -- that we keep up a lively and
humble dependence upon the divine influence, suitable to every emergency of it:
-- that we govern our thoughts well in the solitude of the day, -- and our
discourses well in the conversations of it. These, Sir, were the heads of a
sermon which you lately heard me preach on this occasion, and to which I know
you referred in that request which I am now endeavoring to answer. I will,
therefore, touch upon the most material hints which fell under each of these
particulars.

12. (1.) For seriousness in devotion, whether public or domestic: Let us take
a few moments, before we enter upon such solemnities, to pause, and reflect, on
the perfections of the God we are addressing to, on the importance of the
business we are coming about, on the pleasure and advantage of a regular and
devout attendance, and on the guilt and solly of an hypocritical formality.
When engaged, let us maintain a strict watchfulness over our own spirits, and
check the first wanderings of thought, And when the duty is over, let us
immediately reflect on the manner in which, it has been performed, and ask our
consciences whether we have reason to conclude that we are accepted of God in
it? For there is a certain manner of going through these offices, which our own
hearts will immediately tell us it is impossible for God to approve: and if we
have inadvertently fallen into it, we ought to be deeply humbled before God for
it, lest "our very prayer become sin, Ps. 109, 7.

13. (2,) As for the hours of worldly business; whether it be, as with you,
that of the hands; or whether it be the labor of a learned life, not
immediately relating to religious matters: Let us set to the prosecution of it
with a sense of God's authority, and with a regard to his glory. Let us avoid a
dreaming, sluggish, indolent temper, which nods over its work, and does only
the business of one hour in two or three. In opposition to this, which runs
through the life of some people, who yet think they are never idle, let us
endeavor to dispatch as much as we well can in a little time; considering that
it is but a little we have in all. And let us be habitually sensible of the
need we have of the divine blessing to make our labor successful.

14. (3.) For seasons of diversion: Let us take care that our recreations be
well closen; that they be pursued with a good intention, to fit us for a
renewed application to the labors of life; and thus that they be only used in
subordination to the honor of God, the great end of all our actions. Let us
take heed that our hearts be not estranged from God by them; and that they do
not take up too much of our time; always remembering that the faculties of the
human nature, and the advantages of the Christian revelation, were not given us
in vain; but that we are always to be in pursuit of some great and honorable
end, and to indulge ourselves in amusements and diversions no farther than as
they make a part in a scheme of rational and manly, benevolent and pious
conduct.

15. (4.) For the observation of providence: It will be useful to regard the
divine interposition in our comforts and in our afflictions. In our comforts,
whether more common or extraordinary: That we find ourselves in continued
health; that we are furnished with food for our support and pleasure; that we
have so many agreeable ways of employing our time; that we have so many
agreeable friends, and those so good and so happy; that our business goes on
prosperously; that we go out and come in safely; and that we enjoy composure
and cheerfulness of spirit, without which nothing else could be enjoyed. All
these should be regarded as providential favors, and due acknowledgments
should be made to God on these accounts, as we pass through such agreeable
scenes. On the other hand, Providence is to be regarded in every
disappointment, in every loss, in every pain, in every instance of unkindness
from those who have professed friendship: and we should endeavor to argue
ourselves into a patient submission, from this consideration, that the hand of
God is always mediately, if not immediately, in each of them; and that if they
are not properly the work of Providence, they are at least under its direction.
It is a reflection, which we should particularly make with relation to those
little cross accidents, (as we are ready to call them) and those infirmities
and follies in the temper and conduct of our intimate friends, which may else
be ready to discompose us. And it is the more necessary to guard our minds
here, as wise and good men often lose the command of themselves on these
comparatively little occasions; who calling up reason and religion to their
assistance, stand the shock of great calamities with fortitude and resolution.

. 16. (5.) For watchfulness against temptations; It is necessary, when changing
our pla^^^ or our employment, to reflect, "what snares attend me here?" And as
this should be our habitual care, so we should especially guard against those
snares which in the morning we foresaw. And when we are entering on those
circumstances in which we expected the assault, we should reflect, especially
if it be a matter of great importance, "Now the combat is going to begin: now
God and the blessed angels are observing what constancy, what fortitude, there
is in my soul; and how far the divine authority, and the remembrance of my own
prayers and resolutions will weigh with me when it comes to the trial."

17. (6.) As for dependence on divine grace and influence: It must be
universal; and since we always need it, we must never forget that necessity. A
moment spent in humble servent breathings after the communications of the
divine assistance may do more good than many minutes spent in more reasonings:
and though indeed this should not be neglected, since the light of reason is a
kind of divine illumination, yet still it ought to be pursued in a due sense of
our dependence on the father of lights, or where we think ourselves wisest, we
may become vain in our imaginations Romans 1, 21.22. Let us therefore always call
upon God; and say for instance, when we are going to pray, Lord fix my
attention! Awaken my holy affections, and pour out upon me the spirit of grace
and of supplication Zech. 12, 10! When taking up the Bible, or any other good
book, Open thou mine eyes that^ may behold wondrous things out of thy law Psa.
119*^8. Enlighten mine understanding! warm my heart; May my good resolutions be
confirmed, and all the course of my life in a proper manner regulated! When
addressing ourselves to any worldly business, Lord, prosper thou the work of
mine hands upon me Psa. 90, 17, and give thy blessing to my honest endeavors!
When going to any kind of recreation, Lord, bless my refreshments! let me not
forget thee in them, but still keep thy glory in view? When coming into
company, Lord, may I do and get good! Let no corrupt communication proceed out
of my mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may
minister grace to the ^^^rers Ephesians. 4, 2)! When entering upon difficulties, Lord
give me that wisdom, which is profitable to direct Eccl. 10, 10! teach me thy
way, and lead me in a plain path Psalm. 27, 11! When encountering with
temptations, Let thy strength O gracious Redeemer, be made perfect in my
weakness 2 Cor. 12, 9! These instances may illustrate the design of this
direction, though they be far from a complete enumeration of all the
circumstances in which it is to be regarded.

18. (7.) For the government of our thoughts in solitude: Let us accustom
ourselves, on all occasions, to exercise a due command over our thoughts. Let
us take care of those entanglements of passion, and those attachments to any
present interest in view, which would deprive us of our power over them. Let us
set before us some profitable subject of thought; such as, the perfections of
the blessed God, the love of Christ, the value of time, the certainty and
importance of death and judgment, and of the eternity of happiness or misery
which is to follow. Let us also at such intervals reflect on what we have
observed, as to the state of our own souls, with regard to the advance or
decline of religion; or on the last sermon we have heard, or the last portion
of Scripture we have read. You may, perhaps, in this connection. Sir* recollect
what I have (if I remember right,) proposed to you in conversation; that it may
be very useful to select some one verse of Scripture, which we had met with in
the morning, and to treasure it up in our mind, resolving to think of that at
any time when we are at a loss for matter of pious reflection, in any intervals
of leisure for entering upon it. This will often be as a spring, from whence
many profitable and delightful thoughts may arise, which perhaps we did not
before see in that connection and force. Or, if it should not be so, yet I am
persuaded it will be (...) better to repeat the same Scripture in our mind an
hundred times in a day, with some pious ejaculations formed upon it, than to
leave our thoughts at the mercy of all those various trifles which may
otherwise intrude upon us, the variety of which will be far from making amends
for their vanity.

19. (8.) Lastly for the government of our discourse in company: We should take
care that nothing may escape us which can expose us, or our Christian
profession, to censure and reproach: nothing injurious to those that are
absent, or to those that are present; nothing malignant, nothing insincere,
nothing which may corrupt, nothing which may provoke, nothing which may mislead
those about us. Nor should we by any means be content that what we say is
innocent: it should be our desire that it may be edifying to ourselves and
others. In this view we should endeavor to have some subject of useful
discourse always ready, in which you may be assisted by these hints given about
furniture for thought under the former head. We should watch for decent
opportunities of introducing useful reflections; and if a pious friend attempt
to do it, we should endeavor to second it immediately. When the conversation
does not turn directly on religious subjects, we should endeavor to make it
improving some other way; we should reflect on the character and capacities of
our company, that we may lead them to talk of what they understand best; for
their discourses on those subjects will probably be most pleasing to
themselves, as well as most useful to us. And, in pauses of discourse, it may
not be improper to lift up an holy ejaculation to God, that his grace may
assist us and our friends in our endeavors to do good to each other; that all
we say and do may be worthy the character of reasonable creatures, and (...)
Christians.

20. [III.] The directions for a religious closing (...) the day, which I shall
here mention, are only two. -- us see to it, that the secret duties of the
evening be w^ performed; and let us lie down on our beds in a pious fra^^

21. (1.) For secret devotion in the evening I wo^^^ propose a method something
different from that in t^^ (...); but still, as then, with due allowances for
circumstances, which may make unthought of alteration proper. I should; Sir,
advise to read a portion of Scripture in the first place, with suitable
reflections and prayer, as above: then to read a hymn or psalm: after this to
enter on self-examination, to be followed by a longer prayer than that which
followed reading, to be formed on this review of the day. In this address to
the throne of grace it will be highly proper to entreat that God would pardon
the omissions and offenses of the day; to praise him for mercies temporal and
spiritual; to recommend ourselves to his protection for the ensuing night; with
proper petitions for others, whom we ought to bear on our hearts before him;
and particularly for these friends with whom we have conversed or corresponded
with in the preceding day. Many other concerns will occur, both in morning and
evening prayer, which I have not here hinted at; but I did not apprehend that a
full enumeration of these things belonged, by any means, to our present purpose.

22. Before I quit this head, I must take the liberty to remind you, that
self-examination is so important a duty that it will be worth our while to
spend a few words upon it. And this branch of it is so easy, that when we have
proper questions before us, any person of a common understanding may hope to go
through it with advantage under a divine blessing. I offer you, therefore, the
following queries, which I hope you will with such alterations as you may judge
requisite, keep near you for daily use. "Did I awake, as with God this morning,
and rise with a grateful sense of his goodness? How were the secret devotions
of the morning performed? Did I offer my solemn praises, and renew the
dedication of myself to God, with becoming attention and suitable affections?
Did I lay my scheme for the business of the day wisely and well? How did I read
the Scripture, and any other devotional or practical piece, which I might
afterward conveniently review? Did it do my heart good, or was it a mere
amusement? How has the other stated devotions of the day been attended,
whether in the family or in public? Have I pursued the common business of this
day with diligence and spirituality; doing every thing in season, and with all
convenient dispatch, and "as unto the Lord Col. 2, 23?" What time have I lost
this day, in the morning or the forenoon, in the afternoon or the evening; (for
these divisions will assist your recollection;) and what has occasioned the
loss of it? With what temper, and under what regulations have the recreations
of this day been pursued? Have I seen the hand of God in my mercies, health,
cheerfulness, food, clothing, books, preservation in journies, success of
business, conversation and kindness of friends, etc.? -- Have I seen it in
afflictions, and particularly in little things which had a tendency to vex and
disquiet me? And with regard to this interposition, have I received my comforts
thankfully, and my afflictions submissively? How have I guarded against the
temptations of the day, particularly against this or that temptation which I
foresaw in the morning? Have I maintained an humble dependence on divine
influences? Have I lived by faith on the Son of God Gal. 2, 20, and regarded
Christ this day as my Teacher and Governor, my Atonement and Intercessor, my
Example and Guardian, my Strength and Forerunner? Have I been looking forward
to death and eternity this day, and considered myself as a probationer for
heaven, and through grace an expectant of it? Have I governed my thoughts well,
especially in such or such an interval of solitude? How was my subject of
thought this day chosen, and how was it regarded? Have I governed my discourses
well in such and such company? Did I say nothing passionate, mischievous,
slanderous, imprudent, impertinent? Has my heart this day been full of love to
God, and to all mankind? and have I sought, and found, and improved
opportunities of doing and of getting good? -- With what attention and
improvement have I read the Scripture this evening? How was self-examination
performed the last night? and how have I profited this day by any remarks I
then made on former negligencies and mistakes? With what temper did I then lie
down and compose myself to sleep?"

23. You will easily see, Sir, that these questions are so adjusted as to be an
abridgment of the most material advices I have given in this letter; and I
believe I need not, to a person of your understanding, say any thing as to the
usefulness of such inquiries. Conscience will answer them in a few minutes; but
if you think them too large and particular, you may make a still shorter
abstract for daily use, and reserve these, with such obvious alterations as
will then be necessary, for seasons of more than ordinary exactness in review,
which I hope will occur at least once a week. Secret devotion being thus
performed before drowsiness render us unfit for it, the interval between that
and our going to rest must be conducted by the rules mentioned under the next
head. And nothing will farther remain to be considered here, but,

24. (2.) The sentiments with which we should lie down and compose ourselves to
sleep. Now, here it is obviously suitable to think of the divine goodness in
adding another day, and the mercies of it, to the former days and mercies of
our life: to take notice of the indulgence of Providence in giving us
commodious habitations and easy beds, and continuing to us such health of body
that we can lay ourselves down at ease upon them and such serenity of mind as
leaves us any room to hope for refreshing sleep: a refreshment to be sought not
merely as an indulgence to animal nature, but as what our wise Creator, in
order to keep us humble in the midst of so many infirmities, has been pleased
to make necessary to our being able to pursue his service with renewed
alacrity. Thus may our sleeping, as well as our walking, hours be, in some
sense, devoted to God. And when we are just going to resign ourselves to the
image of death, (to what one of the Ancients beautifully calls its lesser
mysteries,) it is also evidently proper to think seriously of that end of all
the living, and to renew those actings of repentance and faith which we should
judge necessary, if we were to wake no more here. You have once, Sir, seen a
meditation of that kind in my hand: I will transcribe it for you in the
postscript; and therefore shall add no more to this head, but here put a close
to the directions you desired.

25. I am persuaded, the most important of them have, in one form or other,
been long regarded by you and made governing maxims of your life. I shall
greatly rejoice if the review of these, and the examination and trial of the
rest, may be the means of leading you into more intimate communion with God,
and so of rendering your life more pleasant and useful, and your eternity,
whenever that is to commence, more glorious. There is not a human creature upon
earth whom I should not delight to serve in these important interests; but I
can faithfully assure you, that I am with particular respect,

Dear Sir, Your very affectionate friend and servant.


26. This, reader, with the alteration of a very few words, is the letter I
wrote to a worthy friend, (now, I doubt not, with God,) about sixteen years
ago: and I can assuredly say, that the experience of each of these years has
confirmed me in these views, and established me in the persuasion, that one day
thus spent is preferable to whole years of sensuality and the neglect of
religion. I chose to insert the letter as it is, because I thought the freedom
and particularly of the advice I had given in it would appear most natural in
its original form: and as I propose to enforce these advices in the next
chapter, I shall conclude this with that meditation which I promised my friend
as a postscript; and which I could wish you to make so familiar to yourself, as
that you might be able to recollect the substance of it whenever you compose
yourself to sleep.

A serious VIEW of DEATH, proper to be taken as we lie down on our Beds.
OH, my soul, look forward a little with seriousness and attention, and learn
wisdom by the consideration of thy latter end Deuteronomy. 32, 29. Another of thy
mortal days is now numbered and finished: and as I have put off my clothes, and
laid myself upon my bed for the repose of the night, so will the day of his
quickly come to its period; so must the body itself he put off, and laid to its
repose in a bed of dust. There let it rest; for it will be no more regarded by
me than the clothes which I have now laid aside. I have another far more
important concern to attend. Think, oh my soul, when death comes, thou art to
enter upon the eternal world, and to be fixed either in heaven or in hell. All
the schemes and cares, the hopes and fears, the pleasures and sorrows of life,
will come to their period, and the world of spirits will open upon thee. And,
oh, how soon may it open! perhaps before the returning sun brings on the light
of another day. Tomorrow's sun may not enlighten mine eyes, but only shine
round a senseless corpse, which may lie in the place of this animated body: at
least, the death of many in the flower of their age, and many who were superior
to me in capacity, piety, and the prospects of usefulness, may loudly warn me
not to depend on a long life, and engage me rather to wonder that I am
continued here so many years, than to be surprised if I am speedily removed.

And now, oh my soul, answer, as in the sight of God, Art thou ready? art thou
ready? Is there no sin unforsaken, and so unrepented of, to fill me with
anguish in my departing moments, and to make me tremble on the brink of
eternity? Dread to remain under the guilt of it, and this moment renew thy most
earnest applications to the mercy of God, and the blood of a Redeemer, for
deliverance from it.

But if the great account be already adjusted, if thou have cordially repented
of thy numerous offenses, if thou have sincerely committed thyself by faith
into the hands of the blessed Jesus, and have not renounced thy covenant with
him by returning to the allowed practice of sin, then start not at the thoughts
of a separation; it is not in the power of Death to hurt a soul devoted to God,
and united to the great Redeemer. It may take me from my worldly comforts; it
may disconcert and break my schemes for service on earth: but, oh my soul,
diviner entertainments and nobler services wait thee beyond the grave. For ever
blessed be the name of God, and the love of Jesus, for these quieting,
encouraging, joyful views! I will now lay me down in peace, and sleep Ps. 4, 8,
free from the fears of what shall be the issue of this night, whether life or
death may be appointed for me. Father, into thine hands I commend my spirit
Luke 23, 46; for thou l^st redeemed me, O God of truth Ps. 31, 5; and therefore
I can cheerfully refer it to thy choice whether I shall wake in this world or
another.

CHAP. XX. A serious Persuasive to such a Method of spending our Days, as is
represented in the former Chapter.
Christians fix their view too low, and indulge too indolent a disposition,
which makes it the more necessary to urge such a life as that under
consideration, 1, 2. It is therefore enforced, (1.) From its being apparently
reasonable, considering ourselves as the creatures of God, and as redeemed by
the blood of Christ, 3. (2.) From its evident tendency to conduce to our
comfort in life, 4. (3.) From the influence it will have to promote our
usefulness to others, 5. (4.) From its efficacy to make afflictions lighter, 6
(5.) From its happy aspect on death, 7.; and (6.) On eternity, 8. Whereas not
to desire improvement would argue a soul destitute of religion, 9. A prayer
suited to the state of a soul who longs to attain the life recommended above.

1. I HAVE been assigning in the preceding chapter, what I fear will seem to
some of my readers so hard a task, that they will want courage to attempt it;
and it is indeed a life, in many respects, so far above that of the generality
of Christians, that I am not without apprehensions that many who deserve the
name may think the directions, after all the precautions with which I have
proposed them, are carried to an unnecessary degree of nicety and strictness.
But I am persuaded much of the credit and comfort of Christianity is lost in
consequence of its professors fixing their aims too low, and not conceiving of
their high and holy calling in so elevated and sublime a view as the nature of
religion would require, and the word of God would direct. I am fully convinced,
that the expressions of walking with God; of being in the fear of the Lord all
the day long Prove. 23, 17. and, above all, that of loving the Lord our God with
all our heart and soul, and mind and strength Mark. 12, 30. must require, if
not all these circumstances, yet the substance of all that I have been
recommending, so far as we have capacity, leisure and opportunity; and I cannot
but think, that many might command more of the latter, and perhaps improve
their capacities too, if they would take a due care in the improvement of
themselves, if they would give up vain and unnecessary diversions, and certain
indulgencies, which only suit and delight the lower part of our nature, and (to
say the best of them) deprive us of pleasures much better than themselves, if
they do not plunge us into guilt. Many of these rules would appear easily
practicable, if men would learn to know the value of time, and particularly to
redeem it from unnecessary sleep, which wastes so many golden hours of the day:
hours in which many of God's servants are delighting themselves in him, and
drinking in full draughts of the water of life, while these their brethren are
slumbering upon their beds, and lost in vain dreams, as far below the common
entertainments of a rational creature as the pleasures of the sublimest
devotion are above them.

2. I know, likewise, that the mind is very fickle and inconstant, and that it
is a hard thing to preserve such a government and authority over our thoughts
as would be very desirable, and as the plan I have laid down will require. But
so much of the honor of God, and so much of your own true happiness depends
upon it, that I beg you will give me a patient and attentive hearing while I am
pleading with you; and that you will seriously examine the arguments, and then
judge whether a care and conduct like that which I have advised be not in
itself reasonable; and whether it will not be highly conducive to your comfort
and usefulness in life, your peace in death, and the advancement and increase
of your eternal glory.

3. Let conscience say, whether such a life, as I have described above, be not
in itself highly reasonable. Look over the substance of it again, and bring it
under a close examination; for I am very apprehensive that some weak objections
may arise against the whole, which may, in their consequences, affect
particulars, against which no reasonable man would presume to mark any
objection at all. Recollect, O Christian, and carry it with you in your memory
and your heart, while you are pursuing his review, that you are the creature of
God, that you are purchased with the blood of Jesus; and then say whether these
relations in which you stand do not demand all that application and resolution
which I would engage you to. Suppose all the counsels I have given reduced into
practice: suppose every day begun and concluded with such devout breathings
after God, and such holy retirements for morning and evening converse with him
and your own heart: suppose a daily care in contriving how your time may be
managed, and in reflecting how it has been employed: suppose this regard to
God, this sense of his presence, and zeal for his glory to run through your
acts of worship, your hours of business and recreation: suppose this attention
to Providence, this guard against temptations, this dependence upon divine
influence, this government of the thoughts in solitude and of the discourses in
company: nay, I will add farther, suppose every particular direction given to
be pursued, excepting when particular cases occur, with respect to which you
shall be able in conscience to say, I wave it not from indolence and
carelessness, but because I think it will just now be more pleasing to God to
be doing something else; which may often happen in human life where general
rules are best concerted: suppose, I say, all this to be done, not for a day,
or a week, but through the remainder of life, whether longer or shorter; and
suppose this to be reviewed at the close of life, in the full exercise of your
rational faculties, will there be reason to say, in the reflection, "I have
taken too much pains in religion; the Author of my being did not deserve all
this from me: less diligence, less fidelity, less zeal, than this might have
been equivalent for the blood which was shed for my redemption. A part of my
heart, a part of my time, a part of my labors, might have sufficed for him who
has given me all my powers; for him, who has delivered me from that
destruction, which would have made them my everlasting torment; for him who is
raising me to the regions of a blissful immortality." Can you with any face say
this? If you cannot, then surely your conscience bears witness, that all I have
recommended under the limitations above is reasonable; that duty and gratitude
require it; and consequently that, by every allowed failure in it, you bring
guilt upon your own soul, you offend God, and act unworthy your Christian
profession.

4. I entreat you farther to consider whether such a conduct as I have now been
recommending would not conduce much to your comfort and usefulness in life.
Reflect seriously what is true happiness Does it consist in distance from God,
or in nearness to him! Surely you cannot be a Christian, surely you cannot be a
rational man, if you doubt whether communion with the great Father of our
spirits be a pleasure and felicity: and if it be, then surely they enjoy most
of it who keep him most constantly in view. You cannot but know in your own
conscience, that it is this which makes the happiness of heaven; and therefore
the more of it any man enjoys upon earth, the more of heaven comes down into
his soul. If you have made any trial of religion, though it be but a few months
or weeks since you first became acquainted with it, you must be some judge of
it upon your own experience, which have been the most pleasant days of your
life. Have they not been those in which you have acted most upon these
principles; those, in which you have most steadily and resolutely carried them
through every hour of time, and every circumstance of life? The check which you
must, in many instances, give to your own inclinations might seem disagreeable;
but it would surely be overbalanced in a most happy manner by the satisfaction
you would find in a consciousness of self-government; in having such a command
of your thoughts, affections and actions, as is much more glorious than any
authority over others can be.

5. I would also entreat you to consider the influence which such a conduct as
this might have upon the happiness of others. And it is easy to be seen it must
be very great; as you would find your heart always disposed to watch every
opportunity of doing good, and to seize it with eagerness and delight. It would
engage you to make it the study and business of your life to order things in
such a manner that the end of one kind and useful action might be the beginning
of another; in which you would go on as naturally as the inferior animals do in
those productions and actions by which mankind are relieved or enriched; or as
the earth bears her successive crops of different vegetable supplies. And
though mankind be, in this corrupt state, so unhappily inclined to imitate evil
examples rather than good; yet it may be expected, that while your light shines
before men some seeing your good works, will endeavor to transcribe them in
their own lives, and so to glorify your Father which is in heaven Matthew 5, 1.
The charms of such beautiful models would surely impress some, and incline them
at least to attempt an imitation; and every attempt would dispose to another.
And thus, through the divine goodness, you might be entitled to a share in the
praise, and the reward, not only of the good you had immediately done yourself,
but likewise of that which you had engaged others to do. And no eye but that of
an all searching God can see into what distant times or places the blessed
consequences may reach. In every instance in which these consequences appear,
it will put a generous and sublime joy into your heart, which no worldly
prosperity could afford, and which would be the liveliest emblem of that high
delight which the blessed God feels, in seeing and making his creatures happy.

6. It is true indeed, that, amidst all these pious and benevolent cares
afflictions may come, and in some measure interrupt you in the midst of your
pr^jected schemes. But surely these afflictions will sit much ^ighter when your
heart is gladdened with the peaceful and joyful reflections of your own mind,
and with so honorable a testimony of conscience before God and man. Delightful
will it be to go back to past scenes in your pleasing review, and to think that
you have not only been sincerely humbling yourself for those past offenses,
which afflictions may bring to your remembrance; but that you have given
substantial proofs of the sincerity of that humiliation, by a real reformation
of what has been amiss, and by acting with strenuous and vigorous resolution on
the contrary principle. And while converse with God, and doing good to men, are
made the great business and pleasure of life, you will find a thousand
opportunities of enjoyment, even in the midst of those afflictions, which would
render you so incapable of relishing the pleasures of sense, that the mention
of them might, in those circumstances, seem an insult and a reproach.

7. At length death will come; that solemn and important hour, which has been
passed through by so many thousands who have in the main lived such a life, and
by so many millions who have neglected it. And let conscience say, if there was
ever one of all these millions who had then any reason to rejoice in that
neglect; or any one, among the most strict and exemplary Christians, who then
lamented that his heart and life had been too zealously devoted to God? Let
conscience say, whether they have wished to have a part of that time, which
they have thus employed, given back to them again, that they might be more
conformed to this world; that they might plunge themselves deeper into its
amusements, or pursue its honors, its possessions or its pleasures with
greater eagerness than they had done? If you were yourself dying, and a dear
friend or child stood near you, and this book, and the last chapter of it
should chance to come into your thoughts, would you caution that friend or
child against conducting himself by such rules as I have advanced? The question
may perhaps seem unnecessary where the answer is so plain and so certain. Well
then, let me bese^^^ you to learn how you should live, by reflecting how you
would die, and what course you would wish to look back upon, when you are just
quitting this world, and entering upon another. Think seriously; what if death
should surprise you on a sudden, and you should be called into eternity at an
hour's or a minute's warning, would you not wish that your last day should have
been thus begun, and the course of it, if it were a day of health and activity,
should have been thus managed! Would you not wish that your Lord should find
you engaged in such thoughts, and in such pursuits? Would not the passage, the
flight from earth to heaven, be most easy, most pleasant, in this view and
connection? And, on the other hand, if death should make more gradual
approaches, would not the remembrance of such a pious, holy, humble, diligent,
and useful life, make a dying bed much softer and easier than it would
otherwise be? You would not die depending upon these things: God forbid that
you should! Sensible of your many imperfections, you would, no doubt desire to
throw yourself at the feet of Christ, that you might appear before God adorned
with his righteousness, and washed from your sins in his blood. You would also,
with your dying breath, ascribe to the riches of his grace every good
disposition you had found in your heart, and every worthy action you had been
enabled to perform: but would it not give you a delight, worthy of being
purchased with ten thousand worlds, to reflect, that his grace bestowed on you
had not been in vain 1 Cor. 15, 10; but that you had, from an humble principle
of grateful love, glorified your heavenly Father on earth, and, in some degree,
though not with the perfection you could desire, finished the work which he had
given you to do John 17, 4: that you had been living for many years past as on
the borders of heaven, and endeavoring to form your heart and life to the
temper and manners of its inhabitants?

8 And, once more, let me entreat you to reflect on the view you will have of
this matter when you come into a world of glory, if (which I hope will be the
happy case,) divine mercy conduct you thither. Will not your reception there be
affected by your care, or negligence, in this holy course? Will it appear an
indifferent thing in the eye of the blessed Jesus, who distributes the crowns,
and allots the thrones there, whether you have been among the most zealous, or
the most indolent of his servants? Surely you must wish to have an entrance
administered unto you abundantly into the kingdom of your Lord and Savior 2
Pet. 1, 11: and what can more certainly conduce to it than to be always
abounding in his work 1 Cor. 15, 58? You cannot think so meanly of that
glorious state as to imagine that you shall there look round about with a
secret disappointment, and say in your heart, that you overvalued the
inheritance you have received, and pursued it with too much earnestness. You
will not surely complain that it had too many of your thoughts and cares: but,
on the contrary, you have the highest reason to believe, that if any thing were
capable of exciting your indignation and your grief there, it would be that,
amidst so many motives, and so many advantages, you exerted yourself no more in
the prosecution of such a prize.

9, But I will not enlarge on so clear a case, and therefore conclude the
chapter with reminding you, that to allow yourself deliberately to sit down
satisfied with any imperfect seize in religion, and to look upon a more
confirmed and improved state of it as what you do not desire, nay as what you
secretly resolve that you will not pursue, is one of the most fatal signs we
can well imagine that you are an entire stranger to the first principles of it.

A PRAYER suited to the State of a Soul who desires to attain the life
recommended above.
BLESSED God, I cannot contradict the force of these reasonings: oh that I
might feel more than ever the lasting effects of them! Thou art the great
fountain of being, and of happiness; and as from thee my being was derived, so
from thee my happiness directly flowe^ and the nearer I am to thee, the purer
and the more delicious is the stream. With thee is the fountain of life; in thy
light may I see light Psalm. 36, 9! The great object of my final hope is to
dwell for ever with thee; give me now some foretaste of that delight! Give me,
I beseech thee, to experience "the blessedness of that man who fears the
Lord, and who delights greatly in his commandments Psalm. 112, 1; and so form
my heart by thy grace, that I may be in the fear of the Lord all the day long
Prove. 23, 17!

To thee may my awaking thoughts be directed, and with the first ray of light
that visits mine opening eyes, lift up, O Lord the light of thy countenance
upon me Psalm. 4, 6! When my faculties are roused from that broken state in
which they lay, while buried, and as it were annihilated, in sleep, may my
first actions be consecrated to thee, O God, who gave me light; who give
me, as it were, every morning a new life and a new reason! Enable my heart to
pour itself out before thee with a filial reverence, freedom and endearment!
And may I hearken to God, as I desire that he should hearken unto me! May thy
word be read with attention and pleasure! May my soul be delivered into the
mold of it; and may I hide it in mine heart, that I sin not against thee Psalm.
119, 11! Animated by the great motives there suggested; may I every morning be
renewing the dedication of myself to thee, through Jesus Christ thy beloved
Son; and be deriving from him new supplies of that blessed Spirit of thine,
whose influences are the life of my soul!

And being thus prepared, do thou, Lord, lead me forth by the hand to all the
duties and events of the day! In that calling, wherein thou have been pleased
to call me, "may I abide with thee 1 Cor. 7, 20;" not being slothful in
business, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord Romans 12, 11! May I know the
value of time, and always improve it to the best advantage, in such duties as
thou have assigned me; how low soever they may seem, or how painful soever they
may be! To thy glory, O Lord, may the labors of life be pursued; and to thy
glory may the refreshments of it be sought! Whether I eat, or drink, or
whatsoever I do 1 Cor. 10, 31, may that end still be kept in view, and may it
be attained! and may every refreshment and release from business prepare me to
serve thee with greater vigor and resolution!

May mine eye be watchful to observe the descent of mercies from thee: and may
a greatful sense of thine hand in them add a favor and relish to all! And when
afflictions come, which, in a world like this, I would accustom myself to
expect, may I remember that they come from thee; and may that fully reconcile
me to them, while I firmly believe, that the same love which gives us our daily
bread, appoints us our daily crosses; which I would learn to take up, that I
may follow my dear Lord Mark 8, 34. with a temper like that which he manifested
when ascending Calvary for my sake; saying like him, The cup which my Father
has given me shall I not drink it John 18, 11! And when I enter into
temptation, do thou, Lord, "deliver me from evil Matt. 6, 13!" Make me
sensible, I entreat thee, of my own weakness, that my heart may be raised to
thee for present communications of proportionable strength! When I am engaged
in the society of others, may it be my desire and my care that I may do, and
receive, as much good as possible, and may I continually answer the great
purposes of life, by honoring thee, and diffusing useful knowledge and
happiness in the world! And when I am alone, may I remember my heavenly Father
is with me; and may I enjoy the pleasure of thy presence, and feel the
animating power of it, awakening my soul to an earnest desire to think, and
act, as in thy sight!

Thus let my days be spent: and let them always be closed in thy fear, and
under a sense of thy gracious presence! Meet me, O Lord, in mine evening
retirements! May I choose the most proper time for them; may I diligently attend
to reading and prayer; and when I review my conduct, may I do it with an
impartial eye! Let not self-love spread a false coloring over it; but may I
judge myself, as one that expects to be judged of the Lord, and is very
solicitous he may be approved by thee who searchest all hearts, and can not
forget any of my works Amos 8, 7! Let my prayer come daily before thee as
incense, and let the lifting up of my hands be as the morning and the evening
sacrifice Psalm. 141, 2! May I resign my powers to sleep in sweet calmness and
serenity; conscious that I have lived to God in the day, and cheerfully
persuaded that I am accepted of thee in Christ Jesus my Lord, and humbly hoping
in thy mercy through him, whether my days on earth be prolonged, or the residue
of them be cut off in the midst Isa. 38, 10! If death comes by a leisurely
advance, may it find me thus employed; and if I am called on a sudden to
exchange worlds, may my last days and hours be found to have been conducted by
such maxims as these; that I may have a sweet and easy passage from the
services of time to the infinitely nobler services of an immortal state! I ask
it through him, who while on earth was the fairest pattern and example of every
virtue and grace, and who now lives and reigns with thee, able to save unto the
uttermost Heb. 5, 25: to him having done all, I would fly, with humble
acknowledgment that I am an unprofitable servant Luke 17, 10;" "to him be glory
for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAP. XXI. A Caution against various Temptations, by which the young Convert
may be drawn aside from the Course recommended above.
Dangers continue after the first difficulties (considered chap. xvi.) are
broken through, 1. Particular cautions, (1.) Against a stuggish and indolent
temper, 2. (2.) Against the excessive love of sensitive pleasure, 3. Leading to
a neglect of business, and needless expense, 4. (3.) Against the snares of vain
company, 5. (4.) Against excessive hurries of worldly business, 6. which is
enforced by the fatal consequences these have had in many cases, 7. The chapter
concludes with an exhortation to die in this world, and live to another, 8. and
the young convert's prayer for divine protection against the dangers arising
from these snares.

1. THE representation I have been making of the pleasure and advantage of a
life spent in devotedness to God, and communion with him, as I have described
it above, will, I hope, engage you, my dear reader, to form some purposes, and
make some attempt to obtain it. But, from considering the nature, and observing
the course of things, it appears exceedingly evident, that, besides the general
opposition, which I formerly mentioned, as like to attend you in your first
entrance on a religious life, you will find, even after you have resolutely
broke through this, a variety, of hindrances in any attempts of exemplary
piety, and in the prosecution of a remarkably strict and edifying course, will
present themselves daily in your path. And whereas you may, by a few resolute
efforts baffle some of the former sort of enemies, these will be perpetually
renewing their ons^^^, and a vigorous struggle must be continually maintained
with them. Give me leave now, therefore, to be particular in my cautions
against some of the chief of them. And here I would insist upon the
difficulties which will arise from indolence and the love of pleasure, from
vain company, and from worldly cares. Each of these may prove ensnaring to any,
and especially to young persons, to whom I would now have some particular
regard.

2. I entreat you, therefore, in the first place, that you would guard against
a sluggish and indolent temper. The love of ease insinuates itself into the
heart, under a variety of plausible pretenses, which are often allowed to pass,
when temptations of a grosser nature would not be admitted. The mispending a
little time seems to wise and good men but a small matter; yet this sometimes
runs them into great inconveniences. It often leads them to break in upon the
seasons regularly allotted to devotion, and to defer business. which might
immediately be done, but being put off from day to day, is not done at all; and
therefore the services of life are at least diminished, and the rewards of
eternity diminished proportionably; not to insist upon it, that very frequently
lays the soul open to farther temptations, by which it falls, in consequence of
being found unemployed. Be, therefore, suspicious of the first approaches of
this kind. Remember, that the soul of man is an active being, and that it must
end its pleasure in activity. Gird up, therefore, the "loins of your mind 1
Pet. 1, 13." Endeavor to keep yourself always well employed. Be exact, if I
may with humble reverence use the expression, in your appointments with God.
Meet him early in the morning; and say not with the sluggard, when the proper
hour of rising is come, A little more sleep, a little more slumber Prove. 6, 1.
That time which prudence shall advise you, give to conversation, and to other
recreations; but when that is elapsed, and no unforeseen and important
engagement presents, rise and be gone. Quit the company of your dearest
friends, and retire to your proper business whether it be in the field, the
shop, or the closet: for by acting contrary to the secret dictates of your
mind, as to what it is just at the present moment best to do, though it be but
in the manner of spending half an hour, some degree of guilt is contracted, and
a habit is cherished, which may draw after it much worse consequences.
Consider, therefore, what duties are to be dispatched, and in what seasons.
Form your plan as prudently as you can, and pursue it resolutely: unless any
unexpected incident arises, which leads you to conclude that duty calls you
another way. Allowances for such unthought of interruptions must be made; but
if, in consequence of this, you are obliged to omit any thing of importance
which you purposed to have done today. do it if possible tomorrow: and do not
cut yourself out new work till the former plan be dispatched; unless you really
judge it, not merely more amusing, but more important. And always remember,
that a servant of Christ should see to it that he determine on these occasions
as in his Master's presence.

3. Guard also against an excessive love of sensitive and animal pleasure, as
that which will be a great hindrance to you in that religious course which I
have now been urging. You cannot but know that Christ has told us, that a man
must deny himself, and take up his cross daily, if he desire to become his
disciple Luke 9, 23. Christ the Son of God, the Former and the Heir of all
things, pleased not himself Romans 15, 1; but submitted to want, to difficulties
and hardships, in the way of duty, and some of them in the extremest kind and
degree, for the glory of God, and the salvation of men. In this way we are to
follow him; and as we know not how soon we may be called even to resist unto
blood, striving against sin Heb. 12, 4, it is certainly best to accustom
ourselves to that discipline which we may possibly be called out to exercise,
even in such rigorous heights. A soft and delicate life will give force to
temptations, which might easily be subdued by one who has habituated himself to
endure hardship, as a soldier of Jesus Christ 2 Timothy 2, 3. It also produces an
attachment to this world, and an unwillingness to leave it; which ill becomes
those who are strangers and pilgrims on earth, and who expect so soon to be
called away to that better country which they profess to seek Heb. 11, 13 --
16. Add to this, that what the world calls a life of pleasure, is necessarily a
life of expense too, and may, perhaps, lead you, as it has done many others,
and especially many who have been setting out in the world, beyond the limits
which providence has assigned; and so, after a short course of indulgence, may
produce proportionable want. And while in other cases it is true, that pity
should be shown to the poor, this is a poverty that is justly contemptible,
because it is the effect of a man's own folly; and when your want thus comes
upon you as an armed man Prove. 6, 11, you will not only find yourself stripped
of the capacity you might otherwise have secured for performing those works of
charity, which are so ornamental to a Christian profession, but, probably, will
be under strong temptations to some low artifice, or mean compliance, quite
beneath the Christian character, and that of an upright man. Many who once made
a high profession, after a series of such sorry and scandalous shifts, have
fallen into the infamy of bankrupts, and of the worst kinds of bankrupts; I
mean such as have lavished away on themselves what was indeed the property of
others, and so have injured, and perhaps ruined, the industrious, to feed a
foolish, luxurious, or ostentatious humor, which, while indulged, was the
shame of their own families, and, when it can be indulged no longer, is their
torment. This will be a terrible reproach to religion: such a reproach to it,
that a good man would rather choose to live on bread and water, or indeed to die
for want of them, than to occasion it.

4. Guard, therefore, I beseech you, against any thing which might tend that
way, especially by diligence in business, and by prudence and frugality in
expense; which, by the divine blessing, may have a very happy influence to make
your affairs prosperous, your health vigorous, and your mind easy. But this
cannot be attained without keeping a resolute watch over yourself, and
strenuously refusing to comply with many proposals which indolence or
sensuality will offer in very plausible forms, and for which it will plead that
it asks but very little. Take heed, lest, in this respect, you imitate those
fond parents, who, by indulging their children in every little thing they have
a mind to, encourage them, by insensible degrees, to grow still more
encroaching and imperious in their demands; as if they chose to be ruined with
them, rather than to check in them what seems a trifle. Remember and consider
that excellent remark, sealed by the ruin of so many thousands; He that
despises small things, shall fall by little and little.

5. In this view, give me leave also seriously and tenderly to caution you, my
dear reader, against the snares of vain company. I speak not, as before, of
that company, which is openly licentious and profane. I hope there is something
now in your temper and views which would engage you to turn away from such with
detestation and horror. But I beseech you to consider, that those companions
may be very dangerous who might at first give you but very little alarm; I mean
those, who, though not the declared enemies of religion, and professed
followers of vice and disorder, yet nevertheless have no practical sense of
divine things on their hearts, so far as can be judged by their conversation
and behavior. You must often of necessity be with such persons, and
Christianity not only allows, but requires, that you should, on all expedient
occasions of intercourse with them, treat them with civility and respect: but
choose not such for your most intimate friends, and do not contrive to spend
most of your leisure moments among them. For such converse has a sensible
tendency to alienate the soul from God, and to render it unfit for all
spiritual communion with him. To convince you of this, do but reflect on your
own experience, when you have been for many hours together among persons of
such a character. Do you not find yourself more indisposed for devotional
exercises? Do you not find your heart, by insensible degrees, more and more
inclined to a conformity to this world, and to look with a secret disrelish on
those objects and employments to which reason directs as the noblest and the
best? Observe the first symptoms, and guard against the snare in time: and, for
this purpose endeavor to form friendships founded in piety, and supported by
it. "Be a companion of them that fear God, and of them that keep his precepts
Ps. 119, 63." You well know, that in the sight of God "they are the excellent
of the earth;" let them therefore "be all your delight Psalm. 16, 3." And that
the peculiar benefit of their friendship may not be lost, endeavor to make the
best of the hours you spend with them. The wisest of men has observed, that
when "council in the heart of a man is like deep waters," that is, when it lies
low and concealed, "a man of understanding will draw it out Prove. 20, 5."
Endeavor therefore, on such occasions, so far as you can do it with decency
and convenience, to give the conversation a religious turn. And when serious
and useful subjects are started in your presence, lay hold of them, and
cultivate them; and, for that purpose, let the word of Christ dwell richly in
you Col. 3, 16. and be continually made "the man of your counsel Psalm. 119, 24."

6. If it be so, it will secure you, not only from the snares of idleness and
luxury, but from the contagion of every bad example. And it will also engage
you to guard against those excessive hurries of worldly business, which would
fill up all your time and thoughts, and thereby choke the good word of God, and
render it in a great measure, if not quite unfruitful Matthew. 13, 22. Young
people are generally of an enterprising disposition: having experienced
comparatively little of the fatigue of business, and of the disappointments and
encumbrances of life, they easily swallow them up, and annihilate them in their
imagination, and fancy that their spirit, their application and address, will
be able to encounter and surmount every obstacle or hindrance. But the event
proves it otherwise. Let me entreat you, therefore, to be cautious how you
plunge yourself into a greater variety of business than you are capable of
managing as you ought, that is, in consistence with the care of your souls, and
the service of God; which certainly ought not on any pretense to be neglected.
It is true indeed, that a prudent regard to your worldly interest would require
such a caution; as it is obvious to every careful observer, that multitudes are
undone by grasping at more than they can conveniently manage. -- Hence it has
frequently been seen, that while they have seemed resolved to be rich, they
have pierced themselves through with many sorrows 1 Timothy 6, 10. have ruined
their own families, and drawn down many others into desolation with them:
whereas, could they have been contented with moderate employments, and moderate
gains, they might have prospered in their business, and might, by sure degrees,
under a divine blessing, have advanced to great and honorable increase. But if
there were no danger at all to be apprehended on this head; if you were as
certain of becoming rich and great as you are of perplexing and fatiguing
yourself in the attempt; consider, I beseech you, how precarious these
enjoyments are. Consider how often a plentiful table becomes a snare, and that
which should have been for a man's welfare becomes a trap Ps. 69, 22. Forget
not that short lesson, which is so comprehensive of the highest wisdom, One
thing is needful Luke 10, 4. Be daily thinking, while the gay and great things
of life are glittering before your eyes, how soon death will come, and
impoverish you at once; how soon it will strip you of all possessions but those
which a naked soul can carry along with it into eternity, when it drops the
body into the grave. ETERNITY! ETERNITY! ETERNITY! Carry the view of it about
with you, if it be possible, through every hour of waking life; and fully
persuaded that you have no business, no interest in life, that is inconsistent
with it: for whatsoever would be injurious to this view, is not your business,
is not your interest. You see indeed, that the generality of men act as if they
thought the great thing which God requires of them, in order to secure his
favor, was to get as much of the world as possible; at least, as much as they
can without any gross immorality, and without risking the loss of all, for
making a little addition. And, as if it were to abet this design, they tell
others, and perhaps tell themselves, they only seek opportunities of greater
usefulness, but, in effect, if they mean any thing more by this than a capacity
of usefulness, which, when they have it, they will not exert, they generally
deceive themselves; and one way or another, it is a vain pretense. In most
instances men seek the world, -- either that they may hoard up riches for the
mean and scandalous satisfaction of looking upon them while they are living,
and of thinking, that when they are dead, it will be said of them, that they
have left so many hundreds or thousands of pounds behind them; very probably to
ensnare their children, or other heirs, (for the vanity is not peculiar to
those who have children of their own: -- or else, that they may lavish away
their riches on their lusts, and drown themselves in a gulf of sensuality, in
which, if reason be not lost, religion is soon swallowed up, and, with it, all
the noblest pleasures which can enter into the heart of man. In this view, the
generality of rich people appear to me objects of much greater compassion than
the poor; especially as when both live (which is frequently the case) without
any fear of God before their eyes, the rich abuse the greater variety and
abundance of his favors, and therefore will probably feel in that world of
future ruin which awaits impenitent sinners, a more exquisite sense of their
misery.

7. And let me observe to you, my dear reader, lest you should think yourself
secure from any such danger, that we have great reason to apprehend there are
many now in a very wretched state, who once thought seriously of religion when
they were first setting out, in lower circumstances of life, but they have
since forsaken God for Mammon, and are now priding themselves in those golden
chains, which, in all probability, before it be long, will leave them to remain
in those of darkness. When, therefore, an attachment to the world may be
followed with such fatal consequences, let not thine heart envy sinners Prove.
22, 17; and do not, out of a desire of gaining what they have, be guilty of
such folly, as to expose yourself to this double danger of failing in the
attempt, or of being undone by the success of it. Contract your desire:
endeavor to be easy and content with a little: and if Providence call you out
to act in a larger sphere, submit to it in obedience to Providence; but number
it among the trials of life, which it will require a larger proportion of grace
to bear well. For, be assured, that as affairs, and interest multiply, cares
and duties will certainly increase, and probably disappointments and sorrows
will increase in an equal proportion.

8. On the whole, learn, by divine grace, to die to the present world; to look
upon it as a low state of being, which God never intended for the final and
complete happiness, or the supreme care, of any one of his children; a world,
where something is indeed to be enjoyed, but chiefly from himself; where a
great deal is to be borne with patience and resignation; and where some
important duties are to be performed, and a course of discipline to be passed
through, by which you are to be formed for a better state; to which, as a
Christian, you are near, and to which God will call you, perhaps on a sudden
but undoubtedly, if you hold on your way, in the fittest time, and the most
convenient manner. Refer, therefore, all this to him. Let your hopes and fears,
your expectations and desires, with regard to this world be kept as low as
possible; and all your thoughts be united, as much as may be, in this one
center, what it is that God would, in present circumstances, have you to be;
and what is that method of conduct by which you may most effectually please and
glorify him?

The young Convert's PRAYER for divine Protection against the Danger of these
Snares.
BLESSED God! in the midst of ten thousand snares and dangers which surround me
from without and from within, permit me to look up unto thee with my humble
entreaty, that thou would deliver me from them that rise up against me Psalm.
59, 1, and that thine eyes may be upon me for good Jer. 24, 6! When sloth and
indolence are ready to seize me, awaken me from that idle dream with lively and
affectionate views of that invisible and eternal world to which I am tending!
Remind me of what infinite importance it is that I diligently improve those
transient moments which thou have allotted me as the time of my preparation for
it!

When sinners entice me, may I not consent Prove. 1, 10! May holy converse with
God give me a disrelish for the converse of those who are strangers^ thee, and
who would separate my soul from thee! M^^ "I honor them that fear the Lord
Psalm. 15, 4;" and walking with such wise and holy men, may I find I am daily
advancing in wisdom and holiness Prove. 13! Quicken me, O Lord, by their means;
that by me thou may also quicken others! Make me the happy instrument of
inkindling and animating the flame of divine love in their breasts: and may it
catch from heart to heart, and grow every moment in its progress!

Guard me, O Lord from the love of sensual pleasure! May I seriously remember,
that to be carnally minded is death Romans 8, 6! May it please thee, therefore,
to purify and refine my soul by the influences of thine Holy Spirit, that I may
always shun unlawful gratifications more solicitously than others pursue them;
and that those indulgencies of animal nature, which thou have allowed, and
which the constitution of things renders necessary, may be soberly and
moderately used! May I still remember the superior dignity of my spiritual and
intelligent nature, and may the pleasures of the man and the Christian be
sought as my noblest happiness! May my soul rise on the wings of holy
contemplation, to the regions of invisible glory; and may I be endeavoring to
form myself, under the influences of divine grace, for the entertainments of
those angelic spirits, that live in thy presence in a happy incapacity of those
gross delights by which spirits dwelling in flesh are so often ensnared, and in
which they so often lose the memory of their high original, and of those noble
hopes which alone are proportionable to it!

Give me, O Lord, to know the station in which thou have fixed me, and steadily
to pursue the duties of it! -- But deliver me from those excessive cares of
this world, which would so engross my time and my thoughts, that the one thing
needful should be forgotten! may my desires after worldly possessions be
moderated, by considering their uncertain and unsatisfying nature, and while
others are laying up treasures on earth, may I be rich toward God Luke 12, 21!
May I never be too busy to attend to those great affairs which lie between thee
and my soul; never be so engrossed with the concerns of time, as to neglect the
interests of eternity! May I pass through earth with my heart and hope set upon
heaven, and feel the attractive influence stronger and stronger, as I approach
still nearer and nearer to that desirable center; till the happy moment come,
when every earthly object shall disappear from my view, and the shining glories
of the heavenly world shall fill my improved and strengthened sight, which
shall then be theared with that which would now overwhelm me! Amen.

CHAP. XXII. The Case of a Spiritual Decay and Langour in Religion.
Declensions in religion, and relapses into sin, with their sorrowful
consequences, are, in the general, too probable, 1. The case of declension and
langour in religion described, negatively, 2.; and positively, 3.; as
discovering itself. (1.) By a failure in the duties of the closet, 4. (2.) By a
neglect of social worship, 5. (3.) By want of love to our Fellow Christians, 6.
(4.) By an undue attachment to sensual pleasures, or secular cares, 7. (5.) By
prejudices against some important principles in religion, 8.; a symptom
peculiarly sad and dangerous, 9, 10. Directions for recovery, 11. immediately
to be pursued, 12. A prayer for one under spiritual decays.

1. IF I am so happy as to prevail upon you in the exhortations and cautions I
have given, you will probably go on with pleasure and comfort in religion; and
your path will generally be like the morning light, which shines more and more
until the perfect day Prove. 4, 18. Yet I dare not flatter myself with an
expectation of such success as shall carry you above those varieties in temper,
conduct and state, which have been more or less the complaint of the best of
men. -- Much do I fear that, how warmly soever your heart may be now impressed
with the representation I have been making, though the great objects of your
faith and hope continue unchangeable, your temper toward them will be changed.
Much do I fear that you will feel your mind languish and tire in the good ways
of God! nay, that you may be prevailed upon to take some step out of them, and
may thus fall a prey to some of those temptations which you now look upon with
a holy scorn. The probable consequence of this will be, that God will hide his
face from you; that he will stretch forth his afflicting hand against you; and
that you will still see your sorrowful moments, how cheerfully soever you may
now be rejoicing in the Lord, and joying in the God of your salvation Hab. 3,
18. I hope, therefore, it may be of some service, if this too probable event
should happen, to consider these cases a little more particularly: and I
heartily pray that God would make what I shall say concerning them the means of
restoring, comforting, and strengthening your soul, if he ever suffers you in
any degree to deviate from him.

2. We will first consider the case of spiritual declensions and langour in
religion. And here I desire that, before I proceed any farther, you would
observe, that I do not comprehend under this head, every abatement of that
fervor which a young convert may find, when he first becomes experimentally
acquainted with divine things. Our natures are so framed, that the novelty of
objects strikes them in something of a peculiar manner; not to urge how much
more easily our passions are impressed in the earlier years of life, than when
we are more advanced in the journey of it. This, perhaps, is not sufficiently
considered. Too great a stre^ is commonly laid on the flow of affections; and
for want of this, a Christian who is ripened in grace, and greatly advanced in
his preparations for glory, may sometimes be ready to lament imaginary rather
than real decays, and to say, without any just foundation. Oh that it were with
me as in months past Job. 29, 2. Therefore you can hardly be too frequently
told, that religion consists chiefly "in the resolution of the will for God,
and in a constant care to avoid whatever we are persuaded he would disapprove,
to dispatch the work he has assigned us in life, and to promote his glory in
the happiness of mankind." To this we are chiefly to attend, looking in all to
the simplicity and purity of those motives from which we act, which we know are
chiefly regarded by that God who searches the heart; humbling ourselves before
him at the same time under a sense of our many imperfections, and flying to the
blood of Christ and the grace of the gospel.

3. Having given this precaution, I will now a little more particularly
describe the case which I call the state of a Christian, who is declining in
religion, so far as it does not fall in with those which I shall consider in
the following chapters. And I must observe, that it chiefly consists "in a
forgetfulness of divine objects, and a remissness in those various duties to
which we stand engaged by that solemn surrender which we have made of ourselves
to the service of God." There will be a variety of symptoms, according to the
different circumstances and relations in which the Christian is placed; but
some will be of a more universal kind. It will be peculiarly proper to touch on
these; and so much the rather as these declensions are often unobserved, like
the gray hairs which were upon Ephraim, when he knew it not Hos. 7 9.

4. Should you, my good reader, fall into this state, it will probably first
discover itself by a failure in the duties of the closet. Not that I suppose
they will at first or certainly conclude, that they will at all be wholly
omitted, but they will be run over in a cold and formal manner. Sloth, or some
of those other snares which I cautioned you against in the former chapter, will
so far prevail upon you, that though perhaps you know and recollect that the
proper season for retirement is come, you will sometimes indulge yourself upon
your bed in the morning, sometimes in conversation or business in the evening,
so as not to have convenient time for it: or perhaps, when you come into your
closet at that season, some favorite book you are desirous to read, some
correspondence that you choose to carry on, or some other amusement will present
itself, and plead to be dipatched first. This will probably take up more time
than you imagine; and then secret prayer will be hurried over, and perhaps
reading the Scripture quite neglected. You will plead perhaps, that it is but
for once; but the same allowance will be made a second and a third time; and it
will grow more easy and familiar to you each time than it was the last. And
thus God will be mocked, and your own soul will be defrauded of its spiritual
meals, if I may be allowed the expression; the word of God will be slighted,
and self-examination quite disused; and secret prayer itself will grow a burden
rather than a delight; and a trifling ceremony rather than a devout homage, sit
for the acceptance of our Father who is in heaven.

5. If immediate and resolute measures be not taken for our recovery from these
declensions, they will spread farther, and reach the acts of social worship.
You will feel the effect in your families, and in public ordinances. And if you
do not feel it, the symptoms will be so much the worse. Wandering thoughts will
(as it were) eat out the very heart of these duties. It is not, I believe, the
privilege of the most eminent Christians to be entirely free from them: but,
probably, in these circumstances, you will find but few intervals of strict
attention, or of any thing which wears the appearance of inward devotion. And
when these heartless duties are concluded, there will scarce be a reflection
made how little God has been enjoyed in them, how little he has been honored
by them. Perhaps the sacrament of the Lord's supper, being so admirably adapted
to fix the attention of the soul, and to excite its warmest exercise of holy
affections, may be the last ordinance in which these declensions will be felt.
And yet who can say that the sacred table is a privileged place? Having been
unnecessarily straitened in your preparations, you will attend with less
fixedness and enlargement of heart than usual. And perhaps a dissatisfaction in
the review, when there has been a remarkable alienation or insensibility of
mind, may occasion a disposition to forsake your place and your duty there. And
when your spiritual enemies have once gained this point upon you, it is
probable you will fall by swifter degrees than ever, and your resistance to
their attempts will grow weaker and weaker.

6. When your love to God our Father, and to the Lord Jesus Christ fails, your
fervor of Christian affection to your brethren in Christ will proportionally
decline, and your concern for usefulness in life abate; especially, where any
thing is to be done for spiritual edification. You will find one excuse or
another for the neglect of religious discourse, perhaps not only among
neighbors and Christian friends, when very convenient opportunities offer, but
even with regard to those who are members of your own families, and to those
who, if you are fixed in the superior relations of life, are committed to your
care.

7. With this remissness, an attachment either to sensual pleasure or to
worldly business will increase. For the soul must have something to employ it,
and something to delight itself in; and as it turns to one or the other of
these temptations of one sort or another will present themselves. In some
instances, perhaps the strictest bounds of temperance, and the regular
appointments of life, may be broken in upon through a fondness for company, and
the entertainments which often attend it. In other instances, the interests of
life appearing greater than they did before, and taking up more of the mind,
contrary interests of other persons may throw you into disquietude, or plunge
you in debate and contention; in which it is extremely difficult to preserve
either the serenity or the innocence of the soul. And perhaps, if ministers and
other Christian friends observe this, and endeavor, in a plain and faithful
way, to reduce you from your wandering, a false delicacy of mind, often
contracted in such a state as this, will render these attempts extremely
disagreeable. The ulcer of the soul (if I may be allowed the expression) will
not bear being touched when it most needs it; and one of the most generous and
self denying instances of Christian friendship shall be turned into an occasion
of coldness and distaste, yea perhaps of enmity.

8. And possibly, to sum up all, this disordered state of mind may lead you
into some prejudices against those very principles which might be most
effectual or your recovery: and your great enemy may succeed so far in his
attempts against you as to persuade you that you have lost nothing in religion,
when you have almost lost all. He may, very probably, lead you to conclude,
that your former devotional frames were mere fits of enthusiasm; and that the
holy regularity of your walk before God was an unnecessary strictness and
scrupulosity. Nay, you may think it a great improvement in understanding that
you have learnt from some new masters, that if a man treat his fellow creatures
with humanity and good nature, judging and reviling only those who would
disturb others by the narrowness of their notions (for these are generally
exempted from other objects of the most universal and disinterested benevolence
so often boasted of) he must necessarily be in a very good state, though he
pretend not to converse much with God, provided that he think respectfully of
him, and do not provoke him by any gross immoralities.

9. I mention this in the last stage of religious declensions, because I
apprehend that to be its proper place; and I fear it will be found by
experience to stand upon the very confines of that gross apostasy into
deliberate and presumptuous sin, which will claim our consideration under the
next head: and because, too, it is that symptom which most effectually tends to
prevent the success, and even the use, of any proper remedies, in consequence
of a fond and fatal apprehension that they are needless. It is, if I may borrow
the smile, like those fits of lethargic drowsiness which often precede
apoplexies and death.

10. It is by no means my design at this time to reckon up, much less to
consider at large, those dangerous principles which are now ready to possess
the mind, and to lay the foundation of a false and treacherous peace. Indeed
they are in different instances various, and sometimes run into opposite
extremes; but if God awaken you to read your Bible with attention, and give you
to feel the Spirit with which it is written, almost every page will flash in
conviction upon the mind, and spread a light to scatter and disperse these
shades of darkness.

11. What I chiefly intend in this address is to engage you, if possible, as
soon as you perceive the first symptoms of these declensions, to be upon your
guard, and to endeavor as speedily as possible to recover yourself from them.
And I would remind you, that the remedy must begin where the first cause of
complaint prevailed, I mean, in the closet. Take some time for recollection,
and ask your own conscience seriously, How matters stand between the blessed
God and your soul? Whether they are as they once were, and as you could wish
them to be, if you saw your life just drawing to a period, and were to pass
immediately into the eternal state? One serious thought of eternity shames a
thousand vain excuses, with which, in the forgetfulness of it, we are ready to
delude our own souls. And when you feel that secret misgiving of heart, which
will naturally arise on this occasion, do not endeavor to palliate the matter,
and to find out flight and artful coverings for what you cannot forbear
secretly condemning; but honestly fall under the conviction, and be humbling
for it. Pour out your heart before God, and seek the renewed influences of his
Spirit and grace. Return with more exactness to secret devotion, and to
self-examination. Read the Scripture with yet greater diligence, and especially
the more devotional and spiritual parts of it. Labor to ground it in your
heart, and to feel what you have reason to believe the sacred penmen felt when
they wrote, so far as circumstances may agree. Open your soul with all
simplicity to every lesson which the word of God would teach you; and guard
against those things which you perceive to alienate your mind from inward
religion, though there be nothing criminal in the things themselves. They may
perhaps in the general be lawful; to some, possibly, they may be expedient; but
if they produce such an effect, as was mentioned above, it is certain they are
not convenient for you. In these circumstances, above all, seek the converse of
those Christians whose progress in religion seems most remarkable, and who
adorn their profession in the most amiable manner. Labor to obtain their
temper and sentiments, and lay open your case and your heart to them with all
the freedom which prudence will permit. Employ yourself at seasons of leisure
in reading practical and devotional books, in which the mind and the heart of
the pious author is transfused into the work, and in which you can (as it were)
taste the genuine spirit of Christianity. And, to conclude, Take the first
opportunity that presents itself of making an approach to the table of the
Lord, and spare neither time nor pains in the most serious preparation for it.
There renew your covenant with God; put your soul anew into the hand of Christ,
and endeavor to view the wonders of his dying love in such a manner as may
rekindle the languishing flame, and quicken you to more vigorous resolutions
than ever, to live unto him who died for you 2 Cor. 5, 15. And watch over your
own heart, that the good impressions you then felt may continue. Rest not till
you have obtained as confirmed a state in religion as you ever knew. Rest not
till you have made a greater progress than before: for it is certain more is
yet behind; and it is only by a certain zeal to go forward that you can be
secure from the danger of going backward, and of revolting more and more.

12. I only add, that it is necessary to take these precautions as soon as
possible; or you will probably find a much swifter progress than you are aware
in the downhill road; and you may possibly be left of God to fall into some
gross and aggravated sin, so as to fill your conscience with an agony and
horror, which the pain of broken bones Ps. 51, 8. can but imperfectly express.

A PRAYER for one under Spiritual Decays.
ETERNAL and unchangeable Jehovah! thy perfections and glories are, like thy
being, immutable, Jesus thy Son is the same yesterday, today, and for ever
Heb. 13, 8. The eternal world to which I am hastening is always equally
important, and pa^^es upon the attentive mind for a more fixed and solemn
regard, in proportion to the degree in which it comes nearer and nearer. But,
alas! my views, and my affections, and my best resolutions, are continually
varying, like this poor body, which goes through daily and hourly alterations
in its state and circumstances. Whence, O Lord, whence this sad change, which I
now experience, in the frame and temper of my mind toward thee? Whence this
alienation of my soul from thee? Why can I not come to thee with all the
endearments of filial love as I once could? Why is thy service so remissly
attended, if attended at all? and why are the exercises of it which were once
my greatest pleasure, become a burden to me? "Where, O God, is the blessedness
I once spoke of Gal. 4, 15." when my joy in thee as my heavenly Father was so
conspicuous that strangers might have observed it; and when my heart did so
overflow with love to thee, and with zeal for thy service, that it was matter
of self-denial to me to limit and restrain the genuine expressions of those
strong emotions of my soul, even where prudence and duty required it?

Alas, Lord, whither am I fallen! thine eyes sees me still; but oh, how unlike
what it once saw me! Cold and insensible as I am, I must blush on the
reflection. -- Thou "see me in secret Matthew. 6, 6." and see me, perhaps,
often amusing myself with trifles in those seasons which I used solemnly to
devote to thine immediate service. -- Thou see me coming into thy presence as
by constraint; and when I am before thee, so straitened in my spirit, that I
hardly know what to say to thee, though thou art the God with whom I have to
do, and though the keeping up an humble and dutiful correspondence with thee is
beyond all comparison the most important business of my life. And even when I
am speaking to thee, with how much coldness and formality is it? It is perhaps
the work of the imagination, the labor of the lips; but where are those ardent
desires, those intense breathings after God, which I once felt? Where is that
pleasing repose in thee which I was once conscious of, as being near my divine
rest, as being happy in that nearness, and resolving that, if possible, I would
no more be removed from it? But, oh, how far am I now removed! When these short
devotions, if they may be called devotions, are over, in what long intervals do
I forget thee, and appear so little animated with thy love, so little devoted
to thy service, that a stranger might converse with me a considerable time
without knowing that I had ever formed any acquaintance with thee, without
discovering that I had so much as known or heard any thing of God! -- Thou
call me to thine house, O Lord, on thine own day; but how heartless are my
services there? I offer thee no more than a carcass. My thoughts and affections
are engrossed with other objects, while I draw near thee with my mouth, and
honor thee with my lips Isa. 29, 13. Thou call me to thy table; but my
heart is so frozen, that it hardly melts even at the foot of the cross; hardly
feels any efficacy in the blood of Jesus. Oh wretched creature that I am!
Unworthy of being called thine! unworthy of a place among thy children, or of
the meanest situation in thy family; rather worthy to be cast out, to be
forsaken, yea, to be utterly destroyed!

Is this, Lord, the service which I once promised, and which thou have so many
thousand reasons to expect? Are these the returns I am making for thy daily
providential care, for the sacrifice of thy Son, for the communications of thy
Spirit, for the pardon of my numberless aggravated sins, for the hopes, the
undeserved and so often-forfeited hopes, of eternal glory? Lord, I am ashamed
to stand or to kneel, before thee. But pity me, I beseech thee, and help me;
for I am a pitiable object indeed! "My soul cleaves unto the dust," and lays
itself as in the dust before thee; but oh, quicken me according to thy word
Psalm. 119, 25! Let me trifle no longer, for I am upon the brink of a precipice!
I am thinking of my ways, oh give me grace to turn my feet unto thy
testimonies; to make haste without any farther delay that I may keep thy
commandments Psalm. 119, 59.60! Search me, O Lord, and try me Psalm. 139, 23! Go
to the first root of this distemper which spreads itself over my soul, and
recover me from it! Represent sin unto me, O Lord, I beseech thee, that I may
see it with abhorrence! and represent the Lord Jesus Christ to me in such a
light, that I may "look upon him and mourn Zech. 12, 10," that I may look upon
him and love! May I awaken from this stupid lethargy into which I am sinking;
and may Christ give me more abundant degrees of spiritual life and activity
than I have ever yet received! And may I be so quickened and animated by him,
that I may more than recover the ground I have lost, and may make a more speedy
and exemplary progress than in my best days I have ever yet done! Send down
upon me, O Lord, in a more rich and abundant effusion, thy good Spirit! May he
dwell in me, as in a temple which he has consecrated to himself 1 Cor. 3, 16;
and while all the service is directed and governed by him, may holy and
acceptable sacrifices be continually offered Romans 12, 1! May the incense be
constant, and may it be fragrant! May the sacred fire burn and blaze
perpetually Lev. 5, 13; and may none of its vessels ever be profaned, by being
employed to an unholy or forbidden use! Amen.

CHAP. XXIII. The sad Case of a relapse into known and deliberate Sin, after
solemn Acts of Dedication to God, and some Progress made in Religion.
Unthought of relapses may happen, 1. and bring the soul into a miserable case,
2. Yet the case is not desperate, 3. The backslider urged immediately to
return; (1.) By deep humiliation before God for so aggravated an offense, 4.
(2.) By renewed regards to the divine mercy in Christ, 5. (3.) By an open
profession of repentance, where the crime has given public offense, 6. (4.)
Falls to be reviewed for future caution, 7. The chapter concludes, 8. With a
prayer for the use of one who has fal^en into gross sins after religious
resolutions and engagements.

1. THE declensions which I have described in the foregoing chapter must be
acknowledged worthy of deep lamentation: but happy will you be, my dear reader,
if you never know, by experience, a circumstance yet more melancholy than this.
Perhaps, when you consider the view of things which you now have, you imagine
that no considerations can ever bribe you, in any single instance, to act
contrary to the present dictates or suggestions of your conscience, and of the
Spirit of God as setting it on work. No; you think it would be better for you
to die. And you think rightly. But Peter thought and said so too: Though I
should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee Mat. 26, 35: and yet after all
he fell; and therefore be not high minded, but fear Romans 9, 20. It is not
impossible but you may fall into that very sin of which you imagine you are
least in danger, or into that against which you have most solemnly resolved,
and of which you have already most bitterly repented. You may relapse into it
again and again; but, oh, if you do, nay, if you should deliberately and
presumptuously fall but once, Low deep will it pierce your heart; how dear will
you pay for all the pleasure with which the temptation has been baited? how
will this separate between God and you? What a desolation, what a dreadful
desolation, will it spread over your soul! It is grievous to think of it.
Perhaps in such a state you may feel more agony and distress in your own
conscience, when you come seriously to reflect, than you ever felt when you
were first awakened and reclaimed; because the sin will be attended with some
very high aggravations beyond those of your unregenerate state. I well knew the
person that said, The agonies of a sinner in the first pangs of his repentance
were not to be mentioned on the same day with those of the backslider in heart,
when he comes to be filled with his own way Prove. 14, 14.

2. Indeed it is enough to wound one's heart to think how yours will be
wounded: how all your comforts, all your evidences, all your hopes, will be
clouded; what thick darkness will spread itself on every side, so that neither
sun, nor moon, nor stars will appear in your heaven. Your spiritual
consolations will be gone; and your temporal enjoyments will also be rendered
tasteless and insipid. And if afflictions be sent, as they probably may, in
order to reclaim you, a consciousness of guilt will sharpen and invenom the
dart. Then will the enemy of your soul, with all his art and power, rise up
against you, encouraged by your fall, and laboring to trample you down in
utter hopeless ruin. He will persuade you that you are already undone beyond
recovery: he will suggest that it signifies nothing to attempt it any more; for
that very effort, every amendment, every act of repentance, will but make your
case so much the worse, and plunge you lower and lower into hell.

3. Thus will he endeavor by terrors to keep you from that sure remedy which
yet remains. But yield not to him. Your case will indeed be sad; and if it be
now your case, it is deplorably so; and to rest in it would be still much
worse. Your heart would be hardened yet more and more; and nothing could be
expected but sudden and aggravated destruction. Yet, blessed be God, it is not
quite hopeless. Your wounds are corrupted, because of your foolishness Ps. 38,
5; but the gangrene is not incurable. There is balm in Gilead, there is a
Physician there Jer. 8, 22. Do not therefore, render your condition hopeless,
by now saying, "There is no hope Jer. 2, 25," and drawing a fatal argument from
that false supposition for going after the idols you have loved. Let me address
you in the language of God to his backsliding people, when they were ready to
apprehend that to be their case, and to draw such a conclusion from it: Only
return unto me, says the Lord Jer. 3, 1.13. Cry for renewed grace; and, in the
strength of it, labor to return. Cry with David under the like guilt. I have
gone astray like a lost sheep, seek thy servant; for I do not forget thy
commandment Ps. 119, 176; and that remembrance of them is, I hope, a token for
good. But if thou will return at all, do it immediately. Take not one step more
in that fatal path to which thou have turned aside. Think not to add one sin
more to the account, and then to repent; as if it would be but the same thing
on the whole. The second error may be worse than the first; it may make way for
another and another, and draw on a terrible train of consequences beyond all
you can now imagine. Make haste, therefore, and do not delay. Escape, and fly
as for thy life Genesis 19, 17. before the dart strike through thy liver Prove. 7,
23. Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids Prove. 6, 4: lie
not down upon thy bed under unpardoned guilt, lest evil overtake thee, lest the
sword of divine justice should smite thee; and whilst thou proposest to return
tomorrow, thou should this night go and take possession of hell.

4. Return immediately; and permit me to add, return solemnly. Some very pious
and excellent divines have expressed themselves upon this head in a manner
which seems liable to dangerous abuse; when they urge men after a fall not to
stay to survey the ground, nor consider how they came to be thrown down, but
immediately to get up and renew the race, In slighter cases the advice is good:
but when conscience has suffered such violent outrage, by the commission of
known, wilful and deliberate sin, (a case which one would hope should but
seldom happen to those who have once sincerely entered on a religious course,)
I can by no means think that either reason or Scripture encourage such a
method. Especially would it be improper, if the action itself has been of so
heinous a nature, that even to have fallen into it on the most sudden surprise
of temptation, must greatly have ashamed, and terrified, and distressed the
soul. Such an affair is dreadfully solemn, and should be treated accordingly.
If this has been the sad case with you, my then unhappy reader, I would pity
you, and mourn over you; and would beseech you, as you tender your peace, your
recovery, the health and the very life of your soul, that you would not loiter
away an hour. Retire immediately for serious reflection. Break through other
engagements and employments, unless they be such as you cannot in conscience
delay for a few hours, which can seldom happen in the circumstance I now
suppose. This is the one thing needful. Set yourself to it, therefore, as in
the presence of God, and hear at large patiently and humbly, what conscience
has to say, though it chide and reproach severely. Yea, earnestly pray, that
God would speak to you by conscience, and make you more thoroughly to know and
feel what an evil and bitter thing it is that you have thus forsaken him Jer.
2, 19. Think of all the aggravating circumstances attending your offense, and
especially those which arise from abused mercy and goodness; which arise not
only from your solemn vows and engagements to God, but from the views you have
had of a Redeemer's love, sealed even in blood. And are these the returns? Was
it not enough that Christ should have been thus injured by his enemies? must he
be wounded in the house of his friends, too Zech. 13, 6? Were delivered to work
such abominations as these Jer. 7, 10? Did the blessed Jesus groan and die for
you, that you might sin with boldness and freedom, that you might extract, as
it were, the very spirit and essence of sin, and offend God to a height of
ingratitude and baseness which would otherwise have been in the nature of
things impossible! Oh, think how justly God might cast you out from his
presence! How justly he might number you among the most signal instances of his
vengeance! And think how your heart would endure, or your hands be strong, if
he would deal thus with you Ezekiel. 22, 14! Alas! all your former experiencies
would enhance your sense of the ruin and misery that must be felt in an eternal
banishment from the divine presence and favor.

5. Indulge such reflections as these. Stand the humbling sight of your sins in
such a view as this. The more odious and more painful it appears, the greater
prospect there will be of your benefit by attending to it. But the matter is
not to rest here. All these reflections are intended, not to grieve, but to
cure; and to grieve no more than promote the cure. You are indeed to look upon
sin; but you are also, in such a circumstance, if ever, to look upon Christ: to
look upon him whom you have now pierced" deeper than before, and to mourn for
him with sincerity and tenderness Zech. 12, 10. -- The God whom you have
injured and affronted, whose laws you have broken, and whose justice you have
(as it were) challenged by this foolish wretched apostasy, is nevertheless a
most merciful God Deuteronomy. 4, 31 You cannot be so ready to return to him, as he is
ready to receive you. Even now does he, as it were, solicit a reconciliation by
those tender impressions which he is making upon your heart. But remember how
he will be reconciled. It is in the very same way in which you made your first
approaches to him; in the name, and for the sake of his dear Son. Come,
therefore, in an humble dependence upon him. Renew your application to Jesus,
that his blood may (as it were) be sprinkled upon your soul, that your soul may
thereby be purified, and your guilt removed. This very sin of yours, which the
blessed God foresaw, increased the weight of your Redeemer's sufferings: it was
concerned in shedding his blood. Humbly go, and place your wounds (as it were)
under the droppings of that precious balm by which alone they can be healed.
That compassionate Savior will delight to restore you, when you lie as an
humble supplicant at his feet, and will graciously take part with you in that
peace and pleasure which he gives. Through him renew your covenant with God,
that broken covenant, the breach of which divine justice might teach you to
know by terrible things in righteousness Ps. 65, 5; but mercy allows of an
accommodation. Let the consciousness and remembrance of the breach engage you
to enter into a covenant a new, under a deeper sense than ever of your own
weakness, and a more cordial dependence on divine grace for your security, than
you have ever yet entertained. I know you will be ashamed to present yourself
among the children of God in his sanctuary, and especially at his table, under
a consciousness of so much guilt; but break through that shame, if Providence
open you the way. You would be humbled before your offended Father; but surely
there is no place where you are more like to be humbled, than when you see
yourself in his house; and no ordinance administered there can lay you lower
than that in which Christ is evidently set forth as crucified before your eyes
Gal. 3, 1. Sinners are the only persons who have business there; the best of
men come to that sacred table as sinners; as such make your approach to it;
yea, as the greatest of sinners; as one who needs the blood of Jesus as much as
any creature upon earth.

6. And let me remind you of one thing more: If your fall has been of such a
nature as to give any scandal to others, be not at all concerned to save
appearances, and to moderate those mortifications, which deep humiliation
before them would occasion. The depth and pain of that mortification is indeed
an excellent medicine, which God has in his wise goodness appointed for you in
such circumstances as these. In such a case, confess your fault with the
greatest frankness: aggravate it to the utmost; entreat pardon and prayer from
those whom you have offended. Then, and never till then, will you be in the way
to peace: not by palliating a fault, not by making vain excuses, not by
objecting to the manner in which others may have treated you; as if the least
excess of rigor in a faithful admonition were a crime equal to some great
immorality that occasioned it. This can only proceed from the madness of pride
and self-love: it is the sensibility of a wound which is hardened, swelled, and
enflamed! and it must be reduced and cooled, and suppled, before it can
possibly be cured. To be censured and condemned by men, will be but a little
grievance to a soul thoroughly humbled and broken under a sense of having
incurred the condemning sentence of God. Such a one will rather desire to
glorify God, by submitting to deserved blame; and will fear deceiving others
into a more favorable opinion of him than he inwardly knows himself to
deserve. These are the sentiments which God gives to the sincere penitent in
such a case; and by this means he restores him to that credit and regard among
others, which he does not know how to seek; but which, nevertheless for the
sake both of his comfort and usefulness, God wills that he should have; and
which it is, humanely speaking, impossible for him to recover any other way.
But there is something so honorable in the frank acknowledgment of a fault, and
in deep humiliation for it, that all who see it must needs approve it. They
pity an offender who is brought to such a disposition, and endeavor to comfort
him with returning expressions, not only of their love, but of their esteem too.

7. Excuse this digression, which may suit some cases; and which would suit
many more, if a regular discipline were to be exercised in churches: for on
such a supposition, the Lord's supper could not be approached after visible and
scandalous falls without solemn confession of the offense and declarations of
repentance. On the other hand, there may be instances of sad apostasy, where
the crime, though highly aggravated before God, may not fall under human
notice. In this case, remember, that your business is with him to whose
piercing eye every thing appears in its just light; before him therefore
prostrate your souls and seek a solemn reconciliation with him, confirmed by
the memorials of his dying Son. And when this is done, imagine not, that
because you have received the tokens of pardon, the guilt of your apostasy is
to be forgot at once. Bear it still in your memory for future caution: lament
it before God in the frequent returns of secret devotion especially: and view
with humiliation the scars of those wounds which your own folly occasioned,
even when by divine grace they are thoroughly healed. For God establishes his
covenant not to remove the sense of every past abomination, but that thou
may remember thy ways, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more
because of thy shame, even when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou
have done, says the Lord Ezekiel. 16, 63.

8. And now, upon the whole, if you desire to attain such a temper, and to
return by such steps as these, then immediately fall down before God, and pour
out your heart in his presence, in language like this:

A PRAYER for one who has fallen into gross Sin, after religious Resolutions
and Engagements.
O Most holy, holy, holy, Lord God! when I seriously reflect on thy spotless
purity, and on the strict and impartial methods of thy steady administration,
together with that almighty power of thine, which is able to carry every
thought of thine heart into immediate and full execution, I may justly appear
before thee this day with shame and terror, in confusion and consternation of
spirit. This day, O my God, this dark mournful day, would I take occasion to
look back to that fad source of our guilt and our misery, the apostasy of our
common parents, and say, with thine offending servant David, "Behold, I was
shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me Ps. 51, 5." This day
would I lament all the fatal consequences of such a descent with regard to
myself. And, oh, how many have they been! -- The remembrance of the sins of my
unconverted state, and the failings and infirmities of my after life, may
justly confound me! How much more such a scene as now lies before my
conscience, and before thine all seeing eye? For thou, O Lord, know my
foolishness, and my sins are not hid from thee Ps. 69, 5." Thou tellest all my
wanderings from thy statutes Ps. 56, 8: thou see, and thou recordest, every
instance of my disobedience to thee, and of my rebellion against thee: thou
see it in every aggravated circumstance which I can discern, and in many more
which I have never observed or reflected upon. How then shall I appear in thy
presence, or lift up my face to thee Ez. 9, 6! I am full of confusion Job. 10,
15. and feel a secret regret in the thought of applying to thee: But, O Lord,
to whom should I go but unto thee John 6, 68? unto thee, on whom depends my
life or my death: unto thee, who alone can take away that burden of guilt
which now presses me down to the dust: who alone can restore to my soul that
rest and peace which I have lost, and which I deserve for ever to lose!

Behold me, O Lord God, falling down at thy feet! Behold me, pleading guilty in
thy presence, and surrendering myself to that justice which I cannot escape! I
have not one word to offer in my own vindication, in my own excuse. Words, far
from being able to clear up my innocence, can never sufficiently describe the
enormity and demerit of my sin. Thou, O Lord, and thou only, know to the
full how heinous and how aggravated it is. Thine infinite understanding alone
can fathom the infinite depth of its malignity. I am, on many accounts, most
unable to do it. I cannot conceive the glory of thy sacred Majesty, whose
authority I have despised, nor the number and variety of those mercies which I
have sinned against. I cannot conceive the value of the blood of thy dear Son,
which I have ungratefully trampled under my feet; nor the dignity of that
blessed Spirit of thine, whose agency I have, as far as I could, been
endeavoring to oppose, and whose work I have been, as with all my might,
laboring to undo, and to tear up (as it were) that plantation of his grace,
which I should rather have been willing to have guarded with my life, and
watered with my blood. Oh the baseness and madness of my conduct! that I should
thus (as it were) rend open the wounds of my soul, of which I had died long ere
this, had not thine own hand applied a remedy, had not thine only Son bled to
prepare it! That I should violate the covenant that I have made with thee by
sacrifice Ps. 50, 5, by the memorials of such a sacrifice too, even of Jesus
Christ my Lord, whereby I am become guilty of his body and blood 1 Cor. 11, 27.
That I should bring such dishonor upon religion too, by so unsuitable a walk,
and perhaps open the mouths of its greatest enemies to insult it upon my
account, and prejudice some against it to their everlasting destruction!

I wonder, O Lord God, that I am here to own all this. I wonder that thou have
not long ago appeared "as a swift witness against me Mal. 3, 5:" that thou have
not discharged the thunderbolts of thy flaming wrath against me, and crushed me
into hell; making me there a terror to all about me, as well as to myself, by a
vengeance and ruin, to be distinguished even there, where all are miserable,
and all hopeless.

O God, thy patience is mavelous! but how much more mavelous is thy grace,
which, after all this, invites me to thee! While I am here giving judgment
against myself that I deserve to die, to die for ever, thou art sending me the
words of everlasting life, and calling me, as a backsliding child, to return
unto thee Jer. 3, 22. Behold, therefore, O Lord, invited by thy word, and
encouraged by thy grace, I come; and, great as my transgressions are, I humbly
beseech thee freely to pardon them; because I know, that though my sins have
reached unto heaven Rev. 18, 5. and are lifted up even to the skies Jer. 51, 9.
thy mercy, O Lord, is above the heavens Ps. 108, 4. Extend thy mercy to me, O
heavenly Father; and display, in this illustrious instance, the riches of thy
grace, and the prevalency of thy Son's blood! For surely, if such crimson sins
as mine may be made white as snow, and as wool Isa. 1, 18. and if such a
revolter as I am be brought to eternal glory, earth must, so far as it is
known, be filled with wonder, and heaven with praise; and the greatest sinner
may cheerfully apply for pardon, if I, the chief of sinners, find it. And, oh,
that when I have lain mourning, and, as it were, bleeding at thy feet, as long
as thou think proper, thou would at length heal this soul of mine which
has sinned against thee Ps. 41, 4; and give me beauty for ashes, the oil of
joy for mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness Is. 61,
3! Oh that thou would at length restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and
make me to hear songs of gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may
yet rejoice Ps. 51, 8.12. Then, when a sense of thy forgiving love is shed
abroad upon my heart, and it is cheered with the voice of pardon, I will
proclaim thy grace to others; I will teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners
shall be converted unto thee Ps. 51, 13: those that have been backsliding from
thee shall be encouraged to seek thee by my happy experience, which I shall
gladly proclaim for thy glory, though it be to my own shame and confusion of
face. And may this joy of the Lord be my strength Neh. 8, 10. so that in it I
may serve thee henceforward with a vigor and zeal far beyond what I have
hitherto known!

This I would ask, with all humble submission to thy will; for I presume not to
insist upon it. If thou should see fit to make me a warning to others, by
appointing that I should walk all my days in darkness, and at last die under a
cloud, "thy will be done!" But, O God, extend mercy for thy Son's sake, to this
sinful soul at last; and give me some place, though it were at the feet of all
thine other servants, in the regions of glory! Oh bring me at length, though it
should be through the gloomiest valley that any have ever passed, into that
blessed world where I shall depart from God no more! where I shall wound my own
conscience and dishonor thy holy name no more! Then shall my tongue be loosed
how long soever it might here be bound under the confusion of guilt; and
immortal praises shall be paid to that victorious blood, which has redeemed
such an infamous slave of sin, as I must acknowledge myself to be, and brought
me, from returns into bondage and repeated pollution, to share the dignity and
holiness of those who are kings and priests unto God Rev. 2, 6. Amen.

CHAP. XXIV. The Case of the Christian under the Hidings of God's Face.
The phrase scriptural, 1. It signifies the withdrawing the tokens of the
divine favor, 2.; chiefly as to spiritual considerations, 3. This may become
the case of any Christian, 4.; and will be found a very sorrowful one, 5.: The
following directions, therefore, are given to those who suppose it to be their
own: -- I. To inquire whether it be indeed a case of spiritual distress, or
whether a disconsolate frame may not proceed from indisposition of body,. 6.:
or difficulties as to worldly circumstances, 7. If it be found to be indeed
such as the title of the chapter proposes, be advised, II. To consider it as a
merciful dispensation of God, to awaken and bestir the soul, and excite it to a
strict examination of conscience and reformation of what has been amiss, 8, 9,
III. To be humble and patient while the trial continues, 10. IV. To go on
steadily in the way of duty, 11. V. To renew a believing application to the
blood of Jesus, 12. An humble supplication for one under those mournful
exercises of mind, when they are found to proceed from the spiritual cause
supposed.

1. THERE is a case which often occurs in the Christian life, which they who
accustom themselves much to the exercise of devotion, have been used to call
hidings of God's face. It is a phrase borrowed from the word of God, which I
hope may shelter it from contempt at the first hearing. It will be my business
in this chapter to state it as plainly as I can, and then to give some advices
as to your own conduct when you fall into it, as it is very probable you may,
before you have finished your journey through this wilderness.

2. The meaning of it may partly be understood by the opposite phrase, of God's
causing his face to shine upon a person, or lifting upon him the light of his
countenance. This seems to carry in it an allusion to the pleasant and
delightful appearance which the face of a friend has, and especially if, in a
superior relation of life, when he converses with those whom he loves and
delights in. Thus Job, when speaking of the regard paid him by his attendants,
says, If I smiled upon them, they believed it not, and the light of my
countenance they cast not down Job. 29, 24; that is, they were careful, in such
an agreeable circumstance, to do nothing to displease me, or (as we speak) to
cloud my brow. And David, when expressing his desire of the manifestation of
Gods favor to him, says, Lord lift thou up the light of thy reconciled
countenance upon me; and, as the effect of it, declares, thou have put gladness
in my heart more than if corn and wine increased Psalm. 4, 6.7. Nor is it
impossible that, in this phrase, as used by David, there may be some allusion
to the bright shining forth of the Shechinah, that is, the luster which dwelt
in the cloud as the visible sign of the divine presence with Israel, which God
was pleased peculiarly to manifest upon some public occasions, as a token of
his favor and acceptance. -- On the other hand, therefore, for God to hide his
face, must imply the withholding the tokens of his favor, and must be esteemed
a mark of his displeasure. Thus Isaiah uses it: Your iniquities have separated
between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he
will not hear Isa. 59, 2." And again, "Thou have hid thy face from us, as not
regarding the calamities we suffer, and have consumed us, because of our
iniquities Isa. 64, 7. So likewise for God to hide his face from our sins Ps.
51, 9. signifies to overlook them, and to take no farther notice of them. The
same idea is, at other times, expressed by God's hiding his eyes Isa. 1, 15.
from persons of a character disagreeable to him, when they come to address him
with their petitions, not vouchsafeing (as it were) to look toward them. This
is plainly the scriptural sense of the word; and agreeably to this, it is
generally used by Christians in our day, and every thing which seems a token of
divine displeasure toward them is expressed by it.

3. It is farther to be observed here, that the things which they judge to be
manifestations of divine favor toward them, or complacency in them, are not
only, nor chiefly, of a temporal nature, or such as merely relate to the
blessings of this animal and perishing life. David, though the promises of the
law had a continual reference to such, yet was taught to look farther, and
describes them as preferable to, and therefore plainly distinct from the
blessings of the corn-floor, or the wine press Ps. 4, 7. And if you, to whom I
am now addressing, do not know them to be so, it is plain you are quite
ignorant of the subject we are enquiring into, and indeed are yet to take out
the first lessons of true religion. All that David says of beholding the beauty
of the Lord Ps. 27, 4. or being satisfied as with marrow and fatness, when he
remembered him upon his bed Ps. 63, 5, 6." as well as with the goodness of his
house, even of his holy temple Ps. 65, 4. is to be taken in the same sense, and
can need very little explication to the truly experienced soul. But those that
have known the light of God's countenance, and the shinings of his face, will,
in proportion to the degree of that knowledge, be able to form some notion of
the hiding of his face, or the withdrawing of the tokens he has given his
people of his presence and favor, which sometimes greatly imbitters
prosperity; as where the contrary is found, it sweetens afflictions, and often
swallows up the sense of it.

4. And give me leave to remind you, my Christian friend (for under that
character I now address my reader) that to be thus deprived of the sense of
God's love, and of the tokens of his favor, may soon be the case with you,
though you may now have the pleasure to see "the candle of the Lord shining
upon you," or though it may even seem to be sunshine and high noon in your
soul. You may lose your lively views of the divine perfections and glories, in
the contemplation of which you now find that inward satisfaction. You may think
of the divine wisdom and power, of the divine mercy and fidelity, as well as of
his righteousness and holiness, and feel little inward complacency of soul in
the view; it may be, with respect to any lively impression, as if it were the
contemplation merely of a common object. It may seem to you as if you bad lost
all idea to those important words, though the view had sometimes swallowed up
your whole soul in transports of admiration, astonishment and love. You may
lose your delightful sense of the divine favor. It may be matter of great and
sad doubt with you, whether you do indeed belong to God; and all the work of
his blessed spirit may be so veiled and shaded in the soul, that the peculiar
characters by which the hand of that sacred Agent might be distinguished, shall
be in a great measure lost; and you may be ready to imagine you had only
deluded yourself in all the former hopes you have entertained. In consequence
of this, those ordinances, in which you now rejoice, may grow very
uncomfortable to you, even when you do indeed desire communion with God in
them. You may hear the most delightful evangelical truths opened, you may hear
the privileges of God's children most affectionately represented, and not be
aware that you have any part or lot in this matter; and from that coldness and
insensibility, may be drawing a farther argument, that you have nothing to do
with them. And then your heart may meditate terror Is. 33, 18; and under the
distress that overwhelms you, your dearest enjoyments may be reflected upon as
adding to the weight of it, and making it more sensible, while you consider
that you had once such a taste for these things, and have now lost it all. So
that perhaps it may seem to you, that they who never felt any thing at all of
religious impressions, are happier than you, or at least are less miserable.
You may perhaps, in these melancholy hours, even doubt whether you have ever
prayed at all; and whether all that you called your enjoyment of God were not
some false delights, excited by the great enemy of souls, to make you apprehend
that your state was good, that so you might continue his more secure prey.

5. Such as this may be your case for a considerable time; and ordinances may
be attended in vain, and the presence of God may be in vain sought in them. You
may pour out your soul in private, and then come to public worship, and find
little satisfaction in either; but be forced to take up the Psalmist's
complaint; My God, I cry in the daytime, but thou hear not; and in the
night-season, and am not silent Psalm. 22, 2; or that of Job, Behold, I go
forward, but he is not there, and backward, but I cannot perceive him; on the
left hand where he does work, but I cannot behold him; he hides himself on the
right hand that I cannot see him Job. 23, 9: So that all which looked like
religion in your mind shall seem, as it were, to be melted into grief, or
chilled into fear, or crushed into a deep sense of your own unworthiness; in
consequence of which, you shall not dare so much as to lift up your eyes before
God, and be almost ashamed to take your place in a worshipping assembly among
any that you think his servants. I have known this to be the case of some
excellent Christians, whose improvements in religion have been distinguished,
and whom God has honored above many of their brethren in what he has done
for them, and by them. Give me leave, therefore, having thus described it, to
offer you some plain advices with regard to it; and let not that be imputed to
enthusiastic fancy which proceeds from an intimate and frequent view of facts
on the one hand, and from a sincere affectionate desire on the other, to
relieve the tender pious heart in so desolate a state. At least, I am persuaded
the attempt will not be overlooked or disapproved by the great Shepherd of the
Sheep Heb. 13, 20. who has charged us to comfort the feeble minded 1 Thessalonians. 5,
14.

6. And here I would first advise you most carefully to inquire whether your
present distress does indeed arise from causes which are truly spiritual; or
whether it may not rather have its foundation in some disorder of body, or in
the circumstances of life, in which you are providentially placed, which may
break your spirits, and deject your mind? The influence of the inferior part of
our nature on the nobler, the immortal spirit, while we continue in this
imbodied state, is so evident, that no attentive person can, in the general,
fail to have observed it; and yet these are cases in which it seems not to be
sufficiently considered; and perhaps your own may be one of them. The state of
the blood is often such as necessarily to suggest gloomy ideas even in dreams,
and to indispose the soul for taking pleasure in any thing: and when it is so,
why should it be imagined to proceed from any peculiar divine displeasure, if
it does not find its usual delight in religion? or why should God be thought to
have departed from us, because he suffers natural causes to produce natural
effects, without opposing by miracle to break the connection? When this is the
case, the help of the physician is to be sought rather than that of the divine,
or, at least, by all means, together with it; and medicine, diet, exercise, and
air, may, in a few weeks, effect that which the strongest reasonings, the most
pathetic exhortations or consolations, might for many months have attempted in
vain.

7. In other instances, the dejection and feebleness of the mind may arise from
something uncomfortable in our worldly circumstances; these may cloud as well
as distract the thoughts, and embitter the temper, and thus render us in a
great degree unfit for religious services or pleasures; and when it is so, the
remedy is to be sought in submission to divine Providence; in abstracting our
affections, as far as possible, from the present world; in a prudent care to
ease ourselves of the burden, so far as we can, by moderating unnecessary
expenses, and by diligent application to business in humble dependence on the
divine blessing; in the mean time, endeavoring by faith to look up to him, who
sometimes suffers his children to be brought into such difficulties, that he
may endear himself more sensibly to them by the method he shall take for their
relief.

8. On the principles here laid down, it may perhaps appear, on enquiry, that
the distress complained of may have a foundation very different from what was
at first supposed. But where the health is found, and the circumstances easy;
when the animal spirits are disposed for gaiety and entertainment, while all
taste for religious pleasure is in a manner gone; when the foul is seized with
a kind of lethargic insensibility, or, what I had almost called a paralytic
weakness, with respect to every religious exercise, even though there should
not be that deep terryfying distress, or pungent amazement, which I before
represented as the effect of melancholy; nor that anxiety about the
accommodations of life, which strait circumstances naturally produce: I would
in that case vary my advice, and urge you, with all possible attention and
impartiality, to search into the cause which has brought upon you that great
evil, under which you justly mourn. And probably, in the general, the cause is
sin; some secret sin, which has not been discovered or observed by the eye of
the world; for enormities that draw on them the observation and censure of
others, will probably fall under the case mentioned in the former chapter, as
they must be instances of known and deliberate guilt. Now, the eye of God has
seen these evils which have escaped the notice of your fellow creatures; and,
in consequence of this care to conceal them from others, while you could not
but know they were open to him, God has seen himself in a peculiar manner
affronted and injured, I had almost said, insulted, by them; and hence his
righteous displeasure. Oh! let that never be forgotten, which is so plainly
said, so commonly known, so familiar to almost every religious ear, yet too
little felt by any of our hearts. Your iniquities have separated between you
and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you that he will not hear
Isa. 59, 1, 2. And this is, on the whole, a merciful dispensation of God,
though it may seem severe; regard it not, therefore, merely as your calamity,
but as intended to awaken you, that you may not content yourself even with
lying in tears of humiliation before the Lord, but, like Joshua, rise and exert
yourself vigorously to put away from you that accursed thing, whatever it be.
Let this be your immediate and earnest care that your pride may be humbled,
that your watchfulness may be maintained, that your affections to the world may
be deade^^ed, and that, on the whole, your fitness for heaven may in every
respect be increased. These are the designs of your heavenly Father, and let it
be your great concern to cooperate with them.

9. Receive it therefore, on the whole, as the most important advice that can
be given you, immediately to enter on a strict examination of your conscience.
-- Attend to its gentlest whispers. If a suspicion arises in your mind that any
thing has not been right, trace that suspicion, search into every secret
folding of your heart, improve to the purposes of a fuller discovery, the
advices of your friends, the reproaches of your enemies: recollect for what
your heart has smitten you at the table of the Lord; for what it would smite
you if you were upon a dying bed, and within this hour to enter on eternity.
When you have made any discovery, note it down, and go on in your search till
you can say, These are the remaining corruptions of my heart; these are the
sins and follies of my life; this have I neglected; this have I done amiss. And
when the account is as complete as you can make it, set yourself, in the
strength of God, to a strenuous reformation, or rather begin the reformation of
every thing that seems amiss as soon as ever you discover it; Return to the
Almighty, and thou shall be built up, and put iniquity far from thy tabernacle;
then shall thou have thy delight in the Almighty, and shall lift up thy face
unto God. Thou shall make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee; thou
shall pay thy vows unto him, and his light shall shine upon thy ways Job. 22,
23^ 26.27.

10. In the mean time, be waiting for God with the deepest humility, and submit
yourself to the discipline of your heavenly Father, acknowledging his justice,
and hoping in his mercy; even when your conscience is least severe in its
remonstrances, and discovers nothing more than the common infirmities of God's
people; yet still bow yourself down before him, and own, that so many are the
evils of your best days, so many the imperfections of your best services, that
by them you have deserved all, and more than all, that you suffer: deserved,
not only that your sun should be clouded, but that it should go down, and arise
no more, but leave your soul in a state of everlasting darkness. And while the
shade continues, be not impatient. Fret not yourself in any wise, but rather
with a holy calmness and gentleness of soul, "wait on the Lord Ps. 37, 8.34."
Be willing to stay his time, willing to bear his frown, in humble hope that he
will at length "return and have compassion on you Jer. 12, 15." He has not
utterly forgotten to be gracious, nor "resolved that he will be favorable no
more Ps. 77, 7.9. -- For the Lord will not cast off for ever; but though he
cause grief, yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his
mercies Lam. 3, 31.32. It is comparatively but for a small moment that he hides
his face from you; but you may humbly hope, that with great mercies he will
gather you, and that with everlasting kindness he will have mercy on you Isa.
54, 7.8. These suitable words are not mine, but his; and they wear this as in
the very front of them, That a soul under the hidings of God's face may at
least be one whom he will gather, and to whom he will extend everlasting favor.

11. But while the darkness continues, go on in the way of your duty. Continue
the use of means and ordinances: read, and meditate: pray, yea, and sing the
praises of God too, though it may be with a heavy heart. Follow the footsteps
of his flock Cant. 1, 8; you may perhaps meet the Shepherd of souls in doing
it. Place yourself at least in his way. It is possible you may by this means
get a kind look from him; and one look, one turn of thought, which may happen
in a moment, may, as it were, create a heaven in your soul at once. Go to the
table of the Lord. If you cannot rejoice, go and mourn there. Go and mourn that
Savior, whom by your sins you have pierced Zech. 12, 10; go and lament the
breaches of that covenant, which you have there so often confirmed. Christ may
perhaps make himself known unto you in the breaking of bread Luke 24, 35, and
you may find, to your surprise, that he has been near you, when you imagined
he was at the greatest distance from you; near you when you thought you were
cast out from his presence. Seek your comfort in such enjoyments as these, and
not in the vain amusements of this world, and in the pleasures of sense. I
shall never forget that affectionate expression, which I am well assured broke
out from an eminently pious heart, then almost ready to break under the sorrows
of this kind: Lord, if I may not enjoy thee, let me enjoy nothing else; but go
down mourning after thee to the grave! I wondered not to hear, that almost as
soon as this sentiment had been breathed out before God in prayer, the burden
was taken off, and the joy of God's salvation restored.

12. I shall add but one advice more, and that is, That you renew your
application to the blood of Jesus, through whom the reconciliation between God
and your soul has been accomplished. It is he that is our peace and by his
blood it is that we are made nigh Ephesians. 2, 13.14; it is in him, as the Beloved
of his soul, that God declares he is well pleased Matthew. 3, 17; and it is in
him that we are made accepted, to the glory of his grace Ephesians. 1, 6. Go
therefore, O Christian, and apply by faith to a crucified Savior: go, and
apply to him as to a merciful High Priest and pour out thy complaint before
him, and show before him thy trouble Ps. 142, 2. Lay open the distress and
anguish of thy soul to him, who once knew what it was to say, (O astonishing!
that he of all others should ever have said it,) "My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me Matthew. 27, 46?" Look up for pity and relief to him, who himself
suffered, being not only tempted, but with regard to sensible manifestations,
deserted, that he might thus know how to pity those that are in such a
melancholy case, and be ready, as well as able, to succor them Heb. 2, 18. He
is, Emmanuel, God with us Matthew. 1, 23; and it is only in and through him that
his Father shines forth upon us with the mildest beams of mercy and of love.
Let it be therefore your immediate care to renew your acquaintance with him.
Review the records of his life and death: hear his words: behold his actions:
and when you do so, surely you will find a secret sweetness diffusing itself
over your soul. You will be brought into a calm, gentle, silent frame, in which
faith and love will operate powerfully, and God may probably cause the still
small voice of his comforting Spirit to be heard 1 Kings 19, 12. till your soul
bursts out into a song of praise, and you may be made glad, according to the
days in which you have been afflicted Ps. 90, 15. In the mean time, such
language as the following supplication speaks may be suitable.

An humble SUPPLICATION for one under the Hidings of God's Face.
BLESSED God! with thee is the fountain of life Ps. 36, 9. and of happiness. I
adore thy name, that I have ever tasted of thy streams; that I have ever felt
the peculiar pleasure arising from the light of thy countenance, and the
shedding abroad of thy love on the soul. But, alas! these delightful seasons
are now to me no more; and the remembrance of them engages me to pour out my
soul within me Ps. 42, 4. I would come, as I have formerly done, and call thee,
with the same endearment, my Father and my God: but, alas! I know not how to do
it. Guilt and fear arise, and forbid the delightful language. I seek thee, O
Lord, but I seek thee in vain. I would pray, and my lips are sealed up. I would
read thy word, and all the promises of it are veiled from mine eyes. I frequent
those ordinances, which have been formerly most nourishing and comfortable to
my soul; but, alas! they are only the shadows of ordinances: the substance is
gone: the animating spirit is fled, and leaves them now at best but the image
of what I once knew them.

But, Lord, have thou cast off for ever, and will thou be savourable no more
Ps. 77, 7? Have thou in awful judgment determined that my soul must be left to
a perpetual winter, the sad emblem of eternal darkness! Indeed I deserve it
should be so. I acknowledge, O Lord, I deserve to be cast away from thy
presence with disdain; to be sunk lower than I am, much lower: I deserve to
have the shadow of death upon mine eyelids Job. 16, 16, and even to be
surrounded with the thick gloom of the infernal prison. But have thou not
raised multitudes, who have deserved, like me, to be delivered into chains of
darkness 2 Pet. 2, 4, to the visions of thy glory above, where no cloud can
ever interpose between thee and their rejoicing spirits? Have mercy upon me, O
Lord, have mercy upon me Ps. 123, 3! and though mine iniquities have now justly
caused thee to hide thy face from me Isa. 59, 2. yet be thou rather pleased,
agreeably to the gracious language of thy word, to hide thy face from my sins,
and to blot out all mine iniquities Ps. 51, 9! Cheer my heart with the tokens
of thy returning favor, and say unto my soul, I am thy salvation Ps 35, 3.

Remember, O Lord God, remember that dreadful day, in which Jesus thy dear Son
endured what my sins have deserved! Remember that agony, in which he poured out
his soul before thee, and said, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me Matt.
27, 46! Did he not O Lord, endure all this, that humble penitents might through
him be brought near unto thee, and might behold thee with pleasure, as their
Father and their God? Thus do I desire to come unto thee, blessed Savior; art
thou not appointed "to give unto them that mourn in Zion beauty for ashes, the
oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness
Isa. 61, 3: -- O wash away my tears, anoint my head with the oil of gladness,
and clothe me with the garments of salvation Is. 61, 10.

Oh that I knew where I might find thee Job. 23, 3. -- Oh that I knew what it
is that has engaged thee to depart from me! I am searching and trying my ways
Lam. 3, 40. Oh that thou would search me, and know my heart; try me, and know
my thoughts; and if there be any wicked way in me, discover it, and lead me in
the way everlasting Ps. 139, 23.24; in that way in which I find rest and peace
for my soul Jer. 6, 16. and feel the discoveries of thy love in Christ!

O God, who did command the light to shine out of darkness 2 Cor. 4, 6. speak
but the word, and light shall dart into my soul at once! Open thou my lips, and
my mouth shall show forth thy praise Ps. 51, 15. shall burst out into a
cheerful song, which shall display before those whom my present dejections may
have discouraged, the pleasures and supports of religion!

Yet, Lord, on the whole, I submit to thy will. If it is thus that my faith
must be exercised, by walking in darkness for days, and months, and years to
come, how long soever they may seem, how long soever they may be, I will
submit. Still will I adore thee as the God of Israel, and the Savior, though
thou art a God that hides thyself Isa. 14, 15: still will I trust in the name
of the Lord, and stay myself upon my God Isa. 50, 10; trusting in thee, though
thou slay me Job. 13, 15; and waiting for thee more than they that watch for
the morning, yea, more than they that watch for the morning Ps. 130, 6.
Peradventure in the evening time it may be light Zech. 14, 7. I know that thou
have sometimes manifested thy compassions to thy dying servants, and given
them, in the lowest ebb of their natural spirits, a full tide of divine glory,
thus turning darkness into light before them Isa. 42, 16. So may it please thee
to gild the valley of the shadow of death with the light of thy presence, when
I am passing through it, and to stretch forth thy rod and thy staff to comfort
me Ps. 23, 4. that my tremblings may cease, and the gloom may echo with songs
of praise! But if it be thy sovereign pleasure that distress and darkness
should still continue to the last motion of my pulse, and the last gasp of my
breath, oh let it cease with the parting struggle and bring me to that light
which is sown for the righteous, and to that gladness which is reserved for the
upright in heart Ps. 97, 11; to the unclouded regions of everlasting splendour
and joy, where the full anointings of the spirit shall be poured out on all thy
people, and thou will no more hide thy face from any of them Ezekiel. 29, 19!

This, Lord, is thy salvation, for which I am waiting Genesis 49, 18; and whilst I
feel the desires of my soul drawn out after it, I will never despair of
obtaining it. Continue and increase those desires, and at length satisfy and
exceed them all, through the riches of thy grace in Christ Jesus! Amen.

CHAP. XXV. The CHRISTIAN struggling under great and heavy Afflictions.
Here it is advised, (1.) That afflictions should be expected, 1. (2.) That the
righteous hand of God should be acknowledged in them when they come, 2. (3.)
That they should be borne with patience, 3. (4.) That the divine conduct in
them should be cordially approved, 4. (5.) That thankfulness should be
maintained in the midst of trials, 5. (6.) That the design of afflictions
should be diligently inquired into, and all proper assistance taken in
discovering it, 6. (7.) That when it is discovered, it should humbly be
complied with and answered, 7. A prayer suited to such a case.

1. SINCE man is born unto trouble as the sparks fly upward Job. 5, 7. and Adam
has entailed on all his race the sad inheritance of calamity in their way to
death, it will certainly be prudent and necessary that we should all expect to
meet with trials and afflictions; and that you, reader, whoever you are, should
be endeavoring to gird on your armor, and put yourself into a posture to
encounter those trials which will fall to your lot as a man, and a Christian.
Prepare yourself to receive your afflictions, and to endure them, in a manner
agreeable to both those characters. In this view, when you see others under the
burden, consider how possible it is that you may be called out to the very same
difficulties, or to others equal to them. Put your soul as in the place of
theirs. Think how you could endure the load under which they lie; and endeavor
at once to comfort them, and to strengthen your own heart; or rather, pray that
God would do it. And observing how liable mortal life is to such sorrows,
moderate your expectations from it; raise your thoughts above it; and form your
schemes of happiness only for that world where they cannot be disappointed: in
the mean time, blessing God, that your prosperity is lengthened out this far,
and ascribing it to his special providence that you continue so long unwounded,
when so many showers of arrows are flying around you, and so many are falling
by them on the right hand and on the left.

2. When at length your turn comes, as it certainly will, from the first hour
in which an affliction seizes you, realize to yourself the hand of God in it,
and lose not the view of him in any second cause, which may have proved the
immediate occasion. Let it be your first care to humble yourself under the
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time 1 Pet. 5, 6. Own, that he
is just in all that is brought upon you. Neh. 9, 33." and "that in all these
things he punishes you less than your iniquities deserve Ezra 9, 13. Compose
yourself to bear his hand with patience, to glorify his name by a submission to
his will, and to fall in with the gracious design of this visitation, as well
as to wait the issue of it quietly, whatever the event may be.

3. Now that patience may have its perfect work James 1, 4. reflect frequently
and deeply upon your own meanness and sinfulness. Consider how often every
mercy has been forfeited, and every judgment deserved. And consider too, how
long the patience of God has borne with you, and how wonderfully it is still
exerted toward you; and, indeed, not only his patience, but his bounty too.
Afflicted as you are, (for I speak to you now as actually under the pressure,)
look round and survey your remaining mercies, and be gratefully sensible of
them. Make the supposition of their being removed: what if God should stretch
out his hand against you, and add poverty to pain, or pain to poverty, or the
loss of friends to both; or the death of surviving friends to that of those who
you are now mourning over; would not the wound be more grievous? Adore his
goodness that this is not the case: and take heed, lest your unthankfulness
should provoke him to multiply your sorrows. Consider also the need you have of
discipline; how wholesome it may prove to your soul, and what merciful designs
our heavenly Father has in all the corrections he sends upon his children.

4. Nay, I will add, that, in consequence of all these considerations, it may
well be expected, not only that you should submit to your afflictions, as what
you cannot avoid, but that you should sweetly acquiesce in them, approve them;
that you should not only justify, but glorify God, in sending them; that you
should glorify him with your heart, and with your lips too. Think not praise
unsuitable on such an occasion; nor think that praise alone to be suitable
which takes its rise from remaining comforts: but know that it is your duty,
not only to be thankful in your afflictions, but to be thankful on account of
them.

5. God himself has said, In every thing give thanks 1 Thessalonians. 5, 18; and he has
taught his servants to say, Yea also we glory in tribulation Romans 5, 3. And
most certain it is, that to true believers they are instances of divine mercy;
for whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he
receives with peculiar and distinguishing endearment Heb. 12, 6. View your
present afflictions in this light as chastisements of love; and then let your
own heart say, whether love does not demand praise. Think with yourself, it is
thus that God is making me conformable to his own Son; it is thus that he is
training me up for complete glory. Thus he kills my corruptions; thus he
strengthens my graces; thus he is wisely contriving to bring me nearer to
himself, and to ripen me for the honors of his heavenly kingdom. It is if need
be, that I am in heaviness 1 Pet. 1, 6; and he surely knows what that need is
better than I can pretend to teach him; and knows what peculiar propriety there
is in this affliction to answer my present necessity, and do me that peculiar
good which he is graciously intending me by it. This tribulation shall work
patience, and patience experience and experience a more assured hope; even a
hope which shall not make ashamed, while the love of God is shed abroad in my
heart Romans 5, 3.4.5. and shines through my affliction like the sun through a
gently-descending cloud, darting in light upon the shade, and mingling
fruitfulness with weeping.

6. Let it be then your earnest care, while you thus look on your affliction,
whatever it maybe, as coming from the hand of God, to improve it to the
purposes for which it was sent. And that you may so improve it, let it be your
first concern to know what those purposes are. Summon up all the attention of
your soul to hear the rod, and him who has appointed it Mic. 6, 9; and pray
earnestly that you may understand its voice. Examine your life, your words, and
your heart; and pray, that God would so guide your inquiries, that you may
"return unto the Lord that smites you Isa. 9, 13." To assist you in this call
in the help of pious friends, and particularly of your ministers: entreat not
only their prayers, but their advices too, as to the probable design of
Providence; and encourage them freely to tell you any thing which occurs to
their minds upon this head. And if such an occasion should lead them to touch
upon some of the imperfections of your character and conduct, look upon it as a
great token of their friendship, and take it not only patiently but thankfully.
It does but ill become a Christian at any time to resent reproofs and
admonitions, and least of all does it become him when the rebukes of his
heavenly Father are upon him: he ought rather to seek admonitions at such a
time as this, and voluntarily to offer his wounds to be searched by a faithful
and skilful hand.

7. And when, by one means or another, you have got a ray of light to direct
you in the meaning and language of such dispensations, take heed that you do
not in any degree, "harden yourself against God, and walk contrary to him Lev.
26, 27." Obstinate reluctance to the apprehended design of any providential
stroke is inexpressibly provoking to him. Set yourself therefore to an
immediate reformation of whatever you discover amiss; and labor to learn the
general lessons of greater submission to God's will, of a more calm
indifference to the world, and of a closer attachment to divine converse, and
to the views of an approaching invisible state. And whatever particular
proportion or correspondence you may observe between this or that circumstance
in your affliction and your former transgressions, be especially careful to act
according to that more peculiar and express voice of the rod. Then you may
perhaps have speedy and remarkable reason to say, that it has been good for
you, that you have been afflicted Ps. 119, 71; and, with a multitude of others,
may learn to number the times of your sharpest trials, among the sweetest and
the most exalted moments of your life. For this purpose, let prayer be your
frequent employment; and let such sentiments as these, if not in the very same
terms, be often and affectionately poured out before God.

An humble ADDRESS to God under the Pressure of heavy Affliction.
O THOU supreme, yet all righteous and gracious Governor of the whole universe!
Mean and inconsiderable as this little province of thy spacious empire may
appear, thou do not disregard the earth and its inhabitants; but attendest to
its concerns with the most condescending and gracious regards. Thou reignest,
and I rejoice in it," as it is indeed "matter of universal joy Ps. 97, 1. I
believe thy universal providence and care; and I firmly believe thy wise, holy,
and kind interposition in every thing which relates to me, and to the
circumstances of my abode in this thy world. I would look through all inferior
causes unto thee, whose eyes are upon all thy creatures; to thee who formest
the light, and createst darkness, who make peace, and createst evil Isa. 14,
7; to thee, Lord, who, at thy pleasure, can exchange the one for the other,
can turn the brightest noon into midnight, and the darkest midnight into noon.

O thou wise and merciful Governor of the world! I have often said "Thy will be
done:" and now thy will is painful to me. But shall I, upon that account, unsay
what I have so often said? God forbid! I come rather to lay myself down at thy
feet, and to declare my full and free submission to all thy sacred pleasure. O
Lord, thou art just and righteous in all! I acknowledge, in thy venerable and
awful presence, that I have deserved this, and ten thousand times more Ezra 9,
13; I acknowledge, that "it is of thy mercy that I am not utterly consumed Lam.
3, 22," and that any the least degree of comfort yet remains. O Lord, I most
readily confess, that the sins of one day of my life have merited all these
chastisements; and that every day of my life has been more or less sinful.
Smite, therefore, O thou righteous Judge! and I will still adore thee, that
instead of the scourge, thou have not given a commission to the sword, to do
all the dreadful work of justice, and to pour out my blood in thy presence.

But shall I speak unto thee only as my Judge? O Lord, thou have taught me a
tender name: thou condescendest to call thyself my Father, and to speak of
correction as the effect of thy love. O welcome welcome, those afflictions
which are the tokens of thy paternal affection, the marks of my adoption into
thy family! Thou know what discipline I need, thou see, O Lord, that
bundle of folly which there is in the heart of thy poor froward and thoughtless
child; and know what rods, and what strokes, are needful to drive it away. I
would therefore, be in humble subjection to the Father of spirits, who
chasteneth me for my profit; would be in subjection to him, and live Heb. 12,
9.10. I would bear thy strokes, not merely because I cannot resist them, but
because I love and trust in thee. I would sweetly acquiesce and rest in thy
will, as well as stoop to it; and would say, Good is the word of the Lord 2
Kings 20, 19. And I desire, that not only my lips but my soul may acquiesce.
Yea, Lord, I would praise thee, that thou will show so much regard to me as to
apply such remedies as these to the diseases of my mind, and art thus kindly
careful to train me up for glory. I have no objections against being afflicted,
against being afflicted in this particular way: T'^^ cup which my Father puts
into mine hand, shall I not drink it John 18, 11? By thine assistance and
support I will. Only be pleased, O Lord, to stand by me, and sometimes to grant
me a favorable look in the midst of my sufferings! support my soul, I beseech
thee, by thy consolations mingled with my tribulations; and I shall glory in
those tribulations that are thus allayed! It has been the experience of many
who have reflected on afflicted days with pleasure, and have acknowledged that
their comforts have swallowed up their sorrows. And after all that thou have
done, are thy mercies restrained Isa. 63, 15? "Is thy hand waxed short Numb.
11, 23?" or can thou not still do the same for me?

If my heart be less tender, less sensible, thou can cure that disorder, and
can make this affliction the means of curing it. Thus let it be; and at
length, in thine own due time, and in the way which thou shall choose, work out
deliverance for me; and show me thy mavelous loving kindness, O thou that
savest by thy right hand them that put their trust in thee Ps. 17, 7. For I
well know, that how dark soever this night of affliction seems, if thou say,
Let there be light, there shall be light. But I would urge nothing before the
time thy wisdom and goodness shall appoint. I am much more concerned that my
afflictions may be sanctified than that they may be removed. Number me, O God,
among the happy persons, whom whilst thou chastenest, thou teach out of thy
law Ps. 114, 12! Show me, I beseech thee, "wherefore thou contendest with me
Job. 10, 2;" and purify me by the fire, which is so painful to me while I am
passing through it! Do thou not chasten thy children for this very end, that
they may be partakers of thine holiness Heb. 12, 10! Thou know, O God, it is
this my soul is breathing after. I am partaker of thy bounty every day and
moment of my life; I am partaker of thy gospel, and, I hope, in some measure
too, a partaker of the grace of it operating on my heart: Oh may it operate
more and more, that I may largely partake of thine holiness too; that I may
come nearer and nearer in the temper of my mind to thee, O blessed God, the
supreme model of perfection! let my soul be (as it were) melted, though with
the intensest heat of the furnace, if I may but thereby be made fit for being
delivered into the mold of thy gospel, and bearing thy bright and amiable image!

O Lord my soul longs for thee; it cries out for the living God Ps. 84, 2!
In thy presence, and under the support of thy love. I can bear any thing; and
am willing to bear it, if I may grow more lovely in thine eyes, and more meet
for thy kingdom. The days of my affliction will have an end; the hour will at
length come, when thou will wipe away all my tears Rev. 21, 4. Though it tarry,
I would "wait for it Heb. 2, 3. My foolish heart, in the midst of all its
trials, is ready to grow fond of this earth, disappointing and grievous as it
is: and graciously, O God, do thou deal with me in breaking those bonds that
would tie me faster to it. Oh let my soul be girding itself up, and as it were)
stretching its wings, in expectation of that blessed hour, when it shall drop
all its sorrows and encumbrances at once, and soar away to expatiate with
infinite delight in the regions of liberty, peace, and joy! Amen.

CHAP. XXVI. The CHRISTIAN assisted in examining into his Growth in Grace.
The examination important, 1. False marks of growth to be avoided, 2. True
marks proposed: such as, (1.) Increasing love to God, 3. (2.) Benevolence to
men, 4. (3.) Candor of disposition, 5. (4.) Meekness under injuries, 6. (5.)
Serenity amidst the uncertainties of life, 7. (6.) Humility, 8. especially as
enpressed in evangelical exercises of mind toward Christ and the Spirit, 9.
(7.) Zeal for the divine honor, 10. (8.) Habitual and cheerful willingness to
exchange worlds, whenever God shall appoint it, 11. Conclusion, 12. The
Christian breathing after growth in grace.

1. IF by divine grace, you have been born again, not of corruptible seed, but
of incorruptible 1 Pet. 1, 23. even by that word of God, which lives and
abides for ever, not only in the world, and in the church, but in particular
souls in which it is sown; you will, as newborn babes, desire the sincere milk
of the word, that you may grow thereby 1 Pet. 2, 2. And though, in the most
advanced state of religion on earth, we are but infants in comparison of what
we hope to be, when in the heavenly world we arrive unto a perfect man, unto
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ Ephesians. 4, 13; yet, as we
have some exercise of a sanctified reason, we shall be solicitous that we may
be growing and thriving infants. And you, my reader, if so be that you have
tasted that the Lord is gracious 1 Pet. 2, 3. will, I doubt not, feel this
solicitude. I would therefore endeavor to assist you in making the inquiry,
whether religion be on the advance in your souls. And here I shall warn you
against some false marks of growth; and then shall endeavor to lay down others
on which you may depend as more solid. -- In this view, I would observe, that
you are not to measure your growth in grace only, or chiefly, by your advances
in knowledge, or in zeal, or any other passionate impression of the mind; no,
nor by the fervor of devotion alone; but by the habitual determination of the
will for God, and by your prevailing disposition to obey his commands, to
submit to his disposals, and to subserve his schemes in the world.

2. It must be allowed, that knowledge and affection in religion are indeed
desirable. Without some degree of the former, religion cannot be rational; and
it is very reasonable to believe, that without some degree of the latter it
cannot be sincere, in creatures whose natures are constituted like ours. Yet
there may be a great deal of speculative knowledge, and a great deal of
rapturous affection, where there is no true religion at all; and therefore much
more, where there is no advanced state in it. -- The exercise of our rational
faculties upon the evidences of divine revelation, and upon the declaration of
it as continued in scripture, may furnish a very wicked man with a well
digested body of orthodox divinity in his head, when not one single doctrine of
it has ever reached his heart. An eloquent description of the sufferings of
Christ, of the solemnities of judgment, of the joys of the blessed, and the
miseries of the damned, might move the breast even of a man who did not firmly
believe them; as we often find ourselves strongly moved by well-wrought
narrations, or discourses, which, at the same time, we know to have their
foundation in fiction. Natural constitution, or such accidental causes as are,
some of them, too low to be here mentioned, may supply the eyes with a flood of
tears, which may discharge itself plenteously upon almost any occasion that
shall first arise. And a proud impatience of contradiction, directly opposite
as it is to the gentle spirit of Christianity, may make a man's blood boil when
he hears the notions he has entertained, and especially those which he has
openly and vigorously espoused, disputed and opposed. This may possibly lead
him, in terms of strong indignation, to pour out his zeal and his rage before
God in a fond conceit, that, as the God of truth, he is the patron of those
favorite doctrines, by whose fair appearances perhaps he himself is misled --
And if these speculative refinements, or these affectionate sallies of the
mind, be consistent with a total absence of true religion, they are much more
apparently consistent with a very low estate of it. I would desire to lead you,
my friend, into sublimer notions and juster marks; and refer you to other
practical writers, and, above all, to the book of God, to prove how material
they are. I would therefore entreat you to bring your own heart to answer, as
in the presence of God, to such inquiries as these:

3. Do you find divine love, on the whole, advancing in your soul? -- Do you
feel yourself more and more sensible of the presence of God? and does that
sense grew more delightful to you than it formerly was? Can you, even when your
natural spirits are weak and low, and you are not in any frame for the ardors
and ecstacies of devotion, nevertheless find a pleasing rest, a calm repose of
heart, in the thought that God is near you, and that he sees the secret
sentiments of your soul, while you are, as it were laboring up the hill, and
casting a longing eye toward him, though you cannot say you enjoy any sensible
communications from him? Is it agreeable to you to open your heart to his
inspection and regard? to present it to him laid bare of every disguise, and to
say with David, Thou, Lord, know thy servant 2 Samuel 7, 20? Do you find a
growing esteem and approbation of that sacred law of God, which is the
transcript of his moral perfections? Do you inwardly esteem all his precepts
concerning all things to be right Psalm. 119, 128? Do you discern, not only the
necessity, but the reasonableness, the beauty the pleasure, of obedience; and
feel a growing scorn and contempt for those things which may be offered as the
price of your innocence, and would tempt you to sacrifice or to hazard your
interest in the divine favor and friendship? Do you not find an ingenuous
desire to please God, not only because he is so powerful, and has so many good
and so many evil things entirely at his command, but from a veneration of his
most amiable nature and character; and do you find your heart habitually
reconciled to a most humble subjection, both to his commanding and to his
disposing will? Do you perceive that your own will is now more ready and
disposed in every circumstance, to bear the yoke, and to submit to the divine
determination, whatever he appoints to be borne or forborne? Can you in
patience possess your soul Luke 21, 19? Can you maintain a more steady calmness
and serenity when God is striking at your dearest enjoyments in this world, and
acting most directly contrary to your present interests, to your natural
passions and desires? If you can, it is a most certain and noble sign that
grace is grown up in you to a very vigourous state.

4. Examine also, "what effections you find in your heart toward those who are
round about you, and toward the rest of mankind in general." -- Do you find
your heart overflow with undissembled and unrestrained benevolence? Are you
more sensible than you once were of those many endearing bonds which unite all
men, and especially all Christians, into one community; which make them
brethren and fellow-citizens? Do all the unfriendly passions die and wither in
your soul, while the kind social affections grow and strengthen? And though
self-love was never the reigning passion since you became a true Christian, yet
as some remainders of it are still too ready to work inwardly, and to show
themselves, especially as sudden occasions arise, do you perceive that you get
ground of them? Do you think of yourself only as one of a great number, whose
particular interests and concerns are of little importance when compared with
those of the community, and ought by all means, on all occasions, to be
sacrificed to them?

5. Reflect especially "on the temper of your mind toward those whom an
unsanctified heart might be ready to imagine it had some just excuse for
excepting out of the list of those it loves, and toward whom you are ready to
feel a secret aversion, or at least an alienation from them." -- How does your
mind stand affected toward those who differ from you in their religious
sentiments and practices? I do not say that Christian charity will require you
to think every error harmless. It argues no want of love to a friend in some
cases to fear least his disorder should prove more fatal than he seems to
imagine; nay, sometimes the very tenderness of friendship may increase that
apprehension. But to hate persons because we think they are mistaken, and to
aggravate every difference in judgment or practice, into a fatal and damnable
error, that destroys all Christian communion and love, is a symptom generally
much worse than the evil it condemns. Do you love the image of Christ in a
person who thinks himself obliged in conscience to profess and worship in a
manner different from yourself? Nay farther, can you love and honor that which
is truly amiable and excellent in those in whom much is defective: in those in
whom there is a mixture of bigotry and narrowness of spirit, which may lead
them perhaps to slight, or even to censure, you? Can you love them as the
disciples and servants of Christ, who, through a mistaken zeal, may be ready to
cast out your name as evil Luke 6, 22. to warn others against you as a
dangerous person? This is none of the least triumphs of charity, nor any
despicable evidence of an advance in religion.

6. And, on this head, reflect farther, how can you bear injuries? -- There is
a certain hardness of soul in this respect, which argues a confirmed state in
piety and virtue. Does every thing of this kind hurry and ruffle you, so as to
put you on contrivances how you may recompense, or, at least, how you may
disgrace and expose him who has done you the wrong? or can you stand the sh^^k
calmly, and easily divert your mind to other objects, only (when you recollect
these things) pi^ying and praying for those who, with the worst tempers and
views, are assaulting you? This is a Christ-like temper indeed; and he will own
it as such; will own you as one of his soldiers, a^ one of his heroes;
especially if it rises so far, as instead of being overcome of evil to overcome
evil with good Romans 12, 21. Watch over your spirit, and over your tongue, when
injuries are offered; and see whether you be ready to meditate upon them, to
aggravate them to yourself, to complain of them to others, and to lay on all
the load and blame that you in justice can: or whether you be ready to put the
kindest construction upon the offense, to excuse it as far as reason will
allow, and (where, after all, it will wear a black and odious aspect) to
forgive it, heartily to forgive it, and that even before any submission is made
or pardon asked; and in token of the sincerity of that forgiveness, to be
contriving what can be done by some benefit or other toward the injurious
person to teach him a better temper.

7. Examine farther "with regard to the other evils and calamities of life, and
even with regard, to its uncertainties, how can you bear them?" -- Do you find
your soul is in this respect gathering strength? Have you fewer foreboding
fears and disquieting alarms than you once had as to what may happen in life?
Can you trust the wisdom and goodness of God to order your affairs for you with
more complacency and cheerfulness than formerly? Do you find you are unable to
unite your thoughts more in surveying present circumstances, that you may
collect immediate duty from them, though you know not what God will next
appoint or call you to? And when you feel the smart of affliction, do you make
a less matter of it? can you transfer your heart more easily to heavenly and
divine objects, without an anxious solicitude, whether this or that burden be
removed, so it may be but sanctified to promote your communion with God; and
your ripeness for glory?

8. Examine also, "whether you advance in humility." -- This is a silent, but
most excellent grace; and they who are most eminent in it, are dearest to God,
and most fit for the communications of his presence to them. Do you then feel
your mind more emptied of proud and haughty imaginations; not prone so much to
look back upon past services which it has performed, as forward to those which
are yet before you, and inward upon the remaining imperfections of your heart?
Do you more tenderly observe your daily slips and miscarriages, and find
yourself disposed to mourn over those things before the Lord that once passed
with you as slight matters; though when you come to survey them as in the
presence of God, you find they were not wholly involuntary, or free from guilt?
Do you feel in your breast a deeper apprehension of the infinite majesty of the
blessed God, and of the glory of his natural and moral perfections; so as, in
consequence of those views, to perceive yourself (as it were) annihilated in
his presence, and to shrink into less than nothing and vanity Isa. 40, 17? If
this be your temper, God will look upon you with peculiar favor, and will
visit you more and more with the distinguished blessings of his grace.

9. But there is another great branch and effect of Christian humility, which
it would be an unpardonable negligence to omit. Let me, therefore, farther
enquire, Are you more frequently renewing your application, your sincere,
steady, determinate application, to the righteousness and blood of Christ, as
being sensible how unworthy you are to appear before God otherwise than in him?
And do the remaining corruptions of your heart humble you before him, though
the disorders of your life are in a great measure cured? Are you more earnest
to obtain the quickening influences of the Holy Spirit? and have you such a
sense of your own weakness, as to engage you to depend in all the duties you
perform upon the communications of his grace to help your infirmities Romans 8,
26? Can you, at the close of your most religious, exemplary, and useful days,
blush before God for the deficiencies of them, while others perhaps may be
ready to admire and extol your conduct? And while you give the glory of all
that has been right to him from whom the strength and grace has been derived,
are you coming to the blood of sprinkling to free you from the guilt which
mingles itself even with the best of your services? Do you learn to receive the
bounties of Providence, not only with thankfulness as coming from God, but with
a mixture of shame and confusion too, under a consciousness that you do not
deserve them, and are continually forfeiting them? And do you justify
Providence in your afflictions and disappointments, even while many are
flourishing around you in the full bloom of prosperity, whose offenses have
been more visible at least, and more notorious than yours?

10. Do you also advance in zeal and activity for the service of God, and the
happiness of mankind? Does your love show itself solid and sincere, by a
continual flow of good works from it? Can you view the sorrows of others with
tender compassion, and with projects and contrivances what you may do to
relieve them? Do you feel in your breast that you are more frequently "devising
liberal things Isa. 32." and ready to weave your own advantage or pleasure that
you may accomplish them? Do you find your imagination teeming (as it were) with
conceptions and schemes for the advancement of the cause and interest of Christ
in the world, for the propogation of his gospel, and for the happiness of your
fellow creatures? And do you not only pray, but act for it; act in such a
manner as to show that you pray in earnest; and feel a readiness to do what
little you can in this cause, even though others, who might, if they pleased,
very conveniently do a vast deal more, will do nothing?

11. And not to enlarge on this copious head, reflect once more, how your
affections stand with regard to this world and another?" -- Are you more deeply
and practically convinced of the vanity of these things which are seen and are
temporal 2 Cor. 4, 18? Do you perceive your expectations from them, and your
attachments to them, to diminish? You are willing to stay in this world as long
as your Father pleases, and it is right and well; but do you find your bonds so
loosened to it, that you are willing, heartily willing, to leave it at the
shortest warning; so that if God should see fit to summon you away on a sudden,
though it should be in the midst of your enjoyments, pursuits, expectations,
and hopes, you would cordially consent to that remove; without saying, Lord,
let me stay a little while longer to enjoy this or that agreeable
entertainment, to finish this or that scheme? Can you think with an habitual
calmness, and hearty approbation, if such be the divine pleasure, of walking no
more when you lie down on your bed, of returning home no more when you go out
of your house? And yet, on the other hand, how great soever the burdens of
life are, do you find a willingness to bear them, in submission to the will of
your heavenly Father, though it should be to many future years; and though they
should be years of far greater affliction than you have ever yet seen? Can you
say calmly and steadily, if not with such overflowings of tender affections as
you could desire, Behold thy servant, thy child is in thine hand, do with me as
seems good in thy sight 2 Samuel 15, 26! My will is melted into thine, to be
lifted up, or laid down, to be carried out, or brought in, to be here or there,
in this or that circumstance, just as thou please, and as shall best suit
with thy great extensive plan, which it is impossible that I, or all the angels
in heaven, should mend.

12. These, if I understand matters right, are some of the most substantial
evidences of growth and establishment in religion. Search after them: bless God
for them, so far as you discover them in yourself; and study to advance in them
daily, under the influences of divine grace, to which I heartily recommend you,
and to which I entreat you frequently to recommend yourself.

The CHRISTIAN breathing earnestly after Growth in Grace.
O THOU ever blessed Fountain of natural and spiritual life! I thank thee that
I live, and know the exercises and pleasures of a religious life. I bless thee
that thou have infused into me thine own vital breath, though I was once dead
in trespasses and sins Ephesians. 2, 1; so that I am become in a sense peculiar to
thine own children, "a living soul Genesis 2, 7." But it is mine earnest desire,
that I may not only live, but grow; grow in grace, and in the knowledge of my
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ 2 Pet. 3, 18. upon an acquaintance with whom my
progress in it so evidently depends! In this view, I humbly entreat thee, that
thou will form my mind to right notions in religion, that I may not judge of
grace by any wrong conceptions of it, nor measure my advances in it by those
things which are merely the effects of nature, and possibly its corrupt effects!

May I be seeking after an increase of divine love to thee, my God and Father
in Christ: of unreserved resignation to thy wise and holy will, and of
extensive benevolence to my fellow creatures! May I grow in patience and
fortitude of soul, in humility and zeal, in spirituality and a heavenly
disposition of mind, and in a concern, that whether present or absent, I may be
accepted of the Lord 2 Cor. 5, 9; that whether I live or die, it may be for his
glory! In a word, as thou know I hunger and thirst after righteousness, make
me whatever thou would delight to see me! Draw on my soul, by the gentle
influences of thy gracious spirit, every trace, and every feature, which thine
eye, O heavenly Father, may survey with pleasure, and which thou may
acknowledge as thine own image!

I am sensible, O Lord, I have not as yet attained! yea, my soul is utterly
confounded to think how far I am from being already perfect: but this one thing
(after the great example of thine apostle, and the much greater of his Lord) "I
would endeavor to do; forgetting the things which are behind, I would press
forward to those which are before Phil. 3, 12.13. Oh that thou would feed my
soul by thy word and Spirit! Having been as I humbly hope and trust,
regenerated by it, being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, even by the word which lives and abides for ever 1 Pet. 1,
23;" as "a newborn babe, I desire the sincere milk of the word, that I may
grow thereby 1 Pet. 2, 2." And may my profiting appear unto all men 1 Timothy 4,
15. till at length I come unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ Ephesians. 4, 13; and after having enjoyed the pleasure of
those that flourish eminently in the courts below, be fixed in the paradise
above! I ask and hope it through him of whose fullness we have all received,
even grace for grace John 1, 16:" "To him be glory, both now and for ever 2
Pet. 3, 18! Amen.

CHAP. XXVII. The advanced Christian reminded of the Mercies of God, and
exhorted to the Exercises of habitual Love to him, and joy in him.
An holy joy in God our privilege as well as our duty, 1. The Christian invited
to the exercise of it, 2. (1.) By the representation of temporal mercies, 3.
(2.) By the consideration of spiritual favors, 4. (3.) By the views of eternal
happiness, 5. And, (4.) Of the mercies of God to others, the living and the
dead, 6. The chapter closes with an exhortation to this heavenly exercise, 7.
and with an example of the genuine worhings of this grateful joy in God.

1. I WOULD now suppose my reader to find, on an examination of his spiritual
state, that he is growing in grace. And if you desire that this growth may at
once be acknowledged and promoted, let me call your soul to that more
affectionate exercise of love to God, and joy in him, which suits, and
strengthens, and exalts, the character of the advanced Christian; and which I
beseech you to regard, not only as your privilege, but as your duty too. Love
is the most sublime generous principle of all true and acceptable obedience;
and with love, when so wisely and happily fixed, when so certainly returned,
joy, proportionable joy, must naturally be connected. It may justly grieve a
man that enters into the spirit of Christianity to see how low a life the
generality even of sincere Christians commonly live in this respect. Rejoice
then in the Lord, ye righteous, and give thanks at the remembrance of his
holiness Psalm. 97, 12. and of all those other perfections and glories which are
included in that majestic, that wonderful, that delightful, name, THE LORD THY
GOD! Spend not your sacred moments merely in confession, or in petition, though
each must have their daily share: but give a part, a considerable part, to the
celestial and angelic work of praise. Yea labor to carry about with you
continually an heart overflowing with such sentiments, warmed and inflamed with
such affections.

2. Are there not continually rays enough diffused from the great Father of
light and love to inkindle it in our bosom? Come, my Christian friend and
brother, come and survey with me the goodness of our heavenly Father. And oh
that he would give me such a sense of it, that I might represent it in a
suitable manner; that "while I am musing the fire may burn" in my own heart
Psalm. 39, 3, and be communicated to yours! and oh that it might pass, with the
lines I write, from soul to soul; awakening in the breast of every Christian
that reads them, sentiments more worthy of the children of God, and the heirs
of glory; who are to spend an eternity in those sacred exercises to which I am
now endeavoring to excite you!

3. Have you not reason to adopt the words of David, and say, How many are thy
gracious thoughts unto me, O Lord! how great is the sum of them! When I would
count them, they are more in number than the sand Ps. 139, 17.18. You indeed
know where to begin the survey; for the favors of God to you began with your
being. Commemorate it therefore with a grateful heart, that the, eyes which saw
your substance, being yet imperfect, beheld you with a friendly care, "when you
were made in secret," and have watched over you ever since; and that the hand,
which drew the plan of your members, when as yet there was none of them Ps.
139, 15, 16, not only fashioned them at first, but from that time has been
concerned in keeping all your bones, so that not one of them is broken Ps. 34,
20; and that indeed it is to this you owe it that you live. Look back upon the
path you have trod, from the day that God brought you out of the womb, and say,
whether you do not, as it were, see all the rod thick set with the marks and
memorials of the divine goodness. Recollect the places where you have lived,
and the persons with whom you have most intimately conversed; and call to mind
the mercies you have received in those places, and from those persons, as the
instruments of the divine care and goodness. Recollect the difficulties and
dangers with which you have been surrounded; and reflect attentively on what
God has done to defend you from them, or to carry you through them. Think how
often there has been "but a step between you and death;" and how suddenly God
has sometimes interposed to set you in safety, even before you apprehended
your danger. Think of those chambers of illness in which you have been
confined, and from whence perhaps you once thought you should go forth no more;
but said, (with Hezekiah,) In the cutting off of your days I shall go to the
gates of the grave; I am deprived of the residue of my years Isa. 38, 10. God
has, it may be, since that time, added many years to your life; and you know
not how many may be in reserve, or how much usefulness and happiness may attend
each. Survey your circumstances in relative life; how many kind friends are
surrounding you daily, and studying how they may contribute to your comfort.
Reflect on those remarkable circumstances in providence, which occasioned the
knitting of some bonds of this kind, which, next to those which join your soul
to God, you number among the happiest. And forget not, in how many instances,
when these dear lives have been threatened, lives perhaps more sensibly dear
than your own, God has given them back from the borders of the grave, and so
added new endearments arising from that tender circumstance to all your after
converse with them. Nor forget, in how gracious a manner he has supported some
others in their last moments, and enabled them to live behind a sweet odor of
piety, which has embalmed their memories revived you when ready to faint under
the sorrows of the first separation, and, on the whole, made even the
recollection of their death delightful.

4. But it is more than time that I lead on your thoughts to the many spiritual
mercies which God has bestowed upon you, Look back, as it were, to the rock
from whence you were hewn, and to the hole of the pit from whence you were
dug Isa. 51, 1. Reflect seriously on the state wherein divine grace found
you: under how much guilt, under how much pollution! in what danger, in what
ruin! Think what was, and, oh, think with yet deeper reflection, what would
have been the case! The eye of God, which penetrates into eternity, saw that
your mind, amused with the trifles of present time and sensual gratification,
was utterly ignorant and regardless of it; it saw you on the borders of
eternity, and pitied you; saw that you would in a little time have been such a
helpless wretched creature, as the sinner that is just now dead, and has, to
his infinite surprise and everlasting terror, met his unexpected doom, and
would, like him, stand thunderstruck in astonishment and despair. This God
saw, and he pitied you; and being merciful to you, he provided in the counsels
of his eternal love and grace, a Redeemer for you, and purchased you to himself
with the blood of his Son; a price, which, if you will pause upon it, and think
seriously what it was, must surely affect you to such a degree as to make you
fall down before God in wonder and shame, to think it should ever have been
given for you. To accomplish these blessed purposes, he sent his grace into your
heart; so that, though you were once darkness, you are now light in the Lord
Ephesians. 5, 8. He made that happy change which you now feel in your soul, and by
his Holy Spirit which is given to you, he shed abroad that principle of love
Romans 5, 5, which is enkindled by this review, and now flames with greater ardor
than before. Thus far he has supported you in your Christian course; and,
having obtained help from him, it is that you continue even to this day Acts
26, 22. He has not only blessed you, but made you a blessing Genesis 12, 2: and
though you have not been so useful as that holy generosity of heart, which he
has excited, would have engaged you to desire, yet some good you have done in
the station in which he has fixed you. Some of your brethren of mankind has
been relieved, perhaps, too, some thoughtless creature reclaimed to virtue and
happiness, by his blessing on our endeavors. Some in the way to heaven are
praising God for you; and some, perhaps, already there are longing for your
arrival, that they may thank you in nobler and more expressive forms for
benefits, the importance of which they now sufficiently understand, though
while here they could never conceive it.

5. Christian, look round on the numberless blessings of one kind and of
another with which you are already encompassed; and advance your prospect still
farther to what faith yet discovers within the veil. Think of those now unknown
transports with which thou shall drop every burden in the grave, and thine
immortal spirit shall mount, light and joyful, holy and happy, to God, its
original, its support, and its hope to God; the source of being, of holiness,
and of pleasure; to Jesus, through whom all these mercies are derived to thee,
and who will appoint thee a throne near his own, to be for ever the spectator
and partaker of his glory. Think of the rapture with which thou shall attend
his triumph in the resurrection day, and receive this poor mouldering
corruptible body, transformed into his glorious image; and then think, "these
hopes are not mine alone, but the hopes of thousands and millions. Multitudes,
whom I number among the dearest of my friends upon earth, are rejoicing with me
in these apprehensions and views: and God gives me sometimes to see the smiles
on their cheeks, the sweet humble hope that sparkles in their eyes, and shines
through the tears of tender gratitude; and to hear that little of their inward
complacency and joy which language can express. Yea, and multitudes more, who
were once equally dear to me with these, though I have laid them in the grave,
and wept over their dust, are living to God, living in the possession of
inconceivable delights, and drinking large draughts of the water of life, which
flows in perpetual streams at his right hand."

6. O Christian, thou art still intimately united and allied to them. Death
cannot break a friendship thus cemented; and it ought not to render thee
insensible of the happiness of those friends for whose memory thou retainest so
just an honor. They live to God, as his servants; they "serve him, and see his
face Rev. 22, 3^4;" and they make but a small part of that glorious assembly.
Millions equally worthy of thine esteem and affections with themselves inhabit
those blissful regions: and will thou not rejoice in their joy? and will thou
not adore that everlasting spring of holiness and happiness from whence each of
these streams is derived? Yea, I will add, while the blessed angels are so
kindly regarding us, while they are ministering to thee, O Christian, and
bearing thee in their arms, as an heir of salvation Heb. 1, 14, will thou not
rejoice in their felicity too; and will thou not adore that God, who gives them
all the superior glory of their more exalted nature, and gives them a heaven,
which fills them with blessedness, even while they seem to withdraw from it
that they may attend on thee?

7. This, and infinitely more than this, the blessed God is, and was, and shall
ever be. The felicities of the blessed spirits that surround his throne, and
thy felicities, O Christian, are immortal. These heavenly luminaries shall glow
with an undecaying flame; and thou shall shine and glitter among them, when the
sun and stars are gone out. Still shall the unchanging Father of lights pour
forth his beams upon them; and the luster they reflect from him, and their
happiness in him, shall be everlasting, shall be ever growing. Bow down, O thou
child of God, thou heir of glory, bow down, and let all that is within thee
unite in one act of grateful love, and let all that is around thee, all that is
before thee, in the prospects of an unbounded eternity, concur to elevate and
transport thy soul: that thou may, as far as possible, begin the work and
blessedness of heaven, in falling down before the God of it, in opening thine
heart to his gracious influences, and in breathing out before him that incense
of praise which these warm beams of his presence and love have so great a
tendency to produce, and to ennoble with a fragrancy resembling that of his
paradise above.

The grateful SOUL rejoicing in the Blessings of Providence and Grace, and
pouring out itself before God in vigorous and affectionate Exercises of Love
and praise.
O MY God, it is enough! I have mused, and the fire burns Psalm. 39, 3! But,
oh! in what language shall the flame break forth! What can I say but this, that
my heart admires thee, and adores thee, and loves thee! My little vessel is as
full as it can hold; and I would pour out all that fullness before thee, that it
may grow capable of receiving more and more. Thou art my hope, and my help; my
glory and the lifter up of my head Psalm. 3, 3." "My heart rejoiceth in thy
salvation Psalm. 42; and when I set myself under the influences of thy good
Spirit to converse with thee, a thousand delightful thoughts spring up at once;
a thousand sources of pleasure are unsealed, and flow in upon my soul with such
refreshment and joy, that they seem to crowd into every moment the happiness of
days, and weeks and months.

I bless thee, O God, for this soul of mine, which thou have created; which
thou have taught to say, and I hope to the happiest purpose, Where is God my
Maker Job 35, 10? I bless thee for the knowledge with which thou have adorned
it. I bless thee for that grace with which, I trust, I may not (without humble
wonder) say, Thou have sanctified it; though alas! the celestial plant is fixed
in too barren a soil, and does not flourish to the degree I could wish.

I bless thee also for that body which thou have given me, and which thou
preservest as yet in its strength and vigor; not only capable of relishing the
entertainments which thou providest for its various senses, but (which I esteem
far more valuable than any of them for its own sake,) capable of acting with
some vivacity in thy service. I bless thee for that ease and freedom with which
these limbs of mine move themselves, and obey the dictates of my spirit, I hope
as guided by thine. I bless thee that the keepers of the house do not yet
tremble, nor the strong men bow themselves; that they that look out of the
windows are not yet darkened, nor the daughters of music brought low. -- I
bless the, O God of my life, that the silver cord is not yet loosed, nor the
golden bowl broken Eccl. 12, 3.4.6: For it is thine hand that braces all my
nerves, and thine infinite skill that prepares those spirits which flow in so
freely, and, when exhausted, recruit so soon and so plentifully.

I praise thee for that royal bounty with which thou providest for the daily
support of mankind in general, and for mine in particular; for the various
tables which thou spreadest before me, and for the overflowing cup which thou
put into my hands Psalm. 23, 5. I bless thee, that these bounties of thy
Providence do not serve, as it were, to upbraid a disabled appetite, and are
not like messes of meat set before the dead. I bless the too, that "I eat not
my morsel alone Job 31, 17;" but share it with so many agreeable friends, who
add the relish of a social life to that of the animal at our seasons of common
repast. I thank thee for so many dear relatives at home, for so many kind
friends abroad, who are capable of serving me in various instances, and dispose
to make an obliging use of that capacity.

Nor would I forget to acknowledge thy favor, in rendering me capable of
serving others, and giving me in any instances to know how much more blessed it
is to give than receive Acts 20, 35. I thank thee for a heart which feels the
sorrows of the necessitous, and a mind which can make it my early care and
refreshment to contrive, according to my little ability, for their relief: for
this also comes forth from thee, O Lord Isa. 28, 9, the great Author of every
benevolent inclination, of every prudent scheme, of every successful attempt to
spread happiness around us, or in any instance to lessen distress.

And, surely, O Lord, if I thus acknowledge the pleasures of sympathy with the
afflicted, much more must I bless thee for those of sympathy with the happy,
with those that are completely blessed. I adore thee for the streams that water
paradise, and maintain it in ever-flourishing, ever-growing delight. I praise
thee for the rest, the joy, the transport, thou art giving to many that were
once dear to me on earth; whose sorrows it was my labor to sooth, and whose
joys, especially in thee it, was the delight of my heart to promote. I praise
thee for the blessedness of every saint, and of every angel, that surrounds thy
throne above; and I praise thee with accents of distinguished pleasure for that
reviving hope which thou have implanted in my bosom, that I shall ere long
know, by clear sight, and by everlasting experience, what that felicity of
theirs is, which I now only discover at a distance, through the comparatively
obscure glass of faith. Even now, I am waiting for thy salvation Genesis 49, 18,
with that ardent desire on the one hand which its sublime greatness cannot but
inspire into the believing soul, and that calm resignation on the other, which
the immutability of thy promise establishes.

And now, O my God, what shall I say unto thee! What, but that I love thee
above all the powers of language to express! That I love thee for what thou art
to thy creatures, who are in their various forms, every moment deriving being,
knowledge, and happiness from thee, in numbers and degrees far beyond what my
narrow imagination can conceive. But, oh, I adore and love thee yet far more
for what thou art in thyself, for those stores of perfection, which creation
has not diminished, and which never can be exhausted by all the effects of it
which thou impartest to thy creatures; that infinite perfection, which makes
thee thine own happiness, thine own end; amiable, infinitely amiable and
venerable, were all derived excellency and happiness forgot.

O thou first, thou greatest, thou fairest, of all objects! thou only great,
thou only fair, possess all my soul! and surely thou do possess it. While I
thus feel thy sacred Spirit breathing on my heart, and exciting these fervours
of love to thee, I cannot doubt it any more than I can doubt the reality of
this animal life, while I exert the actings of it, and feel its sensations.
Surely if ever I knew the appetite of hunger, my soul hungers after
righteousness Matthew. 5, 6. and longs for a greater conformity to thy blessed
nature, and holy will. If ever my palate felt thirst, my soul thirsts for
God, even for the living God Ps. 42, 2. and pants for the more abundant
communication of his favor. If ever this body, when wearied with labors or
journies, knew what it was to wish for the refreshment of my bed, and rejoiced
to rest there, my soul, with sweet acquiescence, rests upon thy bosom, O my
heavenly Father, and returns to its repose in the embraces of its God, who
"has dealt so bountifully with it Ps. 116, 7." And if ever I saw the face of a
beloved friend with complacency and joy, I rejoice in beholding thy face, O
Lord, and in calling thee my Father in Christ. Such thou art, and such thou will be, for time and for eternity. What have I more to do, but to commit
myself to thee for both? leaving it to thee to choose mine inheritance, and to
order my affairs for me Ps. 47, 4. while all my business is to serve thee, and
all my delight to praise thee. My soul follows hard after God, because his
right hand upholds me Ps. 63, 8. Let it still bear me up, and I shall press on
toward thee, till all my desires be accomplished in the eternal enjoyment of
thee. Amen.

CHAP. XXVIII. The established CHRISTIAN urged to exert Himself for Purposes of
Usefulness.
A sincere love to God will express itself, not only in devotion, but in
benevolence to men, 1, 2. This is the command of God, 3. The true Christian
feels his soul wrought to a holy conformity to it, 4. and therefore will desire
instructions on this head, 5. Accordingly directions are given for the
improvement of various talents: particularly, (1.) Genius and learning, 6. (2.)
Power, 7. (3.) Domestic authority, 8. (4.) Esteem. 9. (5.) Riches, 10. Several
good ways of employing them hinted at, 11. Prudence in expense urged, for the
support of charity, 12, 13. Divine direction in this respect to be sought, 14.
The Christian breathing after more extensive usefulness.

1. SUCH as I have described in the former chapter, I trust are, and will be,
the frequent exercises of your souls before God. Thus will your love and
gratitude breathe itself forth in the divine presence, and will, through Jesus
the great Mediator, come up before it as incense, and yield an acceptable
savor. But then you must remember, this will not be the only effect of that
love to God, which I have supposed so warm in your heart. If it be sincere, it
will not spend itself in words alone; but will discover itself in actions, and
will produce, as its genuine fruit, an unfeigned love to your fellow creatures,
and an unwearied desire and labor to do them good continually.

2. "Has the great Father of mercies," will you say, "looked upon me with so
gracious an eye; has he not only forgiven me ten thousand offenses, but
enriched me with such a variety of benefits; oh! what shall I render to him for
them all! Instruct me, O ye oracles of eternal truth! instruct me, ye elder
brethren in the family of my heavenly Father! instruct me above all, O thou
Spirit of wisdom and of love, what I may be able to do to express my love to
the great eternal fountain of love, and to approve my fidelity to him, who has
already done so much to engage it, and who will take so much pleasure in owning
and rewarding it!"

3. This, O Christian, is the command which we have heard from the beginning,
and it will ever continue in unimpaired force, that he who loves God, should
love his brother also John 4, 21; and should express that love, not in word and
profession alone, but in deed and in truth John 3, 28. You are to love your
neighbor as yourself; to love the whole creation of God; and, so far as your
influence can extend, must endeavor to make it happy.

4. "Yes," will you say, "and I do love it. I feel the golden chain of the
divine love incircling us all, and binding us close to each other, joining us
in one body; and diffusing, as it were, one soul through all. May happiness,
true and sublime, perpetual and evergrowing happiness, reign through the whole
world of God's rational and obedient creatures in heaven and on earth! And may
every revolted creature, that is capable of being recovered and restored, be
made obedient: Yea, may the necessary punishment of those who are
irrecoverable, be overruled by infinite wisdom and love, to the good of the
whole!"

5. These are right sentiments; and if they are indeed the sentiments of your
heart, O reader, and not an empty form of vain words, they will be attended
with a serious concern to act in subordination to this great scheme of divine
Providence, according to your abilities in their utmost extent. And to this
purpose they will put you on surveying the peculiar circumstances of your life
and being, that you may discover what opportunities of usefulness they now
afford, and how those opportunities and capacities may be improved. Enter,
therefore, into such a survey; not that you may pride yourself in the
distinctions of divine Providence or grace toward you, or having received, may
glory as if you had not received 1 Cor. 4, 7; but that you may deal faithfully
with the great Proprietor, whose steward you are, and by whom you are entrusted
with every talent, which, with respect to any claim from your fellow creatures,
you may call your own. And here, having gifts differing according to the grace
which is now given unto us Romans 12, 6. let us hold the balance with an
impartial hand, that so we may determine what it is that God requires of us;
which is nothing less than doing the most we can invent, contrive, and effect,
for the general good. But, oh, how seldom is this estimate faithfully made! and
how much does the world around us, and how much do our own souls suffer, for
want of that fidelity!

6. Has God given you genius and learning? It was not that you might amuse or
deck yourself with it, and kindle a blaze which should only serve to attract
and dazzle the eyes of men; it was intended to be the means of leading both
yourself and them to the Father of lights. And it will be your duty, according
to the peculiar turn of that genius and capacity, either to endeavor to
improve and adorn human life, or, by a more direct application of it to divine
subjects, to plead the cause of religion, to defend its truths, to enforce and
recommend its practice, to deter men from courses which would be dishonorable
to God and fatal to themselves, and to try the utmost efforts of all the
solemnity and tenderness with which you can clothe your addresses, to lead them
into the paths of virtue and of happiness.

7. Has God invested you with power, whether it be in a larger or smaller
society? Remember, that this power was given you that God might be honored,
and those placed under your government, whether domestic or public, might be
made happy. Be concerned therefore, whether you be entrusted with the rod, or
the sword, it may "not be borne in vain Romans 13, 4." Are you a magistrate? have
you any share in the great and tremendous charge of enacting laws? Reverence
the authority of the supreme Legislator, the great Guardian of society: promote
none, consent to none, which you do not in your own conscience esteem, in
present circumstances, an intimation of his will; and in the establishment of
which you do not firmly believe you shall be "his minister for good Romans 13,
4." Have you the charge of executing laws; put life into them by a vigorous and
strenuous execution, according to the nature of the particular office you bear.
Retain not an empty name of authority. Permit not yourself, as it were, to fall
asleep on the tribunal. Be active, be wakeful, be observant of what passes
around you. Protect the upright and the innocent. Break in pieces the power of
the oppressor. Unvail every dishonest art. Disgrace, as well as defeat, the
wretch, that makes his distinguished abilities the disguise or protection of
the wickedness which he ought rather to endeavor to expose, and to drive out
of the world with abhorrence.

8. Are you placed only at the head of a private family? Rule it for God.
Administer the concerns of that little kingdom with the same views, and for the
same principles, which I have been inculcating on the powerful and the great;
if by an unexpected accident any of them should suffer their eyes to glance
upon the passage above. Your children and servants are your natural subjects.
Let good order be established among them and keep them under a regular
discipline. Let them be instructed in the principles of religion, that they may
know how reasonable such a discipline is; and let them be accustomed to act
accordingly. You cannot indeed change their hearts, but you may very much
influence their conduct; and by that means may preserve them from many snares,
may do a great deal to make them good members of society, and may set them as
it were, in the way of God's steps Ps. 85, 13. if peradventure passing by he
may bless them with the riches of his grace. And fail not to do your utmost to
convince them of their need of those blessings; labor to engage them to an
high esteem of them, and to an earnest desire after them, as incomparably more
valuable than any thing else.

9. Again, has God been pleased to raise you to esteem among your
fellow creatures, which is not always in proportion to a man's rank or
possessions in human life? Are your counsels heard with attention? Is your
company sought? Does God give you good acceptance in the eyes of men, so that
they do not only put the fairest construction on your words, but overlook
faults of which you are conscious to yourself, and consider your actions and
performances in the most indulgent and favorable light? You ought to regard
this, not only as a favor of Providence, and as an encouragement to you
cheerfully to pursue your duty, in the several branches of it, for the time to
come; but also, as giving you much greater opportunities of usefulness than in
your present station you could otherwise have had. If your character has any
weight in the world, throw it into the right scale. Endeavor to keep virtue
and goodness in countenance. Affectionately give your hand to modest worth,
where it seems to be depressed or overlooked, though shining, when viewed in
its proper light, with a luster which you may think much superior to your own.
Be an advocate for truth; be a counselor of peace; be an example of candor;
and do all you can to reconcile the hearts of men, and especially of good men,
to each other, however they may differ in their opinions about matters which it
is possible for good men to dispute. And let the caution and humility of your
behavior in circumstances of such superior eminence, and amidst so many tokens
of general esteem, silently reprove the rashness and haughtiness of those who,
perhaps, are remarkable for little else; or who, if their abilities were indeed
considerable, must be despised, and whose talents must be in a great measure
lost to the public, till that rashness and haughtiness of spirit be subdued.
Nor suffer yourself to be interrupted in this generous and worthy course by the
little attacks of envy and calumny which you may meet with in it. Be still
attentive to the general good, and steadily resolute in your efforts to promote
it; and leave it to Providence to guard or to rescue your character from the
base assaults of malice and falsehold; which will often, without your labor,
confute themselves, and heap upon the authors greater shame, or (if they are
inaccessible to that) greater infamy, than your humanity will allow you to wish
them.

10. Once more: Has God blessed you with riches? has he placed you in such
circumstances that you have more than you absolutely need for the subsistence
of yourself and your family? Remember your approaching account. Remember what
an encumbrance these things often prove to men in the way of their salvation,
and how often, according to our Lord's express declaration, they render it as
difficult to enter into the kingdom of God, as it is for a camel to go through
the eye of a needle Matthew. 19, 24. Let it therefore be your immediate, your
earnest, and your daily prayer, that riches may not be a snare and a shame to
you, as they are to by far the greater part of their possessors. Appropriate, I
beseech you, some certain part and proportion of your estate and revenues to
charitable uses; with a provisional increase, as God shall prosper you, in any
extraordinary instance. By this means you will always have a fund of charity at
hand: and you will probably be more ready to communicate, when you look upon
what is so deposited as not in any sense your own, but as already actually
given away to those uses, though not yet affixed to particular objects. It is
not for me to say what that proportion ought to be, To those who have large
revenues and no children, perhaps a third and one half may be too little: to
those whose incomes are small, and their charge considerable, though they have
something more than is absolutely necessary, it is possible a tenth may be too
much. But pray that God would guide your mind; make a trial for one year, on
such terms as in your conscience you think will be most pleasing to him; and
let your observations on that teach you to fix your proportion for the next;
always remembering that he requires justice in the first place, and almsdeeds
only so far as may consist with that. Yet, at the same time, take heed of that
treacherous, delusive, and, in many instances, destructive imagination, that
justice to your family requires that you should leave your children very rich;
which has, perhaps, cost some parsimonious parents the lives of those darlings
for whom they laid up the portion of the poor; and what fatal consequences of
divine displeasure may attend it to those that yet survive, God only knows; and
I heartily pray that you or yours may never learn by experience.

11. And that your heart may be yet more opened, and that your charity may be
directed to the best purposes, let me briefly mention a variety of good uses,
which may call for the consideration of those whom God has in this respect
distinguished by an ability to do good, To assist the hints I am to offer, look
round in the neighborhood in which you live. Think how many honest and
industrious, perhaps too, I might add, religious people are making very hard
shifts to struggle through life. Think what a comfort that would be to them,
which you might without any inconvenience spare from that abundance which God
has given you. -- Hearken also to any extraordinary call of charity which may
happen, especially those of a public nature; and help them forward with your
example and your interest, which, perhaps, may be of much greater importance
than the sum which you contribute, considered in itself. Have a tongue to plead
for the necessitous, as well as a hand to relieve them; and endeavor to
discountenance those poor shameful excuses which covetousness often dictates to
those whose art may indeed set some varnish on what they suggest, but so slight
a one, that the coarse ground will appear through it. -- See how many poor
children are wandering naked and ignorant about the streets, and in the way to
all kinds of vice and misery; and consider what can be done toward clothing
some of them at least, and instructing them in the principles of religion.
Would every thriving family in a town, which is able to afford help on such
occasions, cast a pitying eye on one poor family in its neighborhood, and take
it under their patronage, to assist in feeding, and clothing, and teaching the
children, in supporting it in affliction, in defending it from wrongs, and in
advising those that have the management of it, as circumstances may require,
how great a difference would soon be produced in the appearance of things
amongst us? -- Observe who are sick, that if there be no public infirmary at
hand to which you can introduce them, (where your contribution will yield the
largest increase,) you may do something toward relieving them at home, and
supplying them with advice and medicines, as well as with proper diet and
attendance. Consider also the spiritual necessities of men; in providing for
which, I would particularly recommend to you the very important and noble
charity of assisting young persons of genius and piety with what is necessary
to support the expense of their education of the ministry, in a proper course
of grammatical or academical studies. And grudge not some proportion of what
God has given you to those who, resigning all temporal views to minister to
you the gospel of Christ, have surely an equitable claim to be supported by
you, in a capacity of rendering you those services, however laborious, to
which, for your sakes, and that of your common Lord, they have devoted their
lives. And while you are so abundantly satisfied with the goodness of God's
house, even of his holy temple Psalm. 65.4, have compassion on those who dwell
in a desert land; and rejoice to do something toward sending among the distant
nations of the heathen world that glorious gospel which has so long continued
unknown to multitudes, though the knowledge of it, with becoming regard, to
life everlasting. -- These are a few important charities, which I would point
out to those whom Providence has enriched with its peculiar bounties; and it
renders gold more precious than it could appear in any other light, that it is
capable of being employed for such purposes. But if you should not have gold to
spare for them, contribute your silver; or, as a farthing or a mite, is not
overlooked by God when it is given from a truly generous and charitable heart
Mark 12, 42.43, let that be cheerfully dropped into the treasury where richer
offerings cannot be afforded.

12. And that, amidst so many pressing demands for charity, you may be better
furnished to answer them, seriously reflect on your manner of living. I say not
that God requires you should become one of the many poor relieved out of your
income. The support of society, as at present established, will not only
permit, but require that some persons should allow themselves in the elegance
and delights of life; by furnishing which, multitudes of poor families are much
more creditably and comfortably subsisted, with greater advantage to
themselves, and safety to the public, than they could be if the price of their
labors, or of the commodities in which they deal, were to be given them as an
alms; nor can I imagine it greatful to God that his gifts should be refused, as
if they were meant for snares and curses, rather than benefits. This were to
frustrate the benevolent purposes of the gracious Father of mankind, and, if
carried to its rigor, would be a sort of conspiracy against the whole system of
nature. Let the bounties of providence be used; but let us carefully see to it
that it be in a moderate and prudent manner, lest, by our own folly that which
should have been for our welfare, become a trap Psalm. 69, 22. Let conscience
say, my dear reader, with regard to yourself, what proportion of the good
things you possess, your heavenly Father intends for yourself, and what for
your brethren; and live not as if you had no brethren, as if pleasing yourself
in all the magnificence and luxury you can devise, were the end for which you
were sent into the world. I fear this is the excess of the present age, and not
an excess of rigor and mortification. Examine therefore your expenses, and
compare them with your income. That may be shamefully extravagant in you, which
may not only be pardonable, but commendable in another of superior estate. Nor
can you be sure that you do not exceed, merely because you do not plunge
yourself in debt, nor render yourself incapable of laying up any thing for your
family. If you be disabled from doing any thing for the poor, or any thing
proportionable to your rank in life, by that genteel and elegant way of living
which affect, God must disapprove of such a conduct; and you ought, as you will
answer it to him, to retrench it. And though the divine indulgence will
undoubtedly be exercised to those in whom there is a sincere principle of faith
in Christ, and undisembled love to God and man, though it act not to that
height of beneficence and usefulness which might have been attained; yet be
assured of this, that he who rendereth to every one according to his works,
will have a strict regard to the degrees of goodness in the distribution of
final rewards: so that every neglected opportunity draws after it an
irreparable loss, which will go into eternity along with you. And let me add,
too, that every instance of negligence indulged renders the mind still more and
more indolent and weak, and, consequently, more indisposed to recover the
ground which has been lost or even to maintain that which has hitherto been
kept.

13. Complain not, that this is imposing hard things upon you. I am only
directing your pleasures into a nobler channel; and indeed that frugality,
which is the source of such a generosity, far from being at all injurious to
your reputation, will rather amongst wise and good men, greatly promote it. But
you have far nobler motives before you than those which arise from their
regards. I speak to you as to a child of God, and a member of Christ; as joined
therefore by the most intimate union to all the poorest of those that believe
in him. I speak to you as to an heir of eternal glory, who ought therefore to
have sentiments great and sublime in some proportion to that expected
inheritance.

14. Cast about therefore in your thoughts what good is to be done, and what
you can do, either in your own person, or by your interest with others; and go
about it with resolution, as in the name and presence of the Lord. And as the
Lord gives wisdom, and out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding
Pro. 2, 6, go to the footstool of his throne, and there seek that guidance and
that grace which may suit your present circumstances, and may be effectual to
produce the fruits of holiness and usefulness, to his more abundant glory, and
to the honor of your Christian profession.

The established CHRISTIAN breathing after more extensive Usefulness.
O BOUNTIFUL Father and sovereign Author of all good, whether natural or
spiritual! I bless thee for the various talents with which thou have enriched
so undeserving a creature, as I must acknowledge myself to be. My soul is in
the deepest confusion before thee, when I consider to how little purpose I have
hitherto improved them. Alas! what have I done, in proportion to what thou
might have reasonably expected, with the gifts of nature which thou have
bestowed upon me, with my capacities of life, with my time, with my talents,
with my possessions, with my influence over others! Alas! through my own
negligence and folly, I look back on a barren wilderness, where I might have
seen a fruitful field, and a springing harvest! Justly do I indeed deserve to
be stripped of all, to be brought to an immediate account for all, to be
condemned as in many respects unfaithful to thee, and to the world, and to my
own soul; and, in consequence of that condemnation, to be cast into the prison
of eternal darkness! But thou, Lord, have freely forgiven the dreadful debt of
ten thousand talents. Adored be thy name for it! Accept, O Lord, accept that
renewed surrender, which I would now make of myself, and of all I have unto thy
service! I acknowledge that it is of thine own that I give thee 1 Chronicles. 29,
14; make me, I beseech thee, a faithful steward for my great Lord! and may I
think of no separate interest of my own in opposition to thine!

I adore thee, O thou God of all grace, if while I am thus speaking to thee, I
feel the love of thy creatures arising in my soul; if I feel my heart opening
to embrace my brethren of mankind! Oh make me thy faithful almoner, in
distributing to them all that thou have lodged in mine hand for their relief!
And in determining what is my own share, may I hold the balance with an equal
hand, and judge impartially between myself and them! The proportion thou
allowest may I thankfully take for myself, and those who are immediately mine!
The rest may I distribute with wisdom and fidelity, and cheerfulness; Guide
mine hand, O ever-merciful Father, while thou do me the honor to make me
thine instrument in dealing out a few of thy bounties, that I may bestow them
where they are most needed, and where they will answer the best end! And if it
be thy gracious will, do thou multiply the seed "sown 2 Cor. 9, 10; prosper me
in my worldly affairs, that I may have more to impart to them that need it; and
thus lead me on to the region of everlasting plenty, and everlasting
benevolence! There may I meet with many to whom I have been an affectionate
benefactor on earth; and if it be thy blessed will, with many, whom I have also
been the means of conducting into the path to that blissful abode! There may
they entertain me in their habitations of glory! And, in time and eternity, do
thou, Lord, accept the praise of all, through Jesus Christ; at whose feet I
would bow; and at whose feet, after the most useful course, I would at last
die, with as much humility as if I were then exerting the first act of faith
upon him, and had never had any opportunity, by one tribute of obedience and
gratitude in the services of life, to approve its sincerity!

CHAP. XXIX. The CHRISTIAN rejoicing in the Views of Death and Judgment.
Death and Judgment are near; but the Christian has reason to welcome both, 1.
Yet nature recoils from the solemnity of them, 2. An attempt to reconcile the
mind, [I.] To the prospect of death, 3. from the consideration, (1.) Of the
many evils that surround us in that mortal life, 4. (2.) Of the remainder of
sin which we feel within us, 5. And, (3.) Of the happiness which is immediately
to succeed death, 6, 7. All which might make the Christian willing to die, in
the most agreeable circumstances of human life, 8. [II.] The Christian has
reason to rejoice in the prospect of judgment, 9. Since, however awful it be,
Christ will then come to vindicate his honor, to display his glory, and to
triumph over his enemies, 10. As also to complete the happiness of every
believer, 11. and of the whole church, 12. 13. The meditation of a Christian,
whose heart is warm with these prospects.

1. WHEN the visions of the Lord were closing upon John, the beloved disciple
in the island of Patmos, it is observable, that he who gave him that
revelation, even Jesus, the faithful and true witness concludes with those
lively and important words: He who testifies these things, says, Surely I
come quickly: and John answers, with the greatest readiness and pleasure, Amen,
even so come, Lord Jesus Rev. 22, 20. Come as thou have said, surely, and
quickly! -- And remember, O Christian, whoever you are, now reading these
words, your divine Lord speaks in the same language to you: "Behold I come
quickly." Yes, very quickly will he come by death, to turn the key, to open the
door of the grave for thine admittance thither, and to lead thee through it
into the now unknown regions of the invisible world. Nor is it long before the
judge, who stands, at the door James 5, 9. will appear also to the universal
judgment: and though perhaps not only scores but hundreds of years may lie
between that period and the present moment, yet it is but a very small point of
time to him, who views at once all the unmeasurable ages of a past and future
eternity. A thousand years are with him but as one day, and one day as a
thousand years 2 Pet. 3, 8. In both these senses then does he come quickly; and
I trust you can answer, with a glad Amen, that the warning is not terrible or
unpleasant to your ears, but rather that his coming, his certain, his speedy
coming, is the object of your delightful hope, and of your long expectation.

2. I am sure it is reasonable it should be so; and yet perhaps Nature, fond of
life, and unwilling to part with a long known abode, to enter on a state to
which it is entirely a stranger, may recoil from the thoughts of dying; or,
struck with the awful pomp of an expiring and dissolving world, may look on the
judgment-day with some mixture of terror. And therefore my dear brother in the
Lord, (for as such I can now estem you,) I would reason with you a little on
this head, and would entreat you to look more attentively on this solemn
object, which will, I trust, grow less disagreeable to you, as it is more
familiarly viewed. Nay, I hope, that instead of starting back from it, you will
rather spring forward toward it with joy and delight.

3. Think, O Christian, when Christ comes to call you away by death, he comes
-- to set you at liberty from your present sorrows, -- to deliver you from your
struggles with remaining corruption, -- and to receive you to dwell with
himself in complete holiness and joy. You shall be absent from the body, and be
present with the Lord 2 Cor. 5, 8.

4. He will indeed call you away from this world! But, oh, what is this world
that you should be fond of it, and cling to it with so much eagerness? How low
are all those enjoyments that are peculiar to it; and how many its vexations,
its snares, and its sorrows? Review your pilgrimage thus far; and though you
must acknowledge, that goodness and mercy have followed you all the days of
your life Psalm. 23, 6. yet has not that very mercy itself planted some thorns
in your paths, and given you some wise and necessary, yet painful, intimations,
that "this is not your rest Mic. 2, 10?" Review the monuments of your withered
joys, of your blasted hopes; if there be yet any monuments of them remaining,
more than a mournful remembrance they have left behind in your afflicted heart.
Look upon the graves that have swallowed up many of your dearest and most
amiable friends, perhaps in the very bloom of life, and in the greatest
intimacy of your converse with them; and reflect, that if you hold it out a few
years more, death will renew its conquests at your expense, and devour the most
precious of those that yet survive. View the living as well as the dead; behold
the state of human nature, under the many grievous marks of its apostasy from
God; and say, whether a wise and good man would wish to continue always here.

Methinks, were I myself secure from being reached by any of the arrows that
fly around me, I could not but mourn to see the wounds that are given by them,
and to hear the groans of those that are continually falling under them. The
diseases and calamities of mankind are so many, and, which is most grievous of
all, the distempers of their minds are so various and so threatening, that the
world appears almost like an hospital: and a man, whose heart is tender, is
ready to feel his spirits broken, as he walks through it, and surveys the sad
scene; especially when he sees how little he can do for the recovery of those
whom he pities. Are you a Christian, and does it not pierce your heart to see
how human nature is sunk in vice and in shame? to see with what amazing
insolence some are making themselves openly vile, and how the name of Christ is
dishonored by many too that call themselves his people? to see the unlawful
deeds and filthy practices of them that live ungodly, and to behold, at the
same time, the infirmities at least, and irregularities, of those concerning
whom we have better hopes? and do you not wish to escape from such a world,
where a righteous and compassionate soul must be vexed from day to day by so
many spectacles of sin and misery 2 Pet. 2, 8?"

5. Yea, to come nearer home; do you not feel something within you which you
long to quit, and which would imbitter even Paradise itself? something, which,
were it to continue, would grieve and distress you even in the society of the
blessed? Do you not feel a remainder of indwelling sin; the sad consequence of
the original revolt of our nature from God? Are you not struggling every day
with some residue of corruption, or at least mourning on account of the
weakness of your graces? Do you not often find your spirits dull and languid
when you would desire to raise them to the greatest fervor in the service of
God? Do you not find your hearts too often insensible of the richest instances
of his love, and your hands feeble in his service, even when "to will is
present with you Romans 7, 18?" Does not your life, in its best days and hours,
appear a low, unprofitable thing, when compared with what you are sensible it
ought to be, and with what you wish that it were? Are you not frequently, as it
were, stretching the pinions of the mind, and saying, Oh that I had wings like
a dove, that I might fly away and be at rest Ps. 55, 6?

6. Should you not then rejoice in the thought that Jesus comes to deliver you
from these complaints? That he comes to answer your wishes, and to fulfill the
largest desires of your hearts; those desires that he himself has inspired?
That he comes to open upon you a world of purity and joy, of active, exalted,
and unwearied services?

7. O Christian, how often have you cast a longing eye toward those happy
shores, and wished to pass the sea, the boisterous, unpleasant, dangerous sea,
that separates you from them? When your Lord has condescended to make you a
short visit in his ordinances on earth, how have you blessed the time and the
place, and pronounced it, amidst any other disadvantage of situation, to be the
very gate of heaven Genesis 28, 17? And is it so delightful to behold this gate,
and will it not be much more so to enter into it? Is it so delightful to
receive the visits of Jesus for an hour, and will it not be infinitely more so
to dwell with him for ever? "Lord," may you well say, when I dwell with thee, I
shall dwell in holiness, for thou thyself art holiness; I shall dwell in love,
for thou thyself art love; I shall dwell in joy, for thou art the fountain of
joy, as thou art in the Father, and the Father in thee John 17, 21. Bid welcome
to his approach therefore, to take you at your word, and to fulfill to you that
saying of his, on which your soul has so often rested with heavenly peace and
pleasure; Father I will, that they whom thou have given me, be with me where I
am, that they may behold my glory, which thou have given me John 17, 24.

8. Surely you may say in this view, The sooner Christ comes the better. What
though the residue of your days be cut off in the midst? what though you leave
many expected pleasures in life untasted, and many schemes unaccomplished? Is
it not enough that what is taken from a mortal life shall be added to a
glorious eternity; and that you shall spend those days and years in the
presence and service of Christ in heaven which you might otherwise have spent
with him and for him in the imperfect enjoyments and labors of earth?

9. But your prospects reach, not only beyond death, but beyond the separate
state. For with regard to his final appearance to judgment, our Lord says,
Surely I come quickly, in the sense illustrated before: and so it will appear
to us, if we compare this interval of time with the blissful eternity which is
to succeed it; and probably if we compare it with those ages which have already
passed, since the sun began to measure out to earth its days and its years. And
will you not here also sing your part in the joyful anthem, Amen, even so come,
Lord Jesus!

10. It is true, Christian, it is an awful day: a day in which Nature shall be
thrown into a confusion as yet unknown. No earthquake, no eruption of burning
mountains, no desolations of cities by devouring flames, or of countries by
overflowing rivers or seas, can give any just emblem of that dreadful day: when
the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, as well as the earth and all that
is therein, shall be burnt up 2 Pet. 3, 10. 12; when all nature shall flee away
in amazement before the face of the universal Judge Rev. 20, 11. and there
shall be a great cry, far beyond what was known in the land of Egypt, when
there was not a house in which there was not one dead Exodus 12, 30. Your flesh
may be ready to tremble at the view; yet your spirit must surely rejoice in God
your Savior Luke 1, 47." You may justly say, Let this illustrious day come,
even with all its horrors! Yea, like the Christians described by the apostle 2
Pet. 3, 12. you may be looking for, and hasting to that day of terrible
brightness and universal doom. For your Lord will then come to vindicate the
justice of those proceedings which have been in many instances so much
obscured, and because they have been obscured have been also blasphemed. He
will come to display his magnificence, descending from heaven with a shout,
with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God 1 Thessalonians. 4, 16.
taking his seat upon a throne infinitely exceeding that of earthly, or even of
celestial princes, clothed with his Father's glory and his own Luke 9, 26.
surrounded with a numberless host of shining attendants, when coming to be
glorified in his saints, and admired in all them that believe 2 Thessalonians. 1, 10.
His enemies shall also be produced to grace his triumph: the serpent shall be
seen there rolling in the dust, and trodden under foot by him and by all his
servants: those who once condemned him shall tremble at his presence; and those
who bowed the knee before him in profane mockery shall, in wild despair, call
to the mountains to fall upon them, and to the rocks to hide them, from the
face of that Lamb of God Rev. 6, 16. whom they they once led away to the most
inhuman slaughter.

11. O Christian does not your loyal heart bound at the thought? and are you
not ready, even while you read these lines, to begin the victorious shout in
which you are then to join? He justly expects that your thoughts should be
greatly elevated and impressed with the views of his triumph: but at the same
time he permits you to remember your own personal share in the joy and glory of
that blessed day: and even now he has the view before him of what his power and
love shall then accomplish for your salvation. And what shall it not
accomplish? He shall come to break the bars of the grave, and to re-animate
your sleeping clay. Your bodies must indeed be laid in the dust, and be lodged
there as a testimony of God's displeasure against sin? against the first sin
that was ever committed from the sad consequences of which the dearest of his
children cannot be exempted. But you shall then have an ear to hear the voice
of the Son of God, and an eye to behold the luster of his appearance: and shall
shine forth like the sun Mat. 13, 43. arising in the clear heaven, which is as
a bridegroom coming out of his chamber Ps. 19, 5. Your soul shall be new
dressed to grace this high solemnity; and be clothed, not with the rags of
mortality, but with the robes of glory; for he shall change this vile body, to
fashion it like his own glorious body Phil. 3, 21. And when you are thus
royally arrayed, he shall confer public honors on you, and on all his people,
before the assembled world. You may now perhaps be loaded with infamy, called
by reproachful names, and charged with crimes, or with views which your very
soul abhors; but he will then bring forth your righteousness as the light Ps.
28, 6. and your salvation as a lamp that burns Isa. 62, 1. Though you have
been dishonored by men, you shall be acknowledged by God; and though treated
as the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things 1 Cor. 4, 13. he
will show that he regards you as his treasure, in the day that he makes up his
jewels Mal. 3, 17. When he shall put away all the wicked of the earth like
dross Ps. 119, 119. you shall be pronounced righteous in that full assembly;
and though indeed you have broken the divine law, and might in strict justice
have been condemned, yet being clothed with the righteousness of the great
Redeemer, even "that righteousness which is of God by faith Phil. 3, 9."
Justice itself shall acquit you, and join with Mercy in "bestowing upon you a
crown of life 2 Timothy 4, 8." -- Christ will confess you before men and angels
Luke 12. 8. -- will pronounce you good and faithful servants, and call you to
enter into the joy of your Lord Matt. 25, 21.; he will speak of you with
endearment as his brethren, and will acknowledge the kindnesses which have been
shown to you as if he had received them in his own person Matt. 25, 40." Yea,
then shall you, O Christian, who may perhaps have sat in some of the lowest
places in our assemblies, though it may be none of the rich and great of the
earth would condescend to look upon, or to speak to you, be called to be
assessors with Christ on his judgment seat, and to join with him in the
sentence he shall pass on wicked men, and rebellious angels.

12. Nor is it merely one day of glory and of triumph; but when the Judge
arises and ascends to his Father's court, all the blessed shall ascend with
him, and you among the rest: you shall ascend together with your Savior, to
his Father and your Father, to his God and your God John 20, 17. You shall go
to make your appearance in the new Jerusalem, in those new shining forms that
you have received, which will no doubt be attended with a correspondent
improvement of mind; and take up your perpetual abode in that fullness of joy,
with which you shall be filled and satisfied "in the presence of God Ps. 16,
11." upon the consummation of that happiness which the saints in the
intermediate state have been wishing and waiting for. You shall go from the
ruins of a dissolving world to the new heavens and new earth, wherein
righteousness for ever dwells 2 Pet. 3, 13. There all the number of God's elect
shall be accomplished, and the happiness of each shall be completed. The whole
society shall be presented before God as the bride, the Lambs wife Rev. 21, 9.
whom the eye of its celestial bridegroom shall survey with unutterable delight,
and confess to be without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing Ephesians. 5, 2; its
character and state being just what he originally designed it to be, when he
first engaged to give himself for it, to "redeem to God by his "blood Rev. 5,
9." So shall you ever be with each other, and with the Lord 1 Thessalonians. 4, 17;"
and immortal ages shall roll away, and find you still unchanged; your happiness
always the same, and your relish for it the same; or rather ever growing, as
your souls are approaching nearer and nearer to him who is the source of
happiness, and the center of infinite perfection.

13. And now, look round about upon earth, and single out, if you can, the
enjoyments or the hopes, for the sake of which you would say, Lord, delay thy
coming, or for the sake of which you any more should hesitate to express your
longing for it, and to cry, Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly!

The MEDITATION and PRAYER of a Christian whose Heart is warmed with these
proposals.
O BLESSED Lord! my soul is enkindled in these views, and rises to thee in the
flame Judges 13, 20. Thou have testified thou come quickly; and I repeat my
joyful assent. Amen, even so come Lord Jesus Rev. 22, 20. Come, for I long to
have done with this low life; to have done with its burdens, its sorrows, and
its snares! Come, for I long to ascend into thy presence, and to see the court
thou art holding above!

Blessed Jesus, death is transformed when I view it in this light. The King of
terrors is sent no more as such, so near the king of glory and of grace. I hear
with pleasure the sound of thy feet approaching still nearer and nearer; draw
aside the veil when ever thou please! Open the bars of my prison, that my
eager soul may spring forth to thee, and cast itself at thy feet; at the f^^t
of that Jesus, whom having not seen, I love; and in whom, though now I see thee
not, yet believing, I rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory 1 Pet. 1,
8! Thou, Lord, shall show me the path of life: thine hand shall guide me to thy
blissfull abode, where there is fullness of joy, and rivers of everlasting
pleasure Psalm. 16, 11. Thou shall assign me an habitation with thy faithful
servants, whose separate spirits are now living with thee, while their bodies
sleep in the dust. Many of them have been my companions in thy laborious work,
and "in the patience and tribulation of thy kingdom Rev. 1, 9;" my dear
companions, and my brethren; oh, show me, blessed Savior, how glorious and how
happy thou have made them! Show me to what new forms of better life thou have
conducted them, whom we call the dead! in what nobler and more extensive
services thou have employed them! that I may praise thee better than I now can,
for thy goodness to them! And, oh, give me to share with them in their
blessings and their services, and to raise a song of greatful love, like that
which they are breathing forth before thee!

Yet, O my blessed Redeemer, even there will my soul be aspiring to a yet
nobler and more glorious hope; and from this as yet unknown splendour and
felicity shall I be drawing new arguments to look and long for the day of thy
final appearance. There shall I long more ardently than I now do to see thy
conduct vindicated, and thy triumph displayed; to see the dust of thy servants
re-animated, and death, the last of their enemies and of thine, swallowed up in
victory 1 Cor. 15, 26.54, I shall long for that superior honor that thou
intendest me, and that complete bliss to which the whole body of thy people
shall be conducted. Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly, will mingle itself with the
songs of Paradise, and sound from the tongues of all the millions of thy
saints, whom thy grace has transplanted thither.

In the meantime, O my divine Master, accept the homage which a greatful heart
now pays thee, in a sense of the glorious hopes with which thou have inspired
it! It is thou that have put this joy into it, and have raised my soul to this
glorious ambition; whereas I might otherwise have now been grovelling in the
lowest trifles of time and sense, and been looking with horror on that hour
which is now the object of my most ardent wishes.

Oh be with me always, even to the end of this mortal life! and give me, while
waiting for thy salvation, to be doing thy commandments! May my loins be girded
about, and my lamp burning Luke 12, 35, and mine ears be still watchful for the
blessed signal of thine arrival; that my glowing soul may with pleasure spring
to meet thee, and be strengthened by death to bear those visions of glory,
under the ecstasies of which feeble mortality would now expire!

CHAP. XXX. The CHRISTIAN honoring God by his dying Behavior.
Reflections on the sincerity with which the preceding advices have been given,
1. The author is desirous that (if Providence permit) he may assist the
Christian to die honorably and comfortably, 2, 3. With this view it is
advised, (1.) To rid the mind of all earthly cares, 4. (2.) To review the
humiliation of the soul before God, and its application to the blood of Christ,
5. -- (3.) To exercise patience under bodily pains and sorrows, 6. (4.) At
leaving the world, to bear an honorable testimony to religion, 7. (5.) To give
a solemn charge to surviving friends, 8. Especially recommending faith in
Christ, 9. (6.) To keep the promises of God in view, 10, 11. And, (7.) To
commit the departing spirit to God, in the genuine exercises of gratitude and
repentance, faith and charity, 12. which are exemplified in the concluding
meditation and prayer.

1. THUS, my dear reader, I have endeavored to lead you through a variety of
circumstances; and those not fancied and imaginary, but such as do indeed occur
in the human and Christian life. And I can truly and cheerfully say, that I
have marked out to you the path which I myself have trod, and in which it is my
desire still to go on. I have ventured my own everlasting interests on that
foundation on which I have directed you to adventure yours. What I have
recommended as the grand business of your life, I desire to make the business
of my own; and the most considerable enjoyments which I expect or desire in the
remaining days of my pilgrimage on earth, are such as I have directed you to
seek, and endeavored to assist you in attaining. Such love to God, such
constant activity in his service, such pleasurable views of what lies beyond
the grave, appear to me (God is my witness,) a felicity incomparable beyond any
thing else which can offer itself to our affection and pursuit: and I would not
for ten thousand worlds resign my share in them, or consent even to the
suspension of the delights which they afford, during the remainder of my abode
here.

2. I would humbly hope, through the divine blessing, that the hours you have
spent in the review of these plain things may have turned to some profitable
account, and that in consequence of what you have read, you have either been
brought into the way of life and peace, or been induced to quicken your pace in
it. Most heartily should I rejoice in being further useful to you, and that
even to the last. Now there is one scene remaining; a scene through which you
must infallibly pass, which has something in it so awful, that I cannot but
attempt doing a little to assist you in it; I mean the dark valley of the
shadow of death. I would earnestly wish, that, for the credit of your
profession, the comfort of your own soul, and the joy and edification of your
surviving friends, you might die not only safely, but honorably too: and
therefore I would offer you a few parting advices. I am sensible indeed that
Providence may determine the circumstances of your death in such a manner as
that you may have no opportunity of acting upon the hints I now give you. Some
unexpected accident from without, or from within, may, as it were, whirl you to
heaven before you are aware; and you may find yourself so suddenly there, that
it may seem a translation rather than a death. Or it is possible the force of a
distemper may affect your understanding in such a manner that you may be quite
insensible of the circumstances in which you are; and so your dissolution
(though others may see it visibly and certainly approaching, may be as great a
surprise to you as if you died in full health.

3. But as it is, on the whole, probable you may have a more sensible passage
out of time into eternity; and as much may, in various respects, depend on your
dying behavior, give me leave to propose some plain directions with relation
to it, to be practiced, if God give you opportunity, and remind you of them. It
may not be improper to look over the twenty-ninth chapter again, when you find
the symptoms of any threatening disorder: and I the rather hope, that what I
say may be useful to you, as methinks, I find myself disposed to address you
with something of that peculiar tenderness which we feel for a dying friend; to
whom, as we expect that we shall speak to him no more, we send out, as it were,
all our hearts in every word.

4. I would advise then, in the first place, "that, as soon as possible, you
would endeavor to get rid of all further care with regard to your temporal
concerns, by settling them in time, in as reasonable and Christian a manner as
you can." I could wish, there may be nothing of that kind to hurry your mind
when you are least able to bear it, or to distress or divide those who come
after you. Do that which, in the presence of God, you judge most equitable, and
which you verily believe will be most pleasing to him. Do it in as prudent and
effectual a manner as you can: and then consider the world as a place you have
quite done with, and its affairs as nothing farther to you, more than to one
actually dead; unless as you may do any good to its inhabitants while yet you
continue among them; and may, by any circumstance in your last actions or words
in life leave a blessing behind you to those who have been your friends and
fellow-travellers, while you have been dispatching that journey through it,
which you are now finishing.

5. That you may be the more at leisure, and the better prepared for this,
"enter into some serious review of your own state, and endeavor to put your
soul into as fit a posture as possible, for your solemn appearance before God."
For a solemn thing indeed it is to go into his immediate presence! to stand
before him, not as a supplicant at the throne of his grace, but at his bar as a
separate spirit, whose time of probation is over, and whose eternal state is to
be immediately determined. Renew your humiliation before God for the
imperfections of your life, though it has in the main been devoted to his
service. Renew your application to the mercies of God, as promised in the
covenant of grace, and to the blood of Christ, as the blessed channel in which
they flow. Resign yourself entirely to the divine disposal and conduct, as
willing to serve God, either in this world or the other, as he shall see fit.
And sensible of your sinfulness on the one hand, and of the divine wisdom and
goodness on the other, summon up all the fortitude of your soul to bear, as
well as you can, whatever his afflicting hand may further lay upon you, and to
receive the last stroke of it, as one who would obtain the most entire
subjection to the great and good Father of spirits.

6. Whatever you suffer, endeavor to show yourself an example of patience."
Let that amiable grace have its perfect work James 1, 4; and since it has so
little more to do, let it close the scene nobly. Let there not be a murmuring
word; and that there may not, watch against every repining thought; and when
you feel any thing of that kind arising, look by faith upon a dying Savior,
and ask your own heart, "was not his cross much more painful than the bed on
which I lie? Was not his situation among blood-thirsty enemies infinitely more
terrible than mine amidst the tenderness and care of so many affectionate
friends? Did not the heavy load of my sins press him in a much more
overwhelming manner than I am pressed by the load of these afflictions? and yet
he bore all "as a Lamb" that is brought "to the slaughter Isa. 53, 7." Let the
remembrance of his sufferings be a means to sweeten yours: yea, let it cause
you to rejoice, when you are called to bear the cross for a little while,
before you wear the crown. Count it all joy that you have an opportunity yet
once more of honoring God by your patience, which is now acting its last part,
and will in a few days, perhaps in a few hours, be superseded by complete
everlasting blessedness. And I am willing to hope, that in these views you will
not only suppress all passionate complaints, but that your mouth will be filled
with the praises of God? And that you will be speaking to those that are about
you, not only of his justice, but of his goodness too. So that you will be
enabled to communicate your inward joys in such a manner, as may be a lively
and edifying comment upon those words of the apostle, Tribulation works
patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope; even a hope which
makes not ashamed, while the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the
Holy Ghost, which is given unto us Romans 5, 3.4.5.

7. And now, my dear friend, now is the time, when it is especially expected
from you that you bear an honorable testimony to religion. Tell those that are
about you, as well as you can, (for you will never be able fully to express
it,) what comfort and support you have found in it. Tell them, how it has
brightened the darkest circumstances of your life; tell them, how it now
reconciles you to the near views of death. Your words will carry with them a
peculiar weight at such a season: there will be a kind of eloquence, even in
the infirmities with which you are struggling, while you give them utterance;
and you will be heard with attention, with tenderness, with credit. And
therefore, when the time of your departure is at hand, with unaffected freedom
breathe out your joy, if you then feel (as I hope you will) an holy joy and
delight in G^^ breathe out, however, your inward peace (...) of mind, if you be
then peaceful and serene: oth^^ wi^^ mark it, and be encouraged to tread the
steps which (...) to so happy an end. Tell them what you feel (...) vanity of
the world; and they may learn to (...) less: tell them, what you feel of the
substantial (...) of the gospel; and they may learn to value (...) for they
cannot but know that they must lie (...) on a dying bed too, and must then need
all (...) which the gospel itself can give them.

8. And, to enforce the conviction the more, "give a solemn charge to those
that are about you, that they spend their lives in the service of God, and
govern themselves by the principles of real religion." You may remember, that
Joshua and David, and other good men did so, when they perceived that the days
drew near in which they should die. And you know not how the admonitions of a
dying friend, or (as it may be with respect to some,) of a dying parent, may
impress those who may have disregarded what you and others may have said to
them before. At least, make the trial; and die laboring to glorify God, to
save souls, and generously to sow the seeds of goodness and happiness in a
world where you have no more harvests to reap. Perhaps they may spring up in a
plentiful crop when the clods of the valley are covering your body: but if not,
God will approve it; and the angels that wait around your bed to receive your
departing soul will look upon each other with marks of approbation in their
countenance, and own that this is to expire like a Christian, and to make a
glorious improvement of mortality.

9. And, in this last address to your fellow-mortals, whoever they are that
providence brings near you "be sure that you tell how entirely and how
cheerfully your hopes and dependence in this season of the last extremity are
fixed, not upon your own merits and obedience, but on what the great Redeemer
has done and suffered for sinners." Let them see that you die, as it were, at
the foot of the cross: nothing will be so comfortable to yourself, nothing so
edifying to them. Let the name of Jesus, therefore, be in your mouth, while you
are able to speak; and when you can speak no longer, let it be in your heart,
and endeavor that the last act of your soul, while it continues in the body,
may be an act of humble faith in Christ. Come unto God by him: enter into that
which is within the veil, as with the blood of sprinkling, fresh upon you. It
is an awful thing for such a sinner (as you, my Christian friend, with all the
virtues the world may have admired, know yourself to be) to stand before that
infinitely pure and holy Being, who has seen all your ways, and all your heart,
and has a perfect knowledge of every mixture of imperfection, which has
attended the best of your duties; but venture in that way, and you will find it
both safe and pleasant.

10. Once more: "To give you comfort in a dying hour, and to support your
feeble steps while you are traveling through this dark and painful way, take
the word of God as a staff in your hand." Let books and mortal friends, now do
their last office for you. Call, if you can, some experienced Christian, who
has felt the power of the word of God upon his own heart; and let him bring the
scripture, and turn you to some of those precious promises, which have been the
food and rejoicing of his own soul. It is with this view, that I may carry the
good office I am now engaged in, as far as possible. I shall here give you a
collection of a few such admirable scriptures, each of them infinitely more
valuable than thousands of gold and silver Ps. 119, 27. And to convince you of
the degree in which I esteem them, I will take the freedom to add, that I
desire they may (if God give an opportunity) be read over to me, as I lie on my
dying bed, with short intervals between them, that I may pause upon each, and
renew something of that delightful relish, which, I bless God, I have often
found in them. May your soul and mine be then composed to a sacred silence
(whatever be the commotion of animal nature) while the voice of God speaks to
us in language which he spoke to his servants of old, or in which he instructed
them how they should speak to him, in circumstances of the greatest extremity!

11. Can any more encouragement be wanting, when he says, Fear not, for I am
with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee, yea, I
will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee, with the right hand of my
righteousness Isa. 61, 10." And he is not a man that he should lie, or the son
of man that he should repent: has he said, and shall he not do it? or has he
spoken, and shall he not make it good Number. 23, 19!" -- The Lord is my light,
and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of
whom shall I be afraid Ps. 27, 1?" -- "This God is our God for ever and ever:
he will be our guide even unto death Ps. 68, 14." -- Therefore though I walk
through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art
with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me Ps. 23, 4." -- "I have waited
for thy salvation, O Lord Genesis 49, 18." -- "Oh continue thy loving kindness
unto them that know thee, and thy righteousness to the upright in heart? For
with thee is the fountain of life; in thy light shall we see light Ps. 36,
9.10." -- "Thou will show me the path of life; in thy presence is fullness of
joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures for ever more Ps. 16, 11." -- "As
for me, I shall behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be satisfied, when I
awake, with thy likeness Ps. 17, 15." -- "For I know in whom I have believed,
and am persuaded, that he is able to keep what I have committed to him until
that day 2 Timothy 1, 2." -- Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoiceth;
my flesh also shall rest in hope Ps. 16, 9." -- "For if we believe that Jesus
died, and rose again; those also that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him 1 Thessalonians. 4, 14." -- I give unto my sheep eternal life, said Jesus the good
Shepherd, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my
hand John 10, 28. -- This is the will of him that sent me, that every one that
believes on me should have everlasting life; and I will raise him up at the
last day John 6, 40. -- Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe in God,
believe also in me. In my Father's house are many mansions; if it were not so,
I would have told you: I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare
a place for you, I will come again, and receive you to myself; that where I am,
there ye may also be John 14, 1.2.3. -- Go, tell thy brethren, I ascend unto my
Father and your Father; and to my God and your God John 20, 17. -- Father I
will, that those whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may
behold my glory which thou have given me; that the love wherewith thou have
loved me, may be in them, and I in them John 17, 24. 26. -- He that testifies
these things, says, Surely I come quickly. Amen, even so come, Lord Jesus Rev.
22; 20. -- O death, where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? Thanks be
to God who has given us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ 1 Cor. 15,
55.57.

12. Thus may that God, who knows the souls of his children in all their
adversities Ps. 31, 7. and in whose sight the death of his saints is precious
Ps. 116, 15. cheer and support you and me in those last extremities of nature!
May he add us to the happy number of those who have been more than conquerors
in death! and may he give us those supplies of his Spirit, which may enable us
to pour out our departing souls in such sentiments as those I would now
suggest? though we should be no longer able to utter words, or to understand
them if they were to be read to us! Let us at least review them with all proper
affections now, and lay up one prayer more for that awful moment! Oh that this,
and all we have ever offered with regard to it, may then come in remembrance
before God Acts 10, 4.31!

MEDITATION and PRAYER, suited to the Case of a dying Christian.
O THOU supreme Ruler of the visible and invisible worlds! thou Sovereign of
life and of death; of earth and of heaven! Blessed be thy name, I have often
been taught to seek thee. And now once more do I pour out my soul, my departing
soul, unto thee. Bow down thy gracious ear O God, and let my cry come before
thee with acceptance!

The hour is come when thou will separate me from this world, with which I have
been so long and so familiarly acquainted, and lead me to another as yet
unknown. Enable me, I beseech thee, to make the exchange as becomes a child of
Abraham, who being called of thee to receive an inheritance, obeyed, and went
out, though he knew not particularly whither he went Heb. 11, 8. as becomes a
child of God, who knows that, through sovereign grace, it is his Father's good
pleasure to give him the kingdom Luke 12, 32!

I acknowledge, O Lord, the justice of that sentence by which I am expiring;
and own thy wisdom and goodness in appointing my journey through this gloomy
vale which is now before me. Help me to turn it into the happy occasion of
honoring thee, and adorning my profession! and I will bless the pangs by which
thou art glorified, when this mortal and sinful part of my nature is dissolved.

Gracious Father, I would not quit this earth of thine, and this house of clay
in which I have sojourned during my abode upon the face of it, without my
grateful acknowledgments to thee, for all that abundant goodness which thou
have caused to pass before me here Exo. 33, 19. With my dying breath I bear
witness to thy faithful care. I have wanted no good thing Psalm. 34, 10. I thank
thee, O my God, that this guilty, forfeited, unprofitable life, was so long
spared: that it has been still maintained by such a rich variety of thy bounty.
I thank thee that thou have made this beginning of my existence so pleasant to
me. I thank thee for the mercies of my days and nights, of my months and years,
which are now come to their period: I thank thee for the mercies of my infancy,
and for those of my riper age; for all the agreeable friends which thou have
given me in this house of my pilgrimage, the living and the dead; for all the
help I have received from others, and for all the opportunities which thou have
given me of being helpful to the bodies or souls of my brethren of mankind.
Surely goodness and mercy have followed me all the days of my life Psalm. 23, 6.
and I have reason to rise a thankful guest from the various and pleasant
entertainments with which my table has been furnished by thee. Nor shall I have
reason to repine or to grieve, at quitting them: For, O my God, are thy
bounties exhausted? I know that they are not. I will not wrong thy goodness and
thy faithfulness so much as to imagine, that because I am going from this
earth, I am going from happiness. I adore thy mercy, that thou have taught me
to entertain nobler views through Jesus thy Son. I bless thee with all the
powers of my nature, that I ever heard of his name, and of his death: and would
fain exert a more vigorous act of thankful adoration than in this broken state
I am capable of, while I am extolling thee for the riches of thy grace
manifested in him; for his instructions and his example, for his blood and his
righteousness, and for that blessed Spirit of thine which thou have given me,
to turn my sinful heart unto thyself, and to bring me into the bonds of thy
covenant; of that covenant, which is ordered in all things and sure 2 Samuel 23,
5, and which this death, though now separating my soul from my body, shall
never be able to dissolve.

I bless thee, O Lord, that I am not dying in an unregenerate and impenitent
state; but that thou did graciously awaken and convince me; that thou did
renew and sanctify my heart, and did by thy good Spirit work in it an
unfeigned faith, and real repentance, and the beginning of a divine life. I
thank thee for ministers and ordinances; I thank thee for my sabbaths, and my
sacrament-days; for the weekly and monthly refreshments which they gave me: I
thank thee for the fruits of Canaan, which were sent me in the wilderness, and
are now sent me on the brink of Jordan. I thank thee for thy blessed word, and
for those exceeding rich and precious promises of it, which now lie as a
cordial warm at my heart in this chilling hour; promises of support in death,
and of glory beyond it, and of the resurrection of my body to everlasting life.
O my God, I firmly believe them all, great and wonderful as they are, and am
waiting for the accomplishment of them through Jesus Christ; in whom they are
all yea and amen 3 Cor. 1, 20. Remember thy word unto thy servant on which thou
have caused me to hope Psalm. 119, 40! I covenanted with thee not for worldly
enjoyments, which thy love taught me comparatively to despise; but for eternal
life, as the gift of thy free grace through Jesus Christ my Lord Romans 6, 23;
and now permit me, in his name, to enter my humble claim to it! Permit me to
consign this departing spirit into thine hand; for thou have redeemed it, O
Lord God of truth Psalm. 31, 5? I am thine save me Psalm. 119, 94, and make me
happy!

But may I indeed presume to say, I am thine! O God, now I am standing on the
borders of both worlds; now I view things as in the light of thy presence and
of eternity; how unworthy do I appear, that I should be taken to dwell with thy
angels and saints in glory! Alas, I have reason to look back with deep
humiliation on a poor unprofitable sinful life, in which I have daily been
deserving to be cast into hell. But I have this one comfortable reflection,
that I have fled to the cross of Christ; and I now renew my application to it.
To think of appearing before God in such an imperfect righteousness as my own,
were then thousand times worse than death. No, Lord! I come unto thee as a
sinner; but as a sinner who has believed in thy Son for pardon and life: I fall
down before thee as a guilty polluted wretch; but thou have made him to be unto
thy people for wisdom and righteousness, for sanctification and redemption 1
Cor. 1, 30." Let me have my lot among the followers of Jesus! Treat me as thou
treatest those who are his friends and his brethren! For thou know my soul
has loved him, and trusted on him, and solemnly ventured itself on the security
of his gospel. And I know in whom I have believed 2 Timothy 1, 12. The infernal
lion may attempt to dismay me in this awful passage: but I rejoice that I am in
the hands of the good Shepherd John 10, 11.28; and I defy all my spiritual
enemies, in a cheerful dependence on his faithful care. I lift up my eyes and
my heart to him, who was dead and is alive again; and behold he lives for ever
more, and has the keys of death, and of the unseen world Rev. 6, 18. Blessed
Jesus, I die by thine hand, and I fear no harm from the hand of a Savior! I
fear not that death which is allotted to me by the hand of my dearest Lord, who
himself died to make it safe and happy. I come, Lord, I come, not only with a
willing, but with a joyful consent. I thank thee that thou rememberest me for
good; that thou art breaking my chains, and calling me to "the glorious liberty
of the children of God Romans 8, 21." I thank thee, that thou will no longer
permit me to live at a distance from thine arms; but after this long absence,
wilt have me at home, at home for ever.

My feeble nature faints in the view of that glory, which is now dawning upon
me; but thou know how, gracious Lord, to let it in upon my soul by just
degrees, and to make thy strength perfect in my weakness 2 Cor. 12, 9. Once
more, for the last time, would I look down on this poor world, which I am going
to quit, and breathe out my dying vows for its prosperity, and that of thy
church in it. I have loved it, O Lord, as a living member of the body; and I
love it to the last. I humbly beseech thee, therefore, that thou will guard it,
and purify it, and unite it more and more! Send down more of thy blessed Spirit
upon it, even the Spirit of wisdom, of holiness, and of love; till in due time
the wilderness be turned into a garden of the Lord Isa. 51, 3. and all flesh
shall see thy salvation Luke 3, 6!

And as for me, bear me, O my heavenly Father, on the wings of everlasting
love, to that peaceful, that holy, that joyous abode, which thy mercy has
prepared for me, and which the blood of my Redeemer has purchased! Bear me to
the general assembly and church of the firstborn, to the innumerable company
of angels, and to the spirits of just men made perfect Heb. 12, 22.23. And
whatever this flesh may suffer, let my steady soul be delightfully fixed on
that glory to which it is raised! Let faith perform its last office in an
honorable manner! Let my few remaining moments on earth be spent for thy
glory; and so let me ascend, with love in my heart, and praise on my faultering
tongue, to the world where love and praise shall be complete! Be this my last
song on earth, which I am going to tune in heaven; Blessing, and honor, and
glory, and Power, be unto him that fitteth on the throne, and to the Lamb for
ever and ever, Rev. 5, 13. Amen.

THE END.
A SERMON PREACHED AT MAIDWELL IN NORTHAMPTONSHIRE, June 22. 1735.
By P. DODDRIDGE.
Luke x. 42. former Part -- One thing is needful.


IT was the amiable character of our blessed Redeemer, that he went about doing
good Acts 10, 38. This great motive which animated all his actions, brought him
to the house of his friend Lazarus at Bethany, and directed his behavior
there. Though it were a season of recess from public labor, our Lord brought
the sentiments and the pious cares of a preacher of righteousness into the
parlour of a friend; and there his doctrine dropped as the rain, and distilled
as the dew, on the little happy circle that were then surrounding him. Mary,
the sister of Lazarus, with great delight, made one amongst them; she set
herself down at the feet of Jesus, in the posture of an humble disciple; and we
have a great deal of reason to believe, that Martha his sister, would gladly
have been with her there; but domestic care pressed hard upon her, and she was
cumbered with much serving, being perhaps too solicitous to prepare a sumptuous
entertainment for her heavenly Master, and the train that attended him. Happy
are they that in a crowd of business, do not loose something of the
spirituality of their minds, and of the composure and sweetness of their
tempers! This good woman comes to our Lord with too impatient a complaint;
insinuating some little reflection, not only on Mary, but on himself too. Lord,
do thou not care that my sister has left me to serve alone? Bid her
therefore that she help me Luke 10, 40. Our Lord, willing to take all
opportunities of suggesting useful thoughts, answers her in these words, of
which the text is a part, -- Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled
about many things, but one thing is needful, and Mary has chosen that good
part, which shall not be taken away from her. q. d. Alas, Martha! The concerns
of the soul are of so much greater importance than those of the body, that I
cannot blame your sister on this occasion: I rather recommend her to your
imitation, and caution you, and all my other friends, to be much on your guard
that, in the midst of your worldly cares, you do not lose the sight of that
which so much better deserves your attention.

I shall consider these words, one thing is needful, as a kind of Aphorism, or
wise and weighty sentence, dropped from the mouth of our blessed Redeemer, and
evidently worthy of our most serious regard. In handling them I shall, I.
Consider what we are to understand by the one thing here spoken of. II. Show
you what is intended when it is represented as the one thing needful III. I
will show how justly it may be so represented or prove that it is indeed the
one thing needful. IV. Conclude with some reflections and application.


My friends, the words which are now before us are, to this day, as true as
they were seventeen hundred years ago. Set your hearts to attend to them. Oh
that you might, by divine grace, be awakened to hear them with a due regard,
and might be so impressed with the plain and serious things which are now to be
spoken, as you probably would, if I were speaking by your dying beds, and you
had the full exercise of your reason, and the near and lively view of eternity!

I. I am briefly to consider what we are to understand by the one thing needful.

Now, I answer in a few words, it is the care of the soul, opposed, as you see
in the text, to the care, i. e. the excessive care of the body; for which
Martha was gently admonished by our Lord. This is a general answer, and it
comprehends a variety of important particulars, which is the business of our
ministry often to open to you at large: The care of the soul implies a
readiness to hear the words of Christ, to set ourselves with Mary at his feet,
and to receive both the law and the gospel from his mouth. It supposes that we
learn from this divine teacher the worth of our souls, their danger, and their
remedy. That we become above all things solicitous about their eternal
salvation. That, heartily repenting of all our sins, and cordially believing
the everlasting gospel, we receive the Lord Jesus Christ for righteousness and
life, resting our souls on the value of his atonement, and the efficacy of his
grace. It imports the sincere dedication of ourselves to the service of God,
and a faithful adherence to it, notwithstanding all the oppositions arising
from inward corruptions, or outward temptations, and a resolute perseverence in
the way of gospel dependence, till we receive the end of our faith in our
complete salvation. This is the one thing needful represented indeed in various
scriptures by various names. Sometimes it is called regeneration, or the new
creature, because it is the blessed work of God's efficacious grace. Sometimes
the fear of God, and sometimes his love, and the keeping his commandments; and
very frequently in the New Testament it is called faith, or receiving Christ,
and believing on him, which therefore is represented as the great work of God
John 6, 9; i. e. the great thing which God in his glorious gospel requires, as
well as by his Spirit produces in us each of these, if rightly understood and
explained, comprehends all that I have said on this head. On the whole, we may
say, that, as the body is one, though it has many members, and the soul is one,
though it has many faculties, so in the present case, this real, vital religion
is one thing, one sacred principle of divine life, bringing us to attend to the
care of our souls, as of our greatest treasure. It is one thing,
notwithstanding all the variety of views in which it may be considered, and of
characters under which it may be described. I proceed,

II. To consider what may be intended in the representation which is here made
of it, as the one thing needful.

Now I think it naturally includes these three particulars: it is a matter of
universal concern, of the highest importance, and of so comprehensive a nature,
that every thing which is truly worthy of our regard, may be considered as
included in it, or subservient to it. Let me a little illustrate each of these
particulars, reserving the proof of what I now assert to the third general,
where it will abundantly appear.

1. The care of the soul may be called the one thing needful, "as it is matter
of universal concern."

Our Lord you see speaks of it as needful in the general. He says not for this
or that particular person; or for those of such an age, station, or
circumstance in life, but needful for all. And indeed, when discoursing on such
a subject, one might properly introduce it with those solemn words of the
Psalmist. Give ear all ye people, hear all ye inhabitants of the earth, both
high and low, rich and poor together Ps. 49, 1.2. For it is the concern of all,
from the king that sits upon the throne, to the servant that grindeth at the
mill, or the beggar that lies upon the dunghill. It is needful for us that are
ministers, for our own salvation is concerned. And woe, unsupportable woe, will
be to our souls, if we think it enough to recommend it to others, to talk of it
in a warm, or an awful manner, in public assemblies, or in our private
converse: while it does not penetrate our hearts as our own greatest care. Our
case will then be like that of the Israelitish Lord in Samaria 2 Kings 7, 2.
who was employed to distribute the corn when the siege was raised, seeing it
with our eyes, and dispensing it with our hands, we shall ourselves die
miserable, without tasting the blessings we impart. It is needful to all you
that are our hearers, without the exception of one single person. It is needful
to you that are rich, though it may on some accounts be peculiarly difficult
for you; even as difficult, comparatively speaking, as for a camel to go
through the eye of a needle Mat. 19, 24; yet if it be neglected, you are poor
in the midst of all your wealth, and miserable in all your abundance, and a
wretch starving for hunger, in a magnificent palace and a rich dress, might be
less the object of compassion than you. It is needful for you that are poor;
though you are distressed with so many anxious cares, what you shall eat, and
what you shall drink, and wherewithal you shall be clothed Mat. 6, 31. The
nature that makes you capable of such anxieties as these, argues your much
greater concern in the bread which endures to eternal life John 6, 27, than in
that by which this mortal body must be supported. It is needful for you that
are advanced in years; though your strength be impaired, so that the grasshopper
is a burden Eccl. 12, 5; though you have by your long continuance in sin
rendered this great work so hard that were it less important, one would in pity
let you alone without reminding you of it; yet, late as it is, it must be done,
or your hoary heads will be brought down to the grave with wrath, and sink
under a curse aggravated by every year and by every day of your lives. It is
needful to you that are young, though solicited by so many gay vanities, to
neglect it; though it may be represented as an unseasonable care at present,
yet I repeat it, it is needful to you; immediately needful, unless you who walk
so frequently over the dust of your brethren and companions, that died in the
bloom and vigor of their days, have made some secret covenant with the grave
for yourselves, and found out some wonderful method, hitherto unknown, of
securing this precarious life, and of answering for days and months to come,
while others cannot answer for one single moment.

2. The care of the soul is a matter of the highest importance; beyond any
thing which can be brought into comparison with it.

As Solomon says of wisdom, that it is more precious than rubies; and that all
things which can be desired are not to be compared with her Prove. 3, 15. So may
I properly say of this great and most important branch of wisdom, whatever can
be laid in the balance with it; will be found altogether lighter than vanity.
This is strongly implied when its said in the next text, one thing is needful;
q. d. One thing, and one thing alone i^ so. Just as the blessed God is said to
be only wise 1 Timothy 1, 17, and only holy Rev. 15, 4, because the wisdom and
holiness of angels and men is as nothing when compared with his. What seems
most great and important in life, what kings and senates, what the wisest and
greatest of this world are employing their time, their councils, their pens,
their labors upon, are trifles, when compared with this one thing. A man may
subsist, he may in some considerable measure be happy, without learning,
without riches, without titles, without health, without liberty, without
friends, nay though the life be more than meat, and the body than raiment Mat.
6, 25. Yet may he be happy, unspeakably happy, without the body itself. But he
cannot be so in the neglect of the one thing needful. I must therefore bespeak
your regard to it in the words of Moses, It is not a light thing, but it is
your life Deuteronomy. 32, 47.

3. The care of the soul is of so comprehensive a nature, that every thing
truly worthy of our regard may "be considered as included in it, or
subservient to it."

As David observes, that the commandment of God is exceeding broad Psalm. 119,
96, so may we say of this one thing needful; and as Solomon very justly and
emphatically expresses it, to fear God and keep his commandments is the whole
of man; his whole duty, and his whole interest; and every thing which is wise
and rational does in its proper place and connection make a part of. We should
judge very ill concerning the nature of this care, if we imagined, that it
consisted merely in acts of devotion or religious contemplation; it comprehends
all the lovely and harmonious bonds of social, and human virtues. It requires a
care of society, a care of our bodies, and of our temporal concerns; but then
all is to be regulated, directed, and animated by proper regards to God,
Christ, and immortality. Our food, and our rest, our trades and our labors are
to be attended to, and all the offices of humanity performed in obedience to
the will of God, for the glory of Christ, and in a view to the improving the
mind in a growing meekness for a state of complete perfection. Name any thing
which has no reference at all to this, and you name a worthless trifle, however
it may be gilded to allure the eye, however it may be sweetened to gratify the
taste. Name a thing which, instead of thus improving the soul, has a tendency
to debase and pollute, to enslave and endanger it, and you name what is most
unprofitable and mischievous, be the wages of iniquity ever so great; most foul
and deformed, be it in the eyes of men ever so honorable; or in their customs
ever so fashionable. Thus I have endeavored to show you what we may suppose
implied in this expression of one thing needful. I am now,

III. To show you with how much propriety the care of the soul may be
represented under this character, as the one thing needful, as a matter of
universal and most serious concern, to which every thing else is to be
considered as subservient, if at all worthy of our care and pursuit. Now let me
appeal to the sentiments of those who must be allowed most capable of judging,
and to the evident reason of the care of itself, as it must appear to every
unprejudiced mind.

1. Let me argue from the sentiments of those who must be allowed most capable
of judging in such an affair, and we shall quickly see that the care of the
soul appears to them the one thing needful.

Is the judgment of the blessed God according to truth, how evidently and how
solemnly is that judgment declared? I will not say merely in this or the other
particular passage of his word, but in the whole series of his revelations to
the children of men; and the whole tenor of his addresses to them. Is not this
the language of all, from the early days of Job and Moses, to the conclusion of
the canon of Scripture. If wisdom be hid from the eyes of all the living,
surely God understands the way thereof, he knows the place thereof; and if
he does, it is plainly pointed out, for unto man he still says, behold the
fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil, that is
understanding Job 28, 21.23.28. By Moses therefore, he declared to the
Israelites, that to do the commandments of the Lord, would be their wisdom and
their understanding in the sight of the nations who should hear his statutes,
and say, surely this is a wise and understanding people Deuteronomy. 4, 6. When he had
raised up one man on the throne of Israel, with the character of the wisest
that ever lived upon the face of the earth, he chose to make him eminently a
teacher of this great truth. And now all that he spoke on the curious and less
concerning subjects of natural philosophy is lost, though he spoke of trees
from the cedar to the byssop, and of beasts, and of fowls, and of creeping
things, and of fishes 2 Kings 6, 33; that saying is preserved in which he
testifies, that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom Prove. 1,
7.9.10. and those proverbs, in almost every line of which they who neglect God
and their own souls are spoken of as fools, as if that were the most proper
signification of the word, while the religious alone are honored with the
title of wise. But, in this respect, as attesting this truth in the name of God
and in his own, a greater than Solomon is here.

For if we require what it was that our Lord Jesus Christ judged to be the one
thing needful, the words of the text contain as full an answer as can be
imagined; and the sense of them is repeated in a very lively and emphatical
manner, in that remarkable passage wherein our Lord not only declares his own
judgment, but seems to appeal to the consciences of all, as obliged by their
own secret convictions to subscribe to the truth of it. What is a man profited,
if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul, or what will a man give in
exchange for his soul Mat. 16, 26? If it were once lost, what would he not be
willing to give to redeem it. But it depends not on the words of Christ alone.
Let his actions, his sufferings, his blood, his death, speak what a value he
set on the souls of men. Is it to be imagined, that he would have relinquished
heaven, that he would have dwelt upon earth, that he would have labored by
night and by day, and at last have expired on the cross, for a matter of light
importance? Or can we think that he, in whom dwells all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge, and all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, was mistaken in a
judgment so deliberately formed, and so solemnly declared.

If, after this, there were room to mention human judgment and testimonies, how
easy would it be to produce a cloud of witnesses in such a cause, and to show
that the wisest and best, of men in all ages of the world have agreed in this
point, that, amidst all the diversities of opinion and profession, which
succeeding generations have produced, this has been the unanimous judgment,
this the common and most sollicitous care of those, whose characters are most
truly valuable, to secure the salvation of their own souls, and to promote the
salvation of others.

And let me beseech you seriously to reflect what are the characters of th^^^
who have taken the liberty, most boldly and freely t^^^ clare their judgment on
the contrary side? The number of such is comparatively few; and when you
compare what you have observed of their temper and conduct, I will not say with
what you read of holy men of old, but with what you have yourself seen in the
faithful active, and zealous servants of Christ, in these latter ages, with
which you have conversed, do you on the whole find that the rejectors and
deriders of the gospel, are, in other respects, so much more prudent and
judicious, so much wiser for themselves, and for others that are influenced by
them, as that you can be in reason obliged to pay any great deference to the
authority of a few such names as these, in opposition to those to which they
are here opposed?

But you will say, and you will say it too truly, though but a few may venture
in words to declare for the neglect of the soul and its eternal interest, the
greater part of mankind do it in their actions. But are the greater part of
mankind so wise, and so good, as implicitly to be followed in matters of the
highest importance? And do not multitudes of these declare themselves on the
other side, in their most serious moments? When the intoxications of worldly
business and pleasures are over, and some languishing sickness forces men to
solitude and retirement; what have you generally observed to be the effect of
such a circumstance? Have they not then declared themselves convinced of the
truth we are now laboring to establish? Nay, do we not sometimes see that a
distemper which seizes the mind with violence, yet does not utterly destroy its
reasoning faculties, fixes this conviction on the soul in a few hours, nay
sometimes in a few moments? Have you never seen a gay, thoughtless creature,
surprised in the giddy round of pleasure^ and amusements, and presently brought
not only to seriousness, but terror and trembling, by the near view^ of death?
Have you never seen the man of business and care interrupted, like the rich
fool in the parable, in the midst of his schemes for the present world? And
have you not heard one and the other of them owning the vanity of those
pleasures and cares, which but a few days ago, were every thing to them?
Confessing that religion was the one thing needful, and recommending it to
others with an earnestness, as if they hoped thereby to atone for their own
former neglect? We that are ministers frequently are witnesses to such things
as these, and I believe few of our hearers are entire strangers to them.

And once more, what if, to the testimony of the dying, we could add that of
the dead? What if God were to turn aside the veil which separates between us
and the invisible world, and to permit the most careless sinner in the assembly
to converse for a few moments with the inhabitants of it? If you were to apply
yourself to a happy Spirit, that trod the most thorny road to paradise or
passed through the most fiery trial, and to ask him, Was it worth your while to
labor so much, and to endure so much for what you now possess? Surely if the
blessed in heaven were capable of indignation, it would move them to hear that
it should be made a question. And, on the other hand, if you could enquire of
one tormented in that flame below, though he might once be clothed in purple
and fine linen, and fare sumptuously every day, if you could ask him, Whether
his former enjoyments were an equivalent for his present sufferings and
despair? What answer do you suppose he would return? Perhaps an answer of so
much horror and rage, as you would not be able so much as to endure. Or if the
malignity of his nature should prevent him from returning any answer at all,
surely there would be a language even in that silence, a language in the
darkness and flames, and groans of that infernal prison, which would speak to
your very soul what the word of God is with equal certainty, though less
forcible conviction, speaking to your soul's ear, that one thing is needful.
You see it is so in the judgment of God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ,
of the wisest and best of men, of many who seemed to judge most differently of
it, when they came to more deliberate and serious thought, and not only of the
dying, but of the dead too, of those who have experimentally known both worlds,
and most surely know what is to be preferred. But I will not rest the whole
argument here, I add therefore,

2. I appeal to the evident reasons of the case itself, as it must appear to
every unprejudiced mind, that the care of the soul is indeed the one thing
needful.

I still consider myself as speaking not to Atheists, or to Deists, but to
those who not only believe the existence and providence of God, and a future
state of happiness and misery, but likewise who credit the truth of the
Christian revelation, as many undoubtedly do who live in a fatal neglect of God
and their own souls. Now, on these principles, a little reflection may be
sufficient to convince you, that it is needful to the present repose of your
own mind, needful, if ever you would secure eternal happiness, if ever you
would avoid eternal misery, which will be aggravated, rather than alleviated,
by all your present enjoyments.

1. The care of the soul is the one thing needful, because without it you
cannot secure the peace of your own mind, nor avoid the upbraidings of your
conscience.

That noble faculty is indeed, as you are often told, the vicegerent of God in
the soul. It Is sensible of the dignity and worth of an immortal Spirit, and
will sometimes cry out of the violence that is offered to it, and cry so loud,
as to compel the sinner to hear, whether he will or no. Do you not sometimes
find it yourselves? When you labor most to forget the concerns of your soul,
do they not sometimes force themselves on your remembrance? You are afraid of
the reflections of your own mind, but with all your artifice and all your
resolution, can you entirely avoid them? Does your conscience follow you to
your beds, even if denied the opportunity of meeting you in your closets, and
though with an unwelcome voice, there warn you, that your soul is neglected,
and will quickly be lost: Does it not follow you to your shops and your fields,
when you are busiest there? Nay I will add, does it not sometimes follow you to
the feast, the club, to the dance, and perhaps, amidst all resistance, to the
theater too? Does it not sometimes mingle your sweetest draught with wormwood,
and your gayest scenes with horror? So that you are like a tradesman, who,
suspecting his affairs to be in a bad posture, lays up his books and his
papers, yet sometimes they will come accidentally in his way. He hardly dares
to look abroad for fear of meeting a creditor, or an arrest; and if he labors
to forget his cares and his dangers, in a course of luxury at home, the
remembrance is sometimes awakened, and the alarm increased, by those very
extravagancies in which he is attempting to lose it. Such, no doubt, is the
case of some of your minds, and it is a very painful state, and while things
are thus within, external circumstances can no more make you happy, than a fine
dress could relieve you under a violent fit of the stone. Whereas, if this
great affair were secured, you might delight in reflection, as much as you now
dread it; and conscience your bitterest enemy, would become a delightful
friend, and the testimony of it your greatest rejoicing.

2. The care of the soul is the one thing needful, because without it you
cannot possibly secure your eternal happiness.

A crown of everlasting glory is not surely such a trifle as to be thrown away
on a careless creature, that will not in good earnest pursue it. God does not
ordinarily deal thus, even with the bounties of his common providence, which
are comparatively of little value. As to these, the hand of the diligent
generally makes rich, and he would be thought distracted, rather than prudent,
who should expect to get an estate, merely by wishing for it, or without some
resolute and continued application to a proper course of action for that
purpose. Now, that we may not foolishly dream of obtaining heaven in, the midst
of a course of indolence and sloth, we are expressly told in the word of God,
that the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force
Matt. 11, 1^. And are therefore exhorted to strive, with the greatest
intenseness, and eagerness of mind, as the word properly signifies, to enter in
at the strait gate, for this great and important reason, because many shall
another day, seek to enter in, and shall not be able Luke 12, 24. Nay, when our
Lord makes the most gracious promises to the humble petitioner, he does it in
such a manner as to exclude the hopes of those who are careless and
indifferent. -- Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and you shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you Mat. 7, 7. If therefore you do not ask,
seek, and knock, the door of mercy will not be opened, and eternal happiness
will be lost.

And surely if I could say no more as to the fatal consequences of your
neglect, than this, that eternal happiness will be lost, I should say enough to
impress every mind that considers what eternity means. To fall into a state of
everlasting forgetfulness, might indeed appear a refuge to a mind filled with
the apprehension of future misery. But, Oh how dreadful a refuge is it! Surely
it is such a refuge as a vast precipice, from which a man falling, would be
dashed to pieces in a moment, might appear to a person pursued by the officers
of justice, that he might be brought out to a painful and lingering execution.
If an extravagant youth would have reason to look round with auguish on some
fair and ample paternal inheritance, which he had sold or forfeited merely for
the riot of a few days: how much more melancholy would it be for a rational
mind to think that its eternal happiness is lost for any earthly consideration
whatever. Tormenting thought! had I attended to the one thing which I have
neglected, I might have been great and happy, beyond expression, beyond
conception. Not merely for the little span of ten thousand thousand ages, but
FOR EVER. So that the moment would have come, when, if it had been asked
concerning me, How long has that glorious Spirit been an inhabitant of heaven?
How long has it been enjoying God, and its self in that state of perfection?
The answer would have been such, that no line of any determinate finite length
would have been sufficient to have contained the number of ages, no time can be
assigned sufficient to figure them down. This is eternity, but I have lost it,
and am now on the verge of being. This lamp, which might have outlasted those
of the firmament, will presently be extinguished, and I blotted out from
amongst the works of God, and cut off from all the bounties of his hand. Would
not this be a very miserable case, if this were all? And would it not be
sufficient to prove this to be the better part, which, as our Lord observes,
can never be taken away? But, God forbid, that we should be so unfaithful to
him, and to the souls of men, as to rest in such a representation alone. I
therefore add once more.

3. The care of the soul is the one thing needful, because without it, you
cannot avoid a state of eternal misery, which will be aggravated, rather than
alleviated by all your present enjoyments.

Nothing can be more evident from the word of the God of truth. It there
plainly appears to be a determined case which leaves no room for a more
favorable conjecture or hope. The wicked shall be turned into hell, even all
the nations that forget God. They shall go away into everlasting punishment,
into a state where they shall in vain wish for death, and shall not be able to
find it. Oh! sirs, it is a certain, but an awful truth, that your souls will be
thinking and immortal beings, even in spite of themselves. They may indeed
torment, but they cannot destroy themselves. They can no more suspend their
power, thought and perception, than a mirror its property of reflecting rays
that fall on its surface. Do you suspect the contrary? Make the trial
immediately. Command your minds to cease from thinking but for one quarter of
an hour, or for half that time, and exclude every idea and every reflection.
Can you succeed in that attempt? Or rather, does not thought press in with a
more sensible violence on that resistance, as anxious desire to sleep, makes us
so much the more wakeful. Thus, will thought follow you beyond the grave, thus
will it, as an unwelcome guest, force itself upon you, when it can serve only
to perplex and distress the mind. It will for ever upbraid you, that,
notwithstanding all the kind remonstrances of conscience, and the pleadings of
the blood of Christ, you have gone on in your folly, till heaven is lost, and
damnation incurred; and all for what? for a shadow and a dream.

Oh think not, sinners, that the remembrance of your past pleasures, of your
success in your other cares whilst that of the one thing needful was forgotten
think not that this will ease your minds. It will rather torment them the more.
Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things. Bitter
remembrance! Well might the heathen poets represent the unhappy spirits in
shades below, as eagerly catching at the water of forgetfulness, yet unable to
reach it. Your present comforts will only serve to give you a livelier sense of
your misery, as having tasted such degrees of enjoyment; and to inflame the
reckoning, as you have misimproved those talents lodged in your hands for
better purposes. Surely if these things were believed, and seriously
considered, the sinner would have no more heart to rejoice in his present
prosperity, than a man would have to amuse himself with the curiosities of a
fine garden, through which he was led to be broke upon the rack.

But I will enlarge no further upon these things. -- Would to God that the
unaccountable stupidity of men's minds, and their fatal attachment to the
pleasures and cares of the present life, did not make it necessary to insist on
them so frequently and so copiously!

IV. I proceed to the reflections which naturally arise from hence, and shall
only mention two.

1. How much reason have we to lament the folly of mankind, in neglecting the
one thing needful.

If religion be indeed the truest wisdom, then surely we have the justest
reason to say with Solomon, that folly and madness is in men's hearts. Is it the
one thing needful? Look on the conduct of the generality of mankind, and you
would imagine they thought it the one thing needless: the vainest dream, and
the idlest amusement of the mind. God is admonishing them by ordinances, and
providence, sometimes by such as are most awful, to lay it to heart: he speaks
once, yea twice, yea a multitude of times, but man regards it not. They profess
perhaps to believe all that I have been saying, but act as if the contrary were
self-evident; they will risk these souls and this eternity, for a thing of
naught, for that for the sake of which they would not risk so much as a hand or
a finger, or a joint, no, nor perhaps a toy that adorns it. Surely this is the
wonder of angels, and perhaps of devils too, unless the observation of so many
ages may have rendered it familiar to both. And can we my Christian brethren,
behold such a scene with indifference? If some epidemical madness had seized
our country, or the places where we live, so that as we went from one place to
another, we should every where meet with lunaticks, and see amongst the rest,
some perhaps of the finest genius and improvements, and the most eminent
statesmen of life, amusing themselves with straws and bubbles, or wounding
themselves and others; surely were we ever so secure from the danger of
infection or assault, the sight would cut us to the heart. Surely a good
natured man would hardly be able to go abroad, or even be desirous to live
amongst so many sad spectacles. Yet these poor creatures might, notwithstanding
this, be the children of God, and the higher their frenzy rose, the nearer
might their complete happiness be. But, alas, the greater part of mankind are
seized with a worse kind of madness, in which they are ruining their souls: and
can we behold it with indifference! The Lord awaken our compassion, our
prayers, and our endeavors, in dependence on divine grace, that we may be
instrumental in bringing them to their right mind, and making them wise indeed,
that is, wise to salvation.

2. How necessary is it that we should seriously inquire how this one thing
needful is regarded by us!

Let me entreat you to remember your own concern in it, and inquire -- Have I
thought seriously of it? -- Have I seen the importance of it? -- Has it lain
with a due and an abiding weight on my mind? -- Has it brought me to Christ,
that I might lay the stress of these great eternal interests on him? And am I
acting in the main of my life as one that has these convictions? -- Am I
willing in fact to give up other things, my interests, my pleasures, my
passions to this? -- Am I conversing with God and with man, as one that
believes these things, as one that has deliberately chosen the better part, and
is determined to abide by that choice?

Observe the answer which conscience returns to these inquiries and you will
know your own part in that more particular application, with which I am to
conclude my discourse.

1. Let me address myself to those that are entirely unconcerned about the one
thing needful.

Sirs, I have been stating the case at large, and now I appeal to your
consciences, are these things so? or are they not? God and your own hearts best
know for what the care of your soul is neglected; but be it what it will, the
difference between one grain of sand, and another is not great, when it comes
to be weighed against a talent of gold. Whatever it is, you had need to examine
it carefully. You had need to view that commodity on all sides, of which you do
in effect say, for this will I sell my soul, for this will I give up heaven and
venture hell, be heaven and hell whatever they may. In the name of God, sirs,
is this the part of a man, of a rational creature? To go on with your eyes open
toward a pit of eternal ruin, because there are a few gay flowers in the way.
Or what if you shut your eyes? will that prevent your fall? It signifies little
to say, I will not think of these things, I will not consider them. God has
said, In the last days they shall consider it perfectly. The revels of a
drunken malefactor will not prevent, nor respite his execution. Pardon my
plainness, if it were a fable or a tale, I would endeavor to amuse you with
words, but I cannot do it where your souls are at stake.

2. I would apply to those who are convinced of the importance of their souls,
yet are inclined to defer that care of them a little longer, which, in the
general, they see to be necessary.

I know you that are young, are under peculiar temptations to do this; though
it is strange that the death of so many of your companions should not be an
answer to some of the most specious and dangerous of those temptations.
Methinks if there were the least degree of uncertainty, the importance is too
weighty to put matters to the venture. But here the uncertainty is great and
apparent. You must surely know that there are critical seasons of life for
managing the concerns of it, which are of such a nature, that if once lost,
they may never return: here is a critical season. Now is the accepted time, now
is the day of salvation. Today if ye will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts. This language may not be spoken tomorrow. Talk not of a more
convenient season, none can be more convenient; and, that to which you would
probably refer it, is least of all so. A dying time. You would not choose then
to have any important business in hand; and will you of choice refer the
greatest business of all to that languishing, hurrying, amazing hour? If a
friend were then to come to you with the balance of an intricate account, or a
view of a title to an estate, you would shake your fainting head, and lift up
your pale trembling hand, and say perhaps with a feeble voice, alas, is this a
time for these things! And is it a time for so much greater things than these!
I wish you knew, and would consider in what a strait we that are ministers are
sometimes brought, when we are called to the dying beds of those who have spent
their lives in the neglect of the one thing needful. On the other hand, we fear
least, if we palliate matters, and speak smooth things, we shall betray and
ruin their souls; and, on the other hand, that if we use a becoming plainness
and seriousness, in warning them of their danger, we shall quite overwhelm
them, and hasten the dying moment, which is advancing by such steps. Oh let me
entreat you for our sakes, and much more for your own, that you do not drive us
to such sad extremities; but that if you are convinced, as I hope some of you
may now be, that the care of the soul is that needful thing we have
represented, let the conviction work, let it drive you immediately to the
throne of grace, that from thence you may derive that wisdom and strength which
may direct you in all the intricacies which entangle you, and animate you in
the midst of difficulty and discouragement.

3. I would, in the last place, address myself to those happy souls who have in
good earnest attended to the one thing needful.

I hope when you see how commonly it is neglected, neglected indeed by many,
whose natural capacities, improvements, and circumstances in life, appear to
you superior to your own, you will humbly acknowledge, that it was
distinguishing grace that brought you into this happy state, and formed you to
this most necessary care. Bless the Lord, therefore, who has given you that
counsel, in virtue of which you can say, that he is your portion. -- Rejoice in
the thought, that the great concern is secured; as it is natural for us to do,
when some important affair is dispatched which has long lain before us, and
which we have been inclined to put off from one day to another, but have at
length strenuously and successfully attended. -- Remember still to continue
acting on these great principles which at first determined your choice; and
seriously consider, that those who desire their life may at last be given them
for a prey, must continue on their guard, in all stages of their journey
through a wilderness, where daily dangers are still surrounding them. Having
secured the great concern, make yourselves easy as to others of smaller
importance. You have chosen the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, other
things therefore shall be added unto you; and if any which you desire should
not be added, comfort yourselves with this thought, that you have the good part
which can never be taken away. And, not to enlarge on these obvious hints,
which must so often occur, be very solicitous that others may be brought to a
care about the one thing needful. If it be needful for you, it is for your
children, your friends, your servants. Let them therefore see your concern in
this respect for them, as well as for yourselves. Let parents, especially,
attend to this exhortation, whose care for their offspring often exceeds in
other respects, and fails in this. Remember that your children may never live
to enjoy the effects of your labor and concern, to get them estates and
portions. The charges of their funerals may perhaps be all their share of what
you are so anxiously careful to lay up for them. And, oh! think what a sword
would pierce through your very heart, if you should stand by the corpse of a
beloved child with this reflection, This poor creature has done with life,
before it learnt its great business in it, and is gone to eternity, which I
have been seldom warning it to prepare for, and which perhaps it learnt of me
to forget.

On the whole, may this grand care be awakened to those by whom it has hitherto
been neglected; may it be revived in each of o^^ minds. And that you may be
encouraged to pursue it with greater cheerfulness, let me conclude with this
comfortable thought, that in proportion to the necessity of the case, is the
provision which divine grace has made for our assistance. If you are disposed
to sit down at Christ's feet, he will teach you by his word and spirit. If you
commit this precious jewel, which is your eternal all, into his hand, he will
preserve it unto that day, and will then produce it richly adorned, and
gloriously improved to his own honor, and to your everlasting joy. Amen.

FINIS.

