SHIPWRECK. A SENTIMENTAL AND DESCRIPTIVE POEM. IN THREE CANTOS.

BY WILLIAM FALCONER, AN ENGLISH SAILOR.

-- quaeque ipse miserrima vidi,
Et quorum pars magna fui. --
Virg. Aen. lib. 2. These direful scenes I saw on Candia's shore;
Distressful scenes, in which a part I bore.
PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY PRICHARD and HALL, IN MARKET STREET, NEAR
FRONT STREET. M.DCC.LXXXVIII.

SCENE OF THE THREE CANTOS.
The Scene of the FIRST Canto
Lies near the city of Candia; and the Time comprehends about four days and a
half.

The Scene of the SECOND Canto
Lies in the sea, between cape Fr^schin in Candia, and the island of Falconera,
which is nearly twelve leagues northward of cape Spado. The Time is from nine
in the morning till one o'clock of the following morning.

The Scene of the THIRD Canto
Stretches from that part of the Archipelago which lies ten niles to the
northward of Falconera, to cape Colonna, in Attica. The time is about seven
hours, being from one till eight in the morning.

THE SHIPWRECK.
CANTO I.
The Argument. Proposal of the subject. Invocation. Apology. Allegorical
description of Memory; appeal to her assistance. The story begun. Retrospect of
the former part of the voyage. The ship arrives at Candia. Ancient state of
that island. Present state of the adjacent isles of Greece. The season of the
year. Character of the master and his officers. Story of Palemon and Anna.
Evening described. Midnight. The ship weighs anchor and departs from the haven.
State of the weather. Morning. Situation of the neighboring shores. Operation
of taking the sun's azimuzth. Description of the vessel as seen from the land.

WHILE jarring interests wake the world to arms,
And fright the peaceful vale with dire alarms;
While Ocean hears vindictive thunders roll
Along his trembling wave from pole to pole:
Sick of the scene, where War, with ruthless hand,
Spreads desolation over the bleeding land;
Sick of the tumult, where the trumpet's breath
Bids ^uin smile, and drowns the groan of Death!
It Is mine, retired beneath this cavern hoar,
That stands all-lonely on the sea-beat shore,
Far other themes of deep distress to sing
Than ever trembled from the vocal string.
No pomp of battle sweels the exalted strain,
Nor gleaming arms ring dreadful on the plain:
But, over the scene while pale remembrance weeps,
Fate with fell triumph rides upon the deeps.
Here hostile elements tumultuous rise,
And lawless floods rebel against the skies,
Till Hope expires, and Peril and Dismay
Wave their black ensigns on the watery way.
Immortal Train, who guide the maze of song!
To whom all science, arts and arms belong;
Who bid the trumpet of eternal fame
Exalt the warrior's and the poet's name!
If ever with trembling hope I fondly strayed,
In life's fair morn, beneath your hallowed shade,
To hear the sweetly-mournful lute complain,
And melt the heart with ecstacy of pain;
Or listen to the enchanting voice of love,
While all Elysium warbled through the grove:
O^ by the hollow biast, that moans around,
That sweeps the wild harp with a plaintive sound;
(...) the long surge that foams through yonder cave,
Whose vaults remurmur to the roaring wave;
With living colors give my verse to glow,
The sad memorial of a tale of woe!
A scene from dumb oblivion to restore,
To same unknown, and new to epic lore!
Alas! neglected by the sacred Nine,
Their suppliant feels no genial ray divine!
Ah! will they leave Pieria's happy shore,
To plow the tide where wintery tempests roar?
Or shall a youth approach their hallowed fane,
Stranger to Phoebus, and the tuneful Train?
Far from the Muses' academic grove,
'Twas his the vast and trackless deep to rove.
Alternate change of climates has he known,
And selt the fierce extremes of either zone:
Where polar skies congeal the eternal snow,
Or equinoctial suns for ever glow.
Smote by the freezing or the scorching blast,
'A ship-boy on the high and giddy mast.' Ver. 52. Shakespeare.

From regions where Peruvian billows roar,
To the break coasts of savage Labrador.
From where Damascus, pride of Asian plains!
Stoops her proud neek beneath tyrannic chains,
To where the isthmus Darien.
, lav'd by adverse tides,
Atlantic and Pacific seas divides.
But while he measured over the painful race,
In fortune's wild illimitable chase,
Adversity, companion of his way!
Still over the victim hung with iron sway;
Bade new distresses every instant grow,
Marking each change of place with change of woe.
In regions where the Almighty's chastening hand
With ^^^d Pestilence afflicts the land:
Or where pale Famine blasts the hopeful year,
Parent of Want and Misery severe!
Or where, all dreadful in the embattled line,
The hostile ships in flaming combat join:
Where the torn vessel wind and wave assail,
Till over her crew distress and death prevail.
Wherever he wandered, thus vindictive Fate
Pursued his weary steps with lasting hate!
Fous'd by her mandate, storms of black array
Wirter'd the morn of life's advancing day;
Relaxed the sinews of the living lyre,
And quenched the kindling spark of vital fire.
Thus while forgotten or unknown he woos,
What hope to win the coy reluctant Muse?
Then let not censure, with malignant joy,
The harvest of his humble hope destroy!
His verse no laurel-wreath attempts to claim,
Nor sculptured brass to tell the Poet's name.
If terms uncouth and jarring phrases wound
The softer sense with inharmonious sound,
Yet here let listening sympathy prevail,
While conscious Truth unfolds her piteous tale!
And lo! the power that wakes the eventful song,
Hastes hither from Lethean banks along:
She sweeps the gloom, and rushing on the sight,
Spreads over the kindli^^ scene propitious light!
In her right hand an ^nple roll appears,
Fraught with long annals of preceding years:
With every wise and noble art of man,
Since first the circling hours their course began.
Her left a silver wand on high displayed,
Whose magic touch dispels oblivion's shade.
Pensive her look; on radiant wines that glow,
Like Juno's birds or Iris' flaming bow,
She sails; and swifter than the course of light,
Directs her rapid intellectual flight.
The fugitive ideas she restores,
And calls the wandering thought from Lethe's shores.
To things long past a second date she ^ives,
And hoary Time from her fresh youth receives.
Congenial sister of immortal fame,
She shares her power, and Memory is her name.
O firstborn daughter of primeval Time!
By whom, transmitted down in every clime,
The deeds of ages long elapsed are known,
And blazoned glories spread from zone to zone;
Whose breath dissolves the gloom of mental night,
And over the obscured idea pours the light!
Whose wing unerring glides through time and place,
And trackless scours the immensity of space!
Say! on what seas, for thou alone can tell,
What dire mishap a fated ship befell,
Assailed by tempests, girt with hostile shores?
Arise! approach! unlock thy treasured stores!
A ship from Egypt, over the deep impelled
By guiding winds, her course for Venice held;
Of famed Britannia were the gallant crew,
And, from that isle, her name the vessel drew.
The wayward steps of Fortune, that delude
Full often to ruin, eager they pursued:
And, dazzled by her visionary glare,
Advanced incautious of each fatal snare.
Though warned full often the slippery track to shun,
Yet Hope, with flattering voice, betrayed them on.
Beguiled to danger thus, they left behind
The scene of peace, and social joy resigned.
Long absent they, from friends and native home,
The cheerless ocean were inured to roam:
Yet Heaven, in pity to severe distress,
Had crowned each painful voyage with success:
Still, to atone for toils and hazards past,
Restored them to maternal plains at last.
Thrice had the sun, to rule the varying year,
Across the equator rolled his flaming sphere,
Since last the vessel spread her ample sail
From Albion's coast, obsequious to the gale.
She over the spacious flood, from shore to shore,
Unwearying wafted her commercial store.
The richest ports of Afric she had viewed,
Thence to fair Italy her course pursued;
Had left behind Trinacria's burning isle,
And visited the margin of the Nile.
And now, that winter deepens round the pole,
The circling voyage hastens to its goal.
They, blind to Fate's inevitable law,
No dark event to blast their hope foresaw;
But, from gay Venice, soon expect to steer
For Britain's coast, and dread no perils near.
A thousand tender thoughts their souls employ,
That fondly dance to scenes of suture joy.
Thus time elapsed, while over the pathless tide
Their ship through Grecian seas the pilots guide.
Occasion called to touch at Candia's shore,
Which, blessed with favoring winds, they soon explore:
The haven enter, born before the gale,
Dispatch their commerce, and prepare to sail.
Eternal powers! what ruins from afar
Mark the fell track of desolating war!
Here Art and Commerce, with auspicious reign,
Once breathed sweet influence on the happy plain;
While over the lawn, with dance and festive song,
Young Pleasure led the jocund Hours along.
In gay luxuriance Ceres too was seen
To crown the valleys with eternal green.
For wealth, for valor, courted and revered,
What Albion is, fair Candia then appeared.
Ah! who the flight of ages can revoke?
The sreeborn spirit of her sons is broke;
They bow to Ottoman's imperious yoke!
No longer Fame the drooping heart inspires,
For rude Oppression (...) its genial sires.
But still her fields, with golden harvests crowned,
Supply the barren shores of Greece around.
What pale distress afflicts these wretched isles!
There hope never dawns, and pleasure never smiles.
The vassal-wretch obsequious drag^ his chain,
And hears his famished babes lament in vain.
These eyes have seen the dull reluctant soil
A seventh year scorn the weary labourer's toil.
No blooming Venus, on the desert shore,
Now views with triumph captive gods adore.
No lovely Helens now, with fatal charms,
Call forth the avenging chiefs of Greece to arms.
No fair Penelopes inchant the eye,
For whom contending kings are proud to die.
Here sullen Beauty sheds a twilight ray,
While Sorrow bids her vernal bloom decay.
Those charms, so long renowned in classic strains,
Are doomed to shine on Albion's happier plains!
Now, in the southern hemisphere, the sun
Through the bright virgin and the scales had run;
And on the ecliptic wheeled his winding way,
Till the fierce scorpion felt his flaming ray.
The ship was moored beside the wave-worn strand;
Four days her anchors bit the golden sand:
For sickening vapors lull the air to sleep,
And not a breeze awakes the silent deep.
This, when the autumnal equinox is over,
And Phoebus in the north declines no more,
The watchful mariner, whom Heaven informs,
Often deems the prelude of approaching storms.
True to his trust when sacred duty calls,
No brooding storm the master's soul appalls:
The adv^^^^ing season warns him to the main:
A captive, letter^d to the (...) of gain!
His anxious heart, impatient of delay,
Expects the winds to sail from Candia's bay;
Determined from whatever point they rise,
To trust his fortune to the seas and skies.
Thou living ray of intellectual fire,
Whose voluntary gleams my verse inspire;
Ere yet the deepening incidents prevail,
Till roused attention feel our plaintive tale,
Record whom, chief among the gallant crew,
The unblest pursuit of fortune hither drew!
Can sons of Neptune, generous, brave and bold,
In pain and hazard toil for sordid gold?
They can; for gold, too often, with magic art,
Subdues each nobler impulse of the heart:
This crowns the prosperous villain with applause,
To whom, in vain, sad Merit pleads her cause:
This strews with roses life's perplexing road,
And leads the way to Pleasure's blessed abode,
With slaughtered victims fills the weeping plain,
And smooths the furrows of the treacherous main.
Over the gay vessel, and her daring band,
Experienced Albert held the chief command.
Though trained in boisterous elements, his mind
Was yet by soft humanity refined.
Each joy of wedded love at home he knew;
Abroad confessed the father of his crew!
Brave, liberal, just! the calm domestic scene
Had over his temper breathed a gay serene.
Him science taught by mystic lore to trace
The planets wheeling in eternal race;
To mark the ship in floating balance held,
By earth attracted and by seas repelled;
Or point her devious track, through climes unknown,
That leads to every shore in every zon^
He saw the moon through heaven's blue concave glide,
And into motion charm the expanding tide;
While earth impetuous round her axle rolls,
Exalts her watery zone, and sinks the poles.
Light and attraction, from their genial source,
He saw still wandering with diminished force;
While on the margin of declining day,
Night's shadowy cone reluctant melts away.
Inured to peril, with unconquered soul,
The chief beheld tempestuous oceans roll;
His genius, ever for the event prepa^'d,
Rose with the storm, and all its dangers shared.
The second powers and office Rodmond bore:
A hardy son of England's farthest shore!
Where bleak Northumbria pours her savage train
In sable souadrons over the northern main;
That, with her pitchy entrails stored, resort,
A sooty tribe! to fair Augusta's port.
Wherever in ambush lurk the fatal sands,
They claim the danger; proud of skilful hands!
For while with darkling course their vessels sweep
The winding shore, or plow the faithless deep,
Over bar and shelf the watery path they sound, Ver. 268. A bar is known, in
hydrography, to be a mass of earth or sand collected by the surge of the sea,
at the entrance of a river or haven: so as to render the navigation difficult,
and often dangerous.

With dexterous arm; sagacious of the ground!
Fearless they combat every hostile wind,
Wheeling in mazy tracks, with course inclined.
Expert to moor, where terrors line the road,
Or win the anchor from its dark abode:
But drooping and relaxed in climes afar,
Tumultuous and undisciplined in war.
Such Rodmond was; by learning unrefin'd,
That often enlightens to corrupt the mind.
Boisterous of manners; trained, in early youth,
To scenes, that shame the conscious cheek of truth;
To scenes, that Nature's struggling voice control,
And freeze compassion rising in the soul!
Where the grim hell hounds, prowling round the shore,
With foul intent the stranded bark explore;
Deaf to the voice of woe, her decks they board,
While tardy justice slumbers over her sword;
The indignant Muse, severely taught to feel,
Shrinks from a theme, she blushes to reveal!
Too often example, armed with poisons fell,
Pollutes the shrine, where Mercy loves to dwell:
Thus Rodmond, trained by this unhallowed crew,
The sacred social passions never knew:
Unskilled to argue; in dispute yet loud;
Bold without caution; without honor proud;
In art unschool'd; each veteran rule he prized,
And all improvement haughtily despised:
Yet though full often to future perils blind,
With skill superior glowed his daring mind,
Through snares of death the reeling bark to guide,
When midnight shades involve the raging tide.
To Rodmond next, in order of command,
Succeeds the youngest of our naval band.
But what avails it to record a name
That courts no rank among the sons of Fame?
While yet a stripling, often with fond alarms,
His bosom danced to Nature's boundless charms,
On him fair science dawned, in happier hour,
Awakening into bloom young Fancy's flower;
But frowning fortune, with untimely blast,
The blossom withered, and the dawn overcast.
Forlorn of heart, and by severe decree,
Condemned reluctant to the faithless sea,
With long farewell he left the laurel grove,
Where Science and the tuneful Sisters rove.
Hither he wandered, anxious to explore,
Antiquities of nations now no more:
To penetrate each distant realm unknown,
And range excursive over the untravel'd zon^.
In vain; for rude Adversity's command,
Still on the margin of each famous land,
With unrelenting ire, his steps opposed;
And every gate of hope against him closed!
Permit my verse, ye blessed Pierian Train,
To call Arion this ill-fated swain!
For, like that bard unhappy, on his, head
Malignant stars their hostile influence shed.
Both in lamenting numbers, over the deep,
With conscious anguish taught the harp to weep:
And both the raging surge in safety bore,
Amid destruction, panting to the shore.
This last our tragic story from the wave
Of dark oblivion happily yet may save:
With genuine sympathy may vet complain,
While sad remembrance bleeds at every vein.
Such were the pilots; tutored to divine
The untravel'd course by geometric line:
Trained to command, and range the various sail,
Whose various force conforms to every gale.
Charged with the commerce, hither also came
A gallant youth, Palemon was his name:
A father's stern resentment doomed to prove,
He came, the victim of unhappy love!
His heart for Albert's beauteous daughter bled;
For her a secret flame his bosom fed.
Nor let the wretched slaves of folly scorn
This genuine passion, Nature's eldest-born!
'Twas his with lasting anguish to complain,
While blooming Anna mourned the cause in vain.
Graceful of form, by Nature taught to please,
Of power to melt the female breast with ease,
To her Palemon told his tender tale,
Soft as the voice of summer's evening gale.
OF enjoyed, he saw her lovely eyes relent;
The blushing maiden smiled with sweet consent.
Often, in the mazes of a neighboring grove,
Unheard, they breathed alternate vows of love:
By fond society their passion grew,
Like the young blossom fed with vernal dew.
In evil hour the officious tongue of Fame
Betrayed the secret of their mutual flame.
With grief and anger struggling in his breast,
Palemon's father heard the tale confessed.
Long had he liften'd with Suspicion's ear,
And learnt, sagacious, this event to fear.
Too well, fair youth! thy liberal heart he knew;
A heart to Nature's warm impressions true!
Full often his wisdom strove, with fruitless toil,
With avarice to pollute that generous soil:
That soil, impregnated with nobler seed,
Refused the culture of so rank a weed.
Elate with wealth, in active commerce won,
And basking in the smile of Fortune's sun,
With scorn the parent eyed the lowly shade,
That veiled the beauties of this charming maid.
Indignant he rebuked the enamored boy,
The flattering promise of his future joy!
He soothed and menaced, anxious to reclaim
This hopeless passion, or divert its aim:
Often led the youth, where circling joys delight
The ravished sense, or beauty charms the sight.
With all her powers enchanting music failed,
And Pleasure's syren-voice no more prevailed.
The merchant, kindling then with proud disdain,
In look and voice assumed an harsher strain.
In absence now his only hope remained;
And such the stern decree his will ordained.
Deep anguish, while Palemon heard his doom,
Drew over his lovely face a saddening gloom.
In vain with bitter sorrow he repined,
No tender pity touched that sordid mind;
To thee, brave Albert was the charge confined.
The stately ship, forsaking England's shore,
To regions far remote Palemon bore.
Incapable of change, the unhappy youth
Still loved fair Anna with eternal truth:
From clime to clime an exile doomed to roam,
His heart still panted for its secret home.
The moon had circled thrice her wayward zone,
To him since young Arion first was known;
Who, wand^ring here through many a scene renowned,
In Alexandria's port the vessel found;
Where, anxious to review his native shore,
He on the rearing wave embarked once more.
Often, by pale Cynthia's melancholy light,
With him Palemon kept the watch of night;
In whose sad bosom many a sigh suppressed,
Some painful secre^ of the soul consest.
Perhaps Arion soon the cause divined,
Though shunning still to probe a wounded mind;
He felt the chastity of silent woe,
Though glad the balm of comfort to bestow.
He, with Palemon, often recounted over
The tales of hapless love in ancient lore,
Recalled to me mory by the adjacent shore.
The scene just present, and its story known,
The lover sighed for sorrows not his own.
Thus, though a recent date their friendship bore,
Soon the ripe metal owned the quickening ore:
For in one tide their passions seemed to roll,
By kindred age and sympathy of soul.
These (...) the inferior naval train preside,
The coun^ determine, or the commerce guide:
Over all the rest, an undistinguished crew!
Her wing of deepest shade oblivion drew.
A sullen languor still the skies oppressed,
And held t^^ unwilling ship in strong arrest.
High in his chariot glowed the lamp of day;
Over Ida flaming with meridian ray.
Relaxed from toil, the sailors range the shore,
Where famine, war and storm are felt no more:
The hour to social pleasure they resign,
And black remembrance drown in generous wine.
On deck, beneath the shading canvas spread,
Rodmond a rueful tale of wonders read,
Of dragons roaring on the enchanted coast;
The hideous goblin, and the yelling ghost.
But with Arion, from the sultry heat
Of noon, Palemon sought a cool retreat.
And lo! the shore with mournful prospects crowned; Ver. 438. The intelligent
reader will readily discover, that these remarks allude to the ever-memorable
siege of Candia, which was taken from the Venetians by the Turks in 1669; being
then considered as impregnable, and esteemed the most formidable fortress in
the universe.

The rampart torn with many a fatal wound;
The ruined bulwark tottering over the strand,
Bewail the stroke of War's tremendous hand.
What scenes of woe this hapless isle overspread!
Where late thrice fifty thousand warriors bled.
Full thrice twelve summers were yon towers assailed,
Till barbarous Ottoman at last prevailed:
While thundering mines the lovely plains o'erturn'd,
While heroes fell, and domes and temples burned.
But now before them happier scenes arise!
Elysian vales salute their ravished eyes:
Olive and cedar formed a grateful shade,
Where light with gay romantic error strayed.
The myrtles here with fond caresses twine,
There, rich with nectar, melts the pregnant vine.
And lo! the stream, renowned in classic song,
Sad Lethe! glides the silent vale along.
On mossy banks, beneath the citron-grove,
The youthful wanderers sound a wild alcove:
Soft, over the fairy region langour stole,
And with sweet melancholy charmed the soul.
Here first Palemon, while his pensive mind
For consolation on his friend reclined,
In pity's bleeding bosom poured the stream
Of love's soft anguish, and of grief supreme.
Too true thy words! -- by sweet remembrance taught,
My heart in secret bleeds with tender thought:
In vain it courts the solitary shade,
By every action, every look betrayed!
The pride of generous woe disdains appeal
To hearts, that unrelenting fros^s congeal:
Yet sure, if right Palemon can divine,
The sense of gentle pity dwells in thine.
Yes! all his cares thy sympathy shall know,
And prove the kind companion of his woe.
Albert thou know, with skill and science graced,
In humble station though by fortune placed:
Yet, never seaman more serenely brave
Led Britain's conquering squadrons over the wave.
Where full in view Augusta's spires are seen,
With flowery lawns, and waving woods between,
A peaceful dwelling stands in modest pride,
Where Thames, slow-winding, rolls his ample tide.
There live the hope and pleasure of his life,
A pious daughter, and a faithful wife.
For his return, with fond officious care,
Still every grateful object these prepare;
Whatever can allure the smell or sight,
Or wake the drooping spirits to delight.
This blooming maid in virtue's path to guide,
Her anxious parents all their cares applied.
Her spotless soul, where soft compassion reigned,
No vice untuned, no sickening folly stained:
Not fairer grows the lily of the vale,
Whose bosom opens to the vernal gale;
Her eyes, unconscious of their fatal charms,
Thrilled every heart with exquisite alarms;
Her face, in beauty's sweet attraction dressed,
The smile of maiden-innocence expressed,
While health, that rises with the newborn day,
Breathed over her cheek the softest blush of May.
Still in her look complacence smiled serene;
She moved the charmer of the rural scene.
'Twas at that season when the fields resume
Their loveliest hues, arrayed in vernal bloom,
Yon ship, rich-freighted from the Italian shore,
To Thames' fair banks her costly tribute bore:
While thus my father saw his ample hoard,
From this return, with recent treasures stored;
Me, with affairs of commerce charged, he sent
To Albert's humble mansion; soon I went,
Too soon, alas! unconscious of the event.
There, struck with sweet surprise and silent awe,
The gentle mistress of my hopes I saw:
There, wounded first by Love's resistless arms,
My glowing bosom throbb'd with strange alarms.
My ever-charming Anna! who alone
Can all the frowns of cruel Fate atone;
O! while all-conscious Memory holds her power,
Can I forget that sweetly-painful hour,
When from those eyes, with lovely lightning fraught,
My sluttering spirits first the infection caught?
When, as I gazed, my faultering tongue betrayed
The heart's quick tumults, or refused its aid:
While the dim light my ravished eyes forsook,
And every limb unstrung with terror shook.
With all her powers dissenting Reason strove
To tame at first the kindling flame of love;
She strove in vain; subdued by charms divine,
My soul a victim fell at Beauty's shrine.
Often from the din of bustling life I strayed,
In happier scenes, to see my lovely maid.
Full often, where Thames his wandering current leads,
We roved at evening-hour through flowery meads.
There, while my heart's soft anguish I revealed,
To her with tender sighs my hope appealed.
While the sweet nymph my faithful tale believed,
Her snowy breast with secret tumult heaved:
For, trained in rural scenes from earliest youth,
Nature was here is, and Innocence and Truth.
She never knew the city damsel's art,
Whose frothy pertness charms the vacant heart.
My suit prevailed; for Love informed my tongue,
And on his votary's lips Persuasion hung.
Her eyes with conscious sympathy withdrew,
And over her cheek the rosy current flew.
Thrice happy hours! where, with no dark alloy,
Life's fairest sunshine gilds the vernal day!
For here the sigh that soft affection heaves,
From stings of sharper woe the soul relieves.
Elysian scenes, too happy long to last!
Too soon a storm the smiling dawn overcast!
Too soon some demon to my rather bore
The tidings, that his heart with anguish tore.
My pride to kindle, with dissuasive voice,
Awhile he labored to degrade my choice:
Then, in the whirling wave of pleasure, sought
From its loved object to divert my thought.
With equal hope he might attempt to bind,
In chains of adamant, the lawless wind:
For Love had aimed the fatal thaft too sure:
Hope fed the wound, and Absence knew no cure.
With alienated look, each art he saw
Still baffled by superior Nature's law.
His anxious mind on various schemes revolved;
At last on cruel exile he resolved.
The rigorous doom was fixed; alas! how vain
To him of tender anguish to complain!
His soul, that never Love's sweet influence felt,
By social Sympathy could never melt.
With stern command to Albert's charge he gave,
To waft Palemon over the distant wave.
The ship was laden and prepared to sail,
And only waited now the leading gale.
'Twas ours, in that sad period, first to prove
The heartfelt torments of despairing love.
The impatient wish that never feels repose;
Desire that with perpetual current flows;
The fluctuating pangs of hope and fear;
Joy distant still, and sorrow ever near!
Thus while the pangs of thought severer grew
The western breezes inauspicious blew,
Hastening the moment of our last adieu,
The vessel parted on the falling tide;
Yet Time one sacred hour to Love supplied.
The night was silent, and, advancing fast,
The moon over Thames her silver mantle cast.
Impatient Hope the midnight path explored,
And led me to the nymph my soul adored.
Soon her quick footsteps struck my listening ear;
She came confessed! the lovely maid drew near!
But, ah! what force of language can impart
The impetuous joy that glowed in either neart!
O ye! whose melting hearts are formed to prove
The trembling ecstasies of genuine love!
When, with delicious agony, the thought
Is to the verge of high delirium wrought,
Your secret sympathy alone can tell
What raptures then the throbbing bosom swell;
Over all the nerves what tender tumults roll,
While love with sweet enchantment melts the soul!
In transport lost, by trembling hope impressed,
The blushing virgin sunk upon my breast;
While hers congenial beat with sond alarms;
Dissolving softness! paradise of charms!
Flashed from our eyes, in warm transfusion flew
Our blanding spirits, that each other drew!
O bliss supreme! where Virtue's self can melt
With joys that guilty Pleasure never felt!
Formed to resine the thought with chaste Desire,
And kindle sweet Affection's purest fire!
"Ah! wherefore should my hopeless love, she eries,
While sorrow burst with interrupting sighs,
For ever destined to lament in vain,
Such flattering, fond ideas entertain?
My heart through scenes of fair illusion strayed,
To joys decreed for some superior maid.
It Is mine to feel the sharpest stings of grief,
Where never gentle Hope affords relief.
Go then, dear youth! thy father's rage atone,
And let this tortured bosom beat alone!
The hovering anger yet thou may appease;
Go then, dear youth! nor tempt the faithless seas!
Find out some happier daughter of the town,
With fortune's fairer joys thy love to crown;
While smiling over thee, with indulgent ray,
Prosperity shall hail each newborn day.
Too well thou know good Albert's niggard fate,
Ill-fitted to sustain thy father's hate;
Go then, I charge thee, by thy generous love,
That fatal to my father thus may prove!
On me alone let dark affliction fall!
Whose heart, for thee, will gladly suffer all.
Then haste thee hence, Palemon, ere too late,
Nor rashly hope to brave opposing fate!"
She ceased; while anguish in her angel-face
Over all her beauties shower'd celestial grace.
Not Helen, in her bridal charms arrayed,
Was half so lovely as this gentle maid.
O soul of all my wishes! I replied,
Can that soft fabric stem affliction's t^de?
Can thou, fair emblem of exalted truth!
To sorrow doom the summer of thy youth;
And I, persidious! all that sweetness see
Consigned to lasting misery for me?
Sooner, this moment may the eternal doom
Palemon in the silent earth entomb!
Attest thou moon, fair regent of the night!
Whose luster sickens at this mournful sight;
By all the pangs divided lovers feel,
That sweet possession only knows to heal!
By all the horrors brooding over the deep!
Where Fate and Ruin sad dominion keep;
Though tyrant-duty over me threatening stands,
And claims obedience to her stern commands:
Should fortune cruel or auspicious prove,
Her smile or frown shall never change my love!
My heart, that now must every joy resign,
Incapable of change, is only thine!
O cease to weep! this storm will yet decay,
And these sad clouds of sorrow melt away.
While through the rugged path of life we go,
All mortals taste the bitter draught of woe.
The famed and great decreed to equal pain,
Full often in splendid wretchedness complain.
For this prosperity, with brighter ray,
In smiling contrast gilds our vital day.
Thou too, sweet maid! ere twice ten months are over
Shall hail Palemon to his native shore,
Where never interest shall divide us more.
Her struggling soul, overwhelmed with tender grief,
Now found an interval of short relief:
So melts the surface of the frozen stream,
Eeneath the wintery sun's departing beam.
With warning haste the shades of night withdrew,
And gave the signal of a sad adieu.
As on my neck the afflicted maiden hung,
A thousand racking doubts her spirit wrung
She wept the terrors of the searful wave,
Too often, alas! the wandering lover's grave!
With soft persuasion I dispelled her fear,
And from her cheek beguiled the falling tear.
While dying fondness languish'd in her eyes,
She poured her soul to Heaven in suppliant sighs.
"Look down with pity, oh! ye powers above,
Who hear the sad complaint of bleeding love!
Ye, who the secret laws of sat explore,
Alone can tell if he returns no more:
Or if the hour of future joy remain,
Long-wish'd atonement of long suffered pain!
Bid every guardian minister attend,
And from all ill the much-loved youth defend!"
With grief overwhelmed we parted twice in vain,
And, urged by strong attraction, met again.
At last, by cruel fortune torn apart,
While tender passion streamed in either heart,
Our eyes transfixed with agonizing look,
One sad sarewel, one last embrace we took.
Forlorn of hope the lovely maid I left,
Pensive and pale; of every joy bereft.
She to her silent couch retired to weep,
While her sad swain embarked upon the deep.
His tale thus closed, from sympathy of grief
Palemon's bosom felt a sweet relief.
The hapless bird, thus ravished from the skies,
Where all forlorn his loved companion flies,
In secret long bewails his cruel fate,
With fond remembrance of his winged mate:
Till grown familiar with a foreign train,
Composed at length, his sadly-warbling strain
In sweet oblivion charms the sense of pain.
Ye tender maids, in whose pathetic souls
Compassion's sacred stream impetuous rolls;
Whose warm affections exquisitely feel
The secret wound you tremble to reveal!
Ah! may no wanderer of the faithless main,
Pour through your breast the soft delicious bane!
May never fatal tenderness approve
The fond effusions of their ardent love.
O! warned by friendship's counsel, learn to shun
The fatal path where thousands are undone!
Now as the youths, returning over the plain,
Approached the lonely margin of the main,
First, with attention roused, Arion eyed
The graceful lover, formed in Nature's pride.
His frame the happiest symmetry displayed,
And looks of waving gold his neck arrayed:
In every look the Paphian graces shine,
Soft-breathing over his check their bloom divine.
With lightened heart he smiled serenely gay,
Like young Adonis or the son of May.
Not Cytherea from a fairer swain
Received her apple on the Trojan plain!
The sun's bright orb, declining all serene,
Now glanced obliquely over the woodland scene.
Creation smiles around; on every spray
The warbling birds exalt their evening lay.
Elithe shipping over yon hill, the fieecy train
Join the deep chorus of the lowing plain:
The golden lime and orange there were seen,
On fragrant branches of perpetual green.
The crystal streams, that velvet meadows lave,
To the green ocean roll with chiding wave.
The glassy ocean hushed forgets to roar,
But trembling murmurs on the sandy shore:
And lo! his surface, lovely to behold,
Glows in the west, a sea of living gold!
While, all above, a thousand liveries gay
The skies with pomp ineffable array.
Arabian sweets perfume the happy plains;
Above, beneath, around, enchantment reigns!
While yet the shades, on Time's eternal scale,
With long vibration deepen over the vale;
While yet the songsters of the vocal grove,
With dying numbers tune the soul to love,
With joyful eyes the attentive master sees
The auspicious omens of an eastern bre^eze.
Now radiant Vesper leads the starry train,
And Night slow draws her veil over land and main.
Round the charged bowl the sailors form a ring,
By turns recount the wondrous tale, or sing,
As love or battle, hardships of the main,
Or genial wine, awake their homely strain:
Then some the watch of night alternate keep,
The rest lie huried in oblivious sleep.
Deep midnight now involves the livid skies,
While infant breezes from the shore arise.
The waning moon, behind a watery shroud,
Pale-glimmer'd over the long protracted cloud.
A mighty ring around her silver throne,
With parting meteors crossed, portentous shone.
This in the troubled sky full often prevails,
Often deemed a signal of tempestuous gales.
While young Arion sleeps, before his sight
Tumultuous swim the visions of the night.
Now blooming Anna, with her happy swain,
Approached the sacred Hymeneal fane;
Anon tremendous lightnings flash between,
And funeral pomp, and weeping Loves are seen!
Now with Palemon up a rocky steep,
Whose summit trembles over the roaring deep,
With painful step he climbed; while far above
Sweet Anna charmed them with the voice of love.
Then sudden from the slippery height they fell,
while dreadful yawn'd beneath the Jaws of hell.
Amid this fearful trance, a thundering sound
He hears, and thrice the hollow decks rebound.
Upstarting from his couch, on deck he sprung;
Thrice with shrill note the boatswain's whistle rung.
All hands unmoor! proclaims a boisterous cry;
All hands unmoor, the cavern'd rocks reply!
Roused from repose, alost the sailors swarm,
And with their levers soon the windlass arm. Ver. 791. The windlass is a sort
of large roller, used to wind in the cable, or heave up the anchor. It is
turned about vertically by a number of long bars or levers; in which operation
it is prevented from recoiling by the paul's, v. 794.

The order given, upspringing with a bound,
They lodge the bars, and wheel their engine round;
At every turn the clanging paul's resound.
Uptorn relustant from its oozy cave,
The ponderous anchor rises over the wave.
Along their slippery masts the yards ascend,
And high in air the canvas wings extend;
Redoubling cords the lofty canvas guide,
And through inextricable mazes glide.
The lunar rays with long reflection gleam,
To light the vessel over the silver stream,
Along the glassy plain serene she glides,
While azure radiance trembles on her sides.
From east to north the transient breezes play,
And in the Egyptian quarter soon decay.
A calm ensues; they dread the adjacent shore;
The b^ats with rowers armed are sent before;
With cordage fastened to the lofty prow,
Aloof to sea the stately ship they tow. Ver. 810. Towing is the operation of
drawing a ship forward, by means of ropes extending from her forepart, to one
or more of the boats rowing before her.

The nervous crew their sweeping oars extend,
And pealing shouts the shore of Candia rend.
Success attends their skill, the danger's over,
The port is doubled and beheld no more.
Now Morn, her lamp pale-glimmering on the sight,
Seatter'd before her van reluctant Night.
She comes not in refulgent pomp arrayed,
But sternly frowning, wrapped in sullen shade.
Above incumbent vapors, Ida's height,
Tremendous rock! emerges on the sight.
North-east the guardian isle of Standia lies,
And westward Freschin's woody capes arise.
With winning postures now the wanton sails
Spread all their snares to charm the inconstant gales.
The swelling stu'n-sails now their wings extend, Ver. 825, 826. Studding-sails
are long, narrow sails, which are only used in fine weather and fair winds, on
the outside of the larger square-sails. Stay-sails are three-cornered sails,
which are hoisted up on the stays when the wind crosses the ship's course
either directly or obliquely.

Then stay-sails sidelong to the breeze ascend;
While all to court the wandering breeze are placed,
With yards now thwarting, now obliquely braced.
The dim horizon lowering vapors shroud,
And blot the sun, yet struggling in the cloud:
Through the wide atmosphere, condensed with haze,
His glaring orb emits a sanguine blaze.
The pilots now their rules of art apply,
The mystic needle's devious aim to try.
The compass placed to catch the rising ray, Ver. 835. The operation of taking
the sun's azimuth, in order to discover the eastern or western variation of the
magnetical needle.

The quadrant's shadows studious they survey,
Along the arch the gradual index slides,
While Phoebus down the vertic circle glides.
Now, seen on Ocean's utmost verge to swim,
He sweeps it vibrant with his nether limb.
Their sage experience thus explores the height
And polar distance of the source of light:
Then through the chiliads triple maze, they trace
The analogy that proves the magnet's place.
The wayward steel, to truth thus reconciled,
No more the attentive pilot's eye beguiled.
The natives, while the ship departs the land,
Ashore with admiration gazing stand.
Majestically slow, before the breeze,
In silent pomp she marches on the seas.
Her milk-white bottom cast a softer gleam,
While trembling through the green translucent stream.
The wales, that close above in contrast shone, Ver. 853. The wales, here
alluded to, are an assemblage of strong planks which envelope the lower part of
the ship's side, wherein they are broader and thicker than the rest, and appear
somewhat like a range of heaps which separates the bottom from the upper works.

Clasp the long fabric with a jetty zone.
Britannia, riding awful on the prow,
Gazed over the vassal-wave that rolled below:
Wherever she moved, the vassal-waves were seen
To yield obsequious and confess their queen.
The imperial trident graced her dexter hand,
Of power to rule the surge, like Moses' wand,
The eternal empire of the m^in to keep,
And guide her squadrons over the trembling deep.
Her left propitious bore a mystic shield,
Around whose margin rolls the watery field.
There her bold Genius, in his floating car,
Over the wild billow hurls the storm of war.
And lo! the beasts, that often with jealous rage,
In bloody combat met, from age to age,
Tamed into Union, yoked in Friendship's chain,
Draw his proud chariot round the vanquished main.
From the broad margin to the center grew
Shelves, rocks, and whirlpools, hideous to the view!
The immortal shield from Neptune she received,
When first her head above the waters heaved.
Loose floated over her limbs an azure vest,
A figured scutcheon glittered on her breast;
There, from one parent-soil, for ever young,
The blooming Rose and hardy Thistle sprung.
Around her head an oaken wreath was seen,
Inwove with laurels of unfading green.
Such was the sculptured prow: from van to rear
The artillery frowned, a black tremendous tier!
Embalmed with orient gum, above the wave,
The swelling sides a yellow radiance gave.
On the broad stern, a pencil warm and bold,
That never servile rules of art controlled,
An allegoric tale on high portrayed;
There a young hero; here a loyal maid.
Fair England's Genius in the youth expressed,
Her ancient foe, but now her friend confessed,
The warlike nymph with fond regard surveyed:
No more his hostile frown her heart dismayed.
His look, that once shot terror from afar,
Like young Alcides, or the god of war,
Serene as summer's evening skies she saw;
Serene yet firm; though mild, impressing awe.
Her nervous arm, inured to toils severe,
Brandished the unconquered Caledonian spear.
The dreadful saulchion of the hills she wore,
Sung to the harp in many a tale of yore,
That often her rivers died with hostile gore.
Blue was her rocky shield; her piercing eye
Flashed, like the meteors of her native sky.
Her crest, high-plum'd, was rough with many a scar,
And over her helmet gieam'd the northern star.
The warrior youth appeared of noble fame;
The hardy offspring of some Runic dame.
Loose over his shoulders hung the slackened bow,
Renowned in song, the terror of the foe!
The sword, that often the barbarous north defied,
The scourge of tyrants! glittered by his side.
Clad in refulgent arms, in battle won,
The George emblazon'd on his corselet shone.
Fast by his side was seen a golden lyre,
Pregnant with numbers of eternal fire;
Whose strings umock the witches' midnight spell,
Or waft rapt fancy through the gulfs of hell.
Struck with contagion, kindling fancy hears
The songs of heaven! the music of the spheres!
Borne on Newtonian wing through air she flies,
Where other suns to other systems rise!
These front the scene conspicuous -- over head
Albion^^^ proud oak his filial branches spread:
While on the sea-beat shore obsequious stood,
Beneath their feet, the father of the flood.
Here, the bold native of her cliffs above,
Perched by the martial maid the bird of Jove;
There on the watch, sagacious of his prey,
With eyes of fire, an English mastiff lay.
Yonder fair Commerce stretched her winged sail;
Here frowned the god that wakes the living gale.
High over the poop, the flattering winds unfurled
The imperial flag that rules the watery world.
Deep-blushing armours all the tops invest,
And warlike trophies either quarter dressed.
Then tower'd the masts; the canvas swelled on high,
And waving streamers floated in the sky.
Thus the rich vessel moves in trim array,
Like some fair virgin on her bridal day.
Thus, like a swan, she cleaves the watery plain;
The pride and wonder of the Aegean main!
END OF THE FIRST CANTO,
CANTO II.
The Argument. Reflection on leaving the land. The gale continues. A
water-spout. Beauty of a dying dolphin. The ship's progress along the shore.
Wind strengthens. The sails reduced. A shoal of porpoises. Last appearance of
cape Spado. Sea rises. A squall. The sails further diminished. Mainsail split.
Ship bears away before the wind. Again hauls upon the wind. Another mainsail
fitted to the yard. The gale still increases. Topsails furled. Topgallant-yards
sent down. Sea enlarges. Sunset. Courses reefed. Four seamen lost off the lee
main-yard-arm. Anxiety of the pilots from their dangerous situation. Resolute
behavior of the sailors. The ship labors in great distress. The artillery
thrown overboard. Dismal appearance of the weather. Very high and dangerous
sea. Severe fatigue of the crew. Consultation and resolution of the officers.
Speech and advice of Albert to the crew. Necessary disposition to veer before
the wind. Disappointment in the proposed effect. New dispositions equally
unsuccessful. The mizen-mast cut away.

ADIEU, ye pleasures of the rural scene,
Where peace and calm contentment dwell serene!
To me in vain, on earth's polific soil,
With summer crowned the Elysian valleys smile!
To (...) those happier scenes no joy impart,
But tantalize with hope my aching heart.
For these, alas! reluctant I forego,
To visit storms and elements of woe!
Yet tempests over my head congenial roll.
To su^t the mournful music of my soul!
In black progression, lo! they hover near;
Hall, social horrors, like my fate severe!
Old Ocean! hail, beneath whose azure zone
The secret deep lies unexplor'd, unknown.
Approach, ye brave companions of the sea,
And fearless view this awful scene with me!
Ye native guardians of your country's laws!
Ye bold assertors of her sacred cause!
The Muse invites you; judge if she depart,
Unequal, from the precepts of your art.
In practice trained, and conscious of her power,
Her steps intrepid meet the trying hour.
Over the smooth bosom of the faithless tides,
Propel'd by gentle gales, the vessel glides.
Rodmond exulting felt the auspicious wind,
And by a mystic charm its aim confined.
The thoughts of home, that over his fancy roll,
With trembling joy dilate Palemon's soul:
Hope lifts his heart, before whose vivid ray
Distress recedes, and danger melts away.
Already Britain's parent-cliffs arise,
And in idea greet his longing eyes!
Each amorous sailor too, with heart elate.
Dwells on the beauties of his gentle mate.
Even they the impressive dart of love can feel,
Whose stubborn souls are sheathed in triple steel.
Nor less o'er-joy'd, perhaps with equal truth,
Each faithful maid expects the approaching youth.
In distant bosoms equal ardors glow,
And mutual passions mutual joy bestow.
Tall Ida's summit now more distant grew,
And Jove's high hill was rising on the view:
When, from the left approaching, they descry
A liquid column towering shoot on high.
The foaming base an angry whirlwind sweeps,
Where curling billows rouse the fearful deeps.
Still round and round the fluid vortex flies,
Scattering dun night and horror through the skies.
The swift volution and the enormous train
Let sages versed in Nature's lore explain!
The horrid apparition still draws nigh,
And white with foam the whirling surges fly!
The guns were prim'd; the vessel northward veers
Till her black battery on the column bears.
The nitre fired; and while the dreadful sound,
Convulsive, shook the slumbering air around,
The watery volume, trembling to the sky,
Burst down a dreadful deluge from on high!
The affrighted surge, recoiling as it fell,
Rolling in hills disclosed the abyss of hell.
But soon, this transient undulation over,
The sea subsides, the whirlwinds rage no more.
While southward now the increasing b^^^zes veer,
Dark clouds incumbent on their wings appear.
In front they view the consecrated grove
Of cypress, sacred once to Cretan Jove.
The thirsty canvas, all around supplied,
Still drinks unquench'd the full aerial tide.
And now, approaching near the lofty stern,
A shoal of sportive dolphins they discern.
From burnished scales they beam refulgent rays,
Till all the glowing ocean seems to blaze.
Soon to the sport of death the crew repair,
Dart the long lance, or spread the baited snare.
One, in redoubling mazes, wheels along,
And glides, unhappy! near the triple prong.
Rodmond, unerring, over his head suspends
The barbed steel, and every turn attends.
Unerring aimed, the missile weapon flew,
And, plunging, struck the fated victim through.
The upturning points his ponderous bulk sustain;
On deck he struggles with convulsive pain.
But while his heart the fatal javelin thrills,
And flitting life escapes in sanguine rills,
What radiant changes strike the astonished sight!
What glowing hues of mingled shade and light!
Not equal beauties gild the lucid west,
With parting beams all over profusely dressed.
Not lovelier colors paint the vernal dawn,
When orient dews impearl the enameled lawn,
Than from his sides in bright suffusion flow,
That now with gold imperial seems to glow:
Now in pellucid sapphires meet the view,
And emulate the soit celestial hue;
Now beam a flaming crimson on the eye,
And now assume the purple's decper dye:
But here description clouds each shining ray;
What terms of art (...) Nature's powers display?
Now, while on high the freshening gale she feels,
The ship beneath her lofty pressure reels.
The auxiliar sails that court a gentle breeze
From their high stations sink by slow degrees.
The watchful ruler of the helm no more,
With fixed attention, eyes the adjacent shore.
But by the oracles of truth below,
The wondrous magnet guides the wayward pro^^.
The wind, that still the impressive canvas swelled,
Swift and more swift the yielding bark impelled.
Impatient thus she glides along the coast,
Till far behind the hill of Jove is lost:
And while aloof from Retimo she steers,
Malach's foreland full in front appears.
Wide over yon Isthmus stands the cypress grove
That once enclosed the hallowed fane of Jove.
Here too, me morial of his name! is found
A tomb, in marble ruins on the ground.
This gloomy tyrant, whose triumphant yoke
The trembling states around to slavery broke,
Through Greece, for murder, rape, and incest known,
The Muses raised to high Olympus' throne.
For often, alas! their venal strains adorn
The prince, that blushing virtue holds in scorn.
Still Rome and Greece record his endless fame,
And hence yon mountain yet retains his name.
But see! in confluence borne before the blast,
Clouds rolled on clouds the dusky noon overcast;
The blackening ocean curls; the wind arise;
And the dark scud in swift succession flies; Ver. 128. Scud is a name given by
s^anten to the lowest clouds, which are driven with great rapidity along the
atmosphere, in squally or tempestuous weather.

While the fwoln canvas bends the masts on high,
Low in the wave the leeward cannon lie. Ver. 130. When the wind crosses a
ship^^ course either directly or obliquely, that side of the ship, upon which
it acts. (...) called the weather-side; and the opposite one, which is then
^^ressed downward, is called the lee-side. Hence all the rig^ing and furniture
of the ship are, at this time, distinguished by the side on which they are
situated; as, the lee-cannon, the lee-braces, the weather-braces, etc.

The sailors now to give the ship relief,
Reduce the topsails by a single reef. Ver. 132. The topsails are large square
sails of the second degree in height and magnitude. Reefs are certain divisions
or spaces by which the principal sails are reduced when the wind increases; and
again enlarged proportionally when its force abates.

Each lofty yard with slackened cordage reels,
Rattle the creaking blocks, and ringing wheels.
Down the tall masts the topsails sink amain,
And soon reduced, assume their post again.
More distant grew receding Candia's shore,
And southward of the west cape Spado bore.
Four hours the sun his high meridian throne
Had left, and over Atlantic regions shone:
Still blacker clouds, that all the skies invade,
Draw over his sullied orb a dismal shade.
A squall deep-lowering blots the southern sky,
Before whose boisterous breath the waters fly.
Its weight the topsails can no more sustain,
Reef topsails! reef, the boatswain calls again!
The haliards and topbowlines soon are gone, Ver. 147. Haliards are either
single ropes or tackles, by which the sails are hoisted up and lowered when the
sail is to be extended or reduced. Ver. ibid. Bowlines are ropes intended to
keep the windward edge of the sail steady, and provent it from shaking in an
unfavourable wind.



To cluelines and reef-tackles next they run: Ver. 148. Cluelines are ropes
used to truss up the clues, or lower corners of the principal sails to their
respective yards, particularly when the sail is to be close reefed or fur^ed.
Ver. 148. Reeftackles are ropes employed to facilitate the operation of
reefing, by confining the extremities of the reef clos up to the yard, so that
the interval becomes slack, and is therefore easily rolled up and fastened to
the yard by the poin employed for this purpose, ver. 152.



The shivering sails descend; and now they square
The yards, while ready sailors mount in air.
The weather-earings and the lee they past; Ver. 151. Earings are small cords,
by which the upper corners of the principal sails, and also the extremities of
the reefs, are fastened to the yard-arms.

The reefs enrolled and every point made fast.
Their task above thus finished, they descend,
And vigilant the approaching squall attend.
It comes resistless, and with foaming sweep,
Upturns the whitening surface of the deep.
In such a tempest borne, to deeds of death,
The wayward Sisters scour the blasted heath.
With ruin pregnant now the clouds impend,
And storm and cataract tumultuous blend.
Deep on her side the reeling vessel lies;
Brail up the mizen quick! the master cries, Ver. 162. The mizen is a large
sail of an oblong figure extended upon the mizen-mast.

Man the cluegarnets! let the main-sheet fly! Ver. 163. Cluegarnets are
employed for the same purposes on the mainsail and foresail as the cluelines
are upon all other spuaresails. See the note on ver. 148. Ver. ibid. It is
necessary in this place to remark that the sheets, which are universally
mistaken by the English poets and their readers, for the sails themselves, are
no other than the ropes used to extend the clues, or lower corners of the sails
to which they attached. To the mainsail and foresail, there is a sheet and tack
on each side; the latter of which is a thick ^^pe serving to confine the
weather-clue of the sail down to the ship's side, whilst the former draws out
the lee-clue or lower corner on the opposite side. Tacks are only used in a
side wind.



The boisterous squall still presses from on high,
And swift, and fatal as the lightening's course,
Through the torn mainsail bursts with thundering force.
While the rent canvas fluttered in the wind,
Still on her flank the stooping bark inclined.
Rear up the helm a-weather! Rodmond cries; Ver. 169. The helm is said to be
a-weather when the bar by which it is managed is turned to the side of the ship
next the wind.

Swift at the word, the helm a-weather flies.
The prow with secret instinct veers apace;
And now the foresail right athwart they brace:
With equal sheets restrained, the bellying sail
Spreads a broad concave to the sweeping gale.
While over the foam the ship impetuous flies,
The attentive timoneer the helm applies. Ver. 176. Timoneer (from timonnier,
Fr.) the helmsman or sleersman.

As in pursuit along the aerial way,
With ardent eye, the falcon marks his prey,
Fach motion watches of the doubtful chase,
Obliquely wheeling through the liquid space;
So, governed by the steersman's glowing hands,
The regent-helm her motion still commands.
But now the transient squall to leeward past;
Again she rallies to the sudden blast.
The helm to starboard turns; with wings inclined Ver. 185. The helm, being
turned to starboard, or to the right side of the ship, directs the prow to the
left, or to port, and vice versa. Hence the helm being put a-starboard when the
ship is ranning northward, direct. her prow toward the west.

The sidelong canvas clasps the faithless wind.
The mizen draws; she springs aloof once more,
While the fore-staysail balances before. Ver. 188. This sail, which is with
more propriety called the foretop-mast staysail, is a triangular sail that runs
upon the foretop-mast stay, over the bowsprit. It is used to command the fore
part of the ship, and counterbalance the sails extended toward the stern. See
also the last note of this canto.

The foresail braced obliquely to the wind,
They near the prow the extended tack confined:
Then on the leeward sheet the seamen bend,
And haul the bowline to the bowsprit end.
To topsails next they haste; the buntlines gone,
The cluelines through their wheeled machinery run;
On either side below the sheets are manned;
Again the fluttering sails their skirts expand.
Once more the topsails, though with humbler plume,
Mounting aloft, their ancient post resume.
Again the bowlines and the yards were braced, Ver. 199. A yard is said to be
braced when it is turned about the mast horizontally, either to the right or
left: the ropes employed in this service are accordingly called braces.

And all the entangl'd cords in order placed.
The sail, by whirlwinds thus so lately rent,
In tattered ruins fluttering is unbent.
With brails refix'd, another soon prepared, Ver. 203. The ropes used to truss
up a sail to the yard or mast whereto it is attached, are in a general sense
called brails.

Ascending spreads along beneath the yard.
To each yard-arm the head-rope they extend, Ver. 205. The head-rope is a cord
to which the upper part of the sail is sewed.

And soon their earings and the roebins bend. Ver. 206. Ropebands, pronounced
roebins, are small cords used to fasten the upper edge of any sail to its
respective yard.

That task performed, they first the braces slack, Ver. 207. Because the
lee-brace confines the yard so that the tack will not come down to its place
till the braces are cast loose.

Then to its station drag the unwilling tack;
And, while the lee cluegarnet's lowered away,
Taught aft the sheet, they tally and belay. Ver. 210. Taught implies stiff,
tense, or extended strait: and tally is a phrase particularly applied to the
operation of hauling aft the sheets, or drawing them toward the ship^ stern.
To belay is to fasten.

Now to the north, from Afric's burning shore,
A troop of porpoises their course explore:
In curling wreathes they gambol on the tide,
Now bound aloft, now down the billow glide.
Their tracks awhile the hoary waves retain,
That burn in sparkling trails along the main.
These fleetest coursers of the finny race,
When threat^ning clouds the ethereal vault deface,
Their route to leeward still sagacious form,
To shun the fury of the approaching storm.
Fair Candia now no more, beneath her lee,
Prosects the vessel from the insulting sea:
Round her broad arms, impatient of contr^al,
Roused from their secret deeps the billows roll;
Sunk were the bulwarks of the friendly shore,
And all the scene an hostile aspect wore.
The flattering wind, that late with promised zid,
From Candia's bay the unwilling ship betrayed,
No longer fawns beneath the fair disguise,
But like a ruffian on his quarry flies.
Tossed on the tide she feels the tempest blow,
And dreads the vengeance of so fell a foe.
As the proud horse, with costly trappings gay,
Exulting prances to the bloody fray,
Spurning the ground, he glories in his might,
But reels tumultuous in the shock of fight.
Even so, caparison'd in gaudy pride,
The bounding vessel dances on the tide.
Fierce and more fierce the southern demon blew,
And more incensed the roaring waters grew.
The ship no longer can her topsails spread;
And every hope of fairer skies is sied.
Bowlines and haliards are relaxed again;
Cluelines haul'd down, and sheets let fly amain;
Clued-up each topsail, and by braces squared;
The seamen climb aloft on either yard.
They furled the sail, and pointed to the wind
The yard, by rolling tackles then confined. Ver. 248. The rolling-tackle is an
assemblage of pullies, used to corfine the yard to the weather-side of the
mast, and prevent the former from rubbing against the latter by the fluctuating
motion of the ship in a turbulent sea.

While over the ship the gallant boatswain flies,
Like a hoarse mastiff through the storm he cries:
Prompt to direct the unskilful still appears;
The expert he praises, and the fearful che^^s.
Now some to strike topgallant-yards attend; Ver. 253. It is usual to send down
the topgallant-yards on the approach of a storm. They are the highest yards
that are rigged in a ship.

Some travelers up the weather backstays send; Ver. 254. Travelers are
slender iron rings encircling the backstays, and used to facilitate the
hoisting or lowering of the topgallant-yards, by confining them to the
backstays, in their ascent or descent, so as to prevent them from swinging
about by the agitation of the vessel. Ver. ibid. Backstays are long ropes,
extending from the right and left side of the ship to the topmast-heads, which
they are intended to secure, by counteracting the effort of the wind upon the
sails.



At each mast-head the top-ropes others bend. Ver. 255. Top-ropes are the cords
by which the topgalgallant-yards are hoisted up from the deck, or lowered again
in stormy weather.

The youngest sailors from the yards above
Their parrels, lifts, and oraces soon remove; Ver. 257. The parrel, which is
usually a moveable band of rope, is employed to confine the yard to its
respective mast. Ver. ibid. Lifts are extended from the head of any mast to the
extremities of its particular yard, to support the weight of the latter; to
retain it in balance; or to raise one yardarm higher than the other, which is
accordingly called topping, ver. 258.



Then, topt an-end, and to the travelers tied,
Charged with their sails, they down the backstavs slide.
The yards secure along the booms reclined; Ver. 260. The booms in this place
imply any masts or yards lying on the deck in reserve, to supply the place of
others which may be carried away by distress of weather, etc.

While some the flying cords aloft confined.
Their sails reduced, and all the rigging clear,
Awhile the crew relax from toils severe.
Awhile their spirits, with fatigue oppressed,
In vain expect the alternate hour of rest:
But with redoubling force the tempests blow,
And watery hills in fell succession flow.
A dismal shade o'ercasts the frowning skies;
New troubles grow; new difficulties rise.
No season this from duty to descend!
All hands on deck, the eventful hour attend.
His race performed, the sacred lamp of day
Now dipped in western clouds his parting ray.
His sickening fires, half lost in ambient haze,
Refract along the dusk a crimson blaze;
Till deep immerg'd the languid orb declines,
And now to cheerless night the sky resigns;
Sad evening's hour, how different from the past!
No flaming pomp, no blushing glories cast,
No ray of friendly light is seen around,
The moon and stars in hopeless shade are drowned.
The ship no longer can her courses bear: Ver. 282. The courses are generally
understood to be the mainsail, foresail and mizen, which are the largest and
lowest sails on their several masts: the term is however sometimes taken in a
larger sense.

To reef the courses is the master's care:
The sailors, summoned aft, a daring band!
Attend the enfolding brails at his command.
But here the doubtful officers dispute,
Till skill and judgment prejudice confute.
Rodmond, whose genius never soared beyond
The narrow rules of art his youth had con'd,
Still to the hostile fury of the wind
Released the sheet, and kept the tack confined.
To long-tried practice obstinately warm,
He doubts conviction, and relies on form.
But the sage master this advice declines;
With whom Arion in opinion joins.
The watchful seaman, whose sagacious eye
On sure experience may with truth rely,
Who, from the reigning cause, foretells the effect,
This barbarous practice ever will reject.
For, fluttering loose in air, the rigid sail
Soon flits to ruins in the furious gale.
And he who strives the tempest to disarm,
Will never first embrail the lee yard-arm.
The master said; -- obedient to command,
To raise the tack, the ready sailors stand. Ver. 305. It has been remarked
before, in note 163. page 41. that the tack is always fastened to windward;
accordingly as soon as it is cast loose, and the cluegarnet hauled up, the
weather-clue of the sail immediately mounts to the yard; and this operation
must be carefully performed in a storm, to prevent the sail from splitting, or
being torn to pieces by shivering.

Gradual it loosens, while the involving clue,
Swelled by the wind, aloft unruffling flew.
The sheet and weather-brace they now stand by; Ver. 308. It is necessary to
pull in the weather-brace, whenever the sheet is cast off, to preserve the sail
from shaking violently.

The lee cluegarnet and the buntlines ply.
Thus all prepared, Let go the sheet! he cries;
Impetuous round the ringing wheels it flies;
Shivering at first, till by the blast impelled,
High over the lee yard-arm the canvas swelled:
By spilling-lines embraced, with brails consigned, Ver. 314. The
spilling-lines, which are only used on particular occasions in tempestuous
weather, are employed to draw together and confine the belly of the sail, when
it is inflated by the wind over the yard.

It lies at length unshaken by the wind.
The foresail then secured with equal care,
Again to reef the mainsail they repair.
While some high-mounted over-haul the tie,
Below the down-haul-tackle others ply. Ver. 319. The violence of the wind
forces the yard so much outward from the mast on these occasions, that it
cannot easily be lowered so as to reef the sail, without the application of a
tackle to haul it down on the mast. This is afterward converted into
rolling-tackle. See the note on ver. 248. p. 45.

Jears, lifts, and brails, a seaman each attends, Ver. 320. Jears are the same
to the mainsail, foresail and mizen, as the haliards (note 147. p. 40.) are to
all the inferior sails. The tie is the upper part of the jears.

Along the mast the willing yard descends.
When lowered sufficient they securely brace,
And fix the rolling tackle in its place.
The reef-lines and their earings now prepared, Ver. 324. Reef-lines are only
used to reef the mainsail and foresail. They are passed in spiral turns through
the eyelet holes of the reef, and over the head of the sails between the
ropeband-legs, till they reach the extremities of the reef to which they are
firmly extended, so as to lace the reef close up to the yard.

Mounting on pliant shrouds, they man the yard. Ver. 325. Shrouds are thick
ropes, stretching from the mastheads downwards to the outside of the ship,
serving to support the masts. They are also used as a range of ropeladders by
which the stamen ascend or descend, to perform whatever is necessary about the
sails and rigging.

Far on the extremes two able hands appear,
Arion there; the hardy boatswain here;
That in the van to front the tempest hung;
This round the lee yard-arm, ill omen'd! clung.
Each earing, to its station, first they bend,
The reef-band then along the yard extend; Ver. 331. The reef-land is a long
piece of canvas sewed across the sail, to strengthen the canvas in the place
where the eyelet holes of the reef are formed.

The circling earings, round the extremes entwined,
By outer and by inner turns they bind. Ver. 333. The outer turns of the earing
serve to extend the sail along the yard; and the inner turns are employed to
confine its head-rope cluse to its surface. See note 205. p. {43.}

From hand to hand, the reef-lines next received,
Through eyelet holes and roebin-legs were recv'd.
The reef in double folds involved they lay;
Strain the firm cord, and either end belay.
Had thou Arion! held the leeward post,
While on the yard by mountain-billows tossed.
Perhaps oblivion over our tragic tale
Had then for ever drawn her dusky veil.
But ruling Heaven prolonged thy vital date,
Severer ills to suffer and relate!
For, while their orders those aloft attend,
To furl the mainsail, or on deck descend,
A sea, up-surging with tremendous roll, Ver. 346. A sea is the general name
given by sailors to a single wave or billow: hence when a wave bursts over the
deck, the vessel is said to have shipped a sea.

To instant ruin seems to doom the whole.
O friends, secure your hold! Arion cries,
It comes all dreadful, steeping from the skies!
Uplifted on its horrid edge, she feels
The shock, and on her side half-bury'd reels:
The sail, half-bury'd in the whelming wave,
A fearful warning to the seamen gave:
While from its margin, terrible to tell!
Three sailors with their gallant boatswain fell.
Torn with resistless fury from their hold,
In vain their struggling arms the yard enfold:
In vain to grapple flying cords they try:
The cords, alas! a solid gripe deny!
Prone on the midnight surge, with panting breath,
They cry for aid, and long contend with death.
High over their heads the rolling billows sweep,
And down they sink in everlasting sleep.
Bereft of power to help, their comrades see
The wretched victims die beneath the lee;
With fruitless sorrow their lost state bemoan;
Perhaps a fatal prelude to their own!
In dark suspense on deck the pilots stand,
Nor can determine on the next command.
Though still they knew the vessel's armed side
Impenetrable to the clasping tide;
Though still the waters, by no secret wound,
A passage to her deep recesses found;
Sunounding evils yet they ponder over:
A storm, a dangerous sea, and leeward shore!
Should they, though reef'd, again the sails extend,
Again in fluttering fragments they may rend;
Or should they stand, beneath the dreadful strain,
The down-press'd ship may never rise again.
Too late to weather now Morea's land, Ver. 380. To weather a shore, is to pass
to the windward of it, which at this time is prevented by the violence of the
siorm.

Yet verging fast to Athen's rocky strand.
Thus they lament the consequence severe,
Where perils unallay'd by hope appear.
Long in their minds revolving each event,
At last to furl the courses they consent.
That done, to reef the mizen next agree,
And try beneath it, sidelong in the sea. Ver. 387. To try, is to lay the ship
with her side nearly in the direction of the wind and sea, with the head
somewhat inclined to the windward; the helm being laid a-lee to retain her in
that position. See a further illusiration thereof in the last note of this
canto.

Now down the mast the sloping yard declined
Till by the jears and topping-lift confined. Ver. 389. The topping-lift, which
tops the upper end of the mizen yard (see note 257. pa. 46.) this line and the
six following describe the operations of reefing and balancing the mizen. The
reef of this sail is toward the lower and, the knittles being small short
lines used in the room of points for this purpose (see notes 132. 148. pa.
40.): they are accordingly knotted under the foot-rope, or lower edge of the
sail.

The head, with doubling canvas fenced around,
In balance, near the lofty peak, they bound.
The reef enwrapt, the inserted knittles tied,
To hoist the shortened sail again they hy'd.
The order given, the yard aloft they swayed;
The order given, the yard aloft they swayed;
The helm its post forsook, and, lashed a-lee,
Inclined the wayward prow to front the sea. Ver. 396. Lashed a-lce, is
fastened to the lee side. See note 130. p. 39.

When sacred Orpheus, on the Stygian coast,
With notes divine implored his consort lost;
Though round him perils grew in full array,
And Fates and Furies stood to bar his way;
Not more adventurous was the attempt to move
The powers of hell, with strains of heavenly love,
Than mine, to bid the unwilling muse explore
The wilderness of rude mechanic lore.
Such toil the unwearied Daedalus endured,
When in the Cretan labyrinth immured;
Till art her salutary help bestowed,
To guide him through that intricate abode.
Thus, long entangled in a thorny way,
That never heard the sweet Pierian lay,
The Muse, that tuned to barbarous sounds her string,
Now spreads like Daedalus a bolder wing;
The verse begins in softer strains to flow,
Replete with sad variety of woe.
As yet, amid this elemental war,
That scatters desolation from afar,
Nor toil, nor hazard, nor distress appear
To sink the seamen with unmanly fear.
Though their firm hearts no pageant honor boast,
They scorn the wretch that trembles in his post.
Who from the face of danger strives to turn,
Indignant from the social hour they spurn.
Though now full often they felt the raging tide,
In proud rebellion climb the vessel's side,
No future ills unknown their souls appall;
They know no danger, or they scorn it all!
But even the generous spirits of the brave,
Subdued by toil, a friendly respite crave:
A short repose alone their thoughts implore,
Their harassed powers by slumber to restore.
Far other cares the master's mind employ;
Approaching perils all his hopes destroy.
In vain he spreads the graduated chart,
And bounds the distance by the rules of art;
In vain athwart the mimic seas expands
The compasses to circumjacent lands.
Ungrateful task! for no asylum traced,
A passage opened from the watery waste.
Fate seemed to guard, with adamantine mound,
The path to every friendly port around.
While Albert thus with secret doubts dismayed,
The geometric distances surveyed;
On deck the watchful Rodmond cries aloud,
Secure your lives, grasp every man a shroud!
Roused from his trance he mounts with eyes aghast;
When over the ship, in undulation vast,
A giant surge down-rushes from on high,
And fore and aft dissever'd ruins lie.
As when, Britannia's empire to maintain,
Great Hawke descends in thunder on the main;
Around the brazen voice of battle roars,
And fatal lightnings blast the hostile shores;
Beneath the storm their shattered navies groan,
The trembling deeps recoil from zone to zone.
Thus the torn vessel felt the enormous stroke,
The boats beneath the thundering deluge broke;
Forth starte^ from their planks the bursting rings,
The extended cordage all asunder springs.
The pilot's fair machinery strews the deck,
And cards and needles swim in floating wreck.
The balanced mizen, rending to the head,
In streaming ruins from the margin fled.
The sides convulsive shook on groaning beams,
And, rent with labor, yawn'd the pitchy seams.
They sound the well, and, terrible to hear! Ver. 466. The well is an apartment
in a ship's hold, serving to enclose the pumps. It is sounded by dropping a
measured iron rod down into it by a long line. Hence the increase or diminution
of the leaks is easily discovered.

Five feet immersed along the line appear.
At either pump they ply the clanking brake, Ver. 468. The brake is the lever
or handle of the pump, by which it is wrought.

And turn by turn the ungrateful office take.
Rodmond, Arion, and Palemon here,
At this sad task, all diligent appear.
As some fair castle, shook by rude alarms,
Opposes long the approach of hostile arms:
Grim war around her plants his black array,
And death and sorrow mark his horrid way;
Till, in some destined hour, against her wall,
In tenfold rage the fatal thunders fall;
The ramparts crack; the solid bulwarks rend;
And hostile troops the shattered breach ascend.
Her valliant inmates still the foe retard,
Resolved till death their sacred charge to guard.
So the brave mariners their pumps attend,
And help incessant, by rotation lend;
But all in vain; for now the founding-cord,
Updr^wn, an undiminish'd depth explored.
Nor this severe distress is found alone;
The ribs oppressed by ponderous cannon groan.
Deep-rolling from the watery volume's height,
The tortured sides seem bursting with their weight.
So reels Pelorus, with convulsive throes,
When in his veins the burning earthquake glows;
^^oarse through his entrails roars the infernal flame,
And central thunders rend his groaning frame
Accumulated mischiefs thus arise,
And Fate vindictive all their skill defies.
One only remedy the season gave;
To plunge the nerves of battle in the wave:
From their high platforms thus the artillery thrown,
Eased of their load, the timbers less shall groan:
But a^d^us is the task their lot requires;
A task that hovering Fate alone inspires!
For, while intent the yawning decks to ease,
That ever and anon are drenched with seas,
Some fatal billow, with recoiling sweep,
May whirl the helpless wretches in the deep.
No season this for counsel or delay!
Too soon the eventful moments haste away!
Here perseverance, with each help of art,
Must join the boldest efforts of the heart.
These only now their misery can relieve;
These only now a dawn of safety give!
While over the quivering deck, from van to rear,
Broad surges roll in terrible career,
Rodmond, Arion, and a chosen crew,
This office in the face of death pursue.
The wheeled artillery over the deck to guide,
Rodmond descending claimed the weather side.
Fearless of heart the chief his orders gave,
Fronting the rude assaults of every wave.
Like some strong watchtower nodding over the deep,
Whose rocky base the foaming waters sweep,
Untamed he stood; the stern aerial war
Had marked his honest face with many a scar.
Meanwhile Arion, traversing the waist, Ver. 524. The waist of a ship of this
kind is an hollow space, of about five feet in depth, contained between the
elevations of the quarter d^ck and forecastle, and having the upper deck for
its base or platform

The cordage of the leeward guns unbrac'd,
And pointed crows beneath the metal placed.
Watching the roll, their forelocks they withdrew,
And from their beds the reeling cannon threw.
Then, from the windward battlements unbound,
Rodmond's associates wheeled the artillery round;
Pointed with iron fangs, their bars beguile
The ponderous arms across the steep defile;
Then, hurled from sounding hinges over the side,
Thundering they plunge into the flashing tide.
The ship, thus eased, some little respite finds,
In this rude conflict of the seas and winds.
Such ease Alcides felt, when, clogged with gore,
The envenomed mantle from his fide he tore;
When, stung with burning pain, he strove too late,
To stop the swift career of cruel fate.
Yet then his heart one ray of hope procured,
Sad harbinger of sevenfold pangs endured!
Such, and so short, the pause of woe she found!
Cimmerian darkness shades the deep around,
Save when the lightnings, gleaming on the sight,
Flash through the gloom a pale disastrous light.
Above all other, fraught with scenes of woe,
With grim destruction threatens all below.
Bene^th the storm-lash'd surges furious rise,
And wave uproll'd on wave assails the skies:
With ever-floating bulwarks they surround
The hip, half swallowed in the black profound!
With ceaseless hazard and fatigue oppressed,
Disnay and anguish every heart possessed;
For, while with boundless inundation over
Thesea-beat ship the involving waters roar,
Dispac'd beneath by her capacious womb,
They rage, their ancient station to resume;
By s^cret ambushes, their force to prove,
Through many a winding channel first they rove,
Till gathering fury, like the fever'd blood,
Through her dark veins they roll a rapid flood.
While unrelenting thus the leaks they found,
The pumps with ever-clanking strokes resound.
Around each leaping valve, by toil subdued,
The ^ough bull-hide must ever be renewed.
Their sinking hearts unusual horrors chill,
And down their weary limbs thick dews distill.
No any of light their dying hope redeems!
Pregnant with some new woe each moment teems!
Again the chief the instructive draught extends,
And over the figured plane attentive bends;
To him the motion of each orb was known,
That wheels around the sun's refulgent throne:
But here, alas! his science naught avails;
Are droops unequal, and experience fails.
The different traverses, since twilight made,
He on the hydrographic circle laid,
Then the broad angle of lee-way explored, Ver. 579. The lee-way, or drift.
which in this place are synonymous terms, is the ^^vement by which a ship is
driven sideways at the mercy of the wind and ^^a, (...) pri^^d of the (...)

As swept across the graduated chord,
Her place discovered by the rules of art,
Unusual terrors shook the master's heart;
When Falconera's rugged isle he found,
Within her drift, with shelves and breakers bound;
For, if on those destructive shallows tossed,
The helpless bark with all her crew are lost:
As fatal still appears, that danger over,
The steep St. George, and rocky Gardalor.
With him the pilots, of their hopeless state,
In mournful consultation now debate.
Not more perplexing doubts her chiefs appall,
When some proud city verges to her fall;
While Ruin glares around, and pale Affright
Convenes her councils in the dead of night,
No blazoned trophies over their conclave spread,
Nor storied pillars raised aloft the head:
But here the Queen of Shade around them threw
Her dragon-wing, disastrous to the view!
Dire was the scene, with whirlwind, hail and shower;
Black Melancholy ruled the fearful hour!
Beneath tremendous rolled the flashing tide,
Where Fate on every billow seemed to ride.
Enclosed with ills, by peril unsubdu'd,
Great in distress the master-seaman stood:
Skilled to command; deliberate to advise;
Expert in action; and in council wise;
Thus to his partners, by the crew unheard,
The dictates of his soul the chief referred.
"Ye faithful mates, who all my troubles (...),
Approved companions of your master's c^re
To you alas! 'twere fruitless now to ^^ll
Our sad disti^^, already known too well
This morn with favoring gales the port we left,
Though now of every flattering hope bereft:
No skill, nor long experience, could forecast
The unseen approach of this destructive blast.
These seas, where storms at various seasons blow,
No reigning winds nor certain omens know.
The hour, the occasion, all your skill demands;
A leaky ship, embay'd by dangerous lands.
Our bark no transient jeopardy surrounds;
Groaning she lies, beneath unnumber'd wounds.
It Is ours the doubtful remedy to find;
To shun the fury of the seas and wind.
For, in this hollow swell, with labor sore,
Her flank can bear the bursting floods no more:
Yet this or other ills she must endure;
A dire disease, and desperate is the cure!
Thus two expedients offered to your choice,
Alone require your counsel and your voice.
These only in our power are left to try;
To perish here, or from the storm to fly.
The doubtful balance in my judgment cast,
For various reasons I prefer the last.
It Is true, the vessel and her costly freight,
To me consigned, my orders only wait;
Yet, since the charge of every life is mine,
To equal votes our counsels I resign;
Forbid it Heaven, that in this dreadful hour,
I claim the dangerous reins of purblind power!
But should we now resolve to bear away,
Our hopeless state can suffer no delay.
Nor can we, thus bereft of every sail,
Attempt to steer obliquely on the gale.
For then, if broaching sideward to the sea,
Our dropsey'd ship may founder by the ^ee:
No more obedient to the pilot's power,
The o'erwhelming wave may soon her frame devour."
He said; the listening mates with fixed regard,
And silent reverence his opinion heard.
Important was the question in debate,
And over their counsels hung impending fate.
Rodmond, in many a scene of peril tried,
Had often the master's happier skill descried,
Yet now, the hour, the scene, the occasion known,
Perhaps with equal right preferred his own.
Of long experience in the naval art,
Blunt was his speech, and naked was his heart;
Alike to him each climate and each blast;
The first in danger, in retreat the last:
Sagacious balancing the opposed events,
From Albert his opinion thus dissents.
"Too true the perils of the present hour,
Where toils succeeding toils our strength o'erpower!
Yet whither can we turn, what road pursue,
With death before still opening on the view?
Our bark it is true no shelter here can find,
Sore-shatter'd by the ruffian-seas and wind.
Yet with what hope of refuge can we flee,
Chased by this tempest and outrageous sea?
For while its violence the tempest keeps,
Bereft of every sail we roam the deeps:
At random driven, to present deaths we haste,
And one short hour perhaps may be our last.
In vain the gulf of Corinth on our l^e,
Now opens to her ports a passage free;
Since, if before the blast the vessel (...),
Full in her track unnumbered danger, use*
Here Falconera spreads her lurking snares;
There distant Gr^^^^ her rugged (...).
Should once her bottom strike that rocky shore,
The splitting bark that instant were no more;
Nor she alone, but with her all the crew,
Beyond relief were doomed to perish too.
Thus if to scud too rashly we consent,
Too late in fatal hour we may repent.
"Then of our purpose this appears the scope;
To weigh the danger with a doubtful hope.
Though sorely buffeted by every sea,
Our hull unbroken long may try a-lee.
The crew, though harassed long with toils severe.
Still at their pumps perceive no hazards near.
Shall we, incautious, then the danger tell,
At once their courage and their hope to quell?
Prudence forbids! This southern tempest soon
May change its quarter with the changing moon.
Its rage, though terrible, may soon subside,
Nor into mountains lash the unruly tide.
These leaks shall then decrease; the sails once more
Direct our course to some relieving shore."
Thus while he spoke, around from man to man,
At either pump a hollow murmur ran.
For while the vessel, through unnumber'd chinks,
Above, below, the invading water drinks;
Sounding her depth, they eyed the wetted scale,
And lo! the leaks over all their powers prevail.
Yet in their post, by terrors unsubdu'd,
They with redoubling force their task pursued.
And now the senior pilots seemed to wait
Arion's voice, to close the dark debate.
Though many a bitter storm, with peril fraught,
In Neptune's school the wandering stripling taught,
Not to (...) ^ine summers yet matur'd his thought.
So often he bled by Fortune's cruel dart,
It fell at last innoxious on his heart.
His mind, still shunning care with secret hate,
In patient indolence resigned to Fate.
But now the horrors that around him roll,
Thus roused to action his rekindling soul.
"With fixed attention pondering in my mind
The dark distresses on each side combined,
While here we linger in the pass of fate,
I see no moment left for sad debate.
For, some decision if we wish to form,
Ere yet our vessel sink beneath the storm;
Her shattered state, and yon desponding crew,
At once suggest what measures to pursue.
The laboring hull already seems half filled
With waters, through an hundred leaks distilled;
As in a dropsy, wallowing with her freight,
Half drowned she lies a dead inactive weight.
Thus, drenched by every wave, her riven deck,
Stripped and defenseless, floats a naked wreck;
Her wounded flanks no longer can sustain
These fell invasions of the bursting main.
At every pitch the o'erwhelming billows bend
Beneath their load the quivering bowsprit-end.
A fearful warning! since the masts on high,
On that support, with trembling hope rely.
At either pump our seamen pant for breath,
In dark dismay anticipating death.
Still all our powers the increasing leaks desy;
We sink at sea, no shore, no haven nigh.
One dawn of hope yet breaks athwart the gloom,
To light and save us from the watery tomb.
That bids us shun the death impending here,
Fly from the following blast, and shoreward steer.
"'It Is urged indeed, the fury of the gale
Precludes the help of every guiding sail;
And, driven before it on the watery waste,
To rocky shores and scenes of death we haste.
But happily Falconera we may shun;
And far to Grecian coasts is yet the run:
Less harassed then, our scudding ship may bear
The assaulting surge repelled upon her rear.
Even then the wearied storm as soon shall die,
Or less torment the groaning pines on high.
Should we at last be driven by dire decree,
Too near the fatal margin of the sea;
The hull dismasted there awhile may ride,
With lengthened cables, on the raging tide.
Perhaps kind Heaven, with interposing power,
May curb the tempest ere that dreadful hour.
But here ingulph'd and foundering while we stay,
Fate hovers over and marks us for her prey."
He said; -- Palemon saw with grief of heart,
The storm prevailing over the pilot's art:
In silent terror and distress involved,
He heard their last alternative resolved.
High beat his bosom; with such fear subdued,
Beneath the gloom of some enchanted wood,
Often, in old time, the wandering swain explored
The midnight wizards, breathing rites abhorred:
Trembling approached their incantations fell,
And, chilled with horror, heard the songs of hell.
Arion saw, with secret anguish moved,
The deep affliction of the friend he loved;
And, all awake to friendship's genial heat,
His bosom felt consenting tumults beat.
Alas! no season this for tender love:
Far hence the music of the myrtle grove!
With comfort's soothing voice, from hope derived,
Palemon's drooping spirit he revived,
For consolation, often with healing art,
Retunes the jarring numbers of the heart.
Now had the pilots all the events revolved,
And on their final refuge thus resolved.
When, like the faithful shepherd, who beholds
Some prowling wolf approach his fleecy folds;
To the brave crew, whom racking doubts perplex,
The dreadful purpose Albert thus directs.
"Unhappy partners in a wayward fate!
Whose gallant spirits now are known too late;
Ye! who unmoy'd behold this angry storm
With terrors all the rolling deep deform;
Who, patient in adversity, still bear
The firmest front when greatest ills are near!
The truth though grievous I must now reveal,
That long in vain I purposed to conceal.
Ingulph'd, all helps of art we vainly try,
To weather leeward shores, alas! too nigh.
Our crazy bark no longer can abide
The seas that thunder over her battered side:
And, while the leaks a fatal warning give,
That in this raging sea she cannot live;
One only refuge from despair we find,
At once to wear and scud before the wind.
Perhaps even then to ruin we may steer, Ver. 808. For an explanation of those
maneuvers, the reader is referred to the last note of this cant

For broken shores beneath our lee appear;
But that is remote, and instant death is here:
Yet there by Heaven's assistance, we may gain
Some creek or inlet of the Grecian main;
Or sheltered by some rock, at anchor ride,
Till with abating rage, the blast subside.
"But if, determined by the will of Heaven,
Our helpless bark at last ashore is driven.
These counsels followed, from the watery grave
Our floating sailors in the surf may save.
"And first let all our axes be secured,
To cut the masts and rigging from aboard.
Then to the quarters bind each plank and oar,
To float between the vessel and the shore.
The longest cordage too must be conveyed
On deck, and to the weather-rails belay'd.
So they, who happily reach alive the land,
The extended lines may fasten on the strand.
Whenever, loud thundering on the leeward shore,
While yet aloof we hear the breakers roar,
Thus for the terrible event prepared,
Brace fore and aft to starboard every yard.
So shall our masts swim lighter on the wave,
And from the broken rocks our seamen save.
Then westward turn the stem, that every mast
May shoreward fall, when from the vessel cast.
When over her side once more the billows bound,
Ascend the rigging till she strikes the ground:
And when you hear aloft the alarming shock
That strikes her bottom on some pointed rock,
The boldest of our sailors must descend,
The dangerous business of the deck to tend:
Then each, secured by some convenient cord,
Should cut the shrouds and rigging from the board.
Let the broad axes next assail each mast;
And booms and oars and rafts to leeward cast.
Thus, while the cordage stretched ashore may guide
Our brave companions through the swelling tide,
This floating lumber shall sustain them over
The rocky shelves, in safety to the shore.
But, as your firmest succor, till the last,
O cling securely on each faithful mast!
Though great the danger, and the task severe,
Yet bow not to the tyranny of fear!
If once that slavish yoke your spirits quell,
Adieu to hope! to life itself farewell!
"I know, among you some full often have viewed,
With murdering weapons armed, a lawless brood,
On England's vile inhuman shore who stand,
The soul reproach and scandal of our land!
To rob the wanderers wrecked upon the strand.
These, while their savage office they pursue,
Often wound to death the helpless plundered crew,
Who, escaped from every horror of the main,
Implored their mercy but implored in vain.
But dread not this! -- a crime to Greece unknown!
Such bloodhounds all her circling shores disown;
Her sons, by barbarous tyranny oppressed,
Can share affliction with the wretch distressed:
Their hearts, by cruel fate inured to grief,
Often to the friendless stranger yield relief."
With conscious horror struck, the naval band
Detested for awhile their native land.
They cursed the sleeping vengeance of the laws,
That thus forgot her guardian-sailors' cause.
Mean while the master's voice again they heard,
Whom, as with filial duty, all revered.
"No more remains -- but now a trusty band
Must ever at the pump industrious stand:
And while with us the rest attend to wear,
Two skilful seamen to the helm repair!
O source of life! our refuge and our stay!
Whose voice the warring elements obey;
On thy supreme assistance we rely:
Thy mercy supplicate, if doomed to die!
Perhaps this storm is sent, with healing breath.
From neighboring shores to scourge disease and death!
It Is ours on thine unerring laws to trust:
With thee, great Lord! "whatever is, is just."
He said: and with consenting reverence fraught,
The sailors joined his prayer in silent thought.
His intellectual eye, serenely bright!
Saw distant objects with prophetic light.
Thus in a land, that lasting wars oppress,
That groans beneath misfortune and distress;
Whose wealth to conquering armies fails a prey;
Her bulwarks sinking, as her troops decay:
Some bold sagacious statesman, from the helm,
Sees desolation gathering over his realm:
He darts around his penetrating eyes,
Where dangers grow, and hostile unions rise;
With deep attention marks the invading foe,
Eludes their wiles, and frustrates every blow;
Tries his last art the tottering state to save,
Or in its ruins find a glorious grave.
Still in the yawning trough the vessel reels,
Ingulph'd beneath two fluctuating hills:
On either side they rise; tremendous scene!
A long dark melancholy vale between.
The balanced ship, now forward, now behind, Ver. 908. That the reader, who is
unacquainted with the maneuvers of navigation, may conceive a clearer idea of
the ship's state when trying; and of the change of her situation to that of
scudding, I have quoted a part of the explanation of those articles as they
appear in the Dictionary of the Marine. Trying is the situation in which a ship
lies nearly in the trough or hollow of the sea in a tempest, particularly when
it blows contrary to her course.

In trying as well as in scudding, the sails are always reduced in proportion
to the increase of the storm; and in either state, if the storm is excessive,
she may have all her sails furled; or be, according to the sea-phrase, under
bare poles.

The intent of spreading a sail at this time is to keep the ship more steady,
and to prevent her from rolling violently, by pressing her side down in the
water; and also to turn her head toward the source of the wind, so that the
shock of the seas may fall more obliquely on her flank, than when she lies
along the trough of the sea, or in the interval between two waves. While she
lies in this situation, the helm is fastened close to the lee side, to prevent
her as much as possible from falling to leeward. But as the ship is not then
kept in equilibrium by the operation of her sails, which at other times
counterbalance each other at the head and stern, she is moved by a slow but
continual vibration, which turns her head alternately to windward and to
leeward, forming an angle of 30 or 40 degrees in the interval. That part where
she stops in approaching the direction of the wind, is called her coming-to;
and the contrary excess of the angle to leeward, is called her falling-off.

Veering or wearing, ver. 641. 808. as used in the present sense, may be
defined, the movement by which a ship changes her state from trying to that of
scudding, or, of running before the direction of the wind and sea.

It is an axiom in natural philosophy, That every body will persevere in a
state of rest, or of moving uniformly in a right line, unless it be compelled
to change its state by forces impressed: and that the change of motion is
proportional to the moving force impressed, and made according to the right
line in which that force acts.

Hence it is easy to conceive how a ship is compelled to turn into any
direction by the force of the wind, acting upon any part of her length in lines
parallel to the plane of the horizon. Thus in the act of veering, which is a
necessary consequence of this invariable principle, the object of the seaman is
to reduce the action of the wind on the ship's hind part, and to receive its
utmost exertion on her fore part, so that the latter may be pushed to leeward.
This effect is either produced by the operation of the sails, or by the
impression of the wind on the masts and yards. In the former case the sails on
the hind part of the ship are either furled or arranged nearly parallel to the
direction of the wind, which then glides ineffectually along their surfaces; at
the same time the foremost sails are spread abroad, so as to receive the
greatest exertion of the wind, ver. 916. The fore part accordingly yields to
this impulse, and is put in motion, and this motion, necessarily conspiring
with that of the wind, pushes the ship about, as much as is requisite to
produce the desired effect.

But when the tempest is so violent as to preclude the use of sails, the effort
of the wind operates almost equally on the opposite ends of the ship, because
the masts and yards situated near the head and stern serve to counterbalance
each other, in receiving its impression. The effect of the helm is also
considerably diminished, because the headway, which gives life and vigor to
all its operations, is at this time feeble and ineffectual. Hence it becomes
necessary to destroy this equilibrium, which subsists between the masts and
yards before and behind, and to throw the balance forward to prepare for
v^^^ing. If this cannot be effected by the arrangement of the yards on the
masts, and it becomes absolutely necessary to veer in order to save the ship
from destruction, ver. 927. the mizen-mast must be cut away, and even the
mainmast, if she still remains incapable of answering the helm by turning her
prow to leeward.

Scudding is that movement in navigation by which a ship is carried
precipitately before a tempest, ver. 645. 808. etc.

As a ship flies with amazing rapidity through the water, whenever this
expedient is put in practice, it is never attempted in a contrary wind, unless
when her condition renders her incapable of sustaining the mutual effort of the
wind and waves any longer on her side, without being exposed to the most
imminent danger.

A ship either scuds with a sail extended on her foremast, or, if the storm is
excessive, without any sail, which in the sea-phrase is called scudding under
bare poles.

The principal hazards incident to scudding, are generally, a sea striking the
ship's stern; the difficulty of steering, which perpetually exposes her to the
danger of broaching-to; and the want of sufficient sea-room. A sea which
strikes the stern violently may shatter it to pieces, by which the ship must
inevitably founder. By broaching-to suddenly, she is threatened with losing all
her masts and sails, or being immediately overturned: and for want of sea-room
she is exposed to the dangers of being w^ecked on a lee-shore.



Still felt the impression of the waves and wind,
And to the right and left by turns inclined.
But Albert from behind the balance drew,
And on the prow its doubled efforts threw.
The order now was given to bear away;
The order given, the timoneers obey.
High over the bowsprit stretched the tortured sail,
As on the rack, distends beneath the gale.
But scarce the yielding prow its impulse knew
When in a thousand flitting shreds it flew!
Yet Albert new resources still prepares,
And bridling grief, redoubles all his cares.
Away there! lower the mizen-yard on deck,
He calls, and brace the foremost yards aback!
His great example every bosom fires,
New life rekindles, and new hope inspires.
While to the helm unfaithful still she lies,
One desperate remedy at last he tries.
Haste! with your weapons cut the shrouds and stay;
And hew at once the mizen-mast away!
He said; the attentive sailors on each side,
At his command the trembling cords divide.
Fast by the fated pine bold Rodmond stands;
The impatient ax hung gleaming in his hands;
Brandished on high it fell with dreadful sound;
The tall mast groaning, felt the deadly wound.
Deep-gash'd with sores, the tottering structure rings,
And crashing, thundering over the quarter swings.
Thus when some limb, convulsed with pangs of death,
Imbibes the gangrene's pestilential breath,
The experienced artist from the blood betrays
The latent venom, or its course delays:
But if the infection triumphs over his art,
Tainting the vital stream that warms the heart,
Resolved at last, he quits the unequal strife,
Severs the member, and preserves the life.
END OF THE SECOND CANTO.
CANTO III.
The Argument. The design and influence of poetry: applied to the subject.
Wreck of the mizen-mast cleared away. Ship veers before the wind; her violent
agitation. Different stations of the officers. Appearance of the island of
Falconera. Excursion to the adjacent nations of Greece, renowned in antiquity.
Athens. Socrates. Plato. Aristides. Solon. Corinth. Sparta. Leonidas. Invasion
of Xerxes. Lycurgus. Epaminondas. Modern appearance. Arcadia; its former
happiness and fertility; present distress, the effect of slavery. Ithaca.
Ulysses and Penelope. Argos and Mycenae. Agamemnon. Macronisi. Lemnos. Vulcan
and Venus. Delos. Apollo and Diana. Troy. Sestos. Leander and Hero. Delphos.
Temple of Apollo. Parnassus. The Muses. The subject resumed. Sparkling of the
sea. Prodigious tempest, accompanied with rain, hail, and meteors. Darkness,
lightning, and thunder. Approach of day. Discovery of land. The ship in great
danger passes the island of St. George; turns her broadside to the shore; her
bowsprit, foremast and maintopmast carried away; she strikes a rock; splits
asunder. Fate of the crew.

WHEN in a barbarous age, with blood defiled,
The human savage roam'd the gloomy wild;
When sullen Ignorance her flag displayed,
And Rapine and Revenge her voice obeyed;
Sent from the shores of light the Muses came,
The dark and solitary race to tame.
'Twas theirs the lawless passions to control,
And melt in tender sympathy the soul:
The heart from vice and error to reclaim,
And breathe in human breasts celestial flame.
The kindling spirit caught the empyreal ray,
And glowed congenial with the swelling lay.
Roused from the chaos of primeval night,
At once fair Truth and Reason sprung to light.
When great Maeonides Homer, -- the Iliad.
, in rapid song,
The thundering tide of battle rolls along,
Each ravished bosom feels the high alarms,
And all the burning pulses beat to arms,
From earth upborne on Pegasean wings,
Far through the boundless realms of thought he springs;
While distant poets, trembling as they view
His sunward flight, the dazzling track pursue.
But when his strings, with mournful magic tell
What dire distress Laertes Ulysses, -- the Odyssey.
son befell,
The strains, meandering through the maze of woe,
Bid sacred sympathy the heart overflow.
Thus, in old time, the Muses' heavenly breath
With vital force dissolved the chains of death:
Each bard in epic lays began to sing,
Taught by the master of the vocal string.
It Is mine, alas! through dangerous scenes to stray,
Far from the light of his unerring ray!
While all unused the wayward path to tread,
Darkling I wander with prophetic dread.
To me in vain the bold Maeonian lyre
Awakes the numbers, fraught with living fire!
Full often, indeed, that mournful harp of yore
Wept the sad wanderer lost upon the shore;
But over that scene the impatient numbers ran,
Subservient only to a nobler plan.
It Is mine, the unravel'd prospect to display,
And chain the events in regular array.
Though hard the task, to sing in varied strains,
While all unchanged the tragic theme remains!
Thrice happy! might the secret powers of art
Unlock the latent windings of the heart!
Might the sad numbers draw Compassion's tear
For kindred-miseries often beheld too near:
For kindred-wretches, often in ruin cast
On Albion's strand, beneath the wintery blast:
For all the pangs, the complicated woe,
Her bravest sons, her faithful sailors know!
So Pity, gushing over each British breast,
Might sympathize with Britain's sons distressed:
For this, my theme through mazes I pursue,
Which nor Maeonides nor Maro knew.
Awhile the mast in ruins dragged behind,
Balanced the impression of the helm and wind:
The wounded serpent, agoniz'd with pain,
Thus trails his mangled volume on the plain,
But now, the wreck dissever'd from the rear,
The long-reluctant prow began to veer;
And while around before the wind it falls,
Square all the yards! the attentive master calls -- Ver. 64. To square the
yards, in this place is meant, to arrange them directly athwart the ships
length.

You timoneers her motion still attend!
For on your steerage all our lives depend.
So, steady! meet her, watch the blast behind, Ver. 67. Steady, is the order to
steer the ship according to the line on which she advances at that instant,
without deviating to the right or left thereof.

And steer her right before the seas and wind!
Starboard, again! the watchful pilot cries;
Starboard, the obedient timoneer replies.
Then to the left the ruling helm returns;
The wheel revolves; the ringing axle burns! Ver. 72. In all large ship the
helm is managed by a wheel.

The ship no longer, foundering by the lee,
Bears on her side the invasions of the sea:
All-lonely over the desert waste she flies,
Scourged on by surges, storm and bursting skies.
As when the masters of the lance assail,
In Hyperborean seas, the slumbering whale;
Soon as the javelins pierce his scaly hide,
With anguish stung, he cleaves the downward tide;
In vain he flies! no friendly respite found,
His lifeblood gushes through the inflaming wound.
The wounded bark, thus smarting with her pain,
Scuds from pursuing waves along the main;
While, dashed apart by her dividing prow,
Like burning adamant the waters glow;
Her joints forget their firm elastic tone,
Her long keel trembles, and her timbers groan.
Upheav'd behind her, in tremendous height,
The billows frown with fearful radiance bright!
Now shivering, over the topmost wave she rides,
While, deep beneath, the enormous gulf divides.
Now, launching headlong down the horrid vaie,
She hears no more the roaring (...) gale,
Till up the dreadful height again she flies,
Trembling beneath the current of the skies.
As that rebellious angel who, from heaven,
To regions of eternal pain was driven;
When dreadless he forsook the Stygian shore,
The distant realms of Eden to explore,
Here, on sulphurous clouds sublime upheav'd,
With daring wing the internal air he cleav'd;
There, in some hideous gulf descending prone,
Far in the rayless void of night was thrown:
Even so she scales the briny mountain's height,
Then down the black abyss precipitates her flight.
The masts, around whose tops the whirlwinds sing,
With long vibration round her axle swing.
To guide the wayward course amid the gloom,
The watchful pilots different posts assume.
Albert and Rodmond station'd on the rear,
With warning voice direct each timoneer.
High on the prow the guard Arion keeps,
To shun the cruizers wandering over the deeps:
Wherever he moves, Palemon still attends,
As if on him his only hope depends;
While Rodmond, fearful of some neighboring shore,
Cries, ever and anon, Look out before!
Four hours thus scudding on the tide she flew,
When Falconera's rocky height they view:
High over its summit, through the gloom of night,
The glimmering watchtower cast a mournful light.
In dire amazement rivetted they stand,
And hear the breakers (...) rugged strand:
But soon beyond this shore the vessel flies,
Swift as the rapid eagle cleaves the skies.
So from the sangs of her insatiate foe,
Over the broad champain scuds the trembling roe.
That danger past, reslects a seable joy;
But soon returning sears their hope destroy.
Thus in the Atlantic, often the sailor eyes,
While melting in the reign of softer skies,
Some Alp of ice, from polar regions blown,
Hail the glad influence of a warmer zone;
Its frozen cliffs attemper'd gales supply,
In cooling stream the aerial billows fly;
Awhile delivered from the scorching heat,
In gentler tides the feverish p^^ses beat.
So, when their trembling vessel passed this isle,
Such visionary joys the c^ew beguile:
The illusive meteors of a lifeless fire!
Too soon they kindle, and too soon expire!
Say, Memory! thou, from whose unerring tongue
Instructive flows the animated song!
What regions now the flying ship surround?
Regions of old through all the world renowned;
That, once the poet's theme, the muses' boast;
Now lie in ruins; in oblivion lost!
Did they, whose sad distress these lays deplore,
Unskilled in Grecian or in Roman lore,
Unconscious pass each famous circling shore?
They did; for blasted in the barren shade,
Here, all too soon, the buds of science fade:
Sad Ocean's genius, in untimely hour,
Withers the bloom of every springing flower.
Here Fancy droops, while sullen cloud and storm
The generous climate of the soul deform.
Then if, among the wande^ (...) train,
One stripling, exiled from the (...) plain,
Had over, entranced in Fancy's soothing dream,
Approached to taste the sweet Castalian stream.
(Since those salubrious streams, with power divine,
To purer sense the attemper'd soul refine)
His heart, with liberal commerce here unblessed,
Alien to joy! sincerer grief possessed.
Yet on the youthful mind, the impression cast,
Of ancient glory, shall for ever last.
There, all unquench'd by cruel Fortune's ire,
It glows with inextinguishable fire.
Immortal Athens first, in ruin spread,
Contiguous lies at port Liono's head.
Great source of science! whose immortal name
Stands foremost in the glorious roll of fame;
Here godlike Socrates and Plato shone,
And, firm to truth, eternal honor won.
The first in Virtue's cause his life resigned,
By Hcav'n pronounced the wisest of mankind:
The last foretold the spark of vital fire,
The soul's fine essence, never could expire.
Here Solon dwelt, the philosophic sage,
That fled Pisistratus' vindictive rage.
Just Aristides here maintained the cause,
Whose sacred precepts shine through Solon's laws.
Of all her towering structures, now alone
Some scattered columns stand, with weeds o'ergrown.
The wandering stranger, near the port descries
A milk-white lion of stupendous fize;
Unknown the sculptor; marble is the frame;
And hence the adjacent haven drew its name.
Next, in the gulf of Engia, Corinth lies,
Whose gorgeous fabrics see^^^to strike the skies.
Whom, though by tyrant-victors often subdued,
Greece, Egypt, Rome, with awful wonder viewed.
Her name, for Pallas' heavenly art renowned, Ver. 194. Areh^^^cture

Spread, like the foliage which her pillars crowned.
But now, in fatal desolation laid,
Oblivion over it draws a dismal shade.
Then further westward, on Morea's land,
Fair Misitra! thy modem turrets stand.
Ah! who, unmoved with secret woe can tell
That here great Lacedaemon's glory fell?
Here once she flourished, at whose trumpet's sound,
War burst his chains, and nations shook around.
Here brave Leonidas from shore to shore,
Through all Achaia bade her thunders roar:
He, when imperial Xerxes, from afar,
Advanced with Persia's sumless troops to war,
Till Macedonia shrunk beneath his spear,
And Greece dismayed beheld the chief draw near:
He, at Thermopylae's immortal plain,
His force repel'd with Sparta's glorious train.
Tall Oeta saw the tyrant's conquered bands,
In gasping millions bleed on hostile lands.
Thus vanquished Afia trembling heard thy name,
And Thebes and Athens sicken's at thy fame!
Thy state, supported by Lycurgus' laws,
Drew, like thine arms, superlative applause.
Even great Epaminondas strove in vain
To curb that spirit with a Theban chain.
But ah! how low her freeborn spirit now!
Her abject sons to haughty tyrants bow:
A salse degenerate superstitious race,
Infest thy region, and thy name disgrace!
Not distant far, Arcadia's blessed domains
Peloponnesus' circling shore contains.
Thrice happy soil! where still serenely gay,
Indulgent Flora breathed perpetual May.
Where buxoin Ceres taught the obsequious field,
Rich without art, spontaneous gifts to yield.
Then with some rural nymph supremely blessed,
While tranfport glowed in each enamored breast;
Each faithful shepherd told his tender pain,
And sung of sylvan sports in artless strain.
Now, sad reverse! Oppression's iron hand
Enslaves her natives, and despoils the land.
In lawless rapine bred, a sanguine train
With midnight-ravage scour the uncultur'd plain.
Westward of these, beyond the Isthmus lies
The long, lost isle of Ithacus the wise;
Where sair Penelope her absent lord,
Full twice ten years, with faithful love deplored.
Though many a princely heart her beauty won,
She, guarded only by a stripling son,
Fach bold attempt of suitor-kings repel'd,
And undefiled the nuptial contract held.
With various arts to win her love they toiled,
But all their wiles ^^y virtuous fraud she foiled.
True to her vows, and resolutely chaste,
The beauteous princess triumphed at the last.
Argos, in Greece forgotten and unknown,
Still seems her cruel fortune to bemoan.
Argos, whose monarch led the Grecian hosts,
Far over the Aegean main to Dardan coasts.
Unhappy prince! who on a hostile shore,
Toil, peril, anguish, ten long winters bore.
And when, to native realms restored at last,
To reap the harvest of thy labors past;
A perjured friend, alas! and faithless wife,
There sacrine'd to impious lust thy life!
Fast by Arcadia stretch these desert-plains,
And over the ^and a gloomy tyrant reigns.
Next the fair (...) of Helena is seen,
Where adverse winds detained the Spartan queen;
For whom in arms combined the Grecian host,
With vengeance fired, invaded Phrygia's coast;
For whom so long they labored to destroy
The sacred turrets of imperial Troy.
Here, driven by Juno's rage, the hapless dame,
Forlorn of heart, from ruined Ilion came.
The port an image bears of Parian stone,
Of ancient fabric, but of date unknown.
Due east from this appears the immortal shore
That sacred Phoebus and Diana bore.
Delos, through all the Aegean seas renowned!
(Whose coast the rocky Cyclades surround)
By Phoebus honored and by Greece revered;
Her hallowed groves even distant Persia feared:
But now, a silent unfrequented land!
No human footstep marks the trackless sand.
Thence to the north, by Asia's western bound,
Fair Lemnos stands, with rising marble crowned.
Where, in her rage, avenging Juno hurled
Ill-fated Vulcan from the ethereal world.
There his eternal anvils first he reared,
Then, forged by Cyelopean are, appeared
Thunders, that shook the skies with dire alarms,
And, formed by skill divine, Vulcanian arms.
There, with this crippled wretch, the foul disgrace,
And living scandal of the empyreal race,
The beauteous Queen of Love in wedlock dwelt:
In fires profane can heavenly bosoms melt?
Eastward of this appears the Dardan shore,
That once the imperial towers of Ili^^ bore.
Illustrious Troy! renowned in overy clime,
Through the long annals of unfolding time!
How often, thy royal bulwarks to defend,
Thou saw thy tutelar gods in vain descend!
Though chiefs unnumber'd in her cause was slain,
Though nations perished on her bloody plain,
That refuge of perfidious Helen's shame
Was doomed at length to sink in Grecian flame;
And now, by Time's deep ploughshare harrow'd over,
The seat of sacred Troy is found no more!
No trace of all her glories now remains,
But corn and vines enrich her cultured plains.
Silver Scamander laves the verdant shore,
Scamander often o'erflow'd with hostile gore!
Not far removed from Ilion's famous land,
In counterview appears the Thracian strand,
Where beauteous Hero, from the turret's height,
Displayed her cresset each revolving night;
Whose gleam directed loved Leander over
The rolling Hellespont, to Asia's shore;
Till, in a fated hour, on Thracia's coast,
She saw her lover's lifeless body tossed.
Then felt her bosom agony severe;
Her eyes sad-gazing poured the incessant tear:
Overwhelmed with anguish, frantic with despair,
She beat her beauteous breast and tore her hair;
On dear Leander's name in vain she cried,
Then headlong plunged into the parting tide.
The parting tide received the lovely weight,
And proudly flowed, exulting in its freight!
Far west of Thrace, beyond the Aegean main,
Remote from ocean, lies the Delphic plain.
The sacred oracle of Phoebus there,
High over the mount arose divinely fair!
Achaian marble formed the gorgeous pile;
August the fabric! elegant its style!
On brazen hinges turned the silver doors,
And checkered marble paved the polished floors.
The roofs, where storied tablatures appeared,
On columns of Corinthian mould were reared;
Of shining porphyry the shafts were framed,
And round the hollow dome bright jewels flamed.
Apollo's suppliant priests, a blameless train!
Framed their oblations on the holy fane:
To front the sun's declining ray 'twas placed;
With golden harps and living laurels graced.
The sciences and arts, around the shrine,
Conspicuous shone, engraved by hands divine!
Here Aesculapius' snake displayed his crest,
And burning glories sparkled on his breast;
While, from his eyes' insufferable light,
Disease and Death recoiled, in headlong flight.
Of this great temple, through all time renowned,
Sunk in oblivion, no remains are found.
Contiguous here, with hallowed woods overspread,
Parnassus lifts to heaven its honored head;
Where, from the deluge saved, by Heaven's command
Deucalion leading Pyrrha, hand in hand,
Repeopled all the desolated land.
Around the scene unfading laurels grow,
And aromatic flowers for ever blow.
The winged choirs, on every tree above,
Carol sweet numbers through the vocal grove;
While, over the eternal spring that smiles beneath,
Young Zephyrs, borne on rosy pinions, breathe.
Fair Daughters of the sun! the sacred Nine,
Here wake to ecstacy their songs divine;
Or crowned with myrtle, in some sweet alcove,
Attune the tender strings to bleeding love.
All sadly sweet the balmy currents roll,
Soothing to softest peace the tortured soul;
While hill and vale with choral voice around,
The music of immortal harps resound,
Fair Pleasure leads in dance the happy Hours,
Still scattering where she moves Elysian flowers!
Even now the strains, with sweet contagion fraught,
Shed a delicious languor over the thought.
Adieu, ye vales, that smiling peace bestow,
Where Eden's blossoms ever-vernal blow!
Adieu, ye streams, that over enchanted ground,
In lucid maze the Aonian hill resound!
Ye fairy scenes, where Fancy loves to dwell,
And young Delight, for ever, oh, farewell!
The soul with tender luxury you fill,
And over the sense Lethean dews distill!
Awake, O Memory, from the inglorious dream!
With brazen lungs resume the kindling theme!
Collect thy powers! arouse thy vital fire!
Ye spirits of the storm my verse inspire!
Hoarse as the whirlwinds that enrage the main,
In torrent pour along the swelling strain!
Now, borne impetuous over the boiling deeps,
Her course to Attic shores the vessel keeps:
The pilots as the waves behind her swell,
Still with the wheeling stern their force repel.
For, this assault should either quarter feel,
Again to flank the tempest she might reel. Ver. 390. The quarter is the hinder
part of a ship's side; or that part which is near the stern.

The steersmen every bidden turn apply;
To right and left the spokes alternate fly.
Thus when some conquered host retreats in fear,
The bravest leaders guard the broken rear:
Indignant they retire, and long oppose
Superior armies that around them close;
Still shield the flanks; the routed squadrons join;
And guide the flight in one embodied line.
So they direct the flying bark before
The impelling floods, that lash her to the shore.
As some benighted traveller, through the shade,
Explores the devious path with heart dismayed,
While prowling savages behind him roar,
And yawning pits and quagmires lurk before;
High over the poop the audacious seas aspire,
Uproll'd in hills of fluctuating fire.
As some fell conqueror frantic with success,
Sheds over the nations ruin and distress;
So, while the watery wilderness he roams,
Incensed to sevenfold rage the tempest foams,
And over the trembling pines, above, below,
Shrill through the cordage howls with notes of woe.
Now thunders, wafted from the burning zone,
Growl from afar, a deaf and hollow groan!
The ship's high battlements, to either side
For ever rocking, drink the briny tide:
Her joints unhinged, in palsied languors play,
As ice dissolves beneath the noontide ray.
The skies asunder torn, a deluge pour;
The impetuous hail descends in whirling shower.
High on the masts, with pale and livid rays,
Amid the gloom portentous meteors blaze.
The ethereal dome, in mournful pomp arrayed,
Now lurks behind impenetrable shade;
Now, slashing round intolerable light,
Redoubles all the terrors of the night.
Such terror Sinai's quaking hill overspread,
When Heaven's loud trumpet sounded over his head.
It seemed, the wrathful angel of the wind
Had all the horrors of the skies combined;
And here, to one ill-fated ship opposed,
At once the dreadful magazine disclosed.
And lo! tremendous over the deep he springs,
The inflaming sulphur flashing from his wings!
Hark! his strong voice the dismal silence breaks;
Mad Chaos from the chains of death awakes!
Loud and more loud the rolling peals enlarge!
And blue on deck their blazing sides discharge:
There, all-aghast, the shivering wretches stood,
While chill suspense and fear congealed their blood.
Now in a deluge bursts the living flame,
And dread concussion rends the ethereal frame;
Sick earth convulsive groans from shore to shore,
And Nature shuddering feels the horrid roar.
Still the sad prospect rises on my sight,
Revealed in all its mournful shade and light.
Swift through my pulses glides the kindling fire,
As lightning glances on the electric wire:
But ah! the force of numbers strives in vain,
The glowing scene unequal to sustain.
But lo! at last, from tenfold darkness born,
Forth issues over the wave the weeping morn.
Hail, sacred vision! who, on orient wing,
The cheering dawn of light propitious bring!
All Nature smiling, hailed the vivid ray,
That gave her beauties to returning day:
All but our ship that, groaning on the tide,
No kind relief, no gleam of hope descried.
For now, in front, her trembling inmates see
The hills of Greece, emerging on the lee.
So the lost lover views that fatal morn,
On which, for ever from his bosom torn,
The nymph adored resigns her blooming charms,
To bless with love some happier rival's arms.
So to Eliza dawned that cruel day,
That tore Aeneas from her arms away;
That saw him parting, never to return,
Herself in funeral flames decreed to burn.
O yet in clouds, thou genial source of light,
Conceal thy radiant glories from our sight!
Go, with thy smile adorn the happy plain,
And gild the scenes where health and pleasure reign!
But let not here, in scorn, thy wanton beam
Insult the dreadful grandeur of my theme!
While shoreward now the bounding vessel flies,
Full in her van St. George's cliffs arise:
High over the rest a pointed crag is seen,
That hung projecting over a mossy green.
Nearer and nearer now the danger grows,
And all their skill relentless Fates oppose.
For while more eastward they direct the prow,
Enormous waves the quivering deck overflow
While, as she wheels, unable to subdue
Her sallies, still they dread her broaching-to.
Alarming thought! for now no more a-lee Ver. 485. Broaching-to, is a sudden
and involuntary movement in navigation, wherein a ship, whilst scudding or
sailing before the wind, unexpectedly turns her side to windward. It is
generally occasioned by the difficuity of steering her, or by some disaster
happening to the machinery of the helm. See the last note of the second canto.

Her riven side could bear the invading sea;
And if the following surge she scuds before,
Headlong she runs upon the dreadful shore:
A shore where shelves and hidden rocks abound,
Where death in secret ambush lurks around.
Far less dismayed, Anchises' wandering son Aeneas.

Was seen the straits of Sicily to shun;
When Palinurus, from the helm, descried
The rocks of Scylla on his eastern side;
While in the west, with hideous yawn disclosed,
His onward path Charybdis' gulf opposed.
The double danger as by turns he viewed,
His wheeling bark her arduous track pursued.
Thus, while to right and left destruction lies,
Between the extremes the daring vessel flies.
With boundless involution, bursting over
The marble cliffs, loud-dashing surges roar.
Hoarse through each winding creek the tempest raves,
And hollow rocks repeat the groan of waves.
Destruction round the insatiate coast prepares,
To crush the trembling ship, unnumber'd snares.
But happily now she escapes the fatal strand,
Though scarce ten fathoms distant from the land.
Swift, as the weapon issuing from the how,
She cleaves the burning waters with her prow;
And forward leaping, with tumultuous haste,
As on the tempest's wing, the isle she past.
With longing eyes and agony of mind,
The sailors view this refuge left behind;
Happy to bribe, with India's richest ore,
A safe accession to that barren shore!
When in the dark Peruvian mine confined,
Lost to the cheerful commerce of mankind,
The groaning captive wastes his life away,
For ever exiled from the realms of day;
Not equal pangs his bosom agonize,
When far above the sacred light he eyes,
While, all-forlorn, the victim pines in vain,
For scenes he never shall possess again.
But now Athenian mountains they descry,
And over the surge Colonna frowns on high;
Beside the cape's projecting verge are placed
A range of columns, long by time defaced;
First planted by devotion to sustain,
In elder times, Tritoni^'s sacred fane.
Foams the wild beach below with mad'ning^age,
Where waves and rocks a dreadful combat wage.
The sickly heaven, formenting with its freight,
Still vomits over the main the feverish weight;
And now, while winged with ruin from on high,
Through the rent cloud the ragged lightnings fly,
A flash, quick-glancing on the nerves of light,
Struck the pale helmsman with eternal night;
Rodmond, who heard a piteous groan behind,
Touched with compassion gazed upon the blind:
And, while around his sad companions crowd,
He guides the unhappy victim to the shroud.
Hie thee aloft, my gallant friend! he cries;
Thy only succor on the mast relies!
The helm, bereft of half its vital force,
Now scarce subdued the wild unbridled course;
Quick to the abandoned wheel Arion came,
The ship's tempestuous fallies to reclaim.
Amazed he saw her, over the sounding foam,
Upborne, to right and left distracted roam.
So gazed young Phaeton, with pale dismay,
When, mounted in the flaming car of day,
With rash and impious hand, the stripling tried
The immortal coursers of the sun to guide.
The vessel, while the dread event draws nigh,
Seems more impatient over the waves to fly.
Fate spurs her on: -- thus, issuing from afar,
Advances to the sun some blazing star;
And, as it feels the attraction's kindling force,
Springs onward with accelerated course.
With mournful look the seamen eyed the strand,
Where death's inexorable jaws expand:
Swift from their minds elapsed all dangers past,
As, dumb with terror, they beheld the last;
Now on the trembling shrouds, before, behind,
In mute suspense they mount into the wind.
The genius of the deep, on rapid wing,
The black eventful moment seemed to bring.
The fatal Sisters, on the surge before,
Yoked their infernal horses to the prore.
The steersmen now received their last command,
To wheel the vessel sidelong to the strand.
Twelve sailors, on the foremast who depend,
High on the platform or the top ascend;
Fatal retreat! for while the plunging prow
Immerges headlong in the wave below,
Down-prest by watery weight the bowsprit bends,
And from above the stem deep-crashing rends.
Beneath her beak the floating ruins lie;
The foremast totters, unsustain'd on high:
And now the ship, fore-lifted by the sea,
Hurls the tall fabric backward over her lee.
While, in the general wreck, the faithful stay
Drags the main topmast from its post away.
^ung from the mast, the seamen strive in vain
Through hostile floods their vessel to regain.
The waves they buffet, till, bereft of strength,
O'erpower'd they yield to cruel fate at length.
The hostile waters close around their head,
They sink for ever, numbered with the dead!
Those who remain their fearful doom await,
Nor longer mourn their lost companions' fate.
The heart that ^leeds with sorrows all its own,
Forgets the pangs of friendship to bemoan
Albert and Rodmond and Palemon here,
With young Arion, on the mast appear;
Even they, amid the unspeakable distress,
In every look distracting thoughts confess.
In every vein the refluent blood congeals,
And every bosom fatal terror feels.
Enclosed with all the demons of the main,
They viewed the adjacent shore, but viewed in vain.
Such torments in the drear abodes of hell,
Where sad despair laments with rueful yell,
Such torments agonize the damned breast,
While fancy views the mansions of the bleft.
For heaven's sweet help their suppliant cries implore;
But heaven relentless deigns to help no more!
And now, lashed on by destiny severe,
With horror fraught, the dreadful scene drew near!
The ship hangs hovering on the verge of death,
Hell yawns, rocks rise, and breakers roar beneath!
In vain alas! the sacred shades of yore
Would arm the mind with philosophic lore;
In vain they would teach us, at the latest breath,
To smile serene amid the pangs of death.
Even Zeno's self, and Epictetus old,
This fell abyss had shudder'd to behold,
Had Socrates, for godlike virtue famed,
And wisest of the sons of men proclaimed,
Beheld this scene of phrenzy and distress,
His soul had trembled to its last recess!
O yet confirm my heart, ye powers above,
This last tremendous shock of fate to prove.
The tottering frame of reason yet sustain!
Nor let this total ruin whirl my brain!
In vain the cords and axes were prepared,
For now the audacious seas insult the yard;
High over the ship they through a horrid shade,
And over her burst, in terrible cascade.
Uplifted on the surge to heaven she flies,
Her shattered top half-buried in the s^^ies,
Then headlong plunging thunders on the ground,
Earth groans! air trembles! and the deeps resound!
Her giant-bulk the dread concussion feels,
And quivering with the wound, in torment reels:
So reels, convulsed with agonizing throes,
The bleeding bull beneath the murd'rer's blows.
Again she plunges! hark! a second shock
Tears her strong bottom on the marble rock!
Down on the vale of death, with dismal cries,
The fated victims shuddering, roll their eyes
In wild despair; while yet another stroke,
With deep convulsion, rends the solid oak,
Till like the mine, in whose infernal cell,
The lurking demons of destruction dwell,
At length asunder torn, her frame divides,
And crashing spreads in ruin over the tides.
O were it mine, with tuneful Maro's art,
To wake to sympathy the feeling heart!
Like him, the smooth and mournful verse to drefs
In all the pomp of exquisite distress!
Then, too severely taught by cruel Fate,
To share in all the perils I relate,
Then might I, with unrivaled strains deplore,
The impervious horrors of a leeward shore.
As over the surge the stooping mainmast hung,
Still on the rigging thirty seamen clung;
Some, struggling, on a broken crag were cast,
And there by oozy tangles grappled fast:
Awhile they bore the o'erwhelming billows rage,
Unequal combat with their fate to wage;
Till all benumbed and seeble they forego
Their slippery hold, and sink to shades below.
Some, from the main yard-arm impetuous thrown,
On marble ridges die without a groan.
Three with Palemon on their skill depend,
And from the wreck on oars and rafts descend.
Now on the mountain-wave on high they ride,
Then downward plunge beneath the involving tide;
Till one, who seems in agony to strive,
The whirling breakers heave on snore alive;
The rest a speedier end of anguish knew,
And pressed the stony beach a lifeless crew!
Next, O unhappy chief, the eternal do^^^
Of Heaven decreed thee to the briny tomb^!
What scenes of misery torment thy view!
What painful struggles of thy dying crew!
Thy perished hopes all buried in the flood,
Overspread with corses red with human blood!
So pierced with anguish hoary Priam gazed,
When Troy's imperial domes in ruin blazed;
While he, severeft sorrow doomed to feel,
Expired beneath the victor's murdering steel.
Thus with his helplefs partners till the last,
Sad refuge! Albert hugs the floating mast;
His soul could yet sustain this mortal blow,
But droops, alas! beneath superior woe:
For now soft Nature's sympathctic chain
Tugs at his yearning heart with powerful strain.
His faithful wife, for ever doomed to mourn
For him, alas! who never shall ^eturn;
To black adversity's approach exposed,
With want and hardships unforeseen enclosed.
His lovely daughter left without a friend,
Her innocence to su^cour and desend:
By youth and indigence set forth a prey
To lawless guilt that flatters to betray.
While these reflections rack his feeling mind,
Rodmond, who hung beside, his grasp resigned,
And, as the tumbling waters over him rolled,
His out-stretch'd arms the masters legs infold;
Sad Albert feels the dissolution near,
And strives in vain his fettered limbs to clear,
For death bids every clinching joint adhere.
All-faint, to Heaven he throws his dying eyes,
And, "O protect my wife and child!" he cries:
The gushing streams roll back the unfinished sound!
He gasps! he dies! and tumbles to the ground!
Five, only left of all the perished throng,
Yet ride the pine that shoreward drives along;
With these Arion still his hold secures,
And all the assaults of hostile waves endures.
Over the dire prospect as for life he strives,
He looks if poor Palemon yet survives.
Ah, wherefore, trusting to unequal art,
Did thou, incautious! from the wreck depart?
Alas! these rocks all human skill defy,
Who strikes them once, beyond relief must die:
And now sore-wounded, thou perhaps art tossed
On these, or in some oozy cavern lost.
Thus thought Arion, anxious gazing round,
In vain, his eyes no more Palemon found.
The demons of destruction hover nigh,
And thick their mortal shafts commissioned fly:
And now a breaking surge, with forceful sway,
Two next Arion furious tears away.
Hurled on the erags, behold, they gasp! they bleed!
And groaning, cling upon the elusive weed!
Another billow bursts in boundless roar!
Arion sinks! and Memory views no more!
Ha! total night and horror here preside!
My stunned ear tingles to the whizzing tide!
It is the funeral knell! and gliding near,
Methinks the phantoms of the dead appear!
But lo! emerging from the watery grave,
Again they float incumbent on the wave;
Again the dismal prospect opens round,
The wreck, the shores, the dying and the drowned!
And see! enfeebled by repeated shocks,
Those two who scramble on the adjacent rocks,
Their faithless hold no longer can retain,
They sink overwhelmed, and never rise again!
Two with Arion yet the mast upbore,
That now above the ridges reached the shore;
Still trembling to descend, they downward gaze
With horror pale, and torpid with amaze:
The floods recoil! the ground appears below!
And life's faint embers now rekindling glow:
Awhile they wait the exhausted waves retreat,
Then climb slow up the beech with hands and feet.
O Heaven! delivered by whose sovereign hand,
Still on the brink of hell they shuddering stand,
Receive the languid incense they bestow,
That damp with death appears not yet to glow.
To thee each soul the warm oblation pays
With trembling ardour, of unequal praise;
In every heart dismay with wonder strives,
And Hope the sicken'd spark of life revives;
Her maige powers their exiled health restore,
Till horror and despair are felt no more.
A troop of Grecians who inhabit nigh,
And of these perils of the de^p desery,
Roused by the blustering tempest of the night,
Anxious had claimed Colonna's neighboring height;
When gazing downward on the adjacent flood;
Full to their view the scene of rain stood;
The surf with mangled bodies strewn around!
And those yet breathing on the sea-wash'd ground!
Though lost to science and the nobler arts,
Yet nature's lore informed their feeling hearts;
Strait down the vale with hastening steps they hied,
The unhappy sufferers to assist and guide.
Mean while those three escaped beneath explore
The first adventurous youth who reached the shore;
Panting, with eyes averted from the day,
Prone, helpless, on the tangly beach he lay.
It is Palemon! -- oh! what tumults roll
With hope and terror in Arion's soul!
If yet unhurt he lives again to view
His friend and this feel remnant of our crew!
With us to travel through this foreign zone,
And share the future good or ill unknown.
Arion thus; but ah! sad doom of fate!
That bleeding Memory sorrows to relate;
While yet afloat on some resisting rock,
His ribs were dashed and fractur'd with the shock:
Heart-piercing sight! those cheeks so late arrayed
In beauty's bloom, are pale with mortal shade!
Distilling blood his lovely breast overspread.
And clogged the golden treffes of his head:
Nor yet the lungs by this pernicious stroke
Were wounded, or the vocal organs broke.
Down from his fleck with blazing gems arrayed,
Thy image, lovely Anna! hung portrayed;
The unconscious figure smiling all serene,
Suspended in a golden chain was seen.
Had thou, soft maiden! in this hour of woe,
Beheld him writhing from the deadly blow,
What force of art, what language could express
Thine agony? thine exquisite distress?
But thou, alas! art doomed to weep in vain
For him thine eyes shall never see again!
With dumb amazement pale, Arion gazed,
And cautiously the wounded youth uprais'd;
Palemon then, with cruel pangs oppressed,
In faultering accents thus his friend addressed:
"O rescued from destruction late so nigh,
"Beneath whose fatal influence doomed I lie;
"Are we then exiled to this last retreat
"Of life, unhappy! thus decreed to meet?
"Ah! how unlike what yester-morn enjoyed,
"Enchanting hopes, for ever now destroyed!
"For wounded far beyond all healing power,
"Palemon dies, and this his final hour:
"By those fell breakers, where in vain I strove,
"At once cut off from fortune, life and love!
"Far other scenes must soon present my sight,
"That lie deep-buried yet in tenfold night.
"Ah! wretched father of a wretched son,
"Whom thy paternal prudence has undone!
"How will remembrance of this blinded care
"Bend down thy head with anguish and despair!
"Such dire effects from avarice arise,
"That, deaf to nature's voice, and vainly wise,
"With force severe endeavors to control
"The noolest passions that inspire the soul.
"But, O Thou Sacred Power! whose law connects
"The eternal chain of causes and effects,
"Let not thy chastening ministers of rage
"Afflict with sharp remorse his feeble age!
"And you, Arion! who with these the last
"Of all our crew survive the Shipwreak past.
"Ah! ceast to mourn! these friendly tears restrain!
"Nor give my dying moments kermer pain!
"Since heaven may foon thy wandering steps restore,
"When parted hence, to England's distant shore;
"Should thou, the unwilling messenger of fate,
"To him the tragic story first relate,
"Oh! friendship's generous ardor then suppress!
"Nor hint the fatal cause of my distress,
"Nor let each horrid incident sustain
"The lengthened tale to aggravate his pain.
"Ah! then remember well my last request,
"For her who reigns for ever in my breast;
"Yet let him prove a father and a friend;
"The helpless maid to succor and defend.
"Say, I this suit implored with parting breath,
"So heaven befriend him at his hour of death!
"But oh! to lovely Anna should thou tell
"What dire untimely end thy friend besel,
"Draw over the difmal scene soft pity's veil,
"And lightly touch the lamentable tale:
"Say that my love inviolably true,
"No change no diminution ever knew;
"Lo! her bright image, pendent on my neck,
"Is all Palemon rescued from the wreck
"Take it and say, when panting in the wave,
"I struggled life and this alone to save!
"My soul, that fluttering, hastens to be free,
"Would yet a train of thoughts impart to thee,
"But strives in vain -- the chilling ice of death
"Congeals my blood, and choaks the stream of breath:
"Resigned she quits her comfortless abode,
"To course that long, unknown, eternal road.
"O sacred source of ever-living light!
"^wor^ the weary wanderer in her flight!
"Dire^^ (...) onward to that peaceful shore,
"Where (...) pain and death are felt no more!
"When thou some tale of helpless love shall hear,
"That steals from pity's eye the melting tear.
"Of two chaste hearts, by mutual, passion joined,
"To absence, sorrow and despair consigned.
"Oh! then, to swell the tides of social woe,
"That heal (...) hosom they overflow.
"While (...), this sad Shipwreak tell.
"And what (...) thy wretched friend befell!
"Then, while in streams of soft compassion drowned,
"The swains (...) and maidens weep around;
"While lispi^^ children, touched with infant (...),
"With wonder ga^e and drop the (...) tear:
"O! then this moral bid their souls retain,
" All thoughts of happiness ^^ earth are vain -- sed scilicit ultima semper
Expectanda dies homini; dicique beatus Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera
debet. Ovid. Metam. lib. 3.
."
The last faint accents trembled on his tongue,
That now inactive to the palated clung;
His bosom heaves a mortal groan -- he dies!
And shades eternal sink upon his eyes!
As thus defaced in death Palemon lay,
Arion gazed upon the lifeless clay,
Transfixed he stood with awful terror filled,
While down his cheek the filent drops distilled.
"O ill star'd votary of unspotted truth!
"Untimely perished in the bloom of youth,
"Should ever thy friend arrive on Albion's land,
"He will obey, though painful thy demand:
"His tongue the dreadful story shall display,
"And all the horrors of this dismal day!
"Disastrous day! what ruin have thou bred!
"What anguish to the living and the dead!
"How have thou left the widow all-forlorn,
"And ever doomed the orphan child to mourn!
"Through life's sad journey hopeless to complain!
"Can sacred justice these events ordain?
"But O my soul! avoid that wondrous maze
"Where reason, lost in endless error (...)
"As through this thorny vale of life (...)
"Great Cause of all effects, Thy will be do^^!"
Now had the Grecians on the beech arrived,
To aid the helpless few who yet survived:
While passing they behold the waves o'erspre^^
With shattered rafts and corses of the dead.
Three still alive, benumbed and faint they find,
In mournful silence on a rock reclined.
The generous natives, moved with social pain,
The seeble strangers in their arms sustain;
With pitying sighs their hapless lot deplore,
And lead them trembling from the fatal shore.
END OF THE THRIRD CANTO.
OCCASIONAL ELEGY
THE scene of death is closed, the mournful strains
Dissolve in dying languor on the ear:
Yet Pity weeps, yet Sympathy complains,
And dumb Suspense awaits over whelmed with fear.
But the sad Muses, with prophetic eye,
At once the ^ture and the past explore,
Their harps ^^ livion's insluence can defy,
And waft the spirit to (...) shore.
Then, O Palemon! if thy shade can hear
The voice of Friendship still lament thy do^m;
Yet to the sad oblations bend thine ear,
That rise in vocal incense over thy tomb.
In vain, alas! the gentle maid shall weep,
While secret anguish nips her vital bloom;
Over her soft frame shall stern diseases ^reep,
And give the lovely victim to the tomb.
Relentless phrensy shall the Father sting,
Untaught in Virtue's school distress to bear;
Severe remorse his tortured soul shall wring,
It Is his to groan and perish in despair.
Ye lost companions of distress, adieu!
Your toils and pains and dangers are no more:
The tempest now shall howl unheard by you,
While ocean smites in vain the trembling shore.
On you the blast, surcharged with rain and snow,
In winter's dismal nights no more shall beat:
Unfelt by you the vertic sun may glow,
And scorch the panting earth with baneful heat.
No more the joyful maid, the sprightly strain
Shall wake the dance to give you welcome home;
Nor hopeless love impart undying pain,
When far from scenes of social joy you roam.
No more on you wide watery waste you stray,
While hunger and disease your life consume,
While parching thirst, that (...) without allay,
Forbids the blasted rose of (...) to bloom.
No more you feel Contagion's mortal breath,
That taints the realms with misery severe:
No more behold pale Famine, scattering death,
With cruel ravage desolate the year.
The thundering drum, the trumpet's swelling strain,
Unheard shall form the long embattled line:
Unheard, the deep foundations of the main
Shall tremble when the hostile squadrons join.
Since grief, fatigue, and hazards still molest
The wandering vassals of the faithless deep,
O happier now escaped to endless rest,
Than we who still survive to wake and weep!
What though no funeral pomp, no borrowed tear,
Your hour of death to gazing crowds shall tell,
Nor weeping friends attend your sable bier,
Who sadly listen to the passing bell.
The tutored sigh, the vain parade of woe,
No real anguish to the soul impart;
And often, alas! the tear that friends bestow,
Belies the latent feelings of the heart.
What though no sculptured pile your name displays,
Like those who perish in their country's cause;
What though no Epic Muse in living lays,
Records your dreadful daring with applause.
Full often the flattering marble bids renown,
With blazoned trophies deck the spotted name;
And often, too often, the venal Muses crown
The slaves of vice with never-dying fame.
Yet shall Remembrance from Oblivion's veil
Relieve your scene, and sigh with grief sincere,
And soft Compassion at your tragic tale,
In silent tribute pay her kindred tear.
END OF THE SHIPWRECK.
THE SHIPWRECK.
Occasioned by the Loss of the HALSEWELL EAST-INDIAMAN.
THE sorrow light, and common is the sigh,
When heroes perish, or when Monarchs die;
Tears flow obedient to the court's command,
And servile fashion sables all the land;
The heart, a stranger to the outward show,
Forgets not with its wonted joy to glow.
Far otherwise is public sorrow seen:
When woes domestic sadden all the scene,
Then spreading grief assumes no gloomy vest,
Its house of mourning is each feeling breast!
With sighs the desolating tale we hear,
And every cheek is moistened with a tear:
Tears of high price! that spite of manhood start,
And sighs that vibrate all along the heart,
Thy fate, O gallant Pierce! wherever it is known,
Each child of sympathy shall make its own;
Fame's choicest meed the dismal tale attend,
And sprigs of laurel with the cypress blend!
An equal fate not time itself can show,
Of mighty ruin and extended woe!
Destructive deep, whose captivating calm
Allures the bark with more than siren charm;
With plenty stored, she cheerful spreads the sail,
And vainly trusts to the deceitful gale:
Then sudden howls thy fury from afar,
And midnight tempests all thy caverns tear!
The climbing billows mock the seamen's toil,
And burst relentless on the sinking spoil!
Dismal the trophies that thy conquest wears,
The sighs of friendship, and the orphan's tears!
The weeds of widows, and to glut thy rage,
The hoary honors plucked from childless age!
But these are common to thy awful state,
Alas! new horrors on the Trident wait!
What piercing shrieks ride on the midnight blast,
And groans that deeply murmur to the coast?
Lo! anxious Seraphs hover over the deep,
The Tritons tremble and the Naiads weep!
The hardy veteran to his fate resigned,
In vain collects the firmness of his mind;
His blood flows back at the remembrance wild,
Of widowed consort, and of orphan'd child:
Yet still with less composure can he bear
The fruitless cries of beauty in despair:
Doomed in the keenest anguish to expire,
The daughters helpless grasp their helpless sire.
But thou Supreme! whose undivided sway,
Not man alone, but earth and sea obey;
Whose faithful Providence in unseen form,
Still "points the whirlwind, and directs the storm!"
If deeply agoniz'd with mental pain,
Forgive the mourner that shall dare complain:
Soothe the wild workings of affliction's breast,
And teach our wishes that thy will is best.
THE STORM, A POEM.

DESCRIPTIVE OF THE LATE TEMPEST, Which raged with such destructive Fury
throughout the southern Parts of North America, in July, 1788.

BY A CITIZEN OF PHILADELPHIA.

Who taught the rapid winds to fly so fast,
Or shakes the center with his eastern blast?
Who from the skies can a whole deluge pour?
Who strikes through Nature with the solemn roar
Of dreadful thunder, points it where to fall,
And in fierce lightning wraps the flying ball?
YOUNG. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY PRICHARD and HALL, 1^ MARKET STREET,
NEAR FRONT STREET. M.DCC.LXXXVIII

I DO CERTIFY that Messrs Prichard and Hall, Printers, have entered agreeably
to Act of Assembly, a Pamphlet, entitled, The Storm, a Poem. Descriptive of the
late Tempest, etc. By a Citizen of Philadelphia. Printed by them at
Philadelphia. --

Witness my hand this 22d day of September, 1788. J. B. SMITH, Pro. Ph. Co.

PREFACE.
WHEN subjects of the highest importance are submited to the Public, an apology
is necessary.

I have endeavored, in verses at least equal to my own judgment, to express my
ideas of a late event, which, whilst it awakened poetical feeling, must have
excited national ideas.

I will not attempt to analyze a subject, which from its nature must preclude
extreme regular composition, but appeal to the sensibility of my readers.

THE STORM, A POEM.
INTENT to praise the ambitious chief or king,
Of wasteful war let loftier Poets sing,
And fix, the meed though reason disavow,
The wreath of triumph on the hero's brow;
Or, happily formed for less exalted strains,
Paint the mild glories of the verdant plains,
Where liberty the peasant's toil rewards,
And, what she nobly gave, as nobly guards --
A different theme demands my humbler muse,
Who piteous sighs, and trembles, as she views
Earth, ocean, skies in conflict wild engage,
And the dire wrecks of elemental rage!
O Thou, whose wisdom, still employed for man,
Seems for a moment erring from its plan;
Yet often from poverty elicites wealth,
From anguish gladness, and from sickness health,
And bids those bosoms, which with triumph glow,
Submission learn from salutary woe!
Assist the verse, which scorning mean applause,
Exerts new vigor in the noblest cause;
And boldly warns the valiant and the free,
Flushed with proud conquest, to depend on thee.
Now a fifth time light's delegated source
To glowing Cancer had performed his course,
Since the new world, by hardships bolder grown,
Had fixed bright freedom on her radiant throne,
And taught (Heaven secret works for noblest ends)
The truest lessons to her foes, and friends.
Yet, like the hero, who, with conquest crowned,
Pines with an inward, deleterious wound,
Success a crowd of latent ills supplied;
Neglected labor, overweening pride,
Religion's voice contemned for Pleasure's strain,
And the long list of woes in Luxury's train.
In vain the Press, with Freedom's dictates bold,
Her true ally, the approaching ills foretold.
Ideal treasures swelling in his mind,
To real misery Avarice was blind.
In vain the Preacher turned the sacred leaf,
Or spoke heav'n-prompted -- Luxury was deaf.
As giddy boys the illusive rainbow chase,
Heedless of toil, and fearless of disgrace,
Thus to false industry the merchant bowed,
And worshipped speculation's goody cloud.
The farmer too, fired with the ra^e of gain,
Deserts the ^eady labors of the plain;
And, all-unpractis'd in the giddy ma^e,
In trade's aerial regions holdly strays;
But soon in poverty his rashness mourns,
And, meteer-like, to native earth returns.
Over his neglected art the artist pines,
Or to mad revelry his hours resigns;
Smiles at those ills, at which he once turned p^^^,
And hopes, not dreads, that fatal sponge, a jail.
Destructive luxury! thou child of ease;
Thee let the gilded courts of tyrants please.
Far from our rougher plains retire to vales,
Where silken dalliance, fanned by spicy gales,
Devotes to mean delights the flying hours,
Nor dreads the chains, concealed by fragrant flowers.
Let Commerce too, if with accursed design,
She basely offers incense at thy shrine,
And hopes to check the ardour of the free,
From our indignant coasts retire with thee!
Soothed with the true delight of honest fame,
Methinks I hear our veterans exclaim --
"Our streaming wounds, our flattering hopes forgot,
"Be poverty and freedom still our lot!"
Thus spoke the free and wise! -- But ah! how vain
Their efforts against the flattering tide of gain!
Which, whilst in peaceful stream it seems to flow,
Leads to the dark abyss of cruel woe.
Thus on some lake the hapless vessel sails,
Wafted over peaceful floods by flattering gales;
Security, lulled by deceitful Pride,
Scarce condescends her treacherous course to guide,
Whilst yawning Indolence indulges ease,
And heavy Ignorance no danger sees;
Till the loud cataract assails their ears;
Then all, confused, at once confess their fears;
But ah! too late -- down the swift flood they go,
Lost in the foaming gulf, which roars below.
Nor be to trade alone those ills assigned,
Which wrapped in dreary gloom the public mind;
Since to vile Faction half at least is due;
Faction, which rules the many or the few!
Who still to Freedom pays insidious court;
Borrows her smiles, and imitates her port;
Now mildly flatters, and now storms aloud;
Dazzles the rich, and overawes the crowd;
Till all by turns obey her powerful arts,
And press the shining mischief to their hearts.
On Aetna's fertile sides thus vineyards glow,
And in mild triumph harvests wave below.
The song and dance delight the thoughtless swains,
Whilst Luxury proclaims "a monarch reigns."
When hark! the laboring hill tremendous roars;
And its rocked basis rocks resounding shores.
Columns of smoke and fire alternate rise;
Now flame through either, and now blot the skies.
Anon the burning torrents rush amain
From cliff to cliff, and blaze along the plain;
Involving in resistless, fiery tide
The works of industry, and arts of pride.
Yet who Sicilia's hardy sons shall blame;
Though theirs the misery, yet not theirs the shame.
The heirs of honest poverty and toil,
Again they joy to turn the tepid soil;
Fondly confiding in religious vows,
Again with vines they shade the mountain's brows;
Again their flocks in happy leisure tend;
From heaven they suffer, and to heaven they bend.
Ye, who ^^ult in Freedom's glorious rights,
Whom Industry to solid wealth invites;
That Freedom, once esteemed the brightest crown;
That Industry, whose fruits are all your own!
Say, shall vile sophistry your feet entice
To tread the paths of luxury and vice?
Shall Trade's false glitter lure the free and bold?
Shall Genoa's fate be yours with Geroa's gold?
Alas! the public wealth when nobles carve,
The few may riot, but the people starve!
Or, with the chieftain, whose patrician pride,
Wed in vain pomp the Adriatic tide,
Say, shall ye, in processions captives led,
Be meanly pleased with slavery, shows, and bread?
Mechinks I see your cheeks with fury glow;
Yet calmly read nor deem the Muse your foe --
The solemn verse to worth and honor true;
Genoa and Venice once were free like you;
Like you in open war their foes they dared,
And hoped from liberty their great reward.
Like you to freedom led by reason's light,
The commonwealth they deemed their common right;
Like you, content in industry and toil,
In arts they labored, or they turned their soil;
Like you their chiefs with grateful eyes they viewed;
Like you -- the indignant Muse must here conclude --
Oppression's torrent may ye nobly stem,
Nor to insulting tyrants bow -- like them!
But why the dark, insidious plan describe,
Which sunk the people to a servile tribe?
At first their foes by subtle arts deceived;
The nobles flattered, and the crowd believed;
Till, basely propp'd by those, in blood who trade,
The nobles threatened, and the crowd obeyed.
Free^^^ neglected, or ill-understood,
Their minds to slavery were soon subdued.
In monarchies exulting peasants sing;
They rarely see, and sometimes love their king.
But on Venetian lakes -- in Genoa's streets,
The trembling wretch each hour a tyrant meets.
Religion there, the handmaid of the state,
Pays her glad homage to the rich and great;
The mask and antic garment dares assume,
And scorns at once Morality and Rome.
In this corrupted, proud, tyrannic state,
Who studies to be useful, wise, or great?
To general good there monastries conduce;
Priests are not rigid; nuns not too recluse.
To them their sufferings lovers often relate,
Nor rail at abbess, confessor, or grate.
Here youth's chief merit in indulgence lies,
And none, but nobles, can be learned or wise.
The informer here digests his cruel plan,
Secure of guilt in every worthy man;
Nor wastes the learned judge his time, or breath,
Where innocence and talents merit death.
In secret he the accusation reads;
In secret too the hapless victim bleeds,
Whilst Policy, with dark, insidious tale,
Over the vile system throws her specious veil.
Here see, and execrate, ye brave and free,
The deep, dark, cruel Aristocracy!
For you see history her page unfold,
Rich in the triumphs of the wise and bold!
Yet in that faithful monitress we find,
Heroes were often weak, and sages blind.
But since from Reason's doctrines often we cease
In the calm hour of soul-enchanting peace,
To Virtue learn by Terror to conform,
And dread the Almighty in the raging STORM.
The thick, deep-low'ring clouds; the hollow breeze,
Which, sullen, murmurs over the awe-struck seas;
Affrighted birds, by instinct taught to fly
From the fierce tempest gathering in the sky;
The gallant cock, inured to man's abode,
Who amongst his fellows stern defiance crow'd;
The bristled herd; the patient woolly breed;
The o^ deep-lowing, and the gen'ro^^ steed,
In Nature's accents utt'ring their distress,
The approaching terrors of the storm confess.
With louder horror bending forests roar;
With fiercer fury ocean shakes the shore,
Forgets with impious rage the great command,
Swells his proud waves, and dares insult the land.
In a dun robe of congregated clouds
The source of light and warmth his luster shrouds,
Whilst whirling meteors imitate his ray,
And lightnings flash a momentary day.
Over the drear scene, for his approach prepared,
Loud, and still louder, Thunder's voice is heard.
Protracted war with earth he means to wage,
Nor pours at once his full collected rage.
Anon his wrath, impatient of control,
Bursts over the world, convulsing either pole.
The birds of prey, who rains and winds defy,
Scared by his voice, in giddy circles fly;
No more through air their daring flight they bend,
But with dull, flagging wings to earth descend.
Even the fierce, native tyrants of the wood,
Howling, forget their innate thirst of blood,
And, thunder-tam'd, in trembling squadrons press,
By fear gregarious, to the cave's recess.
Thither the serpent, guileless now, retreats,
Whose noisy rage his malice often defeats;
In gentleness vies with the timid dove,
And trembles at the rattling storm above.
Thus when some land destructive parties tear,
And all would speak, and none will reason hear;
When Rage, disgusted at the war of words,
Bids the deluded crowd unsheath their swords;
Should then some foreign power invade the state,
No more their bosoms burn with factious hate.
But for a season all their feuds forbear,
Confess their danger, and unite from fear.
But see! a wider scene of rage impends;
Before the driving winds the hiccory bends.
His shattered branches whirled along the plain,
Scarce can the sturdy oak its force sustain.
And now methinks he stoops -- ah! no -- in state
Serene he stands, in native strength elate.
Anon the indignant blast, with force renewed,
Assails the mighty monarch of the wood.
Conquered, with hideous crash he falls amain;
And the huge ruin loads the laboring plain.
While thus the mighty fall, the humbler race,
Who shade the streamlet, or the garden grace,
No hope of safety on resistance build;
But blessed in weakness, to the tempest yield.
Stretched on the earth they 'scape the general doom,
Again to flourish, and again to bloom.
The city stormed, thus often the conquering throng
Devote to instant death the bold and strong;
But spare the helpless dame, the blooming maid,
The smiling infant, and the hoary head.
Those humbler triumphs now the storm disdains,
And boldly rushes on the cultured plains;
With nobler objects eager to engage,
And on the works of Man exert his rage.
Thou heir of toil! thou tenant of that shed,
Which, trembling to its base, rocks over thy head!
Around thy neck her arms thy consort flings;
Fast to thy knees thy helpless offspring clings.
For aid they call; and shall they call in vain? --
Rouse all thy courage; every sinew strain.
With double care be every window barred;
Each aperture with strength and courage guard.
Protect thy wife, protect thy infant charge;
And let the furious monster rage at large.
But has he entered? -- On the adverse side
Swiftly throw every door and ^indow wide;
Lest in thy feeble, narrow cottage pent,
Mad with restraint, and struggling for a vent,
His mighty force thy weak partitions tear,
Or whirl thy lifted roof through fields of air.
But hark! the tempest raves with double rage,
And with thy billows, Ocean! dares engage.
To meet his wrath thy foaming billows rise,
And in wild tumult dash against the skies.
Ill fares the mariner, condemned to dare
The united fury of the double war.
His wife, his babes, whom busy Fancy shows
Lost in a sad variety of woes,
By poverty and bitter scorn oppressed --
With keenest anguish rack his manly breast.
Now snap the feeble cords; the quivering mast,
Awhile obedient to the tyrant blast,
Breaks short -- the gaping planks admit the tide --
Swept from the deck the pilot mourns his guide;
Sees through night's haggard gloom no friendly star,
And dreads the latent rock, or treacherous bar.
But shall the brave despond? -- With active hand,
And soothing voice, the master cheers the band;
Where toil and danger call, alert he flies;
Now grasps the helm, and now the pump he plies;
Till all with sympathetic ardour glow,
Preserved by courage, conduct and Freneau.
But vainly provident, expert and brave,
Ocean! how many find in thee a grave?
Piteous the tale! -- The fond, expecting maid
Though silent, seems her lover to upbraid.
The wife (ah wise no more!) with joy prepares
To greet the toil-worn partner of her cares.
The child, with asking eyes, and half-form'd speech,
Demands his absent sire along the beach.
Loved maid! -- fond wife! -- sweet babe! -- alas! no more
Thy lover! -- husband! -- sire! -- shall view the shore.
Ye rich! -- Does haughty wealth withold his ear?
Ye prudent then! the just petition hear.
The gallant man, who toiled and died for you,
Still in his offspring and his widow view.
Humanity shall thus your efforts bless,
And Charity to Trade insure success.
His wrath subsides; the Tempest howls no more,
Sad trophies of his triumphs crowd the shore.
Astonished Edenton still stands aghast,
And hears, or seems to hear, the raging blast.
Virginia's sons their gratitude express,
And piously their great Deliverer bless;
Whilst Baltimore from sad conviction sees,
Not industry alone gives wealth or ease.
To him they bend; him humbly they adore,
Who bids the lightning blaze, the tempest roar
Over men, who though Religion, Justice warn,
The still, calm voice of sacred Conscience scorn.
Thus when our health receives a ruder shock,
And at our bosoms death is heard to knock,
The horrid series of a life ill-spent
We view with terror; and with zeal repent.
And see! where, though the tempest raves no more,
The tossing waves still lash the bellowing shore;
Clad in coerulean robe; his awful head
Crowned with the product of his oozy bod,
And his wan cheeks suffus'd with pl^y's tears;
Stern Chesapeak his frame majestic rears.
The once-exulting plains, now sunk in woe,
Through which his tributary rivers flow,
Whilst indignation swelled his laboring breast,
Sighing he viewed, and thus his rage expressed.
"Ye ravaged plains! ye mountains wild and bare!
Scenes of my fame, and objects of my care!
Ill-fated lands! distressed and guilty too!
What various misery am I doomed to view!
Was it for this my bosom joy'd to feel
The rushing force of gallant Raleigh's keel?
For this to soothe the hero's bosom strove
With the soft blandishments of grateful love?
And bade him in proud London's dreary tower,
Assailed at once by bigotry, and power,
Here raise the noblest trophies of renown,
Far from the zealot's rage, the monarch's frown?
To save a world from proud, imperious Spain,
(Once Europe's dread, and mistress of the main)
By rage oppressed, by avarice defpoil'd,
The patriot counseled, and the hero toiled.
But ah! sad victim of tyrannic pride,
The sage, the hero, and the patriot died!
For you, the tender objects of his care,
His latest sigh he breathed, his latest prayer;
And fondly hoped, beyond the Atlantic main
Commerce, and Arts, and Liberty might reign.
And has he vainly hoped? -- U^ taught to yield
In the dire conflict of the well-fought field,
Scorning to Tyranny to bow the knee,
Ye toiled, ye fought, ye ^^^quer'd, and were free.
But shall the noble strife be incomplete?
Fair Virtue's hopes shall Luxury defeat?
Have heroes bled, shall patriots plan in vain,
And your short page of history fury stain?
With vain ideas of false grandeur cursed,
The plan of Wisdom wildly ye reversed,
And, to cursed luxury unwisely prone,
Rewarded every artist but your own.
For foreign arts your bosoms madly glow;
For foreign wants ye real joys forego;
And, whilst ye thus disgrace the noblest cause,
Reason exclaims "beware of foreign laws."
Though wealth in Europe's costly fashions flaunt,
Shall Industry for glittering trifles pant?
Though maddening pleasures charm the haughty train,
The vile Circean bowl shall Labor drain?
If city Mira mimics foreign aris,
And in imported pride and finery glares,
Already charming in her shepherd's eye,
Shall rural Phyllis with the rainbow vie?
Too weak the load of luxury to bear,
For foreign foes new triumphs ye prepare;
And, whilst the land but half her blessings reaps,
Each virtue sickens, and Religion weeps.
Let toil, let arts henceforth demand your care,
And shun alike mad triumph, and despair.
Though a wild scene of horror spread around,
How light your woes in reason's scale are found,
With those compared, which shake Sicilia's isle;
Or the fell offspring of disastrous Nile?
In Egypt's fens by heat and vapor nursed,
Death-breathing pestilence, by Nature cursed,
Resolves over distant lands to spread his sway,
And in dire triumph meditates his prey,
Byzantium, thee! -- Pale Sickness, trembling Fear,
And agonizing Pain, and wild Despair,
Mark his dire route -- within thy horrid gates,
Squalor, with Apathy, his entrance waits.
Hastening with ghastly smile through groaning streets,
With love fraternal Despotism he greets;
Awes by superior rage the servile train,
Asserts the throne, and takes his turn to reigh.
Ye free! how vain those evils to repeat,
Which rack the foreign poor, or awe the great,
Since truer joys are yours, and fewer woes,
On Liberty and Toil your hopes repose;
Till distant lands shall emulate your fame,
And in triumphant accents Truth exclaim,
Behold the men, of Freedom's joys possessed,
By Labor wealthy, and by Virtue blessed."
He spoke, and, plunging seeks his wave-scoop'd dome;
Over his huge frame the closing billows foam.
THE END

