

THE ADVENTURES OF A PINCUSHION.

DESIGNED CHIEFLY FOR THE USE OF YOUNG LADIES.

Imagination here supplies,
What Nature's sparing ^and denies;
And by her magic powers dispense,
To meanest objects, thought and sense.
THE FIRST WORCESTER EDITION.

PRINTED at WORCESTER, Massachusetts, By ISAIAH THOMAS, And SOLD, Wholesale and
Retail, at his Bookstore. MDCCLXXXVIII.

PREFACE.
THE Author of the following sheets is well aware of the objections which may
be made to the performance; but is in hopes the candor of the public will
excuse those defects, which the nature of the undertaking rendered it almost
impossible to avoid. The pointed satire of ridicule, which would perhaps have
given a zest to those scenes in which the subject of these pages was engaged,
was not, in the opinion of the writer, at all proper for those readers for whom
it was solely designed. To exhibit their superiors in a ridiculous view, is
not the proper method to engage the youthful mind to respect. To represent
their equals as the objects of contemptuous mirth, is by no means favorable to
the interest of good nature. And to treat the characters of their inferiors
with levity, the Author thought was inconsistent with the sacred rights of
humanity. Circumscribed therefore to the narrow boundaries of simple narrative,
it has been the design of the following pages, carefully to avoid exciting any
wrong impression, and, by sometimes blending instruction with amusement, to
make it the more easily retained.

To multiply incidents in these circumstances, was a very difficult task,
especially, as it was wished to make them arise naturally from the subject; and
not obtrude unnecessarily without any seeming cause to produce them. The
avidity with which children peruse books of entertainment, is a proof how much
publications proper for their attention are required. Though the sentiments
should be suited to their simplicity, they ought to be expressed with
propriety; since a taste for elegance may be insensibly acquired; and we should
always endeavor to present them with proper models of imitation. Conscious of
the difficulty of the undertaking, the Author of these adventures would gladly
have declined the task, in the expectation of such a work's engaging the
attention of those, who have genius equal to its accomplishment. With the hope,
therefore, of inspiring others to excel the example, it is now submitted to the
world "with all its imperfections on its head," trusting for a candid reception
to the motive which first suggested the idea: That of presenting the juvenile
reader with a few pages which should be innocent of corrupting, if they did not
amuse.

ADVENTURES OF A PINCUSHION.
IT happened one very fine afternoon in the latter end of May, that Mrs. Airy
had been collecting together a great number of different pieces of silk, (...)
order to make a workbag; which she intended as a present to one of her nieces.
Miss Martha Airy, her eldest daughter, was about ten years old, and had been
for some time indolently lolling with both her elbows on the table, to look at
her Mamma while she was choosing the prettiest pattern for the purpose I just
mentioned. Her chin rested on her two hands, which were crossed over each
other, and she was seated on the back of her brother's ^air, which he had
turned down in that manner for the purpose of serving him as a horse. At last,
however, her weight proving too great for the seat she had chosen, as she did
not keep still, the upper part of the chair back came to the ground, while the
other end mounted up like a piece of board for a seesaw; and she tumbled down
backwards, and in her fall proved the occasion of a great deal of mischief, by
oversetting a curious set of tea china, which her sister Charlotte was playing
with; and which she had received as a present the day before from her grand
papa. Charlotte was so enraged at the loss of her play-things, that without
offering to help her sister, she gave her a slap on the face, and told her, she
was very naughty to spoil things in such a manner by her carelessness and that
she would break her plates whenever they came in her way. She was proceeding in
this manner, when Mrs. Airy thought it time to interfere, and was extremely
angry with Charlotte for her warmth. " Martha was not to blame," added she, "as
she had no intention of doing the least mischief to your cups and saucers. I
think as I told her once before, she was not sitting in a graceful attitude,
and had she moved at the time I spoke to her, it would have prevented her fall;
but that is no justification of your behavior to your sister. She has not
deserved your reproaches, and I did not think you could have behaved so
improperly, as well as unkindly, as to strike any one, especially your elder
sister. Indeed I am much displeased with you, and the threat you made of
breaking her plates in return, is so very naughty and wicked, that I think you
deserve to be punished; and I desire you will ask Martha's pardon for the blow
you have given her." Charlotte colored with indignation and anger, at the
thoughts of submitting in such a manner to humble herself. She had heard some
silly girls declare, they would never confess to be wrong, and was withheld
from acting in the noblest manner, by the false shame of confessing an error.
At length, however, upon her Mamma's coming toward her with an avowed
intention of inflicting some farther punishment, she mumbled out, in a low
voice, which was very difficult to be understood, That she was very sorry she
had struck her. Martha, who was extremely generous, and uncommonly good
natured, very affectionately kissed her sister; and told her, she was much
concerned at the mischief she had occasioned; though she could not have helped
it, as she fell down before she was aware of it, and did not see that her tea
things were near her. Charlotte grew reconciled by degrees; but it was a long
time before she regained her usual cheerfulness. After some time, however, the
sisters seated themselves in a window by the table, and solicited their Mamma
for a bit of silk to make a Pincushion. Mrs. Airy gave them several pieces to
choose which they liked best; and after they had taken them up a dozen times, or
perhaps as many more, had they been reckoned, Martha made choice of a square
piece of pink satin, which she neatly sewed and stuffed with bran, and which,
gentle reader, when it was finished, was the identical Pincushion whose
adventures form the subject of this little volume. Assuming, therefore, the
title of an Historian, or Biographer, which is generally understood to mean a
person who is writing an account of his own, or another's actions, I shall take
the liberty to speak for myself, and tell you what I saw and heard in the
character of a Pincushion. Perhaps you never thought that such things as are
inanimate, could be sensible of any thing which happens, as they can neither
hear, see, or understand; and as I would not willingly mislead your judgment. I
would, previous to your reading this work, inform you, that it is to be
understood as an imaginary tale, in the same manner as when you are at play,
you sometimes call yourselves gentlemen, and ladies, though you know you are
only little boys, or girls. So, when you read of birds and beasts speaking and
thinking, you know it is not so in reality, any more than your amusements,
which you frequently call making believe. To use your own style, and adopt your
own manner of speaking, therefore, you must imagine that a Pincushion is now
making believe to address you, and to recite a number of little events, some of
which really have happened, and others might do so with great probability; and
if any of the characters here represented should appear to be disagreeable, the
Author hopes you will endeavor to avoid their failings, and to practice those
virtues or accomplishments, which render the contrary examples more worthy of
imitation. And now, if you please, we will return to the account of what
farther befell me in the family of Mrs. Airy.

After the young ladies had amused themselves a great while with the pieces of
silk I have so often had occasion to mention, and Miss Martha had completed me
to her entire satisfaction; she took all the pins out of an old green one,
which was originally in the shape of an heart, but had, by loosing a great part
of its inside, through various little holes, quite lost its form; and which,
that she might find those pins which had gone through the silk, she cut open
the old pincushion, and then stuck all she could find upon my sides in the
shape of letters, which she afterward changed to flowers, and a third time
altered to stars and circles; which afforded her full amusement until bedtime.
Miss Charlotte, though her Mamma had given her as much silk as her sister, had
only cut it to waste; while Martha, after she had finished me, had saved the
rest toward making a house wife for her doll. I could not help reflecting when
I saw all Charlotte's little shreads and slips littering the room; what a
simple method may little girls are apt to get into, of wasting every thing
which their friends are so kind as to give them, and which, properly employed,
might make them many useful ornaments for their dolls; and sometimes pretty
trifles for themselves. Charlotte Airy, as such children usually are, was
desirous of having every thing she saw, so that her drawers were always filled
with bits of ribbon, pieces of silk, cuttings of gauze, catgut, and muslin;
that if she wanted to find her gloves, tippet, tuckers, or any part of her
dress, she was obliged to search for them in twenty different places, and
frequently to go without what she was looking for. Martha, on the contrary, by
taking care of what might be of use, and laying it by in a proper place, always
knew where to find what she had occasion for directly. So that it frequently
happened that she went out with her Mamma, when her sister was forced to stay
at home, because she had lost something which had delayed her so long to look
for, that she could not get ready in time. This very circumstance happened the
day after I became acquainted with her, to her no small mortification. Mrs.
Airy was going to see the exhibition of pictures, at the Royal Academy, and
told her daughters if they behaved well, they should accompany her; as Mrs.
Gardner and her niece Miss Lounge, would call at one o'clock. After breakfast,
Charlotte, who had found the mould of an old button in one of her papa's
waistcoat pockets which she had been rummaging, and had cut to pieces an
axletree of a little cart, which belonged to her brother, to make a spindle, in
order to convert it into a teatotum; with which she was so much entertained,
that she was very unwilling to leave it to go to work, though her mamma
repeatedly told her, she would not be ready against Mr. Gardner's coach came.
"Yes I shall, Ma'am!" said she, and played on. "Do pray go to work, Charlotte!"
"Presently, Ma'am." But still she thought she would give it another twirl. "You
shall not go if you have not finished your morning business!" "In a minute I
will!" And so she simply idled away her time, without heeding her mamma's
admonition, until near an hour beyond her usual time of beginning. This put her
into such a hurry to finish, when she found it was so late, that she stitched
some wristbands she was about, and which were intended for her grandpapa, so
very bad, they were obliged to be undone; and that made her so cross, that in
pulling out the work, she broke the threads of the cloth, which entirely
spoiled it. Charlotte was a very fair complexioned pretty girl; but you cannot
imagine how ugly her ill humor made her appear; nor how much more agreeable
her sister looked, who was much browner, was pitted with the small pox, and a
much plainer child. I surveyed them both as I lay on the table, where my
Mistress had placed me to stick her pins in as she took them out of a shirt
collar which she was putting on, Martha looked so placid and cheerful, and
seemed to speak so kindly when she asked a question, that it made her really
charming; while Charlotte, who had a very pretty mouth, and very regular
features, stuck out her lips in a manner so unbecoming, and tossed about her
head with such very illiberal jerks, that she lost all her natural advantages
in her wilful ill humor. A person happening to call on Mrs. Airy, to speak
about some particular business, she left the children to attend him; and
Martha, who pitied her sister's distress, and saw the impossibility of her
finishing the task she was ordered to do, very kindly offered to assist her,
without which, she never could have accomplished it. But their Mamma at her
return, immediately suspected the case to be as I have told you, and enquired
what help Charlotte had had in her absence? They were both girls of too much
honor to deny the truth, and in consequence of her frankly owning her sister's
kindness, Mrs. Airy permitted her to retire, in order to prepare for the
intended expedition. But, alas! poor Charlotte, who indeed was not always so
good as she ought to have been, was not to go that morning, although her Mamma
had consented to it. Betty, who came to put on her srock, was not very fond of
her, for she was sometimes apt, when her Mamma was not in the way, to speak
very haughtily, and in a manner quite unbecoming a young lady. Unfortunately
she forgot herself on the present occasion, and very rudely said, "You must
come and dress me, and you must make haste, or I shall not be ready." Must I?
replied Betty, That is, if I please, Miss Charlotte, though you forgot to put
that in, and unless you speak in a prettier way, I will not help you at all.
"Then you may let it alone, for I will not ask you any otherwise," and away she
went, hanging the door after her, to call her sister, who was ready and waiting
for the coach in her Mamma's room. Martha ran directly, and began to pin her
srock as she desired. But a new distress arose, for as she was too careless
ever to retain any of my fellow servants (commonly called a Pinchushion) in her
service, so she had not one pin to proceed with after three; which had stuck at
one end of me, had been employed. Neither of them chose to apply to Betty,
because they were sure from Charlotte's ill behavior to be denied; and she
would not permit her sister to ask her Mamma, for fear of an enquiry which
might not turn out to her credit. So, in short, they both traversed the room
backwards and forwards, and were quite overjoyed when they found two (one of
which proved to be crooked) between the joining of the floor. Then they each
returned and took me up repeatedly, and examined me over and over, though they
were convinced I had been empty long ago. At last, a loud rap at the door
announced Mrs. Gardner's arrival. The ladies were called, and Martha obeyed,
though with reluctance to leave her sister; and Charlotte, with conscious
shame, and remorse for her past conduct, and heart heaving sobs of
disappointment, saw them drive away without her. I was left upon the table in
the hurry of my mistress's departure, and Charlotte took me up, and earnestly
wished she had had a pincushion of her own: and so I should think would any
one, who had experienced the want of such a useful companion; though unless it
is well furnished with pins, it is in itself but of little assistance, as she
had but too fatally found. The slatternly appearance, and real inconvenience,
which many ladies suffer from a neglect to provide themselves with, and to
retain a few such necessary implements of female economy about them, is really
inconceivable by any person who is accustomed to a proper degree of attention.
Trifles are frequently regarded by the giddy and thoughtless as of no moment,
when essentials are taken care of; but it is the repetition of trifles which
constitutes the chief business of our existence. In other words, people form
their opinion of a young lady from her personal appearance; and if, because she
is at work, and in want of pins, and destitute of a Pincushion, she has quite
undressed herself, and her clothes are dropping off, she will be thought a
negligent slattern; which, I suppose, is what no one would choose to be
esteemed. So, when children accustom themselves to loll their elbows, stoop
their heads, stand upon one foot, bite their nails, or any other ungraceful
actions, it makes them disagreeable, and the objects of dislike to all their
friends, and every one who is acquainted with them. And it is very foolish to
imagine, that because they are not in company with strangers it does not
signify; for ill habits, when once they are acquired, are very difficult to
leave off; and by being used to do an unpolite action, frequently they will do
it without recollecting the impropriety, when if they thought, perhaps, they
would have on no account been guilty of it. Miss Lounge, the young lady who
accompanied Mrs. Airy to the exhibition, was a striking example of what I
mentioned above. She was about sixteen, and very tall of her age; so that she
appeared quite womanly in person, though her manners were to the highest degree
u^genteel. Her method of walking was remarkably unpleasing. She had a strange
way of tossing her legs round at every step, as if she was making circles.
(...) her arms were crossed over each other (...) awkward a manner, and so
unfashionably low, that it made her still more ungraceful in her appearance;
besides this, she had acquired a drawling tone in conversation, which made her
completely an object of disgust; as it was entirely the consequence of her own
neglect, and therefore, was by no means deserving of that pity which is due to
every natural defect, or accidental deformity. She returned with her aunt to
dinner; and Miss Charlotte was quite ashamed of entering the drawing room,
though she was now dressed, and had promised Mrs. Betty she would behave with
more civility for the future. But the fear of her Mamma's exposing her folly to
Mrs. Gardner, had made her dislike to show herself in company; and the
consciousness of having deserved reproof, made her justly apprehensive of
receiving it. She did not venture down stairs, therefore, until dinner was on
the table; and then, with her neck and face as red as blushes could make them,
she paid her compliments to the company, without daring to look at her Mamma.
So cowardly and uncomfortable does the thought of a wrong action make those who
have committed it, even when they are not certain it will be publicly known.
And this reminds me of a few stanzas I found in Miss Martha's work bag one day,
when she put me into it with her scissars (by mistake I suppose) as my proper
place was certainly in her pocket. But as they are so very apropos to my
present subject, I will present my readers with them; and as the author is
quite unknown, if they should not be thought deserving of a favorable
reception, they will not at least subject the writer to any mortification.

IT IS innocence only true courage can give,
Or secure from the fear of disdain;
To be conscious of guilt all affiance destroys,
And the hope of enjoyment is vain.
If to error betrayed, then delay not to own
The crime which has robbed you of peace;
As penitence only can wash out the stain,
Or cause your vexation to cease.
When the ermine of conscience is spotted by guilt,
Most severe are the pangs of the mind;
It Is a woe which no sympathy ever can relieve;
Nay, is hurt by a treatment too kind.
To feel undeserving of friendly esteem,
Is the worst of all evils below:
We may suffer from pain, but the stings of remorse,
Is the heaviest grief we can know.
Then careful your innocence ever maintain,
Be assured, it is worthy your care;
Since no other distress so deprives us of hope,
Or so soon sinks the soul in despair.
There was another short piece by the same hand, which my Mistress had
transcribed, to give her sister on occasion of a little quarrel which had
happened between them, on account of Miss Martha having mentioned to her the
impropriety of speaking rudely to servants, and behaving in a different manner
when her Mamma was absent, to what she could dare to do in her presence. This
reproof Charlotte highly resented, and was very angry that her sister should
find fault with her; and as the following verses were applicable to the
circumstance, she adopted them as her own on the occasion.

NAY, Charlotte, why so much displeased to be told,
That your friends have discernment to see?
If you could descend to deserve my reproach,
The error lies sure not in me.
I mentioned the fault that in future your care,
Might secure from unguarded surprise;
I thought you had sense to rely on my love;
To resent it I deemed you too wise.
The freedom of friendship should never displease,
Though harsh its reproofs may appear;
Since often in public who flatter us most,
Are the first at our weakness to sneer.
Then should we not gladly, with candor receive,
That advice which affection bestows;
For sincerity rarely we meet with in life,
Few will aid us, but numbers oppose.
As to you, I am bound by the dearest of ties,
My sister, as well as my friend:
Nor undue command did I mean to usurp,
Or ever designed to offend.
Then let us united in harmony live,
For sisters should never disagree;
And when I am wrong, equal freedom exert;
To complain of those errors to me.
Mrs. Airy was so generous as not to expose her daughter's folly before Mrs.
Gardner: and as she had met with a severe punishment in the consequence of her
fault, and had promised amendment for the future, after a gentle reprimand,
when she came down the next morning, nothing further passed upon the subject.
Charlotte was so conscious of her late misbehaviour, that she had scarce
courage to enquire what entertainment they had received from a sight of the
pictures at the exhibition; and Martha, who was extremely delicate and
attentive, very cautiously avoided the subject, for fear of appearing to insult
her sister, or to remind her Mamma of the reason which had occasioned her
absence from the party. Mrs. Airy enquired if Martha had not particularly taken
notice of a large picture, which represented the death of Earl Goodwin. She
replied, that Mrs. Gardner had pointed it out to her observation; but that she
had not remarked any particulars, except the figure of a King, and a large
company at dinner. I will tell you the story then, my dear, to which that
picture refers.

In the reign of Edward the confessor, in the year 1042, Earl Goodwin, who had
been accessory to the murder of Prince Alfred, was at dinner with the King at
Windsor; and taking a piece of bread, called God to witness his innocence, and
wished if he uttered any thing but the truth, that the next mouthful he eat
might choke him. Which accordingly happened, and the bread stuck in his throat
and he died immediately at the table. Don't you think, my dear, added Mrs.
Airy, it was a just punishment for his untruth; and an awful judgment for
calling God to witness to a falsehood? Indeed, Ma'am, I think it was quite
dreadful; but are you sure that this account is true? for though it is
certainly very wicked to tell a lie on any occasion, yet, as sometimes many
people are thus guilty, I wonder that such events do not more frequently
happen! You know that Miss Ryeby said she had not been writing last week,
although you saw that her fingers were inked; and Charlotte had seen her doing
it; why then, did not the same accident happen to her? "Because, my love, the
punishment of such crimes do not always immediately follow the commission of
them; but you may be sure that the remorse of conscience, and the secret
uneasiness of mind which the guilty suffer, is a very great unhappiness, and
the apprehension and the fear of a future account after death, besides the idea
of present detection, is such a degree of misery as no other punishment can
equal. As to your question, whether I believe this account to be true? I
certainly do! It was an extraordinary event which was recorded at the time it
happened, and which every historian has mentioned since, and faithfully
transmitted to us. This is the best authority we can have for any fact which
happened before our own time, and therefore entitled to our belief. But why
such examples are so rare, is not to be wondered at; because you know that
wicked people will be punished hereafter; and though such instances sometimes
happen to teach others to be good, and to make them afraid of doing what will
make them liable to such terrible vengeance, yet, in general, a crime of this
kind does not meet with immediate chastisement; because, after death, as I have
before told you, those who have been wicked, will suffer such misery as their
sins deserved. Besides which, the liar is at present detested by every one, and
loses all the advantage of confidence, and the pleasure of being believed: Even
when he does speak truth, he is liable to be suspected, and his word is doubted
on all occasions." The conversation was here interrupted by the arrival of two
young ladies with their Mamma, who came to pay a morning visit to Mrs. Airy;
but as they did not say any thing worth the attention of my readers, I shall
not trouble myself to repeat more of what passed than may be imagined, from the
comments of my mistress and her sister, with which I shall present them.

Martha, before the room door was well shut after them, began to observe that
the eldest Miss Chantillon was very ugly, and very stupid; and the youngest a
good pretty girl, and talked a great deal, indeed. I wish, added she, I could
speak as fast as she does. To talk so fast, my love, said her Mamma, is by no
means any accomplishment; and I am far from your opinion, in so highly admiring
the merits of Miss Lucy. She chatters so quick, as frequently not to be
understood; and has a very silly trick of beginning every sentence with a
laugh, than which nothing can be more illbred. The person who is speaking,
should never laugh, if she can help it, at her own wit, if she designs to
excite mirth, or to meet with approbation from others. But without any such
intention, Lucy assumes an affected giggle whenever she attempts to speak. She
has likewise a very unbecoming pertness in her manner, and by frequent
interruptions when her elders are otherwise engaged, renders herself extremely
disagreeable. I would have you, my good girls, possess that desirable degree of
proper courage, as never to feel ashamed of speaking when it is necessary; but
I think it is an unpleasing sight to perceive a young woman, or child I should
say, for Lucy is young enough for that epithet, affecting to understand every
thing, and giving her opinion unasked, upon subjects, which frequently expose
her ignorance and presumption. This is aiming at a character to which she has
no pretensions; and by wishing to rise into a woman before she has reached the
age of understanding, she is despised for her vanity, and loses that esteem she
might have attained by a proper degree of humility, and a better knowledge of
her station. This observation, my dear Martha, I would particularly address to
you; as you are generally thought uncommonly tall, and are usually imagined to
be much older than you are. This I know you fancy to be a compliment, which
always appears to give you pleasure; but remember, that, if you assume airs of
womanhood, and affect to be thought farther advanced in age, you will have the
less allowance made for any errors you may commit, and consequently meet with
contempt where you might otherwise have escaped censure. Youth, and
inexperience, are justly allowed to excuse any slight inadvertence in manners,
or want of grace in appearance; but if you choose to be thought of more
consequence, you must likewise expect, that the notice you may attract will not
always be favorable to your vanity. I assure you, I think Miss Jenny
Chantillon is much more agreeable than her sister, as she has courage
sufficient to reply to any question, and to speak distinctly when she is
particularly addressed, without enquiring in Lucy's manner, into the reason of
every word which is uttered, and deciding every argument according to her own
fancy: and, I dare say, if you will be careful to observe, you will find that
Jenny always meets with attention from the company, while Lucy is frequently
insulted, by being enjoined to silence, and by her hearers turning from her
with disdain. In short, my dear, it requires a great deal of thought and
propriety, to behave in an agreeable manner, at your age. It is best not to be
anxious to be taken notice of, since that eagerness always defeats its aim.
Girls have not had the advantage of experience to teach them wisdom; and when
once they are engaged in conversation, and find themselves attended to, their
volatile spirits hurry them on, with the desire of obtaining applause for their
wit, to say things which are sometimes neither delicate or prudent; and which
they may, when they have time to reflect, long have reason to repent having
imprudently uttered. Any restraint at such a time, is, I know, always esteemed
an ill natured interruption, and is apt to damp their harmony, and lower their
spirits. I would therefore warn you of the danger before hand, that your own
prudence may be a check to that unlimited indulgence, which at such a period is
liable to excess: and, I dare say, that your good sense will teach you, that my
admonitions are always intended for your advantage. To impress this deeper upon
your mind, I will repeat to you a few lines which were wrote to me, when I was
young, by my aunt, and which, as they frequently occurred to my memory, I found
to be singularly useful.

RECOLLECT, my sweet girl, e're you mix with the world,
There is need of some caution to guide;
Then wisely remember to govern your tongue,
As silence much folly may hide.
Most useful I think, you this maxim will find,
And never its precept neglect;
That who giddy and thoughtless will chatter away,
Shall never gain applause or respect.
Like the Parrot, awhile they may please and amuse;
But no real esteem will acquire;
And I trust that your wish when in converse you join,
Is a nobler regard to inspire.
Remember that memory long may record,
The folly you uttered in jest;
And a secret unmarked, when escaped from your lips,
May long rob your bosom of rest:
Then conscious of error it is vain to repent,
As the mischief admits no relief;
And surely it is simple, so thoughtless to lay
The dismal foundation of grief.
The ladies now all retired to dinner, but I am ignorant of what passed there,
as I was left upon a piece of embroidery, which my mistress was covering with
some white paper to keep it clean; and she did not fetch me until after tea;
when she carried me in her hand down stairs with her work, to show some ladies
who were assembled in the drawing room. I then accompanied her into what was
usually called the green parlour, as the furniture was all of that color;
where she went to play with her young visitors, whose names were Eliza Meekly
and Julia Norris. They amused themselves with playing on the harpsichord, while
Miss Martha personated the musick-master, and Charlotte chose to teach them
dancing. Some part of the evening they played at going to the exhibition; and
just as they determined to visit the pictures, the footman came to acquaint the
young ladies, that their coach was ready. Miss Meekly's bib was unpinned, and
Martha gave me into her hand in a hurry, while she was looking for her cloak.
So without recollecting that I was another's property, Eliza, put me into her
pocket, made a very elegant courtesy, and stepped into the carriage. I felt
really very sorry to part from a family with which I had been some time
connected; and to one of whom I owed my being a Pincushion. But my new mistress
was so very engaging, that I was in hopes she would take care of me, and not
leave me about to the mercy of a little kitten, who jumped into her lap the
moment she got home; and who afterward frisked away with a little tassel which
dropped off from one corner of a work bag which lay on the table. But before I
proceed with my history, it will be necessary to introduce my readers to Miss
Meekly and her companions, and to make them better acquainted with this new
family, who are all of them deserving their notice.

Mrs. Stanley, to whom the house belonged, was the widow of a clergyman, who
had at his death left her in rather indigent circumstances; and she had been
advised (to support herself and two younger sisters who lived with her) to take
a small number of young ladies to board. Her number was confined to six; of
whom two were those I have above mentioned. The others were three sisters,
whose names were Saxby, and a Miss Una; who, for her sweetness of temper, and
excellence in every accomplishment, was esteemed superior to all the rest of
her companions. Harriet Una, was cousin to Miss Meekly, and they usually slept
together. She was just turned of thirteen, was tall and large; had light brown
hair, blue eyes, and a fine complexion: But her goodnature, and willingness to
oblige every one, made her the general favorite, and recommended her to
universal esteem.

When the young ladies retired to bed, Eliza found me in her pocket, and told
Harriet, she was afraid Miss Airy would want her Pincushion; and she was more
concerned, as the family were to go into the country very early the next
morning, and she should have no opportunity to return it. However, continued
she, I will make a new one to present Miss Airy with, when I see her; and I
will keep this, as I have not one at present, my kitten having pulled mine to
pieces this morning; but I will take care this shall not come to the same
mischance. I was glad to hear that was her intention, as I should by no means
have liked the thoughts of sharing the fate of my predecessor. At this time
Mrs. Stanley entered the room to wish them a good night, and to see if they
were properly taken care of. I am very unhappy to night, said Eliza, as soon as
she was gone; and I feel ashamed of receiving Mrs. Stanley's kisses, because I
behaved in a manner I am sure she would not approve. What have you done, my
dear cousin, replied Harriet, to make yourself so uneasy? I will tell you,
answered Miss Meekly, though I do not like to confess my weakness. Just before
dinner, Miss Charlotte Airy asked me to eat some preserved plums, which she
said had been made a present of to her Mamma, and which came from Portugal.
They were very sweet and luscious, and as I am not allowed to have any thing of
that kind, I refused her offer. But when we had dined, she pressed me again,
and laughed at me so much for being so foolish, as to imagine any thing so
innocent could hurt me; but that she supposed, as I went to school, my
mistress, for so she sneeringly called Mrs. Stanley, would whip me if I did.
That at last, overcome with her persecutions, and vexed to be treated so much
like a baby, and as if I was afraid of punishment, I took the plum, and have
not been easy since. And now, my dear Harriet, what shall I do? Suppose Mrs.
Stanley should ask me whether I have eat any thing lately which I ought not;
and if she does not put that question, I feel so undeserving of her caresses,
that she will see by my looks I have behaved improperly. I am very sorry,
replied Miss Una; but as you are so sensible it was wrong, I may spare my
recriminations. However, I think the noblest reparation you can now make, would
be honestly to inform Mrs. Stanley of the crime, and the sincerity of your
regret for having been guilty of it; should it be discovered by any other
means, you will forfeit her esteem, and lose that confidence, with which you
are at present favored: And by such an unsolicited confession, you will
restore satisfaction to your own conscience, and be certain of her approbation.

Eliza was convinced of the propriety and justice of her friend's advice, and
promised to comply with it the next morning. But her excessive timidity
prevented her making use of several opportunities which presented, though the
subject occupied all her attention, and she could scarce think of any thing
else. She again applied therefore to Harriet, and told her it was impossible
for her to summon up courage to do as she had desired; and begged she would,
from her, acquaint Mrs. Stanley with what had happened. Miss Una, in the
mildest terms, complied with her request; and at the same time very generously
commending her honor on every occasion, and urging her present uneasiness to
engage Mrs. Stanley's compassion. Miss Meekly, when she was acquainted with her
cousin's having revealed this secret, which had oppressed her mind, was very
unwilling to attend her to the lady abovementioned. But she received her with
the greatest affection and tenderness; and after expressing, in the warmest
terms, her approbation of such a generous confession, added "You need never my
dear girl, be afraid either of anger, or punishment, when with such a degree of
frankness, you acknowledge any fault you have committed. Be assured, your
friends will be always willing to pardon those errors which you promise to
amend; but let the present instance warn you, my Eliza, never to be led into
actions which you know are improper, because the company you are with may
ridicule your refusal. Miss Charlotte Airy, is, in my opinion, a very naughty
girl, to endeavor to persuade you to do any thing which you have been
forbidden. And I hope from the remorse you have suffered, you will reflect on
the folly of complying with any proposals, which your conscience suggests to
you is wrong. Do not be afraid of being laughed at for being good. Every person
of real sense will esteem you for your resolution: and because a silly girl may
sneer at your apprehension of punishment, it will be much more ridiculous, and
wicked at the same time, to be guilty of what you are conscious is a crime, for
which you will deserve, and perhaps receive correction. Besides, one bad
action, is but too often the cause of the commission of others; and when once
we have deviated from what is right in a small instance, it is frequently the
occasion of accumulated guilt. I will tell you an instance of this kind that
may illustrate my meaning, and which, as I was acquainted with the person who
is the subject of it, will perhaps make a deeper impression on your mind.

A young lady whose real name I shall (for the sake of charity) conceal under
that of Lloyd, and who was, my dear Eliza, nearly of the same age with
yourself, was educated with the utmost attention; and as she was an only child,
was the darling of her parents, and the center of all their future
expectations. Betsey, which was her usual appellation, went one day to visit a
companion, with whom she was extremely intimate; but who, unfortunately for
her, was not possessed of that strict honor which should ever be the basis and
foundation of friendship. When they had been for some time at play in the
garden, she proposed to go to a little shop in the neighborhood to make a
purchase of some gingerbread; and though Miss Lloyd for a time objected to the
proposal without leave, against her mamma's repeated command; yet, her
companion's laughing at her squeamishness (as she wickedly called an adherence
to her duty) prevailed over her better resolutions, and she accompanied her to
the place I mentioned. As it was the only shop of the kind which the village
afforded, the boys of an adjacent school very frequently went there for the
same purpose, as the two young ladies who now entered; and two of the most
unlucky of their number, happened at that time to be bargaining for some ball^*
They staid very soberly until Miss Lloyd had taken out her purse to pay for the
cakes she had purchased; but as the lock of her pocket book was entangled in
it, it came out of her pocket at the same time, when one of the boys snatched
it from her hand, and rudely declared he would see its contents, and know all
the girl's secrets. This vexed her extremely, and she thoughtlessly pursued
him, as he ran away with the prize, until she was a good way from home. He was
joined by several of his school-fellows, who took part with him, and behaved in
so wild a ma^^er as to terrify her greatly. At length, however, she got away
from them, and ran back with all the speed in her power; but as it was later
than her usual time of returning, her parents were uneasy, and questioned her
with great tenderness and anxiety, as to the reason of her stay. She told them,
she had been out with Miss Hannah (the companion she had really visited) and
her maid, and that a horse had been near running over her, which had frightened
her so much, as to prevent her return.

This story was believed by Mr. and Mrs. Lloyd for some time, and Betsey who
had at first been very unhappy at the thoughts of such a wicked deceit, at
length grew reconciled as she found herself undetected. She therefore ventured
upon a second transgression, from the encouragement which she foolishly
imagined the secresy her first fault had given her; and with her intimate Miss
Hannah took another walk, without any person to have the care of them. But
during their absence from home, an unexpected accident punished the imprudent
Miss Lloyd for her disobedience and untruth, in a manner which will give her
cause for repentence to the latest period of her life; for as she was crossing
a road in her return, a horse which had been tied to the rails of a house at a
little distance, broke the bridle which confined him, and gallopped away full
speed, unrestrained by any opposition, until in his passage the unfortunate
Miss Lloyd, who did not perceive his approach, was thrown down, and broke her
leg in such a terrible manner, as to occasion her being a cripple ever after.
She has since confessed, the consciousness of her falsehood was such a
conviction to her mind of the wickedness of her conduct, (when she was made
sensible that the accident was the consequence of her disobedience to her
parents) that it was more difficult to support, than any bodily uneasiness she
had suffered; and the reflections that they would never be able to confide in
her for the future, was the occasion of so much self reproach as to deprive her
of every enjoyment. This instance may serve to convince you, that a slight
error is very frequently without any previous intention, and when least
expected; such crimes seldom occur in the cooler moments of thought (that is,
when you have time to reflect on the wickedness of the action you will never be
capable of committing it) and as no person can be sure they would be able to
resist temptation, it is best never to do any thing which you know to be wrong,
though it may appear to be in the smallest instance, since the desire of
concealing a trifling fault, may lead you to hide it by a falsehood, which is
one of the greatest you can be guilty of.

Miss Meekly was convinced of the truth and propriety of this argument, and
promised to be more attentive for her future conduct. She then joined her
companions with that cheerful good humor, which distinguished her character,
and attended them into the great parlour, where they usually spent the morning.
When they had concluded their work, writing, etc. Mrs. Stanley always made them
read to her, and encouraged them to ask any question which occurred to them; to
make their own observations upon those passages in history which struck their
imaginations; or to propose to her any objection, which arose in their minds,
she desired them to ask the meaning and origin of those customs they did not
comprehend; and by so doing, had frequent opportunities of improving their
understandings. Instances of this kind very frequently occurred, and supplied
them with subjects of conversation. Miss Una was working a map of England, and
enquired one day how long the island had been divided into shires and counties.
Mrs. Stanley applied to the young ladies to know if any of them could resolve
the question, but as they were all silent, "You should endeavor, my dears,
said she, to remember what you read, or it will be of very little advantage. I
believe, Harriet, you read an account of this division a few months ago, when
you was going through the reigns of the Saxon Monarchs. Don't you remember that
the great King Alfred, in the year 886 repaired the city of London, which had
been burnt by the Danes in 839, and that he afterward divided the kingdom into
shires, hundreds, and tithings?" I did not recollect it, said Miss Una. But
pray, added Miss Saxy, did the same king set up all the crosses, for I remember
something about their being erected, though I have forgot when it happened.
Your memory is very short I am afraid, replied Mrs. Stanley; but if you was to
write down such particulars, you would find it of great assistance; as it
appears very illiberal to be unacquainted with those facts, which have occurred
in the history of your native country. All the crosses you mention, were
erected by King Edward the first, in every place where the funeral procession
of his Queen stopped from Lincolnshire (where she died) to Westminster. There
were in all ten, I think. One at Lincoln, Granth^m, Stamford, Geddington,
Northampton, Stony Stratford, Dunstable, St. Alban's, Waltham, and Westminster,
called Charing Cross. You should always endeavor to observe what you read; but
those things which relate to the island in which you live, have a particular
claim to your remembrance. For this purpose I think your present work is
singularly useful, as it will so strongly impress the geography of your country
upon your mind, that I hope, my dear Harriet, you will never forget it. As
nothing material happened to my mistress, and very little variation occurred in
her manner of living, I shall pass over the usual events of every day, which my
readers can easily imagine; such as her taking me out of her pocket during the
time of dressing, and restoring me to that place of confinement when she had
concluded, and proceed to relate an accident in which I was very nearly
concerned.

The kitten I have before mentioned, who was a great favorite with Miss
Meekly, was never allowed to enter her bed chamber; but one day, the weather
being extremely warm, and the door left open, it walked in, and laid itself
down at a little distance from the window, in a spot where the sun shone; the
shutters being half closed to exclude the heat. Eliza was employed in putting a
pair of ruffles into her jacket, and I lay in her lap securely as I imagined,
until a carriage stopping at the gate, she precipitately jumped up to look out
at the visitors, and in her haste let me fall upon the floor. Her motion was so
sudden and unexpected, that I could not save myself, or check the velocity with
which I was impelled. So that I unfortunately rolled on, until I touched the
edge of a bookcase, and discovered myself to Mrs. Puss, who hooked me with her
claws, and twirled me round several times, with as much dexterity as if I had
been spinning; or, to use a more proper simile, as if I had represented a
mouse. I afforded her great entertainment for some time, until at last I found
myself a second time under one of the feet of the bookcase, and so fast wedged
in, that it was beyond the art of even a kitten's invention, to extricate me
from my situation. And Mrs. Stanley coming up stairs. Miss Meekly turned out my
antagonist, and with unavailing care searched for me in every drawer, on every
table, and upon the bed.

Long have I remained in this dull state of obscurity and confinement, unable
to make known my distress, as I want the power of articulation: at least my
language can be only understood to things inanimate as myself. A pen, however,
which fell down near me, engaged to present these memoirs to the world, if ever
it should be employed by the hand of kindness, to rescue my name from oblivion.
Should the eye of youth read this account with any pleasure, it is hoped the
candor of generosity will overlook its imperfections; and should fate, in some
fortunate moment of futurity, again restore me to the possession of Miss
Meekly, or any of her companions, my gratitude will engage me to thank the
public for its indulgence, and to continue the account of my adventures.

If I am not so happy as to meet with approbation, I shall at least have the
consolation to reflect, that these pages have suggested no wrong ideas to the
youthful mind, have given no encouragement to vanity, nor exhibited any
improper example with commendation; which is what better Authors, and works of
higher genius cannot always be happy enough to boast. Such as it is, I submit
this account of myself to the world, and only desire them to remmember, in the
words of the admired Gay, That

From objects most minute and mean,
A virtuous mind may morals glean.
THE ADVENTURES OF A PINCUSHION.
PART II.
I HAD lain so long in my dismal confinement, that I began to despair of ever
presenting the world with any second part of my adventures. And yet, thought I,
it is very hard that a Pincushion so new, so clean, and so beautiful, that
might have a thousand opportunities of seeing the different manners of mankind,
should be thus secluded from company, and condemned by the playful freaks of an
insignificant kitten thus to pass away its best days in obscurity. And here let
me take this opportunity to suggest a useful hint to my young readers, which,
as my inactive situation allowed me sufficient time for reflection, I had
frequently reason to feel the force of; namely, That although I fretted and
fumed every day at my unfortunate condition, I never found it was at all
improved by it, or that my ill humor in the least degree made me happier, or
assisted my escape.

When I determined to submit quietly, I was as happy as any Pincushion in such
a state of retirement could be. But when in a cross fit I tried to roll myself
from under the bookcase, I found the attempt was impossible to accomplish, and
I hurt my sides against the foot of it. The space was so small between the
bottom of my prison and the floor; that, I had no hopes of escape, as it was
impossible for any broom to find its way under; or otherwise the cleanliness of
Mrs. Stanley's maid would certainly have effected my deliverance. But, alas! of
this I had no prospect; and though my endeavors were fruitless, it taught me
such a lesson of contentment, as I wish every little reader of my memoirs, may
remember, and copy in their own conduct. For if they are tired of working,
reading, music, drawing, or any other employment at home; or what is
frequently the case, are impatient of the confinement and disagreeable
circumstances of being at school, I would have them take my advice, and try to
amuse themselves when they have opportunity, and wait with patience until they
are of a proper age, either to leave the place they dislike, or have overcome
the difficulty of learning those accomplishments which are neccessary to be
acquired. For they may depend upon it, that fretfulness and ill humor will
make every condition unhappy; while a resolution to be pleased, and make the
best of every thing, is the only method to be agreeable to others, or
comfortable themselves. The foot of the bookcase will press the closer, when we
petulantly try to escape; and though children are not Pincushions, yet they
will find, that whenever they are fretful and dissatisfied, they will be
unhappy, and never succeed in any thing they undertake. I hope I shall be
pardoned for this digression, but as the event of my escape was so strong in my
mind, I could not pass it by without a pause of observation. Let me now,
however, proceed to inform my readers, that one fine day, when I had determined
to make myself contented, and when from the quietness in which I had been for
some days, I had reason to believe the family were absent, and had therefore
little hope for release, on a sudden I felt the bookcase move, and heard the
sound of men's voices, who, after much pushing and hoisting, took away what had
so long covered me from the eye of every beholder. In short, I found that Mrs.
Stanley had taken another house, as her lease was expired; and in consequence
of the removal of her furniture, I again regained my liberty. One of the
porters took me up, and blew off the flew which so long a confinement had
covered me with, and taking me down stairs, presented me to a chair woman, who
was hired to clean the house. There, mother Trusty, said he, is a present for
you, which, if you please, you may give to little Jenny: it will make her as
fine as a lady. Thank you returned she, I will keep it safe for my girl, and if
you have got a bit of paper, I will wrap it up, for my hands art wet and dirty,
and when I take any thing out of my pocket I may spoil it, you know. But as to
making her fine, Jacob, indeed I do not desire it; and was your present any
thing to wear, she should not have it; for I think finery is not suitable for
us. She is a good child, Jacob, and that is better than being a lady. Well,
Mother Trusty, do as you please, replied Jacob; I don't know who the Pincushion
belonged to, so if you like Jane should have it, why I am glad I found it. So
saying, he complained that the weather was very hot, and after wiping his face
with a coarse apron, which was tied round him, he drank Mrs. Trusty's health;
and took a good draught of porter, which stood on the table. He then sat down
to eat some bread and cheese, and calling a great dog which lay in one corner
of the kitchen, made him set upon his hind legs to beg for some victuals, and
afterward bring him his knot, which he very dexterously did, by taking the
buckle of it in his mouth, and dragging it after him to his master. Another
trick which this animal had been taught, was to shut the door at the word of
command; and his last performance to the entertainment of my new Mistress and
Mr. Jacob, was to pick up his master's wig, and bring it upon his head, which
made indeed a very droll figure to the spectators. At the conclusion of his
meal, Jacob bid adieu to mother Trusty, and they each separated to pursue their
different employments. I was in the mean time laid on one of the shelves,
curiously wrapped up in a bit of paper, which had fallen from the back of that
very bookcase under which I had so long resided; it was torn in two by Jacob,
who took one half to put up some bits of cheese rinds for his dog; and I found
it was a fragment of poetry, which I suppose had been sent to Miss Saxby, as
her name was Martha. I amused myself with the perusal of the lines, which were
as follow:

FRAGMENT.

IT IS a folly, my friend, for to envy the great,
Since content may be found in the lowest estate;
Though Miss *** exults that she is splendidly dressed,
Of true happiness, Martha, she never was possessed.
I have seen her, my friend, when no art could assuage,
Her anger, vexation, and petulant rage;
Because an inferior has treated with scorn,
Those trinkets and gauze which her person adorn.
But, believe me, esteem from true merit must rise,
Or the world will the pageants of fortune despise;
It Is ridiculous, surely, for pride to expect,
Any better return than disdain and neglect.
Let us then, my Martha, more prudent and wise,
Endeavor with nobler ambition to rise;
Let kind emulation our bosoms expand,
The foolish suggestions of pride to withstand.
Let us trust that perfection, each effort shall bless,
As industry ever is crowned with success:
Though hard is the task, yet it is great to aspire,
And the deep buried embers of genius to fire.
It Is a laudable aim, when we seek to excel,
And conquer that sloth which is apt to rebel;
Then let us attentive each precept obey,
And snatch the proud laurels of glory away.
The business of the day being concluded, the good mother Trusty shut up the
house; and taking me down from the shelf, put me carefully in her pocket. We
were not long before we arrived at her habitation, which consisted of two neat
little rooms, in a small house, about the middle of a very pleasant lane. A
clean looking boy and girl were sitting at the door, with a colored apron full
of peace, which they were very busily shelling. They expressed great pleasure at
the sight of Mrs. Trusty, who I found to be their grandmother, and with much
good humor, told her they had each earned a half penny; for that Mrs. Traffic
at the chandler's shop, had given them one penny, and promised them a
farthing's worth of gingerbread, or a stale roll, for getting her peace ready
for supper. Well, and I have brought you home something, replied Mrs. Trusty
unfolding me to the child, who eagerly getting up to recive her present, had
nearly overset the apron and its contents; but her brother luckily caught it so
as to prevent the peace from falling into the dirt. But pray, Jenny, stay until
you have done, and have washed your hands, said her grandmother; for it would
be a pity to spoil this nice satin Pincushion: And what have you brought for
me? cried rosy Dick? as he emptied a handful of peace into the basin. Why
nothing at all; my good boy, replied Mrs. Trusty, but a piece of bread and
cheese; but I hope you are not jealous that your sister should have any thing,
when you cannot partake of it? Jealous! said he: No, I would go without any
thing in the world for the sake of my Jenny; and I will give her my halfpenny
with all my heart, though I have staid away from a nice game at cricket on the
green to earn it. When I am a man you shall see how hard I will work, and take
care of all the money I get, and give it to you, mother, to buy us victuals,
and drink, and clothes; and you shall stay at home and knit; but never, while I
have my health, shall you go out to such hard labor as you now do. Blessings
on my generous boy, exclaimed the tender hearted mother Trusty, while the tears
of affection rolled down her aged cheeks. Just such a man was thy father, Dick.
While he was alive, we never wanted for any thing. He was a good man, indeed he
was; and I hope that you will resemble him. But go, my boy! carry home your
work, and bring the stale roll which you was promised; it will be much better
for you than gingerbread.

Jenny kissed her brother, and thanked him for his kind intention; but we will
give the penny to our grandmother, said she; you know she has got five pence
three farthings which we have had given us already; and when there is enough we
will ask her to buy you a pair of new shoes; because those are too bad to walk
with. Away ran Richard with the peace, and returned in triumph with the roll;
when the little party sat down to supper, with that smiling good humor and
cheerful contentment, which is not always an attendant on the meals of the rich
and the great. But when I saw how very little was sufficient (or was obliged to
be so) for a woman who had been hard at labor all day, and two little hungry
children, I could not help reflecting, how wicked it is in those who are
blessed with plenty, to be dissatisfied with their food, and idly waste when
they are not disposed to eat it, that which would keep the poor from starving,
and which many an unhappy child would be highly thankful to receive. When they
had concluded the meal which their grandmother had brought them, Dick ran to a
neighboring pump, to replenish a broken red pitcher which had lost its handle
and a piece out of the top; and after they had each of them drank with thirsty
eagerness, he kissed his grandmother and sister, and wishing them a good night
went quietly to bed. Little Jenny followed her brother's example, as soon as
she had lain me in a drawer with great care, where all her treasures were
deposited. Among that number was a little paper, which was nearly worn out with
frequent perusal, and which I shall beg leave to present my readers with.

DICK TO HIS SISTER.
THOUGH I am but a boy, yet I Will do the best I can,
And I Will try to earn something, although I am not a man;
But when I am older, nay, Jenny, do not cry,
For the loss of thy father and mother I Will supply.
I Will go to yon farm house, and beg a bit of bread;
And if I get a morsel, my Jenny shall be fed:
Then do not weep so sore, for I hope we know the worst,
And to see you look so dismal, my heart it will burst.
Old granam she will help us, and work for to maintain;
And when I am bigger, I Will pay it all again.
Though as yet I cannot dig, yet, a gleaning I may go,
Then stop your tears, my Jenny, for I cannot see them flow.
When I pass through the church yard, where Daddy is at rest;
I cannot help sobbing, and a sigh will heave my breast:
And I think to myself, if my Jenny too should die,
Ah! who would her place to her Richard ever supply.
Then, my sister, cheer thine heart, and do not look so sad;
If we can but live together, matters will not be so bad.
Now the blackberries are ripe, and I Will gather some for thee;
And we'll eat them, my Jenny, beneath you hollow tree,
I know too, my love, where some honey may be found;
For I have often marked the place which the bees do surround;
And I Will take some for thee, for young Robin taught me how,
One day when I followed in the field with his plough.
Then, my Jenny, be but happy, and cheer us with a smile;
For I fain would make thee blessed, and thy sorrows all beguile.
Though poor Daddy is no more, yet, Richard loves his Jane,
And all thy tears, my sister, cannot bring him back again.
Perhaps it may be thought an uncommon effort for little Dick to turn poet at
so early an age, and with so few advantages from education. But there is no
answering for the powers of natural genius, and many a one may regard an
attempt as impossible, merely because they are too indolent to exert their
faculties. Richard had been taught to read and write at the charity school of
the parish where he lived; and as no application had been wanting on his part,
the progress he made did equal credit to his own abilities, and the attention
of his master, with whom his merit had made him a great favorite.

Jenny was likewise put to a small school at a little distance, by the
benevolence of the vicar's wife, (with whom such instances were very frequent)
and by her assiduity recommended herself to her mistress, who would often
propose her example as a pattern to the rest of her scholars.

The next morning, when mother Trusty got up to her daily labor, she kissed
her grandchildren, and told them to go to school early, and not stay and play
afterward; but to return back again, for she would probably come home to
dinner. This they promised to do; and after they had learnt their lessons, they
affectionately hugged each other, and diligently set forward with their books
in their hands. But Jenny in a few minutes returned to fetch me, in order to
exhibit her new present to her school fellows. We soon arrived at a cottage,
whose apartments were neither large or numerous; but the exquisite cleanness of
it was truly admirable. The mistress, whose name was Markall, was dressed in a
blue and white striped gown, which was rather of the coarsest materials; but
was put on with the neatness of a Quaker, as was a plain bordered mob, with a
white cloth binder, and a colored silk handkerchief; which, with the addition
of a checked apron, and a black petticoat, will give a pretty good idea of her
appearance. She commended Jenny for coming early, and having enquired after her
grandmother and brother, heard her read, and repeat the lesson she had the day
before given her to learn. Soon after which, Betsey Field, Nanny Hay, and the
rest of the scholars arrived; among which number were likewise several boys. As
the room door (which indeed was the door of the house too) was left open for
the benefit of the air, and as one of the forms where the girls were at work,
was placed on that side, they were many of them better disposed to watch the
passing of a cart, or a wheelbarrow; or to attend the flight of birds, and
butterflies, than to mind their works: and Mrs. Markall punished several of
them, with a few strokes of a little cane, which lay on her table for that
purpose.

After she had heard them read, they stood round her in a circle to spell; and
those who were so negligent as to mistake, lost their place in the set, and
exchanged with their more attentive companions. A precedence in the ring was
coveted with great ardour, and encouraged a spirit of emulation among them, as
to stand first (which was my mistress's distinction) was regarded as an
acknowledgment of superior excellence. When they had finished their business,
and the wished for hour of twelve struck, from the church clock, which was very
near Mrs. Markall's house, they all made their rustic courtesies and bows to
the Dame, and poured, like a swarm of summer flies, into the lane. The whole
body of them stood for a few moments to interchange their mutual salutations;
when some divided to the right hand, and the other party to the left, which led
to the church porch; where they seated themselves to be sheltered from the
intense heat of the sun; and Jenny, with a smile of conscious satisfaction,
produced me to her companions. Though she was anxious to display what she was
so well pleased with herself, yet she began to be apprehensive for my safety,
when the girls, with unpolished rudeness, all scrambled for a sight of her
present at the same time. At last the two whose names were above mentioned,
pursued Polly Chant, who was in possession of me, and after scuffling on the
grass, until Nanny Hay knocked her head with great violence against one of the
tomb stones, and Betsey sprained her wrist in trying to wrench me from Polly,
she ran home with the prize with so much swiftness, as to outstrip all her
competitors. What became of poor Jenny I cannot tell, nor how she bore the loss
of me; but I could not help reflecting how much better it would have been, had
these girls been sufficiently polite, to have each satisfied their own
curiosity, and then have resigned me to the inspection of others. Whereas, by
all eagerly snatching me at once, they dirted my outside, and pulled me quite
out of shape; together with making them all very angry, and foolishly
commencing a quarrel, of which the first consequences were the wounds I have
mentioned. Polly Chant, whose property I so unjustly became, was the daughter
of the parish clerk. He was by trade a shoemaker, and had three children, two
girls and a boy. His wife was a notable little woman, who took care of some
poultry, pigs, and asses, which were allowed to feed upon a green before the
house.

As soon as my new mistress arrived at home, her mother ordered her to prepare
what was wanted for dinner; at the same time telling her, she was much
displeased that she did not return from school sooner. Polly answered in a
manner which convinced me, she was more pert than prudent; and ran into a
little back wash house to her sister, who was taking a piece of bacon out of
the saucepan, and who likewise chid her delay; adding, that dinner was ready,
and she had been wanted to lay the table cloth. In reply to this, she told the
history I have just related, and produced me to her sister, who wiping her
hands on a bit of rag which hung on a nail in the window, took me up to
examine: When, lo! Polly, who was at all times too hasty to attend to reason,
not choosing that Sukey should touch me for fear of spoiling my beauty, hastily
snatched me from her, and dropped me, not into the saucepan, which I escaped,
but into a basin of soap and water which stood near it, and in which Mrs. Chant
had just been washing her hands. Upon this arose a quarrel between the sisters,
which was terminated by the entrance of their father, who insisted upon their
bringing his dinner immediately; and Polly, after having carefully wiped, laid
me on a clean handkerchief to dry. I staid with this family some days, and was
witness to many disagreements between the different parties which composed it;
but as I do not think the recital of illiberal abuse could afford any
entertainment to my readers, I shall not trouble myself to repeat it. But the
folly of such behavior must be evident to every reflecting mind, when it is
considered, that although the scenes I have mentioned passed in the low life of
poverty, yet the same ill humor, would occasion equal animosity, in the most
affluent circumstances. And though no situation can justify fretful petulence,
yet, it is certainly more excusable in girls, who were untaught by education,
and unpolished by politeness, than in those, with whom the utmost care has been
exerted, and who have had all the advantages of reading and instruction to
contribute to their improvement. That it is possible for good humor, and a
determined endeavor to please, in a great measure to supply the deficiency of
acquired graces, may be seen in the characters of Richard and Jenny, whose
affection to each other must interest every one in their favor: And the same
sweetness of temper, will likewise recommend to my reader's esteem, the
agreeable Hannah Mindful, to whom I was given one Sunday afternoon, by Polly
Chant, in a walk which they took together after church. And sincerely glad was
I to exchange mistresses, as my last had been so ill tempered and quarrelsome,
and had taken me, in so unjustifiable a manner, from the good natured little
Jenny. Hannah was near fourteen years old, and the eldest of six children. Her
mother was a very worthy woman, but was afflicted with such bad health, that
she was seldom able to leave her bed. Her father had a small farm, and was very
industrious in his business, and very careful of his family; and I was quite
astonished to think, of how much service Hannah's attention proved to her
brothers and sisters; and what a comfort it was to her sick mother, to have
such a good girl, in whom she could confide, and to whose care she could
entrust them.

After she had parted from my late owner she was met in her way home by the
vicar, whose lady was mentioned as the benefactress of my favorite Jenny, and
who with her husband was returning to his house. He stopped at the gate, and
desired Hannah to wait there, or amuse herself in the garden, while he went to
fetch a medicine which he had promised to send to her mother; and at his return
presented her with a couple of fine peaches, which he told her to eat, as she
was a good girl. She thanked him very civilly, and after wishing him good
night, ran home as fast as possible, for fear her mother should want her; to
whom she immediately presented her present, without offering to taste either of
them herself. A niece of Mr. Mindful's lived at this time at his house, whose
name was Sally Flaunt; and who had been a half boarder, at a great school near
London, where she was put by a relation, whose death had left her no friend but
her uncle. She was entirely unprovided for; yet was so inconsiderately proud,
as to make herself a burden to the family, instead of trying to be of any
service, which she might have had sufficient opportunity of being, as she was
near fifteen, and very tall of her age. When Hannah rose in the morning to
assist in getting breakfast, dressing her sisters, and making the beds, Sally
would disdainfully turn round to sleep, because it was in her silly opinion,
unlike a lady to get up early. Without any fortune, or the slightest
recommendation but her industry, she was ever foolishly aiming at a rank in
life, to which she had no pretensions; and without sense to distinguish, that
it is gracefulness of manners, and superior learning, that forms the essential
difference between high life and poverty; and that merit is as much entitled to
respect in the lowest circumstances of indigence, as in the most exalted
station, she was so weak as to imagine, that by imitating some of those foibles
she had seen in girls who had more fortune than understanding, she would be
thought to resemble them, and meet with that regard which is not bestowed on
riches, but on the supposed worth of those who possess them. While Hannah went
up stairs to carry some water gruel to her mother, she dispatched one of her
little sisters to tell Sally that breakfast was ready; but as she had slept so
long, it was some time before she could make her appearance; and Mr. Mindful,
who was justly displeased with her indolence, told one of his children to carry
her milk away; for that those who were too lazy to provide for themselves, and
to be ready at the proper time, might go without food. When Sally therefore
came down, she was much disappointed to hear, that a fast was for the present
enjoined as her portion; and looking very much out of humor, she walked into
the garden. He followed her out; and as she was turning round a little yew
hedge which fronted a field, he took hold of her hand, and pulling her into the
kitchen, told her, he was displeased at her behavior. "You are very foolish,
Sally, said he, because you have been to school, to imagine that you have
nothing farther to do, than set with your hands before you, and play the fine
lady. You have no money to provide for yourself, and there is no person will
take care of you, if you do not work hard to get your bread. Behave as you
should, and I will treat you as my own child: but if you have too much pride to
know your duty, and will not mind my advice, I will turn you out, to try where
you can live better than with me." Sally knew she dare not reply to this
positive speech; and fearing her uncle should become more angry, she promised
to behave better, and walked up stairs to Hannah, who was dusting the furniture
in her own room. To her she related the above particulars, with the tears
running down her cheeks, and with the most dismal sobs of distress and passion.
My good natured mistress compassionately kissed her, and wept to see her
disturbance; but indeed, my dear Sally, said she, I wish you would try to exert
yourself, and as you cannot be a lady, you had better endeavor to please my
father. You see, we all live very happily, and I am sure I would do all in my
power to make you do so too: so cheer up your spirits, and don't weep so sadly.
"I cannot, replied Sally, very crossly! indeed you may, who have never seen any
higher life; but where I was at school, do you think any of the ladies scoured
the rooms, or milked the cow, or went to such work as washing and ironing? O!
Hannah, had you seen the caps, and feathers, and muslin, and gauze frocks,
which they used to wear on a dancing day, and how smart they looked in their
silk shoes, or else red morocco ones, you would not wonder that I do not like
these great black leather things (and she scornfully tossed out her foot as she
spoke.) Indeed, Hannah, I could cry, whenever I see you and your sisters
clothed in such coarse gowns, with your black worsted stockings, and with that
check handkerchief on your neck, and your round cloth caps, with that piece of
linen for a ribbon. I cannot bear it! and I wish I was any thing but what I
am." O, fie, Sally! said Hannah, that is quite ungrateful for the good things
which you are blessed with, to talk in such a manner as that. "What good
things? retorted the haughty girl, raising her voice, and growing more angry.
Do you call this dowlas shift, this coarse apron, this linsey wolsey gown, good
things? Or do you call the brown bread we eat, or the hard dumplings you was
making just now, good things? And, pray, this old worm eaten bed without any
curtains to it, and this little window which is too small to admit one's head
out, and what a little hole there is, quite crammed full of honeysuckles; or
this propped up chest of drawers, or that good for nothing chair with a great
hole in the bottom, which you know, Bet, nearly felt through yesterday, when
she got upon it to reach the box which holds her Sunday straw hat; do you call
these good things? because if you do, I am sorry you know no better." I should
be sorry indeed, rejoined Hannah, with rather more displeasure than was usual
to her, if I knew so much of high life, as to be discontented with what my
father and mother can afford. I think our bread is as good as any body need
wish for? and I am sure the dumplings you so scornfully mention, will be very
well tasted and wholesome. As to the furniture, if it is old, I will answer for
its being clean, Sally; and my father says he can nail a piece of board over
that chair, which will last as many years as the back does. And as to our
clothes, I am sure they are whole and tight; for I would work my fingers to the
bone, before I would see them otherwise. They are coarse to be sure; but they
are as good as our neighbors, and many a one would be thankful to have such to
put on; and though you speak so proudly of the house and every thing in it, I
have seen the ladies at Oakly Hall, who are worth as much money as would buy
all the villages for twenty miles round, come as kindly and sit down in my
mother's room, and take hold of my hand, and my sister's, and speak as prettily
as if I had been a lady too; without looking at the chairs, or finding fault
with the bed. And Miss Goodall, although she is dressed so handsomely, never
seems to think about it; and the last time she stopped here took the loaf out of
my father's hand, and said, let me cut Mrs. Mindful a piece of bread and
butter! I can do it very well, and it shall be thin, such as I know she can
eat. And she brought with her a canister of sago, and went herself to the fire,
and poured the water to mix it, and put some wine into it, which she brought
with her; and showed me the way to do it, with so much good nature, that I
don't think you need be so very proud, Sally, and look so unhappy about your
situation. And I assure you, she has sometimes eat our bread, and always said
it was very good. Hannah was here interrupted by one of her sisters, who came
to call her to assist her mother who was going to get up. She attended her
immediately, and taking me out of her pocket, into which she hastily put me at
the conclusion of the above conversation, she placed me on the table, while she
assisted Mrs. Mindful in putting on a clean cap and bed gown; and after she had
helped her to an old elbow chair, she made the bed; which, as soon as she had
finished, she went into the garden, and returning with a nice nosegay of
flowers, placed them in a little white stone mug upon the table, in order by
their sweetness, to refresh and please her mother, as she was very fond of
them. She then kissed her with great tenderness, and begged her to take an egg
beat up with some milk, which she immediately got ready. These little services
were all performed with so much alacrity and good nature, and such visible
pleasure in her countenance, as doubled the merit of all her actions. It was
impossible inded to see her, without thinking how very agreeable it is in the
power of good nature and industry, to make those who have no other advantages
to recommend them.

Hannah Mindful was a healthy looking country girl, her complexion was burnt by
the sun, and her hands hardened by laborious toil; she was not ornamented by
dress, though her person was at all times made agreeable by neatness: She had
never been taught those graces, which so forcibly recommend the possessor to
general observation; but a constant cheerfulness, and a desire of obliging,
which was never interrupted by petulance, made her beloved by every one who
knew her. To be as good natured as Hannah Mindful, was the highest praise of
every girl in the village; and every mother was ready to propose her conduct,
as an example to her own children. If there was a piece of bread, which her
sisters liked better than the rest of the loaf, she would save it for them by
turns, whenever she had opportunity. If any of them went out to play, and
forgot the business which fell to their share, or which their mother had
ordered them to do, she would either fetch them home again, or, (if in her
power) do it for them herself. By this she often saved them from punishment.
One day when her father had brought two ribbands from a fair, for her sister
Molly and herself, he gave Hannah the liberty of choosing first. She directly
took a pink, which was her favorite color; and left a dark green, which was
what she most disliked: but afterward finding her sister wished for the one
she had chosen, she gave it her immediately, with as much readiness, as if she
had approved of the exchange from the preference to the color she disliked.
Sally told her she thought it was foolish to give up what she had got in her
possession; but Hannah, with a generosity which did great credit to the
goodness of her disposition, replied, that she should never have worn with
comfort, what she evidently saw her sister was desirous to obtain: and I
declare, added she, I feel a much higher gratification in the idea of giving
pleasure to my dear Molly, than I should receive from any difference of color,
or from a present of much greater value. Sally was not of that opinion; for the
indulgence of pride, is the occasion of selfishness, and the cause of the most
despicable meanness. By wishing for greater riches, and despising that way of
life to which she was destined, her heart was constantly agitated, by anxious
vexation. Whereas, Hannah was always cheerful, good humoured, and contented:
And the same incidents, which to the one were the occasion of dissatisfaction
and complaint, the other submitted to without repining, and rejoiced with
gratitude at the felicity of her lot. And thus, my young readers, will it be
with persons of higher rank, than those of whom I am now writing. If you make
yourself unhappy, because some of your companions have more elegant clothes, or
a greater variety than yourself; or because it may suit the fortune of their
parents, to make more splendid entertainments, than the choice or circumstances
of yours will admit; if they ride in their father's carriage, while you walk
on foot and unattended, remember, that is no rational cause of uneasiness. It
is not the station, but the propriety with which it is sustained, that is the
real matter of concern. A beggar may be more respectable than a Prince, if he
is sunk to indigence by misfortune; and exerts his utmost powers, to act with
industry, and maintain the proper conduct which his situation requires. Let me
advise you then, not to wish for that finery which would be unsuitable to your
circumstances; but to submit to the discretion of your parents, because they
must know best what is proper for you. Sally Flaunt had not the power to make
her uncle's brown bread the least degree whiter, although she was too fretful
to eat it with satisfaction. She could not enlarge the rooms, or repair the
furniture, by her discontent; but she might have been as happy as her cousin,
had she been disposed to be good humoured. When any business is necessary to be
performed, if it is done with sullenness and ill will, it becomes the most
laborious toil, and most irksome employment; but if it is executed with
cheerfulness, it is much sooner dispatched, and the fatigue is considerably
abated. It is time, However, to return to my own adventures, without
trespassing longer on your patience by my advice.

I had continued some time with my mistress, when Mr. Goodall (whose daughter I
believe I have beforementioned) gave an entertainment to his tenants, on
account of her attaining her eighteenth year. Mr. Mindful out of kindness to
his family, determined to stay at home himself, and take care of his wife,
while he dispatched all the young ones who were of a proper age, to enjoy an
amusement which would afford them so much pleasure. Hannah dressed herself and
two sisters, as neat as rustic simplicity could adorn them. They had each of
them light brown stuff gowns, white aprons and handkerchiefs, with straw hats;
her own with green, and her sisters with pink ribbons. They had all a nosegay
of flowers in their bosoms, and with the freshness of innocence and health
glowing in their cheeks, prepared to set out for Oakley Hall. Hannah did not
forget to get ready every thing she thought her mother might want in her
absence; and with a kiss of filial affection, bade her adieu.

Jack Mindful, her brother, was a lad of about thirteen, very active and
sprightly, and sometimes apt to be extremely mischievous. I have had no
opportunity before this to introduce him to the notice of my readers; but the
part he took in dressing his cousin for the intended sport, will make it
necessary to exhibit him on the present occasion. Sally, whose attention was
wholly engrossed by the pride of excelling her companions in the finery of her
clothes, had been for some days busily employed in mending an old silk coat,
which had been given her during her stay at school. It had originally been
ornamented with gauze cuffs, which were grown dirty and yellow with keeping:
the rest of the trimming was sufficiently decayed, to make it a rather
despicable garb; and Mrs. Mindful, who justly thought such shabby finery very
improper for her niece's situation, insisted upon her going in a new garnet
colored stuff, which she had lately bought her. This Sally was much distressed
at, and communicated her intention to her cousin Jack, who promised to assist
her in her design; which was, after she had taken leave of Mrs. Mindful, to
carry her clothes to a barn at some distance, and there put on the silk coat,
which she imagined would make her so much better respected by the family at
Oakly Hall. To this place then she repaired, her heart beating with
expectation, and flattered with the imagination of outshining all her
companions. She had made up a new cap for the occasion; and as she was very
tall and womanly in her appearance, thought if she could make any substitute
for a cushion it would much improve her fashionable appearance. On this great
occasion, she borrowed me of Hannah, who went before her cousin; as she did not
choose to have any witness but Jack, who was the only person entrusted with this
important secret. At the barn then we soon arrived, and her stuff gown was
thrown off with disdain, while she prepared, with the assistance of an old
triangular bit of a broken looking glass, to equip for the desirable
expedition. After placing the cushion, which she had taken great pains to
complete, and pinning her hair over it with a piece of black ribbon, she put on
her cap; which exhibited the most tawdry collection of old gauze, bits of
ribbon, and slatternly tassels, that can well be imagined. At last came the
trial of the coat, which as it had been made very long behind, was in that
respect tolerable; but its appearance in front was so short, as to be really
ridiculous. During the time she was looking at her head in the glass, Jack in
turning round hastily threw it down a hole which he had purposely contrived,
and where it was impossible to regain it, as it was so instantly out of sight,
that Sally had not an idea where it had vanished, her search was totally in
vain, and she could only finish her dress by Jack's direction. He pretended to
admire her appearance extremely, and to make it the more complete, he had
before tied a couple of sheep's feet to a piece of ribbon, which he now pinned
to her shoulders, fastening them close to her back with another string which he
likewise pinned down; and by way of addition to the streamers in her cap, he
suspended a number of bits of straw, which he had tied together with a piece of
pack thread. With these burlesque ornaments she hurried with him to the Hall;
and as she was entering the door which led to the house, under pretense of
fastening a piece of the trimming which he said he could improve, he undid the
lower pins, and let the sheep's feet dance about on her back, to the
unspeakable entertainment of every beholder. The laugh which her appearance
occasioned covered her with confusion; and her pride was mortified in the
highest degree, to find her finery treated with such a degree of contemptuous
mirth, instead of that admiration with which she had flattered herself. The
boys were eager to dissect her head-dress, and Polly Chant, who was of the
party, very maliciously pinned one of her cuffs to the table cloth, as she was
lolling her head on her hand to hide those tears of vexation which she could
not forbear. Unfortunately she rose in some haste, upon the appearance of Mr.
Goodall, who entered the room to welcome his guests, and dragged down the salt
seller, and several plates, knives, forks, and spoons; which had they been
brittle materials, would have been certainly demolished; but as the whole
service was of pewter, they escaped unhurt. The bustle which this accident
occasioned, still more disconcerted the unfortunate Sally Flaunt, who bursting
into tears very hastily left the room. In the angry jirk with which she walked
away from the company, her two shoulders were saluted with the sheep's feet, in
such a manner as to make her imagine she had received a blow, which she turned
round very quickly in order to resent; but the agility of her motions, only
served to repeat the imagined offense, the author of which, however, she found
it impossible to discern. But as she was going through an apartment which led
to the garden, she discovered her own figure in a large pier glass; the sight
of which, so fully completed her vexation, that she determined to hurry home
immediately, and snatching her handkerchief from her pocket to wipe her eyes,
she whirled me out with it to a considerable distance, and without perceiving
her loss, left me to enjoy my own reflections. The thought of Sally's
ridiculous vanity entirely took up my attention. How happily might she have
passed the day had she been contented to do so in her proper character; but by
assuming a superiority to her companions, she excited the contempt of Jack
Mindful, who was determined to mortify her pride, by making her an object of
ridicule; and though his mischievous intention was certainly extremely
blameable, yet it was her own folly which put the execution of it into his
power. Had she not determined so meanly to deceive, and disobey her aunt, by
pretending to comply with her advice, at the very moment she was preparing to
act in opposition to it, she would have escaped that mortification, which,
however it might excite pity, was undoubtedly deserved.

I lay unperceived by the door of a little closet until the next morning; when
Mrs. Betty, who came to sweep the room, picked me up, and laid me for some time
on a marble slab, and after she had finished her business, I accompanied her to
breakfast. My new mistress was a pleasing young woman, who was a housemaid in
Mr. Goodall's family. She sat down with the laundry maid, whose name was Joice,
and who complained very much of the heat of the weather. I have been so ill for
some days past, said she, that I can with difficulty stand to wash; and the
heat of the fire when I am ironing, makes me much worse than I should otherwise
be; and then Miss Sophy is so careless, she never considers what will dirt her
clothes, nor how much work she occasions. I am sure her sister at her age was
always neat and nice with half the number of frocks and petticoats which she
requires. I wonder that a young lady should not have more compassion for a poor
servant. "That is because they do not know the trouble it is, replied Betty;
but indeed Joice, Miss Sophy is the same in every thing. If she is cutting a
piece of gauze or paper she is sure to make a litter all over the room; and I
have often seen her cut a card into a thousand bits on the carpet, without
making any use of it at all; and if she is undoing her work, or picking her
doll's clothes to pieces, she will strew the threads on the floor, without
thinking how much trouble it gives me to take them up again. But if she would
but put her bits of rubbish into a piece of paper, it might be taken away
without any difficulty." She will never be beloved like her sister, said Joice.
And then she does not look so much like a young lady; for Jerry says, that when
he is waiting at dinner, he cannot help looking at her, to see how she leans
against the table (which is one way she makes her frock so dirty) and takes
such great mouthfuls, and eats so exceedingly fast, as if she was starving, and
thought she should lose her dinner; and sometimes she drinks without wiping her
mouth, and very frequently when it is not empty. "O! I have seen her myself,
interrupted Betty; I have seen her when I have waited at breakfast, grasp the
spoon in her hand quite down to the bowl of it, and my mistress has told her it
looked very ugly; and then she has altered it for a minute, but has soon held
it as awkwardly as ever. But what I am most angry with her for, is slopping her
milk, or tea, on the tables, just after I have rubbed them until they are as
bright as looking-glasses; and then she smears her hand across, and all my
labor goes for nothing. I wonder how she would like this hot day to have such
violent exercise. But ladies have often little consideration for their servants
feelings." To be sure, said Mrs. Joice, my master and mistress, and Miss
Goodall, are very good natured, Betty; and Miss Sophy will I hope, think more
of the consequence of her actions when she is older. I would do any thing in
the world for my mistress she speaks so kindly, and when I am ill, she says,
"Take your time, Joice, and don't fatigue yourself today, I hope you will be
better tomorrow." I don't care how I slave when people are considerate, and
seem to think I do my duty. During the latter part of this conversation, Mrs.
Betty had laid me on the table, and was pinning her gown close, which had
before hung loose, only fastened with one pin at the top, and the two sides
turned behind; and at the conclusion of it, Mrs. Joice, who had been clearing
away the breakfast things, folded me up in the table cloth, and carrying me
under her arm to the poultry yard, shook me out with the crumbs. She turned
round at the same time, to speak to a gardener, who was emptying some weeds out
of his blue apron upon the dunghill, and did not see my fall. After her
departure, I was peck^^^ at alternately by almost all the sowls, until at last
I was tossed by a bantam hen, under a little water tub, where I have lain ever
since. My last unfortunate adventure has so dirtied my outside, that I should
not now be known. But if the recital of what has hitherto befallen me has at
all engaged the reader's regard, I hope I shall not lose their approbation from
a change of situation or appearance.

The catastrophe which has thus reduced me, was entirely unexpected; and should
teach them that no seeming security can guard from those accidents, which may
in a moment reduce the prospect of affluence to a state of poverty and
distress; and therefore it is a mark of folly, as well as meanness, to be proud
of those distinctions, which are at all times precarious in enjoyment, and
uncertain in possession.

THE END.

