THE INSTITUTION OF THE Humane Society OF THE Commonwealth of MASSACHUSETTS:
WITH THE RULES For regulating said SOCIETY, AND The Methods of Treatment to be
used with Persons apparently dead; with a Number of recent Cases proving the
happy Effects thereof.

BOSTON: Printed in the Year 1788.

Summary of the Method of Treatment to be used with Persons apparently dead
from drowning.
CONVEY the person to the nearest convenient house, with his head raised; --
Strip and dry him as quick as possible; clean the mouth and nostrils from froth
or mud -- if a child, let him be placed between two persons naked, in a hot bed
-- if an adult, lay him on a hot blanket or bed, and in cold weather, near a
fire -- in warm weather, the air should be freely admitted into the room. --
The body is next to be gently rubbed with warm woollen cloths sprinkled with
spirits, if at hand, otherwise dry; -- A heated warming-pan may be now lightly
moved over the back, properly covered with a blanket -- and the body, if of a
child, is to be gently shook every few minutes: -- Whilst these means are
using, one or two assistants, are to be employed in blowing up tobacco smoke,
into the fundament, with the instrument provided for the purpose, or a
Tobacco-Pipe, if that cannot be had -- the bowl filled with Tobacco, and
properly lighted, being covered with a handkerchief, or piece of linen, so as
to defend the mouth of the assistant in blowing; Bathe the breast with hot rum,
and persist in the use of these means for several hours. If no signs of life
should then appear, let the body be kept warm several hours longer, with hot
bricks, or vessels of hot water, applied to the palms of the hands, and soles
of the feet, and this for a longer or shorter time, as the circumstances of the
case may dictate.

THE INSTITUTION OF THE Humane Society OF THE Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
FROM a variety of faithful experiments, and incontestible facts, it is now
considered as an established truth, that the total suspension of the vital
functions in the animal body is by no means incompatible with life; and
consequently, the marks of apparent death may subsist without any necessary
implication of an absolute extinction of the animating principle.

The boundary line between life and death, or the distinguishing signs of the
latter, are objects to which the utmost efforts of the human capacity have
never yet attained. Nor can we, with any degree of certainty, pronounce, that
an animal is dead, until the most unequivocal proofs of putrefaction have been
furnished.

From these facts it might reasonably be expected, that, were proper measures
to be adopted, especially in cases peculiarly doubtful, we might frequently be
enabled to restore to full life, and the enjoyment of it, a beloved friend, or
a valuable member of society. And indeed, numerous successful instances might
be adduced in the cases of persons, who would in a few hours have been
consigned to an untimely grave; and perhaps have suffered all the horrors of
inevitable death, attended with a consciousness of their own terrible situation.

It is not, however, to be understood, that any process, directed to the
abovementioned purpose, can be equally applicable to all cases. For as the
attempt must presuppose an entire state of the vital organs, it is obvious that
those apparent deaths, which are consequent upon disease, afford, in general,
little or no encouragement for such attempts. But in most cases of sudden
death, the vital organs appear to have sustained but a very slight injury, and
only require a seasonable excitement of the heart to renew their action.

The exquisite feelings attendant on the unexpected restoration of an
affectionate friend, or an indulgent parent, a dutiful child, or an intimate
companion of our bosoms, after having been suddenly torn from us, and in
imagination numbered with the dead, may be more easily conceived than
described. Nor is the acquisition of one deserving member of society an object
unworthy the public attention.

Upon these considerations, societies have been formed in various parts of
Europe for promoting attempts to recover persons from apparent death,
especially in cases of suffocation and drowning. The Humane Society established
in Great Britain, in 1774. has been very successful. Within ten years from its
institution, out of 1300 persons apparently dead from drowning, 790 have been
restored to their friends and country. Many of them, no doubt, useful and
valuable men.

For an institution of this nature a considerable fund is necessary. And many
occasional expenses will unavoidably occur. The cause of humanity, however,
deserves every encouragement. And to promote that cause, it is to be hoped the
benevolent will liberally subscribe.

A Society is now formed for these salutary purposes in this Commonwealth: And
the following plan and arrangements are submitted to the inspection of the
public.

RULES for the regulation of a Society instituted in the town of Boston, for
the recovery of persons who meet with such accidents as produce in them the
appearance of death.
I. THAT the Institution shall be called The HUMANE SOCIETY of the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts.

II. That the Society shall be governed by a number of Trustees not exceeding
twelve, of whom one shall be the President, two Vice-Presidents, one Treasurer,
one recording Secretary, and one corresponding Secretary.

III. That the President, or, in his absence, a Vice President, with the major
part of the Trustees, shall constitute a quorum.

IV. That the President, with the advice of the Trustees, shall be empowered to
call at his pleasure a meeting of the Society, but that the Society shall
indispensibly meet twice every year, namely, on the second Tuesday in December
and the second Tuesday in June.

V. That each subscriber shall, in the month of December annually, pay into the
hands of the Treasurer a sum not less than six shillings and eight pence.

VI. That such gentlemen of the faculty, as shall engage to afford their
assistance toward promoting the views of the Society, shall give their medical
attendance gratis.

VII. That the President and Trustees shall be annually elected by ballot on
the second Tuesday in December; and that when a subscriber cannot attend such
election in person, he shall be entitled to vote by proxy.

VIII. That when any accident shall happen, producing apparent death, the
person who shall first discover, and endeavor to recover the subject, shall be
entitled to receive from the Treasurer of the Society, a sum not exceeding
forty-eight shillings, nor less than six shillings, lawful money, at the
discretion of the Trustees.

IX. That the person who shall bring the first intelligence to one of the
physicians of the Society of such accident as is expressed in the preceding
law, shall be entitled to receive from the Treasurer of the Society, a sum not
exceeding nine shillings.

X. That any person, who shall, by a signal exertion, save another from death,
shall receive from the Treasurer of the Society, a sum not exceeding thirty
shillings lawful money, at the discretion of the Trustees.

XI. That the Trustees shall appoint some person to deliver a public discourse
on the second tuesday of June every year, upon some subject connected with the
principal objects of this Society.

XII. That the recording Secretary shall keep a fair copy of all the votes and
proceedings of the Society, and record all such cases and communications as the
Trustees shall direct.

XIII. That the corresponding Secretary shall write all letters relating to the
business of the Society* and shall answer all such letters as the Society shall
receive, they being previously communicated to the President, or Trustees
assembled.

XIV. The President and Trustees shall, upon the second Tuesday in June, in
every year, publicly adjudge a silver medal, not exceeding the value of one
guinea, to the author of the most approved dissertation which they shall have
received in the course of the preceding year, upon some subject connected with
the principal objects of this Society; and the Society shall order the same to
be printed at their expense, provided it shall be agreeable to the author's
inclination.

THOUGH the following Methods are chiefly adapted to cases of apparent death
from drowning, yet the Society think it proper to observe, that most of the
means of restoration herein recommended are applicable to a considerable
variety of other cases, such as hanging, convulsion fits, suffocation by damps,
or noxious vapors, the confined air of wells, cisterns, caves, or the must of
fermenting liquors. -- The Society have in some of the more essential articles
of treatment, followed the recommendations of foreign Societies of a similar
nature; they have however endeavored to render them more conformable to the
particular circumstances of this country.

METHODS of Treatment to be used with Persons apparently dead from drowning.
I. THE unfortunate person is to be conveyed carefully to the nearest house:
For this purpose the head is to be raised a little, as in bed, and the body
should be carried in a natural and easy posture.

II. The Subject is to be immediately stripped, and laid on a warm bed, and the
skin well dried with heated flannels, the mud and froth to be removed from the
mouth and nostrils; if the body was naked at the time of the accident, it is
then to be surrounded as expeditiously as possible with a hot blanket, and
thoroughly dried with coarse cloths or flannels.

III. The smoke of tobacco thrown up the fundament should be ranked among the
earliest applications: If a fumigator should not be at hand, the common pipe
When the common Pipe is used, the smoke is to be blown with the mouth from the
bowl, through the stem, into the fundament, covering the bowl with a
handkerchief, or thin piece of linen.
will answer the purpose of applying this vapor to the bowels. So easy and
important an operation should be repeatedly performed, as the good effects of
tobacco smoke have been proved in many cases.

IV. The skin is to be gently rubbed with warm woollen cloths, and a warming
pan heated (the body being surrounded with flannel) may lightly be moved up and
down the back for a considerable time. Wooden bottles filled with hot water,
etc. or heated bricks, covered with flannel* may be efficaciously applied to
the soles of the feet, palms of the hands, and other parts of the body.

V. If a child has been drowned, its body should be wiped perfectly dry, and
immediately placed in bed between two persons of good constitution; the
salutary effects of the natural vital warmth have been clearly proved in a
variety of successful cases.

VI. The body is to be rubbed with flannels, sprinkled with spirits, and
fomentations of hot rum are to be applied to the breast, etc. and often
renewed. The nostrils may be every now and then tickled with a feather; snuff
and volatiles should be occasionally made use of, to excite sneezing if
possible. The various means of recovery should be made use of by the Assistants
for several hours, the body is to be gently shaken every ten minutes, in order
to render the process more certainly successful; and the bodies of Children in
particular are to be agitated, by taking hold of their arms and legs
frequently, and for a continuance of time. In a variety of instances agitation,
in conjunction with the methods laid down, has forwarded the recovery of boys
who had been drowned, and continued for a considerable time apparently dead.

VII. If there be any signs of returning life, such as sighing, gasping,
convulsive motions, pulsation or a natural warmth, a sponful of any warm liquid
may be administered; and if it proves that the power of swallowing is returned,
then a cordial draught may be given in small quantities, but not without the
direction of a Physician.

VIII. When the air is very cold or moist, the various methods of treatment are
to be made use of near a large fire, or in a heated apartment. On the other
hand, if the weather is warm, or sultry (as in the summer season) the windows
and doors of the room should be opened; and in every other possible way a cool
refreshing air obtained; as it is of the greatest importance in bringing
forward the latent spark of life, or in restoring natural breathing.

IX. No persons are to be admitted into the room, but those who are actually
employed in exerting their utmost endeavors for the recovery of the
unfortunate; six persons are therefore the greatest number that can ever prove
useful on such occasions; and those who are bystanders for the sake of
curiosity should be requested to withdraw, as their presence may retard or
totally prevent the restoration.

Bleeding is never to be employed in such cases, unless by the direction of one
of the Medical Assistants, or some other respectable gentleman of the faculty,
who has paid attention to such unfortunate accidents.

The methods which have been so fully recommended, are to be made use of with
vigor for several hours, although no favorable circumstances should arise;
for it is a vulgar and dangerous opinion to suppose that persons are
irrecoverable, because life does not soon make its appearance; and upon this
opinion, an immense number of the seemingly dead have been committed to the
grave; who might have been RESTORED TO LIFE by resolution and perseverance in
the plans of treatment now recommended.

Methods to be used for the Recovery of Persons frozen.
I. THE body of a person chilled with the Cold, apparently lifeless* is to be
carefully examined, and if the limbs are not stiffened, if there is any degree
of warmth remaining about the breast or in the armpits, it may be proper to
attempt the Recovery, especially if any motion is perceivable by putting the
hand upon the heart.

II. The body is to be placed under cover, but not near a fire. -- -- Nothing
hot is to be applied to any parts of the body; to the soles of the feet,
however, warm bricks may be applied with safety.

III. The body is to be gently rubbed with a woollen cloth, or with a warm
hand, especially about the breast and along the back bone.

IV. Tobacco smoke is to be blown into the fundament from a lighted tobacco
pipe, if convenient, warm clysters should also be injected, and if symptoms of
recovery are then apparent, a little weak wine and water may be given
moderately warmed, but no strong spirits nor any thing else is to be given that
may have a tendency suddenly to increase the circulation of the blood, as every
thing of that kind must at this stage of the recovery prove very injurious.

N. B. Whenever any good has been produced by the means recommended, the person
who has superintended the cure is desired to write a circumstantial account of
it to the Society.

DONATIONS.
DR. Oliver Smith presented the Society with a Machine for injection of tobacco
smoke, to be deposited in a proper place, for the relief of persons apparently
dead from drowning.

The first Vice President presented the Trustees with a deed or title of one
share in Malden-Bridge, and requested the acceptance of the several payments
for the same, amounting to the sum of thirty-six pounds, upon the following
conditions, viz. That the income arising from said share shall be put to
interest continually, for the term of twenty years, as an accumulating fund,
under the direction of the Trustees; at the expiration of which term, the
interest arising from said fund, together with the income of said share, to be
appropriated for the benefit of said Society, at the direction of the Trustees
for the time being.

The following is a List of the Officers elected for the Year 1788.
Hon. JAMES BOWDOIN, Esquire President. THOMAS RUSSELL, Esquire First Vice President.
JOHN WARREN, M. D. Second Vice President. Rev. SIMEON HOWARD, D. D. Treasurer.
Rev. JOHN CLARKE, Corresponding Secretary. Rev. SAMUEL PARKER, Recording
Secretary. Rev. JOHN LATHROP, D D. Trustees. Rev. PETER THACHER, Trustees.
Doct. THOMAS WELSH, Trustees. AARON DEXTER, M. D. Trustees. JOHN AVERY, Esquire
Trustees. Mr. NATHANIEL BALCH. Trustees.
CASES Wherein Persons apparently dead have been recovered.
AN ingenious and very useful Communication on the subject of Restoration from
apparent Death, has been received from Mr. Jonathan Williams of Boston, from
which, as an encouragement for exertion in similar cases, the following facts
are extracted. -- A child of Mr. Williams, at that time in Nantz, at about the
age of 12 days was taken ill, and on the 13th to appearance died. -- Mr.
Wiilliams immediately determined to try an experiment on his child, and by
gentle friction with soft flannel near a fire, in about fifteen minutes
restored it to life; though being very weak from a premature birth, it lived
only 20 hours longer. -- Mr. Williams himself at the age of nine years, fell
into the mill-creek -- it is uncertain how long he continued under water -- he
was at length discovered and taken up breathless; the body was placed between
hot blankets and rubbed on every part with hot cloths, hot bricks were applied
to the soles of his feet, and all the other usual methods were employed, till
every one except his mother was discouraged, and desisted from the use of
means; she alone, however, indefatigably persevered, and was rewarded, though
not until the end of four hours, with the exquisite pleasure of restoring him
to life.

Doctor Franklin communicated to Mr. Williams the case of a gentleman, who
labored under a disease which he himself supposed would prove mortal: When he
approached the last agonies, his faithful servant was weeping by his side -- he
ordered the servant to watch him, and when he had breathed his last, to get
naked into his bed, and as far as possible encompass the body; then to breathe
forcibly into his mouth, and continue this act till he should recover, or
become cold. -- He punctually obeyed; the gentleman recovered, and (...) the
story many years after.

Another well known instance is produced of a Philadelphia gentleman in France,
who about five years since was supposed to have died, and three days afterward
was about to be buried, when a Physician present happening to look into the
coffin, was induced, from the appearance of the countenance, to delay the
funeral; he immediately made use of the common methods; the gentleman revived,
and is now alive and well in Philadelphia.

The following case is extracted from a letter from Dr. Blodget, viz. That on
the 4th or June 1757* he was called to the son of Mr. Nathaniel Gunn, jun. of
Montague, who had been taken out of a Well, and was supposed to be dead. When
he arrived at the house, he found him laid on a bed covered with a blanket,
without the least appearance of life either from pulsation or respiration. The
Doctor opened a vein in the arm but could not obtain any blood; his next
attempt to restore life was by friction, with warm flannels; by persisting in
this plan for about 15 minutes, the Boy began to grow warm, and motion was
observed at the pit of the stomach, and soon after a sigh followed and a
spoonful of water ran out of his mouth; his pulse began to beat and respiration
took place, and in about an hour he was able to sit up in the bed.

Thus without any other means, excepting some trifling cordials, he was
restored to life and health.

Mr. Gunn, upon being informed of the accident, went down the Well, perceiving
the water perfectly still, did not expect to find the Boy there; but plunging
his arm into the water, which was near three feet deep, he found him laying at
the bottom, and immediately carried him into the house, stripped him, and laid
him on the bed as the Doctor found him.

The Doctor observes. that "though it is impossible to determine how long the
Boy was in a state of inactivity, breathless, and to appearance dead; yet if we
allow fifteen minutes for the Boy to be under water, (and I am of opinion it
was much longer) and twenty five minutes for the messenger to come to me, to
the distance of four miles; and twenty five minutes for me to go to Mr. Gunns,
and fifteen minutes after I got there before life appeared in the Boy, we can
account for one hour and one quarter.

The following communication, with which we have been favored by Mr. James
Sumner, farther proves the utility of perseverance in cases which at first may
appear entirely desperate. A Lad of the name of Green, had fallen into the
mill-pond, in this town; he had been under water about 20 minutes, when he was
found and brought on shore apparently dead. -- The body was agitated by rolling
gently on a barrel, and a considerable quantity of water discharged from the
mouth thereby; after this he was conveyed to the house of Mr. Sumner's father:
Mr. Sumner immediately heated a blanket very hot and wrapped up in it the body
of the lad, which he then placed before a pretty large fire, turning it so as
to expose every part to the fire; during this time the body was constantly
rubbed with fine salt, but for the space of an hour and an half no sign of life
whatever appeared: After this Mr. Sumner still persevering, he thought he felt
a small degree of fluttering motion in the belly; he still continued, applying
his hands to various parts of the body, but would have been discouraged from
persevering had he not heard that such attempts, though for a long time
seemingly fruitless, had finally, sometimes, been crowned with success; from
this consideration the measures were continued 'till at length a pulsation was
felt, first in the temples, and soon after in the wrist; not long after this an
effort was made to breathe, with a kind of snorting noise in drawing in the
air; a number of others succeeded, at first more slowly, but gradually in
quicker succession, 'till he began to breathe free and easy; and nothing having
been poured into the mouth, he at length appeared to be perfectly recovered;
when Mr. Sumner led him home in health to his parents.

The following Instances may serve to convey some Idea of the Success with
which the Institution has been attended.
A Child of Mr. Samuel Dashwood, jun. painter, in Boston, of two years of age,
in the month of October, 1787, fell into a Cistern of water, 7 feet deep, and
was taken out by a gentleman of the neighborhood, and was apparently dead:
Fortunately this gentleman was acquainted with the methods recommended by the
HUMANE SOCIETY, and immediately began to put them into practice.

The subject was undressed and wiped as dry as possible; hot blankets were
wrapped round the body, and as one became cool, another was applied, -- with
these friction was used to every part of the body; after a few minutes (between
four and seven) they had the unexpected satisfaction, to discover signs of
returning life, -- the first symptom of recovery, was a convulsive motion of
the chest, attended with a forcible effort to distend the lungs: A Physician
arriving at this time, the pulse was examined, and though perceptible, it was
extremely languid and irregular: -- Fumigation of tobacco, was vigorously
applied, and on the first injection into the bowels, it instantly produced a
full inspiration, succeeded by a loud and laborious roat -- and an evident
increase of the action of the heart; -- On suspending the use of this remedy,
for a minute, the vigor of the pulse was sensibly abated, and on returning to
it again, the effects were as before, together with a small discharge of
indigested matter from the stomach; in about 25 minutes from the child's being
taken out of the water, the pulse began to beat with some degree of regularity,
and the breathing to be performed with less labor and interruption, though he
was still to appearance in considerable distress: At this period he was placed
in a hot bed, with a person, who was directed to continue the friction; hot
bricks were applied to the feet, and a warming-pan of coals directed to be
repeatedly moved over the bed clothes. In three or four hours he appeared to be
perfectly recovered, and is now a healthy and promising child.

THE Society, since their last publication, have erected for the benefit of
shipwrecked Mariners a number of huts, or small buildings, furnished with
necessaries for their Relief, viz. one on Lovell's island, in the harbor of
Boston, situated on the north east side, on a rising ground, about sixty rods
from the shore; one on the outer beach of Nantasket, about forty rods from
Strawberry-Hill, so called; and one on Situate beach, a mile to the southward
of the fourth clift, so called, and nearly opposite to White's ferry.

The following Certificate will show the Effects of this timely Provision for
an Accident to which every Vessel coming upon the Coast is constantly liable.
Boston February 25th, 1788.
THIS may certify, that in the night of the 14th of December last, a small
schooner sailed from this place bound to Cape-Ann, having on board besides the
Captain Mr. John Bishop, four persons, viz. Capt. Philip Haskel, Mr. Joseph
Plumber, Mr. Ephraim Ellery and Mr. -- Smith. The wind being very high, before
day, the schooner was driven upon the rocks, called Ram-head, near Lovell's
Island, in the lower harbor. With great difficulty the people got upon the
island, and to their inexpressible joy, reached the house lately erected by the
Humane Society, for the preservation of shipwrecked Seamen, in which they found
every necessary for warming, drying and making themselves comfortable.

The people all wish to express their gratitude to the Founders of that
benevolent Institution, and acknowledge that, under God, they owe the
preservation of their lives to the shelter, and the means of comfort which they
found in it, as the night was extremely cold, and they were entirely wet before
it was possible for them to get upon the shore.

In behalf of the people belonging to the schooner, and the passengers on
board, ROBERT WILLIAMS, Owner of the schooner.

PREMIUMS adjudged by the Humane Society. The Humane Society was instituted in
the Year 1785.

THE Society with great pleasure announce to the public the exertions of such
of their fellow-citizens as have been instrumental in saving from death a
number of persons who must otherwise inevitably have perished; and as a reward
for such exertions they have adjudged the following Premiums: --

To Mr. Sloane, for saving a Boy who had fallen through the ice into the
mill-pond, and who had repeatedly sunk to the bottom when young Mr. Sloane
discovered him, and without taking off his clothes plunged into the water and
brought him to the shore, where by the use of proper means he was recovered. --
One Guinea.

To Mr. Gleason, for a similar exertion, in saving the child of Mr. Hollis, who
had fallen from a wharf and was drowning; the sum of One Guinea.

To Ebenezer Herring, jun. for saving a Boy who had broken through the ice and
fallen into the channel in Charles-river; the sum of Twenty Shillings. -- The
Boy in this instance saved himself from sinking by holding upon the edge of the
ice until he was dragged out of the water by young Herring, with no small
risque of breaking in himself.


