DIRECTIONS FOR RECOVERING PERSONS, WHO ARE SUPPOSED TO BE Dead, from Drowning,
ALSO FOR PREVENTING and CURING THE DISORDERS, PRODUCED BY DRINKING COLD
LIQUORS, AND BY THE ACTION OF Noxious Vapors, Lightning, and excessive Heat
and Cold, UPON THE HUMAN BODY.

PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE HUMANE SOCIETY, of Philadelphia; to which is
prefixed, the Constitution of the said Society.

(...)

Philadelphia: Printed by Joseph James, in Chesnut-Street.

DIRECTIONS FOR RECOVERING PERSONS, WHO ARE SUPPOSED TO BE Dead, from Drowning,
etc.
OF the many calamities to which mankind are subject, there are none more
productive of distress, than sudden and violent deaths.

IN great cities, instances of this kind (from drowning, suffocation and other
accidents) are very numerous; and this melancholy circumstance is much
aggravated by reflecting, that a large proportion of those who are thus lost to
their friends and country, might be saved if they were properly treated.

THAT this is the case, appears clearly from the reports of several respectable
societies in Europe, which were formed for the purpose, and have happily
succeeded in the humane attempt, of restoring to life, persons apparently
killed by the accidents above mentioned.

IT is now only twenty years since the first society of this kind was formed at
Amsterdam, and but thirteen since the first existence of that in London, and
yet near one thousand persons have been preserved from death by these two
institutions. Societies of the same kind have been formed at Paris, Venice,
Hamburgh and Milan; and from their reports, it also appears, not only that a
large proportion of persons apparently dead, have been recovered, but that this
recovery may be effected, after they have been a long time in that situation.

AS the inhabitants of this part of America are exposed, not only to all those
accidents which occur in England and Holland, but to several others which
rarely take place there (as those produced by excessive heat and cold, and by
light ning) they must have additional inducements to form an institution of
this kind: And although its objects are of the highest importance, the following
plan for attaining them, will show, that the business of such an institution is
very practicable and easy.

First -- AS people in general are uninformed of the proper methods to be
pursued in such cases, and as medical assistance cannot always be procured in
time, it will be necessary to lodge directions respecting the proper treatment
in all those places where such accidents commonly occur.

Secondly -- IT will be necessary to deposit at those places, such apparatus
and medicines as have been found most useful in these cases; as the time lost
in waiting for them, if they are not at hand, may deprive the unfortunate
person of all chance of recovery.

Thirdly -- It will also be necessary to place at proper distances, near
rivers, a number of grapples and other instruments, for extracting speedily
from the water, those who fall into it.

BY these means, the Societies above mentioned, have had the satisfaction of
restoring fathers to the fatherless, and living children to parents who were
deploring their loss; -- and have rendered to humanity, the important service
of preserving from death, a large number of useful members of the community.
Their great success influenced a number of gentlemen in Philadelphia, to
associate themselves for the same purpose, under the name of the "Humane
Society;" who, as they are desirous of the concurrence of their
fellow-citizens, have subjoined their constitution; and hope that those who
approve of it, will unite with them in carrying it into execution.

The CONSTITUTION of the HUMANE SOCIETY.
THE HUMANE SOCIETY, instituted in the year 1770, for the recovery of drowned
persons, having for some years past not been sufficiently attended to, it is
now agreed to revive it; and further, to include in its objects, persons
disordered by noxious vapors, lightning, drinking cold water, and from the
action of excessive heat and cold upon the body; for which purpose, the
following plan is adopted: --

THAT every person, paying one dollar annually, for the use of the institution,
shall be deemed a contributor.

THAT the contributors shall choose Twelve Managers, on the second Wednesday in
March, of every year, who shall, as soon as convenient, choose from among
themselves, a president, two inspectors, and a secretary. They shall likewise
choose a treasurer from among the contributors. They shall hold stated meetings
on the second Wednesday of every month. Their business shall be to regulate all
the affairs of the institution. Five Managers to make a quorum.

DIRECTIONS, for RECOVERING PERSONS, who are supposed to be DEAD, from DROWNING.
I. AS soon as the body is taken out of the water, it must be conveyed to a
house, or any other place, where it can be laid dry and warm, avoiding the
usual destructive methods of hanging it by the heels, rolling it on a barrel,
or placing it across a log on its belly.

II. THE clothes must be immediately stripped off, and the body wrapped up in
blankets, well warmed. It should be laid on its back, with the head a little
raised. If the weather be cold, it should be placed near a fire; but if the
weather should be warm, it will be sufficient to place it between two blankets
well heated; taking care to prevent the room from being crowded, with any
persons who are not necessarily employed about the body.

III. AS soon as it can possibly be done, a bellows should be applied to one
nostril, while the other nostril and the mouth are kept closed, and the lower
end of the prominent part of the windpipe (or that part which is called by the
anatomists, Pomum Adami) is pressed backward. The bellows is to be worked in
this situation; and when the breast is swelled by it, the bellows should stop,
and an assistant should press the belly upwards, to force the air out. The
bellows should then be applied as before, and the belly should again be
pressed; and this process should be repeated from twenty to thirty times in a
minute, so as to imitate natural breathing as nearly as possible. Some volatile
spirits, heated, should be held under the valve of the bellows, while it works.
If a bellows cannot be procured, some person should blow into one of the
nostrils, through a pipe or quill, while the other nostril and mouth are closed
as before; or if a pipe or quill be not at hand, he should blow into the mouth,
while both nostrils are closed; but whenever a bellows can be procured, it
should be preferred, as air forced in by this means, will be much more
serviceable than air which has already been breathed.

IV. AT the same time, the whole body should be rubbed with the hand, or with
hot woolen cloths. The rubbing should be modearte, but continued with industry
a long time, and particularly about the breast.

V. DURING this time, a large quantity of ashes, or salt, or sand, should be
heated; and as soon as it is milk-warm, the body should be placed in it; the
blowing and rubbing are then to be continued as before; and when the ashes, or
salt, are cooled, some warmer must be added, so that the whole may be kept
milkwarm.

THESE methods should be continued three or four hours, as in several instances
they have proved successful, although no signs of life appeared until that
time. When the patient is able to swallow, he should take some wine, or rum and
water; bleeding or purging ought not to be used, without consulting a
physician, who should be called in as soon as possible.

To prevent the fatal Effects of drinking cold Water, or cold Liquors of any
Kind in warm Weather.
1st, AVOID drinking while you are warm, or,

2d, DRINK only a small quantity at once, and let it remain a short time in
your mouth before you swallow it; or,

3d, WASH your hands and face, and rinse your mouth with cold water before you
drink. If these precautions have been neglected, and the disorder incident to
drinking cold water has been produced, the first, and in most instances, the
only remedy to be administered, is sixty drops of liquid laudanum in spirit and
water, or warm drink of any kind.

IF this should fail of giving relief, the same quantity may be given twenty
minutes afterward.

WHEN laudanum cannot be obtained, rum and water, or warm water should be
given. Vomits and bleeding should not be used without consulting a physician.

The dangerous Effects of noxious Vapors, from Wells, Cellars, fermenting
Liquors, etc. may be prevented,
BY procuring a free circulation of air, either by ventilators, or opening the
doors or windows, where it is confined, or by changing the air, by keeping
fires in the infected place, or by throwing in water, in which stone-lime has
been dissolved.

THESE precautions should be taken, before entering into such suspected places,
or a lighted candle should be first introduced, which will go out, if the air
is bad. When a person is let down into a well, he should be carefully watched,
and drawn up again on the least change. But when a person is apparently dead,
from the abovementioned cause, the first thing to be done is to remove the
body to a cool place in a wholesome air; then let the body be stripped, and let
cold water be thrown from buckets over it for some time. This is particularly
useful in cases of apparent death from drukenness. -- Let the treatment now be
the same as that for drowned persons. The head should be raised a little; and
continued frictions, with blowing into the nostril with a bellows, should be
practiced for several hours.

In Cases of Suffocation, from the Fumes of BURNING CHARCOAL,
THE general treatment recommended for curing the disorders brought on by
noxious vapors, is to be applied; but the dangerous effects of this may be
prevented, by taking care not to sit near it when burning; to burn it in a
chimney; and where there is no chimney, to keep the door open, and to place a
large tub of water in the room.

IN all these, as well as in cases of drowned persons, moderate purges and
bleeding are only to be used, with the advice of a physician.

To prevent the fatal Effects of Lightning,
LET your house be provided with an iron conductor; but when this cannot be
had, avoid sitting, or standing, near the window, door, or walls of an house,
during the time of a thunder gust. The nearer you are placed to the middle of a
room, the better. When you are not in an house, avoid flying to the cover of
the woods, or a solitary tree, for safety.

WHEN a person is struck by lightning, let continued frictions and inflations
of the lungs be practiced: Let gentle shocks of electricity be made to pass
through the chest, when a skilful person can be procured to apply it; and let
blisters be applied to the breast.

To prevent Danger from Exposure to the Excessive Heat of the Sun.
DISORDERS from this cause, or (as they are vulgarly termed) strokes of the
sun, may be expected, when a person who is exposed to his rays, is affected
with a violent headache, attended with throbbing or with giddiness; where the
disorder takes place, these symptoms are followed by faintiness and great
insensibility, with violent heat and dryness of the skin, redness and dryness
of the eyes, difficulty of breathing, and, according as the disease is more or
less violent, with a difficulty, or entire inability of speaking or moving.

TO guard against these dangerous effects of heat, it will be proper,

1st, TO avoid labor, or violent exercise, or exposing yourself to the rays of
the sun, immediately after eating a hearty meal:

2d, TO avoid drinking spirits of any kind, when you are thus exposed. These
add an internal fire to the heat of the sun, and are particularly hurtful in
harvest. Vinegar and water, sweetened with molasses or brown sugar, butter-milk
and water, small beer, whey, or milk and water, are the most proper drinks for
people who are exposed to excessive heat. But the less a person drinks of
liquors of any kind in the forenoon, the better will he endure the heat of a
warm day. It will also be proper,

3d, TO wear a white hat, or to cover a black one with white paper, when you
are necessarily exposed to the hot sun, and to avoid standing still when in
such a situation.

4th, TO retire into the shade as soon as you begin to be affected with pain or
throbbing in the head, with giddiness or with faintiness.

If these precautions have been neglected, and the symptoms above described
have come on, it will be proper,

1st, TO remove the person so affected into a cool, dry place, and to loosen
all his garments, particularly those around his neck and breast.

2d, TO examine whether the pulse at the wrists or temples beats forcibly, and
if it does, to bleed immediately; but if the pulse be weak, or cannot be
perceived, bleeding must not be performed.

3d, TO place his feet and legs (or if it can be done) the lower half of his
body, in warm water. But if this remedy fails,

4th, DR. Tissot advises to apply linen cloths wet with cold water, or with
cold water and vinegar, to the temples and all over the head.

5th, TO administer plentiful draughts of vinegar and water sweetened.

IN all cases of this kind, a physician should be sent for, unless the patient
recovers speedily.

To prevent the Effects of excessive Cold.
Persons are in danger of being destroyed by it, when they become very drowsy,
or are affected with general numbness or insensibility of the body. As the cold
which proves fatal, generally affects the feet first, great care should be
taken to keep them as warm as possible.

1st, BY protecting them when you are exposed to cold with wool, or woollen
socks within the shoes or boots, or with large woollen stockings drawn over
them, or when you ride, with hay or straw wrapped round them.

2d, BY keeping up a brisk circulation in the blood vessels of the feet, by
moving them constantly; or when this is impracticable, from a confined
situation, and two or more persons are exposed together,

3d, BY placing their feet, without shoes, against each other's breasts.

IF notwithstanding these precautions, a person should be rendered sleepy or
insensible by cold, he must exert himself and move about quickly, for if he
should sleep in the cold, he will inevitably perish. When a person who is
traveling in company, begins to be affected in this manner, his companions
should force him to walk briskly or to run.

WHEN cold has produced apparent death, the body should be placed in a room
without fire, and rubbed steadily with snow, or cloths wet with cold water, at
the same time that the bellows is applied to the nose, and used as in the case
of drowning. This treatment should be continued a long time, although no signs
of life appear, for some persons have recovered, who were to appearance
lifeless for several hours.

When the limbs only are affected by cold, they should be rubbed gently with
snow, or bathed in cold water with ice in it, until their feeling and power of
motion returns; after which, the bathing or rubbing with snow is to be repeated
once every hour, and continued a longer or shorter time, as the pains are more
or less violent.

THE person thus affected should be kept from the fire, for warmth and acrid
applications of every kind are very injurious.

Managers of the HUMANE SOCIETY.
JOHN JONES, President; BENJAMIN RUSH, BENJAMIN DUFFIELD, CASPAR WISTAR, SAMUEL
P. GRIFFITTS, JOHN R. B. RODGERS, Inspector. ROBERT PARRISH, Inspector. TENCH
COXE, JOHN BAYARD, JOHN'S HOPKINS, ISAAC JONES, CHARLES MARSHALL, Secretary.

