THE MISCELLANEOUS WORKS OF Mr. PHILIP FRENEAU CONTAINING HIS ESSAYS, AND
ADDITIONAL POEMS.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY FRANCIS BAILEY, AT YORICK'S HEAD, IN MARKET STREET. M
DCC LXXXVIII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following Essays and Poems, selected from some printed and manuscript
papers of Mr. Freneau, are now presented to the public of the United States, in
hopes they will prove at least equally acceptable with his volume of poems
published last year. -- Some few of the pieces in this Volume have heretofore
appeared in American Newspapers; but through a fatality, not unusually
attending publications of that kind, are now, perhaps, forgotten; and, at any
time, may, possibly, never have been seen, or attended to, but by very few.

The Printer.

CONTENTS.
THE Pictures of Columbus 1 The Hermit of Saba 30 The Folly of writing Poetry
38 Description of Aleina's Gardens 41 Advice to Authors 42 The Picture Gallery
49 A Discourse upon Beards 54 The Antiquarian 60 The Man of Ninety 64 The
scornful Lady 66 Horace, Lib. 2. Ode 16. imitated 67 The Indian Student 69 The
Prisoner 72 The Lost Sailor 74 On Swedenberg's Theology 76 May to April 78 Few
honest Cobblers 79 The Sailors Relief 81 Robert Slender's Idea of the Soul 87 An
Oration upon Rum 91 The Market Man 93 The Man in Business 94 The Man out of
Business 95 The Debtor 96 Rules how to avoid Sheriffs, etc. 97 The Private
Tutor 106 The City Poet 111 The Bachelor's House 119 The Splenetic Indian 122
The Inexorable Captain 128 Directions for Courtship 133 The Pamphleteer and the
Critic 140 New Year's Verses for 1786 142 On prohibiting the Sale of Dr.
Ramsay's History 144 Literary Importation 145 The Englishman's Complaint 146
The Newsmonger 147 The Almanac Maker 150 The Wild Honey Suckle 152 Female
Caprice 153 The Drunken Soldier 154 Stanzas, on the West Indies 155 The
luselvent's Release 157 St. Preux to Eloisa 159 To Misfortune 160 The Fiddler's
Farewell 162 The Departure 163 The distress Shepherdess 166 Lines on the Death
of a Lady 167 The modern Miracle 168 An Author's Soliloquy 170 Horace, Lib. 1.
Ode 15, translated 172 The Dull Moralist 174 Patrick Mulhoni 175 Lines written
at Port Royal 176 The Misfortune of March 179 Philander and Lavinia 182 Elegiac
Lines 186 Lines on the Death of Mr. Bell 187 The Indian Burying Ground 188
Epitaph 189 The Power of Novelty 190 The Sick Author 195 The Voyage of Timberoo
Tabo-eede 204 Report of a Law Case 216 The Academy of Death 217 Robert
Slender's Idea of a Visit, etc. 242 A Discourse upon Law 245 Light Summer
Reading 251 Narratives, Observations and Advice, etc. 269 The Philosopher of
the Forest, Numb. 1 281 On the Death of Col. John Laurens 289 The Philosopher
of the Forest, Numb. 2 290 The Philosopher of the Forest, Numb. 3 299 The
Philosopher of the Forest, Numb. 4 305 Sentiments of a Traveller 311 The
Philosopher of the Forest, Numb. 5 314 The Philosopher of the Forest, Numb. 6
320 The Philosopher of the Forest, Numb. 7 325 The Philosopher of the Forest,
Numb. 8 332 The Philosopher of the Forest, Numb. 9 343 Reflections, etc. by Mr.
Sender 352 The Philosopher of the Forest, Numb. 10 360 A Discourse on Whigs and
Tories 367 The Philosopher of the Forest, Numb. 11 375 Interesting Thoughts, by
C. Clodhopper 380 Priscilla Tripstreet's Answer to C. Clodhopper 384 Mr.
Clodhopper's Reply 390 A polite Catechism, for 1782 391 New Year's Verses for
1788 392 A Discourse upon Esquires, by R. Slender 395 A Discourse on City
Burying Places 403 A Journey from Philadelphia to New York 409
SUBSCRIBERS NAMES in Pennsylvania, New Jersey and Delaware States.
MR. John Anderson Hon. Charles Biddle, 6 copies John Beatty, Esquire. M. D. Mr.
Matthew Carey, printer John Caldwell Capt. Robert Caldwell Le Chevalier ou
Ponceau Mr. James Davidson, jun. Col. Richard Humpton, late of the American
army Mr. James Muir Peter Markoe John Park, A. M. of Dover Mr. William
Prichard, bookseller in Philad. 12 copies Mr. Edward Pole Col. Thomas Procter,
Esquire. Abraham Pryor, Gent. 2 setts Major John Richardson, Chester Col. Thomas
Rodney Rev. Wm. Rogers, A. M. Hon. David Rittenhouse Mr. Robert Smith, printer
Nathan Sellers Robert Smock James Tilton, Esquire. Dover Major George Turner Hon.
John Vining, Wilmington Mr. John Young Major Charles Young
SUBSCRIBERS in New York.
Those. Allen, bookseller, 14 cop. Jeronimus Alshyne George Bond Esquire. 2 copies
Capt. James Black Mr. Peter Blood good Walter Bicker Walter Burling, N. Haven
Philip Brasher Peter Baas Henry Bedlow Peter Blood good Robert Boggs Samuel
Boyd Major James Chrystie, 2 copies Mr. Robert Campbell, Hackinsack De Wit
Clinton James Cutting, Student of Physic, N. York Mr. James Cochran W. C.
Calder Moses de Wit Samuel de Riemer Thomas Elm, 2 copies Andrew G. Fraunces
Abraham Franklin Patrick Ferrall Timothy Ford Cornelius Fish James Giles, Esquire.
attor. at law Samuel Gale, student of physic Mr. George Graham Thomas Garner,
mercht. Those, Greenleaf, printer Ebenzer Hazard, Esquire. PostMaster General to the
U. States Mr. -- Hardy Mr. Samuel Knight jun. Nathaniel Hazard Hon. John Henry
(Maryland) 4 copies Mr. Jonathan Hunt Robert Hodge, bookseller, 12 books Philip
L. Hoffman Benjamin Holmes Martin Hoffman James Harvey Caleb D. Howard William
Henderson -- Kemp, A. M. 2 cop. Charles M'Knight, M. D. 2 copies Henry Kuhl
Hon. John Laurence, Esquire. Delegate of Congress for N. York Mr. John Loudon,
printer Edward Livingston, Esquire. Hon. Walter Livingston, one of the
Commissioners of the Board of Treasury Rev. William Linn Augustia H. Lawrine
Mr. Peter Mesier jun. Hercules Mulligan John Mulligan William Mooney Jacob
Morton Thomas Nixon Abimuel Y. Nicoll, Student of Physic Mr. James Nourse,
Kentucky John O'Connor, 4 copies John Pintard, 2 copies Hon. Charles Pinckney,
Esquire. Delegate in Congress for S. Carolina Capt. George Read John F. Roorbach,
Esquire. Gerard Rutgers, Esquire. Mr. Jeronimus Riker James B. Read (Charleston, S. C.)
John Reid, bookseller James Shuter jun. George Scriba, 2 copies Jas. Smith,
mercht. 2 cop. David Seth, M. D. Peter Steddiford, Student in Divinity Jacob
Shepherd Capt. John Stagg jun. Mr. Wm. Shotwell, mercht. George Snowden, jun.
-- Thompson, mercht. Malachi Treat, M. D. Henry C. Van Schaack Prolyer Wettmore
Robert Watson John Wilson William W. Woolsey Col. Marinus Willet, Sheriff of
the city and country of N. York
SUBSCRIBERS in Maryland.
James Carroll, Esquire. Annapolis Nicholas Carroll, Esquire. do. Stephen Clark,
bookseller, do. 12 copies Capt. William Campbell, do. Major John Davidson, do.
George Digges, Esquire. Prince George's county Mr. Benjamin F. A. C. Daschell
George Fitzhugh, Esquire. Baltimore county Mr. Samuel Green Rev. Ralph Higenbotham,
Annapolis Thomas Harwood, Esquire. do. Mr. Benjamin Harwood, do. Benjamin Hall,
Esquire. Prince George's county Mr. Those. Johnson jun. Annap John Johnson do. John
Knapp do. Capt. John Kelly do. Mr. R. B. Latimer do. John Muir do. James
Maccubin do. Addison Murdoch, Esquire. Prince Geroge's county Mr. John R. Plater
Major Christopher Richmond, Annapolis Capt. James Smith, do. Mr. Richard
Sprigg, jun, do. Zephaniah Turner, Esquire. Charles county John Thomas, Esquire. West
river Mr. John Wright, Annapolis William Wells do. John White do. Major S. T.
Wright, Queen Anne's county
SUBSCRIBERS in Charleston, South Carolina.
Jos. Atkinson, Esquire. Charleston Isaac Alexander, Esquire. Camden Doct. Nath.
Alexander, do. Mr. Thomas Abernethie, Charleston Mr. Alexander Alexander, do.
Ashley Adams, do. James Anderich, mercht. John Budd, Esquire. Charleston Francis
Breman, Esquire. do. Joseph Be, Esquire. do. Thomas Bourke, Esquire. do. Mr. Samuel
Baldwin, do. Jeremiah Brown Captain John Baas, do. Mr. Jonathan Badger, do.
Samuel Beach, Esquire. do. Mr. Peter Bremar, do. Hon. AEdanus Burke, Esquire. do, one
of the associate judges of South Carolina Mr. Peter Belin, do. Hon. Dan.
Bourdeaux, Esquire. do. John Beal Esquire. do. Mr. Francis Breen, do. Alexand, Bethune,
Stono. Luke Breen, Charleston Thomas Butler, Esquire. Peter Beunnetheau, Esquire. do.
Mr. Samuel Beckman, do. Henry Benbridge James Ballentine, Esquire. Joseph Brown,
Esquire. Mr. James Bentham Benj. Cudworth, Esquire. Waxsaws Mr. John Cox, Charleston
Charl. Burnham Cochran William Clelland, Christ Church Parish Mr. Job Colcock,
6 copies, Charleston Doctor John Crocker, do. Mr. James Chouler, do. Jacob
Cantor, do. John Cobbison, do. John Chisholm, Esquire. Beaufort District Mr. Will.
Cook, Charleston Mr. George Cox John Calvert Robert Cochran, Esquire. William
Crafts, merchant Edw. Darrell, Esquire. Charleston Mr. Ralph Dawes, do. Thomas
Doughty, do. John D. Dickenson, do. Hon. Will. Dunbar, Esquire. Savannah River Hon.
Jonathan Downs, Esquire. Henry William De Saussure, Charleston, Attorney at law
William Doughty, Esquire. John Sandford Dart, Esquire. Mr. Those. Eveleigh, Charleston
James Elsmore, do. Henry Ellison, do. William Elliott John Edwards, jun. Esquire.
Mr. Joseph Elliott Alexander Fraser, sen. Esquire. Charleston Doctor James E. B.
Finley, Beaufort Rev. Mr. Richard Furman, High Hills Santee George Hugg, Esquire.
Charleston Capt. Thomas Fitzgerald, do. Mr. Robert Forster, do. Richard S.
Footman, do. Will. Fishburn, Esquire. Round O Doct. Henry Collins Flugg Alexander
Fraser, jun. Esquire. Peter Freneau, Esquire. Charleston Mr. George Greenland,
Charleston Mr. John Barton Gibbons, do. John Geyer, do. Harry Grant, mercht.
do. Dominic Geoghegan, do. Hugh Giles, Esquire. Pee Dee Mr. Alexander Grant Philip
Gadeson, Esquire. Hon. John Fauchereaud Grimke, Esquire. one of the associate judges of
South Carolina Mr. Adam Gilchrist, 4 copies Charles Isaac Grimball William
Graham John Gibbons Mordecal Gift, Esquire. James Garvey Rev. Mr. Will.
Hollingshead, Charleston Mr. John Hamilton, do. John Heart, do. Robert G.
Harper, Esquire. do. John Be Holmes, Esquire. do. Wm. Henderson, Esquire. late Brig. Genesis
continental troops Mr. Will. Holmes, Charleston Rev. Mr. John Hurt, St.
Stephen's, Santee Isaac Holmes, Esquire. Charleston Doctor Isaac Hayne, Pon Pon
John Hunter, Esquire. Both River Robert Herriott, Esquire. George Town Mr. P. Hyrne
William Harrison, bookseller, Charleston John Hatter, Esquire. Mr. Richard Ham John
Holmes Thomas Hall, Esquire. Postmaster of South Carolina Doctor Tucker Harris
George Abbot Hall, Esquire. Mr. John Harbeson Richard Humphreys, jun. Robert
Howard, jun. Mayburry Jolly, Charlest. John Joyner, Esquire. Beaufort James
Johnson, Esquire. do. Mr. Alex. Inglis, jun. Charlest. Capt. Charles Isaacs James
Kennedy, Esquire. (Sheriff of Charleston distr.) 2 copies Mr. John Kerr, Charleston
Sebastian Keely, do Thomas Legare, Esquire. Charlest. Doct. Edward Lynah, do. Mr.
Stephen Lawrence, do. Edward Lightwood, Esquire. do. John Lightwood, Esquire. Mr. --
Lang Doct. James Lynah, Charlest. Mr. George Logan Benjamin Legare, Esquire.
Richard Lustington, Esquire. Library Society, Charleston Mr. Benjamin (...) His
Excellency Gov. Moustle, 6 copies fine James Mitchell, Esquire. Commissioner of the
Treasury Mr. John M'Farlane Ephraim Mitchell, Esquire. Surveyor General Alexander
Moultrie, Esquire. Attorney General Mr. James Milligan, Charlest. Daniel Mazyck,
late Capt. in the 2d Regt. of S. C. 2 copies Capt. William Murrer, late of the
Pennsylvania line Mr. James Macomb, jun. merchant, Charleston Edward Mitchell,
Esquire. George Town Mr. Thomas Mitchell, do. Alexander M'Gillivray, Charleston
Francis Mulligan, Haddrell's Point John M'Call, Esquire. Albert Aerney Muller, Esquire.
James M'Call, Esquire. Mr. John David Miller Thomas Morris, merchant John Hort
M'Call Thomas Martin, mercht. Doct. Will. Neufville, Charlest. Mr. Peter
Marshall Neufville, 2 vol. do. Isaac Neufville, 2 vol. do. George Fred. Newman,
Merchant, do. Thomas Nicholls Abraham Newton Thomas Ogier, Merchant, Charleston
Isaac Parker, Esquire. Charleston Doct. Will. Parker, do. Doctor Bejamin b. Perry,
Dorchester Doctor John Ernest Poyas, Charleston Mr. John Patterson, Charleston
John Potter Capt. Charles Prince Hon. David Ramsay, Esquire. Doct. Joseph Hall
Ramsay, Charleston Mr. Enos Reeves, do. William Rivers, jun. do. Doctor Jos.
Rush, John's Island Doct. Will. Reed, Charleston Hon. Jacob Read, Esquire. do. late
member of Congress Mr. William Russell, mercht. Charleston Rich. Brook
Roberts, Esquire. do. Mr. John Rhodes, mercht. do. Thomas Roper, Esquire. Nathaniel
Russel, mercht. John Robertson Daniel Stevens, Esquire. Charleston Doct. Will.
Smith Stevens, do. Mr. John Shecut, do. Lawrence Sanders George Smith Doct.
John R. Stevenson Mr. Jacob Sass, Charleston Archar Smith, George T. Samuel
Smith, Charleston Rich. Scott, Esquire. St. Andrews Mr. Those. Singleton, Charlest.
Thomas Smith Archibald Saltus Thom. Smith, jun. 2 vol. Charleston Daniel Smith,
Esquire. do. Mr. Daniel Strobel, jun. do. Savage smith, do. Robert Squibb, gardener
Abr. Sasportas, merchant John Simmons Samuel Stent, 2 copies William Sanders
Josiah Smith, Esquire. Charles H. Simmons Auth. Toomer, Esquire. Charlest. Thomas
Turner, Esquire. late Captain in the Massachusetts line Mr. James Hamden Thomson,
Charleston William Hunter Torrans, Esquire. Attorney at Law William Tate, Esquire. do.
do. Hon. Daniel Tucker, Esquire. George Town James Thomson, Esquire. Beaufort District
Mr. William Thayer, mercht. Peter Trezevant Arnoldus Vanderhorst, Esquire.
Charleston, 2 copies John Vanderhorst, Esquire. Benj. Waller, Esquire. Charleston Mr.
Alexander Walker, do. James Witter, jun. James Island Dr. John Witherspoone,
St. Stephen's Santee Samuel Warren, Esquire. Mr. Thomas Waring, jun. Dr. Rich.
Waring, Charleston John Webb, Esquire. do. Mr. Thompson Whitehouse, St. Thomas's
Parish Felix Warley, Esquire. Clerk of the Senate Hon. Benjamin Waring, Esquire. High
Hills Santee Thomas Waring, sen. Esquire. Charleston Minor Winn, Esquire. Winnsborough
Thomas Winstanley, Esquire. Attorney at Law, Charleston Morton Wilkinson, Esquire.
Doctor Bedford Williams, George Town Mr. Theophil. Ward, Charlest. Philemon
Waters, Esquire. Bush River Mr. Charles Weston John Ward, Esquire. Edward Weyman, Esquire.
Mr. Richard Wayne.
THE PICTURES OF COLUMBUS, THE GENOESE.
PICTURE I. COLUMBUS making MAPS. History informs us this was his original
profession: and from the disproportionate vacancy observable in the drafts of
that time between Europe and Asia to the west, it is most probable be first
took the idea of another continent, lying in a parallel direction to, and
existing between both.

AS over his charts Columbus ran,
Such disproportion he surveyed,
He thought he saw in art's mean plan
Blunders that Nature never made;
The land in one poor corner placed,
And all beside, a swelling waste --!
"It cannot be so," Columbus said;
" This world on paper idly drawn,
" Over one small tract so often gone
" The pencil tires; in this void space
" Allowed to find no resting place.
" But copying Nature's bold design,
" If true to her, no fault is mine;
" Perhaps in these moist regions dwell
" Forms wrought like man, and loved as well.
" Yet to the west what lengthened seas!
" Are no gay islands found in these.
" No sylvan worlds that Nature meant
" To balance Asia's vast extent?
" As late a mimic globe I made
" (Imploring Fancy to my aid)
" Over these wild seas a shade I threw,
" And a new world my pencil drew.
" But westward placed, and far away
" In the deep seas this country lay
" Beyond all climes already known,
" In Neptune's bosom placed alone.
" Who knows but he that hung this ball
" In the clear void, and governs all,
" On those dread scenes, remote from view,
" Has traced his great idea too.
" What can these idle charts avail --
" Over real seas I mean to sail;
" If fortune aids the grand design,
" Worlds yet unthought of shall be mine.
" But how shall I this country find!
" Gay, painted picture of the mind!
" Religion The Inquisition made it criminal to assert the existence of the
Antipodes.
holds my project vain,
"And owns no worlds beyond the main.
" 'Midst yonder hills long time has stayed
" In sylvan cells a wondrous maid,
" Who things to come can truly tell,
" Dread mistress of the magic spell.
" Whatever the depths of time can show
" All pass before her in review,
" And all events her eyes survey,
" 'Till time and nature both decay.
" I Will to her cave, enquiring there
" What mighty things the fates prepare;
" Whether my hopes and plans are vain,
" Or I must give new worlds to Spain."
PICTURE II. The CELL of an INCHANTRESS.
Inchantress. WHO dares attempt this gloomy grove
Where never shepherd dreamed of love,
And birds of night are only found,
And poisonous weeds bestrew the ground:
Hence, stranger, take some other road,
Nor dare profane my dark adobe;
The winds are high, the moon is low --
Would you enter? -- no, no, no: --

Columbus. Sorceress of mighty power! The fifteenth century was, like many of
the preceding, an age of superstition, credulity and ignorance. When this
circumstance therefore is brought into view, the mixture of truth and fiction
will not appear altogether absurd or unnatural. At (...) rate, it has ever been
tolerated in this species of poetry.

Hither at the midnight hour
Over hill and dale I Have come,
Leaving ease and sleep at home:
With daring aims my bosom glows;
Long a stranger to repose,
I have come to learn from you
Whether phantoms I pursue,
Or if, as reason would persuade,
New worlds are on the ocean laid --
Tell me, wonder-working maid,
Tell me dire inchantress, tell,
Mistress of the magic spell!

Inchantress. The staring owl her note has sung;
With gaping snakes my cave is hung;
Of maiden hair my bed is made,
Two winding sheets above it laid;
With bones of men my shelves are pil'd,
And toads are for my supper boiled;
Three ghosts attend to fill my cup,
And four to serve my pottage up;
The crow is waiting to say grace: --
Would thou in such a dismai place
The secrets of thy fortune trace?

Columbus. Though death and all his dreary crew
Were to be opened on my view,
I would not from this threshold fly
'Till you had made a full reply.
Open wide this iron gate,
I must read the book of fate:
Tell me, if beyond the main
Islands are reserved for Spain;
Tell me, if beyond the sea
Worlds are to be found by me:
Bid your spirits disappear,
Phantoms of delusive fear,
These are visions I despise,
Shadows and uncertainties.

Inchantress. Must I, then, yield to your request!
Columbus, why disturb my rest! --
For this the ungrateful shall combine,
And hard misfortune shall be thine; --
For this the base reward remains
Of cold neglect and galling chains! In 1498 he was superseded in his command
at Hispaniola, and sent home in irons. Soon after finishing his fourth voyage,
finding himself neglected by the Court of Spain after all his services, he
retired to Valladolid in Old Castile, where he died on the 20th of May, A. D.
1506.

In a poor solitude forgot,
Reproach and want shall be the lot
Of him that gives new worlds to Spain,
And westward spreads her golden reign.
BEFORE you came to vex my bower
I slept away the evening hour,
Or watched the rising of the moon,
With hissing vipers keeping tune,
Or galloping along the glade
Took pleasure in the lunar shade,
And gathered herbs, or made a prize
Of horses tails and adders eyes:
Now open flies the iron gate,
Advance, and read the book of fate!
On thy design what woes attend!
The nations at the ocean's end,
No longer destined to be free,
Shall owe distress and death to thee!
The feats of innocence and love
Shall soon the scenes of horror prove:
But why distrub these Indian climes,
The pictures of more happy times!
Has avarice, with unfeeling breast,
Has cruelty thy soul possessed?
May ruin on thy boldness wait! --
Advance, and read the book of fate.
WHEN vulture, fed but once a week,
And ravens three together shriek,
And skeleton for vengeance cries,
Then shall the fatal curtain rise!
Two lamps in yonder vaulted room,
Suspended of r a brazen tomb,
Shall lend their glimmerings, as you pass,
To find your fortune in that glass
Whose wondrous virtue is, to show
Whatever the inquires wants to know.

PICTURE III. The MIRROR.
Columbus. STrange things I see, bright mirror, in thy breast: --
There Perseverance stands, and nobly scorns
The gabbling tongue of busy calumny;
Proud Erudition in a scholar's garb
Derides my plans and grins a jeering smile.
Hypocrisy, clad in a doctor's gown,
A western continent deems heresy:
The princes, kings, and nobles of the land
Smile at my projects, and report me mad:
One royal woman only stands my friend,
Bright Isabell, the lady of our hearts,
Whom avarice prompts to aid my purposes,
And love of toys -- weak female vanity! --
She gains her point! -- three slender barques I see
(Or else the witch's glass deceives mine eye)
Rigged trim, and furnished out with stores and men,
Fitted for tedious journeys over the main:
Columbus -- ha! -- their motions he directs;
Their captains come, and ask advice from him,
Holding him for the soul of resolution.
Now, now we launch from Palos! prosperous gales
Impel the canvas: now the far famed straight
Is passed, the pillars of the son of Jove,
Long held the limits of the paths of men:
Ah! what a waste of ocean here begins,
And lonely waves, so black and comfortless!
Light flies each bounding galley over the main;
Now Lancerota gathers on our view,
And Teneriffe her clouded summit rears:
Awhile we linger at these islands fair
That seem the utmost boundaries of the world,
Then westward aiming on the unfathomed deep
Sorrowing, with heavy hearts we urge our way,
Now all is discontent -- such oceans passed,
No land appearing yet, dejects the most;
Yet, fertile in expedients, I alone
The mask of mild content am forced to wear:
A thousand signs I see, or feign to see,
Of shores at hand, and bottoms underneath;
And not a bird that wanders over the main,
And not a cloud that traverses the sky
But brings me something to support their hopes:
All fails at last! -- so frequently deceived
They growl with anger -- mad to look at death
They gnash their teeth, and will be led no more;
On me their vengeance turns: they look at me
As their conductor to the realms of ruin:
Plot after plot discovered, not revenged,
They join against their chief in mutiny:
They urge to plunge him in the boiling deep
As one, the only one that would pursue
Imaginary worlds through boundless seas: --
The scene is changed -- Fine islands greet mine eye,
Covered with trees, and beasts, and yellow men;
Eternal summer through the valleys smiles
And fragrant gales over golden meadows play! --
Inchantress, it is enough! -- now veil your glass --
The curtain falls -- and I must homeward pass.

PICTURE IV. COLUMBUS addresses King FERDINAND.
PRince and the pride of Spain! while meaner crowns,
Pleased with the shadow of monarchial sway,
Exact obedience from some paltry tract
Scarce worth the pain and toil of governing,
Be thine the generous care to send thy fame
Beyond the knowledge, or the guess of man.
THIS gulphy deep (that bounds our western reign
So long by civil feuds and wars disgraced)
Must be the passage to some other shore
Where nations dwell, children of early time,
Basking in the warm sunshine of the south,
Who some false deity, no doubt, adore,
Owning no virtue in the potent cross:
What honor, sire, to plant your standards there, It is allowed by most
historians, that Ferdinand was an implicit believer, and one of the most
superstitious bigots of his age.

And souls recover to our holy faith
That now in paths of dark perdition stray
Warped to his worship by the evil one!
THINK not that Europe and the Asian waste,
Or Africa, where barren sands abound,
Are the sole gems in Neptune's bosom laid:
Think not the world a vast extended plain:
See yond' bright orbs, that through the either move,
All globular; this earth a globe like them
Walks her own rounds, attended by the moon,
Bright comrade, but with borrowed luster bright.
If all the surface of this mighty round
Be one wide ocean of unfathomed depth
Bounding the little space already known,
Nature must have forgot her wonted wit
And made a monstrous havoc of proportion.
If her proud depths were not restrained by lands,
And broke by continents of vast extent
Existing somewhere under western skies,
Far other waves would roll before the storms
Than ever yet have burst on Europe's shores,
Driving before them deluge and confusion.
BUT Nature will preserve what she has planned:
And the whole suffrage of antiquity,
Platonic dreams, and reason's plainer page
All point at something that we ought to see
Buried behind the waters of the west,
Clouded with shadows of uncertainty.
The time is come for some sublime event
Of mighty fame: -- mankind are children yet,
And hardly dream what treasures they possess
In the dark bosom of the fertile main,
Unfathomed, unattempted, unexplor'd.
These, mighty prince, I offer to reveal,
And by the magnet's aid, if you supply
Ships and some gallant hearts, will hope to bring
From distant climes, news worthy of a king.
PICTURE V. FERDINAND and his FIRST MINISTER.
Ferdinand. WHat would this madman have, this odd projector!
A wild address I have today attended,
Mingling its folly with our great affairs,
Dreaming of islands and new hemispheres
Placed on the ocean's verge, we know not where --
What shall I do with this petitioner?

Minister. Even send him, fire, to perish in his search:
He has so pestered me these many years
With idle projects of discovery --
His name -- I almost dread to hear it mentioned:
He is a Genoese of vulgar birth
And has been round all Europe with his plans
Presenting them to every potentate;
He lives, it is said, by vending maps and charts.
And being used to sketch imagined islands
On that blank space that represents the seas,
His head at last grows giddy with this folly,
And fancied isles are turned to (...) lands
With which he puzzles me perpetually:
What pains me too, is, that our royal lady
Lends him her ear, and reads his mad addresses,
Opposed to reason and philosophy.

Ferdinand. He acts the devil's part in Eden's garden;
Knowing the man was proof to his temptations
He whispered something in the ear of Eve,
And promised much, but meant not to perform.

Minister. I Have treated all his schemes with such contempt
That any but a rank, mad-brain'd enthusiast,
Pushing his purpose to extremities,
Would have forsook your empire, royal sir,
Discouraged and forgotten long ago.

Ferdinand. Has he so long been busy at his projects? --
I scarcely heard of him till yesterday:
A plan pursued with so much obstinacy
Looks not like madness: -- wretches of that stamp
Survey a thousand objects in an hour,
In love with each, and yet attached to none
Beyond the moment that it meets the eye --
But him I honor, though in beggar's garbs,
Who has a soul of so much constancy
As to bear up against the hard rebuffs,
Sneers of great men, and insolence of power,
And through the opposition of them all
Pursues his object: -- Minister, this man
Must have our notice: -- Let him be commissioned
Viceroy of all the lands he shall discover,
Admiral and general in the fleets of Spain;
Let three stout ships be instantly selected,
The best and strongest ribb'd of all we own,
With men to mann them, patient of fatigue:
But stay, attend! how stands our treasury? --

Minister. Empty -- even to the bottom, royal sir!
We have not coin for bare necessities,
Much less, so pardon me, to spend on madmen.

PICTURE VI. COLUMBUS addresses Queen ISABELLA.
WHILE Turkish queens, dejected, pine,
Compelled sweet freedom to resign;
And taught one virtue, to obey,
Lament some eastern tyrant's sway,
Queen of our hearts, bright Isabell!
A happier lot to you has fell,
Who make a nation's bliss your own,
And share the rich Castilian throne.
Exalted thus, beyond all fame,
Assist, fair lady, that proud aim
Which would your native reign extend
To the wide world's remotest end.
From science, fed by busy thought,
New wonders to my view are brought:
The vast abyss beyond our shore
I deem impassable no more.
Let those that love to dream or sleep
Pretend no limits to the deep:
I see beyond the rolling main
Abounding wealth reserved for Spain.
From Nature's earliest days concealed,
Men of their own these climates yield,
And sceptered dames, no doubt, are there,
Queens like yourself, but not so fair.
But what should most provoke desire
Are the fine pearls that they admire,
And diamonds bright and coral green
More fit to grace a Spanish queen.
Their yellow shells, and virgin gold,
And silver, for our trinkets sold,
Shall well reward this toil and pain,
And bid our commerce shine again.
As men were forced from Eden's shade
By errors that a woman made,
Permit me at a woman's cost
To find the climates that we lost.
He that with you partakes command,
The nation's hope, great Ferdinand,
Attends, indeed, to my request,
But wants no empires in the west.
Then, queen, supply the swelling fail,
For eastward breathes the steady gale
That shall the meanest barque convey
To regions richer than Cathay. The ancient name for China.

Arrived upon that flowery coast
Whose towns of golden temples boast,
While these bright objects strike our view
Their wealth shall be reserved for you.
Each swarthy king shall yield his crown,
And smiling lay their sceptres down,
When they, not tamed by force of arms,
Shall hear the story of your charms.
Did I an empty dream pursue
Great honor still must wait on you
Who sent the lads of Spain to keep
Such vigils on the untravell'd deep,
Who fixed the bounds of land and sea,
Traced Nature's works through each degree,
Imagined some unheard of shore
But proved that there was nothing more.
YET happier prospects, I maintain,
Shall open on your female reign,
While ages hence with rapture tell
How much they owe to Isabell!
PICTURE VII. Queen ISABELLA'S Page of Honor writing a reply to COLUMBUS.
YOUR yellow shells, and coral green,
And gold, and silver -- not yet seen,
Have made such mischief in a woman's mind
The queen could almost pillage from (...) crown,
And add some costly jewels of her (...)
Thus sending you that charming coasts (...) find
Where all these heavenly things abound,
Queens in the west, and chiefs renowned.
But then no great men take you by the hand,
Nor are the nobles busied in your aid;
The clergy have no relish for your scheme,
And deem it madness -- one archbishop said
You were bewildered in a paltry dream
That led directly to undoubted ruin,
Your own and other men's undoing: --
And our confessor says it is not true,
And calls it heresy in you
Thus to assert the world is round,
And that Antipodes are found
Held to the earth, we cannot tell how. --
BUT you shall sail; I heard the queen declare
That mere geography is not her care; --
And thus she bids me say,
" Columbus, haste away,
" Hasten to Palos, and if you can find
" Three barques, of structure suited to your mind,
" Strait make a purchase in the royal name;
" Equip them for the seas without delay,
" Since long the journey is (we heard you say)
" To that rich country which we wish to claim --
" Let them be small -- for know the crown is poor
" Though basking in the sunshine of renown.
"Long wars have wasted us: the pride of Spain
" Was never before so high, nor purse so mean;
" Giving us ten years war, the humbled Moor
" Has left us little else but victory:
" Time must restore past splendour to our reign."
PICTURE VIII. COLUMBUS at the Harbor of PALOS, in Andalusia.
Columbus. IN three small barques to cross so vast a sea,
Held to be boundless, even in learning's eye,
And trusting only to a magic glass,
Which may have represented things untrue,
Shadows and visions for realities! --
It is a bold attempt! -- Yet I must go,
Traveling the surge to its great boundary;
Far, far away beyond the reach of men,
Where never galley spread her milk-white sail
Or weary pilgrim bore the Christian name!
BUT though I were confirmed in my design
And saw the whole event with certainty,
How shall I so exert my eloquence,
And hold such arguments with vulgar minds
As to convince them I am not an idiot
Chasing the visions of a shattered brain,
Ending in their perdition and my own?
The world, and all its wisdom is against me;
The dreams of priests; philosophy in chains;
False learning swollen with self-sufficiency;
Men seated at the helm of royalty
Reasoning like schoolboys; -- what discouragements!
Experience holds herself mine enemy,
And one weak woman only hears my story! --
I Will make a speech -- "Here jovial sailors, here!
" Ye that would rise beyond the rags of fortune,
" Struggling too long with hopeless poverty,
" Coasting your native shores on shallow seas,
" Vexed by the galleys of the Ottoman;
" Now meditate with me a bolder plan,
" Catching at fortune in her plenitude!
" He that shall undertake this voyage with me
" Shall be no longer held a vulgar man:
" Princes shall wish they had been our companions,
" And Science blush she did not go along
" To learn a lesson that might humble pride
" Now grinning idly from a pedant's cap,
" Lurking behind the veil of cowardice.
" FAR in the west a golden region lies
" Unknown, unvisited for many an age,
" Teeming with treasures to enrich the brave.
" Embark, embark -- Columbus leads the way --
" Why, friends, existence is alike to me
" Dear and desirable with other men;
" What good could I devise in seeking ruin?
" Embark, I say; and he that sails with me
" Shall reap a harvest of immortal honor:
" Wealthier he shall return than they that now
" Lounge in the lap of principalities,
"Hoarding the gorgeous treasures of the east." --
ALAS, alas! they turn their backs upon me,
And rather choose to wallow in the mire
Of want, and torpid inactivity,
Than by one bold and masterly exertion
Themselves ennoble, and enrich their country!

PICTURE IX. A SAILOR'S HUT, near the Shore. THOMAS and SUSAN.
Thomas. I WISH I was over the water again!
It Is a pity we cannot agree;
When I try to be merry it is labor in vain,
You always are scolding at me;
Then what shall I do
With this termagant Sue;
Though I hug her and squeeze her
I never can please her --
Was there ever a devil like you!

Susan. If I was a maid as I now am a wife
With a sot and a brat to maintain,
I think it should be the first care of my life,
To shun such a drunkard again:
Not one of the crew
Is so hated by Sue;
Though they always are bawling,
And pulling, and hauling --
Not one is a puppy like you.

Thomas. Dear Susan, I Am sorry that you should complain:
There is nothing indeed to be done;
If a war should break out, not a sailor in Spain
Would sooner be found at his gun:
Arriving from sea
I would kneel on one knee,
And the plunder presenting
To Susan relenting --
Who then would be honored like me!

Susan. Today as I came by the sign of the ship,
A mighty sine captain was there,
He was asking for sailors to take a small trip.
But I cannot remember well where:
He was hearty and free,
And if you can agree
To leave me, dear honey,
To bring me some money! --
How happy -- indeed -- I shall be!

Thomas. The man that you saw not a sailor can get,
It Is a captain Columbus, they say;
To fit out a ship he is running in debt,
And our wages he never will pay:
Yes, yes, it is he,
And, Sue, do ye see,
On a wild undertaking
His heart he is breaking --
The devil may take him for me!

PICTURE X. BERNARDO, a Spanish Friar, in his canonicals.
DID not our holy book most clearly say
This earth is built upon a pillar'd base;
And did not REASON add convincing proofs
That this huge world is one continued plain
Extending onward to immensity,
Bounding with oceans these abodes of men,
I should suppose this dreamer had some hopes,
Some prospects built on probability.
What says our lord the pope -- he cannot err --
He says, our World is not orbicular,
And has rewarded some with chains and death
Who dared defend such wicked heresies.
But we are turning heretics indeed! --
A foreigner, an idiot, an imposter;
An infidel (since he dares contradice)
What our most holy order holds for truth)
Is pouring poison in the royal ear;
Telling him tales of islands in the moon,
Leading the nation into dangerous errors,
Slighting instruction from our brotherhood! --
O Jesu! Jesu! what an age is this!
PICTURE XI. OROSIO, a Mathematician, with his scales and compasses.
THIS persevering man succeeds at last!
The last gazette has published to the world
That Ferdinand and Isabella grant
Three well rigged ships to Christopher Columbus;
And have bestowed the noble titles too
Of Admiral and Viceroy -- great indeed! --
Who will not now project, and serawl on paper --
Pretenders now shall be advanced to honor;
And every pedant that can frame a problem,
And every lad that can draw parallels
Or measure the subtension of an angle,
Shall now have ships to make discoveries.
THIS simple man would sail he knows not where;
Building on fables, schemes of certainty; --
Visions of Plato, mixed with idle tales
Of later date, intoxicate his brain:
Let him advance beyond a certain point
In his fantastic voyage, and I foretell
He never can return: ay, let him go! --
There is a line toward the setting sun
Drawn on an ocean of tremendous depth,
(Where nature placed the limits of the day)
Haunted by dragons, fond of solitude,
Red serpents, fiery forms, and yelling bags,
Fit company for mad adventurers. --
There, when the sun descends, it is horror all;
His angry globe through vast abysses gliding
Burns in the briny bosom of the deep
Making a havoc so detestable,
And causing such a wasteful ebullition
That never island green, or continent
Could find foundation, there to grow upon.
PICTURE XII. COLUMBUS and a PILOT.
Columbus. TO take on board the sweepings of a jail
Is inexpedient in a voyage like mine
That will require most patient fortitude,
Strict vigilance and staid sobriety,
Contempt of death on cool reflection founded,
A sense of honor, motives of ambition,
And every sentiment that sways the brave. --
Princes should join me now! -- not those I mean
Who lurk in courts, or revel in the shade
Of printed ceilings: -- those I mean, more worthy,
Whose daring aims and persevering souls
Soaring beyond the sordid views of fortune
Bespeak the lineage of true royalty.

Pilot. A fleet arrived last month at Carthagene
From Smyrna, Cyprus, and the neighboring isles:
Their crews, released from long fatigues at sea,
Have spent their earnings in festivity,
And hunger tells them they must out again.
Yet nothing instantly presents itself
Except your new and noble expedition:
The fleet must undergo immense repairs,
And numbers will be unemploy'd a while:
I Will take them in the hour of dissipation
(Before reflection has made cowards of them
Suggesting questions of impertinence)
When desperate plans are most acceptable,
Impossibilities are possible,
And all the spring and vigor of the mind
Is strained to madness and audacity:
If you approve my scheme, our ninety men
(The number you pronounce to be sufficient)
Shall all be entered in a week, at most.

Columbus. Go, pilot, go -- and every motive urge
That may put life into this expedition.
Early in August we must weigh our anchors.
Time wears apace -- bring none but willing men,
So shall our orders be the better borne,
The people less inclined to mutiny.

PICTURE XIII. DISCONTENTS at Sea.
Antonio. DREADFUL is death in his most gentle forms! --
More horrid still on this mad element,
So far remote from land -- from friends remote!
So many thousand leagues already sailed
In quest of visions! -- what remains to us
But perishing in these moist solitudes;
Where many a day our corpses on the sea
Shall float unwept, unpitied, unentomb'd!
O fate most terrible! -- undone Antonio!
Why did thou listen to a madman's dreams,
Pregnant with mischief -- why not, comrades, rise! --
See, Nature's self prepares to leave us here;
The needle, once so faithful to the pole,
Now quits his object and bewilders us;
Steering at random, just as chance directs --
O fate most terrible! -- undone Antonio! --

Hernando. Borne to creation's utmost verge, I saw
New stars ascending, never viewed before!
Low sinks the bear! -- O land, my native land,
Clear springs and shady groves! why did I change
Your aspect fair for these infernal wastes,
Peopled by monsters of another kind;
Ah me! designed not for the view of man!

Columbus. Cease, dastards, cease; and be informed that man
Is nature's lord, and wields her to his will;
If her most noble works obey our aims,
How much more so ought worthless scum, like you,
Whose whole existence is a morning dream,
Whose life is sunshine on a wintry day,
Who shake at shadows, struck with palsied fear;
Measuring the limit of your lives by distance.

Antonio. Columbus, hear! when with the land we parted
You thirty days agreed to plough the main,
Directing westward. -- Thirty have elapsed,
And thirty more have now begun their round,
No land appearing yet, nor trace of land,
But distant fogs that mimic lofty isles,
Painting gay landscapes on the vapourish air,
Inhabited by fiends that mean our ruin --
You persevere, and have no mercy on us --
Then perish by yourself -- we must return --
And know, our firm resolve is fixed for Spain;
In this resolve we are unanimous.

JUAN DE VILLA-REAL to COLUMBUS. (A billet.) " I heard them over night a plot
contriving
" Of fatal purpose -- have a care, Columbus! --
" They have resolved, as on the deck you stand,
Aiding the vigils of the midnight hour,
To plunge you headlong in the roaring deep,
And slaughter such as favor your design
Still to pursue this western continent."

Columbus, solus. Why, nature, have thou treated those so ill,
Whose souls, capacious of immense designs
Leave ease and quiet for a nation's glory,
Thus to subject them to these little things,
Insects, by heaven's decree in shapes of men!
But so it is, and so we must submit,
Bending to thee, the heaven's great chancellor!
But must I fail! -- and by timidity!
Must thou to thy green waves receive me, Neptune,
Or must I basely with my ships return,
Nothing accomplished -- not one pearl discovered,
One bit of gold to make our queen a bracelet,
One diamond for the crown of Ferdinand!
How will their triumph be confirmed, who said
That I was mad! -- Must I then change my course,
And quit the country that would strait appear,
If one week longer we pursued the sun! --
The witch's glass was not delusion, sure!
All this, and more, she told me to expect! -- (To the crew.)
" Assemble, friends; attend to what I say:
" Signs unequivocal, at length, declare
" That some great continent approaches us:
" The sea no longer glooms unmeasured depths,
" The setting sun discovers clouds that owe
" Their origin to fens and woodland wastes,
" Not such as breed on ocean's salt domain: --
" Vast flocks of birds attend us on our way,
" These all have haunts amidst the watery void,
" Sweet scenes of ease, and sylvan solitude,
" And springs, and streams that we shall share with
" Now, hear my most importunate request: [them.
"I call you all my friends; you are my equals,
" Men of true worth and native dignity,
" Whose spirits are too mighty to return
" Most meanly home, when nothing is accomplished --
" Consent to sail our wonted course with me
" But one week longer, and if that be spent,
" And naught appear to recompense our toil,
" Then change our course and homeward haste away --
" Nay, homeward not! -- for that would be too base --
" But to some negro coast, where we may hide,
" And never think of Ferdinand again."

Hernando. One week! -- too much -- it shall not be, Columbus!
Already are we on the verge of ruin,
Warmed by the sunshine of another sphere,
Fanned by the breezes of the burning zone,
Launched out upon the world's extremities! --
Who knows where one week more may carry us?

Antonio. Nay, talk not to the traitor! -- base Columbus,
To thee our ruin and our deaths we owe!
Away, away! -- friends! -- men at liberty,
Now free to act as best befits our case,
Appoint another pilot to the helm,
And Andalusia be our port again!

Columbus. Friends, is it thus you treat your admiral,
Who bears the honors of great Ferdinand,
The royal standard, and the arms of Spain!
Three days allow me -- and I Will show new worlds.

Hernando. Three days! -- one day will pass too tediously --
But in the name of all our crew, Columbus,
Whose speaker and controuler I am owned;
Since thou indeed art a most gallant man,
Three days we grant -- but ask us not again!

PICTURE XIV. COLUMBUS at CAT ISLAND.
Columbus, solus. HAIL, beauteous land! the first that greets mine eye
Since, bold, we left the cloud capp'd Teneriffe,
The world's last limit long supposed by men. --
Tired with dull prospects of the watery waste
And midnight dangers that around us grew,
Faint hearts and feeble bands and traitors vile,
Thee, HOLY SAVIOR, on this foreign land
We still adore, and name this coast from thee! He called the island San
Salvador. It lies about 90 miles S. E. from Providence.

In these green groves who would not wish to stay
Where guardian nature holds her quiet reign,
Where beardless men speak other languages,
Unknown to us, ourselves unknown to them.

Antonio. In tracing over the isle no gold I find --
Naught else but barren trees and craggy rocks
Where screaming sea-fowl mix their odious loves,
And fields of burning marle, where devils play
And men with copper skins talk barbarously --
What merit has our chief in sailing hither
Discovering countries of no real worth!
Spain has enough of barren sands, no doubt,
And savages in crowds are found at home; --
Why then surmount the world's circumference
Merely to stock us with this Indian breed?

Hernando. Soft! -- or Columbus will detect you murmuring --
This new found isle has re-instated him
In all our favors -- see you yonder sands? --
Why, if you see them, swear that they are gold,
And gold like this shall be our homeward freight,.
Gladding the heart of Ferdinand the great,
Who, when he sees it, shall say smilingly,
" Well done, adventurous fellows, you have brought
" The treasure we expected and deserved!" --
Hold! I am wrong -- there goes a savage man
With gold suspended from his ragged ears:
I Will brain the monster for the sake of gold;
There, savage, try the power of Spanish steel --
It Is of Toledo The best steel-(...), in Spain are manufactured at Toledo and
Billea.
-- true and trusty stuff!
He falls! he falls! the gold, the gold is mine!
First acquisition in this golden isle! --

Columbus, solus. Sweet Sylvan scenes of innocence and ease,
How calm and joyous pass the seasons here!
No splendid towns or spiry turrets rise,
No lordly palaces -- no tyrant kings
Enact hard laws to crush fair freedom here;
No gloomy jails to shut up wretched men;
All, all are free! -- here God and nature reign;
Their works unsullied by the hands of men --
Ha! what is this -- a murdered wretch I see,
His blood yet warm -- O hapless islander.
Who could have thus so basely mangled thee,
Who never offered insult to our shore --
Was it for those poor trinkets in your ears
Which by the custom of your tribe you wore, --
Now seized away -- and which would not have weighed
One poor piastre!
Is this the fruit of my discovery!
If the first scene is murder, what shall follow
But havoc, slaughter, chains and devastation
In every dress and form of cruelty!
O injured Nature, whelm me in the deep,
And let not Europe hope for my return,
Or guess at worlds upon whose threshold now
So black a deed has just been perpetrated! --
We must away -- enjoy your woods in peace,
Poor, wretched, injured, harmless islanders; --
On Hayti's This island is now called Hispaniola.
isle you say vast stores are found
Of this destructive gold -- which without murder
Perhaps, we may possess! -- away, away!
And southward, pilots, seek another isle,
Fertile, they say, and of immense extent:
There we may fortune find without a crime.

PICTURE XV. COLUMBUS in a Tempest, on his return to Spain.
THE storm hands low; the angry lightning glares
And menaces destruction to our masts;
The Corposant A vapor common at sea in bad weather, something larger and
rather paler than the light of a candle; which, seeming to rise our of the sea,
first moves about the decks, and then ascends or descends the rigging in
proportion to the increase or decrease of the storm. Superstition formerly
imagined them to be the souls of drowned men.
is busy on the decks,
The soul, perhaps, of some lost admiral
Taking his walks about most leisurely,
Foreboding we shall be with him tonight;
See, now he mounts the shrouds -- as he ascends
The gale grows bolder! -- all is violence!
Seas, mounting from the bottom of their depths,
Hang over our heads with all their horrid curls
Threatening perdition to our feeble barques,
Which three hours longer cannot bear their fury,
Such heavy strokes already shatter them;
Who can endure such dreadful company! --
Then, must we die with our discovery!
Must all my labors, all my pains be lost,
And my new world in old oblivion sleep --?
My name forgot, or if it be remembered,
Only to have it said, "He was a madman
"Who perished as he ought -- deservedly --
"In seeking what was never to be found!" --
Let Us obviate what we can this horrid sentence,
And, lost ourselves, perhaps, preserve our name.
It Is easy to contrive this painted casket,
(Caulk'd, pitched, secured with canvas round and round)
That it may float for months upon the main,
Bearing the freight within secure and dry:
In this will I an abstract of our voyage,
And islands found, in little space enclose:
The western winds in time may bear it home
To Europe's coasts: or some wide wandering ship
By accident may meet it tossed about,
Charged with the story of another world.
PICTURE XVI. COLUMBUS visits the COURT at Barcelona.
Ferdinand. LET him be honored like a God, who brings
Tidings of islands at the ocean's end!
In royal robes let him be straight attired,
And seated next ourselves, the noblest peer.

Isabella. The merit of this gallant deed is mine:
Had not my jewels furnished out the fleet
Still had his world been latent in the main --
Since on his project every man looked cold,
A woman, as his patroness shall shine;
And through the world the story shall be told
A woman gave new continents to Spain.

Columbus. A world, great prince, bright queen and royal lady,
Discovered now, has well repaid our toils,
We to your bounty owe all that we are;
Men of renown and to be famed in story.
Islands of vast extent we have discovered
With gold abounding: see a sample here
Of those most precious metals we admire;
And Indian men, natives of other climes.
Whom we have brought to do you princely homage,
Owning they hold their diadems from you.

Ferdinand. To fifteen sail your charge shall be augmented:
Hasten to Pa^es, and prepare again
To sail in quest of this fine golden country,
The Ophir, never known to Solomon;
Which shall be held the brightest gem we have,
The richest diamond in the crown of Spain.

PICTURE XVII. COLUMBUS in CHAINS. During his third voyage, while in San
Domingo, such unjust representations were made of his conduct to the Court of
Spain, that knew admiral, Bovadilla, was appointed to supersede him, who sent
Columbus home in irons.

ARE these the honors they reserve for me,
Chains for the man that gave new worlds to Spain!
Rest here, my swelling heart! -- O kings, O queens,
Pations of monsters,* and their progeny,
Authors of wrong, and slaves to fortune merely!
Why was I (...) by any prince's side,
Honored, caressed like some first peer of Spain.
Was it that I might fall most suddenly
From honor's summit to the sink of scandal!
It Is done, it is done! -- what madness is ambition;
What is there in that little breath of men,
Which they call Fame, that should induce the brave
To forfeit ease and that domestic bliss,
Which is the lot of happy ignorance,
Less glorious aims, and dull humility. --
Whoever thou art that shall aspire to honor,
And on the strength and vigor of the mind,
Vainly depending, court a monarch's favor,
Pointing the way to vast extended empire;
First count your pay to be ingratitude,
Then chains and prisons, and disgrace like mine!
Each wretched pilot now shall spread his sails,
And treading in my footsteps, hail new worlds,
Which, but for me, had still been empty visions.
PICTURE XVIII. COLUMBUS at VALLADOLID. After he found himself in disgrace with
the Court of Spain, he retired to Valladolid, a town of Old Castile, where he
died, it is said, more of a broken heart than any other disease, on the 20th of
May 1506.

1.
HOW sweet is sleep, when gained by length of toil!
No dreams disturb the slumbers of the dead --
To snatch existence from this scanty soil,
Were these the hopes deceitful fancy bred;
And were her painted pageants nothing more
Than this life's phantoms by delusion led?
2.
The winds blow high: one other world remains;
Once more without a guide I find the way;
In the dark tomb to slumber with my chains --
Praised by no poet on my funeral day,
Nor even allowed one dearly purchased claim --
My new found world not honored with my name.
3.
Yet, in this joyless gloom while I repose,
Some comfort will attend my pensive shade,
When memory paints, and golden fancy shows
My toils rewarded, and my woes repaid;
When empires rise where lonely forests grew,
Where Freedom shall her generous plans pursue.
4.
To shadowy forms, and ghosts and sleepy things,
Columbus, now with dauntless heart repair;
You lived to find new worlds for thankless kings,
Write this upon my tomb -- yes -- tell it there --
Tell of those chains that sullied all my glory --
Not mine but their's -- ah, tell the shameful story.
THE HERMIT OF SABA.
HERMIT, FIRST MARINER, SECOND MARINER, THIRD MARINER.
Scene. THE ISLAND OF SABA.
Hermit THOUGH many years on these tall cliffs residing
I recollect not such a dreadful quarrel
Between the seas and water-vexing tempests
As now torments my ears and pains my eyes --
Clouds low suspended seem to embrace the foam
Of yonder angry ocean -- bursting thunders
With their pale sheets of lightning are as busy
As though they meant to cleave this mass of nature,
Proving at once the world's mortality --
But am I safe on this sea-girded island,
Or can these shores, thus beaten, bear the shock
Of such a bold assault --?
When universal ruin shall approach,
Will the grand scene be more astonishing
When thou, sky-pointing Saba,
Shall tremble on thy base most fearfully --!
Night comes! -- I Will to my cavern in the mountain
Far from the torrent's roar and bursting billow;
That cavern where I often have found repose
Since on this barren isle, a shipwrecked stranger,
I made my sole escape. -- Ha! what are these!
A barque half buried in the spouting surge
Comes rushing towered the isle, impelled by winds
That scorn all motives of compassion.
Hark! now the strikes the iron pointed reef
Foundering; the horrid surge that breaks upon her
Has sealed their doom, and hope itself forsakes them,
Man is too weak to combat with the power
Of these mad elements, that conquer all,
Ending the day light of our misery! --
Yes, yes -- I Will to my haunt, for scenes like these
Pain the shocked soul and damp all resolution; --
Or, shall I to the shore, while day remains,
And search among the shell-incrusted coral,
Left if by some great chance or miracle
Some wretch survives upon the ragged rocks,
Who knowing not of human kind residing
On this sequestered, unfrequented isle,
Tired in contending with the angry billows
And beaten by the surge the whole night through
For want of such relief, may die ere morning --
Perdition! three I see upon the rocks
Clinging to keep off death, while the rude billow
Swells over their heads insultingly victorious:
Now from the reef upborne I see them struggle,
Heaven grant successfully! -- they labor on,
Now headlong to the shore, now back they go
Despairing to the main --! -- now, now they land
Safe in that calm recess, a narrow bay
To them the haven from impending ruin --
So what are you? --

First Mariner, If thou art an inhabitant of the isle
Lend your kind aid to three unhappy wretches
Of threescore souls the only three remaining --
And if thou know of any sheltered spot
Where from these horrid blasts and water spouts
We may retire to pass the long dull night,
Or if thou know of any standing pool
Or running stream, or earth-supported spring,
O tell us; and as nothing more remains
Our gratitude must be thy sole reward.

Hermit. Among the hills, on their declivities
Full many a sylvan haunt I have espied
Ere now, in wandering when the heaven was bright:
But springs or running streams abound not here,
The skies alone supply the hollowed rock
From whence I drain my annual full supply.
Yet to my cavern you shall all resort
To taste a hermit's hospitality --
If you have strength, ascend this winding path
And amongst these rugged rocks, still following me,
We soon shall reach a safe retreat, removed
Alike from noisy seas and mountain torrents.

Second Mariner. Lo! here the tall Palmettoe, and the Cedar,
The time tree, and sweet scented shrubs abundant
With mingling branches form a blessed abode;
Here, bleating lambs crowd to the evening fold
And goats and hids that wander over the hills,
Vexed by the storm, herd to the social hermit:
In neighboring groves the juicy lemon swells,
The golden orange charms the admiring eye,
And the rich cocoa yields her milky stream.

Hermit. Here, strangers, here repose your wearied limbs
While some dead boughs I bring from yonder thicket
To wake the friendly blaze. -- To drain the dams
Of these impatient kids, be next my care:
The cocoa's milky flesh, dried pulse and roots
Shall be your fare to night; and when tomorrow
Dispells the gloom, and this tornado ceases,
We'll search along the shores and find where lie
The bodies of your dear and lost companions,
That so we may commit them to the dust,
And thus obliterate from our remembrance
The horrid havoc that this storm occasioned.

Third Mariner. O good old man, how do I honor thee!
My future days, my services are yours:
For you will I be earlier than the sun
To bring you sticks to light the morning fire;
For you will I attempt these dangerous cliffs
And climb on high on filch the blushing plum;
For you will I from yonder rocky height
Drain crystal waters to delight your taste:
But now be kind; I wish to hear you tell
What chance or fortune brought you to these shores;
Whether alone on these rough craggs you dwell
Where wandering mist is gathered into showers,
Or whether town or village decks the plain,
Or is there sheltered port where swelling sails
Lodge lofty ships, from hurricanes secure,
Fenced in by reefs, or locked by neighboring hills.

Hermit. No town or village owns this scanty soil,
Nor round its coast one safe recess is seen
Where lofty ship or barque of meaner freight
Might rest secure, untroubled by the winds,
Which still pursue the restless surge that pours
And spits its venom on these ragged shores;
Nor in these woody wilds, till you were wrecked,
Except myself did Christian man reside,
Wandering from Europe to these Indian isles
So late discovered on the world's green end:
All lies as Nature formed it, rough throughout,
And chance has planted here this garden wild,
For such as I, who wandering from the world,.
Cities, and men, and civilized domains,
The farther distant, find the bliss more pure.

Third Mariner. In such a sad retreat, and quite alone! --
To hold no converse but with senseless trees,
To have no friendship but with wandering goats,
And worthless reptiles that infest the ground --
Can man be happy in so dull a scene?

Hermit. To the steep summit of this slighted isle
I often climb at early dawn of day,
And over the vast expanse I throw my view,
Not idly thence the busy scene surveying --
Vast fleets I sometimes see, each kept at bay
Or joining both in angry conversation,
Their object avarice half, and half ambition --
What is it all to me? what are they seeking
That can give more than a sufficiency --
That phantom I have here which they pursue,
Grasping it, miser-like, in my embraces --
The stream distilling from the shaded cliff,
And fruits mature from trees by nature planted,
And contemplation, heaven-born contemplation!
These are my riches! I am wealthier far
Than Spain's proud fleets that load the groaning ocean.
Wait you in yonder cave -- I shall return --
My herds of goats are wandering in the wild,
And I must house them ere the close of day. (Exit.

First Mariner. Who can this hermit be -- what does he here?
In such a dismal cell who would inhabit
Thus lonely, who has crowds and cities seen --
Is he some savage offspring of the isle,
The mountain goat his food, his god the sun;
Some wretch produced from mindgled heat and moisture,
Full brother to the hungry pelican;
His friend some monster of the adjacent wood;
His wife some sorceress, red hair'd hag from hell;
His children, serpents, scorpions, centipedes --!

Third Mariner. It was but n^w -- he spoke before he though -- he told me
That he is richer than the fleets of Spain
That burden the wide bosom of the main --
And then he seemed so pleased and satisfied,
Boasting himself the happiest of mankind.

Second Mariner. Where should this wealth be hid -- his cave shows none:
A prayer book and a cross, a string of beads,
A bed of moss, a cap, an earthen jug,
And some few goat skins, furnish out his cave.
But still this humble guise of poverty
Vast sums of splendid riches may conceal:
The flooring of his den is a loose sand --
Searching a fathom deep may show strange things,
While we so long pursuing, hit on fortune:
Perhaps this hermit is some bloody pirate,
Who having plundered friends and foes, alike,
Has brought his booty here to bury it.

First Mariner. Lo! there he comes, driving his goats before him:
He means to fence them from the tempest's rage
Under the shelter of those tufted cedars:
It does, indeed, appear most possible,
That in this cavern rusts his plundered wealth:
When sleep has locked his senses in repose
We'll seize him on his couch, and, binding him,
Cast him from yonder jutting promontory
That hangs a hundred fathoms over the deep --
Thus, shall his fate prevent discovery.

Second Mariner. Your project pleases me -- it is most wrong
That such a savage should enjoy such hoards
Of useful wealth, he has no heart to use:
He builds no ships, employs no mariners,
But, like a miser, hides the ill gotten store,
And had he died before we wandered hither
His gold had perished, and none been the wiser.

Third Mariner. While you observe his motions, fellow sufferers,
Of twisted bark I Will make a set of thongs
Wherewith to bind him at the midnight hour,
Left waking, (...) should struggle to be free
And slip our hands before we gain the summit
From whence we mean to plunge his tawny carcass:
There, there he comes -- "Now, hermit, now befriend us,
" For cruel, merciless hunger gnaws our vitals,
" And every mischief that can man dishearten
" Is ripe to drive us into desperation!"

Hermit. Have patience, till from yonder arched grotto
I bring my bowls of milk and seasoned roots,
And fruits I plucked before the day was high: --
Now, friends, enjoy my hospitality;
All Is at your service, wretched shipwrecked men;
And when you have satisfied the rage of hunger
Repose on these soft skins: your sea-beat limbs
Demand the aid of kind refreshing sleep:
I Will to my evening prayers, as I am wont,
And early dreams; -- for traveling over the hills
And pelted by the storm the whole day past,
My knees grow feeble, and I wish for rest. (Exit.

Second Mariner. Yes, yes -- first pray, and then repose in peace,
Hermit of Saba, never to wake again!
Or should you wake, it must be in convulsions,
Tossed from the peak of yonder precipice,
Transfixt on pointed rocks most bloodily.

Third Mariner. Now, now is the time: he sleeps: I hear him snore --
This hidden gold has so possessed my brain
That I, at all events, must handle it:
Yet should the hermit 'wake while thus engaged,
Sad mischief might ensue: his nervous arms
(More than a match for our exhausted vigor)
Might exercise most horrible revenge!
Long practicing among these rugged mountains,
Pursuing goats, bounding from rock to rock,
And cleaving trees to feed his evening fire,
His nerves and blood are all activity;
And then he is of so robust a fabric
That we should be mere children in his hand,
Whirling us from the precipice at pleasure,
(Thus turning on ourselves our own designs)
Or catching up some fragment of a rock
Grind into atoms our pale, quivering limbs;
Taking full vengeance on ingratitude.

First Mariner. Fast bound in chains of sleep, I first assail him: --
This knotty club shall give the unerring blow;
You follow on, and boldly second me!
Thus -- comrades -- thus! -- that stroke has crushed his brain! --
He groans! he dies! -- now bear him to the summit
Of yond' tall cliff, and having thence dislodged him,
Uninterrupted we shall dig his riches,
Heirs to the wealth and plenty of his cave.

Second Mariner. It Is done, it is done -- the hermit is no more: --
Say nothing of this deed, ye hills, ye trees,
But let eternal silence brood upon it.
O base, base base! -- why was I made a man,
And not some prowling monster of the forest,
The worst vile work of NATURE's journeymen!
Ye lunar shadows' (...) resemblance yield
From craggy pointed rock, or leasy (...),
That may remind me of this murdered hermit.

Third Mariner. Deep have I fathomed in his cave, but find
No glimpse of gold -- we surely did mistake him:
His treasures were not of that glittering kind; --
Dried fruits, and one good book; his goats, his kids,
There were, indeed, his riches. --
Now, hermit, now I feel remorse within me:
While here we stay thy shadow will torment us,
From every little (...) or bush projecting;
And when from ^ence we go, that too shall follow,
Crying -- Perdition on these fiends from Europe,
Whose bloody malice, or whose thirst for gold
Fresh from the slaughter house of innocence
Unpeoples isles, and lays the world in ruin!

ON THE FOLLY OF WRITING POETRY. (1785).
To SYLVIUS.
OF all the fools that haunt our coast
The scribbling tribe I pity most:
Their's is a standing scene of woes,
And their's no prospect of repose.
Then, Sylvius, why this eager claim
To light your torch at (...) flame!
To few she shows sincere regard,
And none from her should hope reward.
A garret high (dark, dismal room)
Is still the pensive poets' doom;
Hopes raised to heaven must be their lot,
Yet bear the curse, to be forgot.
Boldly they tell of things above,
And trace their tribe from Grecian Jove,
Yet stand abashed, with all their fire,
When brought to face some snuffling 'squire.
To mend the world is still th^^ aim --
The world, alas! remains the same,
And so must stand to every age,
Proof to the morals of the page.
The wight that keeps a tippling inn,
The red-nos'd boy, that deals out gin,
If aided by some paltry skill
May both be statesmen when they will.
The man that mends the beggar's shoes,
The quack that heals your negro's bruise,
The wretch that turns a cutler's stone --
Have wages they can call their own:
The head that plods in trade's domains
Gets something to reward its pains;
But WIT -- that does the world beguile --
With pain attracts an empty smile.
Yet each presumes his verse shall rise
And gain a place beyond the skies --
From earth and cold oblivion freed;
Immortal in the poets' creed.
Can Reason in that breast remain,
Which fondly feeds a hope so vain;
When every age, that passes by,
Beholds a tribe of poets die!
Poor Sappho's fate shall Milton know --
His scenes of grief, and tales of woe,
Fame scarce shall save from death's domain
When Goths, once more, shall have their reign
To all that write, and all that read,
Death shall, with hasty step, succeed;
Even Shakespeare's page of mirth and tears
Shall sink beneath this flood of years.
Ned Spenser's doom shall, Pope, be thine!
The music of each moving line
Shall bribe an age or two to stay,
Admire thy strain -- then flit away.
The people of old Chaucer's times
Were once in raptures with his rhymes;
But Time, that over verse prevails,
To other ears tell other tales:
Why then so sad, dear rhyming friends?
One common fate on both attends;
The bards that please a monarch's ear,
And them, who rhyme for bread, -- or beer.
Mere structures, formed of common earth,
Not they from Jove derive their birth,
Or why, like empty bubbles, pass
To mingle with the meaner mass. --
Of all the souls from dust that came
To animate this mortal frame,
Of all the millions on the wing,
How few can taste the muses' spring!
Sejanus, of mercantile skill,
Without whose aid the world stands still,
And by whose wonder working play
Great things are done, (his flatterers say)
Sejanus has, in house, declared
" These States, as yet, have borne no bard,
" And all the sing-song of our clime
" Is only nonsense -- tagg'd with rhyme." --
With such a bold, conceited air
When such assume the critic's chair,
Low in the dust is genius laid --
The Muses with the man in trade.
Then, Sylvius, come -- let you and I
On Neptune's breast new gambols try;
Perhaps the muse may still impart
Her bal^, to ease the aching heart.
Though cold might chill, and storms dismay,
Yet Zoilus will be far away --
With me, at least, depart, and share
No garret -- but a cabin there.
ARIOSTO'S DESCRIPTION OF THE GARDENS in ALCINA'S ENCHANTED ISLAND.
From the Italian.
IN these fair fields unfading flowers abound;
Here purple roses cloth the enamored ground;
Here, to the sun expand the lillies pale,
Fanned by the sweet breath of the western gale.
Here, fearless hares, through dark recesses stray,
And troops of conies scour the woodland way,
Here stately stags with branching horns appear,
And rove at random, unassail'd by fear.
Unknown the snare, the huntsman's fatal art,
That wings the missile weapon to the heart,
In social bands they trace their sylvan reign,
Chew the rich cud, or graze along the plain.
In these gay shades the nimble deer delight,
Here herds of goats ascend the rocky height,
Browse on the shrubs that shade the vale below,
And crop the plants that there profusely grow.
ADVICE TO AUTHORS.
BY THE LATE MR. ROBERT SLENDER. MANY people, no doubt, will be anxious to know
something of the history and character of the above named Robert Slender; and
the Editor is really sorry it is not in his power to afford them the most ample
information. Of two things, however, the reader may be assured, that he was a
Pennsylvanian by birth, and a stocking and tape weaver by trade, and has now
been dead something more than a year and an half; having been buried with very
little ceremony by a few of his most intimate friends and neighbors. --
Notwithstanding he was an author as well as a weaver of stockings and tape
(both of which articles he manufactured on a curious loom of his own invention)
we cannot say he ever possessed the least faculty or turn of mind for amassing
the treasures of this world; so that when his executors came to examine his
strong-box, little or nothing was discovered therein more than a bundle of
manuscripts, penned in a very antiquated, obscure and perplexing hand; from
which, however, we shall now and then present such extract, to the public in
the course of this work, as shall appear to be best deserving of their notice:
Indeed, had our old friend stuck closer to his loom for any length of time than
he was wont to do, it is highly probable his box would have been stored with
riches of a very different nature; but such as they are, gentle reader, they
are wholly and sincerely at thy service. -- ROBERT SLENDER was, in his person,
a tall spare man with a meag^e aspect, of a sociable dispassion; fond of
traveling from place to place, and was known to have made frequent visits to
the several capitals of the American continent and islands, while his brother
weavers were more profitably employed at home at their looms. Writing and
weaving seem to have been rather his amusements than his serious occupations;
and one proof of his having been a man of sense is, his not having depended
upon authorship alone for a subsistence. In his temper he was extremely
irascible; but I have often remarked that when he saw his writings treated with
malevolence, contempt or neglect, he never became angry or outrageous; whereas,
when his stockings or tape were calumniated, he was instantly changed into a
monster of passion and revenge, breathing out nothing but menaces and curses
against the enemies of his loom.

HE was extremely fond of sunning himself in clear winter mornings, and has
been known to sit three hours together on the south side of a hill in December
or January, enjoying the salutary beams of the great and splendid luminary. --
Reader, if these few particulars will at all gratify thee, our purpose is
answered. In this miscellaneous collection of original papers we shall now and
then present thee with an essay, a paragraph, a sentiment, or a poem of the
late facetious Robert Slender; all of which, it is hoped, will be treated by
the critics with more indulgence than the rest, since these effusions are to be
considered as the works of a deceased author, who, it does not appear, ever
intended his lucubrations, at least the greater part of them, for the eye of
the public. The first piece of his with which we shall present thee is the
above, containing his Advice to Authors, which, from several circumstances, we
conclude was written in the latter part of his life.



THERE are few writers of books in this new world, and amongst these very few
that deal in works of imagination, and, I am sorry to say, fewer still that
have any success attending their lucubrations. Perhaps, however, the world
thinks justly on this subject. The productions of the most brilliant
imagination are at best but mere beautiful flowers, that may amuse us in a walk
through a garden in a fine afternoon, but can by no means be expected to engage
much of that time which God and nature designed to be spent in very different
employments. In a country, which two hundred years ago was peopled only by
savages, and where the government has ever, in effect, since the first
establishment of the white men in these parts, been no other than republican,
it is really wonderful there should be any polite original authors at all in
any line, especially when it is considered, that according to the common course
of things, any particular nation or people must have arrived to, or rather
passed, their meridian of opulence and refinement, before they consider the
professors of the fine arts in any other light than a nuisance to the
community. This is evidently the case at present in our age and country; all
you have to do the^, my good friends, is to graft your author (...) upon some
other calling, or support drooping genius by the assistance of some mechanical
employment, in the same manner as the helpless ivy takes hold of the vigorous
oak, and cleaves to it for support -- I mean to say, in plain language, that
you may make something by weaving garters, or mending old sails, when an Epic
poem would be your utter destruction.

BUT I see no reason that, because we are all striving to live by the same idle
trade, we should suffer ourselves to be imbittered against each other, like a
fraternity of rival mechanics in the same street. Authors (such I mean as are
not possessed of fortunes) are at present considered as the dregs of the
community: their situation and prospects are truly humiliating, and any other
set of men in a similar state of calamitous adversity would unite together for
their mutual defense, instead of worrying and lampooning each other for the
amusement of the illiberal vulgar. -- And I cannot do otherwise than freely
declare, that where the whole profits of a company amount to little or nothing
at all, there ought not, in the nature of things, to be any quarrelling about
shares and dividends.

As to those authors who have lately exported themselves from Britain and
Ireland, and boast that they have introduced the Muses among us since the
conclusion of the late war, I really believe them to be a very good natured
set of gentlemen, nowithstanding they, in the course of the last winter,
called me poctaster and scribbler, and some other names still more unsavory.
They are, however, excuseable in treating the American authors as inferiors; a
political and a literary independence of their nation being two very different
things -- the first was accomplished in about seven years, the latter will not
be completely effected, perhaps, in as many centuries. It is my opinion,
nevertheless, that a duty ought to be laid upon all imported authors, the nett
proceeds of which should be appropriated to the benefit of real American
writers, when become old and helpless, and no longer able to wield the pen to
advantage.

IF a coach or a chariot constructed in Britain, pays an impost of twenty
pounds at the custom-house, why should not at least twice that sum be laid upon
all imported authors who are able to do twice as much mischief with their
rumbling pindaric odes, and gorgeous apparatus of strophes, antistrophes and
recitativos? -- I, for my own part, am clearly of opinion, that these gentlemen
should be taxed; not that I would wish to nip their buds of beauty with the
untimely frost of excise, but merely to teach them that our own natural
manufactures ought to be primarily attended to and encouraged.

I WILL now, gentlemen, with your leave, lay down a few simple rules, to which,
in my opinion, every genuine author will make no difficulty to conform.

1. WHEN you write a book for the public, have nothing to do with Epistles
dedicatory. They were first invented by slaves, and have been continued by
fools and sycophants. I would not give a farthing more for a book on account of
its being patronized by all the noblemen or crowned heads in Christendom. If it
does not posses intrinsic merit enough to protect itself, and force its way
through the world, their supposed protection will be of no avail: besides, by
this ridiculous practice you degrade the dignity authorial, the honor of
authorship, which ought evermore to be uppermost in your thoughts. The silly
unthinking author addresses a great man in the style of a servile dependent,
whereas a real author, and a man of true genius, has upon all occasions a bold,
disinterested and daring confidence in himself, and considers the common cant
of adulation to the sons of fortune as the basest and most abominable of all
prostitution.

2. BE particularly careful to avoid all connection with doctors of law and
divinity, masters of arts, professors of colleges, and in general all those
that wear square black caps. A mere scholar and an original author are two
animals as different from each other as a fresh and salt water sailor. There
has been an old rooted enmity between them from the earliest ages, and which it
is likely will forever continue. The scholar is not unlike that piddling
orator, who, cold and inanimate, not roused into action by the impelling flame
of inspiration, can only pronounce the oration he has learned by rote; the real
author, on the contrary, is the nervous Demosthenes, who stored with an
immensity of ideas, awakened within him he knows not how, has them at command
upon every occasion; and must therefore be disregarded as a madman or an
enthusiast by the narrow and limited capacity, as well as the natural
self-sufficiency of the other.

3. IT is risquing a great deal to propose a subscription for an original work.
The world will be ready enough to anticipate your best endeavors; and that
which has been long and anxiously expected, rarely or never comes up to their
expectations at last.

4. IF you are so poor that you are compelled to live in some miserable garret
or cottage; do not repine, but give thanks to heaven that you are not forced to
pass your life in a tub, as was the fate of Diogenes of old. Few authors in any
country are rich, because a man must first be reduced to a state of penury
before he will commence author. Being poor therefore in externals, take care,
gentlemen, that you say or do nothing that may argue a poverty of spirit.
Riches, we have often heard, are by no means the standard of the value of a
man. This maxim the world allows to be true, and yet contradicts it every hour
and minute in the year. Fortune most commonly bestows wealth and abundance upon
fools and idiots; and men of the dullest natural parts are, notwithstanding,
generally best calculated to acquire large estates, and hoard up immense sums
from small beginnings.

5. NEVER borrow money of any man, for if you should once be mean enough to
fall into such a habit you will find yourselves unwelcome guests every where.
If upon actual trial you are at length convinced you possess no abilities that
will command the esteem, veneration or gratitude of mankind, apply yourselves
without loss of time to some of the lower arts, since it is far more honorable
to be a good bricklayer or a skilful weaver than an indifferent poet. -- If you
cannot at all exist without now and then gratifying your itch for scribbling,
follow my example who can both weave stockings and write poems. -- But, if you
really possess that sprightliness of fancy and elevation of soul which alone
constitute an author, do not on that account be troublesome to your friends. A
little reflection will point out other means to extract money from the hands
and pockets of your fellow citizens than by poorly borrowing what, perhaps, you
will never be able to repay.

6. NEVER engage in any business as an inferior or understrapper. I cannot
endure to see an author debase his profession so far as to submit to be second
or third in any office or employment whatever. If fortune, or the ill taste of
the public compels you even to turn shallopman on the Delaware, let it be your
first care to have the command of the boat. Beggary itself, with all its
hideous apparatus of rags and misery, becomes at once respectable whenever it
exhibits the least token of independence of spirit and a single spark of
laudable ambition.

7. IF you are in low circumstances, do not forget that there is such a thing
in the world as a decent pride. They are only cowards and miscreants that
poverty can render servile in their behavior. Your haughtiness should always
rise in proportion to the wretchedness and desperation of your circumstances.
If you have only a single guinea in the world be complaisant and obliging to
every one: If you are absolutely destitute of a shilling, immediately assume
the air of a despot, pull off your hat to no one, let your discourse, in every
company, turn upon the vanity of riches, the insignificancy of the great men of
the earth, the revolution of empires, and the final consummation of all things.
-- By such means you will at least conceal a secret of some importance to
yourself -- that you have not a shilling in the world to pay for your last
night's lodging.

8. SHOULD you ever be prevailed upon to dedicate your book to any great man or
woman, consider first, whether the tenor and subject of it be such as may in
some measure coincide with the age, temper, education, business and general
conversation of the person whose patronage is requested. A friend of mine once
committed a great error on this score. He wrote a bawdy poem, and dedicated it
to the principal in the department of finance.

9. NEVER make a present of your works to great men. If they do not think them
worth purchasing, trust me, they will never think them worth reading.

10. IF fortune seems absolutely determined to starve you, and you can by no
means whatever make your works sell; to keep up as much as in you lies, the
expiring dignity of authorship, do not take to drinking, gambling or
bridge-building as some have done, thereby bringing the trade of authorship
into disrepute; but retire to some uninhabited island or desert, and there, at
your leisure, end your life with decency.

THE above is all that has yet been sound written by Robert Slender relative to
authors and authorship -- and further the copyist at this time says not.

THE PICTURE GALLERY.
IT is full six months since I was persuaded by a friend to pay a visit to a
certain picture gallery in a country town, upon his assuring me it was much
frequented by people of taste, and that the views and entertainments there
exhibited would well reward me for the expense and trouble of attending them.
At our first entrance I was struck with a vast number of half-finished faces,
hung up on the wall on either side of me, the originals of several of which,
however, I recollected to have seen before in different parts and places of
these States. -- The person whose business it was to attend upon strangers in
this gallery and explain matters to them, being ignorant of this circumstance,
and taking me for a foreigner, began immediately to give me, very
circumstantially, a short history of these worthies, one by one, concluding the
account of every individual with asserting that this one also had a very great
share in accomplishing the American Revolution.

THIS one (observed I to my friend) I very well know, and this one, and him
yonder on horseback, but who are these? -- I recognize exactly the features of
his excellency the commander in chief, and here is Reed, and Moultrie, and
Marion; and there is Lincoln, and Montgomery, and Green, and some few others I
might name -- but who are yonder fat headed animals that are also putting in
their claim for immortality? -- To tell you the truth, replied my friend, there
are too many placed here who are remarkable for nothing but their wealth, their
impudence, or their meanness; and who, instead of having really contributed to
the establishment of the liberties of America, grew fat upon the miseries of
the soldiery, and approved of the American Revolution only as it promised to
bring about a revolution in their own fortunes for the better. -- This was
their virtue, this was their patriotism. -- Finding little or nothing worth
detaining us any longer in this school of art, except some few miniatures, we
took our leave and returned home. -- Having been somewhat fatigued with the
walk, I went to bed earlier than common in the evening, and, amongst other
dreams and visions of the night, I once more, in imagination, paid a visit to
the pictures and heads we had been looking at the preceding day.

I IMAGINED I saw the painter standing in the entrance of his gallery, which
was besieged by a number of humble petitioners, each in his turn recapitulating
his own merits and services, and earnestly requesting the artist to take their
likenesses for the satisfaction and information of posterity, as they pretended
they had, individually, a very great share in accomplishing the American
Revolution.

THE first that particularly attracted my attention was an honest shoemaker. --
Ah, God bless your honor, (said he to the painter) you cannot possibly have
already forgot the services of John Bullskin, cordwainer, who once mended a
pair of boots for his excellency General WASHINGTON when he was marching to
besiege little York! -- it is likewise well known that I risqued my life and
ventured my awl for the good of the country when I made shoes for Captain
Sturgeon's company -- indeed, had the enemy taken me prisoner, while employed
in making rebel shoes, you know I should most certainly have been sent to
England and beheaded! --

THE painter at first seemed inclined to comply with the applicant's request,
when a person whispered in his ear that this fellow was not only low in the
world, but had, on a certain occasion, been entrusted with a parcel of shoe
leather belonging to the public stores and designed for the use of the
soldiery, more than half of which he had been convicted of embezzling and
applying to his own use and emoluments. -- The painter then observed to him,
that to be a rogue and poor at the same time was truly despicable -- Go, said
he, go, thou son of Crispin, acquire five or six thousand pounds by
speculation, extortion, or how you please; make me a handsome present; out of
it, and thy swarthy visage shall brighten up in my gallery, and command the
veneration of thy fellow citizens for ages and generations to come.

THE next personage that presented himself was a harmless tailor: the moment I
saw him, I knew, and could have sworn to his occupation, not only from his
awkward gait, but also from a large pair of shears he carried under his left
arm. It was sometime before he could find an opportunity to make himself known
to the painter, but at last taking advantage of a small and momentary opening
among the throng of petitioners, he boldly presented himself, and demanded
audience.

AND pray, friend, said the painter, what are your merits and pretensions? -- I
see nothing in your face that entitles you to a station in my gallery of
immortality -- Have you served in the army and been cheated out of your pay --
so much for revolutions, my lad. -- When you wielded the sword in defense of
liberty you thought you were somebody, but you must be a simpleton if you are
not convinced by this time that you were nothing. If you have been cheated, I
indeed pity your case and condition, but I suspect there is nothing so
particular or uncommon in either as to countenance a claim to everlasting
remembrance.

I HAVEN (...) served in the army, replied the tailor, nor am I acquainted with
the use of any weapon but this, and this (first pointing to his shears, and
then to a large needle in his sleeve) yet by these two have I amassed
thousands, and without shedding a single drop of blood I have therewith gained
more real honor than ever attended the spontoon, the dagger, the short dirk,
or even the long three edged sword.

I BEG pardon, cried the painter, I really did not know I had been all this
time conversing with so considerable a personage as you seem to be. Will you do
me the pleasure to acquaint me with your name and quality.

MY name, answered the other, with some warmth, is Galumpus; a name that cannot
be otherwise than familiar to you, if you are in the least conversant in the
affairs of the great world. Without my assistance the American Revolution must
undoubtedly have been nipped in the bud, and left to be accomplished by the men
of future ages. What a savage and contemptible appearance would our armies have
made, had not I, the renowned and ever memorable Galumpus, stepped in to their
assistance, in the hour of distress and misery, and with this right hand
stripping off their Indian blankets and shapeless attire, arrayed them in the
robes of comeliness, and distinguishable only from the men of Europe by the
different colors of their garments!

IF what you say be true, replied the painter, you indeed deserve the
acknowledgments and recollection of late posterity -- but I must make some
enquiry about you from those who are not so much interested in your behalf as
you yourself appear to be. -- A person then advanced, who assured the painter,
in the hearing of the whole assembly, that this man had, on a certain occasion,
been entrusted with a large quantity of the public cloth, intended for the use
of the army in the time of the late war, and that, by appropriating about one
third of it to his own use, he had acquired a handsome estate, while many of
the soldiers, in consequence, perished by the severity of the weather, and for
want of the stipulated supply.

THE petitioner was a good deal disconcerted at this information, which he
seemed to suppose had been forgotten; he nevertheless soon after repeated his
request with a face of unparallelled impudence, and offered no less than forty
guineas as the purchase of immortality.

THE painter hesitated: -- at last a by-stander suggested that the picture
should be drawn, and hung up in the gallery, provided a naked soldier,
perishing with cold, was added to the piece in one corner of the back ground,
and a gallows with a ladder, and a rope suspended from it, in the other.

THE crowd was by this time increased to a very great number, all bound hither
on the same errand. But I could not avoid observing, that the men of real merit
and virtue, the maimed and unrewarded soldier, and the honest and disinterested
patriot, hung back in the rear of the throng; while impudence, avarice,
selfishness, ignorance, cowardice and villainy were foremost, and most
vociferous in arrogating those honors to themselves which were due to those
only who had the modesty not to be perpetually troubling the world with the
history of their merits; and whom experience had taught to consider the neglect
and ingratitude of their countrymen as the most honorable badge of distinction.

I SHOULD doubtless have been witness to numberless other applications to the
painter, but unfortunately, in the midst of my dream, a favorite spaniel, that
sleeps every night at the foot of my bed, suddenly barked at something that
disturbed him, and thus deprived the world of the remainder of my dream.

A DISCOURSE UPON BEARDS.
I WAS some time since (perhaps twenty months ago) prevailed upon to pass an
evening at a beer-house in a certain populous town of a neighboring state,
where there happened to be a cheerful fire and a good deal of company, but
little or no conversation. The weather I remarked, was unusually wet and heavy,
the wind had blown some days at east-north-east, and we had been drinking our
pints of strong beer a piece, the efficacy of which was not, however, powerful
enough to dissipate this drowsy and fullen humor. -- John Shovelshoes smoked
his pipe by himself in unsocial silence; David Doolittle played with the tavern
keeper's spotted dog; Richard Timbertoe sat in silent admiration of the
landlady's favorite cat; and Robert Slender amused himself with drumming on
the great dining table with the four fingers of his right hand. At this instant
my good friend Adam Blackbeard started up from his seat in a passion, called
aloud for a glass of honest grog, leaped up on the table, and with an audible
voice, delivered the following extempore lecture. As it is as good as some
others I have seen published, and the subject equally important, I have kept a
transcript of it, faithfully taken from the gentelman's own mouth, at the time
of delivery; and sincerely hope its publication may prove of general utility.

A LECTURE ON BEARDS.
PERMIT me, gentlemen, to address you on a subject which I do not remember to
have seen handled by any one of the celebrated writers of antiquity, and which
I am sorry to say, few or none of the moderns have deemed worthy of their
serious attention. It is a subject upon which Aristotle himself, that admirable
naturalist, has thought fit to be uncommonly sparing in his observations; which
Titus Livy has not once mentioned in any of his decades, neither has it been
descanted on in the almanac of John Nathan Hutchins, who, if I am rightly
informed, suffered nothing else of similar importance to escape him.

THE subject, which has thus forcibly impressed itself on my ideas at this
present time, is, gentlemen, nothing more or less than that of beards. --
Beards, you will say! -- what can possibly be said on this most barren of all
topics that will command silence only for one quarter of an hour? -- Lend me
your attention but that short space of time, and I will endeavor to convince
you that the subject has been hitherto shamefully neglected, and that it
contains far more pith and energy than the world has been willing to suppose.

THE word beard, says the celebrated Isaac Casaubon, is derived from bard,
under which denomination the poets of former ages generally passed, These
personages, I suppose for want of a barber, constantly suffered the hair upon
the chin and upper lip to increase to its full natural length, from which
custom this excrescence acquired the appellation of beard, from the bards that
encouraged its growth by their own example.

HOWEVER, Salmasius. Heinsius, Aldrovandus, Julius Scaliger, Dr. Bentley, and
several other learned men are of a different opinion. The word beard, (say
they) is undoubtedly derived from bear, an animal often met with in the forests
of America, and by no means unknown in many parts of Europe and Asia. The bear
has been noted for a tuft of hair upon his chin, strikingly analogous to what
we call the beard in the human species Hence; then, comes the name, by only
adding the letter d, as in the former case they wickedly interpolated an e. --
But, if any one should presume to deny that bears have beards, (says the acute
and celebrated Bentley) he must be extremely ignorant, not only in the history
of animals; commonly termed Zoology, but must have been criminally negligent in
perusing the story of David, the son of Jesse, as preserved in the Jewish
records; for there, we are expressly told, that a bear was caught by the beard,
and afterward smitten with the edge of the sword.

THUS far the critics and scholiasts. I come now, in the first place, to
enumerate the several grand divisions of beards. -- Beards, gentlemen, at least
to a superficial observer, are, in their essence, similar. It is therefore from
the color only, which is nothing more than a quality, that we can make the
several distinctions, and the rather, as it is my fixed determination to reason
only from what we know. Beards, I say, may be primarily divided into black,
yellow, red, and gray; and to these I shall speak, each in its turn and order,
only premising that Nature seems to have entertained a mortal antipathy to the
color of blue in her distribution of beards. What was the foundation in the
eternal reason for this antipathy, is not for such as me to ^ay, neither will I
be so bold as to assert that a total negation of blue beards is absolutely the
case in rerum natura, inasmuch as a wild man with a blue beard is said to have
been actually caught some years ago in a trap, in the desolate and mountainous
parts of the kingdom of Poland. Why a sample of this man's beard was not sent
to be deposited in the cabinet of curiosities belonging to the Philosophical
Society in Philadelphia, is hard to determine. I am therefore inclined to
believe that the man with the abovementioned blue beard did never really exist.
I come now to the first division of my subject, which was, to say something
upon the excellence of black beards.

AND here I cannot be sufficiently thankful, that I myself, who am gifted to
talk thus learnedly on so new and intricate a subject, as this, am also blessed
with a beard of this most excellent color and order. Beards of the other three
divisions may, without all manner of doubt, have their particular and
individual merits, but I do assert, and I defy any man to prove to the
contrary, that all the male worthies of antiquity, the Alexander's, the
Pompeys, the Scipios, etc. were all men of your right glossy black beards.
Should any of you ask me what Nature saw in this color, or rather in this
absence of all color, that she should make it, in this case, the criterion and
standard of so much excellence; I answer, that black bodies are ever observed
to absorb the largest quantity of solar rays. Thus, by a natural and easy
analogy, the blackness of the beard gives us to understand that your
black-bearded men have sucked in the largest quantity of the divine
intelligence, or that fine etherial matter which is said to constitute the
souls of the animated creation, and according to the distribution of which we
become capable of the different degrees of wisdom, valor, goodness of heart,
honesty, and other virtues. Rejoice then, ye men of black beards, in being so
particularly distinguished by the patron of all excellence; but take not the
merit to yourselves, inasmuch as your beards have not been spun with the
distaffs of this world, neither have your own hands twisted them, even as a
thread of silk is twined. -- I must now proceed to the second head of my
discourse, which was, to speak a few words relative to yellow beards.

I SHALL make no secret of it, that I am always particularly upon my guard in
my dealings and connexions with this second class of beards; and sorry I am
that it is not my power to plunge the whole race of yellow bearded into the
staining pot of blackness itself, yea, into the pickling tub thereof, thereby
darkening their beards even as mine own is darkened! -- I have, upon many
occasions, observed that yellow beards are for the most part vehemently
inclined to overreaching, wrangling, schism, rebellion, and other evil works,
which are not convenient. Whether this be owing to a natural thinness of the
blood, which transmits too many aqueous particles into the small tubes of each
particular hair, and thereby deadens those virtuous principles which are so
apparent in black beards, and thus prevents them from attaining to the same
degree of maturity; or whether dame Nature, when she was busy in spinning out
beards from her invisible distaff, kept a pinch of snuff between her thumb and
forefinger, and therewith soiled the thread, I shall not pretend to determine;
but certain it is that yellow-bearded men are addicted to numerous evil
practices.

THIRDLY, the red beard is, of all others, the most mischievous and intolerable
-- but it is meet that I should make some preliminary explanations.

THE ignified, igneous, or fiery particles which are contained in the whole
mass of the blood of man, and which are equally disseminated throughout the
entire human system, do, like the base and worthless individuals of a nation,
sometimes find means to form and collect themselves into certain globules or
little bodies and juntos of hot sanguinary matter, and these globules again
uniting, do at length become formidable in the regions bordering on the heart;
from whence, mounting aloft with extreme rapidity, they pass the narrow channel
of the jugular vein, and soon after seating themselves in the vicinity of the
brain, do produce daring designs and mad purposes of treasons, murders, rapes,
and what not? -- Here, then, they propagate and bring forth abundantly other
fiery particles, precisely of their own nature and temperament, till the region
of sentimentalism and intelligence is overstocked. They then make a disposition
to emigrate, and finding no other outlet, pass into the great world through the
barbicular tubes; and hence, gentlemen, red beards acquire their dangerous
menacing appearance. -- There is something so terrible and shocking in this
species of beards, that I must beg to be excused from dwelling any longer on so
disagreeable a part of my subject. I sincerely pity the man whom Nature has
thus distinguished to this own detriment. Such a one is fit for treasons,
stratagems, and spoils -- the shaking of her beard is terrible; let no such
beards be trusted!

THIS leads me to the fourth and last general head of my discourse, which was
to say something, though unworthy, upon gray beards. Gray beards, gentlemen,
are nothing more than the decay of beards in general. What renders them the
more dangerous to the community, at large, is the extreme difficulty of
distinguishing to which of the three former classes they did originally and
truly belong. The man that possesses a decent black beard at sixty, and is
accordingly respected for the same among his friends and acquaintance, as well
as the public in general, is nevertheless in danger of being considered an
arrant scoundrel at eighty, by the rising generation, unless he can make it
appear his beard was not originally red or yellow. Hence, it would be advisable
for every man that lives long enough to acquire a gray beard, to procure a
certificate in due season from the parson or chief magistrate of his parish,
ascertaining to which of the three original ranks, or orders, his beard
formerly appertained and belonged.

GENTLEMEN, I have spoken sufficiently on beards at this time, and remain your
most devoted humble servant.

ADAM BLACKBEARD.

THE ANTIQUARIAN.
THERE is no individual that has a greater claim to the commiseration of
benevolent minds than the woman whose lot it is to marry a man of learning and
science, but whose natural judgment of men and things is not equal to his
studied acquirements in literature. This, nevertheless, was the hard fortune of
a female acquaintance of mine, the amiable and good-natured Amelia, who in her
younger days had imbibed an opinion that people of deep erudition, or those
that had the appearance of it, were the only persons in the world, that, next
to the virtuous and wealthy, were to be chosen for agreeable companions in the
journey through life.

IN conformity with this mistaken notion she was afterward united to a man, at
that time a preceptor in a college, who was so very learned that he could talk
Greek in all its dialects with the most flowing volubility, and could tell the
name of every thing in He brew or Syriac, at the same time that he could not
seat himself in a chair in a genteel company, without doing it in the most
awkward and disagreeable manner possible. -- After several years absence in
foreign countries, I paid this lady a visit some time ago, soon after my
return, when in the course of an afternoon's chat, while her husband was at his
studies in another apartment, she gave me the following history of her
situation.

"GOOD Mr. Timbertoe, I was in a great error when I formerly imagined every
excellence was included in a thorough knowledge of Greek: but this was the
fault of the person that superintended my education. He persuaded me to believe
that a scholar was every thing; whereas I find to my vexation that, from the
pattern I have in my possession, they are the most insipid companions in the
universe. A plain honest hearted farmer's son once paid his addressed to me,
but I foolishly rejected him because he could talk nothing but a little
homespun English, in the plain modern style. By this error in judgment, or
rather this prejudice imbibed from education, I sacrificed a plentiful living
on a decent farm for the sake of a parcel of old moth eaten books, musty
manuscripts, metaphysical perplexities, dreams of pagan superstition, and a man
whose business and conversation has far less to do with the people of the
present age than with those who lived eighteen or twenty centuries ago. Talk to
him of matters that have passed almost under his nose; mention the battle of
Germantown or of Brandywine; bring into view the capture of Burgoyne or the
masterly maneuvers of Washington, and he is either wholly silent or pays very
little attention to what you say. These things are modern, and events like
these seem to him to have been of trifling moment in the world, while the
remotest mention of his beloved ancients, the least hint of the retreat of
Xenophon with the ten thousand Greeks out of Persia, of the wars of Alexander,
Caesar, Scipio, or Pompey, in a moment engages his whole attention, and then we
are sure to hear of nothing but of them and their marches and counter-marches
for days together. -- But this is not the worst of it, Mr. Timbertoe; I am
perishing for want of company. The gentlewomen, formerly of my acquaintance,
will not any longer venture to come near the house, having been more than once
affronted for not dressing according to the antiquated fashions of the Spartan
dames mentioned in history. Hence, whenever I am sick, I see few or none
besides my husbands and the physician, who is also an antiquarian, and
altogether as unwelcome to me as the ghost of Aristotle or Socrates. Excepting
him, as I said before, we have very few male visitants. The parson himself has
almost forborne our house on account of an angry, but well conducted dispute,
he lately had with my husband, relative to the education of the Persian youth
in the time of Cyrus, the son of Astyages and Mandane. There was also a master
of a vessel who used to call now and then to pass an evening with us, but we
have differed terribly with him, in my opinion on a very trivial matter,
something relative to the rigging of Mark Anthony's ships; to the best of my
remembrance, whether they carried what are called top-gallant sails or not;
which my husband positively affirmed they did, and the other as obstinately
denied, till blows had almost decided the contest.

"As to the schoolmaster of the neighborhood, who is allowed to be something
of a philosopher, as well as an excellent instructor of youth, he has been our
inveterate enemy, ever since my husband and he had a warm dispute together in
Latin (which lasted the whole evening) about the antiquity of
temple-spectacles, which the schoolmaster affirmed to have been in use among
the ancient Romans, grounding his opinion on the following verse attributed to
Virgil:

Nocte pluit tota: redeunt spectacula mane which the unfortunate preceptor
construed to mean, that spectacles are of little or no use very early in dark
rainy mornings.

"AND yet these continual bickerings, silly as they are, my dear Mr. Timbertoe,
are not the only vexations I endure from this man of extensive erudition but
weak judgment. He is almost continually in a childish fret, loudly complaining
that the least noise or conversation, when as his studies, totally deranges and
perplexes his ideas. This being the case, one would think the garret, or some
retired part of the house would be his choice. -- No such thing: -- he will
commit his ideas to writing no where but in the hall, where we are constantly
passing and repassing, and of course the least noise or stir, the crying of a
child, the fall of a cup, or the sudden shutting to of a door, throws him into
agonies of rage, which are frequently accompanied with the sudden destruction
of his whole sheet of scribbled paper, and a general flagellation of the
domestics. -- Thus am I confined for life to a most whimsical companion who,
with his peculiarity of temper and present stock of knowledge, might have been
tolerable good company two or three thousand years ago, but hates and despises
every thing modern, and affects to think no author worth reading that is not at
least eight or nine hundred years old; and no person worth talking to who does
not carry the whole load of learned trash, and lumber of antiquity in his head."

WHILE I was sympathizing with Amelia on her unfortunate choice, the learned
man at last came in, with the weight of at least three thousand years suspended
from his eye brows. Instead of accosting him in the usual manner, I made free
to ask, What news from the south side of the Alps, and whether he believed i^
true that Hannibal had really hollowed out a passage through the rocks, by the
application and operation of vinegar only? -- He answered me dryly, that such a
report was in town, and it was not improbable there might be truth in the
story, as he believed the vinegar of the ancients to have had much more
strength and spirit in it than the thin watery trash so called, that is in use
among the moderns; he then added, that he intended shortly to compose a Latin
treatise on this subject, which would prove beyond a doubt that the Alpine
rocks might have been really dissolved in the manner, and by the means
mentioned in the public prints. -- After having said this, he left us abruptly,
and returned to his books and papers. -- I am persuaded many characters of this
kind do really exist among us: Every thing that has been written by the
ancients, and any thing that is brought from the other side of the globe, is,
with them, inestimable; every thing modern or home-made is in their opinion
contemptible, merely because it is modern, and happens to be of our own
manufacture.

THE MAN OF NINETY; OR, A VISIT TO THE OAK.
" TO yonder boughs that spread so wide,
Beneath whose shade soft waters glide,
Once more I take the well known way;
With feeble step and tottering knee
I sigh to reach my WHITE-OAK tree,
Where rosy health was wont to play.
If to the grave, consuming slow,
The shadow of myself, I go,
When I am gone will thou remain! --
From dust you rose, and grew like me;
I man became, and you a tree,
Both natives of one verdant plain.
How much alike; yet not the same!
You could no kind protector claim;
Alone you stood to chance resigned:
When winter came, with blustering sky.
You feared its blasts -- and so did I,
And for warm suns in secret pined
When vernal suns began to glow
You felt returning vigor flow,
Which once a year new leaves supplied;
Like you, fine days I wished to see,
And May was a sweet month to me,
But when November came -- I sighed!
If through your bark some rustic arm
A mark impressed, you took the alarm,
And tears awhile I saw descend;
Till Nature's kind maternal aid
A plaster on your bruises laid,
And bade your trickling sorrows end.
Like you, I feared the lightning's stroke
Whose flame dissolves the strength of oak,
And ends at once this mortal dream; --
You saw with grief the soil decay
That from your roots was torn away;
Your sighed -- and cursed the stream.
With borrowed earth, and busy spade,
Around your roots new life I laid,
While joy revived in every vein;
Once more that stream shall death impart!
Though Nature owns the aid of art,
No art, immortal, makes her reign.
How much alike our fortune -- say --
Yet, why must I so soon decay
When thou have scarcely reached thy prime --
Erect and tall you joyous stand;
The staff of age has found my hand,
That guides me to the grave of time.
Could I, fair tree, like you, resign,
And banish all these fears of mine,
Gray hairs would be no cause of grief;
Your blossoms die, but you remain,
Your fruit lies scattered over the plain --
Learn wisdom from the falling leaf.
As you survive, by heaven's decree,
Let withered flowers be thrown on me,
Sad compensation for my doom,
While Christmas greens and gloomy pines,
And cedars dark, and barren vines,
Point out the lonely tomb.
The enlivening sun, that burns so bright,
Never had a noon without a night,
So LIFE and DEATH agree;
The joys of man by years are broke -- "
'Twas thus the man of ninety spoke,
Then rose, and left his tree.
THE SCORNFUL LADY.
DRESSED out in all her gay attire,
Who sees but, seeing, must admire
The nymph with all her cruel arts
Bound on a cruise to capture hearts.
Aloft her silken streamers play,
The ensigns of unbounded sway:
For her the wretched victim burns,
Yet she no love for love returns.
Young Jockey from the isle of Kent
In chasing her a year had spent,
And owned at last no privateer
Could ever yet compare with her.
Proud of the artillery of her eyes
She would not own so poor a prize,
But, disregarding force or prayer,
She struck him dumb, and left him there.
Thus huntsmen of their prowess boast,
Who, hunting on the Spanish coast,
No deer at once by them is slain,
But left to languish on the plain.
When first this heavenly form I passed,
She backed her topsails to the mast --
I saw there was no chance to fly,
At once she bade me yield or die.
Amazed at such a strange attack
I changed my course and hurried back,
But such a fatal arrow met
As pierced me deep, and pains me yet.
Ah, Celia, what a strange mistake
To ruin just for ruin's sake;
Thus to delude us in distress,
And quit the prize you should possess.
Years may advance with silent pace
And rob that form of every grace,
And all your conquests be rapaid --
With Teague O'Murphy, and his spade.
HORACE, Lib. II. Ode 16. IMITATED, AND ADDRESSED TO GOVERNOR PARR. GOVERNOR of
Nova Scotia. This address was occasioned by the return of General Arnold to
that Province from Britain.

Otium divos rogat in patenti, etc.

THE sailor tossed on stormy seas
Implores his patron god for ease,
When Luna hides her paler blaze,
And stars obscurely dart their rays.
For ease the Yankee, fierce in war,
His flores of vengeance points afar;
For ease the toiling Dutchman sighs
Which gold, nor gems, nor purple buys.
No treasured heaps from India trade,
No doctor's or the lawyer's aid
Can ease the tumults of the mind,
Or cares to gilded roofs assigned.
The lot of man he best completes
Whose board is crowned with frugal treats,
Whose sleep, no fears nor thirst of gain,
Beneath his homely roof, restrain.
Why, then, with wasting cares engage,
Weak reptiles of so frail an age;
Why thus to distant climates run
And lands beneath another sun?
For, though to China's costs we roam,
Ourselves we never can leave at home,
Care. swift as deer, as tempests strong
Ascends the prow, and sails along.
The mind that feels an even state,
And all the future leaves to fate;
In every ill shall pleasure share,
As every pleasure has its care.
Death early sealed MONTGOMERY'S doom,
In youth brave LAURENS found a tomb,
While Arnold spends in peace and pride
The years that heaven to them denied.
An hundred slaves before you fall,
A coach and six attends your call,
And vestments, tinged with Tyrian dye,
Wherever you go, attract the eye;
On me, a poor and small domain,
With something of the rhyming vein,
The Muse bestowed -- and share of pride
To spurn a traitor from my side.
THE INDIAN STUDENT, OR, FORCE OF NATURE.
Ruta mihi et rigui placeant in vallibus amnes;
Flamina amem, sylvasque inglorius. --
VIRG. Georg. II. V. 483.
FROM Susquehanna's utmost springs
Where savage tribes pursue their game,
His blanket tied with yellow strings,
A shepherd of the forest came.
Not long before, a wandering priest
Expressed his wish, with visage sad --
" Ah, why (he cried) in Satan's waste,
" Ah, why detain so fine a lad?
" In Yanky land there stands a town
" Where learning may be purchased low --
" Exchange his blanket for a gown,
" And let the lad to college go." --
From long debate the Council rose,
And viewing Shalum's tricks with joy,
To Havard hall, Havard College, at Cambridge in Massachusetts.
over wastes of snows,
They sent the copper-colour'd boy.
One generous chief a bow supplied,
This gave a shaft, and that a skin;
The feathers, in vermillion died,
Himself did from a turkey win:
Thus dressed so gay, he took his way
Over barren hills, alone, alone!
His guide a star, he wandered far,
His pillow every night a stone.
At last he came, with leg so lame,
Where learned men talk heathen Greek,
And Hebrew lore is gabbled over,
To please the Muses, twice a week.
Awhile he writ, awhile he read,
Awhile he learned the grammar rules --
An Indian savage so well bred
Great credit promised to their schools.
Some thought he would in law excel,
Some said in physic he would shine;
And one that knew him, passing well,
Beheld, in him, a sound divine.
But those of more discerning eye
Even then could other prospects show.
And saw him lay his Virgil by
To wander with his dearer bow.
The tedious hours of study spent,
The heavy-moulded lecture done,
He to the woods a hunting went,
But sighed to see the setting sun.
No mystic wonders fired his mind;
He sought to gain no learned degree,
But only sense enough to find
The squirrel in the hollow tree.
The shady bank, the purling stream,
The woody wild his heart possessed,
The dewy lawn, his morning dream
In Fancy's gayest colors dressed.
" And why (he cried) did I forsake
" My native wood for gloomy walls;
" The silver stream, the limpid lake
" For musty books and college halls.
" A little could my wants supply --
" Can wealth and honor give me more;
" Or, will the sylvan god deny
" The humble treat he gave before?
" Let Seraphs reach the bright abode,
" And heaven's sublimest mansions see --
" I only bow to NATURE'S GOD --
" The Land of Shades will do for me.
" These dreadful secrets of the sky
" Alarm my soul with chilling fear --
" Do planets in their orbits fly,
" And is the earth, indeed, a sphere?
" Let planets still their aims pursue,
" And comets round creation run --
" In HIM my faithful friend I view,
" The image of my God -- the Sun.
" Where Nature's ancient forests grow,
" And mingled laurel never fades,
" My heart is fixed; -- and I must go
" To die among my native shades."
He spoke, and to the western springs,
(His gown discharged, his money spent)
His blanket tied with yellow strings,
The shepherd of the forest went.
Returning to the rural reign
The Indians welcomed him with joy;
The council took him home again,
And blessed the copper-colour'd boy.
THE PRISONER.
TO fields of green and tufted pines.
Where Nature plans her bold designs,
While little souls for pleasure stray,
I find content, an easier way.
Once, like the rest in folly's train,
A jail I deemed the worst of pain;
But reason says, and say we can,
It Is wisdom's walk, the school for man.
Your men of sense take half an age
To moralize from Plato's page;
But TRUTH, that guides my pen, can tell,
A sheriff's writ will do as well.
The pitying eye, that upwards cast,
Laments our daily, dull repast,
That deems our time is spent in care,
Should look at home, and find it there.
Of debts and duns no more afraid,
I now enjoy a happier shade,
And more secure retreats from pain
Than fancy paints or poets feign.
The painted cards and flying dice
No longer plague with dull advice;
I deal my cards, I shake my hand,
And fear no loss of house or land.
When friends forsake, and riches fail.
The last resource is still a jail:
Here busy fools from toil repair,
And find an end of all their care.
While others pay for learning sense,
We here are taught at no expense;
With doubts and fears the world is cursed,
But we are blessed, who know the worst.
When at my window dark and high
I stand to see the crowd go by,
My fate with their I scorn to share
For all betray the marks of care.
Of all the woes they feel or fear
How few have gained admittance here!
No scolding wives disturb our rest,
No storms at sea our sleep molest.
No surly duns infest our gate,
No schemes to live, no cares of state;
No knotty points disturb our brain,
No beggar's tale, no plans of gain.
If parsons come to preach or pray
So kind they are they ask no pay;
No landlords here with faucy eye
Distrain our goods -- and make us cry.
If states decline, or empires fail,
What odds to us, who live in jail?
Since freedom can be our's no more
'Twere mad to ask, Who bolts the door?
When sickness comes so blessed are we
The doctor scarce expects a see --:
What station can with our's compare,
Who with our keys thus look our care!
THE LOST SAILOR.
TRUE to his trade -- the slave of fortune still --
In a sweet isle, where never winter reigns,
I found him at the foot of a tall hill,
Mending old sails, and chewing sugar canes:
Pale ivy round him grew, and mingled vines,
Plantains, bananas ripe, and yellow pines,
And flowering nightshade with its dismal green,
Ash-colored iris painted by the sun,
And fair-hair'd hyacinth was near him seen,
And China pinks by marygolds o'er-run: --
" But what (said Ralph) have I, that sail the seas,
" Ah, what have I to do with things like these!
" I did not wish to leave those shades, not I,
" Where Amoranda turns her spinning wheel;
" Charmed with the shallow stream, that murmured by,
" I felt as blessed as any swain could feel,
" Who, seeking nothing that the world admires,
" To one poor valley fixed his whole desires.
" With masts so trim, and sails as white as snow,
" The painted barque deceived me from the land:
" Pleased, on her sea-beat decks I wished to go,
" Mingling my labors with her hardy band;
" The captain bade me for the voyage prepare,
" And said -- By Jasus, it is a grand affair!
" To combat with the winds who first essayed,
" Had these gay groves his lightsome heart beguiled,
" His heart attracted by the charming shade
" Had changed the deep sea for the woody wild;
" And slighted all the gain that Neptune yields
" For Damon's cottage, or Palemon's fields.
" His barque, the bearer of a feeble crew,
" How could he trust when none had been to prove her;
" Courage might sink when lands and shores withdrew,
" And sickly whelps might spoil the best maneuver;
" But Fortitude, though woes and deaths await,
" Still views bright skies, and leaves the dark to fate.
" From monkey climes where limes and lemons grow,
" And the sweet orange swells her fruit so fair,
" To wintry worlds with heavy heart I go
" To face the cold glance of the northern bear,
" Where lonely waves, far distant from the sun,
" And gulphs, of mighty strength, their circuits run.
" But how disheartening is the wanderer's fate!
" When conquered by the loud tempestuous main,
" On him, no mourners in procession wait,
" Nor do the sisters of the harp complain,
" Nor can I think on coral beds they sleep
" Who sink in storms, and mingle with the deep.
" It Is folly all -- for who can truly tell
" What streams disturb the bosom of that main,
" What ugly fish in those dark climates dwell
" That feast on men -- then stay, my gentle swain!
" Bred in yond' happy shades, be happy there,
" And let these quiet groves claim all thy care."
So spoke poor Ralph, and with a smooth sea gale
Fled from the magic of the enchanting shore,
But whether winds or waters did prevail
I saw the black ship never returning more,
Though long I walked the margin of the main,
And long have looked, and still must look invain!
ON THE HON. EMANUEL SWEDENBORG'S UNIVERSAL THEOLOGY.
IN this choice work the curious eye may find
The noblest system to reform mankind,
Old truths confirmed that skeptics have denied,
By most perverted, and which some deride.
HERE truths divine in heavenly visions grow
From the vast influx on our world below.
Here, like the blaze of our material sun,
Enlightened Reason proves that GOD IS ONE; --
As that, concentered in itself, a sphere,
Illumes all nature with its radiance here,
Bids towered itself all trees and plants aspire,
Awakes the winds, impells the seeds of fire,
And, still subservient to the almighty plan,
Warms into life the changeful race of man;
So, like that sun, in heaven's bright realms we trace,
One power of LOVE that fills unbounded space,
Existing always by no borrowed aid,
Before all worlds; eternal, and not made; --
To that indebted, stars and comets burn,
Owe their first movements, and to that return:
Prime source of wisdom, all contriving mind,
First spring of reason, that this globe designed;
Parent of ORDER, whose unwearied hand
Upholds the fabric that his wisdom planned,
And, its due course assigned to every sphere,
Revolves the seasons and sustains the year; --
Pure light of TRUTH, wherever thy rays combine
Thou art the substance of the power divine;
Naught else on earth that full resemblance bears,
No sun that lights us through our circling years,
No stars, that through yon' heavenly mansions stray,
No moon that glads us with her evening ray,
No seas, that over their gloomy mansions flow,
No forms beyond us, and no shapes below.
THEN slight, ah slight not this instructive page
For the low follies of a thoughtless age,
Here, to the truth by reason's aid aspire,
Here the gay visions of the blessed admire;
Behold that heaven in these neglected lines,
In whose vast space perpetual daylight shines,
Where streams of joy through plains of pleasure run,
And night is banished from so bright a sun.
PLUNGED in that gulf, whose dark unfathomed wave
All tongues and nations to destruction gave, --
Here, man no more disgraced by death appears,
Lost in dull slumbers through a waste of years --
No empty dream, or still more empty shade;
Remains the substance, but the form decayed,
Sees what he saw, knows what before was known,
The same ideas, but more perfect grown.
WHERE parted souls with kindred spirits meet,
Rapt to the bloom of beauty all complete;
In that celestial, vast, unbounded sphere,
Naught there exists but has its image here!
All there is MIND! -- that intellectual flame,
From whose vast depth Platonic visions came,
In which creation ended and began,
Flows to this abject world, and beams on man.
MAY TO APRIL.
1.
WITHOUT your showers
I breed no flowers,
Each field a barren waste appears;
If you don't weep
My blossoms sleep,
They take such pleasure in your tears.
2.
As your decay
Made room for May,
So I must part with all that is mine;
My balmy breeze,
My blooming trees,
To torrid suns their sweets resign.
3.
For April dead
My shades I spread,
To her I owe my dress so gay;
Of daughters three
It falls on me
To close our triumphs on one day.
4.
Thus to repose
All Nature goes;
Month after month must find its doom:
Time on the wing
May ends the Spring,
And Summer frolics over her tomb.
FEW HONEST COBBLERS; A POEM. In Imitation of Dr. WATTS'S Indian Philosopher.
WHY should our shoes so soon grow old;
So soon the hide with which they are soal'd
Be worn and out of date --?
Crispin, it is strange the thread that sews
Millions of coats, should leave our shoes
In such a ragged state!
Invain I sought the secret cause,
Searched in the leather for its flaws,
The tanner cursed invain;
Stepped into shops where shoes were made,
Saw artists hourly ply their trade;
But none would this explain.
Then towered the west, and cross the street
Where folks at tall St. Michael's meet,
I hurried, vexed in mind;
'Till near the banks of Ashley's flood,
On soil of marsh I sighing stood,
For tanner's use designed.
Not far from thence a cobler's son
Stood by his hides, and thus begun,
With aspect dull and sad:
Twice he came over the lazy stream,
The faults of shoes were all his theme,
For many a fault they had!
He said, "the spacious ample hide
" That does for all our hoofs provide
" No thinking man would blame,
" Since, shaped into so many foals,
" Some would have flaws and some have holes
" To blast the cobler's fame.
" The artist wise that shaped the shoe
" One hide from every creature drew,
" And scraped that hide with care;
" This is an honest skin," he said,
" Then down he sat to try his trade,
" And make a handsome pair.
" But scarce these hides had left the vatt
" When, lodged aloft, a hungry rat
" Attacked them teeth and claws,
" Ah cruel chance and ragged fate!
" He gnawed them early, gnawed them late:
" Starvation has no laws.
" Happy the man that finds a shoe
" That Is to his expectations true,
" One real good below:
" But O the crowds of wretched wights
" That travel barefoot these dull nights
" And wound the bleeding toe!"
THUS sung the cobler's hopeful son;
I found at length his song was done:
He said, he was no Jew:
Sure, then, cried I, ere I Will agree
For these damned shoes you mean for me,
I will go barefoot too.
Some happier Crispin; tell me where,
What other shop affords a pair,
Where better shoes are found;
Swift as Don Quixote's steed of old,
I Would run to get my boots new soal'd,
And wear them -- tight and sound.
CHARLESTON, (S. C.) 1786.
THE SAILOR'S RELIEF.
ALEXANDER DISMAL, Inn-holder, to the Printer of the Weekly Gazette.
RIGHT WORTHY!
Since all are for the public good distressed,
And each proposes what he thinks is best --
Why may not I propose, among the rest? --

I AM one of that numerous tribe, who, under the smiles of heaven, endeavor to
make an honest livelihood by keeping a house of decent entertainment for such
as choose to favor me with their custom: -- but I beg leave to observe (I hope
without offense) that there is no class of people by which our fraternity,
adjacent to the river, so much suffer, at times, as by seafaring men; though
none expend their money with a more liberal hand and heart, as long as they
have a single sixpence in their funds to draw upon. -- Sunday last, the
twenty-third day of January, 1784, was a time of woeful humiliation to us poor
publicans. The river opened on a sudden, the sailors went off in triumph, and,
for the most part, considerably indebted to those, who had for several weeks
preceding found them in victuals and lodging. As I am a sincere and hearty
friend to all seafaring men, having myself been formerly master of a small
coasting packet; and notwithstanding I have frequently been a considerable
sufferer by the roguery of some individuals, I would nevertheless beg leave to
remark, that in a country like this, so remarkable for its public and private
charity toward our unfortunate fellow men, it would well become us to provide
some resources, either by a general tax, or certain tolls to be paid by every
vessel passing and repassing Gloucester Point, to assist, comfort, cherish and
support such seafaring men, in needy circumstances, as happen to be detained
here during the winter season by temporary interruption of our navigation;
particularly those who are unable, through mere mischance, mishap, old age, or
other incapacity, immediately to help themselves.

IN pursuance of this plan I would humbly propose that a three decked ship, of
about four hundred tons burden, should be forthwith built and finished off in
a plain manner at the public expense, with commodious and comfortable
apartments throughout for poor and distressed seamen, regard being always had,
in the distribution of the various apartments, to the known rank and station of
the party relieved. I do not mean, however, that this vessel should be launched
into the water. Every purpose of accommodation would be much better answered by
letting her remain upon dry land, and many disagreeable accidents thereby
prevented. It would nevertheless be necessary that her station should be as
near as possible to the river, as no true Jack-tar can endure to be long out of
sight of navigable water. The most applicable name I can at present think of
for this humane foundation, is, THE SAILOR'S RELIEF.

IT is obvious, at first glance, that such a ship as this would not cost so
much to the public as one designed for real sea service. She would not require
more than one half of the crooked timber commonly made use of in vessels of the
proposed burden, nor need her planks be more than three fourths of an inch
thick, or at most one inch. Sailors are never truly and fully contented except
when on shipboard, consequently they would be no where better pleased than in
such a situation as this, where they would enjoy all the merriment and good
humor of a seafaring life, without having those bitter gales and mountainous
waves to encounter, which, for a great part of the year, are so fatal and
terrible to the marine fraternity on these coasts. -- I would further propose,
that the ship should be kept constantly victualled by contract, or otherwise,
with common sea provisions, faithfully laid in, and a cook to be provided by
the public, who had not been previously less than seven years at sea in that
capacity. -- Rigged she should be completely, to the end that the older sailors
might be constantly practicing their various maneuvers according to the state
of the winds and weather, and the younger ones taught to be ready and dextrous
in the art of working a ship when in actual service. Over and above the
standing rigging, she should be furnished with a complete set of running geer,
including every article from the topgallant sheets to the jeer falls and
clue-garnets: Not a brace, bowline, top-rope, sheet, halyard, bunt line, clew
line or reef takle should be wanting; and the masts, yards, sails, stays,
shrouds and tops should be as punctually supplied, and as exactly arranged in
their proper places, as if they were really to travel the high seas. -- Some
distressed or disabled old sea-commander, of good character and sober
conversation, might preside here, in the two capacities of master and chaplain,
with the proper officers under him, during the hard season, for keeping the
crew in order; but whenever the river is clear of ice, I would have all hands
discharged (excepting such as should be found absolutely helpless, and a few
others) and the skuttles barred down till the navigation should be again
obstructed, and these useful men once more seen wandering about the streets to
look out a shelter from the unpitying storm.

I LEAVE it to others to point out a proper spot of ground whereon to erect
this pile of benevolence; only taking care that the horizon should be as little
obstructed as possible, that they might every day have an opportunity of
determining the latitude and longitude of the ship with the precision in such
cases necessary. As to the manual labor on board, I am of opinion it would not
be excessive, especially as the helm, the anchor, and the pump would require
little or no attendance, -- yet an allowance of weak grog would be absolutely
necessary to keep up the spirits of the crew, and it should be a standing rule
among them to take in all sail at sunset, for fear of being incommoded with
squalls in the night.

A CERTAIN sailor went off clandestinely a few days ago, no less than fourteen
pounds three shillings and four pence in my debt, leaving an old sea chest in
my possession for security, which, upon the word of a Christian man, contained
nothing more than two pair of old frocks and trowsers, a small brown wig (three
fourths gnawed away by the rats) a sea cap, which by its appearance may, for
aught I know, have circumnavigated the globe half a dozen times, and a book
called the Seaman's Assistant, which I will adventure to say would not fetch
ninepence, even if it were to be set up at Bell's auction room to be disposed
of to the highest bidder, and recommended by all the persuasive oratory of that
truly original humourist -- There is also, among his other trumpery, a sort of
strange diary or journal of his proceedings, which seems to have been penned
while he lodged in my house. Three or four paragraphs of this elegant
performance I shall transcribe for the amusement of yourself and your readers,
and therewith conclude this paper. The bad spelling your compositor will be
pleased to correct, for I really have not skill enough in language to do it
myself.

DECEMBER. 20. 1784. This day I came in from sea in the brig Ragged Fortune --
settled with the captain -- the balance in my favor being four dollars and two
thirds. -- N. B. The captain, I suspect, cheated me damnably, but upon my
taking a cud of tobacco into my mouth, and telling him as much, he gave me a
glass of your right stiff grog, true old stingo, which squared accounts, and
set all to rights again. I then signed a receipt in full.

DECEMBER. 22. Had high fun last night at Moll Clinker's, but upon my feeling in
my pockets for money to pay the reckoning, when I was leaving the house, found
not a farthing to bless myself with. -- Mom. No getting through life without
now and then falling in with breakers, and thumping on the shoal grounds --
left my new silver buckles in pawn.

JANUARY 3, 1785. Find myself woefully in debt already -- dream every night of
old Carlisle, and other pickaroon constables. -- Mem. to keep a good look out
from my tops, and if possible steer clear of those cutter built sons of whores
till the river opens. -- Jan. 5. At 12 last night, fell in with a watchman, the
new building then bearing due west, and Christ church steeple nearly south
east. As bad luck would have it he carried no lanthorns, so that he suddenly
boarded me in the dark, and at the first shock carried away all the breast
hooks of my new blue jacket, the starboard lifts of my half worn castor hat,
and nearly two thirds of the after leech of my old great coat. Note, he
battered my hull severely, but I suspect his main top was somewhat the worse of
the judicious and masterly discharges I made upon it with my short oaken
cudgel. -- After engaging, as near as I could judge, about half a glass, he
thought fit to sheer off, with his cutwater in a shattered condition, and his
dead lights beaten in; and so left me to pursue my course without further
molestation.

JANUARY 10. This morning, about eight o'clock, being then in the latitude of
Swede's church, (the weather cold, with strong gales from the northwest) saw a
very ugly fellow, with his jib-boom unrigg'd, fleering after me, directly in my
wake. -- As I judged him to be in chase, I instantly put about and stood to the
northward. He pursued me at a great rate; and for a while neared me every
minute hand over hand; but my maneuvers were so uncommonly excellent and well
timed, that I fairly lost sight of him by half past twelve, P. M. the Methodist
meeting house then bearing S. S. E. distant one hundred and fifty yards by dead
reckoning. -- Nothing remarkable this afternoon, except that the wind changed
to southwest.

JANUARY 15. My landlord begins to look sour at me, and talks of nothing else
but scarcity of money and the hardness of the times. -- Possibly he means to
carry me into dock -- I want new sheathing, it is true; but I Will be d -- d if
they shall lay me ashore at spring tides, however -- one has no certainty when
they will float again. -- I once lay three long weeks fast aground on my beam
ends in Baltimore jail, and, by the diamonds on our bosen's nose, did not get
off at last till I had thrown overboard the very watch from my pocket, and --
ah poor Sue! -- thine own ring from my finger, to lighten me!

JANUARY 19. Still beating to windward upon a very short allowance -- my grog
all out, my rigging daily becoming worse and worse, and something every hour
giving way. -- Yesterday morning at three quarters past four, the wind blowing
fresh at east-south-east, half east, with rain and sleet, I carried away the
lee strap of my larboard boot hose, back stays and all, in making the best of
my way to avoid one of the most active, privateer-built devils of constables
that ever cruised in these seas. He rather outwalked me, going large, but by
keeping well to windward, that is, by skulking through the narrow allies and
by-streets, I had evidently the advantage till sunrise, when I very fortunately
got clear of him by favor of a thick fog and heavy rain.

JANUARY 21. At 25 minutes past eight, had the misfortune to run soul of a
large black double decked transport belonging to the holy see, with a gray
goose in tow. In less than two minutes I cut away his main spritsail yard,
bob-stay, topping lifts, quarter cloths, foretopsail bowlines, and the weather
lanyards of his main shrouds. In the conflict, which was very dreadful, they
threw overboard a volume of Ernulphus's curses, and other contraband Romish
commodities, together with a large bundle of certificates, which I picked up
and made off with, intending to restore them (at least the certificates) to the
right owners, the poor devils of soldiers, upon their paying me two and
sixpence in the pound.

IT would be presuming too much upon the patience of your readers, Mr. Printer,
to transcribe any more of this strange animal's remarks. He has writ me a
letter from the Delaware capes, however, in which he promises to pay me
honorably when be returns, even if he should be forced to go to the very
center of the north pole, or to a certain outlandish people he calls the
Hantipods, to earn the money.

ROBERT SLENDER'S IDEA OF THE HUMAN SOUL.
-- We are such stuff
As dreams are made of; and our little life
Is rounded with a sleep!
SHAKESPEARE.
NOTHING has, at all times, exercised the wit and ingenuity of speculative
writers more than that seemingly simple question, what is the soul of man? --
The metaphysicians define it to be the power or faculty of thinking within us;
which is just saying nothing at all, as it still leaves us to decide what that
power is, or in what its essence or nature consists. The anatomists suppose it
wholly to exist in the nerves, and pretend that upon the proper tone or tension
of the nervous system depend all the flights of wit or fancy, profound genius,
common sense, or deplorable stupidity. Plain Johan Shovelshoes, the Conestogoe
waggoner, imagines the soul to be a thin airy substance, somewhat of the nature
of a fine mist, enclosed somewhere about the center of his pericranium, and
from thence, like a spider in her web, watching every thing that passes within
and about him. This man's hypothesis, possibly, comes nearest to the truth, for
how can any one in his senses assert or believe, with the Platonists, that an
immaterial being (which by the bye, is what, at present we can have no
conception of) can be shut up in a material skull? -- For my own part, I take
the soul to be as really substance as the body, and do conceive that it is
matter only modified, like water and earth, a different way: or, in other
words, man is a machine, moving, acting, and thinking by the help of certain
springs originally contrived for those purposes, and still sustained in the
necessary perfection by the wisdom of the deity.

THE matter, then, or substance of the soul may be compared to a fluid or
distillation of liquors, containing within themselves a principle of life and
animation, and imparting their genial influence to others of a colder nature,
when mingled therewith. And this is all that can possibly be meant by the union
between the soul and the body.

LET us, by way of explanation, suppose a dozen of pint tumblers arranged on a
table, and nearly filled with that cold and spiritless element we call water.
Let us also suppose there to be placed upon another part of the same table, a
dozen bottles of different liquors, geneva, wine, rum, brandy, cider, small
beer, etc. etc. -- The water, while it continues in its natural state, we will
suppose to represent an inanimate human body, or a fcetus not yet informed with
life. In comes the waiter, and pours a glass or two of your best old Madeira
into one of these pint tumblers that had been partly filled with water. --
Immediately it is diffused throughout, and this water becomes as it were,
animated with life and spirit: its motions are more lively than before, its
effects more perceptible, and cold has no longer the same power of congelation
over it as formerly. This glass, if you please, shall represent one of your
fellows of fine wit: a brisk, airy blade, whose natural constitution inclines
him to warm all around him, with his benevolence and generosity of soul.

YOUR worship takes up another of these bottles, suppose of Jamaica spirits,
and impregnates a second glass of cold water. This mixture represents one of
your hot headed touchy fellows, who is in a violent passion of rage three
fourths of his time, and read to cut the throats of half the world for every
supposed flight or affront that whim or caprice suggests has been put upon him;
one who imagines that every arrow in the creation is pointed at his mighty
self, and all mankind in conspiracy against his worthless carcass. -- We will
suppose the third bottle contains Metheglin. -- This, you will all allow, is a
dead heavy liquor. Such rapid trash will discolor the water, it is true, but
does very little more: it imparts something like life to the aqueous body, but,
after all, the mixture is dull and spiritless, and typifies one of your stupid
fellows, who has neither life, sentiment or activity; one, whose whole
existence, as the great writer in our motto elegantly expresses it, is rounded
with a sleep! -- and which, when that little portion of animation is evaporated
that once barely discolored this phlegmatic fluid, remains still that dull and
lifeless mass, which boasts not a spark of inspiring flame, and whose very
perceptions are not sufficiently animated to render it even sensible of the
sweets of repose.

PUT some vinegar into that water, fellow -- ah! what sad trash it is -- this
tumbler of water has a sour soul indeed -- an ill natured, squabbling soul, the
very quintessence of acidity itself! -- For what purpose did thou, O Jupiter,
permit this strange unpalatable ingredient in the lord of thy inferior creation
-- this glass neither pleasures the taste, gratifies the smell, or delights the
eye. -- We make another attempt, and put one third of small beer to two thirds
of water -- This produces the soft and milky soul, equally fitted to be the
dupe of the nurse and the priest, and which will yield its assent to any thing,
provided its great grandmother previously believed in the same doctrines. Pour
a little high proof brandy into this mixture, and enthusiasm is instantly
kindled into being, upon the dregs of dullness, insipidity, and nonsense.

BUT what has this good natured bottle of American Whisky done that we should
conclude our discourse without trying its efficacy on the watery fluid? -- No
sooner do we taste of this divine mixture, O Plato, than we are -- not touched
but rapt, not wakened but in spir'd! -- we are carried beyond ourselves into
those joyous regions where the first source of generosity, bravery, benevolence
and goodnature is displayed to our enraptured view. Whiskey has accomplished
revolutions in empires, and carried us successfully through myriads of toils
and difficulties, that water alone would have taught us to consider as wholly
unsurmountable!

BUT is the soul nothing more, you will jocosely say, than a little wine or
vinegar -- and does every natural virtue, and difference of ability and
inclination, arise from nothing more than a varied temperament of the blood,
and a different tone of the nerves? -- Many are inclined to think so, and I
hope you will not esteem me the less for giving my opinion heartily on this
subject. -- That power, be it what it may, which ordained one tree to produce
sour apples, and another sweet, though, perhaps, within ten paces of each
other; that same power, by nearly the same means, makes one man radically a
pattern of good nature and benevolence, another, of rancour and villainy.

TRACTS AND ESSAYS ON SEVERAL SUBJECTS. By Mr. SLENDER.
I. AN ORATION UPON RUM. (In the style of Dr. Hervey.)
RUM! thou art the quintessence of excellence, the assistant of Nature, the
enlivener of Fancy, and the mother and author of great and glorious actions.
When overcome with labor, or wearied with care, or vexed with ingratitude, or
dejected by misfortunes, I return home sad and solitary; the mists of sorrow
are upon my countenance, and the resemblance of the sleep of death hangs upon
my brow. -- I call for the liquid of the limpid fountain: I drink it, but it
yields me no relief! -- My heart is still heavy, my ideas are flat and
waterish, and I am but at a small remove from the beast with four legs. Some
happy chance, some guardian angel, the friend of man, directs me to the
sparkling flask! -- I seize it with rapture, and drink of it with ecstacy! --
Immediately I call out, Why, O Nature, w^rt thou so niggardly! why were not all
thy springs, thy rivulets, thy rivers, thy lakes, and even thy oceans
replenished with this divine liquid, instead of the insipid element of which
they now consist! --

I DRINK again: I feel the strength of ten men: nothing is too difficult for me
to attempt, nothing too hazardous to execute. The journey of a hundred miles is
contracted to a span of my hand, and the men of mighty bones are diminished to
the contemptible size and stature of grasshoppers. Rum! thou art also the
support of heroism. The mind of supreme ingenuity first placed thee in the
plants that grow, and concealed thee from the undiscerning in the plump grains
of the harvest. It was left to the men of latter ages to discover thee there,
and accommodate thee to their own use and purposes. While the ox or the horse
travels on his tedious journey, it is, indeed, with a heavy heart! He is
nourished but not inspired; is fed, but not inebriated -- how painful are the
hours, how ungrateful is the road, how dull are his prospects! -- But to man,
who carries with him the jovial flask, it is nothing. Every object puts on the
color of gaiety, and, by the assistance of this magic, every difficulty
vanishes before him. Without this, out whole life would have been little better
than a sort of cat-sleep, a dream between slumbering and waking, a moment of
animation not worth enjoying.

AND yet, true happiness is only discoverable in the first moments of
intoxication -- I drink again, and am immediately degraded from the rank of a
god to a condition far inferior to that of a beast. Such is the unaccountable
nature of man. The moment he tastes of happiness it palls upon his appetite,
and tells him, I am still to be sought for.

II. THE MARKET MAN.
IT has often been a subject of merriment to me to notice the very different
countenance worn by the same person only in the two opposite and seemingly
trivial circumstances of going to and returning from the beef-market. A man
going to market, for the most part, has a dull and heavy look. His head hangs
dejectedly, and although he walks with a tolerable brisk and steady pace, you
may easily perceive that he considers himself not at all entitled to the notice
or observation of those he meets. But no sooner has he arrived at the stall and
begun to discuss matters with the butcher, than by degrees the gloom wears off,
and his morning melancholy is dissipated. -- He purchases, at length, an
excellent leg of mutton or a lion of veal, and marches homeward with it in
triumph. If you observe him narrowly, while on his way to his habitation, you
will see him every now and then incline his head downward, and cast a loving
eye upon what he has purchased; or peeps into the faces of those he meets, with
a look of wishful impatience, as if he was desirous they should congratulate
him on his acquisition. Then he looks up to the second-story windows, and takes
care to hold his mutton in such a manner that it can be fairly and distinctly
seen by the spectators from thence: in short, he takes every method in his
power to convince you that he at this moment feels himself of more consequence
than he was fifteen minutes ago, before he saw the butcher. -- Now, I see no
forcible reason why large volumes should be written to explain this matter upon
philosophical principles. I am of opinion it may be sufficiently accounted for
in a few plain words. Vanity, we all know, is natural to the human race. When
the man went to market he had money in his pocket, without all doubt; but how
was the world to know that? -- This was the occasion of his sadness. When he
returned, he had the satisfaction of tacitly telling the public that he had not
gone abroad without well lining his pockets with the one thing needful; and
what is more, that he and his family intend this very day to eat an excellent
dinner.

III. THE MAN IN BUSINESS.
A MAN in business is at once known by his air and gait; and in my numerous and
extensive walks through the streets of this large and populous city, I do not
know that I was ever deceived in my judgment on the matter. There is a certain
smartness of demeanor attendant upon this description of men that is totally
unknown to those in a contrary situation, but i^ also transferred to them in a
moment when a good job of employ falls into their clutches. A man in business
always walks fast, not caring whose heels or toes he treads upon: his shoes are
constantly kept well blacked, his buckles cleaned, his coat and hat brushed,
his beard close shaven, and his hair decently combed, queued and powdered. His
eye has an insolent glance, and is commonly fixed upon something at a distance
before him, now and then upon the ground, but never upwards. If he stops to
talk with you, he looks first at your shoes, then at your stockings, and so
gradually advances up to your hat: if your habit and person answers to his
ideas of a man in business, he smiles upon you as bone of his bone and flesh of
his flesh; if not, he bids you an everlasting adieu, and walks off with as
little ceremony as possible. -- He rarely looks into the faces of those he
meets, minds nothing that passes on the opposite side of the way, and, in fine,
is little better than a perambulating machine, till he comes to the scene of
action, his counting house, or his law shop.

IV. THE MAN OUT OF BUSINESS.
LET us now consider the reverse of the medal, my good Mr. Momus, and we shall
find the contrary criterion to be equally certain. -- And here I cannot be
otherwise than melancholy, because at this individual moment I perceive
sympathy forcibly and sensibly exerting herself in my bosom --: but I will
finish what I have begun, before I am too much disconcerted by recollection.

A MAN out of business moves but slowly and heavily along, and that, too, with
his hands in his coat pockets! -- He pays a most patient and particular
attention to the physiognomies of all those he meets, as if willing to
discover, without giving offense, whether or not they are in the same
disconsolate situation with himself. Every step he takes shows humility: his
heart bleeds within him if he sees but a dog ill used -- Can it be then, my
dear Mr. Momus, that humanity in a man is oftentimes nothing more than the
casual offspring of want and necessity!

HE is fond of stopping at retail shops, and seems particularly happy when he
has an opportunity of exchanging a few words with the man stationed behind the
counter. His mouth is generally open, and most particularly so when he casts
his eyes toward the upper windows of the houses, or when he takes a walk among
the shambles. He never passes an inn-holder's sign without carefully reading
what is thereon written for his instruction, and as carefully examines the
device or painting that is likewise exposed for his edification. If he takes up
a Gazette he pays no attention to the news-paragraphs or essays till he has
read over the advertisements from beginning to end. His shoes are commonly
dusty, his hat cocked with pins, and his hair or wig cruelly neglected. If he
steps into the house of an acquaintance his visits are always too long, and his
conversation, while there, most commonly turns upon the scarcity of money or
the peculiar and unparallelled poverty and rascality of the present age.

THESE are the main, distinguishing marks of the two characters, and I am much
deceived if they will not generally be found to have been faithfully delineated.

V. THE DEBTOR.
NEXT to a constable or jailor, who may be reckoned the more immediate
instruments of vengeance, I firmly believe there is not a more redoubtable
object within the whole circumference of social life, things visible or
invisible, present or to come, than a creditor in the eye of a debtor. For my
own part, I am positive I possess no despicable share of courage and
resolution, yet I solemnly aver and declare, that I never in my life met with a
person to whom I was indebted any thing considerable, more especially when his
demands were urgent and I not in a condition (...) answer them, and I did not
instantly perceive a deadly tremor pervading all my limbs, a cold sweat forcing
its way through the pores of my skin, a dreary discomposure of mind, and a
total inability to act, think, or speak with the vigor and assurance, if not
the downright impudence, I can command upon other occasions. Let my creditor
be, in reality, ever so worthy a man, handsome, polite, well dressed, or what
you please, it is all nothing! -- My imagination pictures him to be a devil; a
monster in human shape, with features horribly distorted; an everlasting frown
on his countenance, and a jail with iron windows engraven on his forehead!

IN conformity with this idea, I take every method in my power to shun him. I
travel only in the night, or go round about, many a long mile, through winding
alleys and unfrequented streets, to have the better chance of avoiding him. If
I see him in a vast crowd of people, I think him the ugliest man among them
all. I never pass by his habitation except in the dead time of the night, or
when fogs as thick as mustard, my dear Mr. Momus, may in some sort conceal me
from his view. My gloomy ideas represent it as a den of destruction, where
friendship or social converse can have no admission. His wife, his children,
his housekeeper, his negroes, and his very house dog are to me objects of
serious terror -- and it is only at church, on Sundays, that I can look one or
more of them in the face with any tolerable degree of composure.

VI. RULES AND DIRECTIONS HOW TO AVOID CREDITORS, SHERIFFS, CONSTABLES, etc.
Mr. SLENDER requests the Reader to take notice, that these RULES, (hereafter
inserted) which, from their number and excellent use, were afterward
denominated the GOLDEN DOZEN, were originally drawn up by his Honor the
PRESIDENT of the DEBTOR'S CLUB.
I FORMERLY belonged to, and acted in the honorable station of Treasurer to a
certain CLUB, of which, I recollect, no man was allowed to become a member who
could not make it appear that he labored under actual persecution and
harrassment from his creditors and their emissaries, and had at least four
writs of debt out against him at once. Neither could any member be elected
president against whom had been issued less than twelve, his assistant ten, the
secretary eight, his deputy six, and the treasurer five.

HAVING taken notice, for some time, that our numbers began considerably to
decrease, and rather with more celerity than was to be wished for the
wellbeing, and indeed the very existence of our little society, we found, upon
investigating the matter, that the bailiffs had of late been more active than
usual, of consequence more successful, and had unfortunately made prize of many
of our fellow members; some of them having been taken by decoy, others by
superiority of swiftness in the pursuer, and, what completed our chagrin,
several of them, after having evaded all dangers in the high streets, were
seized almost at the very entrance of our club-room, and conveyed away without
mercy to jail.

UPON taking the matter into serious consideration, and devising what methods
should be adopted to counteract these vexatious, impending evils, we at length
agreed to appoint a committee of our club (the President to be chairman) in
order to draw up a set of rules for the information, instruction, edification,
comfort, and direction of the members in general, and, in particular, of such
as had been lately elected, and consequently might well be supposed not to have
much experience of the truly infernal schemes of creditors, the diabolical and
pitiful cunning of bailiffs, and (...) base wiles and deceptions of our enemies
in general.

THESE RULES, (known by the name of the Golden Dozen) after proper
deliberation, were at length confirmed, assented to, and established by the
president, and other commissioned officers of the club. Every member was
obliged by a penal law, made on purpose, to have a copy to be by him carefully
read over three times a week; and it was no small satisfaction to observe, that
after the introduction of this valuable code amongst us (and which manifests
the very sublimity of art and ingenuity) our numbers were once more found to be
upon the increase from day to day, and that but very few captures were
afterward made from the debtor's club. For the use and benefit of those whom
it may now concern, I have been at the pains to take a copy of those rules, as
signed and attested by the worthy President and secretary; together with the
preamble or introductory sentiments; and that, solely and simply out of a
benevolent principle; as I could wish all the distressed of this description,
in the whole world, to profit by these our well meant labors. -- This
instrument is as follows: --

"THERE is certainly no moral evil in the mere circumstance of being in debt:
if there be any thing at all criminal in the matter, it must be referred to a
determined resolution in the delinquent never to pay what he owes. Knowing,
however, many honest fellows who have the misfortune to be in arrears to
unmerciful creditors, and who would discharge their debts if it lay in their
power, but nevertheless choose to take their own time for so doing, rather than
be confined at the discretion of these infernal harpies; WE, the president,
directors, and ^^ing members of the ancient and honorable DEBTORS CLUB, shall,
for the benefit of our brethren in general, set down a few RULES, chiefly the
fruit and result of our own ^erilous experience in times bypast; by the
careful and exact observance of which, we will undertake to say, they may
traverse the streets of this or any other considerable metropolis with some
degree of safety and unconcern, at any hour or time of the day or night.

RULE I.
IN the first place, it is absolutely necessary that every member should have
the geography of Philadelphia perfectly well digested in his head; for which
purpose an exact and minute map of the town is ordered to be drawn and engraven
at the expense of the society, and hung up in the club room for the use of the
members in general. A knowledge of the main passages is but a small part of the
necessary stock. The alleys and bye-streets, dear friends, with a precise and
lively idea of the bearings and distances of all the principal corners and
short turns from each other, is indispensibly required. To which may be added,
an actual acquaintance with the various taverns and tippling houses, with some
notion of the tempers and dispositions of the innholders, their wives and other
domestics. A small system on this last mentioned subject, compiled from actual
observation, by some one of the more ingenious and learned members, would, no
doubt, be particularly acceptable to the club.

II.
WHEN you find yourself far advanced in debt, abdicate your wonted dwelling
place without loss of time, and with as much secrecy as possible. Let your next
habitation be fixed in some obscure court or alley in the outskirts of the
city. If it is walled up at one end, and where, of consequence, people cannot
much pass and repass, so much the better.

III.
HAVE as little acquaintance or connection as may be with your next neighbors;
and, above all, be particularly careful never to stand in, or lean over your
front door.

IV.
COULD it be any way avoided, it would be better never to walk the streets at
all, except in dark nights and very foggy weather. He was a great enemy to our
society that first proposed setting up lamps in the streets. I even hold moon
light nights to be hazardous, especially after that officious planet has
entered her second quarter. N. B. Let your wife or son always go to market.

V.
NEVER leave your habitation till you are convinced the coast is clear. An
acquaintance of ours, who had for a long time evaded all the dexterity of the
bailiffs in the main streets, was nabbed one morning at his own door, in just
stepping out to examine a decayed part of the pavement. A debtor leaving his
house is precisely in the situation of a ship taking her departure from a
dangerous coast. It is necessary that the channel be well ascertained, and a
good look-out kept to avoid the breakers. When she is arrived on the high seas,
there is not half the danger as while she is yet in the offing.

VI.
HAVING safely, and without interruption, advanced into the main streets and
public squares of the city, immediately summon to your recollection who are
your creditors; which are tall men and which short; who wear cocked hats or
flapped; what are their particular features, habits, gait in walking, etc. etc.
By these means you will always be on your guard, and may distinguish danger at
some distance.

VII.
WHEN you perceive a creditor at a distance in front, on the same side of the
way with yourself, and advancing directly toward you, I would have you call
diligently to mind his character and occupation. If he happens to be a
philosopher, a mathematician, or a dealer in politics, you may safely venture
to meet him, and even look him full in the face, as it will be five hundred to
one if he recollects you, being perhaps intent upon a scheme of longitude;
meditating on petrified crabs claws; or contriving some beneficial project for
the future emolument of the public of the United States.

VIII.
IN the blank leaves of your almanac insert a description of the several city
catch-poles; not neglecting to set down also the names of your principal
creditors, with some short characteristic account of each; as, what party he
belongs to, whether he is a Constitutionalist or a Republican, a religious man
or a freethinker, etc. By these means, if chance or fortune should so order
that you must inevitably encounter your enemy face to face, you can adapt your
discourse to his prejudices. If he is a Constitutionalist, you can trump up
some strange news about the downfall of the bank and the loss of its charter;
if a Republican, tell him a few innocent lies about the probability of a speedy
establishment of a theater in this city. But, if he is a religious man, and has
no connection with politics, force upon him some wonderful story relative to the
conversion of many hundreds of people in one of the southern States, and the
conviction of several thousands more. -- Should your enemy be a Quaker, give
him a particular account of a certain captain of a vessel that was struck dead
on a sudden in one of the islands by a flash of lightning, for bringing a cargo
of negroes from Africa. If the creditor be an infidel, invent a lie boldly, and
give him to understand that the Deists have built a new church in Virginia, and
have hired a certain Christian priest to harrangue them twice aweek, taking his
text, for the most part, out of David Hume's essays. Should he happen to be a
sexton of a church, or a physician, tell him immediately of a yellow fever that
is breaking out in the lower part of the town, and spreading on all sides with
the greatest rapidity. -- By such methods as these, you will hardly ever fail
to put the debt entirely out of your creditor's head, and you will be allowed
to pass on in peace.

IX.
IF you happen to be a very little man, and slim withal, and should behold
certain danger approaching, without being able to devise any other possible or
probable means of escape, endeavor to bring some large object (such, for
instance, as a Dutch farmer with a bundle of flax on his shoulder) directly in
a line betwixt yourself and your enemy, so that when you are in opposition, the
Dutchman may be in conjunction. If you can, by dint of swift walking, come up
close in the rear of the interposing object, your situation will undoubtedly be
so much safer, as it will be a hundred to one if the bailiff or creditor does
not pass by without your once attracting his attention. It is true, the being
so close aboard the farmer's hinder parts may possibly subject you to some
accidental inconveniences, but these can by no means be put in competition
with seven or eight months close imprisonment in the New Jail.

X.
SHOULD your wife or mistress prevail upon you to take a walk with her on some
dark evening to visit a friend, be careful not to have a lighted lanthorn along
with you; it is commonly as fatal to people in our circumstances as the Will of
Wisp to country fellows, leading them into mire and misery. A former fellow
member, one Dick Prettyman, now with the sheriff, had no fewer than sixteen
writs of debt out against him at one time. He had nevertheless long evaded
every exertion and artifice of the constables to take him in the day time; but,
at length, as if evils enough had not been already thrown in his way by the
established lamps of the city, he must needs undertake to gallant a young woman
home one dark evening, with a glaring flambeau in front of them. It is almost
needless to say, that by a fatal inattention to the instruction now conveyed in
this tenth rule, and which ought at all times to have suggested itself to a man
of good sense, he was seized and escorted to jail by the light of his own
lanthorn.

XI.
MANY debtors are inclined to think themselves in perfect safety on Sundays,
and therefore walk abroad without reserve or circumspection, not considering
that this Sunday privilege (how benevolent soever it may appear in theory) is
verily nothing better than the offspring of a low and despicable policy. The
unexperienced debtor walks abroad on this day without suspicion, returns home
with as little caution, is dogged to his house either by one of his creditors,
an emissary, or the constable; and when once his retreat is known, farewell to
all future quiet and peace of mind. -- Unless you are remarkably fortunate or
dexterous, it cannot be long, in the nature of things, till you are seized at
your own threshold, merely through this single piece of imprudence. To obviate
a mischief of such magnitude, we would recommend, then, by all means, that
after you have once sallied out upon Sabbath Days, you entertain not the most
distant idea of returning to your own den till the night be far advanced,
unless you can see a fair chance of arriving snug in port under cover of a
violent snow storm, a very close fog, or a heavy shower of rain attended with
severe thunder and lightning.

XII.
IT sometimes happens that a member is unfortunately snapped up by accidents
that no human care or prudence could possibly foresee or avoid; such, for
instance, as in the sudden turning of a corner, when you meet your foe
unexpectedly, and he instantly seizes you by the collar or the nape of the
neck. People of little or no genius would imagine, that when matters are come
to this desperate issue the only part left would be to resign yourself quietly
to your fate, confess that whatever is, is right, and lay your accounts with
being locked up in jail, and letting things take their common and natural
course. -- It must be heartily allowed that the situation now supposed, is
calamitous and hopeless enough; however, as the saying is, there are remedies
for every thing but death; and a remedy, therefore, even in this seemingly
desperate case, we will venture to recommend; and which has actually been known
to succeed in more than threescore instances.

ALWAYS remember to carry a decent looking letter constantly in your pocket,
directed to yourself, and written in a reputable hand and style, having the
seal broke, which must be of the best black patent wax you can procure. This
letter is to contain certain information of a large estate of forty thousand
pounds, sterling, that has been bequeathed you by a rich uncle in the West
Indies, whose only son and child, having turned out a rake and spendthrift, had
been cut off from enjoying his father's estate with five shillings and a
fiddle; and that you, as the next in blood, had fallen heir thereto. The letter
may also signify that ten thousand pounds of the estate (all in gold and
silver) is by this time on its way hither in the ship Gogmagog, which said ship
may be expected in with the first southerly winds.

AFTER you have walked a while jail-wards, under convoy of your creditor, the
sheriff, or his deputy, you must tell him, with a composed and deliberate air,
"that a great piece of good fortune has lately befallen you." -- His
countenance, upon this, will immediately brighten up; and he will naturally
enquire, How this has come to pass? -- You answer him, very civilly, by taking
out your letter and putting it into his hands. -- He has scarcely finished
reading it, before he slackens his hold, leaves you at your liberty, makes a
bow, wishes you great joy upon your uncle's death, and soon after dismisses you
with a very complaisant request, that "if it be not wholly inconvenient you
will please to discharge that little balance as soon as the said ship arrives"
-- which you faithfully promise to do, and so shaking hands, part good friends."

SUCH were the regulations to which we faithfully conformed ourselves for many
years with great and signal success; and which were also soon after assumed by
several other Clubs, upon a similar foundation, in other cities. The original
copy was signed by the following officers.

PERIANDER PENNYLESS, President, DARBY COPPERSWORTH, Assistant. KIRWAN
M'KILLMEE, Secretary, BENJAMIN SWETT, Dep, Sec. ROBERT SLENDER, Treasurer.


VII. THE PRIVATE TUTOR.
THIS is an animal that would be truly worthy of pity, if there were any reason
to believe that he himself was at all sensible of the misery of his condition.
Insensibility, or a want of the finer feelings, is generally allowed to be a
true characteristic of the lower orders of the human species. It was,
nevertheless, undoubtedly meant for a blessing by the power that formed the
mind, and resembles the divine spirit of the poppy, that friendly plant, which,
by exerting its charming sleepy influence over the mortal frame, benumbs the
senses, and gives ease to the foul when Nature is inflicting her most
excruciating torments.

THE PRIVATE TUTOR is absolutely a slave in every respect, except that he has
not, like other slaves, the privilege and pleasure of keeping company with, and
enjoying the conversation of his equals, without incurring disgrace thereby.
Bred up in the habits and pursuits of a liberal mind, he has, we will suppose,
taken his degrees at a college, can boast of a general acquaintance with books;
and has imbibed high ideas of liberty and independence. What then can alleviate
his vexation and anguish, when he finds himself compelled by want of fortune to
sink into this pitiful situation? -- Nothing but that friendly, yet fatal
insensibility (whether natural or acquired) which I mentioned above.

TO prevent as much as possible any young man of spirit and abilities from
degrading himself into this wretched state of meanness and servility, I will
endeavor to give an idea of the usage a private tutor may generally expect
from the Bashaws that most commonly employ them.

THE first step you take when you find yourself driven to embrace this
miserable occupation, is, to look carefully over the newspapers of the day. By
and by you see an advertisement to the following purport:

WANTED: A person capable of teaching not only the languages, but Philosophy,
Geography, Pneumatology, Metaphysics, Chemistry, Meteorology, Bell-Letters, and
other polite arts and sciences. He will be employed as private tutor in a
family of consequence, and, if approved, may expect a handsome salary.

YOU immediately determine within yourself to take advantage of Fortune while
she is in a favorable mood, and strike boldly for the place. Upon application
to the printer, you are informed that the advertiser is a country gentleman of
immense fortune, by the name of Adrian Van der Bunscooten, Esquire, who
resides, with his family, at his seat about a dozen miles from the city.

HAVING dressed yourself in the best manner you are able, you set out on foot,
without loss of time, and toward noon arrive very weary at the desired port.

THE first person you see is a servant, who wishes to know your business in
that place? -- After having enquired whether the master of the house be at home
or not, and being answered in the affirmative, you send word up by the servant,
that "a man has come to accept the place of private tutor in the family, as
offered in the public papers."

THE gentleman of the house, upon hearing this, instantly comes down to take a
view of you: ten to one but he looks at you through a magnifying glass. If he
has penetration enough to discover (or thinks he discovers) that you are at
once possessed of education and servility of soul, and the place is not
engaged, he intimates that you may possibly suit his purpose. -- You then
naturally enquire what the yearly income is to be? -- He tells you it is no
less than thirty pounds, lawful currency of the State; to be paid either
quarterly, or at the end of the year, as may best suit!

RATHER than wander again in the disconsolate mood of a Man out of business,
you accept the terms, without daring to intimate that the salary is by no means
adequate to the trouble you expect to be at: Nay, you even venture to tell him,
that you would prefer receiving it in a lump at the end of the year!

YOU are then informed that your pupils are to be three young gentlemen and two
young ladies -- that it is expected the young gentlemen will be at all times
under your eye, and that whenever they think proper to go a shooting, swimming,
or elsewhere, you must attend them for fear of accidents.

HAVING nodded with your head by way of assent to his proposition, the great
man informs you, with an eye of ineffable good nature and condescension, that
you will have the honor to breakfast, dine, and sup with himself and family,
except when the governor, the controuler of the finance, or some other great
gentleman or lady from the city, pays a visit to the house, in which case it
will be expected that you descend to your proper element, the kitchen.

A GREAT man's kitchen naturally gives you an idea of plenty; you therefore
shrug up your shoulders, by way of telling him that you agree to his terms.

YOU are next informed by the lady of the house, Madam Catarina Van der
Bunscooten, that her beloved offspring, and her dear lambs, may be led, but not
drove -- that the art and mystery of teaching is to play them into knowledge
with marbles, nine-pins, shuttle cocks, and whirligigs -- that many children,
from her own knowledge, have been taught to read merely by playing cards and
dice, and that constraint of any kind has nothing to do with education.

STRUCK with the admirable beauty and fine apparel of this great lady, you bow
your head, in token of being thoroughly convinced of the truth of what she has
asserted.

AFTER being settled in the family, you soon perceive that the servants pay
less attention to you than your knowledge of Greek would seem to demand. If
wine is handed to the guests, you are the very last that is noticed, if not
sometimes wholly neglected. -- Your shoes are either not blacked in the morning
at all, or it is left for yourself to do. Yet, if you are once known to perform
this menial office with your own hands, farewell to all ideas of consequence
with, or respect from, the sable brotherhood of the kitchen.

THE coachman, however, still condescends to acknowledge himself to be upon a
level with you; but if you will not converse freely, drink punch, and smoke a
pipe with him in his hovel; or teach the footman to read, write, cipher, and
play tricks in winter evenings, you are a lost man -- and will be treated with
little else than abuse and contempt by all the inferior part of the household.

THE young ladies are averse to learning geography; as they tell the gentleman,
their father, that your method of teaching is rather obscure and
unintelligible. -- Adrian van der Bunscooten gives you a friendly hint of this,
in the presence of the young junto; and intimates also that "neither the girls
nor the boys are defective in point of genius -- the fault of not learning
cannot therefore be imputed to them."

YOU now put up your earnest prayers to him that is the author of all
plainness, common sense, clear reasoning, and perspicuity of thought and
language, "that he would be graciously inclined to enable you so to express
your ideas of things, that they may be conveyed without obscurity, let, or
hindrance into the minds of your dear young pupils."

A LUCKY thought then strikes you: your scholars have not been studious or
attentive enough to gain a rational idea of the globe of the earth from a plane
surface on paper; you therefore procure a large round pippin or an orange, and
mark thereon the equator, the tropics, the polar circles, with the parallells
of latitude and longitude. You, further, represent the different cities of the
world and their situations, by pins stuck into the apple or the orange. --
While you are explaining matters in this manner, your pupils are constantly
endeavoring to stifle a loud laugh. -- The farce ends with one of the young
ladies stealing away the apple when the lecture is finished, and soon after
eating it up for her own edification and amusement.

THE first year of your servitude at length comes to a conclusion: the great
man sends for the physician, the county lawyer, and the clergyman; they are
desired to examine the young students, male and female, and give an account of
the proficiency that has been made by them in their education. -- They are
unanimously of opinion (upon examination) that the young ladies and gentlemen
have learned "little, or nothing worth mentioning."

IT cannot be my fault, says the great man of the house; my own father,
Dederick van der Bunscooten was never looked upon as defective in genius: My
wife is allowed, on all hands, to be descended from the great lawyer Shadrach
O'Possum, the oracle of his age and nation; how can it be then, that these here
young youths have not made more proficiency? -- my thirty pounds salary cannot
be thrown away in this manner!

But, are you sure, says the private tutor, that you yourself are not a swine,
sir?

HERE the conversation ends: You lose your whole salary, curse the trade of a
PRIVATE TUTOR, and spend the remainder of your life in basket-making.

VIII. THE CITY POET.
TAKING a walk sometime since in the fields (I recollect it was late in
November) with an old citizen of my acquaintance, who is well known for being
in the commission of the peace, we observed a strange figure at a distance,
which appeared to be crossing the plain in a direction at right angles to the
line in which we were then walking. As we rather neared the object for some
time, I soon discovered it, by the means of a small pocket glass, to be no
other than my friend Menalcas, the poet, who is remarkable for being extremely
moral and religious in his writings, but at the same time most insufferably
dull and tedious. -- He had no sooner got sight of us, than he instantly
changed his course, and stood directly toward us.

Now, said I to the magistrate that was with me, unless we are fortunate enough
to escape him by a speedy retreat, or some lucky circumstance turns up in our
favor, of which, however, I see no prospect, we shall be condemned to pass the
remainder of this afternoon in very constant but very dull confabulation. --
"Heaven forbid, replied the 'squire, that I should be tortured with accounts of
Apollo, and the Muses, and Jupiter, and Olympus, and the rest of them. I never
could endure such stuff. I would sooner try a dozen petty criminals than have
any thing to do with a single page of the heathen mythology." -- There is no
danger of the heathen gods, answered I; Menalcas execrates their memory as much
as you yourself can possibly do; the only misfortune is, that the modern
theology, in his hands, frequently becomes ten times more ridiculous and
contemptible than that which you complain of in the books of Homer.

NOTWITHSTANDING our utmost endeavors and exertions in retreating, Menalcas
was visibly gaining upon us every minute; and by the time we had got abreast of
the Center House, he joined us with ease, although he wore a large pair of jack
boots, which he informed us had considerably impeded his progress. -- "My
worthy friends, said he, shaking us both heartily by the hands, I cannot
express the satisfaction I feel in meeting with you in these sequestered parts.
A constant residence in the city strangely disqualifies one for the company of
the muses. There, all is art and wax-work; here, we have simple nature just as
she came from heaven, pure and unadulterated. In these charming solitudes we
forget the cares of the world, critics, criticism, and censure! Here the
inhabitants are innocent and happy, and, in my opinion, bear some considerable
resemblance, in their manners, to the ancient people of the golden age."

STRANGE, thought I, that the man can be so entirely ignorant of the world as
to imagine, that the distance of little more than half a mile from the city can
produce such a change in himself as well as in the morals of the people: he
must, no doubt be poetically mad! -- "But whither away are you traveling, my
lads, said he; for my own part I was going further afield, till I had got into
the very center of rural felicity, where the innocent country maidens are
washing the lambkins in the limpid stream, and where the harmless shepherds are
regaling themselves with the fragrant smell of the new made hay!"

"I PRESUME, sir, you must certainly have been asleep during the summer season
(said the 'squire somewhat angrily) to talk now of washing sheep and mowing
hay, when we are well nigh upon the eve of the winter solstice -- why, sir,
your feelings might convince you that the weather is too cold even to wash a
dog!

SIR, I beg pardon, replied the poet; -- you must know I am somewhat of a warm
constitution, and do not pay quite so much attention to almanacs as some other
people do, I could mention.

ALMANACS! retorted the 'squire, I would have you to know, sir, you would have
been much better employed in reading, or even making almanacs, than in
scribbling a parcel of something, which is neither law nor gospel, and which I
am convinced you yourself do not believe or understand.

FINDING my friend and the author to be growing warm upon a very delicate
point, I thought it high time to compromise matters between them, in which I
was so happy as, in some measure, to succeed. We then determined to walk back
toward the city, in compliance with an invitation from Menalcas to pass an
hour or two at his lodgings on our way home, and hear him read part of an Epic
poem of his own composition, in manuscript, and which he represented as one of
the first, if not the very first production of the present age. -- After a
variety of poetical conversation (for Menalcas would touch upon no other
string) we at last arrived opposite to a narrow alley in an obscure part of the
Southern liberties, into which having conveyed ourselves, the poet leading the
way, we entered a high but narrow wooden building, which seemed to be a
receptacle for several families appertaining to the inferior class. We soon
discovered the poet's apartment to be the very loftiest in the whole building,
but this was nothing more than I expected.

IT is cunningly remarked in most systems of Natural Philosophy, that similar
causes every where produce similar effects. Thus, a stone being thrown upwards
in Europe falls again to the ground, after it has attained to its utmost point
of elevation. It does the same in America, and in the East Indies, and in New
Holland, and every where else; which proves that the principle of attraction is
universal upon this earth. -- But authors, (particularly poets) of all
sublunary bodies, are the only ones we are acquainted with, that act directly
contrary to the well known principle above mentioned. In one word, they as
naturally tend toward a garret, as a stone, a drop of water, or a volume of
dull poems does toward the center of the earth: this, then, must be upon a
centrifugal principle, the effect being the same every where, be the cause what
it may. A poet in Europe has his garret, another in America, Asia, or Africa,
has the same; so that the philosophical axiom stands good.

AT this instant the poet burst out into a sudden and rapturous exclamation --
"Behold, gentlemen, (said he) the place where I am exercised with the divine
dreams of Parnassus! -- Here the Muses deign to visit their humble votary, and
dictate to me at the midnight hour what shall enchant the people of the coming
age! What earthly exercise of the mind is equal to this!" --

THE exercise of darning stockings (said the 'squire) would be rather more to
the purpose.

THE only furniture we saw in Menalcas's garret was a bench, a bed with a pair
of old Dutch blankets, all spread upon the floor, an earthen jar in one corner
of the apartment, and an ancient oaken table full of papers and manuscripts.

AS there were no chairs, we all three very civilly helped ourselves to the
bench, without ceremony, being considerably fatigued by our walk. I now
ventured to ask Menalcas for a draught of water, in hopes something of a more
generous and inspiring nature would be offered. -- "That is right, my honest
fellows, (said he) I had almost forgot -- I esteem myself happy, gentlemen,
that I have it in my power to present you both with a cup of as excellent water
as ever flowed out of the spring of Castalia. It was fetched two miles by my
servant, as he knows I am not fond of pump water at this season of the year.
None of your home brewed trash for me neither -- none of your punch, your
strong beers, or your small wines; they are ruinous to the constitution,
gentlemen; and, more than that, I know a neighbor of mine, an attorney, who
has drank no other liquor than water these forty years past, and is still a
hale, vigorous man."

UPON saying this, he presented us, each, with a pewter cup full of stale water
from the jar in the corner of the room. For my own part, said the 'squire, upon
tasting it, I distinguish nothing in this water that should entitle it to be
brought from such a distance. I think I could furnish you with some at least
equally good out of a pump-well not forty yards distant!

BUT now to our poem, gentlemen, (said Menalcas) I promised you a poem, and as
yet have treated you only with a glass of excellent water!

WHILE he was searching up and down for his poem, I cast my eye upon the table
and saw dozens of sonnets, madrigals, acrostics, epithalamiums, rebuses,
riddles, and elegies upon the deaths of young ladies. Amongst the latter, one
particularly attracted my notice, which happened so lie open, inscribed, Upon
the death of Miss Mariana Silvershoes: it began, as follows: "O Muse! in woeful
verse begin to tell
How our dear lady, Mistress Marian, fell;
There was in her, before death took her hence,
A moral certainty of innocence;
A saint was she, if ever saint there was,
Yet death on her has fixed his iron claws." etc.


MENALCAS, said I, (pointing to the poem) you have flattered this lady too
much. It is true, if saintship consists in fine gauze, red ribbons, flowered
muslins, a precise knowledge of the contents of a milliner's shop, and, added
to these, a fortune of eight or ten thousand pounds; the lady, whose death you
have celebrated was undoubtedly a very considerable saint, I am afraid, however
(continued I) the eight thousand pounds alone inspired your muse, as the
beginning of your poem (putting it into his hands) smells strongly of the
earth. If you had been wholly disinterested and impartial you would also have
written something on the death of the truly amiable and once charming Aspasia,
who lately died unnoticed and unsung. Such a subject would have inspired other
strains! -- She carried every virtue in her breast, as well as every charm in
her countenance and was, indeed, sweet as the blossom of the vernal morn; but
she wanted the eight thousand pounds, which I am sorry to say, made the
principal merit of the other.

"YOU are always teazing and plaguing one with your reflections, Mr. Slender,
returned the poet. -- That elegy, think what you will of it, has met with
considerable applause from the lady's relations. I beg you would replace it,
and not criticize thereon with too much severity. But now lend your attention
to the epic poem I promised you and your friend.

"THE subject, you must know, is taken from the scripture; from whence Milton
also derived the idea of his Paradise Lost, and if he had not previously hit
upon the story of our old grandsire and his unfortunate attachments, I am well
convinced this would have been his choice also.

"I ENTITLE my work The FALL of ADONIBEZEK, a poem, in twelve books. The
lamentable and heart breaking history of this monarch you will find in the
first chapter of the book of Judges. Perhaps no other epic poem, that ever was
attempted, has been erected upon so narrow a foundation as this. The exordium
of the poem, which I shall now read to you, is wonderfully sublime, and cannot
fail of striking the most ignorant reader with extraordinary emotions: "I SING
that mighty chief, who vexed by foes,
At length was robbed of both his thumbs and toes:
But lest, perchance, we should incline to err,
It Is best to tell his moral character;
Since he himself, as ancient records say,
Full seventy kings had served the self-same way -- "


The poem then went on with a long and circumstantial account of the
provocations this monarch has given the Israelites, and proved beyond
possibility of contradiction that this seeming piece of cruelty, by them
inflicted, was nothing more than a just return of vengeance upon his own head
for previously treating others in the same inhuman manner. However, the author
of the poem concludes his first book with humanely supposing that the Jews did
not force him to walk under guard after he was deprived of his toes, or, in his
own words, "His toes cut off, perhaps they let him ride;
So to Jerusalem he came -- and there he died!" --


THE second book began with a melancholy account of the siege of the city of
Bezek, and the slaughter of ten thousand men: "Now, round the city dreadful
things are done;
Some writers say, a woman boiled her son,
Nay, crimes like this were oftentimes renewed; --
It was a sin of the first magnitude."


The remainder of this second book was taken up with particular accounts of the
various skirmishes between the two parties, so very minutely related that one
would have sworn the poet had by some lucky accident been admitted to a sight
of the newspaper paragraphs of those very times.

IN the third book we are informed, by way of episode, that the judgment before
mentioned had fallen upon Adoni-bezek in consequence of his not having paid due
attention to his established clergy, and their temporal rights. He then goes on
to give an account of several prodigies which had plainly pointed out his
approaching ruin long before: "Oft'times, at night, the town-clock struck
thirteen,
(A watchman said) when twelve it should have been;
While from the clock they saw descending down
A man accoutred in a parsons gown."


UPON the 'squire's objecting in this place, that it was not certain that the
clergy had either gowns or clocks belonging to their churches in those days,
the poet replied, "That was more than he knew; and at any rate (continued he)
the critics can only make an anachronism of it, and Virgil, you know has
several such, and his poem never the worse!" --

MENALCAS was now about to enter upon the fourth book, but as night was near at
hand, and my friend, the 'squire, out of all patience, we with some difficulty
obtained the poet's permission to depart, after we had promised to call again
in a few days to hear him read the remaining nine Books of his poem. He
informed us also, for our comfort, that if we did not call soon our
satisfaction would be considerably delayed, as the manuscript was, after a few
trivial corrections to be put into the printer's hands for publication. After
having promised thus far, we took our final leave of him, not without admiring
at the folly of a man, who, destitute of the least spark of poetical genius or
harmony in his soul, was nevertheless attempting performances that in their
nature as well as in their execution could only render him ridiculous. If
poetry, as being the language of exalted passion, has its peculiar charms and
captivating beauties for some minds, we ought still to remember that prose is
the language of sober' reason, and therefore of infinitely more use in the
affairs, and for the amusement of the generality of mankind, than the other.
Instinct evermore infallibly directs the brute creation to accomplish by the
shortest means what is within the compass of their powers and abilities; man
alone, who pretends to reason, will go farther, and, overleaping the bounds
that nature assigned him, is too often bewildered and lost in attempting
matters infinitely beyond his capacity.

IX. THE BACHELOR'S HOUSE.
THIS is a den, which the instant I see it, as instantly brings to my
remembrance every thing that is dreary and uncomfortable in the sublunary walks
of man. -- Indeed, in the city I cannot say I have yet arrived to such an
absolute certainty in my determinations, but in riding or walking through the
country I have never yet failed of being able to point out exactly, even at a
considerable distance, a building that is inhabited by a married man, or, on
the contrary, that which is occupied by the most selfish of all human beings,
the OLD BACHELOR.

THE house of an old Bachelor has its front windows evermore shut; the smoke,
too, ascends only out of one chimney, and that but in a small quantity.

IF any trees are planted round about his habitation, they are generally of the
barren kinds, the yew or the joyless willow, the locust, or the gloomy cedar.

THE road that leads to his gate is overrun with grass; -- a certain token that
very few are fond of his company: -- the gate itself opens with much
difficulty, the hinges being sadly rusted, from long disuse.

IF you visit his stables and coach house, you only see a solitary
riding-chair, barely sufficient to contain one person; a most positive and
indubitable proof, that his benevolence has never extended beyond himself, and
the comfortable accommodation of his own dear carcass.

A DISHEARTENING silence reigns in and about the whole fabric, only now and
then interrupted by the crowing of a cock, the neighing of a horse, or the
cackling of a solitary goose.

IF a servant happens to come out while you are making your observations, you
might almost swear it to be the picture of spleen and melancholy. His whole
appearance and deportment demonstrates that he is at once cook, washerwoman,
and farmer: that he is, in fact, the servant of an old Bachelor!

LET us now, Mr. Momus, pay a short visit to the interior of the fabric; if we
are but fortunate enough to prevail upon the inhabitant to grant us admittance.

A SURLY dog at the portal menaces us with the discipline of his teeth, if we
persevere in our determination to enter. We, nevertheless, escape this danger,
and are shown into a back room, where the Bachelor sits by his fire ^ide in an
arm-chair, with a long beard and ragged stockings, an Almanac in his hand, and
a pair of spectacles on his nose. -- It is the only chair in the room, so that
we take the liberty to seat ourselves on one side of the bed by way of
succedaneum.

HIS only visible companion is a cat, that sits in the corner of the chimney
with his eyes shut, and his tail wreathed into something like a spiral circle:
-- the animal now opens his eyes, and looks up into our faces; but his looks by
no means possess that glance of social complaisance, of which, you may
remember, we took notice last year as so remarkable in the eyes of a cat
belonging to the household of the gay Widow Lovelace.

ONE might venture to take an oath that his Almanac furnished the Bachelor with
materials for discourse upon every subject; for he talks of little or, nothing
else but the weather, the change of the moon, or the meeting of the county
courts; tells us a long story about the prince of Grecia; discloses the best
method of raising hemp; and laments the mortifying circumstance of our having
no visible eclipses during the current, or ensuing year.

AFTER we have sat a long time, if he is pleased with our conversation, he
orders the beforementioned melancholy negro servant to bring a decanter with
some wine, having first chalked the fellow's lips to intimidate him from
drinking at the tap. The servant is perfectly well acquainted with his master's
meaning. The decanter is brought, with a quantity therein to the amount of two
entire glasses; for you know it cannot be expected the man should give away all
his substance to strangers and aliens.

WE presently afterward dismiss ourselves, as our visit is only for the sake
of observation. As soon as we are gone, the servant brings him a brown biscuit
and a luncheon of smoked beef. He gnaws awhile upon these by way of taking his
dinner, drinks a small glass of wine and water; and, if it be a rainy day,
returns to his Almanac; otherwise, goes to his stable and confabulates with his
horse:

IT would be terrible, however, to remain always at home. He sometimes pays a
visit to his neighbors, but never tarries long in a house where there is a
family of children. If one of the little junto should make overtures of
acquaintance, by laying its hand upon his knee, it is received with frowns and
dismissed with a growl -- he insinuates that he cannot endure to have his
clothes spoiled, and immediately gets up and departs the house.

IF, on his way home, he meets a beggar, he gives him nothing. If a friendless
orphan asks him for sixpence, he complains that "numbers are straggling about
that ought to be sent to the house of correction."

WITHOUT multiplying instances of this kind, we may safely conclude and
determine, that an Old Bachelor is, in most instances, wholly destitute of that
benevolence, generosity, sympathy, and expansion of soul, which we may
constantly observe in married men.

X. THE SPLENETIC INDIAN.
TO the best of my recollection, it was about the middle of the month of
August; we were sitting on a green bank by the brook side; the fox grapes were
not yet come to maturity, but we were anticipating the pleasure we should soon
experience in eating some fine clusters that at this instant we perceived
hanging over our heads in the thick shade of a tall beech tree; when, upon a
sudden clamor raised by some young fellows, who were advancing rapidly toward
us, the learned Indian Sachem Tomo-cheeki, who at this time happened to be my
friend and companion, seized me by the hand, and intimated a strong desire that
I should accompany him to his wigwam, situated at many miles distance in the
wilderness.

A REQUEST so unusual, and at such a sultry season of the year, (it being now
the height of the dog days) and to all appearance occasioned by so trifling a
circumstance as the approach of a few noisy bacchanalians, could not but give
me some surprise. I nevertheless accepted his offer, and we then walked on
together westward without saying a word, though not forgetting to kindle our
pipes afresh at the first house we came to.

WE had no sooner entered the forest, than I began to be convinced that all
things around us were precisely such as Nature had finished them. The trees
were straight and lofty, and appeared as if they had never been obliged to Art
in their progress to maturity. -- The streams of water were winding and
irregular, and not odiously drawn into a right line by the spade of the
ditcher. The soil had never submitted to the plough-share, and the air that
circulated through this domain of Nature was replete with that balmy fragrance
which was breathed into the lungs of the long lived race of men, that
flourished in the first ages of the world.

AT last we approached the wigwam, as I discovered by the barking of a yellow
dog, who ran out to meet us. The building seemed to be composed of rough
materials, and at most was not more than eight feet in height, with a hole in
the center of the roof to afford a free passage to the smoke from within. It
was situated in a thicket of lofty trees, on the side of a stream of clear
water, at a considerable distance from the haunts of civilized men. A young
Indian girl was angling in the deepest part of the stream, from whence she
every now and then drew a trout, or some other inhabitant of the waters. An old
squaw sat at a very small distance, and, after cutting off the heads and
extracting the entrails, hung the fish in the smoke to preserve them against
the time of winter.

THE Indian and myself then entered the wigwam, and without ceremony seated
ourselves upon blocks of wood covered with fox-skins. The furniture of his
habitation consisted of scarcely any thing beside. The flooring was that which
was originally common to all men and animals. I thought myself happy that I had
been permitted to come into the world in an age when some vestiges of the
primitive men and their manner of living were yet to be found. A few ages will
totally obliterate the scene. -- I now determined to teize the Indian, if
possible.

BUT, for a man of your education, (said I) (...) Tomo-cheeki, to bury yourself
in this savage retreat, is to me inexplicable. You, who have traveled on foot
no less than one hundred and seventeen leagues, till you came to the walls of
Dartmouth College, and all for the sake of gaining an insight into languages,
arts and mysteries; and then to neglect all you have acquired, at last, is a
mode of conduct for which I cannot easily account. What! was not the mansion
house of a fat clergyman a more desirable acquisition than this miserable hut,
these gloomy forests, and yonder savage stream -- Was not the food and liquor
belonging to the white men of the law far superior to these insipid fish, these
dried roots, and these running waters -- Was not a physician's cap, an elegant
morning gown, and a grave suit of black clothes, made by an European tailor,
more tempting to your imagination than this wretched blanket, that is eternally
slipping from your shoulders, unless it be fastened with skewers, which are by
no means convenient?

"PARDON me, (replied the Indian) if all those blessings and advantages you
have mentioned seemed nothing, to my view, in comparison with these divine
solitudes. Opinion alone is happiness. The GREAT MAN that has chosen his
habitation beyond the stars will dispose of us as he pleases. I am under an
obligation to pass that life happily here which he has given me, because in so
doing I serve and adore him. I could not but be sorrowful were I to be removed
forever from this stream. Let me alone, white man; others shall make laws and
pass sleepless nights for the advantage of the world; sachem Tomo-cheeki will
leave all things to the invisible direction; and provided he can be contented
in his wigwam, the end of his existence is accomplished. -- But (continued he)
of what great value can that education be which does not inculcate moral and
social honesty as its first and greatest principle. The knowledge of all things
above and below is of inconsiderable worth, unconnected with the heart of
rectitude and benevolence. Let us walk to the remains of an old Indian town --
the bones of my ancestors repose in its vicinity."

HE had scarcely uttered these words when he seized his staff, and rushed out
of the wigwam with a sort of passionate violence, as if deeply agitated at the
recollection of the past, present, and future fate of his countrymen. -- I
followed him with equal celerity.

"BUT (said he) it is in vain to grieve! In three centuries there will not be
one individual of all our race existing upon the earth. I lately passed this
stream, and it being swollen with rains at my return, I could not, without the
greatest danger cross over it again to my wigwam. The winds raged, the rain
fell, and the storms roared around me. I laid me down to sleep beneath a copse
of hazles. Immediately the unbodied souls of my ancestors appeared before me.
Grief was in their countenances. All fixed their eyes upon me, and cried, one
after the other; Brother, it is is time thou had also arrived in our abodes:
thy nation is extirpated, thy lands are gone, thy choicest warriors are slain;
the very wigwam in which thou residest is mortgaged for three barrels of hard
cider! Act like a man, and if Nature is too tardy in bestowing the favor, it
rests with yourself to force your way into the invisible mansions of the
departed."

BY this time we had arrived at the ruins of the old Indian town. The situation
was highly romantic, and of that kind which naturally inclines one to be
melancholy. At this instant a large heavy cloud obscured the sun, and added a
grace to the gloominess of the scene. The vestiges of streets and squares were
still to be traced; several favorite trees were yet standing that had outlived
the inhabitants. The stream ran, and the springs flowed as lively as ever, that
had afforded refreshment to so many generations of men that had now passed
away, never to return. All this while the Indian had melancholy deeply depicted
upon his countenance, but he did not shed many tears till we came to that
quarter where his ancestors had been entombed.

"THIS spot of land, said he, recovering himself a little, was once sacred to
the dead, but is now no longer so! this whole town, with a large tract around
it, not even excepting the bones of our progenitors, has been sold to a
stranger. We were deceived out of it, and that by a man who understood Greek
and Hebrew! Five kegs of whiskey did the business. He took us in the hour of
dissipation when the whole universe appeared to us but a little thing; how much
less, then, this comparatively small tract of country, which was
notwithstanding our whole dependence for the purposes of hunting and fishing!
-- Here(continued he, sighing) was the habitation of Tawtongo, one of our most
celebrated warriors. He, in his time, could boast of having gained no fewer
than one hundred and twenty seven complete victories over his enemies, yet he
was killed at last by an unarmed Englishman. Here, too, on the opposite side of
the way, stood the house of Pilawaw, the admirable; she had been addressed by
thirty three suitors of her own nation, but refused them all, and went off at
last with an Irish pedlar, for the sake of three yards of silver ribband and a
new blanket. Yonder stood the dwelling of Scuttawabah, my immediate ancestor,
he died for joy of having found a keg of rum that had been lost by some western
trader. May his joys be continued behind the western mountains! Recollection
overcomes me. -- Let us return to the wigwam in the forest."

As soon as we had reached this sequestered abode, the Indian once more sat
himself down, and leaned his head upon his hand, melancholy enough, to be sure.
The old squaw desired to be informed why he was so sorrowful: the remedy, said
she, is in your power. -- He then started up, as if suddenly recollecting
somewhat, and cried out, "Existence is but a dream, an agreeable dream, indeed,
if we choose only to consider it as such. Bring me that jug of strong cider; it
will be my friend when all others fail and forsake me; choicest gift of God to
man, and which the white people alone possess the art and knowledge of
producing!"

HE courteously offered me a share of his beverage, but I found it so
intolerably sour that I was forced to swear by all the gods of the Indians I
would not have any connection with it. -- He then pointed to the stream where
the girl was angling, and said, with a pleasant countenance, that had
brightened up for a moment, "Go, you are a sober man: the clear waters are good
for you; for my own part, this juice of the apple shall be sufficient." -- Two
hours now elapsed without any one uttering a word. -- The Indian had by this
time drank two large gallons of cider, and recollecting in an instant that he
had signed away his lands and wigwam some days before for a mere trifle, he
became at once outrageous, his rage heightened to an alarming degree of
extravagance by the strong fumes of the liquor he had swallowed -- It is
enough, said he, my house and land are departed: I will speak a word in favor
of suicide.

"'IT IS all in vain! these flowers, these streams, these solitary shades, are
nothing to me. I shall not offend the spirit of truth when I say they are
odious in my eyes. Sixty times has the sun performed his journey of a year
since I was first struck with the beauty of his yellow rays. Could I be a
witness of sixty yet to come would there be any thing new, or which I had not
seen before? It is high time we should intrude ourselves into the invisible
abodes when all things satiate and grow stale upon us here below. I will this
very night enclose myself in my wigwam and, setting it on fire, depart with the
thin vapor that shall arise from the dried wood of the forest, when piled
around me. No, no, (continued he, tasting the remains of his cider) there is
nothing new: all is old, stale, and insipid."

AT this instant an Indian trader alighted at the door. He appeared to have
come a considerable distance, and now proferred to barter a keg of French
brandy for some beaver skins he saw hanging on a post.

FRENCH brandy! cried Tomo-cheeki; that must be something new.

IT is surely such, replied the wandering trader, at least in this remote
wilderness.

I WILL taste it, by heaven, said the Indian.

BUT will it not prove the falsehood of your position and assertion, interrupted
I, that there is nothing new under the sun? To him that exists through all ages
nothing can be strange or novel: with the transitory race of man, the case is
wholly different. Art and nature are combined in perpetually composing new
forms and substances for his use and amusement on the ocean of life.

"THE divinity himself must surely reside in that delicious liquor, exclaimed
the Indian, tasting a second time; take all my skins and furrs, and when the
dawn of the morning appears, return home, stranger, and bring me a fresh supply
of this celestial beverage. My existence had indeed began to be a burden: I was
meditating to extricate myself by the shortest method. I have now learned
wisdom, and am convinced that it is VARILTY alone that can make life desirable.

XI. THE INEXORABLE CAPTAIN. A SHORT STORY. (From Mr. SLENDER'S Journals.)
THE island of Barbados was formerly very fertile, and employed prodigious
fleets in exporting its productions. The case, however, has been long
otherwise. The lands are exhausted, the seasons are not so moist as formerly,
and want and poverty are, of consequence, every hour and minute to be met with
in this once so delightful a spot. I formerly visited it in a very distressed
time, when war had wasted both continents, and the seas were covered with
public and private ships of war. No provision vessels had arrived in a long
time, and the public stores on the island were nearly consumed. At length there
came in a small barque from a distant part of the continent, and no sooner was
she brought to her moorings than we saw crowds of people besieging her on every
side. Every complexion that Nature had shaded between the remotest extremes of
white and black, was observable in this variegated host, and every countenance
was strongly marked with anxiety and solicitous concern. Every one wished to
become a purchaser. An engrosser came down, and offered to take the whole, if
an English shilling per bushel was abated in the price. His proposal was not
agreed to, and, to complete his chagrin, the company dismissed him with a
universal hiss.

A POOR woman had, with much ado, procured a conveyance on board, and was
telling the master of the barque a lamentable story indeed. Her husband had,
the other day, lost both his legs and an arm in an engagement with a French
privateer. She now had him to provide for, as well as seven helpless children.
The privateer to which he belonged had taken no prizes of any considerable
value, so that there was nothing to expect from that quarter; and she now
brought the last two pieces of eight she had in the world, for which, in regard
to (...) peculiar ill (...) she hoped the master of the barque would not insist
upon (...) full price; but that he would order two business to be measured out
into her basket.

IT is impossible for me to relieve all the stricken deer, replied he, but
should I even grant your request, the quantity you mention would be but a small
and trivial supply to you and yours; and when it is gone, what will you or they
be the better of it?

IT would prolong our existence a few days, answered the woman, very
rationally; and HE who permitted you to reach our port with this small supply,
will, perhaps, by the time it is expended, send us a greater abundance.

I HOPE they will not drop in till I have disposed of my cargo, said the master
of the barque; and I would advise you, my honest girl, to borrow some money
from your friends, as it is my determination not to recede a single stiver from
the price I have fixed.

I HAVE no friend, answered the woman, that will lend me the tenth part of a
groat.

THE commander of the barque, upon hearing this, retired to his cabin, and did
not appear again till the woman returned homewards as she came -- with an empty
basket! --

"HE must be a very hard-hearted man," said one of the islanders present.

THAT may possibly be the case, replied I; but only observe the hypocrisy and
insincerity of mankind: the woman had a sufficiency of ready money to purchase
one third of a bushel at the specified price; but she would not rely upon the
benevolent Being, vulgarly called Providence, for any thing under the present
and precise supply of two bushels.

"SHE had a right to make the best bargain she could," said the islander.

AND so has the master of the barque, answered I; for, you may rely upon it,
the officer of the customs will not abate him a ^^thing of his fees.

"BUT where is that pity and compassion," cried the islander, "and those other
emotions of sympathy, which ought to sway the breast of every MAN on these
trying occasions?"

HE would give but (...) account of his voyage to his owners, returned I, (...)
he was not, even upon such occasions, proof to all the scenery of misery, as
well as deaf to the voice of pity.

THE vessel was by this time drawn toward the wharf, and a stage laid to the
shore.

A THIN man of a pale complexion now attracted my notice; who led a couple of
mules with several empty bags on their backs; -- the poor animals were almost
as thin and meagre as himself.

A TRANSIENT sparkle of joy kindled up in the eyes of all three at the sight of
a large heap of corn that had been just measured out to a rich planter; but as
itmoved off in the plantation cart, the momentary flash was at an end, and the
heavy gloom of sadness succeeded in its place.

CRUEL illusion, said I -- how bitterly are they oftentimes deceived who place
their hearts and affections on things below, even when their desires are
justifiable in themselves.

THE thin man then stepped up to the master of the barque, and began to tell
him that he possessed two acres of land among the mountains, upon which he had
found means to support a female companion and a considerable number of children
for several years; but that the dry weather had been of such long continuance
the present season, that the seed of all his hopes had perished in the ground;
and that a small quantity of cotton, and a little coffee (neither of which were
yet ripe) were their whole dependence.

AND what is all this to me, my good friend, said the commander of the little
barque.

I WAS thinking, replied the other, that if your honor would let me have five
or six measures out of your cargo. I would give you the coffee and cotton, as
they now stand in the field, in pledge of payment; and by the time your honor
returns to this island a second time, I would have both articles in prime
order, ready to deliver into your hands.

AND who will be responsible to me, replied the tar, that you will not in the
mean time have ran away, or removed to some other place, or will not, upon my
return, swear point blank that you never saw or heard of me before in your
life; at best, you will be concealed in your mountains, and I might as well
seek for the bones of the Cyclops in Sicily, as expect any success in ferreting
you from your den.

MY principles would not suffer me to act in that manner, said the thin man.

AND my principle is never to trust to the honor of mankind, retorted the
other; so that if you cannot produce the one thing needful, you and your cattle
had better be packing, without more ado.

THE man turned about with tears in his eyes, and looked pitifully at his
mules, and his mules looked at him, and the looks of both were full of regret
and disappointment.

THE master of the barque then stepped to the quarter deck and took a large
dram of brandy. -- But, if you would reflect a moment, continued he (returning
and addressing the thin man) you would be at once sensible of the impropriety
of your request. The hard hand of necessity has also driven me hither to make
the most of a trifle, and that without loss or delay of time. You and I are two
beings that have this day met by accident, and could reciprocally spend a month
in relating the story of our mutual wants and difficulties. Believe me, we have
not sailed from the gardens of paradise, nor cleared out from the bosom of
affluence. I have, at this terrible season of the year, come a long way, no
less than six hundred leagues, over a stormy ocean, in a feeble barque, which
will, perhaps, never accomplish my return. Absent from those I love, and the
scenes natural to man, I have risqued the cruelty of enemies, the horrors of
shipwreck; have patiently endured the beating shower, long, dreary nights, and
cold, pinching winds! -- and a thousand difficulties and mischances may yet
attend me on my way to my native land -- and all for what? -- You would have me
return home with a parcel of fine promises, an hundred millions of which would
not ballast my vessel, so as to enable her to carry sail on her return.

I DO not perfectly comprehend the meaning of these arguments, said the thin
man; but if my wife was here, I think she could answer them: She has a devil of
a tongue, and an understanding as keen as a razor.

KEEP her at home, then, in God's name, answered the tar; for I have one of
exactly the same stamp to hold arguments with on my own coasts.

THE man and his mules then returned sullenly to the mountains.

BUT, you will say, to what purpose is all this idle story? -- I will heartily
confess there is very little instruction to be gathered from it, more than
this, That necessity alone renders one half of the world insensible to the
miseries and wants of the other.

XII. DIRECTIONS FOR COURTSHIP.
Hoe eadem ut sciret, quid non faciebat Amyntas.?
VIRG.
THE parson of our parish used to say, in his hours of convivial gaiety, that
nothing puzzles a man of true delicacy more, than how to make the first
advances to the woman he loves, with a becoming propriety of sentiment,
language, and behavior.

I MUST confess I am somewhat of his opinion in this matter, and having in my
time observed many a promising alliance broken off by a mere idle inattention
to what even a very moderate share of understanding ought always to dictate
upon these occasions, I shall, for the benefit of those whom it may concern,
set down a few easy rules, by the assistance of which people may at least
prevent themselves from becoming personally ridiculous, if they cannot succeed
to the utmost of their wishes in other respects.

I.
WHEN you take a serious liking to a young woman, never discover your passion
to her by way of letter. -- It will either give the lady an idea that you are a
bashful booby, or that you have not any address in conversation; both which
defects are sufficient to ruin you in the estimation of any woman of only
tolerable good sense.

II.
DURING the time of courtship be careful never to discourse with the lady upon
serious subjects, or matters that are not strictly and immediately pertinent to
the purpose you are upon. If she asks you What news, you must not tell her a
long story out of the Dutch or English gazettes about the decline of trade, the
fall of stocks, or the death of Mynheer Van der Possum. -- She looks for no
such answers. You must rather relate a melancholy tale of two or three young
gentlemen of fortune and handsome expectations that have lately drowned
themselves in the Schuylkill, or thrown themselves headlong from the^^ third
story windows, and been dashed to piece (...) the pavement for the sake of a
certain inexorable (...) one, whose name you cannot recollect; but the beauty
and shafts of whose eyes these poor young gentlemen could not possibly
withstand. Such intelligence as this will instantly put her into good humor;
and upon the strength of that lie alone, you will be allowed liberties with her
person that a recapitulation of all the morality in Tillotson, or the real news
of five hundred gazettes. Would not so effectually enable you to take.

III.
I WOULD advise you never to make use of the dictatorial style till you are
perfectly sure of your Dulcinea; and that period depends in a great measure
upon your own prudence. Till then, you must seem to give the preference to her
judgment in all matters that happen to be discussed, and submit to be
instructed by her in whatever she apprehends you do not understand. Your trade
or occupation in life she takes for granted you are perfectly acquainted with;
and remember never to say a word on that score in her hearing, unless your
calling happens to have no spice of vulgarity about it. If, however, you are a
governor of an island, or happen to be some considerable officer of state, you
may frequently make professional allusions, as her vanity will be gratified
thereby; and women, we all know, are naturally fond of power.

IV.
HAVE a care that you do not pester her with descriptions of the Alps, the
Appennines, and the river Po. A lady is not supposed to know any thing of such
matters: -- Besides, you must be a very cold lover if those far-fetched things
can command your attention a moment in the company of a fine woman. -- Whatever
she thinks proper to assert, it is your business to defend and prove to be
true. If she says black is white, it is not for men in your probationary
situation to contradict her. On the contrary, you must swear and protest that
she is right; and, in demonstrating it, be very cautious of using pedantic
arguments, making nice logical distinctions, or affecting hard and
unintelligible terms.

V.
I HOLD it to be extremely dangerous to make jocular remarks upon any of the
inferior parts of the lady's dress. The head-dress, indeed, custom and female
courtesy permits us to treat with a little more freedom; but even this requires
great care and a nice judgment, or you are sure to offend. -- Above all things
never mention the words petticoat, garters or shoes in her presence. I once, in
my youthful days, introduced a friend of mine to a young lady, as a preliminary
to future connexions. I remember he was violently in love with her, and would
almost have given his right arm to have had peaceable possession. But he ruined
all by his unlucky choice of a subject in his very first conversation. --
"Madam, said he, (thinking to be very smart) I have some fault to find with
your shoes." -- The lady blushed -- [I endeavored to turn the conversation
another way, but found it impossible.] -- "Madam, (said he again) you must
permit me to criticize a little upon your shoes! the toes are too round, the
straps too short for the oval of the buckle, and the heels appear to me at
least two inches higher than they ought to be." --

Now there was no great harm in all this; the consequence, however, was, that
the lady immediately called up the footman, and ordered him to conduct the
gentleman down stairs -- I cannot think (said she) of being addressed by a man,
who, from his discourse, appears evidently to have been bred up nothing more
than a simple shoemaker; and what is worse, will forever continue so!

VI.
WHEN you are courting a young lady, be careful never to send her any presents
that are very easily to be come at, or such as particularly appertain to your
own shop or line of business. A certain French tobacconist of some fortune fell
in love with a girl of considerable merit and beauty, but having never turned
his attention much to the gay world, he was not so well acquainted with what is
called the etiquette of polite life as Frenchmen in general are. -- By way of
introducing himself to the lady he sent her his compliments, a letter full of
love, and a basket of ^ut tobacco, to the chewing and smoking of which he
himself was extravagantly addicted; and therefore very rationally concluded
that the whole world ought to do the same.

THE lady returned the tobacco by the same servant that brought it, with some
expressions of contempt and indignation; as the present seemed to imply, that
she was fond of smoking and chewing this very vulgar and nauseous weed. -- The
Frenchman, fired with resentment upon seeing his ill-judged present returned,
then sat down and wrote the following billet by way of answer: --

"VAT! you send home de tabac? -- den vat shall I send in reverse [return] --
You will have me send my own heart? dat I cannot en present -- adieu."

HE soon after enquired of one of the lady's relations what she was
particularly fond of -- some one answered, soft cheese.

HE accordingly purchased a large cheese of an excellent quality, and, to show
that he was in every sense her slave, carried it to her himself upon his
shoulder. -- The lady, you may be sure, could do no less than smile. --

"WHY you laugh, lady? Mademoiselle, en verite, you be in one tres-agreeable
good humor, pardie!"

I AM laughing, said the lady, to think you are turned cheesemonger! -- It is
almost needless to say, that both he and his cheese were instantly dismissed
the house forever.

VII.
IF it can possibly be avoided, never, in the hours of courtship, let your
discourse turn upon any thing relative to female anatomy.

FEW young ladies can ever forgive the man that is found guilty of only
insinuating in company, that the sex have any thing to do with materiality.
Whatever, therefore, may be your private opinion, you must, while in their
society, be an absolute immaterialist in regard to the rational female world.
Perhaps, an instance may sufficiently illustrate my meaning.

A CERTAIN juvenile lady of acknowledged good sense and beauty some time ago
had the misfortune to fall out of her coach, and broke no less than three of
her ribs on the left side, dislocated one of her hips, and considerably injured
her left shoulder, etc. This was for some days a topic of public conversation.
-- Dick Prettyman, whom I have mentioned upon another occasion, was at that
time paying his addresses to Miss Angelica Evergreen. Upon her enquiring of
Dick, one afternoon, the particulars of this untoward accident, he was silly
enough to blurt out in plain language before a polite assembly of young
females, that the lady had fallen out of the coach topsy-turvy, had broken
three of the best and strongest ribs in her whole body, had considerably
damaged one of her hips, and that her legs, etc. had not escaped entirely
without injury. -- The company blushed up to the eyes, unfurled their fans, and
a general confusion took place; till one of the most resolute of the ladies
peeped from behind her fan, and exclaimed -- "Fie, Mr. Prettyman! have you been
bred up in a hogstye, sir, to talk in this scandalous manner in the presence of
ladies?"

HE was then turned out of the room by unanimous consent; and this small
inattention to a proper decorum in conversation had very nearly ruined his
expectations. I remember it was not till after a long and sincere repentance
that he reinstated himself in Miss Angelica's favor.

Now, had he been a man of sense and breeding he would have related the
disaster in this manner: --

THE chariot was driving along with vast rapidity, pomposity, and an ineffable
display of grandeur, when suddenly one of the rotatory supporters, commonly
called wheels, struck a post, through the carelessness of the celestial
chariotteer, and completely overturned this most elegant and awful machine: --
that divine creature, Miss Myrtilla Myrtlebones, then tumbled out upon the
dusty pavement, which, I will be bold to say, never before received so heavenly
and sky-bespangled a burden. Her guardian angel, it seems, was at that moment
neglecting his duty. -- She fell -- and, O lamentable! -- that exquisitely
delicate frame, which the immortal Jupiter himself had put together with such
wonderful excess of art; that heavenly frame, I say -- was considerably
disordered by so rude and severe a shock.

SUCH a representation of matters, though, in reality, giving very little
information in itself, would have thrown the whole female circle into the most
charming humor in the world; whereas the vulgar way, in which Dick told it,
was only calculated for the ears of the surgeon.

THESE few rules, which are of the negative kind, I will be confident to say,
would prevent much disappointment, chagrin, and misunderstanding, were they
strictly observed amongst that part of the gay world engaged in courtship and
amors. -- I must now, my dear Mr. Momus, leave you awhile in the company of
his honor the President of the Debtor's Club, Adrian Van der Bunscooten,
Menalcas the city poet, and the rest of our late company; while I descend from
my garret, merely for the sake of relieving my attention, and looking after my
secular concerns. -- I find myself, moreover, troubled with a headache; am
splenetic, solitary, and sad, I can scarcely tell why or wherefore. -- In such
circumstances, I have ever found it best to make an excursion of one or two
hundred miles, as well for the sake of varying this vain scene of things, as
for a new supply of spirits. I will therefore set out this moment, and
endeavor to collect some merry companions: should the journey prove any way
remarkable, in the way of adventure, and we are fortunate enough to return with
whole bones, I will most certainly give you some sketches of it, amongst the
succeeding collections of my papers.

THE PAMPHLETEER AND THE CRITIC.
SIX sheets composed -- struck off and dry --
The work may please the world, thought I,
If some, impelled by spleen or spite,
Refuse to read -- then let them write --
I too with them shall have my turn,
And give advice to tear or burn.
Now from the binder's, hurried home
In neat array, my leaves are come:
Alas, alas! is this my all!
The volume is so light and small,
That, aim to save it as I can,
'Twill fly before Flirtilla's fan!
Why did I no precautions use
To curb these frolics of the Muse;
Ah, why did I invoke the Nine
To aid these humble toils of mine,
That now forebode through every page
The fopling's sneer, the puppy's rage?
Did I for this so often rise
Before the sun bedecked the skies,
And near your Schuylkill's wandering stream
Invoke the Muses' morning dream,
And scorn the winds that blew so cool? --
I did -- and I was more the fool.
Yet slender though the book, and small,
And harmless, take it all in all,
I see a dreadful form appear,
A quill suspended at his ear --
(...) fate depends on his decree,
(...) what he writes must sacred be.
A brute of such a horrid mien
At wild Sanduske never was seen;
And in the dark Kentucky groves
No beast, like this, for plunder roves,
Nor dwells in Scotia's horrid waste
A reptile of so vile a taste.
The monster comes, severe and slow;
His eyes with forked lightnings glow;
Takes up the book, surveys it over,
Cries out -- damned stuff! -- but says no more!
The book is damn'dby his decree,
And what he says must sacred be!
But was there nothing to his taste!
Was all my work a barren waste,
Was not one bright idea sown,
And not one image of my own!
Its doom was just, if this was true --
But vengeance shall be glutted too.
Give me a cane of mighty length,
A staff proportioned to my strength,
Like that by whose prodigious aid
The man of Gath his motions made,
Like that which once on Aetna's shore
The giant of the mountains bore.
For wit traduced at such a rate,
To other worlds I Will send him strait,
Where all the past shall nothing seem,
Or just be imag'd like a dream,
Where new vexations are designed,
No dull quietus for the mind.
Armed with a staff of such a size,
I strike -- he groans -- the critic dies!
Here, scribbler, help me! -- seize his pen
With which he kills all rhyming men;
This goose- quill must not with him go
To persecute the scribes below.
How vast a change an hour may bring!
How abject lies this snarling thing!
No longer wit to him shall bow,
To him the world is nothing now!
And all he writ, and all he read
Is with himself to Tophet fled.
Dead though he be (not sent to rest)
No keen remorse torments my breast:
Yet something in me seems to tell
We might have let him live as well;
'Twas his to snarl and growl and grin,
And life had else a burden been.
NEW YEAR'S VERSES, FOR 1786. [Written for the Carriers of the Columbian
Herald.]
OLD eighty five is past and gone,
Another year comes hurrying on
To quit us in its turn:
With outspread wings and running glass
Thus time's deluding seasons pass --
So parsons say, and mourn:
Their gloomy strain adds grief to grief;
We are the lads that give relief
With sprightly wit and merry lay:
Our various page to all imparts
Amusement fit for social hearts,
And drives the monster, spleen, away.
Abroad our leaves of knowledge fly,
And twice a week they live and die;
Short season of repose!
Fair to your view our toils display
The monarchs aim, what patriots say,
Or sons of art disclose:
Whatever the barque of commerce brings
From sister States, or foreign kings,
No atom we conceal?
All Europe's prints we hourly drain,
All Asia's news our leaves contain,
And round our world we deal.
If falsehoods sometimes force your fears,
And horrid news from proud Algiers,
That gives our tars such pain;
Remember all must have their share,
And all the world was made for care,
The monarch and the swain.
If British isles (that once were free,
In Indian seas, to you and me)
All entrance still restrain,
Why let them starve with all their host
When British pride gives up the ghost,
And courts our aid invain.
We fondly hope some future year
Will all our clouded prospects clear,
And commerce stretch her wings;
New tracks of trade new wealth disclose,
While round the globe our standard goes
In spite of growling kings.
Materials thus together drawn
To tell you how the world goes on
May surely claim regard;
One simple word we mean to say,
This is our jovial New Year's day,
And now, our toils reward.
CHARLESTON,(S.C.) JAN. 1786
ON PROHIBITING THE SALE OF Dr. DAVID RAMSAY'S History of the Revolution of
South Carolina, in London, 1786.
SOME bold bully Dawson, expert in abusing,
Having passed all his life in the practice of bruising,
At last, when he thinks to reform and repent,
And wishes his life had been soberly spent,
Though a course of contrition in earnest begins,
He scarcely can bear to be told of his sins.
So, the British, worn out with their wars in the west,
Where burning and murder their prowess confessed,
When at last they agreed 'twas invain to contend,
(For the days of their thieving were come to an end)
They got their historians to scribble and flatter,
And foolishly thought they could hush up the matter.
BUT RAMSAY arose, and with TRUTH on his side,
Has told to the world what they labored to hide,
With his pen of dissection, and pointed with steel,
If they never before felt -- he has taught them to feel,
Themselves and their projects has truly defined,
And dragged them to blush at the bar of mankind.
As the author himself, and the world might expect,
They have treated his work with a surly neglect;
In reply to his reason they splutter and rail,
And, prompted by RAWDON, prohibit the sale.
BUT, alas! their chastisement is only begun --
Thirteen are the states -- and the tale is of one;
When the twelve yet remaining their stories have told,
The king will run mad -- and the book will be sold.
LITERARY IMPORTATION.
HOWEVER we wrangled with Britain awhile
We think of her now in a different style,
And many fine things we receive from her isle;
Among all the rest,
Some demon possessed
Our dealers in knowledge and sellers of sense
To have a good bishop imported from thence.
The words of Sam Chandler were thought to be vain,
When he argued so often, and proved it so plain,
That Satan must flourish till bishops should reign:
Though he went to the wall
With his project and all,
Another bold Sammy, Dr. Samuel Seabury, bishop of Connecticut.
in bishop's array,
Has got something more than his pains for his pay.
It seems we had spirit to humble a throne,
Have genius for science inferior to none,
But never encourage a plant of our own:
If a college be planned,
It Is all at a stand
'Till to Europe we send at a heavy expense,
To bring us a pedant to teach us some sense.
Can we never be thought to have learning or grace
Unless it be brought from that damnable place
Where tyranny reigns with her impudent face,
And popes and pretenders,
And sly faith-defenders
Have ever been hostile to reason and wit,
Enslaving a world that shall conquer them yet.
It Is a folly to fret at the picture I draw:
And I say what was said by a Doctor Magraw; A noted practitioner in physic,
formerly of N. York.

"If they give us their learning, they will give us their [law."
How that will agree
With such people as we
I leave to the learned to reflect on awhile,
And say what they think in a handsomer style.
CHARLESTON. (S. C.) 1786.
THE ENGLISHMAN'S COMPLAINT.
ARRIVING from Britain with cargo so nice
Once more have I touched at these regions of rice!
Dear Ashley, with pleasure thy stream I review;
But how changed are these plains that we wished to subdue.
Though through the wild woods he extended his reign,
And death and the doctor were both in his train,
Cornwallis no longer disturbs your repose,
His lordship is dead, or, at least in a doze.
By Sullivan's island how quiet we pass;
Fort Johnson no longer salutes us, alas! --
The season has been you did nothing but mourn,
But now you will laugh at a Briton's return!
Instead of gay soldiers that walked the parade,
Here is nothing but draymen and people in trade;
Instead of our navy that thundered around;
Here is nothing but ships without guns to be found.
Instead of lord Rawdon and Nesbitt Balfour,
Whose names and whose notions you cannot endure,
But whom in their glory you could not despise
When puffed by the soap-suds of Rivington's lies,
Instead of those tyrants, who homewards have flown,
This country is ruled by a race of its own,
Whom once we could laugh at -- but now we must say
Seem rising to be in a handsomer way.
To us and our island eternally foes
How tedious you are in forgetting your woes,
Your plundered plantations you still will remember
Although we have left you -- three years last December.
THE NEWSMONGER.
Nimium notus omnibus
Moritur ignotus sibi.
SENYCAE THYESTES.
AN insect lives among mankind
For what wise ends by fate designed,
I never yet could clearly find:
In pain for all, and thanked by none,
And most perplexed when most alone,
No State regards him, or the throne.
Beneath a dusty roof restrained,
To one dark spot forever chained,
His ink is to the bottom drained.
The flowers that deck the summer field,
The vernal bloom that frost concealed,
To him no spark of pleasure yield.
His days are one continual whim:
The seasons change, but not for him,
On foreign prints his eyes grow dim*
He life supports on self esteem,
He plans, contrives, and lives by scheme,
And spoils good paper -- many a ream.
Distressed for those he never saw --
Of kings and princes not in awe
He scorns their mandates, and their law.
Relief he finds for other's woes,
The wants of all the world he knows, --
His boots are only out at toes.
Now Europe's feuds employ his brains,
Now Asia's news his head contains --
But still his labor for his pains.
The river Scheldt he opens wide,
And Joseph's ships in triumph ride --
The Dutchmen are not on his side.
On great affairs condemned to fret,
The interest on our foreign debt
He hopes good Louis may forget.
He fears the Bank will hurt our trade,
And fall it must, without his aid --
And yet his barber goes unpaid.
Our western posts (that Britons Keep
In spite of treaties) break his sleep;
He plans their conquest at one sweep.
He grumbles at the price of flour,
Then mourns and mutters many an hour
That CONGRESS have so little power.
Although he has no ships to lose
The Algerines he dares abuse,
And longs to hear some better news.
The French, he thinks will soon prepare
To undertake some grand affair:
"So'tis but war we need not care."
Where Mississippi laves the plain,
He hopes the bold Kentucky swain
Will seize her forts and plague old Spain:
Such morning whims, such evening dreams!
Through long dull nights he planns odd schemes
To dispossess her of those streams.
He prophesies the time will come
When few shall drink West India rum --
Our spirits will be proof at home.
The tories on New Scotland's coast,
He deems may all their freedom boast
In half a century -- at most.
Then shakes his head, and shifts the scene,
Talks much about the empress queen,
And wonders what the Germans mean.
He doubts, and frets, and seems afraid
The States will lose by China trade,
Since dollars for their tea are paid;
Then hopes that by the month of June
Lunardi in his new balloon
Will make a journey to the moon.
THUS all the business of mankind,
And all the follies we might find
Are huddled in his crazy mind;
'Till doomed to think of new affairs,
At last with death he walks down stairs,
And leaves -- the wide world to his heirs.
THE ALMANAC MAKER.
Qui tuto positus loco
Infra se vido^ omnia
(...) suo libens
Fato, nec queritur mori.
SENEC.
WHILE others dwell on mean affairs,
Their kings, their councils, and their wars,
Philaster roves among the stars.
In melancholy silence he
Travels alone and cannot see
An equal for his company.
Not one of all the learned train
Like him can manage Chrarles's wain
Or motion of the moon explain.
He tells us when the sun will rise,
Points out fair days, or clouded skies; --
No matter if he sometimes lies.
An annual almanac to frame
And publish with pretended name,
Is all his labor, all his aim.
He every month has something new,
Yet mostly deals in what is true
Obliging all, and cheating few,
Our sister moon, the stars, the sun,
In measured circles round him run;
He knows their motions -- every one.
The solar system at his will --
To mortify such daring skill,
The comets -- they are rebels still.
Advancing in its daily race
He calculates the planets place,
Nor can the moon elude his chase.
In dark eclipse when she would hide
And be awhile the modest bride,
He pulls her veil of crape aside.
EACH passing age most have its taste;
The sun is in the center placed,
And fuel must supply his waste;
But how to find it he despairs,
Nor will he leave his idle cares
Or love to mind his own affairs.
He prophesies the sun's decay;
And while he would his fate delay,
New sorrows on his spirits prey.
So much upon his shoulders laid,
He reads what Aristotle said;
Then calls the comets to his aid,
The people of the lunar sphere
As he can plainly make appear
Are coming nearer year by year.
Though others often gaze in vain
Not one of all the starry train
Could ever puzzle his strong brain.
The ram, the twins, the shining goat,
And Argo, in the skies a float,
To him are things of little note;
And that which now adorns the bear,
(I heard him say) the sailors star,
Will be in time the Lord knows where.
Thus nature waiting at his call,
His book, in vogue with great and small,
Is sought, admired and read by all.
How happy thus on earth to stay,
The planets keeping him in pay --
And when it is time to post away,
Old Saturn will a bait prepare,
And hook him up from toil and care
To make new calculations there.
THE WILD HONEY SUCKLE.
FAIR flower, that do so comely grow,
Hid in this silent dull retreat,
Untouched thy honey'd blossoms blow,
Unseen thy little branches greet:
No roving foot shall find thee here,
No busy hand provoke a tear.
By Nature's self in white arrayed,
She bade thee shun the vulgar eye,
And planted here the guardian shade,
And sent soft waters murmuring by;
Thus quietly thy summer goes,
Thy days declining to repose.
Smit with these charms, that must decay,
I grieve to see thy future doom;
They died -- nor were those flowers less gay,
(The flowers that did in Eden bloom)
Unpitying frosts, and Autumn's power
Shall leave no vestige of this flower.
From morning suns and evening dews
At first, thy little being came:
If nothing once, you nothing lose,
For when you die you are the same;
The space between is but an hour,
The mere idea of a flower.
FEMALE CAPRICE; OR, THE STUDENT's COMPLAINT.
IT was, you most own, a most pitiful thing,
That we must commence, and no ladies would sing,
So long at our studies, and poring on Greek,
And Logic, and Latin, and learning to speak,
And not in return for our trouble and pains,
Not a quaver to have of their holiday strains
Was hard in extreme -- and I Am sorry to find
No reason as yet for their malice assigned.
Though tutored by LAW, The Rev. Andrew Law, Professor of Music.
who is music's delight,
They have not a single idea of RIGHT,
Or else I presume they had surely bestowed
Some elegant strains on the elegant ode;
The poet, poor fellow, no doubt had his share
Of trouble and thinking, his lines to prepare,
And then to neglect them and fall in a pet,
Was such an affront as he will never forget.
HEREAFTER commencing, to punish the sex,
With Latin and Logic their noddles we'll vex,
In dark metaphysics we'll rattle away,
Nor shall they be wiser for all we may say;
No witty orations shall tempt them to smile,
But, after haranguing on nothing awhile,
We'll send them away just as dull as they came;
And year after year it shall still be the same,
Till each cruel creature relents -- and agrees
Tocry out -- "Dear fellows, we'll sing what you please."
N. YORK, May. 1786.
THE DRUNKEN SOLDIER. A PARODY.
In a mouldering cave, where the wretched retreat, etc.
IN a hovel forlorn, not a mile from his tent,
Poor Trim sat distracted with care;
He looked at his bottle, and saw it half spent,
And gave himself up to despair.
The walls of his hut were bespattered around
With the grog he had vomited up;
And even the dirt, and the grass on the ground
Were bedewed with the dregs of his cup.
The housewife beheld through a hole in the wall
Him weeping, his whiskey half done,
She cursed him, his liquor, his bottle and all,
Thus warning the man of the gun,
" O Trim, do forbear; not a grunt, not a swear
" For your grog so deservedly lost;
" Your bones shall be broke; I will put up my prayer,
" And the answer shall be to your cost.
" The boys of the barracks, those soldiers so bold,
" Of gaming have finished their task,
" And such is the news, it is currently told,
" They are coming to drink out your flask:
" A council was held ere your eyes were awake,
" And this was the captain's decree,
" That, when it is emptied, the bottle shall break,
" And the charge is entrusted with me."
To the broomstick straitway, like a fury, she flew:
But he with his bottle began,
And said, "Shut the door, let me touch it once more,
And then -- they may drink, if they can." --
With a circle of black she encompassed his eyes;
At last into slumbers he sunk,
Then she laid him down snug, lest the sight of his jug
Should tempt him again to get drunk.
STANZAS WRITTEN In a blank leaf of BURKE'S History of the West India Islands.
THESE Indian isles, so green and gay,
In summer seas by nature placed --
Art hardly told us where they lay
'Till tyranny their charms defaced;
Ambition there her conquests made
And avarice rifled every shade!
The Genius wept his sons to see
By foreign arms untimely fall,
And some to distant climates flee
Where later ruin met them all:
He saw his sylvan offspring bleed
That fiercer natures might succeed.
The chief that first over barren waves [ Columbus.
To these fair islands found his way,
Departing, left a race of slaves,
Cortez, thy mandate to obey;
And these again, if fame says true,
To lord it over the savage crew.
No more to Indian coasts confined,
The Genius thus indulged his grief;
While he to tears his heart resigned
With pain he saw the falling leaf;
" And thus (he cried) our reign must end,
" We, like the leaves, must now descend:
" Ah, what a change! the ambient deep
" No longer hears the lover's sigh;
" But wretches meet to wail and weep
" The loss of their dear liberty,
" Unfeeling hearts possess these isles,
" Man frowns, and only Nature smiles."
Proud of these vast extended shores
The haughty Spaniard calls his own,
No other world may share those stores
To other worlds so little known;
His Cuba lies a wilderness
Where slavery digs what slaves possess.
Jamaica's sweet romantic vales
Invain with golden harvests teem,
Her endless spring, her balmy gales
Did more to me than magic seem:
Yet what the god profusely gave
Is here denied the toiling slave.
Fantastic joy and fond belief
Through life support the galling chain,
Hope's airy scenes dishearten grief
And bring his native climes again:
His native groves his heaven display
The funeral is the happy day.
For man reduced to such disgrace
Invain from love fair virtue fell:
Distress compells him to be base,
He has no motive to excel:
In death alone his prospects end,
The world's worst foe is his best friend.
How great their praise, let truth declare,
Who, smit with honor's sacred flame,
Bade freedom to these coasts repair,
Assumed the slaves neglected claim,
And scorning interest's sordid plan
Proved to mankind the rights of man.
Ascending here, may this warm sun,
With freedom's beams divinely clear,
Throughout the world his circuit run
Till these dark scenes shall disappear,
And a new race, not bought or sold
Springs from the ashes of the old.
PENNSYLVANIA, 1786.
THE INSOLVENT'S RELEASE; AND MISERIES OF A COUNTRY JAIL.
1.
"NOT from those dismal dreary coasts I come
Where wizzard Faustus chews his brimstone rolls,
Nor have I been to wrangle with the men
Of that sad country, where, for want of rum,
Dead putrid water from the stagnant fen
Is drank unmingled by departed souls:
Nor from that dog house do I bring you news,
Where Macedonian Philip See Lucian's Dialogues.
mends old shoes,
But from that dreadful place arrived,
Where men in debt at cribbage play,
And I most cunningly contrived
To fatten on two groats a day --
Full on my back they turn the key,
The 'squire himself is not so free.
2.
When to these rugged walls, a fathom thick,
I came, directed by the sheriff's stick,
Alas, said I, what can they mean to do!
I am not conscious of one roguish trick!
I am no thief -- I took no Christian's life,
Nor have I meddled with the parson's wife,
(Which would have been a dreadful thing you know)
Then, by these gloomy walls, this iron gate
Appointed by the wisdom of your state
To shut in little rogues and keep out great;
Tell me, ye pretty lads that deal in law,
Ye men of mighty wigs, ye judges, say --
Say! by the jailor's speckled face
That never beamed one blush of grace;
How long must I
In prison lie
For just nine shillings -- that I cannot pay!
3.
Return, ye happy times, when all were free,
No jails on land, no nets at sea;
When mountain beasts unfettered ran,
And man refused to shut up man,
As men of modern days have shut up me! --
This is the dreary dark abode
Of poverty and solitude;
Such was the gloomy cell where Bunyan lay
While his dear Pilgrim helped the time away --
Such was the place where Wakefield's vicar drew
Fine morals from the imprisoned crew,
And found both time to preach and pray.
4.
In bed of straw and broken chair
What consolation could be found!
No gay companions ventured there
To push the ruddy liquor round!
From jug of stone
I drank, alone,
A beverage neither clear nor strong;
No table laid,
No village maid
Came there to cheer me with her song;
My days were dull, my nights were long!
My evening dreams,
My morning schemes
Were how to break that cruel chain,
And, Jenny, be with you again.
ST. PREUX TO ELOISA.
As there is a pleasure in being mad In J. J. Rousseau's letters St. Preux is
supposed to make a voyage round the world in Lord Anson's squadron, chiefly
with a view to forget his attachment to, and passion for, Eloisa. He is here
supposed to write the above lines to her soon after their tempestuous passage
round Cape Horn, and at their first arrival in the tropical climates of the
Indian seas.

Which none but madmen know,
So I a secret pleasure had
In rambling to and fro' --
Which they that always stay at home,
Like lazy plants untaught to roam;
Which they shall never know.
But leaving France last New Year's day
I bade a long adieu!
Had I not minded what these sailors say,
I had been still with you,
And, free from frosts and chilling snows,
On your fond bosom found repose.
Now, while through barbarous climes we sail,
Should Neptune force our ship on shore
On some rude isle, by some rough gale,
I to your arms return no more,
But for some swarthy dame shall bring
Cool waters from the Indian spring.
Yet love, with undiminish'd joy,
Shall trace your form in Fancy's glass,
While I more fond, and you less coy,
Over swelling seas together pass --
No rocks or seas can love divide
Where heart with heart is thus allied!
TO MISFORTUNE.
DIRE Goddess of the haggard brow,
MISFORTUNE, at that shrine I bow,
Where forms uncouth betray thee still,
A leaky ship, a doctor's bill,
A poem damned, a beggar's prayer,
An empty purse, a load of care,
The critic's growl, the pedant's sneer,
The urgent dun, the law severe,
A smoky house, rejected love,
And friends that void of friendship prove.
FOE to the pride of scheming man,
Whose power controuls the wisest plan,
To thy decree we still submit
Our views of gain, our works of wit.
Untaught by thee the feeble mind
A dull repose, indeed, might find;
But life unvext by such control
Can breed no vigor in the soul.
The calm that smooths the summer seas
Is a soft scene of rest and ease,
But skies that fret, and storms that rave
Alone can teach us to be brave.
If half the woes for which we groan,
In reason's view, are all our own,
Why should we paint fine shadows here,
Then sigh, to find them disappear.
On Hattaras' cliffs who hopes to see
The maiden fair, the orange tree,
Awhile on hope may fondly lean
Till sad experience blots the scene.
For ruined states or trade perplexed
It Is almost folly to be vexed;
The world at last will have its way,
It Is our's no longer than today.
On other shores a happier guest
The mind must fix her heaven of rest,
Where milder skies and softer climes
Shall please the men of other times.
THE FIDDLER'S FAREWELL.
"To fiddle at frolics I find is invain;
No creature alive will attend to my strain,
And I and my dog must be trudging again;
The strings of the fiddle
Are broke in the middle
Excepting the bass which I never could bear,
And to make a new purchase, I Have nothing to spare,
The village all knew it, and cared not a pin:
The night was so cold, and my coat was so thin
I shook like a leaf when the ladies came in;
They thought it a joke
That the fiddle was broke,
And never once offered my strings to repair,
But begged of Van Tweezle to give them an air.
Van Tweezle began in so dismal a tone,
All thought he had better have let it alone;
When the folks were to dance they did nothing but grean,
Old captain O'Blunder
Was brim-full of wonder,
And said, "My dear boy, such a whining you keep,
You have hit on a tune that will set us to sleep."
Yet, still he went on to our utter surprise,
And sung till the ladies had tears in their eyes,
And Bunyan we thought, had returned in disguise:
We waited so long
For the close of his song,
That most of us thought he would never conclude,
His muses were in such a musical mood.
Old ditties he sung that are fairly worn out;
The wars of the Jews, that were compassed about
Whom Titus, the Roman, had put to the rout:
We all were in pain
To be puzzled again,
For ten times before we had heard them, at least,
And far better told by the nurse and the priest.
THE DEPARTURE. 1785
1.
FROM Hudson's cold, congealing streams
As winter comes, I take my way
Where other suns prompt other dreams,
And shades, less willing to decay,
Beget new raptures in the heart,
Bid spleen's dejective crew depart,
And wake the sprightly lay.
2.
Good-natured Neptune, now so mild,
Like rage asleep, or madness chained,
By dreams amused, or love beguiled
Sleep on till we our port have gained.
The gentle breeze, that curls the deep,
Shall paint a finer dream on sleep! --
Ye nymphs, that haunt his grottoes low,
Where sea green trees on coral grow,
No tumults make
Lest he should wake,
And thus the passing shade betray
The sails that over his waters stray.
3.
Sunk is the sun from yonder hill,
The noisy day is past;
The breeze decays, and all is still,
As all shall be at last;
The murmuring on the distant shore,
The dying wave is all I hear,
The yellow fields now disappear,
No painted butterflies are near,
And laughing folly plagues no more.
4.
The woods that deck yon' fading waste,
That every wanton gale embraced,
Ere summer yet made haste to fly;
How smit with frost the pride of June!
How lost to me! how very soon
The fairy prospects die!
Condemned to bend to winter's stroke,
Low in the dust the embowering oak
Has bid the fading leaf descend;
Their short lived verdure at an end
How desolate the forests seem,
Beneath whose shade
The enamored maid
Was once so fond to dream.
5.
What now is left of all that won
The eye of mirth while summer stayed --
The birds that sported in the sun,
The sport is past, the song is done;
And nature's naked forms declare,
The rifled groves, the valleys bare,
Persuasively, though silent, tell,
That at the best they were but dressed
Sad mourners for the funeral bell.
6.
Now while I spread the venturous sail
To catch the breeze from yonder hill,
Say, what does all this folly mean?
Why grieve to pass the watery scene?
Is fortitude to heaven consigned --?
No -- planted also in the mind,
She smooths the ocean when she will.
7.
But life is pain -- what ills must try,
what malice dark and calumny,
Indifference, with her careless eye,
And slander, with her tale begun;
Bold ignorance, with forward air,
And cowardice, that has no share
In honors gained, or trophies won.
8.
To these succeed, (and these are few
Of nature's dark, unseemly crew)
Unsocial pride, and cold disgust,
Servility, that licks the dust;
Those harpies that disgrace the mind;
Unknown to haunt the human breast
When pleasure her first garden dressed --
But vanished is the shade so gay,
And lost in gloom the summer day
That charmed the soul to rest.
9.
What season shall restore that scene
When all was calm and all serene,
And happiness no empty sound,
The golden age, that pleased so well --
The MIND that made it shall not tell
To those on life's uncertain road;
Where lost in folly's idle round,
And seeking what shall never be found,
We press to one abode,
THE DISTRESSED SHEPHERDESS; OR, MARIANA'S Complaint for the Death of DAMON.
Written, 1775.
WHAT madness compelled my dear shepherd to [go
To the siege of Quebec, and distract me with woe!
My heart is so full, it would kill me to tell
How he died on the banks of the River Sorel.
O river Sorel! thou did hear him complain
When dying he languish'd, and called me invain!
When, pierced by the Briton he went to repel,
He sunk on the shores of the river Sorel.
O cruel misfortune, my hopes to destroy:
He has left me alone, with my Colin, his boy,
With sorrow I see him, with tears my eyes swell;
Shall we go, my sweet babe, to the river Sorel?
But why should I wander, and give him such pain;
My Damon will never see his Colin again:
To wander so far where the wild Indians dwell! --
We should faint ere we came to the river Sorel.
But even to see the pale corpse of my dear
Would give me such rapture, such pleasure sincere!
I Will go, my dear boy, and my grief I will tell
To the willows that grow by the river Sorel.
How shall I distinguish my shepherd's dear grave
Amidst the long forest that darkens the wave --:
Perhaps they could give him no tomb when he fell;
Perhaps he is sunk in the river Sorel!
He was a dear fellow! -- O, had he remained!
For he was uneasy whenever I complained;
He called me his charmer, and called me his belle,
What a folly to die on the banks of Sorel!
Then, let me remain in my lonely retreat;
My shepherd departed I never shall meet --
Here Is Billy OF Bluster -- I love him as well,
And Damon may stay at the river Sorel.
LINES ON THE DEATH OF A LADY.
TRANSFERRED to heaven, Lavinia has no share
In the dull movements of this world of care;
Her blaze of beauty, still in death admired,
A moment kindled, and at once expired;
Sweet as the favorite offspring of the May,
Serenely mild and innocently gay,
Adorned with all that nature could impart
To please the fancy and to gain the heart,
Heaven never above more innocence possessed,
Nor earth the shade of a diviner guest;
A mind all virtue, flames descended here
From some gay seraph of some brighter sphere;
Yet not her virtues opening into bloom,
Nor all her sweetness saved her from the tomb,
From prospects darkened, and the purpose crossed,
Misfortune's winter, and a lover lost;
The heart of kindness, and the soul of love! --
Ye thoughtless fair! her early death bemoan,
And while you mourn her fate, think on your own.
THE MODERN MIRACLE.
WHY on my heart this weight of care,
Why sigh to reach the elbow chair!
My eyes are dim -- alas, too slow
I feel the purple current flow;
No more am I to mirth inclin'd'
What strange ideas haunt my mind --
What means this deadly parching heat? --
What pulyes in my bosom beat!
I hate to hear the goldfinch sing,
The parrot is a noisy thing --
The spinet shall untuned remain; --
For I -- alas -- am full of pain!
'TWAS thus Florella, fainting, spoke --
Sir Gilbert then his lancet took,
And, while they flew to fetch a band,
She leaned her head upon his hand. --
" Dear Madam, let me bare your arm;
" The lancet was not meant for harm:
" I only wish to find a vein
" And thence a gentle current drain
" Which to your bosom shall restore
" That pulse of health it knew before;
" Which to your lovely, languid eye
" New shafts of ruin shall supply,
" And to that sweet deluding face
" Add every charm and every grace."
So, standing by the lady's side,
Sir Gilbert then his lancet tried,
And pierced the blue and swelling vein --
Away the purple current ran --
AH, Gilbert! how like death it seems!
My life will vanish with these streams
So wastes the soul when Nature dies --
Advance, and close my sleepy eyes!
Elysian fields, Elysian bowers,
Gay irees, and never fading flowers,
Receive me to your silent state
Where painted beaus on ladies wail --
Alas, alas! -- or do I dream,
Or is it Lethe's fabled stream --
Does life on such a stream depend --
You Have brought me to my journey's end --
Alas, my heart -- alas, my head! --
And do I die -- or am I dead! --
Now up and down the servants ran,
Confusion reigned from maid to man:
This held her head, and that the bowl --
" The Lord have mercy on her soul!
" Attend to move your lady fair
" (Said Gilbert) from her easy chair,
" And let her on the couch be laid --
" She may require some further aid --
" Now, by the paleness on your cheek,
" Florella, do -- my dearest -- speak --
" Her pulse is gone, her lips are dumb --
" Ye wonders of the world to come! --
" Poor, harmless, pretty, chattering thing,
" No harm, indeed, I meant to bring --
" No fault of mine has bid thee die --
" But if I could new life supply,
" Dear nymph, I would my art essay
" To bid that gentle spirit stay,
" Which now, too soon, for heaven prepares,
" And quits a world of crimes and cares!" --
FLORELLA to the couch conveyed,
(As fame supposed a real maid)
The servants from the corpse withdrew,
But Gilbert would more sorrow show --
He went -- for what? -- Florella, tell --
Perhaps, to (...) his last farewell --
Perhaps he (...) for want of grace --
What few will dream, in such a case;
Like Orpheus, he, by passion led,
Explored the kingdoms of the dead,
Relieved the fainting maid so fair, --
Out-doctor'd death -- and got an heir!
AN AUTHOR's SOLILOQUY.
MY leaves bound up, compact and fair,
In neat array at length prepare:
To pass their hour on time's broad stage,
To meet the surly critic's rage,
The statesman's slight, the pedant's sneer --
Alas! were these my only fear
I should be quiet and resigned --
What most torments my boding mind
Is that no critic will be found
To read my works and give the wound!
THUS, when one fleeting year is passed
With dead men's works my book is class'd;
With some to praise, but more to blame,
The soul returns from whence it came,
And I must wear the marks of time
Who hardly flourished in my prime.
THRICE happy DRYDEN, who could meet
Some rival bard in every street:
When all were bent on writing well,
It was some credit to excel,
While those condemned to stand alone
Can only by themselves be known:
Thrice happy DRYDEN, who could find
A Milbourne, for his sport designed;
And POPE, who saw the harmless rage
Of Dennis, bursting over his page,
Might well despise the critic's aim,
Who only helped to swell his fame.
ON these bleak climes by Fortune thrown
Where rigid reason reigns, alone,
Where mimic fancy holds no sway
Nor golden forms around her play,
Nor Nature takes her magic hue --
Alas, what has the Muse to do!
An age employed in pointing steel
Can no poetic raptures feel;
No fabled Love's enchanting power,
Nor tale of Flora's painted bower,
Nor woodland haunt, or murmuring grove,
Can their prosaic bosoms move.
THE Muse of Love in no request;
I Will try my fortune with the rest:
Which of the Nine shall I engage
To suit the humor of the age:
On one, alas, my choice must fall,
The least engaging of them all!
So late she does her wreathes prepare
I hardly think them worth my care:
Her visage stern, severe her style,
A clouded brow, a cruel smile,
A mind on murdered victims placed --
She, only she can suit the taste.
HORACE, LIB. I. ODE 15. TRANSLATED.
Nereus prophesies the destruction of Troy. Pastor quum traberet per freta
navibus, etc,
AS 'cross the deep to Priam's shore
The Trojan prince bright Helen bore,
Old Nereus hushed each noisy breeze
And calmed the tumults of the seas.
Then, musing on the traitor's doom,
Thus he foretold the woes to come;
" Ah, why remove, mistaken swain,
" The prize that Greece shall fetch again!
" With omens sad you sail along;
" And Europe shall resent the wrong,
" Conspire to seize your bride away,
" And Priam's town in ashes lay.
" Alas! what toils and deaths combined!
" What hosts of men and horses joined! --
" Bold Pallas now prepares her shield,
" And arms her chariots for the field.
" Can you heavenly forms engage,
" A goddess kindling into rage;
"Who never have dared a mortal foe
" And wars, alone, of Venus, know.
" Invain you dress your flowing hair,
" And songs to aid the harp, prepare;
" The harp, that sung to female ears,
" Shall fail when Mars and Greece appears.
"Invain shall you bewail your bride,
" And meanly in her chamber hide,
" In hopes to shun, while lingering there,
" The massy dart and Cretan spear.
" Invain shall you, with hastening pace,
" Avoid fierce Ajax in the chase;
" For late those locks, that please the eye,
" In dust and death shall scattered lie.
" Do you not see Ulysses too,
" The sage that brings your nation low;
" And Nestor from the land of Pyle --
" Chiefs skilled in arms and martial toil.
" Do thou not see bold Teucer here,
" And him -- no tardy chariotteer;
" Who both pursue with eager force,
" And both control the thundering horse.
" Thou, to thy grief, shall Merion know,
" And Tydeus' son shall prove thy foe,
" Who wastes your realms with sword and fire;
" Tydides, greater than his fire.
" Like timorous deer, prepared to fly
" When hungry wolves are passing by,
" No more the herbs their steps detain,
" They quit their pastures and the plain:
" So you from his triumphant arms
" Shall fly, with all your female charms; --
" Can deeds like this your valor prove,
" Was this your promise to your love?
" Achilles' wrath shall but delay
" Your ruin to a later day --
" The Trojan matrons then shall mourn,
" And Troy by Grecian vengeance burn."
THE DULL MORALIST.
WHEN Shenkin's dull, distracted Muse
In howling strain her note began,
The shepherds boded bloody news,
And over the plains affrighted ran;
Florinda would not venture near,
The music did so pain her ear.
He told the nymphs in heavy rhyme
That they must shortly quit the plain,
Since autumn is a stormy time,
And summer will not come again --
The nymphs replied -- "We ask not here
To have two harvests in one year."
Though every thing was blithe and gay,
And Nature tuned a cheerful song,
You would have thought, to hear him play,
That all the world was going wrong:
Thus birds of night bode weather foul,
Thus nightly sings the winking owl.
Like him that sleeps in yonder tomb,
Whose bones will never make a stir,
He labors in eternal gloom,
And is a dry philosopher,
Who gave the best advice he had
To mend the world -- or make it mad,
To him creation was a shade;
So much his head on tomb-stones ran,
That Rosalinda, smiling, said,
"He is the sexton's journeyman," --
Then let him sigh, and sob, and sing,
His autumn never had a spring.
PATRICK MULHONI. A SUBSCRIPTION PRAYER. Date obolum Belisario --
"IF over the mountains, or under the Line,
It still was his lot to play organs to swine;
Ah, give him a tomb, for a tomb is his due,
A shilling's a trifle to me or to you:
If you give him a tomb, that his name may survive,
May Fortune attend you, and help you to thrive,
May you always have something to praise and approve,
And the pleasure to dream of the girl that you love.
WHILE fiddles are playing it is folly to sigh,
When the heart is oppressed it is a pleasure to die --
Though some were disputing and some were perplexed
He filled up his bottle and hung to his text;
A dabster he was from the county of Mead,
And he was a Paddy, and he had long teeth,
Enjoying the best and prepared for the worst,
As a sailor he swore, as a soldier he cursed:
Ah, stranger, I Am sore you had loved the old crony,
So throw in a shilling for Paddy Mulhoni.
He was sick of the world in the prime of his life,
To hasten his exit, he married a wife,
But finding his fair one a damnable elf,
He shut up his shop -- and grew sick of himself."
LINES WRITTEN AT PORT ROYAL, in the Island of JAMAICA.
HERE, by the margin of the murmuring main,
While her proud remnants I explore invain,
And lonely stray through these dejected lands
Fanned by the noontide breeze on burning sands,
Where the dull Spaniard once possessed these shades,
And ports defended by his Pallisades --
Though lost to us, PORT ROYAL claims a sigh,
Nor shall the Muse the unenvied gift deny.
OF all the towns that graced Jamaica's isle
This was her glory, and the proudest pile,
Where toils on toils bade wealth's gay structures rise,
And commerce swelled her glory to the skies:
St. Jago, seated on a distant plain,
Never saw the tall ship entering from the main,
Unnotic'd streams her Cobra's margin lave
Where yond' tall plantains shade her glowing wave,
And burning sands or rock surrounded hill
Confess its founder's sears -- or want of skill.
WHILE over these wastes with wearied step I go,
Past scenes of death return, in all their woe,
Over these sad shores in angry pomp he passed,
Moved in the winds, and raged with every blast --
Here, OLD Port Royal contained more than 1500 buildings, and these for the
most part large and elegant. This unfortunate town was for a long time reckoned
the most considerable mart of trade in the West Indies. It was destroyed on the
17th of June, 1692, by an earthquake which in two minutes sunk the far greater
part of the buildings, by which disaster near good people lost their lives.
opening gulphs confessed the almighty hand,
Here, the dark ocean rolled across the land,
Here, piles on piles an instant tore away,
Here, crowds on crowds in mingled ruin lay,
Whom fate scarce gave to end their noonday feast,
Or time to call the sexton, or the priest.
WHERE yond' tall barque, with all her ponderous load,
Commits her anchor to its dark abode,
Eight fathoms down, where unseen waters flow
To quench the sulphur of the caves below,
Here midnight sounds torment the sailor's ear,
And drums and fifes play drowsy concerts here,
Sad songs of woe prevent the hours of sleep,
And Fancy aids the fiddlers of the deep;
Dull Superstition hears the ghostly hum,
Smit with the terrors of the world to come.
WHAT now is left of all thy boasted pride!
Lost are thy glories that were spread so wide,
A spit of sand is thine, by heaven's decree,
And wasting shores that scarce resist the sea:
Is this Port Royal on Jamaica's coast,
The Spaniard's envy, and the Briton's boast!
A shattered roof over every hut appears,
And mouldering brick-work prompts the traveller's fears;
A church, with half a priest, I grieve to see,
Grass round its door, and rust upon its key! --
One only inn with tiresome search I found
Where one sad negro dealt his beverage round; --
His was the part to wait the impatient call,
He was our landlord, post-boy, pimp, and all;
His wary eyes on every side were cast,
Beheld the present, and revolved the past,
Now here, now there, in swift succession stole,
Glanced at the bar, or watched the unsteady bowl.
No sprightly lads or gay bewitching maids
Walk on these wastes or wander in these shades;
To other shores past times beheld them go,
And some are slumbering in the caves below;
A negro tribe but ill their place supply,
With bending back, short hair, and downcast eye;
A feeble rampart guards the unlucky town,
Where banished Tories come to seek renown,
Where worn-out slaves their bowls of beer retail,
And sunburned strumpets watch the approaching sail.
HERE (scarce escaped the wild tornado's rage)
Why sailed I here to swell my future page!
To these dull scenes with eager haste I came
To trace the relics of their ancient fame,
Not worth the search! -- what domes are left to fall,
Guns, gales, and earthquakes shall destroy them all --
All shall be lost! -- though hosts their aid implore,
The TWELVE APOSTLES A Battery so called, on the side of the harbor opposite
to Port Royal.
shall protect no more,
Nor guardian heroes awe the impoverished plain;
No priest shall mutter, and no saint remain,
Nor this palmetto yield her evening shade,
Where the dark negro his dull music played,
Or casts his view beyond the adjacent strand
And points, still grieving, to his native land,
Turns and returns from yonder murmuring shore,
And pants for countries he must see no more --
Where shall I go, what Lethe shall I find
To drive these dark ideas from my mind!
No buckram heroes can relieve the eye,
And George's honors only raise a sigh --
Not even these walls a glad remembrance claim,
Where grief still wastes a half deluded dame,
Whom to these coasts a British Paris bore,
And basely left, lost virtue to deplore. --
In foreign climes detained from all she loved,
By friends neglected, long by fortune proved,
While sad and solemn passed the unwelcome day
What charms had life for her, to tempt her stay!
Deceived in all -- for meanness could deceive --
Expecting still, and still condemned to grieve,
She scarcely saw, to different hearts allied,
That her dear Florio never pursued a bride. --
Are griefs like thine to Florio's bosom known?
Must these, alas, be ceaseless in your own? --
Life is a dream -- its varying shades I see,
But this base wanderer hardly dreams of thee.
YE mountains vast, whose heights the heaven sustain,
Adieu, ye mountains, and fair Kingston's plain;
Where Nature still the toils of art transcends --
In this dull spot the fine delusion ends,
Where burning sands are borne by every blast
And these mean fabrics still bewail the past,
Where want, and death, and care, and grief reside,
And threatening moons advance the imperious tide: --
Ye stormy winds, awhile your wrath suspend,
Who leaves the land, a bottle, and a friend,
Quits this bright isle for yon' blue seas and sky,
Or even Port Royal quits -- without a sigh!
Sept. 1784.
THE MISFORTUNE OF MARCH. [Written in the pastoral style of the old British
Poets.]
IT was upon a raw and windy day,
When fields of ice were floating to the sea,
And Greenland birds sat croaking on the shore,
Looking the wide waste of the waters over;
But yet the vernal equinox was nigh,
And though the wintry winds had ceased to roar
Yet many an icicle, as we went by,
Hung from the farmer's thatch, or cottage door:
It was on such a day Palemon held his way
To the deep lake, whose lately liquid face
The night bypast in other semblance dressed
As if it would its summer visage trace
In the blue mirror on its waves impressed,
And aid the gambols of a wayward boy
Who had been told the dairy maid's advice
And cautioned not to trust to one night's ice.
BUT he of pleasure only thought; and said,
" To sport awhile upon the frozen wave
" And take the sad remains of winter's joy,
" And cut strange figures that must shortly fade
" Since the warm sun his summer time will have,
" Be this day's business for a shepherd's boy."
So to the lake he came; and sinding there
The slippery surface would his footsteps bear
He girt upon his soals the channell'd steel,
Though cautious yet, he left not far the shore,
For old Menalcas splitting faggots near
Had just been telling a disheartening tale
(That struck less enterprizing lads with fear)
Of one who had been drowned in times of yore
And swallowed in the lake and seen no more.
BUT now grown daring, he disdained to stay
So near the rustics on the inglorious strand,
And found no honors where no dangers lay;
But while he yet was sporting near the land
Fair Amaryllis chanced to come that way,
"Return (she said) rash boy (and waved her hand)
For now the sun is high and shines out clear,
And this smooth glittering scene that spreads so wide
Is a more masque that would destruction hide,
Will take new colors by the close of day
And all the glazed deception disappear.
" THESE winds (said he) that blow so cold and raw
" Feel more to me like winter than the spring,
" Nor do I think that ice or snow will thaw
" Till a new moon shall milder seasons bring." --
He spoke: nor guessed the influence of the sun
That unperceived did undermine his floor,
Nor thought, as from the bank he swiftly ran,
That old Menalcas would not see him more.
Now to the center of the lake arrived
Three fathoms down the heavy waters lay,
And far above them on a shell of ice
The scaly tribe with pity saw him play;
Alas, they could not give him good advice,
For fish have ceased to speak since Esop's day.
AND yet he should have been severely shy,
Fro just three years agone, that very day,
A fortune-telling dame had traveled by
And all the village lads had heard her say,
As for a groat she told Palemon's fate,
"That he should of no slow consumption die,
"Nor for the fever's deadly summons wait;
"Not one disease upon the doctor's list
"Shall end his life -- but on a sudden missed
"He for himself shall find a grave (she said)
"And all by too much drink:" -- Nor more delayed,
But having got her fee,
And taking up her staff, away she went;
And ever since that day, all thought she meant
That young Palemon would a drunkard be.
PLEASED with the distance gained, he smiled to think
How Amaryllis, now no longer seen,
Would anxiously expect him on the brink
And wonder what his long delay could mean;
So he remained, till with the midday sun
He saw at last his skating time was over,
And all his pranks, and all his frolics done;
And then began to look toward the shore,
But the frail ice his weight no longer bore,
And nothing to support him could he find;
And down he sunk, for dolphins none were there,
And Naiads, that were once so very kind
To catch up drowning men, and on their shoulders bear.
THEN, night approaching, all the village train
Came to the lake, and gazed with anxious eye,
Over the wide waste they looked and looked again,
And old Menalcas breathed a heavy sigh,
And said, "Young swain, if to the farther shore
You did not, ere the noon day sun, repair,
Sad Amaryllis shall not see you more
Until the village bell shall call you there
Where Goodman Long staff laid his boys of yore."
THEN round the lake they went, and often explored
Each branching creek, and pond, and darkened stream:
Nine days they searched; nor was he yet restored
And his sad fate was every day their theme,
And every night of him the lads did dream --
At last they found his corpse upon the shore,
And strait the village bell began to ring;
The sexton and the priest then muttered over
Some holy words -- and some their flowers did bring,
And strewn them over his grave, and every year
Fair Amaryllis comes, and sings her ditties here.
PHILANDER AND LAVINIA.
WHILE lost so long to his Creolian maid,
Careless of fortune and of same he strayed,
Philander to a barbarous region came
And found a mistress in a colder shade
Fair as Aurelia; and perhaps might claim
With her the impassioned soul, and friendship's holy flame;
Yet sprightly loves upon her bosom played,
And youth was in her blush, and every shepherd said
She was a modest and accomplished dame.
WHAT have I done, (the wandering shepherd cried)
Thus to be banished from a face so fair,
(For now the frosts had spoiled the daises pride,
And dull November did his storms prepare)
Ah, what have I to do with swelling seas
Who once could pipe upon the hollow reed; --
I take no joy in such rude scenes as these,
Nor look with pleasure on the vagrant weed
That gulphy streams from rugged caverns bore,
Which floats through every clime, and never finds a shore;
But other fields and other flowers were mine,
Till wild disorder drove me from the plain,
And the black dogs of war were seen to join,
Roam over the soil and dispossess the swain:
Why must I leave these climes of frost and snow,
Were it not better in these glooms to stay,
And while on high the autumnal tempests blow
Let others over the wild seas take their way,
And I with my Lavinia's tresses play? --
Ah, no, no, no! the imperious wave demands
That I must leave these shores, and lose these lands
And southward to the high equator stray:
But fancy now has lost her vernal hue;
See nature in her wintry garb arrayed --
And where is that fine dream which once she drew
While yet by Cobra's stream I fondly played!
LAVINIA heard his long complaint and said,
Would thou for me detain the expecting sail --?
Go, wanderer go! -- the trees have lost their shade,
And my gay flowers are blasted by the gale,
And the bright stream is chilled that wandered through the vale:
Ah, why, Philander, do you sigh, so sad!
Why all this change in such a jovial lad?
Smooth seas shall be your guard, and free from harms
Return you safely to Lavinia's arms;
Or should the eastern tempest rend your sail,
Trust me, dear shepherd, should the winds prevail
And you be laid in Neptune's cradle low,
The winds shall bring me back the woeful tale
When I shall to the long shore weeping go,
And while I see the ruffian surge aspire,
Some consolation will it be to know
No pain or anguish can afflict the head
The limbs or stomach when the heart is dead;
And those black eyes that sparkle with desire,
When turned to pearls the sea-nymphs shall admire.
THUS long debating, on the bank they stood,
The heavy burdened barque at anchor lay,
While the foretopsail from the yard unfurled
Shook in the wind, and summoned him away;
Brisk blew the gales, and curled the yielding flood,
Nor had he one excuse to urge his stay,
But only that he wished to linger there: --
Curse on these winds (he said) that blow so fair,
Why do not tempests brood upon the deep
And all but the moist south in quiet sleep!
To the bleak shore the parting lovers came,
And while Philander did his sighs renew,
So near the deep they bade their last farewell
That the rough surge as if to quench their flame
Burst in and broke the embrace, and over Lavinia flew;
While a dark cloud hung lowering over the main,
From whence the attendants many an omen drew
And said, Philander would not come again.
Now to their various heights the sails ascend,
And southward from the land their course they bore;
Lavinia mourned her lover and her friend,
And stood awhile upon the sandy shore,
Till interposing seas the hull concealed,
And distant sails could only greet her view
Like a faint cloud that brushed the watery field,
And swelled by whistling winds, impelling, flew:
Then to a neighboring hill the nymph withdrew,
And the dear object from that height surveyed
Till all was lost and mingled in the main,
And night descended with her gloomy shade
And kindled in the heavens her starry train.
SAFE to the south the ocean wading keel,
In one short month its rapid course achieved,
And the bright star that marks the frozen pole
Was in the bosom of the deep received:
And now the weary barque at anchor rode
Where Demarara pours her sultry wave,
Moist Surinam, by torrents overflowed,
And Parambiro vends the fainting slave; --
Philander there, not fated to return,
While he along the silent current strayed
Where Commenwyn flows gently through the shade,
Perceived destruction in his bosom burn,
And the warm flood of life too fiercely glow:
The vertic sun a deadly fever gave,
And Demarara found his bones a grave
Deep in the waste where oceans overflow,
And Oronoko's streams the forests lave.
OFTEN to the winding shore Lavinia came
Where fond Philander bade his long adieu,
(And that sleep hill which gave her the last view)
Till seven long years had round their orbits ran,
Yet no Philander came, or none she knew:
Alas (she cried) for every nymph beside
Each distant flood some welcome wanderer sends,
And all but I get tidings from their friends:
Sad Mariamne drowns herself in woe
If one poor month Amyntor quits her arms,
And says, "from Ashley's stream he comes too slow," --
And bodes the heavy storm, and midnight harms:
WHAT would she say, if doomed to wait, like me,
And mourn long years and no Philander see!
ELEGIAC LINES.
IN all the radiance of the skies
She came to bless our longing eyes,
Adorned with all the charms that can
Intoxicate the heart of man,
Or bid the frantic passions move
To crush the object of their love.
As she her shining race begun,
Confessed the daughter of the sun,
Of all the beams that from him play,
She was the most delightful ray;
Her brow so black, her lips so red,
Her breath by melting blossoms fed,
Her eye with beauty so replete,
Her breast, where love his music beat,
Gay smiles upon her face so fair,
And every pleasure painted there.
THOUGH round her grave the muses play,
And many a tender thing they say,
Here she did not wish to stay
From her Florio far away:
Then cheer the night and gild the gloom,
Dear keeper of this shaded tomb,
'Till day approach, and opes the door,
And morning comes, to cease no more.
JAMAICA, Sept. 1784.
LINES OCCASIONED BY The Death of Mr. ROBERT BELL, the celebrated humourist,
and truly philanthropic Bookseller, formerly of Philadelphia.
By schools untaught, from nature's source he drew
That flow of wit which wits with toil pursue.
Above dependence, bent to virtue's side;
Beyond the folly of the pedant's pride;
Born to no power, he took no splendid part,
Yet warm for freedom, glowed his honest heart;
Foe to all baseness, not afraid to hate
The sceptered miscreant, or the slave in state:
Bound to no sect, to blame them or defend,
He loved his jest, a female, and his friend: --
The tale well told, to each occasion fit,
In him was nature -- and that nature wit:
Alike to pride and wild ambition dumb
He saw no terrors in the world to come,
But, slighting sophists and their flimsy aid,
To God and Reason left the works they made.
IN chase of fortune, half his life was whim,
Yet fortune saw no sycophant in him;
Bold, open, free, the world he called his own,
But wished no wealth that cost a wretch a groan --
Too social BELL! in others so refined,
One sneaking virtue never possessed your mind --
Had Prudence only held her share of sway,
Still had thy cup been full, thyself been gay!
But while we laughed, and while the glass went round,
The lamp was darkened -- and no help was found;
On distant shores you died, where none shall tell
"Here rest the virtues and the wit of BELL."
LINES OCCASIONED BY A Visit to an old INDIAN BURYING GROUND.
IN spite of all the learned have said
I still my old opinion keep;
The posture that we give the dead
Points out the soul's eternal sleep.
Not so the ancients of these lands; --
The Indian, when from life released,
Again is seated with his friends,
And shares again the joyous feast.
His imag'd birds, and painted bowl,
And ven'son, for a journey dressed,
Bespeak the nature of the soul,
Activity, that wants no rest.
His bow for action ready bent,
And arrows, with a head of bone,
Can only mean that life is spent,
And not the finer essence gone.
Thou, stranger, that shall come this way,
No fraud upon the dead commit,
Yet, mark the swelling turf, and say,
They do not lie, but here they sit.
Here, still a lofty (...) remains,
On which the curious eye may trace
(Now wasted half by wearing rains)
The fancies of a ruder race.
Here, still an aged elm aspires,
Beneath whose far projecting shade
(And which the shepherd still admires)
The children of the forest played.
There often a restless Indian queen,
(Pale Marian with her braided hair)
And many a barbarous form is seen
To chide the man that lingers there.
By midnight moons, over moistening dews,
In vestments for the chase arrayed,
The hunter still the deer pursues,
The hunter and the deer -- a shade.
And long shall timorous Fancy see
The painted chief, and pointed spear,
And reason's self shall bow the knee
To shadows and delusions here
EPITAPH.
WITH life contented, as in death resigned,
To seats congenial flew the unspotted mind:
Attending angels hailed her to that shore
Where time's dull winter clouds the mind no more;
Learn hence to live like her -- and, while you sigh,
Hear what she was, and aim like her to dio.
ESSAYS, TALES, AND POEMS. BY Mr. SLENDER.
I. THE POWER OF NOVELTY.
AMONGST the many strange and unaccountable propensities in human nature, I
take the desire of novelty to be one of the most common and universal. A
continued sameness, in any respect whatever, is invariably observed to beget
disgust. Nature, however, has in our present state of being, acted conformably
to this whimsical humor thus implanted in man: The earth is not one continued
plain, but is beautifully diversified with hills, valleys, woods, and rivers;
we are not enervated by a perpetual summer, or frozen by the benumbing rigors
of an unceasing winter. The constant company of the sun himself, who is the
material source of all cheerfulness and beauty, she feared might become
unpleasant, and has therefore sometimes overspread the heavens with a veil of
clouds to conceal him from our view; the globe of the earth is regularly every
twenty-four hours intruded between us for the same purpose; and in the winter,
this same sun, at her command, withdraws to pass the greater part of that
season behind the extensive ranges of the southern hills. For fear we should be
disgusted with eternal wakefulness, this our kind mother, Nature, has also
given us sleep; and that life itself might not become irksome by an endless
repetition of days and seasons, she has given us death to vary the dream of
existence.

FOR several reasons that I could produce, I am inclined to believe that in
those planets where there are no hills and valleys, no diversity of land and
water, and where the sun moves perpetually in the plane of the equator, or in
other words where he has no declination, here, I say, I am induced to believe
that the rational inhabitants can have no appetite for novelty. -- In the
comets, on the contrary, the face of nature must be incessantly changing, and
new objects continually coming into view. Like the crew of a ship sailing
through an immense ocean interspersed with an innumerable multitude of islands,
the inhabitants are hourly gratified with new scenes; suns now burning with an
intense yellow blaze, now changed to the pale whiteness of a star; an
atmosphere sometimes circular and in a state of equilibrium, at others kindled
up into a rectilinear blaze of the most irradiated splendour, and heated with
torrid gales that must be continually producing a change in the Cometarians
something analogous to what we call death, as often as they approach the
fearful orb of the sun. An endless variety too must take place in the body of
the comet itself; a variety of which we on this globe can have no adequate
conception or idea.

THE mind of a philosopher cannot be otherwise than entertained when he
observes how eager every rank and degree of life is, in one way or another, to
gratify this humor of novelty in itself. At present, however, we shall confine
our speculations to that species of novelty, which is equally welcome to all
ranks, and which either is, or ought to be found in gazettes and newspapers.

A MAN that is doomed to drudge perpetually at an attorney's desk, or is fated
to take his stand behind a merchant's counter from day to day, and from year to
year, has very few opportunities to gratify the innate desire of novelty, as
far as respects, the circumstance of change of place. The variety of customers
or clients, however, in some degree compensates for the want of liberty to
ramble. When these are few, or any accident interrupts the usual resort of new
faces, the man behind the counter is without doubt the most melancholy being on
this earth, 'till his spleen is removed by a news-paper.

I REMEMBER, that having returned several years ago from a long voyage, I soon
after paid a visit to an old friend of mine, one Timothy Tympan, a very ancient
man of the typographical craft, who printed gazettes in a small village of a
neighboring state. His very first question to me, after my entering the room,
was, what news!

NOT being able to recollect, all on a sudden, any thing particularly
remarkable, I replied that news was scarce, and that I had hardly any thing in
that way worth his attention, excepting what related to my own private concerns.

WHAT, no hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes or insurrections, said Tympan! --
None that I know of, answered I.

No battles, burning mountains, murders, or sudden deaths, that would make a
figure in the Gazette under some of the foreign heads?

No battles, said I, excepting one I was witness to this morning between a
drayman and his wife, in which the latter evidently gained a complete victory.

PSHAW! that would be too vulgar (said Tympan) -- no such battles for me -- a
heavy judgment fell upon our business when the disputes between the Russians
and Turks were adjusted by negotiation. -- Give me your battles, wherein ten
thousand men's heads are sliced off like cucumbers an hour before breakfast
time -- these were battles for you -- and on the banks of the Boristhenes too;
-- mind that, Robert. -- I can swear and declare I should not have the least
spark of fellow feeling for the deaths of two millions of our species, at only
two hours warning, so it happened on the other side of the Atlantic; and I am
convinced most of my customers and readers (...) precisely of the same way of
thinking.

OUR friends and connexions ought undoubtedly to be dear to us, returned I --
but we should also consider that men are men every where, and that their
miseries in every place ought equally to influence the amiable heart of
sympathy and benevolence.

"WHY, hang it, it is not out of any principle of cruelty neither that I take
delight in printing these things, for I assure you I have not the heart even to
kill a chicken; but then, my dear sir, one naturally you know, takes such
delight in reading about murders and massacres, especially as we are always
sure, at this distance, that none of our relations or neighbors are amongst
them. -- But come, tell us -- had you no violent storms on your voyage -- did
not your vessel spring a leak in five or six places, and spoil half your cargo
-- did none of your masts go overboard with ten or a dozen sailors on the lee
yard arm, who sunk out of sight, and were never heard of more! -- come, be
free, it is the devil to have a friend just returned from a long voyage, and
not to be able to gratify our customers with the loss of a single mast, a yard
-- no men washed overboard -- no leaks -- no waterspouts -- no nothing!"

WE were rather plagued with long calms, answered I, than any thing else. In
every other respect the weather was agreeable enough, and our vessel proved
remarkably tight and sound.

"AND how goes it with the caliph of Babylon -- does he make out to keep his
head upon his shoulders? -- I cannot endure that fellow's bloody despotism --
may I die by an overdose of hiera picra if I would not almost lose a finger to
be able to tell the public that this cursed dog had been strangled by his own
mutes, and his head fixed on a pole forty yards high. -- "

IF the caliph of Babylon is a bad man (replied I) I sincerely wish him the due
reward of his demerits; but, as matters are, I am so unfortunate as not to have
the least knowledge either of him or his concerns.

"WELL, then -- are there no new nations of giants lately discovered in
Patagonia, twenty or thirty feet in length, and proportionably broad over the
shoulders and hips -- ah -- if we had but a giant or two in this country, what
an excellent and fertile source of paragraphical information would he be! we
should easily forgive him for pulling up a few trees by the roots, or treading
down now and then an insignificant village or two in New England, for the sake
of the glorious entertainment he would afford the good people of our country
and neighborhood."

BUT how, if he should advance into these parts, and commit similar
depredations in your own province, and at your own doors, quoth I?

"IT would be a very easy matter (replied my friend) to restrain him to the
eastern side of the Hudson; and, if he should attempt to head that river, you
know a small garrison at Ticonderoga, with a few twelve pound cannon, might
easily check his further progress. -- And how is it with the Algerines; may not
one expect their fleet in these seas in the course of six or eight months? How
delightfully such a paragraph as this would read. -- On Wednesday last, the
Elizabeth, of Philadelphia, captain Cleverboy, engaged, off the capes of
Delaware, the Algerine ^ebeque Cara Alla Mustapha, mounting 22 guns, Solomon
Osman Faddleclack, commander; -- the infidel fought desperately for something
better than seven glasses, when he thought proper to submit to the superior and
almost intolerable fire of the Elizabeth. The pirate had his decks completely
cleared three times, but did not strike till the standard of Algiers was singed
from the ensign staff. -- N. B. 200 of his men were killed on the spot, and
near twice that number desperately wounded. -- This would be glorious
intelligence for us newsmongers, Mr. Slender; but peace has ruined every thing,
and in a little time we shall have nothing to tell our readers but mere stuff,
and a parcel of uninteresting events, such as that "Mynheer Schoonhoven, a
Dutch burger, smoked out three full pipes of tobacco in seven minutes and an
half;" or, that "Captain Mizentop saw two sail at a distance which he took to
be brigantines, but could not be positive, as the air was somewhat hazy."

HERE our discourse ended for the present, but I soon discovered that,
notwithstanding my reserve in point of giving intelligence, my friend was
determined to have a paragraph out of me and my voyage at any rate. On the next
publication day I read with some surprise in his paper as follows:

"NORFOLK, June 25. On Sunday last arrived here the sloop Brazenbones, in
twelve weeks from Africa. In her came passenger Mr. Robert Slender. He brings
little or no intelligence worth communicating; and confirms what we have long
feared would be the case, that there will be few or no heads broken, or throats
cut, in the old world during the current year. There is too much reason to
surmise that the caliph of Babylon is still in good health, notwithstanding his
late enormities. The giants of Patagonia continue to be very peaceable; and the
vessel in which Mr. Slender arrived on these coasts proved very tight and sound
on her voyage, having unfortunately neither lost a mast, nor had one man washed
overboard."

II. THE SICK AUTHOR.
FINE and exalted sentiment has so little connection with, or relation to the
common affairs of this world, that the lives of most men, who have shined in
the walks of genius and imagination, afford us a striking proof, that the
possessors of elegant and inventive minds are by no means to be envied for
their fortune or success, when they attempt to join in the usual and more
necessary pursuits of mankind in general.

HE, who by the natural bent of his genius, is constantly attempting to strike
out new paths through the wilderness of life, cannot otherwise than meet with
numberless obstacles and difficulties, because he is not willing to confine
himself to the beaten road which time, custom and convenience have long
established, and of consequence, has become smooth and easy. -- If he cannot
find a congeniality of sentiment between himself and his fellow travelers,
that is another fertile source of infelicity. The world cannot be expected to
take him by the hand who is constantly endeavoring to avoid their company, and
shows them upon every occasion that he gives the preference to his own ideas.

SEVERAL of us made a party some time ago to pay a visit to the lodgings of the
poet Antronius. I had heard he was sick; and more persons than one had assured
me, he was either dying or dead; a report, however, which several circumstances
convinced us was not true. -- There was something in the very structure and
aspect of his garret that was highly sentimental, and unlike any other
habitation below the moon. Not one of his chairs were furnished with four legs:
a board, laid across a large basket, served him for a writing desk; -- his bed
and himself were both extended on an old trunk, which to appearance, had a very
excellent spring-lock and key, but no hinges. A dish of crab-shells proved,
beyond a doubt, that he had been beholden to the aquatic ^lement for his last
night's repast. Several manuscripts lay in sight, some torn, others gnawed by
rats; a paper lay on his table, which seemed to be an account he had lately
drawn out to send to his bookseller, and was as follows:

Philadelphia, July 25. George Folio, bookseller, Dr. To Lewis Antronius.

l. s. d. To 7 dreams at 1 s. 0 7 0 T a short and impartial account of the
people in the moon 0 8 4 To the ecclesiastical history of ditto 1 2 6 To a
description of the palace of the sun, in blank verse 0 4 2 To a conversation
with Nisroc the Babylonian 0 0 6 2 2 6

The only printed books I saw, were an Euripides of an old edition, and my good
friend Plautus; his elegant text almost shoved out of doors by the beastly hand
of some Dutch commentator. So indubitable a proof of extreme poverty, as all
around us too plainly demonstrated to be the case, could not but excite some
few ideas of melancholy even in minds that had for many minutes past been on
the verge of laughter.

I LONG ago told you, Antronius, said I (accosting him first) that this would
be your case and condition at last. A wise man will always accommodate his
employment to the nature, qualifications, and character of the country he
happens to reside in. Shoemakers are of no use in that nation (mentioned, I
think either by Mandeville or Pliny) whom nature has furnished with hoofs.
Barbers cannot possibly exist, as such, among a people who have neither hair
nor beards. How then could a poet hope for success in a city where there are
not three persons possessed of elegant ideas!

ANTRONIUS, at these words, raised his head, as if this was the first moment of
his having noticed us. -- "I do indeed recollect the advice you gave me (said
he, with a faint voice) but such an irresistible torrent of sentiment was
continually rushing in upon my mind from all quarters, that I could scarcely
ever command a moment's leisure to think of this world or its more immediate
concerns. But, if so many men (continued he) that have done real service to the
world, have notwithstanding met with no other reward than ingratitude and
neglect, if not insult and cruelty at last, what reason can I have to count
upon the world's favors, whose labors have been merely speculative, such as
could only relieve the hour of idleness or gratify the fancies of a sentimental
few, and that only, perhaps, when every other amusement failed them, from
accidental causes, a rainy day, or the tedious length of a winter's evening?

"POETRY, gentlemen, I am fully convinced, is at best but a poor trade, as
things are, and to the far greater part of the world is the same as the music
of an organ to the ears of a deaf man. The only people that ever turned it to
any real account were the ancient Hebrew and Egyptian priests; by refining the
popular religion into a handsome poetical style, they attained to an importance
and elevation of character and fortune, which has been the lot of few poets,
religious, moral or profane, since their time."

HERE Antronius began to talk a little wild, from the delirium occasioned by
his fever, and thus went on:

"Now we are upon the subject of religion, gentlemen, I would take leave to
mention, that amongst the almost infinite variety of creeds and religious
systems that have ever been obtruded upon the world, I firmly believe the old
Pythagorean notion of transmigration to have the best pretensions to truth. --
Nay, gentlemen, it is indubitably true; for I no^ recollect perfectly well,
that I myself am at this instant doing penance in this very garret for a few
^ow lived tricks formerly committed in a different (...) o^ being. I remember I
wrote poetry so long ago (...) in the r^ign of Ezra-bel-baradan, one of the
most (...) kings of Persia. I was made poet-laureat to this monarch, feasted
every day upon partridges, had women and wine at my command, and, in short,
passed my time very agreeably, having little or nothing to do in the way of
business, more than to write an annual birth-day-ode in honor of the king, my
master.

"AT my death, however, I was taken into custody by the spirit of the in^erior
world, who, in return for my having lived in so much ease during my last state
of human existence, obliged me to animate the body of a camel. In this
condition I continued more than twenty years, traveling under heavy burdens,
through deserts parched with everlasting drought. We were at length attacked
one day on the borders of Egypt by a band of Arabian robbers, one of whom,
after killing my master, wantonly run a dart into my belly, and killed me also.
-- It would be tedious to detain you, gentlemen, with an uninterrupted account
of all the successive changes that have fallen to my lot, during the immense
number of years that have passed since the era I mentioned, down to the latter
times. Sufficient be it to say, that in the reign of queen Anne, of England, I
was a considerable officer of state in the British nation, and by taking proper
advantages of the times and my situation, cheated the government out of more
than fifty thousand pounds sterling, at one stroke. I had managed matters so
cunningly too, that no hold could be taken of me. I lived afterward at my
ease, rode in my coach, conversed familiarly with the great men of the age, and
died at last full of days and honor. But the spirit of retribution, has so
deeply resented my conduct in that affair, that I have, since the period I
mentioned, undergone no less than four changes; I have been a drayman's horse,
a Jamaica field negro, a sailor in an English man of war, and last of all,
gentlemen, to complete my misery, am now doing penance in the character of an
American poet. -- What will become of me next, I cannot yet tell; certain I am,
however, that be the change what it may, it cannot be very much for the worse.

"BUT somebody, I find, has played me a slippery trick: a report has been
industriously circulated that I am dead. I wonder if any one could have
believed it, especially as a single line has not appeared in the public papers
to countenance the pitiful lie. No epitaph, no inscription, no funeral stanzas!
alas, alas, to what purpose have I lived and writ, to have no notice taken of
me when there was so much reason for my friends to think I was numbered with
the departed!"

I SHOULD not wonder at all, said Argyrastes, another of our company, if there
had been a dozen poem already written and inscribed to your memory. The world
oftentimes acts very absurdly in this particular. A retainer to the fine and
fanciful arts is considered as a superfluous individual of society in most
countries. His art will not support him; he nevertheless has been taught to
consider the public as his debtor. The public, in their turn, conceive him to
be a bu^^hen entailed upon them: they therefore rejoice exceedingly when he is
dead; because a tombstone, a wooden pyramid, and a scrap of poetry will cost
but a trifle in comparison to a proper encouragement of the living artist;
indeed, the last article may be computed to cost nothing at all, as every fool
now a days writes elegies and epitaphs gratis. But I will relate a story to you
that shall not be altogether foreign to the subject we are upon:

CUPA Loka Yupanqui, the celebrated Peruvian astromer, who formerly lived upon
the summit of the very high mountain of Chinkopequa, in the neighborhood of
the once imperial city of Cuzco, had during a long life made no fewer than
three thousand nine hundred and forty-nine observations upon the planetary
motions, for the benefit and instruction of his countrymen; which observations
were all engraved upon copper, and by by order of the priests of the sun
deposited in the royal academy of arts and sciences. This celebrates astronomer
was nevertheless so very indigent that those who were acquainted with him did
not hesitate to assert that he derived his bodily sustenance rather from the
benign influences of the stars, than any sublunary emoluments resulting from
his skill and penetration as an astronomer. All men read his observations with
pleasure: the royal clock was daily regulated thereby; the ecliples of both
luminaries were noted to a single minute, and, in consequence, universal praise
was the portion of Cupa Loka Yupanqui, a name in the Peruvian language
importing, Wisdom in whatever relates to the heavens and the stars. -- At
length, on a sudden he disappeared from his hut on the summit of the mountain.
The smoke of his chimney had ceased for many days, and the dog that was wont to
convey his written observations in a basket to the sacerdotal college was no
longer seen traveling down the usual path.

SOME curious people at last ascended to his habitation. They found the
astrolabe lying on a table in good order: the image of the sun was unmolested;
his quadrants and sextants were hanging in their respective places as usual,
but the astronomer was departed, not without violent suspicious of his having
been torn in pieces by some wild beast from the Cordilleras. Woe is me! said
Arequepa, one of the citizens of Cuzco, who shall now give us notice of the
approach of the comets; who will tell us when the moon is preparing to array
herself in her mourning weeds, and who will be found sufficient to regulate the
going of the royal clock at Cuzco! -- Every one, in his way, lamented the fate
of the astronomer, that had thus so unaccountably disappeared. Royalty itself
seemed chagrined at the loss. The Inca was observed to eat no supper on the
evening of the day he heard the news. The select virgins of the palace hung a
black veil over the representation of the great luminary in the royal college.
It was undoubtedly meant as a compliment to the memory of Cupa Loka Yupanqui.

WHEN six days more had elapsed, all the learned men of the imperial city put
on mourning, and the upper windows of the temple of the sun were shut, thereby
signifying that the learning of the empire was in a great measure obscured by
the departure of this miracle of astronomical science. On the following day the
royal edict made its appearance, in which it was commanded that a monument of
one hundred feet in height, to be composed of the most costly marble that could
be procured, should be forthwith erected to the memory of this celebrated
astronomer and philosopher, with emblems and inscriptions suitable to those
arts in which he had excelled.

No order from the Inca could possibly be disobeyed without the most exemplary
punishments in consequence. No expense, therefore, was spared to procure the
choicest materials; and what added considerably to the cost and trouble, was, a
supplement to the edict, importing that the aforementioned monument, should be
erected on the summit of the mountain Chinkopequa, and in the very spot where
the cottage of the astronomer yet stood, and where he had made the far greater
part of his observations.

THE difficulty of transporting such a vast quantity of the most weighty
materials up so steep a hill, and to so prodigious a height, was at first
deemed almost insuperable. The unremitted labors, however, of many thousands
of people accomplished it at last, and they were just preparing to lay the
foundation stone of this stately fabric when Cupa Loka Yupanqui was seen coming
up toward the multitude, on the opposite side of the mountain.

UNIVERSAL confusion now ensued. Some imagined it to be the ghost of the
philosopher returning from the prisons of the sun; others, less superstitious,
but more interested, were for killing him immediately, that the work might not
be interrupted, after being so far advanced. -- In the midst of their clamours,
the astronomer once more gained the summit of Chincopequa, but was struck with
astonishment when he saw his old and humble habitation pulled down, and so
immense an edifice erecting in its stead.

MY children, said the old man, is this a dream, or do I behold realities!
Thirty days ago my cottage stood in this place. I then sat out on a visit to
one of the valleys of the Andes, the residence of a sage inchanter, who
professes to have discovered the exact time and duration of our empire. What
temples are these you are raising in so unpromising and remote a situation as
this? If the Inca will not do an act of injustice to one of the meanest of his
subjects, let him restore to me again my cottage, my cypress tree, my
astrolabe, and the image of my God and his father, the Sun.

THE work was now suspended, and a messenger immediately dispatched to the
court with intelligence that the astronomer had either not been dead, or was
returned to life, as he had just arrived on foot from the east, and had
demanded the restoration of his cottage and instruments.

THE countenance of every one brightened up at this agreeable news. The Inca
himself examined into the truth of the report. and finding it to be true,
ordered public rejoicings to be made, the upper windows of the solar temple to
be opened, and the veil to be removed from the image of the sun in the royal
college. The astronomer was then sent for to the palace, to explain the reason
of his having disappeared so suddenly and unaccountably, and for a time longer
by twenty-nine days and an half than he had ever before been known to absent
himself. This he accounted for to the satisfaction of the monarch and the
populace. The Inca then commanded him to make any request he pleased, and it
should be granted.

YOUR sublime majesty, the descendent of the sun, replied the old man, is too
gracious to one like myself, who can only boast that my descent is from the
dust of the valley. My request and desire is then, that as I have,
notwithstanding all my knowledge and services, suffered the evils of extreme
poverty these sixty years past, your majesty will now be graciously inclined to
order, that the precious materials which you have caused to be purchased at so
high a price wherewith to erect a monument for me, when dead, may be
immediately sold and disposed of to the best advantage, so that with the
proceeds thereof I may be comfortably supported while I personally remain in
the lands of the living!

III. THE VOYAGE OF TIMBEROOTABO-EEDE, AN OTAHEITE INDIAN. Copied from the
Hieroglyphical Records of that distant nation.
1. A STATE PAPER.
INSTRUCTIONS from his majesty TOARRO TORANO, Prince of the noble and exalted
island of (...), unrivalled in the ocean; king of kings* and for whose sake
only the sun and moon give light in the firmament, and shine upon their
children in the midst of the waters -- To his slave Timber^o-T^b^eede, captain
of the Royal Pahie (galley) now riding at anchor in the bay of Matavai.

WHEREAS, there is reason to believe that many countries, as well as nations of
barbarians, do exist in different parts of the ocean that have never yet been
visited by our august flag, and consequently have never been favored with an
opportunity to bow their heads in token of their assent to our sublime laws,
their compliance with the principles of our exalted religion, and their full
and complete acknowledgment of the superior excellence of our arts, sciences,
manners, and mode of government. -- We do, therefore, commission and empower
you, our faithful and beloved slave, Timberoo Tabo-eede, to prepare our royal
galley Mannu-Mahanna [bird of the sun] with all due expedition for a voyage of
sixteen Malama [moons] toward the rising of the great luminary, manning her
with a sufficient number of our most expert sailors, and taking on board a
quantity of provisions answerable to so long and hazardous a voyage. -- All
lands that you shall discover, and which, upon investigation, shall appear to
be inhabited by barbarians and savages, we do hereby authorize you to take
possession of in our royal name, and for our use, as appendages to this our
royal government; and be particularly careful to bring us an inhabitant of
every new country you discover, by way of specimen of the make, manners and
language of the tribe or nation to which he belongs.

WHEN you are in any country actually possessed by barbarians, remember that
you regulate yourself and crew in every respect by the laws and customs of our
own island, and not by those of the savages you happen to be among. -- Should
you at any time be in want of provisions, and they will not consent to furnish
you with any quantity you may require, you must immediately do your endeavor
to get possession of the person of the prince, or some other great man of the
country, whom you are to hold in confinement on board our royal galley till
such times as your demands are answered; and should they continue obstinate in
their refusal, you are hereby directed to put the great man to death, stabbing
him with the patty-pattoo, by way of intimidating them into a compliance.

SHOULD you discover any iron, you are to take instant possession of it, as a
precious metal naturally appertaining and belonging to ourself only, and not by
any means to those miserable barbarians, who, it is very likely, do not worship
our supreme deity Taroatai^etoomoo.

PREVIOUS to your departure from the island of Otaheite, you are to receive one
of the priests of our household on board the royal galley before mentioned,
whose business it shall be to instruct the barbarians in our true faith; not
forgetting a complete set of tattowing instruments, to perform that blessed
operation on the posteriors of such great men and ladies as shall be sincerely
willing to be converted to our most holy religion.

THESE, most faithful slave, are the instructions which we expect you will
particularly observe, leaving other and less important matters to your own
discretion and prudence, of which we have long had the most convincing and
satisfactory proofs. May the Spirit of the ocean grant gentle winds and smooth
seas to the faithful slaves of the king; to the end that our dear and beloved
galley, (the bird of the sun) may safely return to our island after the
revolutions of sixteen moons are accomplished.

2. The JOURNAL OF TIMBEROO TABO-EEDE, presented to the king on his return.
ON the twentieth day of the third moon, every thing being in perfect
readiness, we weighed anchor from the bay of Matavai, and directed our course
southward, steering in the day time by the sun that enlighteneth all things,
but in the dead hours of the night by the stars that are immovable, and hang
over the southern extremity of the ocean. We soon lost the view of his
majesty's great island which extends its summit to the clouds, and ought not
to be mentioned on the same day with Huaheine, Ulietea, or Bolabola, I now
called up to my recollection the long journey that lay before us over the
waves, by the command of him whose will directs the strength of Ota^eite, as
a boy plays with the infant offspring of the hog of the valley. But melancholy
and heaviness took full possession of my soul, till I was impressed with an
idea of the glory that might arise from the discovering of new worlds, and
giving the miserable barbarians the true knowledge of the great
Taroataihetoomoo, the god whom we love and adore.

ON the twenty ninth day of the third moon a mighty storm arose, in which the
royal galley, the bird of the sun, was in great danger from the strength of the
rapid movements of the deep ocean. But your majesty's seamen behaved like bold
men, and were not dismayed. When the weather once more became favorable, and
the blue azure of the firmament appeared, we found the guiding stars of the
south to be high, so that I now commanded the pilot to turn the prow of the
galley toward the rising of the sun, and the wind blowing fresh from the place
of his setting for many days together, we at length after three moons swift
sailing came in sight of a great country, which none of your majesty's mariners
had ever seen or heard of before.

THE air was now so cold, that all the cloth in Otaheite would scarcely have
sufficed to have kept us warm. But our blood was good, and our hearts were of
that kind which can endure every thing for the sake of extending the power, and
carrying to the ignorant the religion and learning of our dear and beloved
native island.

As the sea broke to a prodigious height upon the rude shore of this unknown
country, which appeared exceedingly mountainous and barren, all our attempts to
place our feet upon the dry land were for a long time ineffectual, and once (my
heart trembles at the recollection) your majesty's royal galley, the bird of
the sun, was almost driven upon the sharp rocks, where the seas broke to a
greater height than the utmost branch of the far famed cocoa nut tree in the
royal garden. But when all hope was given over, the spirit of the winds caused
it to blow fiercely from the shore, and we were once more carried out of danger.

AT last, we discovered a large extent of land terminating in a point, and
within it a smooth and gentle bay, into which we safely conducted our galley.
Here we put our feet upon the land, and made a large fire to drive away the
cruel god of the winter from amongst us. While the fire burned bright he
vanished from our remembrance, but when the blaze was extinguished he came
again and cruelly tormented us in our toes, and in our singers, in our ears,
and on the tips of our noses, and also miserably afflicted the flesh that is
spread over the ribs.

WE remained seven days in this disconsolate country and in all that time saw
but one of the natives. Him we endeavored to approach, but could not. He
appeared thin and meagre, and the spirit of the winds assisted him in his
flight toward the forests of the hills. We then dispatched your majesty's
priest after him, with injunctions to perform the holy operation of tattowing
on his hinder parts with the instrument of thirty teeth, if he should be
caught. But the Spirit of the winds still assisted him, and he presently
disappeared in the bosom of the mountains.

AFTER receiving on board such supplies of wood, and water, and shell fish as
could be procured on these cold and inhospitable shores, and repairing the
damages the royal galley had sustained in passing over so great a portion of
the deep and unfathomable seas, we once more exposed ourselves to the mercy of
the waves, and by the aid of the wind which bioweth from the setting of the
sun, we again sailed eastward, and afterward to the north, coming again into
the spaces under the more perceptible dominion of the sun, we were again
favored with pleasant breezes and whole days of warm sunshine, like that
continued summer your majesty's subjects enjoy in the valleys of Otaheite.

MORE than four moons now passed without discovering any thing that much
resembled land. We were all weary and began to be afraid that no other
countries were to be found in these parts of the ocean. Scarra-boo, the cabin
boy, was continually on the top of the mast, and saw nothing. At last, after a
long time, he cried out, that he saw a little hill in the midst of the waters.

OUR hear^s now became alive within us. Tamao-Tama^de, the chief cook, then
climbed up the mast also, and bade us be of good courage, because what the boy
had said was true. "There will be hogs on this hill, said he, and springs of
water, and we shall no longer be choked with extremity of thirst."

THE prow of the royal galley, the bird of the sun, was then directed toward
this hill, which appeared like a man's head floating on the blue surface of the
agitated waters. By and by the shoulders seemed to rise above the waters also.
We soon knew it to be an island, which we named Killamaroo-nee, i. e. the land
of hills and valleys. -- When the next morning appeared we were close in upon
the shore, and saw the harbor and the town, and the ships belonging to the
barbarians. The natives seemed to be very numerous, and, upon our landing, we
found them to be of a variety of different colors, from a pale yellow to an
absolute and unmingled balck. -- They came down to the sea side, and frequently
cast an eye of admiration at our vessel; for it must be observed, that the
ships appertaining to the savage islanders, and which we saw at anchor in the
harbor, were exceedingly heavy and clumsy, and would not sail so far in a day
as your majesty's galley would do in a small division thereof. We saw many
pieces of iron that had been driven into different parts of these vessels,
which we endeavored to extract with our fingers and teeth, but without the
desired effect. (...) Hawke^worth^^ account of Cook's first voyage, etc.


As soon as we landed, we drew up in order with our patty-pattoos upon our
shoulders, and were received by many hundreds of the inhabitants, who looked at
us with a mixture of terror and veneration; and it was some time before they
could entirely rid themselves of their timid sense of our superiority. Their
language seemed barbarous in a high degree, as being very unlike our own.

THEIR houses also appeared to us to have been constructed with very little
ingenuity; for, instead of leaving the sides open, as with us, they completely
enclose them, which must, in our opinion, prevent that free circulation of air
within, which is necessary for the health and well-being of the human frame.

THEY have several sorts of cloth, which we took to be of their own
manufacture, but all were, without exception, very mean and ^li^sey. Upon
throwing them a few scraps of that kind made in your majesty's island, they
catched at them with the greatest eagerness and avidity; a convincing proof
that our's was reckoned of a much superior quality.

WE observed a strange animal among them, near the height of a middle sized
man; with large eyes, a busny tail, and long slim legs, but in several other
particulars very unlike any thing we had ever seen in these our native islands.
The people of the country call it a horse. -- An' please your majesty, it is
most like a large black hog of any thing you are acquainted with; having four
legs, a tail, two eyes, a belly, and a back, with ears, and other parts usually
found in a swine.

THE second time we went on shore, a person, apparently of some consequence,
advanced toward us as we were traveling about the town, and by signs, for we
understood not a word of what he said, invited the principal persons among us
to his habitation. We were agreeably surprised with an entertainment of flesh
and roots, cooked in the savage fashion, on which we made a shift to satisfy
our hunger. During the time of eating, we were encircled by a number of black
people of both sexes, who had green branches in their hands, which we at first
supposed were emblematical of peace and friendship, but, as we soon after
discovered, were only meant to brush away the flies from our victuals.

THEIR places of worship are far superior in point of size to any thing of the
same sort in your majesty's island of Otaheite. But we gained, while amongst
them, a very imperfect idea of their religion, owing to our not staying long
enough to acquire a perfect knowledge of their language. We found out, however,
with some difficulty, that they worship three Gods, first, second, and third,
whom they yet hold to be only one and the same. If we comprehended them aright,
they asserted that the second one formerly came down from the clouds, and was
put to death for the offenses of the island. This, may it please your majesty,
appeared to us a very strange conceit; but, if the matter has been really so,
your slave is inclined to think, that it is high time for some benevolent
divinity to descend upon the island a second time, as it is at present overrun
with every species of wickedness; particularly injustice, falsehood, and
cruelty. The white people are intolerably proud, selfish, vain, malevolent, and
lazy; and are supported by a miserable race of black slaves, whom they steal
away from a distant country, and force them to undergo the severest labors.
The slightest punishments inflicted for the slightest offenses upon these
wretched men, are infinitely more severe than your majesty would think due to
the crime of high treason itself.

BUT, we must do the white men the justice to say, that they did not seem at
all urgent that we should be acquainted with the particulars of their religion;
nor did the priests themselves take much notice of us. The reason given us for
this conduct was very odd. A man in red told us, that the high priest of the
island and his deputies never took any notice of those, who had not in their
possession considerable quantities of small circular plates of yellow metal.
There was some superstition in this matter, which we never could unravel.
Possibly, sir, these little plates of metal may be the image or sign of their
god, as Ti^raboo, my first lieutenant, has more than once told me, that he saw
the representation of a man's head on one of them. Be the matter as it may, the
islanders are so amazingly tenacious of these trinkets, that we never could lay
our ^ingers on a single one of them to bring away only for your majesty's
inspection.

THEIR custom of burial is wholly different from our own. We expose our dead
upon a frame above the surface of the earth; these infidels, on the contrary,
bury theirs some considerable depth in the ground. The reason is apparent:
These people hate and envy each other mortally, while living, and it is but
natural that they should huddle the carcases out of sight as soon as possible,
when they are dead.

THEY punish theft with the most aggravated severity, but, what seemed very odd
to us, they forcibly (...) up by the neck one of your majesty's mariners (...)
stealing a piece of white metal they call silver, to all appearance of little
or no value, and only laughed at us when we pilfered a nail, or a small spike,
(both, of infinitely more value) out of an old wooden building.

THE white women in this island seemed to us to be a very insipid set of
animals. They would as soon think of flying in the air as diving in the sea for
shellfish; and not one in five thousand knows even how to paddle a canoe.

THE people in general appear to possess a very small stock of animal spirits,
as we observed all ranks and orders among them constantly drinking strong
liquors, to support a decent degree of resolution and enterprise.

THEY have a most shameful custom of eating, in companies, off a wooden
platform, called in the barbarian language, a Table, and even looking each
other in the face while they eat, as well as talking with the utmost
familiarity upon whatever subject occurs. This practice, in our opinion, is
very wrong, and we endeavored to convince them that it was so but could not
prevail upon them to change it. -- On the contrary, (and what is very
wonderful) these same people allow of very little of the most intimate species
of familiarity between the sexes; so that their private intercourse, and the
propagation of the species, carries with it an idea of criminality, and is
therefore managed by stealth, and in the dark hours of the night, to avoid the
imputation of what they would otherwise deem public scandal.

THEIR mourning for the dead, in this country, cannot be sincere, as I do not
remember ever to have seen a drop of blood shed upon these occasions. Nay the
next relations are oftentimes frolicking and drinking while strangers are hired
to make wry faces, outcries, and lamentations for the departed.

THE worship in their churches consists principally in gazing upon each others
faces. We went to these places several times, but gained very little
instruction. A man in black had a good deal to say from an elevated station,
but we could make nothing of his discourse. Another sat a few steps below him,
who at certain intervals opened his mouth very wide, uttering strange and
dismal noises, in which the greatest part of the assembly joined him. Toward
the conclusion of the service we saw several old men coming toward us with
long black sticks, polished very nicely, which we supposed were to chastise
those who had been inattentive to the words of the man in black. From one end
of each of these sticks was suspended a small black cap. -- As far as we could
perceive, the inattentive persons had no other way to avoid being beaten than
by throwing a piece of metal into one of these caps, which in an instant
pacified the chastiser. As we had nothing wherewith to make atonement, we fled
with precipitation before the black stick had reached us. Our own priest, after
he had gained some little knowledge of the barbarian language, did his endeavor
not only to convince the citizens and islanders in general of their being under
the influence of a false religion, but also offered to instruct them in the
true faith and enlightened theology of our own country. We are sorry to inform
your sublime majesty, that his success was by no means answerable to his
labors, and it was with some difficulty he escaped three or four sound
drubbings from the priests of the in^idels, for even attempting to make
converts. -- These people seem to be under some indissoluble obligation to
believe only what has previously been believed for them by their progenitors.

GREAT numbers among them were employed, in our opinion, very childishly, and
in a manner that your majesty's subjects would deem an absolute waste of time.
They manufacture a thin white substance, which they call paper. A man lays a
leaf of this before him, takes the quill of a water fowl and cuts it sharp, and
then amuses himself whole days together in the most ridiculous manner possible,
dipping the point of his quill into a black liquid, and making little marks and
scratches upon the abovementioned white substance. What surprised us most was,
that the old men and chiefs of the land seemed to take as much delight in this
silly diversion as the boys and girls of thirteen or fourteen years of age. For
my own part, I am inclined to believe it is nothing more than a kind of
exercise to pass away time. Ti^raboo, however, my first lieutenant, thinks
otherwise, and pretends to be convinced, that it is some other of their
superstitious practices, handed down from the earliest ages of the country, and
the original meaning of which is now lost.

THE divine ceremony of tattowing is not performed upon the bodies of either
sex, which leads me to think that their ignorance or neglect of this rite alone
would fully justify your majesty, in the eyes of the world, in sending out a
large fleet and army to reduce this island to unconditional submission and
exemplary obedience, or extirpate the present inhabitants to make room for a
colony of the more enlightened natives of our own royal island.

ACCORDING to your majesty's orders, we have brought you a native of the region
we discovered, by way of sample of his countrymen. We made several attempts to
catch the high priest of the island, as he had the reputation of being a very
learned man, and might probably have given us, when properly civilized, some
satisfactory insight into the religion and morality of his fellow-citizens, but
we are sorry to inform your majesty that he was too alert for us, and were
obliged to content ourselves at last with a man of the law, who being fat and
awkward, was easily overtaken, and secured on board the royal galley; but has
proved to be a very stupid fellow, being able to tell us very little worth
knowing or remembering: He does not even appear to have the least knowledge of
making cloth, or manufacturing glass heads.

WE made many other remarks upon the religion, laws, customs, and manner of
living observable among these islanders, which remarks I shall faithfully
communicate to your majesty at another time.

WE then weighed anchor and took leave of the country, and after searching a
long time invain for other islands inhabited by a more rational people, we once
more directed our course for Otaheite, which by the favor of the spirit of the
winds we have again reached in safety. All that now remains is, that your
majesty would grant us liberty to prostrate ourselves in the temple of the
great spirit, Taroataihetoomoo, in acknowledgement for the protection he has
showed us.

3. A STATE PAPER.
IN Council, the 10th day of the 4th moon. -- It is Resolved by the king, great
men, and governors of the royal island of Ota^eite, that the nation discovered
by our servant Timberoo-Tabo-eede appears, from his account, to be in the
highest degree barbarous, savage, and untractable. The acquisition of such a
country and such inhabitants would therefore answer no good purpose, and would
only tend to corrupt the pure religion and decent system of manners and morals
we have received from our ancestors. A nation that possesses so small a share
of natural reason as not to have discovered the necessity of tattowing, can
never make good subjects; and they who can pass their whole lives in scratching
little marks upon a thin white substance called paper, do not deserve the honor
of being protected by the sublime monarch of Ota^eite.

IV. REPORT OF A LAW CASE. SOLOMON DASH, Plaintiff, FREDERICK FLUTE, Defendant.
STATE of the CASE.
TWO moneyed men, Solomon Dash and Frederick Flute, for the bettering the
condition of themselves and families, did agree to purchase a lot of land
between them, which was to be equally divided for the purpose o^ erecting two
contiguous buildings thereon. In the article drawn upon this occasion, it was
stipulated by the parties concerned, that upon Solomon Dash's paying a certain
specified sum, to the original proprietor of the land more than Frederick
Flute; ^e the said Frederick should relinquish so much of the half part of the
purchased territory as would be sufficient for a foot alley between the side
walls of the two buildings, affording a free passage to the back parts of the
premises. It was further agreed that the width of this alley, or passage,
should be sufficient for the passing and repassing of the person of him the
before mentioned Solomon Dash, without his rubbing against the wall as he
passed. This agreement was signed, July 25, 1760.

NOW, in process of time, after all was finished, and their respective families
were quietly settled upon the premises, it so happened, that the said Solomon
Dash, who, (as well as his neighbor Frederick Flute) was a lean man at the
time the above agreement was made, grew at length very fat, corpulent, and
unwieldy; his belly hung over his knees, and his shoulders jutted out some
considerable distance beyond their former dimensions. The consequence was, that
Mr. Dash found he could no longer pass through the alley without the greatest
difficulty, and not at all when he had put on his over coat in a cold winter's
day.

MATTERS being thus circumstanced, Solomon Dash applied to Frederick Flute to
pull down the wall of the house of him the said Flute, in order to widen the
alley, as by the (...) and original agreement and compact it was to be
sufficiently wide for the passing and repassing of the person of him the said
Solomon Dash, which at present was evidently not the case.

"BUT it was strictly the case at the time we made the agreement, and when we
erected our houses," said Frederick Flute.

"But it is not the case now," said Solomon Dash.

UPON this, the parties determined to go to law, and each presented a handsome
fee to his lawyer, and retaining fees to other lawyers. Solomon Dash's lawyer
was of opinion that an action would lay, and that Mr. Flute would be obliged to
pull down his wall.

ON the contrary, Frederick Flute's lawyer assured his client that the wall
might remain, and that Solomon Dash would be compelled to draw in his belly and
shoulders,

ABOUT one year now elapsed before the matter could possibly have a hearing
before the judges. However, when the long wished for day of trial came, both
the parties attended with their counsel, rolls, writings, witnesses, etc. etc.
The judges were seated on the bench, and silence was proclaimed, After the
witnesses were examined and other preliminary matters settled, the counsel on
behalf of the plaintiff got up and spoke as follows:

"May it please their honors the judges, and you, gentlemen of the jury!

"I RISE up to speak, may it please your honors, in behalf of a man, who has
been injured, basely injured, inasmuch as he has been considered punishable by
the defendant for a habit of body which it was not in his power to prevent.
Punish a man for growing fat, gentlemen! You might with equal propriety punish
a bull for having horns, or a camel for the protuberance that nature has
planted on his back. -- It appears very evident to me from the witnesses that
have been examined, and the sum of their evidence, that my client, Solomon
Dash, was ipso facto a lean man at the time (...) agreed and stipulated that
the alley or passage, in question, was to be sufficient for his passing and
re-passing; but -- was that to say, gentlemen of jury, that he was never to
become a fat man, gentlemen of the jury? -- As I find the peculiar
circumstances of this case involve a great number of difficulties; to obviate
them as much as possible, I shall in the first place endeavor to show that
fatness and corpulency do not in themselves convey an idea of criminality.
Secondly, that notwithstanding Mr. Dash was a lean man when the buildings were
erected, yet that it may be fairly argued from implication that he must have
meant the agreement to be no longer valid than during the time of his
continuing in propria persona a lean man. Thirdly and lastly, I shall briefly
make it appear, also, by way of winding up the matter, that it would be much
better a dozen stone walls should be removed, yea, torn from their foundations
as far as pole from pole, than that (...) man's shoulders should be ^awed down
to a diminut^^^ size for the sake of being accommodated to any passage whatever.

"IN the first place, then if the court pleases, I am to show that the simple
circumstance of a man's being fat or corpulent is not criminal in the eye of
the law. In proof of this, I shall beg leave to produce a case in point from a
small two shilling history of the life and reign of queen Elizabeth. A certain
fat man was taken up and committed to jail upon a charge of writing libels and
lampoons against her majesty and the government. As there appeared to be some
wit in these pieces, it was argued by Mr. Justice Brazenbrains, that the said
fat man could not be the author of them, as it was well known no fat person had
ever been remarkable for wit. -- The accused was, nevertheless, found guilty,
and sentenced accordingly; not for being a fat man -- mark that, gentlemen of
the jury -- not for being fat, I say, but simply because it was proved that he
both writ and published the libels. Here, you see, the only criminal
circumstance was the mischievous thing called wit, and not the accidental
circumstance of fatness. -- But, gentlemen, I will go further -- I will also
prove from reason and the eternal fitness and aptness of things that a man's
being simply fat, is no crime either in law or equity. Man, it is generally
allowed, is nothing more than animal rationale, a creature endued with reason;
of consequence, he stands related in a certain degree to the genus irrationale,
or brute creation, who only possess that inferior sort of reason which never
goes wrong. Now, when we go to market, as rationalists we always give the
preference to what is fat; we do not search up and down for a lean goose, a
lean turkey, or a lean pig -- No, gentlemen, we purchase only what is fat (in
Latin pinguis) and so far from leanness being countenanced amongst us, I am
clear, that instances, might be adduced, tending to prove that the clerk of the
market may legally make a seizure of whatever is exposed to sale remarkably
emaciated. I shall now, gentlemen, for your further satisfaction, reason
syllogistically a little; a mode of ratiocination which I hope will in a great
measure dissipate all your remaining doubts on this matter. -- A fat animal,
you will all allow, is at all times and in every respect to be preferred to a
lean one -- but a fat man is an animal to all intents and purposes -- therefore
a fat man is eternally and invariably preferable to a lean one.

"SECONDLY, I am to show that the covenant or article of agreement was no
longer valid than during the time of my client's being a lean man.

"WHEN the agreement was entered into by the parties, Mr. Solomon Dash's idea
must have been conceived thus: "I am not a fat man now, it is true; therefore
in my present circumstances such or such a width of passage may answer my
purpose; but, as the works of nature are in a state of perpetual rotation, it
is possible certain changes may also take place in that perambulating microcosm
at present known by the name of Solomon Dash. If therefore the works of nature
are compelled to submit to a change, why not a stone or brick wall also, which
is nothing more than the production of an art mean in itself and merely
mechanical." -- These, gentlemen, are evidently the principles upon which Mr.
Dash went. -- But further -- I will bring, by permission of the court, another
case in point, which I hope will throw some considerable additional light on
this subject.

"IN Dullman's reports, page 2096, may it please your honors, is recorded the
case of one Darby Quibble against Nathan Quirk. This Nathan Quirk was a very
base man who lived in the reign of George the first of England. It seems he had
signed an agreement with the aforesaid Darby Quibble, obligating himself to
supply said Darby with one gallon of old Jamaica spirits per week during the
natural life of him the before mentioned Darby Quibble, provided said Darby got
fairly drunk therewith every Lord's day morning previous to the ringing of the
first bells. It appeared upon trial that this agreement had been punctually
observed by both the parties till a terrible hurricane having happened and
destroyed several entire fleets then coming from the islands, both rum and
spirits all at once became so scarce, that they were to be had neither for love
nor money. Upon this, the above named Nathan Quirk refused to fulfill his
obligation any longer, for this plain reason, that the article specified in the
obligation was not to be had. -- What did Darby do in this case? Why he sued
Quirk in an action of damage, and the case was tried before lord chief justice
Bullring. And what was the judgment given? -- why simply this -- the defendant
prevailed over his adversary, because it was clear in law that the agreement
was and could be no longer binding upon said Nathan, the defendant, than during
the time or times that the specified article could be purchased within the
realm. When that failed, the failure without doubt operated as forcibly in
favor of the defenddant's not fulfilling his part of the obligation, as though
the said Darby had died a natural death; and for this plain reason, quia
necessitas valet supra omnia pacta. -- In the same manner the present article
of agreement can be considered as no longer binding upon Mr. Dash, than during
the time Mr. Dash continued to be a lean man.

"THIRDLY and lastly, I was to prove that the expense or trouble of demolishing
and rebuilding a stone wall ought not to be put in competition with the
dislocating or screwing in of a man's shoulders. -- I might here, please your
honors, as applicable to the case, say a great deal upon the nature of walls
in general, particularly of the walls of Troy; the Chinese wall, which, with
all its turnings and windings, runs 1500 miles, and terminates at the Kang sea;
the walls of Babylon, and other celebrated walls of antiquity, did I not fear I
should presume too much upon the patience of the court. -- But, I do
nevertheless insist upon it, gentlemen, that no walls whatever, be they
Babylonian, Chinese, Trojan, or American, ought to stand in the way of the
shoulders of Mr. Dash. -- What! a man of his importance to be squeezed through
a narrow alley like a hog through a wicker-work -- Forbid it justice, forbid it
equity, forbid it the laws of my country. -- These are my arguments, gentlemen,
and upon the strength of these I confidently rest the cause of my client with
the opinion of the honorable court, and you, gentlemen of the jury, and humbly
desire a verdict in favor of Mr. Dash."

THE council for the defendant then rose from his bench, seemingly in a great
passion, and thus began:

"May it please the court, and you gentlemen of the jury!

THE agreement formerly entered into by the parties, Dash and Flut^ appears to
me, gentlemen, to be of the nature of a contract. Here is one, and there is the
other, Here is a sum of money, for you, Mr. Flute, and there is your alley-way,
Mr. Dash. -- It has been argued by the plaintiff's counsel learned in the law,
that "fatness in not criminal in itself" -- that I deny, gentlemen of the jury;
-- a gross fat habit of body ( obesus in Latin, from obedo, to over-eat) is
produced by gluttony, gluttony is the mother of laziness, and laziness, we are
well assured, is the natural cause of all vice. -- And shall a good and
substantial stone wall be pulled down for the sake of a man whose paunch alone
derogates from the dignity of man! -- If I see a sat horse, a fat swine, or a
fat goose, to be sure, I am well pleased; but a fat man always disgusts me;
because he carries indolence in his countenance, dullness in his head,
stupidity in his eyes, and a tallow-chandler's shop in his belly.

"BUT throwing invective on one side, it must be evident to every man of common
understanding, may it please your honors, that, all other considerations
apart, there is an original flaw in the article of agreement, which must
operate considerably in favor of the defendant, Frederick Flute. -- The
article stipulated expressly, that the alley-way should be sufficient for the
passing and repassing of the plaintiff -- But mark, gentleman of the jury, the
words, at all times, and, in all circumstances whatever, are wanting. This is
the flaw; and this defect, I am well convinced, will gain us the cause.

"FOR, supposing now some good natured man should, out of mere favor, or for a
certain compensation, give me permission in writing to pass through the middle
entry of his dwelling house once every day for the sake of a short cut to my
law shop in another street, would that be a good reason, gentlemen of the jury,
that I should not only claim the said privilege during my whole life, but
should also take upon me to send my servants the same way, with their
wheelbarrows, hampers of porter, boxes of law books, and the like? -- Certainly
not; taking such a liberty would be preposterous in every sense, and I should
not only thereby lose my former privilege in propria persona, but might also be
sued in an action of trespass.

"Now, had my friend (supposed in this case) given me from under his hand, that
I should have the liberty of passing and repassing at all times through his
middle entry, and in all circumstances whatever; that is, at all periods of my
life, whether at thirty years old, or at fifty, or at five score -- whether
alone or in company, on horseback or on foot, the case would have been
materially different; and had I even worn the floor through with my horse's
hoofs, by reason of my daily passing and repassing, he could not have brought
an action against me, as the law supposes and allows, in all such cases a sort
of natural decay, although it may be produced by artificial means. In like
manner, if a man take a house upon lease for the term of thirty or forty years
(I speak indefinitely) he is not answerable for the mere natural decay and
waste of that house, gentlemen of the jury. -- But farther, sirs, who knows but
in time Mr. Dash, the plaintiff, may revert into his former habit of leanness?
Will he in that case consent to re-imburse Mr. Flute for the expense and
trouble he may have been at in pulling down and rebuilding his side wall? -- I
believe not. -- Giving your verdict, therefore, in favor of the plaintiff
would be punishing leanness with a witness, gentlemen of the jury. But is
leanness really a crime, in the eye of the common or any other law? -- Let us
attend to what my Lord Chief Justice Killbuck says upon the subject. Leanness,
says he, simply considered, does not imply criminality, neither ought a man is
suffer in life, limb or property, merely for being lean At the sametime,
instances may be produced wherein leanness has been the efficient cause of
condemnation in criminal cases. Such was the case of one Isaac Barebones,
mentioned by Counselor Clump in the one hundred and twenty-ninth volume of his
Reports. This Isaac Barebones, it appeared, was so extremely emaciated that his
(...) could be compared and likened to nothing else but knobs of iron, and his
fingers to scarcely any thing in the know^ world but the claws of a hammer. But
still all this was not criminal; the parts just mentioned being as yet only
(...) posses^^, and not in usum redacto. -- Isaac, however, (...) day smote a
man upon the head with his right fist, and killed him outright. He was soon
after apprehended, tried, found guilty, and finally hanged; not for being lean,
but for a very different reason. It had been clearly proved upon the trial,
that the blow be gave would scarcely have occasioned a black eye, had his fists
been soft and fleshy like those of most other men. -- He was hanged, then
simply for not having considered, that his hands, by being covered with nothing
better than something bearing a semblance to shrivelled parchment, had acquired
the nature and solidity of steel, and were therefore, in every sense, unlawful
weapons either for the purpose of attack or de^ence. Thus far the learned
counselor; and I beg leave to remark thereon, that if simple emaciation or
leanness is not considered as criminal in cases of life and death, much less
can it be so, gentlemen of the jury, where property is only concerned.

"I SHALL in the last place observe, that if your decree should be such as to
compel Mr. Flute to remove his wall, who can tell what distance will satisfy
the plaintiff. Who knows what extravagant dimensions Mr. Dash may yet arrive to
in point of bulk? -- Will he give security that he will not in time come to be
as large as an ox? -- Who can tell us when he will stop fattening? -- Should he
expand to the size of an elephant, is the defendant to give up half his little
territory to accommodate a monster, a cumberer of the earth, a walking
nuisance. -- Gentlemen of the jury, this must not be; I therefore conclude with
praying you to find a verdict in favor of the defendant."

OPINION of the JUDGES.
IT is the opinion of the Court, that although there is evidently a flaw in the
contract between the two parties, yet it was certainly implied, and the
Plaintiff certainly meant, never to give up his natural right of becoming a fat
man, when the constitution of his body should inclin^ that way. However,
gentlemen of the jury, as it will be much easier to reduce the over-corpulency
of the Plaintiff, than to remove the house of the Defendant, it is our opinion
and judgment, that the aforenamed Frederick Flute ought nevertheless to make a
suitable compensation to Solomon Dash for the inconveniences he has long
suffered, and still does suffer, from the straitness of his alley.

THE jury then withdrew, and soon after returned their verdict in favor of the
plaintiff, and that damages might be brought.

The COURT then gave Sentence, as follows:

YOU, Frederick Flute, are enjoined and commanded by this Court to purchase
forthwith, seven kilderkins of the best and most venerable white wine vinegar
that can be procured, for the sole use, benefit, and behoof of him the said
Solomon Dash; to the end that, by the drinking plentifully of this emaciating
liquid, he may be happily reduced to a size proportionate to the dimensions of
the alley-way, that has occasioned the dispute.

THUS matters ended for the present. The Defendant complied strictly with the
sentence given by the court; but the determination was not, by any means,
pleasing to the plaintiff. After several months consideration he renewed the
suit, and appealed to a higher court, and after that to another, 'till at last
it came before the high tribunal of Chancery, when the prosecutor's Counsel was
obliged to plead an Arrest of Judgment, inasmuch as Mr. Dash appeared, not
indeed mis-named, but mis-characterized, in the Declaration; having now, by his
long intercourse and acquaintance with law and lawyers, become a VERY LEAN MAN;
AND, CONSEQUENTLY, THAT THERE COULD (...) NO FARTHER CAUSE OF ACTION!

V. THE ACADEMY OF DEATH, A FRAGMENT.
THERE are a thousand things which an author may propose to himself as the
objects of his serious study and attention, during his waking hours, which he
nevertheless, upon trial, finds himself unable to make any thing of, at least,
so as to satisfy himself and his readers. -- Of this nature have been several
subjects wh ich I have from time to time undertaken to write upon, and as often
thrown aside from a conviction that I did not possess capacity equal to, or
materials sufficient for investigating them thoroughly. The reality of the
apparitions of the departed, the nature of the spiritual world, the seemingly
self-produced operation and organization of matter, the harmony of discord, and
the ultimate design of the material creation, have been some of those that
puzzled me the most. -- But, instead of perplexing you, my dear (...) with
these matters as much as I have puzzled and perplexed myself, and that to no
purpose; I will if you are in your usual good humor, relate an imaginary
excursion which I lately made in a dream, during a long stormy night in the
month of January, when the whole face of nature being under the temporary
impressions of death, a visit to the domains of that monarch was by no means
unseasonable.

I IMAGINED I was setting out on a long journey, the term of which was not
fixed in my own mind. Upon looking forward, in idea, it appeared to me like
casting the eye along an avenue of many miles in length, which terminated in
darkness, closed in, seemingly, upon both sides, and prevented any farther
prospect. -- I had scarcely entered this avenue, when I discovered it to be no
other than the common passage of mankind into another state of existence.

THE passage was dark enough, to be sure, but was by no means so frightful as I
had imagined. "The gods (said Seneca) conceal from men the happiness of death,
that they may endure to live." Be that as it may, if I was not perfectly happy,
the very worst circumstance attending me was, the want of company. I was
consequently left entirely to my own reflections and ideas, which you very well
know, are not at all times the most eligible companions.

AFTER several hours traveling, this narrow passage opened into a pleasant
country, variegated with streams, forests, plains, hills, and valleys. -- Being
now fully sensible that I had made a passage from one state of existence to
another, I observed to a man whom I overtook, heavy laden with books of
theology, that "this region greatly resembled the world from which I had lately
departed." -- The man replied, that there "was certainly a resemblance; but be
not deceived, (continued he) the world you have come from is no more than a
shadow of this in which you now are. That was only reflection, this is reality
itself; and the great body of light you see in our firmament is not a sun, such
as formerly warmed you, awakened the winds, and caused the plants to grow; it
is the luminary of TRUTH, which pervades all things here, and without the real,
or the reflected influence of which, all things in the universe would be no
better, to created (...)."

I NOW wandered at full liberty in a very (...) country till I arrived at a
building of immense size, and which seemed to contain many hundreds of
apartments. Over the principal door in the front was written in large letters,
THIS IS THE ACADEMY OF DEATH.

As the door of the building stood wide open to all comers, I made no
hesitation to enter. The first thing that particularly attracted my notice, was
the circumstance of the name of the inhabitant being inscribed over the door of
every apartment. At the first glance, I distinguished Aristotle, Archimedes,
and the names of a number of other celebrated men, with whose characters I,
although a simple weaver, had been formerly acquainted while upon earth. From
what I saw, it was natural to conclude, that the persons themselves resided in
the apartments thus allotted them -- and if they have brought their ideas with
them, thought I, they cannot be any other than good company.

ALOUD noise now interrupted my observations for a moment. A poet and a
mathematician, both just arrived, struck up a hasty agreement to take up their
abode together in the kitchen garret of the academy. Finding every other
apartment pre-occupied, they preferred that humble situation to any other in a
different part of the country, as they would here be neighbors to the
ancients, and from their shreds might probably receive frequent assistance.
They had conceived a strange notion too that they might mutually throw light
upon each other's studies by living together in the same room. -- "As you
shined in the walks of Fancy, said the mathematician, and I was celebrated for
the investigation of strict truth, we shall be of good use to each other. Your
fine fancies will contribute to enliven my speculations, and my invariable
attachment to truth and certainty will give your ideas a coloring of
rationality."

THEY quarr^lled, however, before the one had (...) or the other written five
lines of a new poem The governor of the academy was then called, who
immediately enjoined SILENCE; and upon hearing the cause of their dispute,
ordered a partition wall of solid adamant to be instantly run up between them,
in order to prevent future misunderstandings. There may be a great deal of
truth (said he) in the works of fancy, but I never yet knew any occasion for
fancy in the works of truth.

FINDING now that the governor of the academy was leaving us without assigning
me any the least apartment in the building, I began to conclude that no other
than men of acknowledged same and merit upon earth were to be accommodated in
this edifice after death. Struck with a consciousness, too, that I had not
attained to any post or employment in the other world above that of a simple
weaver, I was preparing, with some reluctance, to travel farther on to seek the
habitations of the spirits that had moved in my own humble sphere of life, when
the governor of the academy again made his appearance; who, as I should have
mentioned before, was no other than Death himself.

"YOU have been loitering here some time (said he) Mr. Slender. A moment's
reflection might teach you that these apartments were not designed for men of
your level. Cast your eyes to the door of every chamber in this academy, and
you will find no other names written thereon than those of the sages, and
heroes, and geniuses of antiquity. You cannot make any pretensions to be equal
to the most insignificant among them: retire therefore, without delay, and
advance farther on toward the hovels belonging to the men of the loom in
yonder forest."

GREAT monarch of these silent abodes (replied I) (...) individual amongst the
dead can be more deeply conscious of his meanness and incapacity than him that
now has the honor to address you. All the favor I have to ask before I depart
hence to mingle with the (...) of antiquity, is, that some few of these door^
may be opened, and that I may have a transient view of those ancient sages, of
whom I heard so much t^lk (...) the men of sentiment in the other world. --
"Almost all the better sort that come hither, answered (...) ^^perintendant of
the academy, have made the same (...). And I would willingly gratify the
curiosity of all, were it not that the far greater part of these men,
especially the philosophers, are of a bashful and solitary turn: and more than
that, they are (as in the other world) almost continually at their studies,
hate company, and above all things, cannot endure to be stared at. -- However,
as I do not recollect that any weaver, excepting yourself, has ever made a
similar request, I will, in some measure, gratify your wish. You shall not only
have a sight of them, but some few among them shall speak, for your entire and
more complete satisfaction."

HE then stamped with his foot, and immediately the door opposite to him flew
open, over which was written the name of

LUCIAN, the Rhetorician of Samosata.
As I had in my life time read a translation of this celebrated humourist of
antiquity, I had expected to see a merry old fellow, abounding in jokes and
laughable conceit^. -- Judge then what must have been my disappointment, when I
saw a little, crabbed looking old man, sitting by a table, and writing
something with a steel pen on a tablet of wax. -- He is, doubtless, thought I,
notwithstanding his serious face, contriving some humourous dialogue. He
cannot, however, be employed in ridiculing the popular religion of his country,
for the time of his probation has been long expired: he must now be acquainted
with the truth, if ever; and it is not likely that a probationary religion can
have any toleration in this country, where the condition of the dead is
absolutely fixed and unalterable. I then made free to advance further into his
apartment, with a view of having some conversation, if possible, with a man
that had been so remarkable for his wit; when he instantly caught up his
walking stick, and gave me a smart rap over the shoulders, at the same time
ordering me to leave the room, as he wished me to know, that a man i^ never
more seriously inclined than at the moment he is contriving a story (...) will
make the world laugh heartily; and that although those ludicrous fables may, in
an instant, impart pleasurable ideas to the gay fellows that read them, yet
nothing is more certain, than that every thing valuable of this nature is
produced amid silence, solitude, and melancholy. -- I m^st confess I felt
somewhat hurt by a manner of treatment so different from what I had expected,
and that too from one of the first wits of antiquity. -- "But I would have you
to know, Mr. Slender (said he, laying down his stick) that although I might
have been regent of Alexandria, yet I was not torn in pieces by dogs, as some
have asserted. It is the nature of the busy world on earth to lay a great man
in the dust by the most infamous means possible; and I am sorry this idle
report has met with so much credit among them as it has. If I ridiculed the
gods and philosophy of my age and country; whose systems TIME has at length,
also, proved to be false, no one amongst all the dead or living can say, that I
denied the existence of the PROVIDENCE that superintends all things."

As I still felt the effects of the rap he had given me over the shoulders, I
forbore to make him any reply, and turned my face another way.

THE next apartment that was opened to me was that of

PLATO, the Philosopher of Athens.
I cast my eye full upon this fanciful sophist of antiquity. He was sitting on
a bench, and looking horizontally, as if meditating on something future; at the
same time holding imaginary dialogues with his master ^^crates, who was not
present. -- "You may think what you will of it, Socrates, said he (musing) but
I will honestly confess that I was an enemy to the poets, and ordered them to
be banished from my visionary commonwealth, only because I failed in my early
endeavors to make poems equal to those of Homer, the poet of Chios. I found,
also, that the rhapsodists had been before hand with me in involving the
mysteries of religion in poetical fables; finding that I could not rival them
in this line, all the part that was left me, was to substitute philosophical
fables in the stead of their (...) ones. -- And pardon me, Socrates, if I made
you argue so long a time in behalf of the immortality of the soul, against the
sects that, during my abode upon earth, were retainers to a contrary opinion.
-- You may remember we talked so long on the subject that we fairly lost
ourselves, and only proved at last what you had previously asserted, that in
the other world we knew nothing." -- So much candor as the Athenian
philosopher discovered in this short soliloquy, could not possibly do otherwise
than afford me some degree of satisfaction. -- He was, no doubt, a lover of
truth, thought I; but he took strange methods to come at it. He reasoned in a
circle instead of a right line. Every step we took in his writings, we imagined
ourselves just within the grasp of the desired object. When we attempted to lay
hold of it, we were utterly deceived, and found we had been only entertained
with a pleasing flow of fine and flowery language.

I WAS preparing to depart, finding the philosopher to be in a very pensive and
melancholy mood; when he again cast his eyes toward something which he
imagined to be Socrates, and began a discourse upon LOVE.

"LOVE, (said he) my dear Socrates, was the daughter of Jupiter and the fine
either of the firmament; whereas, the other inferior gods of the celestial
nature were only produced from Jupiter and the air, which you know is a
substance of a much grosser quality than the other, and was represented in the
Grecian theology by the goddess Juno. -- LOVE^ after passing some time in the
courts of Olympus, at length descended to the earth to receive the homage of
men, and by the charms of her person and behavior so gained upon the
affections of mankind, that, from a state of savage ferocity, they soon became
a civilized and social race of beings. -- After a certain time, Jupiter himself
also descended upon the earth, and, of course, several natural children were
the consequence of his amors among the daughters of the forests.

"ONE of these, a female, very much resembled the child LOVE, that was formerly
born to him by the fine either of the firmament, and for that reason he called
her by the name of DESIRE, which is of a somewhat similar import. No sooner had
this counterfeit beauty grown up to a full age, than she was almost universally
preferred to the other by the sons of men; although her features were neither
so delicate, her countenance so innocent, h^^ ideas so exalted, or her person
throughout possessed of half the elegance and charming simplicity of the other.

THE sky-bred damsel took umbrage at this perversion of taste, and finding that
her shrines were deserted, and that mankind in general paid their whole
adoration to her sister Desire, she resented the neglect, passed most of her
time in solitude, and soon after retired to the deserts of the wilderness. --
Love was afterward addressed by very few, and when addressed, it was only by
those who had nothing but deformity to recommend them.

"NOW, my dear Socrates, as wise a man as you were, you seem not to have made a
proper discrimination in your notions of these two deities, or you never would
have paid your addresses to Xantippe, who, at best, had nothing more to
recommend her than a good person and a fresh complexion. Love came from heaven,
and is therefore of a celestial nature and origin; Desire is from the earth,
and, as such, can boast of nothing more than what is earthly. -- And what did
you see in marriage that could tempt the heart of a wise man? Had you not
penetration (...) discover that human felicity is always prodigiously abated,
oftentimes wholly an^ihilated, by the possession of the desired object? You
must have been sensible, from your deep knowledge of ^uman nature, that the
hours of courtship, and the minutes while the maid is yet coy, are the
pleasantest of a man's whole life; and yet you foolishly abridged the term, and
thus all your fine ideas terminated in disgust. Had you continued single, you
would have been in love as long as you lived, nor would those charming colors
have vanished so speedily, which I fear were, for the most part, ob^^terated
within a month or two after ^our nuptials. Had it not been for this one false
step, I say, you would have been always in love, nor would Xantippe, by means
of so unequal a connection, have been known to posterity, as nothing better than
a vixen and tormentor." -- Here he ended his speech.

HE still retains his old notions of sentimental love, said the superintendant,
but his own example did by no means correspond with his doctrines. He chose to
live single, it is true, but the virtue of chastity in him was nothing more
than mere appearance. Though he was fond upon all occasions to consider LOVE as
a passion in a high degree sentimental, yet his feelings were no other than
those of a man. At the very time when he set up his Academy at Athens, and
disciples flocked in to him from all parts, I have incontestible proofs that
two ladies, Lasthenia, the Mantinian, and Axiothia, the Philasian, attended his
lectures in the habits of men, and passed several hours every night with this
very Plato, conversing on subjects very different from those of philosophy,
rhetoric, or the moral perfections of the Deity.

THE next door that flew open, in obedience to the signal of the governor,
discovered

ALEXANDER, the Hero of Macedon.
His countenance was fierce, daring and disdainful; and I could not avoid
noticing on this and other occasions, that the countenances of the personages
in this world of the departed, for the most part accorded ^^actly with the
characters that the best historians had given us of their minds in the
terrestrial world to which they formerly belonged.

ALEXANDER was engaged in conversation with an odd looking ghost, whom I
recollected, from the accounts given of him in history, to be no other than
Diogenes. -- "Tell me now, Sawny, said the Cynic^ (with a malicious grin) were
you sincere when you said you would wish to be Diogenes in preference to all
other men, had you not happened to be Alexander?"

I WAS so far sincere, replied the conqueror, that, had it not been my lot to
be born a king, to rule over and enslave the persons of mankind, I should have
wished to have been born a philosopher, that I might, in like manner, play the
tyrant with their minds.

"BUT, as matters stood, (continued Diogenes) you were far from being a wise
man. Your boldness and daring exploits have so fascinated the judgments of
mankind, that your faults are forgotten in the splendour of the single, and, I
had almost said, brutal virtue called courage."

I DO not recollect that I ever acted like a fool, said the hero.

"YOUR history, however, will afford numberless instances of folly, returned
the cynic. -- I will not at present mortify you with the mention of more than
one. When you had proceeded so far into the burning climates and sands of
India, that your army, being in want of almost every thing, had determined to
proceed no farther, you foolishly advanced in front of them, and declared that
if they did not persevere, you yourself would march on alone to meet the host
of the enemy, and encounter them all with your single spear. -- Had your
soldiers taken you at your word, and suffered you to march forward, how
ridiculous yourself and your conduct would have appeared! -- But Fortune
favored you, and your soldiers were fools enough to be charmed with your
desporation. -- They followed you, (...) conquered.

"THE Roman in yonder pavilion, acted with much more caution and prudence (...)
such a dilemma. His army was inclined to desert him on a similar occasion. --
Stay behind, then, in the name of all the gods, said Ces^^ -- I will take the
tenth legion, and with them march (...) to death or victory. -- Here was the
policy which you wanted -- a spirit of emulation and jealousy was kindled in a
moment among the soldiery; and for fear the tenth legion should gain the
victory alone, the whole host at once became heroes and volunteers of honor."

THE door of Alexander's apartment now closed of itself by some invisible
direction, and I was, in return, presented with a view of

ARISTOTLE, the Despot in Philosophy.
I was disgusted with this spirit the first moment I beheld him. He had a
malignant vivacity in his eyes, that plainly proved he was choleric and
impatient of contradiction. He seemed to be engaged in the instruction of a
number of pupils in the mysteries of the invisible nature; but it was easy to
perceive that his ancient dogmatical spirit still remained. He dealt altogether
in positives, confessed himself ignorant of nothing, advanced numerous opinions
without thought or reflection, and had afterward the impudence to defend them,
simply because he had so advanced them. -- I turned from him with disgust, and
was in the next place presented with a view of

HOMER, the Poet of Chios.
He did by no means resemble the first of the human species in shape and
features. On (...) contrary, his appearance was rather vulgar, and (...) was
even inclined to doubt, whether this could really be the man that had composed
the Iliad and the Odyssey, till the governor of the Academy, perceiving my
surprise, desired me not to distrust the reality of the representation. This is
the genuine poet of Chios, said he: you see him now just as he appeared when he
had completed his two grand performances, and (...) about sixty-five years of
age. -- "In my opinion said I, Mr. Governor, this poet has attracted so much
notice in the world rather by the beauty of his exp^^^sion than by the solidity
and depth of his knowledge. Yet his works have produced legislators and
philosophers, saints and heroes, and his various pictures of life are
faithfully copied. His religion is to this day the religion of the human heart.
We secretly (...) his theology upon earth from a principle inseparable from
human nature, because his gods are like ourselves and similitude always begets
affection." I then turned round to accost the poet, and, contrary to my
expectation, found him affable and talkative.

IF an everlasting remembrance amongst the nations of mankind can at all
gratify the souls in this (...) said I, you, illustrious bard, cannot be
otherwise than completely happy. Who would set a life of poverty and hardship
in competition with a tomb over which was written -- Here lies the man, for the
honor of (...) birth seven capital cities of Greece contended!

"YOU are mistaken, stranger, said the poet if you imagine that what is called
same among men has any influence upon the condition of the dead. It is true,
the recollection of those charming ideas that passed through my mind when I
wrote the Iliad and Odyssey, still afford me something like pleasure; but the
fame that has accrued is nothing. How dearly too, did I pay while upon earth,
for what in itself was no solid satisfaction. I was born in a rude and
barbarous country, where men were yet so much inclined to the savage nature,
that prisoners of war (...) always either sacrificed to the gods, or reduced to
(...) state of slavery. I spent the bright days of my youth in acquiring the
knowledge of arts, sciences and languages among the philosophers of Egypt; I
afterward applied myself to traveling, and passed many years in ^^^dering
from place to place, to observe what I could of m^n and manners, the variegated
face of nature, and the progress of the arts in different nations.

^BUT (...) this was nothing but infelicity, and while I was endeavoring to
acquire the knowledge and ideas of a God, I lost that share of content and
satisfaction which is usually allotted to a man. When I found myself arrived to
(...) maturity of judgment and observation to set about my two great poems, my
best days were gone, the sun had passed the meridian; and I found myself
verging rapidly toward old age and misery. Thus cruelly did Nature deal with
me upon earth. After infusing into my veins a portion of the (...) blood of
Apollo, she left me to sink into the dust with as little regard as she had
previously shown to Ir^s and Thersites. -- Old age and poverty, with the (...)
calamity of blindness, overtook me at last, and it was with the greatest
difficulty I subsisted at all by singing fragments of my poems through the
several cities of Greece. It has been reported upon earth, that I had a
conference with Lycurgus, the legislator of Sparta, upon the subject of
legislation. It was no such thing. That severe lawgiver was too deeply
intoxicated with his own opinions to pay much regard to the fancies and
fictions of a retailer of Rhapsodies: -- Nay, I was not even his cotemporary.
Possibly, however, I justly merited all the mischiefs I suffered. I disguised
many matters in my poems with the real truth of which the world had a right to
be acquainted in after times. Amongst these it may be worth while to mention,
that Ulysses might have returned home in less than the tenth part of ten years,
had Penelope been (...) the model of conjugal virtue I have pictured her. Alas,
poor man; that was not his case! -- She (...), in fact, one of the most noted
termagants and jilts of her age, and the poor wanderer remained abroad ten
years after the destruction of Troy, for no other reasons than that he might be
out of the hearing of her tongue, and not be mortified with repeated instances
of her infidelity."

THERE (...) something so pleasing in the ideas and language of this man of
Chios, that I thought I could have remained a century in his apartment without
weariness, provided he would continue talking. -- He then seemed to recollect
himself, and thus went on --

"THERE was Helena, too, the wife of Menelaus. The critics have found great
fault with the Grecian States for having involved themselves in a long and
desperate war on account of an idle woman, whom they had much better have left
in possession of the Trojans. Possibly their notions may be just; but, if I am
rightly informed, many wars have been declared since my time upon equally
trifling provocations. -- You will admire, perhaps, at the conduct of this
princess. What (you will say) could have induced her to leave her husband and
her friends, a crown, a palace, and whatever was most flattering to the human
heart, to follow a stranger into the small territory of Priam, over which his
numerous tribe of elder brothers made it extremely improbable he should ever
have any the least (...) have not given the true reason in my poems. I will now
heartily acknowledge what was the real cause of the preference she gave the
Trojan. Menelaus, her husband, was considerably advanced in years, and wore
blue garments. Paris, on the contrary, was a young fellow, and never appeared
habited in any other than superfine scarlet. That circumstance was sufficient
to turn the scale of female affection in his favor."

HERE the governor stamped with his foot, and the door instantly closed. You
must have no further conversation with Homer, said he; what he has been (...)
you, are secrets that ought not to be divulged for the honor of antiquity, as
well as of his own poems. -- The next ghost I saw, was

ARCHIMEDES, the Geometrician of Sicily.
"THEY may deny it, if they please, said he; but Syracuse would have submitted
much sooner to the Romans than it did, had it not been for my machines. As to
the burning glasses, I did really contrive something of that sort too, but the
historian told a lie, when he informed posterity that I set the Roman galleys
on fire therewith. I remember it was with some difficulty that I only singed
off one of the eyebrows of an inhabitant of Agrigentum, for which he would have
taken my life, had I not instantly slipped ^ut of his way."

IF this man lived at lodgings in Syracuse, said I, they could certainly afford
to entertain him at a cheap rate. I remember to have heard that his mind was
generally so absorbed in deep study that he would frequently forget to eat his
victuals for days together; and when the city was at last taken, he was so
intent upon resolving a geometrical figure in his Museum, that he knew nothing
of the matter, and chose rather to be cut to pieces by a soldier (...) his
favorite study. Such conduct would be ridiculed in a common fabricator of (...)
modern times; yet in Archimedes, the ancient, it is reckoned praise worthy. But
I am of opinion the investigation of truth is scarcely worth a man's pains,
when it so occupies the mind as to suspend all regard for self preservation --

[ The remainder of this piece is wanting.]

VI. ROBERT SLENDER'S IDEA OF A VISIT TO A MODERN GREAT MAN.
FROM my earliest childhood I ever entertained a secret disgust for great men,
and had even a sincere hatred to big men, till accident discovered to me that
the terms were not always synonimous.

I OWE this ridiculous prejudice to one David Doomsday, the constable of the
village in which I was born, who was long reckoned the greatest man in those
parts; one branch of his business having been to whip petty criminals, and put
disorderly persons in the stocks.

SINCE I have arrived at maturer age, I have not seen much reason to alter my
opinion in regard to the generality of the great men of the vulgar.

WHEN we pay a visit to one of these great men, the first thing or idea that
particularly strikes us, is the great man's tacit con^ession of his own real
littleness by the magnitude of his buildings. -- An everlasting solitude reigns
in the front of his dwelling; his doors are forever shut, over whose
inhospitable threshold the repeated voice of a surly knocker can with much ado
procure an admittance. -- No honest house dog advances to the marble steps to
welcome the friendless stranger to a participation of the pleasures within; a
snarling ^ur is only seen at a distance, within a gate, betraying himself, from
his behavior, to be as much a puppy as his master. Every thing wears the
appearance of fordid selfishness, and every thing informs you that the tawdry
daughters of equipage, and the strutting sons of fortune, are only welcome here.

BUT supposing we should be so happy as to make them hear us. The great man
himself does not deign to advance to the door to receive you. A waiting man, or
a pimp, or a sycophant, or a dependant, or a private secretary is sent, at the
summons of the knocker, to be informed what you want, or to know who you are.
If you are, apparently, of no great consequence, he keeps the lowermost of the
two doors shut to, cautiously pulls the other scarcely half open, and then
holds parley with you.

NOW, may he suffer all the tortures of Tantalus, who first contrived this
inhospitable sort of doors.

THE fellow tells you a thousand lies, or makes a thousand lying excuses,
rather than let you in. At last, by collecting the resolution and impudence of
a devil, you intimidate him. He then unbolts the lower door, with a very ill
will, and in you step. -- The cieling returns a hollow sound, like that of a
vault. -- The floor is of mahogany, lately rubbed over with wax. In spite of
all your care, your shoes have soiled it, and you may of consequence assure
yourself that the lady of the house, at least, is your enemy forever.

THAT is not the worst of it neither; a mahogany floor rubbed over several
times with wax never fails to assume a devilish slippery quality. Your shoes or
boots being hard and unpliant, your foot-hold deceives you, and you tumble
along at full length upon the floor.

THE whole house is instantly alarmed. The lap dog runs out in a rage to seize
you by the throat -- and it is with some difficulty that you are able at last
to disengage yourself, and recover your legs.

THE porter then walks slowly on before you through a long dreary entry, and at
the same time treads so lightly that you can scarcely hear him at all. At
length you arrive at the back parlour, or at the dining room, or at the study
-- The great man nods with his head.

YOU look all around, and are amazed that the furniture is for show only and
not for use. The bottoms or seats of the great man's chairs are of wrought
(...) or red velvet. -- Heaven forbid, cry you, that my weather beaten
posteriors should come into contact with these curious and ingenious devices!
-- The weather is very cold -- You immediately conclude that the great man must
be of a very warm constitution, inasmuch as his whole fire place and hearth are
scarcely of the dimensions of a country chaffing-dish! -- But, he certainly
deems himself a very great man, nevertheless, for yonder hang a couple of pier
glasses each full eight feet in length. His size must certainly be in
proportion thereto.

He is at breakfast -- instead of asking you to sit down and partake with him,
he, in a surly tone, and with a heavy countenance, demands your business in
that place? --

NO sooner have you made an effort to speak, o^ force out half a dozen words,
than he catches up a newspaper and reads something to his wife.

YOU make another effort, but by the time you have articulated ten words more,
in comes one of his clerks with a pen sticking behind his ear, and a long piece
of writing in his hand.

THEY fall to examining of it, and in all appearance the examination will be
tedious enough -- You find yourself agreeably deceived, however, as they finish
(...) something less than two hours.

THE clerk then walks off, and you renew your applications. -- Fifteen words
and an half are now uttered on your part -- when a loud rap is heard at the
door. A loud rap at the door (says Jacob Boehman) always betokens
importance in him that rappeth. -- Away runs the house dog, lap dog, and
footman. -- The footman instantly returns with word, that "the lieutenant
governor has urgent business with the great man, and must speak with him in
less than ten minutes!"

NOW, very likely, all this is nothing more than a villainous contrivance to
get rid of you; but how are you to know that, Mr. Shovelshoes!

THE very mention and idea of the lieutenant governor strikes you dumb. -- The
great man desires you to call on him at some other time, a week or two hence,
as he is very busy at present on other matters.

YOU either make no reply, or your remonstrances avail nothing -- Invain you
tell him that you have traveled two hundred miles on foot, on purpose to
settle this business -- Invain do you put him in mind that you have but twenty
shillings in your pocket, and cannot of course remain above three days longer
in the city! -- He is deaf to all this -- you are conducted into the street a
short way through a back door -- the do^^ is slammed after you, and you walk
sullenly away, f^^^ting and swearing, and wishing all great men to the devil.

THE above is a true idea of a plebeian visit to a modern great man -- experto
creed Roberto.

VII. A DISCOURSE UPON LAW.
HE that draws the picture, or cuts out of wood or marble, the image of a toad
or serpent, or any other hideous or loathsome animal or reptile, is not to be
blamed, however disagreeable the object may be to our senses, provided it be a
true representation of nature. In the same light is he to be considered, who
represents mankind as they really are, not what self love prompts them to
believe themselves to be. -- When I assert that men are naturally enemies to
each other, many will startle at the idea, but the truth of such an opinion has
been confirmed by the experience of several thousand years. In those
combinations of men, called societies, families, and nations, although they
have found it necessary to unite together for their mutual safety of
convenience, yet even there the mutual propensity to warfare breaks out, and
discovers itself continually. The clown wars with his fist, the woman with her
broomstick, the gentleman with his sword and pistol; but they who are willing
to keep whole bones, and yet cannot help being at enmity with others, go to law.

I WAS led into this train of reflections by attending to the whimsical, though
not very uncommon disposition of a person residing in the neighborhood of my
lodgings, whose character and practice remarkably confirms what I have been
saying. He is now in his sixty-sixth year, and has been constantly in a state
of juridical warfare, as he frankly confesses, ever since he came to the age of
twenty-one, and was capable of suing and being sued. It is certain, also, that
he has kept a regular journal of the last five and forty years of his life,
which I have been gratified with a sight of, through the favor of a friend; and
must confess, it is one of the most extraordinary performances that ever fell
under my notice. Previous to this, I had been in the man's company five or six
times, and was as often mortified and vexed to find that his whole conversation
was nothing but a dull recapitulation of his own triumphs or losses, his
casting or being cast, his suing or being sued,

WHEN I saw his Journal or diary, however, I was no longer at a loss how to
account for the peculiarity of his conversation. To gratify my readers, I shall
give them an an abstract of one week's transactions. --

"JUNE 10, 1784. Heard that Robert Woodpecker walked across my fields with a
gun on his shoulder. -- Mem. To endeavor to get sufficient evidence, so as to
proceed on a prosecution for damages in a court of justice. -- 11th. Caught
Eliakim Careless, the pedlar, in the fact of leaving the gate open on my land
in the country -- had thoughts of caning him, but considered, that by
smothering my resentment I might sue him and recover damages. -- 12th. Took up
my neighbor Gregory's gray nag in the atrocious act of reaching his neck and
head through the fence, to (...) my fresh grass. -- Quere, Whether it is not
actionable at law, as being a trespass? -- pounded the aggressor, and expect
the law will allow me damages, at least against that part of the horse, which
was within the enclosure. -- June 13th. Charged Robert Woodpecker with the
heinous crime of walking over my lands with a gun on his shoulder, thereby
breaking the peace. -- He pleads that the gun had no lock -- Quere again,
Whether a gun without a lock is not a gun to all intents and purposes in the
eye of the law, inasmuch as, in default of a lock, it may be discharged with a
match -- and whether the true nature and definition of a gun lies not rather in
the breech, barrel, stock and ram-rod than in the lock? -- 14th. Rode twenty
miles this day to take out a summons for Eliakim Careless. -- Quarreled with
'squire Goosecap, the justice of the peace, who refused to issue the summons,
under pretense that I was a wrangling fellow. -- Mem. To complain to his
superiors. -- June 15th. Received four shillings and sixpence as a compensation
for the damages done by my neighbor Gregory's gray nag, on Tuesday last. -- At
the same time horsewhipped a lame beggar for having the impudence to ask ^e for
two pence. -- 16th. Shot a strange pig trespassing within my enclosures, which
we had for dinner this day, being Saturday. -- Note, the law says, No swine
shall be suffered to run at large, etc"

HOW happy is it for the world, that this man was not born an absolute monarch!
what bloody and rancorous contests would he not have occasioned among the
subjected herd of mankind! -- His head is full of chicanery, evasions,
quibbles, distinctions without a difference, crotchets and catches. He talks of
little else but writs of fieri facias, venditioni expo^as, arrests,
adjournments, prosecutions, judgments, courts of judicature, pleas, petit and
grand juries, dockets, reports, certificates, errors in judgment, fees, jail
delivery, demurrers, actions, causes, ejectments, and the like; which he cannot
entirely forget, even in his sleeping moments. In that silent season, when
(...) might reasonably suppose the mind, for variety's sake, would incline to
dwell upon a new set of ideas, (...) as I am credibly informed, pleads causes
with wonderful facility, method and regularity: collects the evidence, examines
witnesses, and has even been known to rise up in his bed, and, with his eyes
shut, deliver a very sensible and pathetic charge to a Jury.

BUT the worst part of my story is yet to come. This singular person has, from
being possessor of a plentiful estate in the country, reduced himself, by the
unhappy irascibility of his temper, very near to a (...) of beggary, and has
latterly been, in a manner, compelled to be at peace, merely because he could
not find money to keep his lawyers in pay.

TWO days ago I had the misfortune to fall under the lash of his displeasure,
in walking the street, by accidentally treading with the heel of my shoe on one
foot of his favorite spaniel. The poor animal's toes, it must be confessed,
were considerably bruised, (...) bled very freely; which I must confess gave me
(...) pain, as I am naturally compassionate, and sincerely feel for the
sufferings and miseries of the brute creation, more especially when they are
occasioned by (...) fault or neglect of my own: but as this disaster (...)
perfectly accidental, I thought myself excuseable, (...) far, at least, as
after having apologized for the crime, not to be attacked with ill language, or
illiberal threats on so trifling an occasion. But this lover of law hearing the
dog howl and groan piteously, rushed out (...) moment, and, seizing me by the
collar, threatened (...) sue for damages immediately, unless I made ample
amends upon the spot for the crime I had committed, which he said he doubted
not would be considered and trea^^ in any court as no less than an action of
assault and ^^^tery. Had you been non compos mentis, continued he, it would
have been a very different affair -- since it is a maxim in law, that insanus
non capax mali, a madman cannot be found guilty of a crime, because he is not
capable, by reason of his idiotism, to make a proper discrimination in his
ideas of good and evil.

I LISTENED to this piece of learning with some attention, and having informed
the angry man that I had trodden on the dog's foot inadvertently, assured him
nevertheless that I was sorry for it; that no man, not even the owner of Spado,
was more a friend to dogs than myself, and finally, apprehending the wound was
but slight, hoped he would not give himself or me, any farther trouble about a
matter of so little consequence, or apparent danger to the patient.

"YOU have confessed, then, that you are guilty of the fact -- very good -- had
you held your tongue, (...) whole proof of the crime would have lain upon me,
as plaintiff -- now I have you at my mercy, and the mercy of the law."

TO cut the matter short, I desired to be informed what sum would satisfy him
by way of compensation for the supposed damage, and if his estimation was
reasonable, assured him I would cheerfully pay it on the spot.

"IT would be a bad precedent, replied he, and upon considering the matter, I
do not see how I could answer it to my conscience, or my country, to let such
flagrant offenses go unpunished by the laws of the land, -- the damages, sir,
must be estimated by the proper judicial authority, and I am inclined to think
they will be very considerable. -- If you cannot discharge them, together with
the cost, after sentence is pronounced, or the jury have given in their
verdict, you must be held in custody till the law discharges you therefrom. So,
unless you can procure bail and security for your appearance on the next court
day, I desire you will walk into this apartment (pointing to a little dark
chamber) till I send for one of the city bailiffs, who will conduct you to, and
safely keep you in, the common prison, till you are set at liberty by due
course of law."

NOTWITHSTANDING my natural moderation, I raised up my staff in a menacing
manner, and was about to retort with some severity upon the head and shoulders
of the litigant, when on a sudden, my prosecutor shrunk back, and began to look
with anxious eagerness at some distant object through an eye glass, and
presently after turned as pale as ashes. He then left me, and rushed into the
back apartment of his dwelling, first barring up his doors and windows with all
possible expedition. I soon found that one of his creditors was hard by, with a
bailiff and a writ of debt, which relieved me from any farther altercation with
this troublesome, litigious piece of nature's workmanship.

PRACTITIONERS of the law are either standing subjects of ridicule, or else of
severe satire in all nations where they are encouraged. A certain author says,
Theologis animum, subjecit lapsus Adami, et medicis corpus, et bona juridicis;
that is, the fall of Adam has given our fo^ls into the hands of the clergy, our
bodies to the physicians, and our estates to the lawyers. If there be any truth
in this observation, society must reproach itself only for having given birth
to the evil called a lawyer; since it is plain that if mankind were not
naturally as well as habitually quarrelsome, and unjust in their dealings with
each other, there would be no more necessity for lawyers than there would be
for physicians, were all men so constituted by nature as to enjoy perpetual
health and vigor.

IT has ever been my opinion, that the artificial perplexities, (...)
distinctions, (...) uncertainties, and the vexatious delays of the law, (...)
have their use and advantages to the public. The man that goes to law with his
neighbor angrily, (and there are few that do otherwise) would in the same heat
of passion, or by the same habitual irrascibility of disposition, kill or maim
his opponent, if he durst, in this hour of resentment and keen sensibility and
conviction of being wronged. The mischief, thus occasioned, would be fatal and
irretrievable, but not so the mischiefs committed by going to law, since the
applications of the arm and of the tongue are so widely different in their
effects. During the tedious process of the civil court, the violent resentful
passions get time to cool, affairs are often compromised by the consent of the
persons at variance, the utmost stretch and rigor of justice is dispensed
with, and by the time both parties are pretty well tired of verbal contention,
and their pockets sufficiently drained, they sit down revenged, if not
satisfied, with the consideration that one has ruined the other -- and by
having the world to begin again, may both, perhaps, prove more useful to the
public than if they had retained their estates.

VIII. LIGHT, SUMMER READING: Which may possibly please such as have a (...)
for modern Novels.
SECT. I.
IN the youthful part of my life, I remember I passed several months very
agreeably in one of the Summer islands, having lodged, during my stay, in the
house of a man, who went constantly habited in a white linen coat.

WE were one day taking a walk together, and had trudged on a long way through
tall groves of cedar, and diminutive plantations of cotton, till we came to an
arm of the sea, which separated the one we were on from another of the larger
islands of this cluster. -- When we had crossed it, and traveled about a mile
farther, we came in sight of a solitary building, situated in the midst of a
thick wood, and to all appearance, remote from any other habitation.

THE garden was walled in with stone, and we could see that it produced
cabbages, roots of a name I shall not mention, sour and sweet oranges, limes,
lemons, onions, and a profusion of elegant, exotic as well as aboriginal,
flowers. On the side adjoining the thickest part of the wood we saw a few goats
and kids, a cow tied to a cedar tree by a rope made of palmetto leaves, and a
horse confined to the trunk of a fig tree by the same kind of tether.

"THIS, said my conductor, is the habitation of the once admirable MARCIA. She
would still be every way charming, were it not that her mind has imbibed a
melancholy tint from the solitary aspect of her habitation."

JUST as he finished these words I looked over the garden wall, and saw a
beautiful young person sitting in a thoughtful attitude in the shade of a large
orange tree. Her head was reclined upon her hand, a muslin handkerchief hung
negligently over her left arm, and a garland of flowers lay neglected at her
feet.

BUT is it possible (said I to the man in the white linen coat) that the
simple situation of this rural retreat could have alone produced so uncommon a
degree of melancholy in a person every way so adorable?

IT has lately been whispered about, replied he, that a certain student from
another island, who is now in Europe, told her some fine stories two or three
years ago, that are still woefully fresh in her remembrance. Her disordered
imagination represents him as perpetually returning, and yet always absent. She
has figured him as the very paragon of excellence, such a one as never appeared
upon this earth before, and will hardly ever be seen again. Strange
infatuation, that a little smattering of Latin, a smoothness of tongue, an
unmeaning eye, a handsome leg, and a large quantity of ridiculous small talk,
should have thus commanded her whole attention, and produced such unaccountable
effects! -- She has considered this fellows as something so uncommon, that when
the fit of delirious melancholy hangs more heavily than usual upon her mind
(and which is, for the most part, the case at the new and full moons) she is
constantly enquiring for the young man with the green eyebrows. -- Her
disconsolate parents are still living: she is their only child, and as their
hopes were centered in her welfare, her present situation is to them far more
afflicting than death itself.

PRAY, gentlemen, said the crazy lady (looking over the wall at us, with an air
of sudden recollection) have you seen the young man with the green eye brows?

NOT I, replied the man in the white linen coat, but they say he is on his way
home.

MY dreams did not deceive me, then, (answered she) I saw him last night
walking with a candle and lanthorn across the woods: but he was at a great
distance, and when I called to him, he would not even deign to cast a look
toward (...).

SHE had scarcely uttered these words, when she hurried away, and concealed
herself from our view in a thick cluster of lime shrubs and coffee trees.

"NOW this is all a piece of fancy (continued the man in the white linen coat)
the person about whom she is so anxious, and in whose real return she is, no
doubt, considerably interested, is not an ace better than other people. His
fortune indeed, is greater than what has fallen to her share; he has a vast
number of acres of thrifty cedar trees, and she has but a few. -- When he found
she gave him the preference to a numerous crowd of suitors, he ought not to
have persuaded himself that fordid interest was her only motive, since that was
infinitely below the divinity of her character. Instead of giving her his hand,
and indeed she should have done him by far the greatest honor, he wrote a
cold, unanimated piece of philosophy, which he addressed to this charming
creature, recommending to her, patience and resignation to the divine will!"

THE solitary Marcia now made her appearance again, with a small cage in her
hand, enclosing a beautiful Ca^ary bird.

THERE have been several requests and applications made to me of late (said
she) to set this little fellow at liberty, and among the rest, a very polite
copy of verses, in which the bird himself threatens to leave this world for a
better, if I do not forthwith release him from his confinement; but I am
resolved not to let him go for fear he also should take it into his head never
to return!

HAVING said this, she burst into tears, and retired again to her orange tree.

WHAT a pity it is (said I) that she, whom nature seems to have formed in one
of her kindest moods, in respect to shape, features and sentiment, should
nevertheless have been left so easily liable to such a derangement in the
nerves of the brain!

THIS I take to be one of those accidental events (replied the man in the white
linen coat) which cannot be foreseen or avoided. Nature has ever been at
variance with fate and accident. The web she has so admirably wrought, is at
the same time of so fine and delicate a thread, that every little petulant fly
can break through it at pleasure. The most curious and complicated machines,
such as clocks and watches, are most easily put out of order, and then the hand
on the dial points to six when it is twelve, or runs the whole circuit of a
dozen hours in as many minutes: whereas the corn mill, or the smoke jack will
perform what is expected from them for years, without any considerable
deviation from the purpose of the artist. -- A small blow on the skull is
sufficient either to render us complete idiots or destroy us altogether, and
the slightest impression upon the nerves of the heart does oftentimes generate
a confusion in the whole human machine that no skill can rectify. -- On what
precarious terms do we enjoy the beams of yonder sun! -- Nay (continued he) we
are all more or less affected with idiotism at times. Do not fogs and clouds
produce a heaviness and melancholy temper in the mind, which nothing but the
clear beams of the great luminary can dissipate. If a little air thickened into
storms and vapors can thus easily discompose that frail substance called the
soul, how can it possibly withstand, unmoved, the fatal effects of what it
esteems to be, and what oftentimes are, the real evils of life. -- The mind,
also, is liable to derive a melancholy hue from melancholy objects, with which
it happens to be too intimately connected; like the winged insect that always
assumes the color of the substance upon which it feeds; or like the cabbages I
planted last year in the same field with my tobacco, which tasted so strongly
of the bitter Indian weed, that they became wholly useless.

SECT. II.
SEVERAL weeks had now elapsed without our thinking any more about the
disconsolate Marcia, when, to the best of my remembrance, about the middle of
the month of September, we again, in one of our walks inadvertently paid a
visit to the solitary habitation which had before attracted our notice. -- We
looked over the stone fence of the garden for some minutes, to catch, if
possible, a sight of her under her favorite orange tree; but she was not
there. A book only lay open by the side of a rose bush, which we supposed she
had been reading; and here and there a leaf seemed to have (...) folded down;
doubtless, for the more readily finding such striking passages as had engaged
her attention for a review -- But we were not near enough to examine the title,
or to discover from any other circumstance what book it might be.

AS the weather was extremely warm, we at last concluded to advance toward the
mansion house, which stood at the opposite side of the garden, to rest a
little, and refresh ourselves with a draught of cool cistern water.

UPON our knocking, an old man appeared at the door, whom we took to be the
gardener, or rather the superintendant of the affairs of the little plantation,
and who, after some casual discourse, informed us that Marcia had been removed
several days before to a distant part of the island, with a view of recovering
her health and senses by a change of air and objects.

WE then, by leave of the superintendant, took a walk into the garden, and
having advanced up to the seat under the sweet orange tree, we found the book
we had seen to be no other than a Poem, in blank verse, upon the misery of man,
the brevity and infelicity of life, and the certainty of death.

"NEXT to half a dozen idle love romances I could name (said the man in the
white linen coat) this is one of the most dangerous books I know of to put
into the hands of young people naturally inclined to pensiveness or a
depression of spirits. -- Where it is much attended to, it hardly ever fails to
deject and darken the mind with its melancholy and dismal prospects of what is,
and ever has been the lot of man; and the high coloring of which can only tend
to make us more miserable, and dissatisfied, in proportion as they are more
faithfully copied from the gloomy side of nature. Give me but one glimpse of
the beauties of the visible creation and I will consider ages of darkness and
oblivion as the easiest of all compensations for that momentary view of so
glorious a display of wonders. Life can be nothing (...) than a curse to that
man, who finds in himself a disposition to harp continually on the bass-string
of its misery. It was either a weakness in judgment, or a naturally dark and
splenetic habit of mind that could have put the author upon composing a work,
which is, for the most part as stiff and harsh in its numbers, as it is sad and
dreary in its colors. -- Alas, poor Marcia! I am much afraid this m^lancholy
book, although it has little or nothing to do with love, has nevertheless
contributed, in some degree, to spread that gloom over her elegant mind, which
shall now cloud it forever! -- As it is the most ridiculous thing in the world
to carry the romantic ideas of juvenile love and fondness into common or
married life, so it is a most ungrateful temper of mind to expect more from
nature than ever she intended to give, and thereby lose also the enjoyment of
what she has given; or to look for the gardens of paradise in a wilderness of
weeds. Mankind were certainly designed for activity and the severe labors of
the rural and commercial life: these are most capable of dissipating, or
rather, preventing melancholy, and reconciling us to our condition. As men
deviate from the original plan and purpose of nature, and herd together in
cities and cloisters, and become effeminate and sedentary, they cannot be
otherwise than wretched accordingly. But this is not the fault of nature.

"TO lament the decay of man or the fatality of accident, as something foreign
to ourselves, is no less inconsistent and absurd. Look at yonder forest: how
fair and flourishing it appears; how green, how delightful! -- yet all this
proceeds from decay itself, and without it the whole face of nature would soon
wear the wrinkles of decrepit old age. -- If we had been designed for a race of
splenetic melancholy creatures, this earth, no doubt would only have been
enlightened by a moon, or some other sickly planet of a similar nature, whose
feeble and reflected rays might have been congenial with the heavy heart. --
Has yonder sun (first bright image of the deity) any connection with gloom or
sadness? How cheerfully he rises from the ocean, and what a blaze of
magnificent splendor does he drive before him! -- What a lively verdure does
his creative influence display upon this spot of earth, and with what pleasure
does the eye, which is not deluded by a sickly imagination, behold it! --
Nature has been by far more attentive to us than we are willing to acknowledge.
The delightful sky-blue of the firmament is by no means the effect of chance. A
curious composition of air and water has given it that charming azure, which it
is impossible to look up at and ^e sad. Without it the sun, the moon, and stars
would appear to be fastened upon the shadows of death; and the lands and the
seas, as well as the minds of all men and animals would inevitably sympathize
with the horrid gloom."

THE man in the white linen coat was here interrupted in his harangue by the
sudden appearance of a tall young man at the other end of the garden, whom we
discovered standing under a fig tree, and was very seriously etching something
on the bark with his penknife. -- I enquired of my friend who this might be, or
what view he could have in being so busily engaged in that manner?

"I HAVE seen him several times before, replied my friend; but, except from
hearsay, I know very little more of him than that he has been some short time
on these islands, and has already spoiled more young trees with his whimsical
inscriptions, than he ever will, perhaps, be able or willing to pay for. --
They tell me he is not only half mad himself, but is likewise extravagantly
fond of mad people; and frequently sends verses to this same Marcia, which,
most people think, serve only to increase her insanity. -- The following has
been handed to me as a specimen of the manner in which he writes:

TO MARCIA.
SMIT by the charms of thy bright eyes,
When I, Marcella, fondly gaze,
Strange feelings in my bosom rise,
And passion all my reason sways;
Worlds I would banish from my view,
And quit the gods, to talk with you.
The smile that decks your fading cheek
To me a heavy heart declares,
When you are silent I would speak,
But cowardice alarms my fears:
All must be heaven that you do prize,
As all is death that you despise.
When, wandering in the evening shade,
I shared her pains, and felt her grief,
A thousand tender things I said,
But she would grant me no relief:
When from her hair I brushed the dew,
She sighed, and said -- it is not for you.
When drooping, dull, and almost dead
With severs brought from sultry climes,
She would not hold my fainting head,
But recommended me some rhymes
On patience, and on fortitude,
And other things, less understood.
When aiming to engage her heart
With verses from the muses stock;
She sat, regardless of my art,
And counted seconds by the clock:
And thus, she cried, shall verse decay;
And thus the world shall pass away!
When languishing upon her bed,
(No longer fond of India gowns)
I came -- and while the parson read
Of crystal skies and coral crowns,
She bade me at a distance stand,
And leaned her head upon her hand.
So drooping hangs the fading rose
When summer sends the driving shower,
So to the grave Marcella goes,
Her whole duration but an hour:
Who shall oppose the sad decree,
Or what, fair maid, recover thee!
Such honor in her spirit dwells,
Such virtues in her bosom reign,
That now with pride my jerkin swells,
To think I have not lived invain,
Since slighting all the sages knew,
I learn philosophy from you.
"He is now, I will engage to say, engraving the initial letters of her name on
the rind of that unfortunate fig tree; and I am told he constantly avoids the
sensible and the gay, to come here and converse with this melancholy creature.
What a strange perversion of mind; to be attracted by reason in ruins, and
captivated by a disordered brain! -- He has ever been unfortunate himself;
perhaps her similar destiny is the cause of his regard. He pretends to be
proprietor of a small island among the Lucayas, in which they say there is a
great deal of money, formerly buried there by the pirates. He has made several
voyages with an intention to take possession of it, but has never been able to
suc^ed; and the very last time he visited it he was attacked by some armed
fishermen, driven off, and narrowly escaped with his life. -- I am informed
also, he has some little smattering of education; but few or none have ever
been the better of it, as he continues long in no one place; having found it
full as necessary, I suppose, to know something of the world as inhabited by
the moderns, as to have read the classical accounts preserved in the writings
of the ancients. -- At present he passes most of his time here in rambling up
and down among the cedars, composing poems and elegies, instead of the more
usual method of killing care by the aid of the bottle."

INDEED, said I, it is a wonder he does not take to hard drinking, or some
other wicked course, in consequence of these rascally discouragements.

"IT is impossible (replied the man in the white linen coat) for a thinking
mind to be very unhappy at any time, or in any circumstances. The imagination
is a never failing source of pleasureable ideas, and these supply the absence
of agreeable company, and the want of fortune; or lay brighter colors upon the
gloomier scenes of life than strict reason has ever been known to deal in. Thus
the life of an enthusiast is a pleasing dream, which he at all times, even in
the closing moments, recollects with pleasure, because almost every event
therein has been touched over by the fine pencil of the imagination; which,
like the wand of a magician, transfers every thing that happens in real life to
the more agreeable landscapes of an enchanted and fictitious country."

A SMALL wooden pyramid painted white, and almost overgrown with sweet briar
and ivy, now attracted our attention to another part of the garden.

WHAT a fertile brain must this fellow possess; (said the man in the white
linen coat) he has been here with his scribbling also! Here are some of the
stranger's verses written on a white board with a black lead pencil! If I were
sure his jerkin was not again introduced, I would beg of you, Mr. Slender, to
read them aloud, especially as my own eye sight is rather on the decay.

I OBEYED my patron's injunction: that which first presented itself seemed to
be a mere scrap, and was as follows:

MY heart, unmann'd, as this dire whirlwind passed,
Sighed at the sound, and sunk at every blast. --
Smooth are the seas when victory claims applause,
And short the path when love and friendship draws:
Once I was blessed -- from cares and dangers free,
And crossed this stream to pass an hour with thee:
Now all is dark! -- the heavens their beams deny,
And clouds perplex, and angry lightnings fly. --
Then what is life -- these suns, with flattering power,
That smile a moment, and expand the flower;
Paint every grace, and every charm impart
To move the fancy, or control the heart,
If one dark cloud the fostering beam denies,
And chills the flower, which thus, like Marcia, dies.
On another side were a few stanzas, which we conjectured were meant to reflect
on some former levities of his own, and which had, in all likelihood, reduced
him to his present ridiculous situation.

AND I was once a merry lad,
Not often serious, never sad;
From house to house I boldly ran
And made sweet love to Nell and Nan.
I learnt no art, I knew no trade;
So, blessed was I while summer stayed --!
No morning plague, no evening care,
For every day was warm and fair.
Then I was dressed in jerkin blue,
And yellow strings were in my shoe,
Fine ruffles over my knuckles fell,
And Moll, the milk-maid, liked me well;
A sword I girded to my waist,
With belt and buckles -- all in taste --
My buttons gilt, and clouded cane,
A neck cloth from the looms of Spain,
A silver watch, and crystal seal
Suspended by a chain of steel,
Which often made the ladies say,
"He is too rich to run away."
My hat was edged with silver lace,
And diamonds did my fingers grace;
My scarlet coat, and stockings white
Struck Nan, the spinster, with delight.
The neighbors said (I looked so gay)
"He Is only born to sing and play;
Was ever such a happy man,
Who takes no care for pot or pan!" --
But times grew hard, and cash came slow,
And Moll, the milk-maid, said no, no --
What comfort then was left for me --
I quit the chase, and went to sea.
SECT. III.
WE now took our leave of the venerable keeper of the garden, and pursued our
journey in company with an Indian physician, who overtook us on the pathway,
walking at a great rate; and, as I afterward learned, had lately arrived here
from the continent with a view of making several medicinal experiments on the
constitutions of the inhabitants, particularly the curing of intermittent
fevers by means of strong doses of the essence of tobacco.

AS this man was traveling homeward, he very cordially invited us to spend a
day or two with him in his cabin, to which we readily agreed; and had the
satisfaction to find him learned not only in the science of roots, herbs, and
weeds, but also of considerable knowledge in Indian antiquities and theology.

GROWING weary, however, of his entertainment after the ^^cond day; as it
consisted of very little more than some dried theology, and a few rolls of
strong tobacco; the man in the white linen coat, in his turn, invited this
very learned and hospitable person to accompany us to his dwelling; to which
invitation the savage made no objections.

WE had not proceeded very far on our way, when we discovered a funeral
procession advancing toward us, headed by the parson of the parish in which we
were. He was a little man, dressed in black, with a scarf hanging over his left
shoulder. Upon enquiry, we found they were proceeding to a church about a
league distant, where the corpse they attended was to be deposited.

"AND to whom may this body belong," said the Indian physician, addressing a
man that walked in the rear of the procession.

IT is the corpse of the unfortunate Marcia, replied the other, speaking low;
she died suddenly yesterday morning, and is now carrying to be interred in the
vault of her ancestors.

WE were must affected at this intelligence, as we had hoped to hear of her
recovery, instead of her decease.

AT the request of my friend, the man in the white linen coat, the Indian
agreed to attend the funeral along with us, and accordingly we all three fell
in among the followers, and traveled on with a slow pace till we came to the
scene of interment. The situation was wild and gloomy. Naked rocks, dark
cedars, the head of a small lake, and the venerable tombs of the dead completed
the scenery.

IT was pity, said I to the singing clerk, (who stood near me) that fate has so
ordered matters, that this young creature should depart the world in so very
extravagant a condition of mind. Though too many pass their whole lives in a
state of insanity, it were to be wished that toward the evening the clouds of
frenzy might be dissipated, and the sun of reason set clear.

THE singing clerk looked full in my face, opened his mouth wide, and was about
to make some reply, when silence was ordered, that the clergyman might
pronounce a speech over the body -- But his reverence stumbled at the
threshold: he had unluckily forgot his pocket Bible, and could not recollect
his text.

CANNOT he say something applicable to the melancholy occasion (whispered the
Indian) without the formality of taking a text?

WERE you to give him three worlds, each as rich as a dozen of the Indies,
replied the clerk, you could not get a word out of him upon any other condition.

THE sexton of the parish was then ordered to mount one of the horses, and make
the best of his way to the good doctor's house to bring the Bible.

AFTER waiting a full and entire hour, he returned with the vexatious
intelligence, that the Bible was not to be found -- it was stolen -- or, it was
hid -- or, it had been neglected -- or, it was mislaid -- or, they knew not
what had been done with it. -- "More is the pity," exclaimed the singing clerk.

THE doctor of divinity then mounted the horse himself, apparently with some
uneasiness, and set out personally to bring the Bible at all events.

BY this time, however, the sun was set, and the whole company stood waiting in
anxious expectation of the clergyman's return, 'till darkness had taken
possession of the earth; but there was yet no appearance either of the divine
or his Bible.

AS it is more than probable he cannot find his book, said the man in the white
linen coat, I am positive he will not return at all; and, as it is now almost
dark, I am of opinion the sooner the funeral ceremonies are finished the
better. The body of the unfortunate Marcia ought not to be deposited in these
silent retreats of death without some living token of our respect. She was
amiable while living, and notwithstanding the misfortune of a disordered brain
and an innocent unsuspecting confidence in another's honor, is, in my way of
thinking, no less amiable when dead. -- Our friend the Indian will, I know, be
complaisant enough on this occasion to give us a few sentences, and then the
venerable sexton may proceed to close the scene, and we shall be at liberty to
return to our respective homes.

"This man is not in holy orders," cried the sexton.

"HE does not wear a black coat or a gown," said the singing clerk.

"HE has not a gray wig on his head," observed one of the church wardens.

IT is no matter, replied the man in the white linen coat, he has a plain
understanding, has written a treatise on the virtues of tobacco, and knows what
is common sense as well as the best of you.

CASTING my eyes at this instant toward the east, I perceived a glimmering
among the trees, which proved to be the moon rising, two days after the full.
The evening was calm and serene, the dews had already begun to fall, and every
thing was hushed except the surge of the ocean, which we could distinctly hear
breaking on the rocks of the adjacent coast; -- when finding the parish clergy
man did not return, the Indian shook the dew from his blanket, stepped boldly
upon a tombstone of black marble, and, for reasons best known to himself,
preferring the Indian style on this occasion, thus began:

INSTEAD of these dismal countenances, why have we not a feast of seven days!
Instead of the voice of sorrow, why are not the instruments of music touched by
the hand of skill! -- Fair daughter of the morning, thou did not perish by
slow decays. At the rising of the sun we saw thee; the ruddy bloom of youth was
then upon thy countenance: in the evening thou were nothing, and the pallid
complexion of death has taken place of the bloom of beauty. -- And now thou art
gone to sit down in the gardens that are found at the setting of the sun,
behind the western mountains, where the daughters of the white men have a
separate place allotted to them by the spirit of the hills. As much as the mind
is superior to the body, so much are those charming regions preferable to these
which we now inhabit. -- Man is here but an image of himself, the
representation of an idea that in itself is not subjected to a change. -- That
which derived its origin from the dust, shall indeed to the dust return, but
the fine etherial substance does not cease to think, and shall be again
employed by the immortal gods to put the forms of things in motion. What was
thine error? -- it was nothing: the bow was too mighty for the string, and the
foundation too feeble for the fabric that was built upon it. All shall be right
when thou art arrived at the foot of the mountains, where the sound of the
wintry winds will not be permitted to reach thee, and the light of the lamp is
not extinguished by the sickly blasts of autumn --

WHAT infernal stuff is this, (exclaimed the clergyman, who at this period of
the Indian's discourse had returned on a full gallop, with a large folio bible
before him) what infernal heretical trash is this with which my ears are
insulted! -- Miscreant, avaunt, (said he, addressing the Indian) or I will
teach you how to make speeches within the bounds of my jurisdiction.

THE Indian then modestly stepped down from the tombstone, and the legitimate
clergyman took his place. After making a slight apology for his stay, he read
his text by the light from a horn lanthorn, which the clerk held up to his
nose, and then proceeded to mumble over a written discourse upon the subject he
had chosen, and which held him about half an hour.

IN my country, observed the Indian, they would make a more animated speech at
the interment of a favorite fox!

THIS divinity-monger is the angel of our church, answered the man in the white
linen coat, and it is dangerous to criticize upon his productions, especially
as he considers every one to be in the wrong who does not precisely fall in
with his own opinions in matters appertaining to religion.

WEAK men are always arrogant, positive, and self-conceited, replied the Indian
-- Let us hasten home, whispered the man in the white linen coat, for the
night begins to wear apace.

SECT. IV.
BEFORE we quitted the precincts of the church yard, we were once more
gratified with a view of the crack-brained poet, whom we had before seen
cutting inscriptions on the bark of the fig trees. He was at this time walking
alone, looking now at the cedars, then at the full moon, and then again
repeating verses in praise of Solitude -- companion of the wise and good, but
from whose holy searching eye, the herd of fools and villains fly.

"WELL, said he, the philosophical student may now return from Europe as soon
as he pleases, since he has often been heard to say he would never set foot on
this land, while Marcia was living. -- But remorse and anguish shall be his
doom, and a lasting sense of ingratitude, and fruitless reflection upon
opportunity lost, and despair, and regret, and the frettings of bachelorism,
and pensive melancholy, and pangs of recollection, and solitary walks among the
hills, and unavailing sighs when he passes by the garden and the favorite
orange tree! -- Yes -- she is dead -- and this most amiable piece of nature's
workmanship is under the absolute dominion of the sexton, whose spade has shut
up thousands in these dark abodes, and where he himself shall also retire when
the days of his sextonship are accomplished.

"BUT why (continued he) need we make so many words about so trivial a matter
as the death of Marcia, inasmuch as she was not mistress of twenty thousand
pounds? -- Besides, such events as these happen almost every day in some one
part of the world or another! -- However, her story may answer well enough to
tell to the boys and girls, as their amusement ought to be consulted as well as
that of men of sense: -- and let Marcia's epitaph run thus:

YOU, who shall round this tomb your vigils keep,
Wake me, wake me -- I do not wish to sleep.
My eyes were always pleasur'd with the day;
Wake me, wake me, for here I dread to stay.
In these dark shadows of our mother ground
Where no sunbeam, or moon's pale ray is found,
Nor gentle music bids poor Marcia weep,
Wake me, wake me -- I came not here to sleep."
IX. NARRATIVES, OBSERVATIONS AND ADVICE ON DIFFERENT SUBJECTS.
NATURE has, in many instances, been little better than a severe stepmother to
mankind. She has turned us out into a world, where we shall find millions of
our own species, that from motives of necessity only, will punish us for doing
ill, and even for not doing what is right in their opinions only; but very few
that will reward us (...) well. Happy, thrice happy, is the cobbler that (...)
confined and contented in yonder stall! He subsists by the wants, not by the
good will of the public, since there is no man, who does not want his shoes or
his boots mended at least three times in twelve months; and let his fortune
lead him into what corner of the earth it may, he is sure of practicing an
honest, if not a very honorable employment, that of finding the public in
soals; -- whereas, the man of refined learning and education can only subsist
by the wickedness, the peevishness, the hypocrisy, the idleness, the fears, or
the miseries of mankind!

WHEN you are carried before a magistrate to answer for any misdemeanor,
whether the God within you is conscious of guilt or not, always remember to put
a bold face upon the matter, let the consequence be what it may. For, if you
hang your head down -- if you stammer -- if you look at the wall over the
magistrate's head, while he examines you -- or, on either side of him -- or at
his shoe buckles -- or if you tell the same story two different ways -- depend
upon it, these little circumstances of guilt will be a considerable weight in
the scale to your disadvantage.

THERE can be no natural evil in DARKNESS, since it is nothing more than a
negative quality, the mere partial absence of light; and he who walks in that
season cannot thereby displease the great spirit above, whose eye sees all
things, and before whom the veil of night is no disguise.

NIGHT, thou art the season of excellence; and although thy majestic and truly
venerable shades may be perverted to the villainous purposes of some
individuals, yet it is in the public glare of day that the evil deed is
designed, and the robber and the murderer contrives his infamous purpose.

(...)! -- thou art the time of reflection, favorable (...) the poet and
philosopher; the mother of sublime ideas, who did exist in, and pervaded the
unmeasured expanse of the universe long before the substance or the quality
called LIGHT did at all beam forth, except in the comprehension of the first
great cause. Fools, and idiots, and men destitute of ideas, only shun thee;
till aided by a little oil and a wick of cotton they drive thee from their
remembrance, and substitute the song and the dance in the room of thy venerable
and truly philosophical shades.

SEVERAL years ago, I remember, there was a certain learned Indian, that
traveled up and down the country, making speeches and delivering short moral
discourses to such audiences as he could casually pick up. He once, in my
hearing, made a very eloquent discourse, pro and con, on the following subject,
An barba viget dum homo dormiat? Whether a man's beard grows when he is asleep?
-- He had the good fortune at that time to acquit himself so well in
elucidation the important matter, that several young gentlemen, and others
present, had thoughts of recommending him to some office, or putting him into
some easy employment, suitable to the manners and habits of a philosopher.

"I CANNOT be easy in my mind, said one gentleman, that so valuable a person as
this Indian should continue his vagrant mode of life, at once without end, use,
or design. I was just thinking that as the sexton of our parish church is very
old, and cannot, in the common course of nature, live many months longer, if he
would consent to accept of the place, I would try to engage him to remain among
us in quality of deputy-expectant, 'till the old man dies. This Indian appears
to be of a philosophical turn of mind, which is no small recommendation in a
parish sexton; and fourteen pounds, six shillings, and nine pence ayear, is,
with your leave, gentlemen, no such contemptible matter."

"LA, mama, (said one of the young ladies) if papa would let the Indian stay at
our house, what pretty chip-hats and baskets he would learn us to make."

"IF my school consisted but of twenty more scholars than it does, (said the
parish pedagogue) he should not be out of employ, I warrant him. I would engage
him for an assistant at ten pounds a year. It is below a philosopher to grasp
at high salaries."

"HARDLY any one of these employments would support him decently, and in the
philosophical character, (said a man with red stockings) but there is a friend
of mine, a grocer, in a village of the next county, who is about laying aside
business, and would willingly give up the care of his shop to some person of
genius, merit, and ability. Would the Indian take the charge of it upon
himself, I have not the least doubt but he would make something handsome, in
the course of fifteen or twenty years."

"FOR my part, (said a man with a blue nightcap, who was a tavern keeper) I
have a parcel of bad tavern debts to collect in. If the Indian will undertake
this at the rate of two and an half per cent. for his trouble, I think he will
find his account in it."

"VERY pretty employments (said I) for a philosopher."

BEING once at sea on my passage from the Summer Islands to the West Indies, I
observed to the master of the vessel, among some other conversation, that "it
is impossible for any man to conceive or tell, who has not already put them to
the test, what is the utmost extent of the powers of his mind, or to what
lengths his ability can reach, both in doing and suffering. -- Wherever there
is a genuine spirit of enterprise, great actions are sure to be accomplished
even with very moderate qualifications in other respects. He, who is persuaded
a thing is impossible or really difficult to be executed, it is most likely
will never think of attempting it at all. For this reason, (continued I) I was
always angry with Timan^hes, the celebrated Grecian painter, who, in the famous
picture of the sacrifice of Iphigenia, having, as he though, exhausted every
image of grief in the bystanders, drew the father of the young lady with a
veil over his face, as if utterly unable to express his grief. This, it is
true, was an honest acknowledgment of inability; and for this very reason I do
not see what grounds the world has to admire it as a masterly stroke in the
painter."

"I WILL not undertake to decide upon the merits of this matter, said the
captain, but I am convinced painters in general are damned rascals: the fellow
that painted our stern, and the gingerbread work about the head and quarter
galleries, charged me no less than nine dollars and an half, when at the same
time I knew a man, who has a genius for the business, but did not serve an
apprenticeship of seven years to learn how to mix colors, that would have done
it, and in a much better manner too, for about half the money." -- I demanded,
why he did not employ the man of genius, then?

"BECAUSE the owner of the vessel has a mortal antipathy to all men of ability
(replied the captain) and declared he would always give the preference to those
who had learned their trade by honest means."

THIS voyage proved so unlucky and disastrous that I might full as well have
been home at my loom, for any thing I was the better of it. But this is nothing
to my present purpose. -- We had a Creolian family on board that had been to
the bay of Passamacadia for their bodily health, and were now returning to
their possessions and friends in the West Indies.

THE family consisted of an old widow lady; her three daughters, Elizabeth,
Rachel, and Alicia; her steward, with a female companion, and some menial
servants, for whose general use and accommodation the cabin had been hired
during our passage to the islands.

AS these people were very much upon the reserve, I had very little discourse
with them, and still less to any valuable purpose. A consciousness of great
wealth in people of shallow heads naturally begets a selfish and unsociable
spirit, which affects to consider every thing within the compass of its own
little horizon as inferior to itself.

THE southerly wind, which had now blown fresh for several hours, shifting
suddenly two points to the eastward, began at length to increase into a storm
attended with sudden and violent squalls and blasts, which frequently obliged
us to settle all sail to them, and go under close reefs in the more moderate
intervals.

NIGHT came on at last, and the gale increased to such a degree, that the
vessel was obliged to be hove to under her main-stay-sail, and before ten
o'clock, P. M. under bare poles, in which posture we resigned ourselves to the
mercy of the winds and waves; the vessel at the same time making a great deal
of water through both her lower and upper works, and our pumps going without
intermission.

THE unsociable temper of the cabin was now done away; and I could not but
reflect, upon this occasion, how naturally a near prospect of destruction
levels all distinction, and, like death, brings down the pride of wealth and
splendour to the common surface of mortality. As we had the disagreeable
circumstance of a very leaky vessel, laden with the heavy articles of flour,
bar-iron, and tobacco, the incessant clanks of the pump-brakes alarmed the old
Creolian lady exceedingly, as well as her family and the attendants.

"PRAY, captain O'Bluster (said she, advancing with some difficulty to the
cabin door) is it your opinion that we shall be able to live through this
terrible storm?"

"THAT is a question, madam (replied he, putting his head down the companion
leaf) that I would not wish to answer in direct terms. However, I would have
you prepare for the worst, for I do assure you the sea runs mountains high, and
our situation and prospects are such, as give me very small hopes of seeing
tomorrow's sun."

THIS perplexing and ridiculous answer threw the whole cabin into an immediate
state of desperation. There was an Indian priest on board, whom I have more
than once mentioned in the course of these collections, with whom I lodged in
the forecastle. As soon as the widow lady had received capt. O'Bluster's final
answer, as above specified, she sent one of her most resolute domestics to
invite the Indian and myself to sit with herself and family, as it was hoped
the company of a number of men would help to keep up the spirits of the young
ladies.

AS the request was civil and complaisant, we complied with it, and reeled into
the great cabin in the best manner we could, and seated ourselves near the
steward, who seemed almost frightened out of his senses; supporting ourselves
at the same time by the carlings and birth-boards, to prevent our being tossed
and tumbled to and fro, by the sudden lurches and shocks of the vessel in
encountering the seas.

DEAR sir, (said one of the young ladies to the Indian) do you think, sir, we
are in very deep water?

"AS I heard the captain say we are more than two hundred leagues to the
eastward of the continent (replied the savage) the water is, no doubt, of a
very great depth hereabouts; but I will not pretend to say it is absolutely
unfathomable: but, after all, it is a matter of mere moonshine to us, or ought
to be so; (continued he sighing) six fathoms, or sixty, or six hundred will be
the same to us! -- And when once we are descended into those horrid abysses,
upon the surface of which we are now, as it were by a miracle, suspended;
believe me, we shall not be in a capacity to perceive the difference!"

"My steward is a poor creature (exclaimed the old lady) and if he only was to
be drowned, the world would have but little occasion to regret the loss of him.
-- Did you ever, sir (continued she, addressing herself to the Indian) did you
ever, sir, write a last will and testament, sir?"

I DO not recollect (answered he) that I ever did; but I am of opinion, white
woman, that it is not beyond the limits of common sense.

"AS the master of the vessel gives us very little hope of surviving the storm
(said one of the young ladies, addressing the Indian) mamma thinks it is best
to have her affairs put in order, and her worldly concerns settled before she
goes the way of all flesh; and if the good Indian will write the will, I engage
my word he shall be generously rewarded."

FOR my own part, said the Indian, I do not see what people in our situation
have to do with rewards and settlements; but still, if my compliance in this
affair will contribute any thing at all to the ease and quiet of the good white
woman's mind, let us immediately endeavor to write it to the best of our
skill, and have done; since I myself am by no means easy in my mind.

THE ink, pen and paper were then delivered to him, and after enquiring the
testator's name, he wrote as follows, reading what he had written sentence by
sentence.

I, DOROTHY AMELIA LOUISA BRAZEN-BONES, now at the mercy of the high seas,
passenger, being in good health of body, and of sound memory and understanding,
but, nevertheless, upon the point of being dissolved, at the time of this
present writing --

THIS will never do, said the steward. The lawyers will pick a hole in the
will: How is it possible she can be in good health of body, and at the same
time upon the point of being dissolved? --

THE matter is really so, replied the Indian; and heaven forbid, particularly
at such a time as this, when the gods of the firmament are raging against us,
that I should write or utter a single syllable contrary to the strictest truth.

YOU must, nevertheless, do your endeavor to alter it a little, returned the
steward; it is not at all customary with us, at least in time of health, to
word the preamble of a will in that manner.

DO you feel or perceive yourself at all sick, white woman? queried the Indian.

"I FELT a little sea sick just now, replied the lady; but it begins to go
over."

HE then wrote in this manner -- I Dorothy Amelia Louisa Brazenbones, now at
the mercy, etc. being in good health of body, and of sound memory and
understanding, except only that I am a little sea-sick, which is, however,
beginning to go over, do give and bequeath as follows: --

"YOUR preamble does not yet sound right in my ears, objected the steward; this
alteration implies, nay plainly expresses, a recovery from illness, and in a
state of convalescence it is not usual for people to make their wills -- and --
and this circumstance, trifling as it may seem, may possibly nevertheless
afford room for the lawyers to find a flaw. I must beg you to amend it."

AT this instant the brigantine took a heavy roll, and every moveable article
in the cabin, lanthorns, ladies, stewards, slaves, Indians, earthen ware and
weavers went to leeward in an undistinguished mass of confusion.

AFTER some time, however, matters were once more put to rights, as far as our
forlorn and disagreeable situation and circumstances would allow, and the
Indian resumed the preamble of the will in the following manner.

I, DOROTHY AMELIA LOUISA BRAZEN-BONES, being in good health of body, and
blessed with sound memory and understanding, except that I am in violent sear
of dying, do give in the following manner. [Here he writ according to her
directions] -- To my dearly beloved daughter Elisabeth Brazenbones I do give
and bequeath all that sugar plantation or estate lying and being on Carliste
bay in Barbados, to her and the heirs of her body forever -- together --

ALAS, exclaimed the steward, what prospect can this young woman have of heirs
in the present situation of matters!

-- together with the negroes (continued the Indian) belonging to, and now
resident upon the same, that is to say, negro Quacow, Mingo, Johnny, Spanish
Jack, Tormentina, one armed Sue --

THAT is entirely wrong, madam, interrupted the second daughter; you always
promised Sue to me in your life time, and I shall take it very hard if you will
not allow me one choice out of so many now you are d -- d -- dead! --

NO interruption, impudence, (cried the old woman in a pet) -- do not provoke
me, I say, with your nonsense, at such a time as this too, when I am at the
point of death, and in so much trouble.

I AM extremely ill used, replied the young lady, and I purtest if Sue is taken
from me, you shall not, indeed, mamma, hear the last of it in a long time.

BUT there is one thing that till this moment I never thought of, said the
steward.

AND what is that, mr. steward? replied the widow lady.

IT is, (said he, musing) that as in all likelihood the vessel will soon
founder with every soul on board, who will be evidences to the will?

TRULY, answered the old gentlewoman, that is a point I did not before consider!

AND thus it is (said the Indian) that sordid avarice and a base attachment to
the world, too often makes fools and idiots of half mankind!

THERE was another passenger on board, who had a negro man of about forty-five
years of age in his possession, that he intended to dispose of to the highest
bidder, when we arrived amongst the islands.

I HAD several times taken occasion to make some remarks, in his hearing, upon
the cruelty and injustice of one man's selling another into slavery for life --
And for my part, said the Indian, it is not my nature to hold even a dog in
thraldom against his consent, much less one of my own species.

His nose is very flat, observed the passenger.

BUT heaven forbid, replied the Indian, that his nose should stand in the place
of an argument for slavery.

His lips are also very thick, continued the passenger, and I am positive the
devil himself cannot have a much blacker skin.

WHEN the mother of mankind, said the Indian priest, took up a handful of clay
to mould it into shape and animation, the veins of black or of white were, in
her estimation, the same. She said not unto the black, "thou art better than
the white," not unto the white, "thou art superior to the black." -- But the
demons of cowardice, and sloth, and avarice, and pride were hovering round, and
in the absence of nature infused into one the spirit of tyranny, into the other
the servility of soul.

UPON our arriving in port, the aforenamed Indian priest and myself agreed to
take up our lodgings at the same inn, and on our way thither we could not avoid
observing, that the passenger, mentioned in the preceding paragraph, had
already procured his negro to be confined in a yard, open to the dews of the
firmament, but surrounded with high stone walls, where a cargo of newly
imported Africans were also exposed for sale; and for fear the enclosure should
not be sufficient to prevent the negro's escape into the mountains, the owner
had his legs bound together with thick thongs of muleskin, so that he would be
constrained to pass most of the night in a sedentary or recumbent posture. --
"There will be several purchasers down tomorrow, said a slave merchant; but as
the negro is pretty far advanced in years, and appears to have been already
well night w^rn out with hard service, it is my candid opinion he will sell but
for a mere trifle."

ABOUT three o'clock the succeeding morning the rain began to pour down
furiously, attended with wind, thunder, and lightning. -- The Indian then
called to me from the little loft where he was lodged, and requested me to
inform him, whether the negro's legs were still tied or not?

I ANSWERED him, It was most likely they were.

THEN may the God of the Christians have mercy upon his soul, answered the
savage; for the fatigue of our long voyage, the scantiness of his provision,
the agitation of his mind, and above all this terrible weather, and his
wretched manacled situation, cannot otherwise than put an end to his life
before the dawning of the day.

I REPLIED, that I sincerely feared it would be the case.

BUT it was nonsense to bind the negro's legs, observed the Indian: had the
proprietor contented himself with locking up his slave in the enclosure, he
could not possibly have made his escape over those high walls.

CRUELTY and avarice, answered I, are (...), and void of all reflection; and
provided their own nerves are at rest, the tortures of the bleeding victim make
no impression, because they are equally strangers to sympathy. -- When your
nation has once determined to put a prisoner to death, your pity is laid
asleep, you drop not a tear when you behold the torments and agonies of
expiring nature; you put kindled matches into his flesh, and even your women
and your children take pleasure in his misery -- you keep him nine days upon
the rack of anguish -- and what is it that urges you to these dreadful
extremities -- is it not the thirst of revenge? -- Avarice acts with equal
power upon the minds of the civilized Europeans, and produces similar effects.

SOON after sunrise the owner came into the inn, and told us with tears in his
eyes, that the negro was dead!

THE PHILOSOPHER OF THE FOREST. NUMB. I. Written, and first printed in the
Freeman's Journal, Nov. 1781.
IN the course of my observations upon men and manners, I have frequently
remarked, that every reader seems curious to know something of the private
character, circumstances, and leading features of an author, previous to the
perusal of his writings. I shall therefore, in compliance with this humor,
confine this my first paper, to some account of my life, situation and fortunes.

I DREW my first breath upon the borders of Switzerland, on the south side, and
within view of that stupendous range of mountains known by the name of Jura.
Here, in a solitary valley, my ancestors had for many ages taken up their
abode, having, as I have been told, ever supported the character of plain,
industrious people, who were acquainted with no other than the rural life;
perhaps nearly resembling that so much celebrated in the early ages of
innocence and rustic simplicity.

MY father and mother dying, their little estate fell to me, their sole heir;
and for aught I know, might have continued in the family for ages to come, had
not some unfortunate events rendered it fatally necessary for the descendent of
the famous William Tell (for from him I was derived in the maternal line) to
remove from this enchanting scene of rural bliss; and experience the
vicissitudes and vexations of a very different kind of life.

WHETHER I possess any drops of the antimonarchial blood of this, my ever
honored and renowned ancestor, or whether it has been an actual view of the
effects of regal tyranny in different parts of Europe and Asia; or be the cause
what it may, I have always entertained an extravagant affection for republics,
and could never find myself long at ease under the dominion, or even in the
vicinity of kings, emperors, stad^holders, viceroys, or aristocratists; all
which, in my opinion, are but different terms at this day for tyrants and
oppressors. Whenever I happened to be a witness to the miseries of despotic
governments, What simpletons, thought I, are the herd of the human race, to
surrender up so many of their just, necessary, and natural rights forever, and
without power of recall, into the hands of one or more men; which, unless they
all prove just, wise, patriotic, and benevolent (a miracle not to be looked for
in this world) commonly renders the people the miserable slaves of ambition,
avarice and oppression. -- But I must revert to the history of my misfortunes.
-- A beautiful grove of ancient oaks had grown and flourished for many
centuries adjoining my before mentioned progenitor's little estate, which he
held in see simple. His farm-house was situated almost under the shade of these
oaks, but, unfortunately, the soil they grew upon belonged to another person,
residing in a neighboring canton, who now took it into his head to have the
whole forest cut down, and the land cleared for the purposes of agriculture. --
From the earliest days of my childhood I had experienced the most lively
emotions of pleasure in rambling uncontrouled and at full liberty, among these
venerable ^ades; I had therefore conceived an unspeakable affection for this
tall and delightful grove, and heard the sound of the fatal ax with the most
painful sensations of grief; and had a favorite nymph or hamadryad of the
forest (according to the opinion of the ancients) resided in every tree, I
could not have been more sensibly afflicted. -- All my endeavors to dissuade
the proprietor of these trees from his fatal resolution, proved vain. He
obstinately persisted therein, calling me, at the same time, fool and madman
for repining at the advantages of so enlarged a prospect. The days of my
felicity were, therefore, now at an end. Gloomy thoughts took possession of my
soul, and I soon formed a design of quitting my native land forever, and
retiring to some other part of the world.

WHAT soon after confirmed me in my purpose, was the additional mortifying
circumstance of his erecting a large stone building within two hundred paces of
our old and venerable habitation, which he peopled with a set of animals, whose
humor, sentiments and conversation were, in every respect, diametrically
opposite to, and engaged upon different objects from my own.

LABORING under such accumulated misfortunes, which I confess,
notwithstanding, will appear to most men to be little better th^n imaginary, I
soon disposed of my paternal inheritance, and with a dejected heart and a
tearful eye, took my leave of it forever. -- The charming solitude and privacy
that was wont to reign through this delightful haunt, was now lost and
vanished. It was no longer sheltered from the bleak north-east wind. It was
laid open to the view of the adjacent country, and crowds of travelers -- a
misfortune indeed; as rural quiet and unobserved retirement were ever the
darling objects of my soul. There is something in woods and solitudes congenial
with my nature -- it was in these the VISIBLE DEITY took leave of man when he
left him to the mercy of the elements, and to the vanity of his own inventions;
and it is in these that I conceive the mind still finds itself in the best
humor to contemplate, in silent admiration, the great and inexhaustible source
of all things. Towns and palaces are my abhorrence, and if at any time I have
found it necessary to reside in great cities (as I once did in Moscow in
Russia, for more than six months) still, by intervals I retired to the forests,
and conversed with the simple genius of the wilderness -- a conversation I
infinitely prefer to that of heroes, kings, statesmen, or philosophers
themselves. -- At the time of the abovementioned unfortunate event, I was in
the twenty-second year of my age, and having, while a boy, read such books as I
could procure, chiefly in the language of the high Germans, they insensibly
actuated me with a desire to travel, and learn something more of mankind, and
the world upon which they exist, than could be gathered from books only. I
therefore set out upon my travels, with the nett proceeds of my inheritance,
but in about two years, (although I had observed the most rigid economy,
consistent with my views) I found my finances at so low an ebb, having, I fear,
been rather too curious in examining cabinets of rarities, and purchasing
access into libraries, that I was compelled to strike out some other scheme for
prosecuting my design.

A PLACE of some convenience soon offered in the suit of a Neapolitan nobleman,
who was then about to embark at Messina, on a voyage of curiosity to the
country of Palestine, commonly called the Holy Land. With this person I visited
most of the islands, and regions bordering upon the Mediterranean; but he
afterward dying at Damietta in Egypt. I was once more reduced to difficulties
in a strange land, and far removed from my native coasts.

AFTER some days consideration, I concluded, by the advice of a trading Jew, to
embrace the profession of traveling pilgrim, or religious and philosophical
wanderer; and as my thirst for seeing the world, and observing its customs,
manners, and policy, was rather increased than abated, I determined, for the
future, to gratify my curiosity at the expense of the public of all the nations
of the earth. In pursuance of this plan, I presently provided myself with a
broad girdle, a scrip, a staff, and such other furniture as long custom has
rendered indispensably necessary to men of this character; and then setting
out, unattended and unaccompanied, have ever since prosecuted my travels in
this mode, without experiencing any event that has bettered my fortune, or put
me long out of humor with myself or mankind.

I HAVE now spent upwards of thirty years wandering up and down the world as a
pilgrim; a line of life which I can assure you, has, like all others, its
hardships, discouragements and difficulties, as well as its pleasures and
advantages. In Asia, and particularly that part called China (anciently Cathay)
I have been taken for a Spanish Jesuit, sent among them by some European prince
to propagate the Catholic faith; in some parts of Europe for a philosopher
wandering in quest of natural knowledge; but have ever been considered in
America as a rabbinical Jew, collecting contributions for the distressed of
that nation residing in and near Jerusalem.

IT would be tedious in this place to particularize my various peregrinations:
sufficient be it to say, that I have more than once shivered with cold under
the arctic circle, where the sun is invisible for several days together in the
month of December; have visited most of the countries bounded upon the Indian
and Ethiopic oceans; that I have had poetical dreams upon the tomb of Virgil,
in the neighborhood of Naples, and have glowed with the tropical heat in the
close and sultry valleys of Brazil. -- More than two years have now elapsed
since I arrived upon the coasts of North America: the fame of these new and
flourishing republics was my principal inducement for coming hither: I had also
an ardent desire to see, and converse with those far famed patriots and
soldiers, who, by the assistance of a virtuous yeomanry, have established the
reign of freedom and equity, in direct opposition to the arms and influence of
the most assuming and presumptuous tyranny.

I HAVE now fixed my place of residence in the midst of a forest of
considerable extent on the western side of the Delaware, not many miles from
the beautiful and populous city of Philadelphia; in which retirement, it is
likely I may continue some months, and possibly till I set out again for the
east, as I am obligated by a solemn vow, which nothing but death can obviate,
to visit the holy sepulcher at Jerusalem once more, before I depart to the
invisible abodes of the spirits of men.

I AM now in the fifty-sixth year of my age, a time of life at which every man
of sense and reflection ought to have settled his temporal concerns, and
prepared himself for those of the invisible ages to come. -- But as long as I
reside in the forests of Pennsylvania, the public may expect to receive now and
then from my retirement, a piece of writing on political, moral, philosophical,
or religious subjects: and were it not that I am engaged in composing a
voluminous treatise on a very abstruse and delicate subject, De anima mundi,
these lucubration should appear much oftener, than it is probable they will. I
have been near thirty years in collecting materials for that most extraordinary
piece, concerning the divine and incomprehensible intelligence which pervades
and enlivens the immensity of matter, in the same manner as the body of man is
put in motion by the actuating spring within it. I am the more bent upon
finishing this treatise, as I am (without vanity) convinced, no person but
myself possesses a stock of resolution and perseverance equal to the task.

THE place of my abode, as I intimated before, is in a dark and unfrequented
solitude, exactly coinciding with the melancholy cast and recluse nature of my
own mind. From its wild and unpromising appearance, as well as from its
difficulty of access, I much question whether this spot has been visited,
perhaps for twenty years past, by any human being but myself. -- I subsist
wholly upon water, roots and vegetables, being convinced Pythagoras was right
when he forbade his disciples the use of animal flesh. A kind providence has
amply rewarded me for my self denial, inasmuch as I have not had an hour's
sickness these twenty-five years past, am altogether devoid of vicious
ambition, and have never been at all inclined to shed the blood of any man or
injure him in the slightest degree. In short, my benevolence is unbounded, and,
after the example of a certain order of Bramins in the farther India, extends
itself to the most insignificant and contemptible of the reptile, or insect
creation. The cavern I possess and inhabit was formed by simple nature, in one
of her sportive humors, that has huddled a multiplicity of rocks into a
chaotic assemblage indeed, but enclosing among them a vaulted grotto with a
long winding entrance; the whole being perfectly sheltered from the severity of
the winter, as well as from the violent heats of the summer season. There is
also a small stream of water passing by the foot of one of the largest of the
rocks, which, to the best of my observation, is never chilled by the cold
blasts of January, or rendered disagreeably warm amid the fervours of August.

I AM sometimes, though rarely, seen in the city, where I find considerable
amusement in observing the hurry and business of the men of the world, their
eager concern and restless anxiety about matters that (...) to them to be of
the greatest moment, but in my (...) are but of secondary importance in our
journey through this life. Although I am not at all fond of being known, yet I
will so far gratify the curious as to inform them, if that will in any degree
contribute to their satisfaction, that I am in stature considerably above the
middle size, of a very swarthy complexion, and much injured by the weather; am
of an astrabilarious habit; walk with a staff of black ebony, which I formerly
cut with my own hands on the Balegate mountains in East India, and constantly
have on a pair of temple spectacles, as my eye sight is none of the best. My
eyes themselves are extremely black and penetrating, and the mustachios on my
upper lip are of the same color. I commonly wear a large pair of jack-boots
without spurs, but am never seen on horseback, or in any carriage drawn by
cattle. I speak most of the languages of the old world, ancient and modern,
with fluency, as having conversed so frequently with the various nations
thereof. There are indeed a few niceties in the dialect of the Kalmuck Tartars
with which I am not s^ well acquainted; as also, several Chinese characters of
inferior note, that I have been rather neglectful in studying; but I apprehend
an ignorance of this nature to be pardonable.

IF these few particulars, relative to my person, retreat and qualifications,
will at all gratify my readers, they are at liberty to make the best of them.
But I hope an idle and unseasonable curiosity will not prompt such persons to
undertake the discovery of my sylvan abode. The search would, most probably, be
fruitless, as chance alone, not industry, design or perseverance conducted me
to it. But if by some unfortunate coincidence of chances this cavern should be
discovered while I am the inhabitant, the vexation I formerly felt in
Switzerland upon the cutting down of the beautiful grove, will undoubtedly
return, and hasten my departure on a pilgrimage to the east, which might
otherwise have been deferred a considerable time.

TO THE MEMORY OF THE BRAVE, ACCOMPLISHED AND PATRIOTIC COL. JOHN LAURENS, Who,
in the 27th year of his age, was killed in an engagement with a detachment of
the British from Charleston, near the river CAMBAHEE, in South Carolina,
August, 1782.
SINCE on her plains this generous chief expired,
Whom sages honored, and whom France admired;
Does Fame no statues to his memory raise,
Nor swells one column to record his praise
Where her palmetto shades the adjacent deeps,
Affection sighs, and Carolina weeps!
THOU, who shall stray where death this chief confines,
Approach, and read the patriot in these lines:
Not from the dust the muse transcribes his name,
And more than marble shall declare his fame
Where scenes more ^^orious his great soul engage,
Confessed thrice worthy in that closing page
When conquering Time to dark oblivion calls,
The marble totters, and the column falls.
LAURENS! thy tomb while kindred hands adorn,
Let northern muses, too, inscribe thy urn. --
Of all, whose names on death's black list appear,
No chief, that perished, claimed more grief sincere,
Not one, Columbia, that thy bosom bore,
More tears commanded, or deserved them more! --
Grief at his tomb shall heave the unwearied sigh,
And honor lift the mantle to her eye:
Fame through the world his patriot name shall spread,
By heroes envied and by monarchs read:
Just, generous, brave -- to each true heart allied,
The Briton's terror, and his country's pride;
For him the tears of war-worn soldiers ran,
The friend of freedom, and the friend of man.
THEN what is death, compared with such a tomb,
Where honor fades not, and fair virtues bloom,
Ah, what is death, when fame like this endears
The brave man's favorite, and his country's tears.
THE PHILOSOPHER OF THE FOREST. NUMB. II.
A FEW evenings since, as I was reclining in my cavern, by the pale light of a
solitary lamp; the train of thought I was then in, led me to form some
conjectures on the nature, origin, and design of man. Fatigued at length, with
meditating on a subject, in which the farther I pursued it, the more I was
bewildered, I fell asleep. Fancy was not long unemployed; and I imagined I saw
at my bedside one of those individuals of superior intelligence, which are
denominated angels or genii. This divine form desired me to arise and attend
him; informing me, at the same time, that he wished to illuminate my
understanding as far as he could be permitted.

WHEN we had arrived at the summit of a very lof^y rock, he desired me to turn
my view eastward, and consider attentively all that offered itself to my
observation. I looked as he directed me, and saw a large and beautiful city,
whose inhabitants were employed in every species of commerce, as well as in the
practice of the liberal and mechanical arts. I perceived also, that the so^l of
the city afforded no wells, springs, or rivulets of water proper for the use of
man or beast; but, at a considerable distance from the suburbs, I saw a certain
number of blind mules, laboring at as many wells; and by means of a machine,
to which they were attached, drawing water perpetually, which was received into
large wooden vessels, and from thence distributed among the citizens, as well
as to the cattle and domestic animals.

CONTIGUOUS to the circular path of every mule was stationed an overseer with a
large lash-whip in his hand; with which, at least once in every revolution, he
gave the mule one or more severe stripes to accelerate his progress.

Go forward to the gray mule (said the genius) and hear what he has to say.
Approaching, as he had desired me, I found the vatt was full, and consequently
that the gray mule enjoyed a small interval of rest. To my great surprise, the
mule then opened his mouth, and began to speak in the following manner.

"WHAT am I, or where am I? -- What means this eternal perambulation in the
same tiresome track, as far as I can perceive, without use or design? To what
strange purpose am I thus kept busy in turning these wheels and axles: I am
lashed and goaded without mercy: have small portions of rest allotted me: am
fed regularly thrice a day to prevent my strength failing me: I am attended by
a tormentor, never weary, whose whole business is to restrain me from idleness:
-- and all for what? Can it be that the author of my existence takes pleasure
in seeing me wounded and tormented? Or has he some wise and benevolent purpose
to answer by my sufferings? I am willing so to hope -- but, to me, this present
state of existence, as well as the work I am engaged at, is from beginning to
end an unsearchable mystery."

HERE the gray mule concluded abruptly, as he heard the driver advancing
toward him, and notifying to him, with a crack of his whip, to continue his
labor. -- If this blind mule knew, said the genius, that the lives of the
inhabitants of so vast and populous a city as this you see, depended, in a
great measure, upon his labors, he would no longer think he had been created
invain. And thus it is with the race and generations of man: they were not made
without end and design, but the particular view and meaning of their creation I
am not, at present, permitted to disclose to you. He then requested me to turn
my eyes to a different quarter, where the first object that fixed my attention
was a large globe of wax, which seemed to hang, at some distance from the
earth, self suspended in the warm beams of the sun. A young person in female
attire, of the most beautiful form and features that ever the eye of
imagination beheld, was standing by the globe, with a small golden instrument
in her right hand, bearing some resemblance to a mason's trowel. I asked the
genius the name of this amiable creature, and who she might be?

SHE is, answered my attendant, the mother of all men and animals, and of all
the visible creation: her name is NATURE: attend well to what she is about. --
I was for some time so smitten with the divine beauty of her features, that I
could not immediately obey the last injunction: her fine eyes entirely
captivated my heart and fancy: I thought I beheld in her the true and admirable
origin of all art, science, wit, genius, and understanding, and those powers of
the soul, by which we are enabled to soar above inert matter, and the limited
capacities of the brute creation. How is it possible, exclaimed I, in the
extravagance of my ecstacy, that the works of those who have formed their
models from the amiable goddess should be otherwise than immortal, when she
herself is no other than the pure source and essence of immortal beauty itself!

I NOW found myself constrained by an invisible hand to attend to her
operations. -- She appeared to be perpetually busy: not a moment of her time
was lost. I saw day and night alternately passing over her like light and
shade, at equal intervals, but there was no cessation of her labors on that
account. The wax that composed the globe, on which she seemed to bestow great
attention, was soft and pliable, though not inclined to liquefaction; and
consisted of different sorts and qualities. Out of these she was constantly
moulding the forms of all animal and vegetable substances, almost without name
or number. Now she fabricated a man, now a horse, next a bull, an elephant, a
goat, a snake, a frog, a gnat, and so on. All forms seemed alike easy to her,
and if there was any difference in them, it proceeded rather from the fineness
or coarseness of the waxen materials, than from any slightness or deficiency in
the workmanship.

THE genius now left me for a few minutes, and advanced toward the goddess
Nature, where she was at work, requesting her to mould, for his gratification,
two or three (...) her most favorite designs. -- I will grant your request,
said she, provided you consent to take that image along with you to the
celestial abodes of Jupiter, which you shall most approve, and shall seem best
worthy of your choice. -- The guardian genius assented.

SHE then took up a small quantity from a stratum of wax most exquisitely
tempered, and began her operations. The first she formed was a warrior, or
hero: I knew him by his spear and shield, and a mien that betokened exalted
sentiments and daring designs; but there was something in his countenance that
did not much please the attending genius. -- She, next, as far as Nature
unassisted by art could go, molded a great statesman and politician -- then a
legislator; then an inventor of useful arts; a doctor of divinity; a man of the
law; a poet; a philosopher; a physician of the deepest skill -- all these were
merely such -- the last of all, and with the utmost exertion of her skill,
formed, in one heart, the seeds and principles of a just, disinterested,
benevolent, upright and honest man.

THE genius then desired her to desist from her operations: "It is enough,"
said he, for this last image approaches to my idea of the celestial Jupiter. He
then clasped to his bosom the last she had formed, and flew to the courts of
Olympus to lay this most excellent piece of Nature's workmanship at the feet of
the deity.

THE goddess Nature then took the others into her own possession, and though most
exquisitely admirable in themselves, mixed them once more with the great
globular mass from which they at first had been taken; and in which they thus
found their origin and their end. -- I could not avoid making a reflection --
Such, thought I, is the reward of virtue -- virtue and rectitude of heart are
received into the divine abodes when science, wit, poetry, philosophy, and the
rest, are resolved into their original nothing!

BY this time the genius had returned. I will now, said he, represent the
origin of things to you in a different manner.

I THEN cast my eyes downward, and saw the earth at it appeared after it first
emerged from its ancient chaotic state. The genius informed me that the power
that had ultimately effected this great and wonderful revolution was of a
nature too intensely bright for me to behold; but, continued he, you may, if
you please, obtain a sight of the deputies he has employed to transact matters
under his general agency.

IMMEDIATELY I saw a number of strange forms upon the earth, now solitary,
contriving how to people it with living creatures.

IN condescension to the weakness of your understanding, said the genius, we
will call these Nature's Journeymen.

I PERFECTLY understand you, answered I. Let us observe them. -- The first
thing they set about, was, to make a composition of fire, air, earth, water and
sulphur. This mass contained the principles of all life and motion, thought,
sentiment and action. Having thus paved the way, they at first diverted
themselves with forming vegetables, minerals and trees of the forest, from this
heterogeneous mass. Soon after, Firando, as my conductor called him, the most
ingenious amongst them, and confessedly their superior, made a tree capable of
bearing fruit, which upon a closer inspection I found to be the apple. The rest
applauded his invention, but were little more than imitators. In a short time
every one of them had a tree of his own, and producing a species of fruit of
his own contriving. Glandiferino, however, one of their fellow journeymen, was
heartily laughed at by the rest for not having ingenuity enough to contrive any
thing better on his tree than an acorn. They, nevertheless, allowed on all
hands, that the tree itself was of an excellent contexture.

SOME hours had now (seemingly) elapsed, when, after several attempts and
experiments, the sensitive plant was the nearest approach their united
ingenuity could make toward symbolizing their ideas of animal life.

IN a little time, however, they made great improvements. A bear was first
fabricated: then a hog; a wolf; a fox; a leopard; a lion; and finally a horse,
which was for some time considered as a masterpiece of ingenuity. The
different species of fish were next invented, among which the dolphin was by
far the most beautiful, and which several of them endeavored to excel in that
particular, but without effect.

THE inferior orders of animals and insects, such as rats, mice, cats, weasels,
birds, musketoes, and the like, were contrived at odd hours in the evening and
noon vacations, by the 'prentice boys.

THE horse, as I before observed, was for some time looked upon as the most
perfect creature the five ingredients were capable of composing. But Firando
alone was not of this opinion. He knew that fire wa^ an element used also in
the composition of the gods, and he declared that nothing in their resemblance
was yet produced. -- "It is my desire, said he, to form an animal, whose
inclinations and appetites shall not be altogether consined to the earth, but
to comprehend such a portion of the element of fire as shall carry his ideas
upwards to the source of all things." He then retired, sad and solitary, to the
forest, with a quantity of the elementary composition, in order to contrive a
more perfect animal than had yet appeared, but the utmost stretch of his
ingenuity produced, for the present, only a monkey: afterward a baboon; and
lastly, an ouran-outang. The other workmen laughed heartily at these odd
animals, and pronounced the horse alone to be infinitely superior to all three.

FIRANDO now gave himself up to the deepest melancholy: I must soon depart,
said he, to the planet Saturn; but I would willingly leave a nobler creature
here upon earth than we have yet been able to compose. Just as he uttered these
words he saw the baboon climbing a tree, and was struck with the idea of a man.

HE then poured a quantity of the elementary composition into a small jar, but
with an additional portion of fire. As he was beginning his work, the monkey,
in playing some pranks on a shelf, overset a cup of lamp-black, which fell
directly into the jar. Firando nevertheless went on with his manufacture, and
in a little time had formed a man and woman, but they were perfectly black.
These, as the genius told me, were the first ancestors of the African negroes.
The other journeymen and boys gazed at the negro couple with marks of jealous
satisfaction; they, however, admired their black wooly hair, their snow white
teeth and dark jetty skin, and at the same time confessed that this creature
infinitely excelled all that had hitherto been created.

BUT Firando thought he could still improve on his invention. He then took a
lash-whip and drove away the monkey, for fear of some other sinister accident
happening by his means. Having washed his hands, that he might not soil the
pure elementary composition, he resumed his labors; and by now and then
infusing additional particles of liquid fire, he at length completed a white
man and woman, every way answerable to the original idea in his own mind,
except that, at the desire of one of his brethren, he tinged them with a little
red.

"THIS is my last labor upon earth," exclaimed Firando. "I must now take my
flight to the planet Saturn. You will endeavor, said he, (addressing himself
to the other journeymen) to excel this model. I am convinced, however, the task
will be difficult: but should you succeed, the greater will be the honor due
to your ingenuity. Consider well this my last work -- MAN! he is at the head of
all sublunary excellence. His eye is fixed upon the celestial canopy: he reasons
upon the design and nature of his own existence: his breast glows with noble
and exalted ideas: he measures the distances of the stars from each other, and
comprehends the course and limits of the rapid comet. Make a more perfect
creature if you can." -- He then departed to people the cold regions of the
planet Saturn.

HE was no sooner out of sight than Glandiferino attempted to depreciate his
work. There is not so much originality in this creature, said he, as Firando
imagines. The general idea of its form and structure is taken from the brute
creation, and of their nature he must certainly partake in some considerable
degree. That is nothing to the purpose, replied Coeligenitus, another of the
journeymen: it is the curious organisation within that excites my wonder; for,
upon close examination, I find that fire, earth, air, water and sulphur,
differently modified and distributed, and nothing else, produce those actions,
excite those sentiments, and perform those wonders, a few of which Firando
recounted, previous to his departure.

AFTER this conversation, they each went to work, trying every method in their
power to excel this model, but could never succeed. They made men, it is true,
resembling Firando's pattern in outward appearance, but internally they were no
other than cats, puppies and weasels. One was a thief; another a bully and a
wrangler; a third a dunce; a fourth an idiot; a fifth a monster of avarice or
envy; a sixth a sycophant -- and so on, almost without end.

"THESE, said the genius, are the originals of all the villainous and worthless
part of mankind; they were constructed by Nature's journeymen and apprentices,
and unfortunately in such abundance, that the first model made by the master
workman, can at present hardly be seen or discovered amongst them." -- By some
accident, my large book De animos mundi, fell down, at this period of my dream,
from the shelf where I usually lay it, after inserting my observations for the
day: the noise awakened me, and, for the present, put an end to my dreaming.

THE PHILOSOPHER OF THE FOREST. NUMB. III.
HAVING replaced this volume of curious speculations, I again composed myself
to sleep, and while detained in that silent state, the original globe of the
earth was once more presented to my view. I imagined, however, that several
hours were elapsed between this and my former visit; but I perceived the
journeymen artisans still at work and forming animals of every kind and
species, almost without number. -- Previous to this, a general rule had been
laid down among them not to produce any animal except it should have some other
for an enemy. By these means, said they, the original genuine nature of the
elements will remain unaltered, as the everlasting and unerring REASON has
declared they ought to be; but which, when they are compounded and wrought up
into one animal, undergo a visible change, and beget not a spirit of friendship
and harmony, but the narrow principle of self-love.

THEY had proceeded so far in the practice of this fatal opinion, that the
earth and its rivers were every where stained with blood, and the original
model of the artist Firando was extirpated from the world.

ALAS, said I to the genius, who still seemed to attend me, what means all
this? cannot every individual exist without perpetually plotting and
accomplishing the ruin of his neighbor? -- It is no matter, replied he, it is
of no consequence in the estimation of the first cause of all things: their
doom is to be once resolved into their original, distinct, composing elements,
and when that is effected, it is of small importance in what manner it may have
been brought about.

As I was attending to their operations, I cast an eye of particular curiosity
at one of the forms who was sitting on the bank of a large body of water. He
had been constructing several sorts of fish, some of them offensive, others
defensive. At last he completed a sea tortoise, but it was remarkable, that the
brains of this creature were, for the size of his body, extremely small: Why,
said I, to my attendant, does he take such extraordinary care to shield this
animal from the assaults of enemies, when so many others are left naked and
defenseless?

THE reason is this, replied the genius: Most of those unarmed animals you talk
of, are gifted (...) abilities and cunning which will be generally sufficient
for their defense and safety, independent of such a load of armor as you see
upon the tortoise. The Cuttle-fish, for instance, when closely pursued, has the
faculty of emitting a black liquid substance, which will instantly expand in
the surrounding element, and effectually protect him from farther pursuit,
(...) bewildering his enemy: Again, the Flying-fish, as you may perceive, is
naturally weak and defencesess; when, therefore, the dolphin, his natural
enemy, is in pursuit of him, and on the point of snapping him up, the good
natured artist has furnished him with wings, by the aid of which he wisely and
instinctively quits his native element, and continues his flight through the air,
till he has baffled and wearied his pursuer.

YES, said I, but the benevolence you talk of, seems in some measure to have
missed its aim; for the moment the unhappy animal quits the water, I see
myriads of voracious birds, the manufacture of other journeymen, watching to
seize and devour him. His little life is, therefore, nothing else than a
prolongation of misery. Terror and apprehension of death are his constant
companions: Can existence be a blessing to such a creature; and would not a
benevolent mind rather wish him not to have been created at all?

THIS is one of those cases, answered the genius, in which a lesser evil (like
the blind mule at the wheel) is permitted for the sake of a greater good. They
flying-fish is the principal support of the dolphin, and a numerous species of
the feathered creation, which, if his race were annihilated, or did not exist,
would speedily perish for want of sustenance."

I COULD not avoid observing to my director, that almost every animal, reptile,
and insect they made, was inspired with rancour and enmity to the human race,
and which they were constantly manifesting upon every occasion.

YOUR remark is just, said the genius, but the powers of the mind of man are
more than a match for the united enmity of the inferior part of animated nature.

How can that be possible, answered I, when one of the artisans is at this
moment fabricating a reptile that possesses ample power to destroy mankind
unawares, and can infuse inevitable death into them before they have the most
distant idea of danger?

THE matter was thus -- Several sorts of serpents had been invented, but they
were for the most part harmless. At length Altavolo (one of the journeymen, and
a snakemaker) seeing two men bearing false evidence, in a dispute between two
other men, took so great a dislike to the whole human species on account of the
perjury, that he raved and stormed with all the madness of hatred and passion.
-- "Would to heaven, cried he, that Firando had been better employed than in
contriving an animal that can be guilty of so much premeditated baseness! --
and were it not for the irrevocable decree, that no one amongst as shall mangle
or extirpate the work of another, I swear I would instantly annihilate the
human race: -- notwithstansting, I will torment them bitterly: I have hitherto,
for my diversion only, turned off the anvil a number of serpents of various
natures, but not one amongst them capable of doing much mischief; I will now
construct a species that shall carry certain unavoidable destruction in its
sting, a death terrible in its nature, but all too little to satisfy my hatred
and disgust to mankind!"

HE then, with amazing ingenuity and skill, began to mould that order of the
serpentine tribe, since known by the name of the Rattle-snake. It was about
five feet in length, and of a yellowish hue. Over and above the teeth designed
for mastication, there were two, very small and sharp pointed, fixed in a
sinewy substance near the extremity of the upper jaw. At the root of these he
placed two small bladders, so constructed, that at the same instant an incision
was made with the teeth, a drop of greenish, poisonous liquid should be emitted
into the wound, which in a short time would produce an entire cessation of all
animal motion.

As soon as this destructive and irritable animal was finished, the fabricator
turned it out at its full liberty. I then saw it retire immediately to the
woods and rocks, where it lay in a listening posture, as if watching for its
prey. Soon after, a man accidentally coming along directly toward him, the
snake unperceivedly coiled himself up into a spiral wreath, raised his head
from the center, and sprung at the fleshy part of the traveller's leg. The
deadly greenish liquor was instantly infused; the man suffered excruciating
tortures, and in a short time was dissolved into his original elements.

BY this time the artist Firando had returned from his long voyage to the
planet Saturn, and began to examine what had been done on earth during his
absence. After he had fully satisfied his curiosity, he addressed his brother
artists in the following manner -- "You have strangely mistaken my original
design; my plan was harmony, and you have universally proceeded upon the
principle of discord. However, that I may not be thought to take a malignant
pleasure in mortifying you, I will leave all animated forms in their present
situation for the space of eight thousand years; at the conclusion of which
period, I will totally annihilate these complicated fabrics of matter, and
arrange things anew, and in a more harmonious order, In the mean time, and we
must all soon take our flight to a distant system in the creation, by order of
the Great Invisible, to operate upon a different kind of substance from any
that is found on this earth, let us endeavor to mitigate matters a little,
here below; since the period is very remote when a more perfect arrangement is
to take place. In all the debased part of mankind, let us implant the principle
of HONOR, which will in some degree compensate for the want of innate
rectitude of heart: and let us impart such a consistency to the soil and matter
of the earth, that mankind cannot subsist upon it, without the exercise of
severe and perpetual labor. Thus, by keeping them employed without
intermission, excepting the few hours allowed for the repose of nature, there
will be the less opportunity and inclination for the perpetration of those
crimes; a propensity to which you have so fatally planted within them."

"ALL this will be too little to restrain them, exclaimed Altavolo; they at
present enjoy an ever during spring and summer conjoined, in one season;
because the sun moves continually in the plane of the equator; they must be
pinched, like the people in the cometary worlds, with the extremities of heat
and cold, if you would effectually restrain them from idleness. If Firando
pleases, who alone has had an interview with the deity, that glorious planet
the Sun shall no longer move in the plane of the equator; he shall travel
obliquely over it, forming an angle of at least fifty degrees, which will
abundantly produce the wished for effect."

"THAT will be too severe a punishment, said one of the others: it will be
impossible for the nature of man to support itself under it. Let us be more
moderate, and have some compassion upon the works of our own hands." So, after
some debate, it was agreed, that the sun's utmost declination from the
equinoctial, north or south, should never exceed twenty-three degrees and
twenty-nine minutes, till the eight thousand years were elapsed.

BUT as to this deadly and poisonous serpent, said Firando, I must beg of you,
most humane Altavolo, to destroy him before he propagates his breed too
extensively upon the earth.

THAT I will never consent to on any terms, replied the other; I had just and
good reasons for constructing him: he is a curious piece of mechanism: he does
honor to my inventive powers, and it is the delight of my eyes to behold him.
-- Will you suffer me then, said Firando, to suggest some little alterations in
him?

PROVIDED, said the other, you do not abate his venomous and destructive
qualities: these I am determined shall remain unalterably fatal.

FIRANDO then took up the snake, and suspended a number of small bells near the
extremity of its tail; at the same time commanding it to give notice with
these, if at any time it had an intention to wound men or certain other
animals, that they might have a moment of time to get out of its way. When this
was accomplished, the same benevolent artist formed a small plant, particularly
adapted to the soils where he observed the rattle-snake fondest of frequenting;
the application of which, he intended should counteract the bad effects of the
venom, if made in due season; this he planted with great secrecy in a dark
forest a little after midnight, for fear Altavolo should^^ee what he had done,
discover the salutiferous nature of the plant, and pull it up.

THE journeymen, artisans having thus settled matters, took their leave of the
earth for eight thousand years, directing their flight to the southwestern
quarter of the horizon. I followed them with my eyes as far as I possibly
could, when, desirous of being informed, with certainty, how much of this term
should have been elapsed at the time when a man, known by the appellation of
the Philosopher of the Forest, should appear upon earth, I turned round to the
genius to ask him the question, when I suddenly awoke; and found myself reduced
to the necessity of relying upon my own speculations in ascertaining this
difficult point.

THE PHILOSOPHER OF THE FOREST. NUMB. IV.
IN the neighborhood of the forest, in the midst of which I have taken up my
abode, and at about the distance of about two English miles from the place of
my retreat, resides an honest country parson, the only individual with whom I
have yet had an opportunity to contract an acquaintance in this part of the
country, unless I should except a benevolent husbandman in the same vicinity,
who has more than once supplied me with the fruits of the earth, and such
vegetables as are suitable to my plain, frugal, and regular manner life. The
clergyman, who shall be more particularly the subject of this paper, is a man
of uncommon humility, and is indeed remarkable for every virtue that can be
supposed necessary to adorn the pastoral, or any other character. With a small
annual income, and a few acres of land, I will undertake to assert that he is
one of the happiest men this day existing. While others are seeking vain and
transitory honors on oceans raging beneath a wintry sky, or in bloody battles
by land, in those unjoyous climes where the scorched soldier faints beneath the
powerful influence of a vertical sun, he enjoys the blessings of content and
retirement, and experiences more real felicity in having reclaimed one person
from vice, than the greatest monarch could enjoy by desolating countries,
subduing armies, or reducing innumerable provinces to the most absolute and
unconditional submission. Although this man is in a situation that places him
above real want and contempt, yet still he is one whom an ill-judging world
styles poor; an epithet that could be no way debasing if applied to the
individuals of the priesthood of all nations, with even more justice than it is
to my neighbor the rural clergyman: they would then bear a nearer resemblance
to that truly illustrious person, who many hundred years ago visited this earth
in the character of a needy and despised stranger.

THERE is not a sight in all the walks of men, that gives me half the disgust,
as that of a Christian clergyman rolling in his coach, swelling with pride and
impertinence, associating only with princes, nobles, and the wealthy men of the
land, and courting the favor of kings and Cesars: In words he may indeed
profess to be a follower of the humble and patient man of Nazareth, while his
conduct too plainly proves that his heart is set upon a very different object.
-- My acquaintance with this good natured and consistent ecclesiastic commenced
in a very singular manner. The church where he usually, at least once a week,
calls his little flock together, is a venerable fabric of some antiquity, for
an American structure, situated in a retired valley, on the margin of a large
forest. When I first settled myself in the vicinity of this remote solitude,
with a design to prosecute my voluminous ^^eatise de anima mundi without
interruption, I used now and then, as is indeed still my custom in good
weather, to make an excursion to this antique pile, and amuse myself with
reading the various inscriptions on the tombstones; in reflecting upon the
momentary continuance of the race of man in the present state of being; and in
considering the mortifying change that is here effected from what was once
estimated vigorous, brave, gay, sensible, or beautiful, to all that was
loathsome, deformed, or despicable; with a thousand musings of the same kind
that spontaneously arose from the uses, silence, solitude, and other
circumstances of the place.

ONE evening, a little before sunset, as I was visiting this wonted scene of my
meditations, I happened to meet on the spot with the good clergyman of the
parish who was sitting on a grave stone, and as I have since learned, had come
thither upon the same design as myself. He at first seemed a good deal
surprised at my aspect, figure, and manner of approaching him; for I then wore
my Arabian dress, and had on my head a small turban, such as are in fashion
among the Greek Christians of European Turkey, and which I have found from
experience to be much more convenient than the common hats worn in America, and
other western countries. -- As my appearance must have been perfectly new to
the good man, it is no wonder if he was at first under some disagreeable
apprehensions from my approach: he seemed also to fix a very uneasy eye upon
the black walking stick I then had in my hand, part of the history of which I
have given in the first number of these luc^brations. When I at length had
advanced within about two yards of him, the honest man desired to know who I
was, whether a dead or a living character, and what was my business in that
solitary burying ground?

SINCE we have been better acquainted, he has informed me, that notwithstanding
he had never been one of those who give implicit credit to the idle and
ridiculous stories, so common in every country of the world, relative to the
apparition of ghosts and specter, yet when he first beheld me in my outlandish
habit, walking toward the churchyard with my spectacles over my nose, he began
to think there might be some reality in those tales; and made no doubt but the
spirit of some one of his departed parishioners, had, for some unknown
purposes, been permitted to leave the invisible world, and to re-visit, with an
assumed body, these silent mansions of the dead; he has declared also that he,
nevertheless, thought it somewhat strange and unaccountable that an inhabitant
of the other world should have occasion for a pair of spectacles, or a walking
staff; which are commonly supposed to be furniture only necessary for living
persons.

To go on with my narrative of what happened in the burying-ground:

I TOOK him by the hand, assuring him at the same time, in answer to the
question he had put, That I had never yet been admitted to the unseen abodes of
departed men, but was in every essential respect a mere mortal like himself,
but one who had nearly worn himself out with traveling over all the known
countries of the universe in search of knowledge, and speculating, in the mean
time, upon a subject, that Aristotle himself, the prince of philosophers, had
never dared, professedly, to meddle with.

THE good man seemed to be agreeably surprised, and after making some enquiry
concerning the place of my nativity, and of the occasion that led me to this
solitary abode of the dead (in both which points I satisfied him) we walked
together to his habitation; and as there happened to be a certain congeniality
in our dispositions, this slight accidental acquaintance in a little time
ripened into an intimate friendship. -- Excepting the honest husbandman I
mentioned before, this is the only person I ever visit; they are both men of
simple, upright, and blameless lives, strangers to all fantastical politeness,
vain ceremony, and insincerity; their houses are plain rural edifices, and the
most curious observer, even Vitruvius himself, if alive, would be at a loss to
discover any thing in their structure, bearing more than a very rude
resemblance to any of the five orders of architecture. -- This neighborhood is
remarkably peaceable and civil: how it may be with the other inhabitants I
cannot say, but the ecclesiastic and the husbandman both tell me, that neither
of them have locked their doors by night for near forty years past; their
property being secure, and they sleeping in the utmost safety, without that
precaution. One reason, indeed; of their happy security may be, that this
district is considerably remote from the more noted and frequented high roads
of the country, and is but little known to any more than its simple inhabitants.

NOT even the unhallowed footsteps of a British army have ever been suffered to
defile these charming plains* the happy rustics have heard of wars, tumults,
and bloodshed, but the particularly benevolent hand of providence has so
ordered, that the abomination of desolation has been kept at a distance; the
dreadful scene has never been realized in the vicinity of these quiet abodes.

WHEN I reflect upon the felicity of the inhabitants of this little territory,
fancy ungratefully forces upon my remembrance, with inexpressible regret, the
idea of those happy days I once enjoyed in my father's cottage on the romantic
borders of Switzerland. -- Hence, in spite of my philanthropy, I am often
compelled to execrate the miscreant, whose cruel ravages in the little groves
first banished me from the simple blessings of the rural life, to wander
through savage parched countries, over tiresome tracts of unfathomed oceans,
and to visit rivers and islands planted on the extremities of the universe, for
the sake of observing the various genius of mankind, their manners, customs,
and religions, as well in their rude and uncultivated state, as in the polite
and civilized; and for the purpose of collecting such manuscripts of the
ancient Dervises and Bramins, as might, in some measure, assist me in
completing that immense undertaking I have now in hand. But I find the desire
of knowledge is insatiable, and begin to blame myself for having traveled so
far, and suffered so many hardships in pursuit of a phantom, that may indeed be
seen but never grasped; and which now at last, when I am sinking under a load
of years, gives me but restless days, anxious nights, melancholy musings, hard
study, and intense application of thought; and deprives me of that satisfaction
and content of mind, which this simple clergyman so amply enjoys; who has never
read perhaps more than three or four volumes of theology, the common authors
called Classics, a little ancient and modern history, and traveled a few days
journey beyond the village that gave him birth.

As I intend in some future paper to give a farther and more particular account
of this clergyman, I shall conclude the present with informing my readers, that
he has undertaken to send these pieces of writing regularly once a week for me
to the city. He also receives such letters as are to me directed, which I
examine at my leisure, and to which, if any way interesting, I will not neglect
to return an answer. I have, however, of late had several handed to me that
have given me no small degree of chagrin; one of these was superscribed "To the
wild man that lives in the woods." -- It must have been written by some simple
countryman, as it contained a request from the writer, that, "as he made no
doubt I was deeply skilled in the science of the stars, I would exert my
abilities to the utmost, to discover from the different aspects of these
luminaries, where he might find two or three horned cattle, and a gray horse,
that had either been stolen or had strayed from him, and been absent some
days," -- I hereby inform the author of that letter, whoever he may be, that
these sparkling globes of light, that seem, in the absence of the sun, to
fasten on the beautiful azure of the firmament, have far less connection with
human affairs than he imagines; and I beg, for the time to come, that he will
interrupt my meditations with no such useless and impertinent epistles.

SENTIMENTS OF A TRAVELLER. Written 1780.
WHILE I was yet on the other side of that immense body of water which
separates the eastern and western worlds, I had imbibed strange opinions
concerning America in general, but more particularly of that part which at this
day comprehends the thirteen United States. From my own reflections, as well as
from the conversation of others, I had been inclined to believe that the people
of these countries, who had then supported a war for three years against one of
the most powerful, enterprising and warlike nations upon the face of the earth,
must have been nearly reduced to the original state of nature, that is, were
destitute of houses, clothing, and most of the common necessaries, not to
mention the luxuries and conveniences of life; had been driven into woods and
mountains, where they suffered all the miseries of cold, hunger and nakedness,
or at best were clad in buffaloe and bear skins, and supported a miserable life
upon acorns or a little parched maize; that their fields were growing up a
second time into woods; and, finally, that they were preserved from total
extirpation solely by a native obstinacy and invincible love of liberty* that
set at defiance the most vigorous exertions of their enemies.

BUT how were my opinions, in many particulars, confounded, and my expectations
most agreeably disappointed, when, after my arrival at an eastern port called
Newbury, in traveling southwestward through the country, I perceived
agriculture in all its glory; towns and cities well peopled, regulated and
supplied with every necessary; the harbors crowded with ships of war and
commerce; the people obedient to, and cheerfully active, in supporting the
laws; and almost every thing in a flourishing condition.

WHEN I beheld all this, I could not avoid asking myself, Are these the
republics of yesterday, or are they of a thousand years standing? -- Here and
there, indeed, where their enemy had been able to penetrate, the most horrid
vestiges of devastation were yet to be seen, but like a cut or a bruise in the
flesh of a vigorous, robust young man, they were healing apace, and promising
in a little time to be no longer painful or discoverable.

THE view of these things brought to my remembrance a passage in the writings
of Diodorus the Sicilian, who speaking of the exploits of Dion against
Dionysius, has, if I recollect rightly, the following reflection: -- "Who would
ever have imagined that a person with two transports only, should get the
better of a prince who had in his pay, and at his devotion, four hundred ships
of war, one hundred thousand foot, ten thousand horses, proportionable stores
of ammunition and provision, and treasure sufficient for the maintenance of
such numerous forces: who, besides all this, had in his possession the most
considerable of all the Grecian cities, where he was master of havens, arsenals
and citadels that were impregnable, and was moreover strengthened with the most
powerful alliances? -- The cause of DION'S unparallelled success was, in the
first place, his courage and magnanimity, joined to the good will and affection
of those for whose liberty he was engaged -- these circumstances, concurring in
the same instant, produced such a wonderful event, as may by posterity be
thought incredible."

IT is hardly possible for an untravelled subject of the old and regular
governments of the eastern world to entertain proper conceptions of the
wonderful and astonishing efforts that may be made against an enemy by a young
and growing country and people, who are actuated by a genuine, ardent sense of
the value and blessings of liberty: they may be trampled down repeatedly, but,
like the grass of a fine soil in the vernal season, they will rise again in the
space of a night, invigorated by that strong principle of life, which, from the
minutest fibers of the root, pervades every vein of the stock and branches.
(Imperfect.)

THE PHILOSOPHER OF THE FOREST. NUMB. V. [Containing some particulars relative
to the Island of SNATCHAWAY.]
At the same time that we delineate the vices and follies of this Island, let
us not forget, that she is a friend to science; maintains a bold, warlike, and
enterprising race of men; and may justly boast of having produced a
considerable number of persons, whose actions and sentiments have done real
honor to the nature of man.

IN the year of the Christian era 1765, as I was crossing that part of the
Mediterranean which extends between Corsica and Genoa, in a Spanish Felucca,
the vessel on a sudden sprung a large leak; an accident that menaced us with
almost immediate destruction, particularly as the sea water poured in upon us
in such quantities as rendered the incessant working of our pumps of little or
no avail. In this distress, just before the vessel went down, we embarked in
the boat, to the number of sixteen persons, each taking what he thought most
precious: for my own part, I was not on this occasion much incumbered with
baggage, having long before laid down a rule to myself, and which I never yet
violated, to be the owner of no other property than a staff, a scrip, a pair of
spectacles, a bundle of oriental manuscripts, and such articles of dress as
should not be troublesome to carry with me, and yet of so humble a kind as not
to be likely to induce any person to rob or kill me for the possession of them.

As the weather was favorable, we rowed toward the European shore, which was
yet, however, at a very great distance, when, after seven or eight hours hard
labor, we perceived a sail in the north-eastern quarter of the horizon, which
proved to be a trading ship on her return from the dominions of the gr^nd duke
of Tuscany to the island of SNATCHAWAY. After much entreaty and many
disregarded signals of distress, we were, a little before night, taken on
board, and, after several weeks sailing, safely arrived at this celebrated
island. Perhaps it may not be amiss to mention, that the commander, who was a
Snatchawegian, appeared to possess all the importance and despotic authority of
an Indian Mogul; and because he had obliged us in saving our lives, treated us
with the greatest inhumanity and contempt during the voyage: he seemed to be a
man totally devoid of all the finer feelings of the mind, and took a pleasure
in rendering others as miserable as he possibly could, without utterly
destroying them. That he might be in some measure indemnified for the trouble
we had given him, he sent us on shore almost as naked as we came into the
world: As to my own part, he sold the very spectacles off my nose, together
with my long blue gown which I had received about a year before as a present
from an Arabian chief: I had even much ado to retain my staff of black ebony,
which has been my constant companion for many years past, and I hope will
attend me to the grave.

AFTER we were set on shore, I traveled for some months up and down the
Snatchaway country, hoping soon to experience the hospitality and generosity,
and be a witness to the liberty, which, according to their own writers, this
nation enjoys in preference to all others in the world. But I soon discovered
that the boasted freedom of the bulk of the nation was but a name; and their
whole liberty consisted in their being allowed to rail at their superiors,
talking with some freedom of the affairs of the government, and calling the
first magistrate a fool, whenever his conduct, or that of his ministry,
happened to displease them.

IN return for this glorious privilege, the people at large are the slaves of
the rich and great; at saddled with kings, royal families, lords spiritual and
temporal, and myriads of their needy dependents, who subsist wholly upon the
labors of the industrious: while the bulk of the people are oppressed by heavy
imposts, are retained in an abject state of poverty by these unsympathizing
leeches, and have to struggle desperately to preserve a miserable existence.

THIS nation is likewise said to be charitable beyond all others; a specimen
whereof take as follows: An old debauchee or a sordid miser having gathered an
estate by the most infamous means possible, when at last he finds himself
arrived at those uncomfortable boundaries which separate this world from the
world invisible; when he is upon the point of making his entrance into a new
and unknown state of existence, instead of bequeathing his ill-gotten hoard to
those that may be allied to him, by blood or otherwise; instead of casting an
eye of pity upon an helpless orphan, or the maimed soldier neglected by his
country, his last will declares that (by way of bribing the superior powers) a
hospital shall be built, or a church erected out of that substance which he can
now no longer personally enjoy. He takes care, also, not to forget to provide,
since an affected charity is always noisy, that a monument for himself be
raised in or near this cathedral or hospital, with epitaphs and eulogiums
thereon inscribed, to tell the world that so great a patron of benevolence and
religion once existed.

THIS island abounds, also, with more odd, anomalous, and fantastical
characters than perhaps are to be found in the whole world beside. One person
will form a resolution not to marry till his last hour is come, and then
seriously requests his young bride never again to be married to an old man. --
Another is the most wretched of all created beings as long as the wind happens
to blow from the east: a third, without having ever stirred beyond the
boundaries of his native village or farm, takes it into his head that all
nations, excepting his own are barbarians, slaves, papishes, cannibals, cowards
or monsters of cruelty. -- I knew a person, not far from the royal cathedral,
so surprisingly whimsical in his disposition, that he swore an oath (and a
terrible one it was) never to rise out of bed while the wind bl^w at east, or
either of the adjacent points. While at home, he ever had it in his power
throughout the day to ascertain the direction of the current of air by means of
a weathercock on the spire of a neighboring church, which he could view
through a glazed window as he reclined with his head on a pillow. A certain
person of his acquaintance having by some accident discovered the whim,
contrived one night to have this index of the winds wedged fast precisely in an
eastern and western direction, with the head toward the east. The winds had
already blown several days from the reprobated point, and the whimsical man for
some time bore very well with this obstinate perseverance of easterly weather,
but finding at length, from the unvarying position of his informant, that there
was likely to be no end to the easterly weather, actually hanged himself one
morning with his garters, out of mere vexation and despair.

THOUSANDS in that country are wearied or disgusted with life long before the
age of forty. While I resided in the metropolis, hardly a day passed but there
were numerous instances of suicide; even their females hanged, drowned, or
strangled themselves with the most undaunted resolution, often for some little
imaginary slight or affront, that would scarcely have caused a sigh or an
hour's uneasiness to the beautiful damsels of Circassia, the Levant isles, or
even Asiatic Tartary.

BUT what particularly displeased me, was their almost perpetual executions of
criminals. Thousands of vicious or unfortunate wretches are annually hurried
out of the world in a most ignominious manner, for trifling thefts and other
petty crimes, which indeed ought to be discouraged in every community, but
certainly cannot be of so heinous a nature as to merit the extremity of death,
when murders, highway robberies, and a few other crimes justly reckoned
capital, can meet with no greater punishment.

THE men of Snatchaway are also intolerably proud and ambitious. They imagine
there are some peculiar excellencies in the contexture of their bodies, some
precious drops of blood in their veins of a superior quality to that of other
nations. They suppose themselves animated by a species of courage wholly
unexperienced by foreigners, and which is able to break down and carry all
before it: it is, in short, Snatchaway courage. -- If at any time a native of
this island is vanquished in battle or elsewhere, he does not attribute his
disgrace to the strength or bravery of his antagonist, but to some unusual and
unforeseen defect in himself. In prosperity he is excessively arrogant,
imperious, and presuming; in adversity he can only suffer with patience when he
conceives the world is looking upon him with an eye of sympathy and admiration.
The very shoemakers, weavers and pedlars of Snatchaway suppose themselves, by
some happy privileges of birth, to be upon an equality with, and can swallow as
much flattery as, any first minister or crowned head in Europe or Asia. The
Snatchaway men are also of a nature greedy and selfish beyond conception, and
look upon the neighboring nations of the continent as their natural enemies,
and treat them as such whenever their wars or commerce interfere with their own
private or national interest. They are likewise destitute of politeness as well
as common civility to strangers. The people of Fickle-land, on the opposite
coast of the continent, although, perhaps, the most civilized, brave, generous
and humane in the world, are the perpetual objects of their abuse and ridicule:
The Snatchaway stage alone is a convincing proof of my assertion. If a coward,
a fop, a debauchee, a miser, or any other contemptible character is to be
represented, it is sure to be in the disguise of a Fickle-lander. Even the
grammatical blunders of one of these who attempts to speak in the Snatchaway
tongue, are an everlasting source of merriment for all ranks, the great vulgar
as well as the small. They have persuaded themselves, and endeavor to persuade
others who have not an opportunity to judge for themselves, that this nation
(the Fickle-landers) wholly consists of feeble diminutive men, flatterers,
boasters, fops and poltroons: If it is objected to them, Why do you not conquer
that country, and append it to your own dominions, fee^^g it is so easy to be
effected by reason of the weaknes^ effeminacy, and cowardice of the natives? --
They have a reply ready, viz. "The people of Fickle-land have imbibed such
slavish principles, and are such contemptible objects in themselves, that it
would be a disgrace for Snatchaway men to rule over them." -- Thus excusing
their known inability by a mean invective against a nation that has at all
times baffled their mercenary designs and mortified their ambition.* * * * *
(Imperfect.)

[Written in 1781.]

THE PHILOSOPHER OF THE FOREST. NUMB. VI. (Concluding the account of the
Clergyman of the Forest.)
THERE are so many accomplishments in the person, and such an amiable
simplicity in the manners of this rural clergyman, that I have often been
induced to spend more time in this company than I could well spare from the
great and voluminous work in which I am almost perpetually engaged. To make
some amends for this, which however cannot be called lost time, the lamp in my
cavern burns far into the night, and it is not, commonly, till toward the dawn
of the day, that I allow myself those moments of repose, of which all persons
stand more or less in need in this mortal life, to fit them for the duties and
labors thereof.

As this man industriously avoids all occasions of speaking much concerning
himself, I have been obliged to make use of some pains and artifice to collect
a few sketches of the history of his life, in which I have by degrees so far
succeeded that the following short account may be looked upon as authentic.

HE is a native of the Northern American world, and assures me has never
indulged the least inclination to set his foot off the terra firma, or trust
himself any considerable time to the watery element (of which he entertains the
most horrible ideas) for all the advantages that might accrue from visiting the
most renowned cities, conversing with the wisest philosophers, or being
admitted into all the cabinets of curiosities, assemblies of literati, or
celebrated libraries that the eastern continent affords.

HE is now in his sixty-fourth year, and seems to have received a tolerable
classical education, as he has more than once explained passages to me from
Quintus Curtius, and translated whole chapters out of Titus Livius, the Roman
historian, with considerable elegance of diction. Although he is arrived to an
advanced age, and time has already sprinkled his head with gray, yet such has
been his temperance, and regularity of life, that few, from his appearance,
would suppose him to be more than fifty. One reason for his carrying his years
so well may be his never having been known to make free with spirituous
liquors; and he is far above the womanish weakness of peevishness, fretfulness,
and falling into sudden and violent passions of rage. He is equally a stranger
to melancholy and lowness of spirits, and is in short of that equality of mind,
as having never been much elevated by prosperity, or dejected by adversity,
that secures the felicity of content and cheerfulness to the happy possessor.
There is an agreeable serenity continually upon his countenance, and his whole
conduct in regard to himself, as well as his demeanor in his connections and
intercourse with the world, proves that his conversation and hopes are fixed on
a better country.

IT is with pleasure I observe that he is an utter enemy to slave-keeping. The
unhappy African was never beheld in his fields to faint beneath the lashes of
an unfeeling tyrant, or to groan out a life of bondage and misery to support
his vanity, his wickedness, or his imaginary wants. He has preached, too, with
such success against this execrable practice, that there are but one or two of
his parishioners who are at present known to hold any individual of their own
species in slavery, and even these are so entirely convinced of the impropriety
of their conduct, that they have not dared for a long time to appear in the
church. Such as were convinced by his reasonings on this subject, dismissed
their slaves sometime ago, making provision, however, for their sustenance till
they should be in a situation to help themselves, and retaining (but perfectly
at their liberty) the old and decrepit, who had passed their best days and the
vigor of youth in the service of their masters.

HE has often told me that he had once formed a resolution, before he purchased
the few acres of land he now possesses, in imitation of an ancient patriarch,
never to call more ground his own than would be just sufficient for a burying
place. His motive for which resolution I suppose was the same as that of the
venerable Abraham the patriarch; that he might thereby demonstrate to the
world, or at least to the little sphere in which he moved, that his mind was so
little taken up with this earth and its various enjoyments, that he thought it
a species of folly to appropriate to himself a greater share of the soil
thereof than would be just sufficient to entomb his bones. -- I could never
discover with any certainty how he came to depart from this sentiment and
design. It is not unlikely, however, that he had penetration enough to observe,
that mankind are often ungrateful to whom they are in reality most obliged, and
nor unfrequently leave those to perish in poverty and obscurity, who, when
advanced in years, or enfeebled with toil, ought to be the objects of their
tenderest concern. -- It must have been for some such reason as this, that
while he had it in his power, he made himself master of so much of the
perishable substance of this world, as would barely ensure him from suffering
by the malice or contempt of mankind, whenever they should think fit to
withdraw their favors or attention.

THE principal satisfaction that life affords to this uncommon man is the
opportunity of doing a good action, or being in any respect serviceable to the
real interests of his fellow creatures. -- Amongst other particulars, he lately
intimated to me, that in his younger days he had experienced a keen ambition to
be known in the world as an author of note and character* He accordingly
composed several pamphlets and essays on different subjects, and procured them
to be published; but as he had the mortification to find that scarcely any one
read these labored productions but himself and two or three very intimate
friends, he soon became weary of authorship, left the town in disgust, retired
to a solitary abode in the country, and pored over two or three orthodox
theological authors for several years, and was then sent abroad with a
commission to instruct the western American savages in the doctrines and
morality of the Asiatic Messiah. He informs me he was full three years on that
mission, but finding little or no prospect of success among these rude and
uncultivated people, from whom indeed he at last narrowly escaped with life, he
retired to these civilized parts of the country, where he ha^ now resided
thirty-seven years, instructing the parishioners by his example, as well as by
the doctrine he preaches, which is virtuous and moral, without mystery.

ALTHOUGH, in comparison to my own, the travels of this ecclesiastic have been
a mere nothing, yet he is willing to imagine they have been very extensive. He
has more than once entertained me with circumstantial details of his long
journies by land, and danger of being shipwrecked in an Indian canoe on the
great lakes of Canada. As he has never had an opportunity of paying a visit to
the great salt ocean that washes these coasts, he is often very particular in
his enquiries relative thereto, and has more than once asked me whether the
navigation of the Atlantic is as hazardous as what might be expected upon those
lakes? -- He has also been anxious to be informed whether the galleys in use
upon the Mediterranean at this day, are of a similar construction with those of
the ancient Greeks and Romans, the representation of which he has seen upon
medals: -- whether any remains of old Troy are to be seen in this late age; or
if it be true that what is now shown for the ruins of Palmyra, was in reality
the ancient Tadmor, the city that Solomon, the son of David, built in the
wilderness: -- what is the present extent of the once famous city of Jerusalem;
or whether the spot in Mesopotamia, where the garden of Eden is supposed to
have been situated, retains any traces of its antediluvian beauties and
fertility; or, finally, if it be probable that the grand pyramid of Egypt, with
the neighboring ones, were certainly within the walls of the ancient Memphis?

As he is a person of an easy comprehension, and a tolerable proficient in
ancient and modern history, I now and then pass an evening with him very
agreeably in discoursing upon these subjects. The only question he ever put to
me that gave me the least uneasiness, was, that I would so far favor him as to
trust him with the important secret, where my cavern was situated? -- I
immediately desired him to reflect what an unreasonable request he was making,
and to recall to his mind a maxim he frequently had in his mouth -- "What you
would have kept a secret, impart to nobody." -- He immediately acquiesced in
the propriety of my refusal, and at the same time assured me, he would not give
me any trouble, for the time to come, on that score; adding, that he supposed I
was engaged in abstruse studies, which could not succeed if my retirement was
once discovered to the world.

THERE are many other particulars relating to this honest man, of which I make
no doubt some of my more curious readers would be glad to be informed; as,
"Whether he has a wife or children -- how many acres does his glebe contain; to
what may his annual income amount; is he a tall or a short man, or middle
sized, and what figure does he exhibit in the pulpit; what subjects does he
mostly preach on -- does he read his sermons, or speak extempore, or does he
commit them to memory? -- what sect does he adhere to; does he wear a gown, or
a plain black suit; -- or in what part of the country is the old cathedral and
its cemetery situated, where our acquaintance began?"

IT is almost needless to say, that for various reasons these queries cannot,
or rather must not, be now answered. However, the diligent and attentive reader
may, from several hints contained in this paper, more easily discover what he
is not, than precisely what he is. Sufficient be it to say, that his
sentiments, in matters of religion, are far from being narrow or selfish; he
execrates, despises, on persecutes no man for the sake of his opinions; is a
slave to the more confined notions of no sect or party, and has ever lived upon
the best terms with the various Christian denominations in this part of the
country.

As to some other points relative to the situation of his rural retirement, his
social connexions, and the like; it is not impossible, nay, it is more than
probable that time, which brings all things to light, may disclose these
matters, as well as several other interesting particulars, of which no one has
yet the least idea.

THE PHILOSOPHER OF THE FOREST. NUMB. VII.
FATIGUED with that perpetual hurry of thought, in which my studies had engaged
me for some days past, I yesterday morning took up my walking st^ff, and as the
weather was uncommonly fine for the season, and promised an agreeable day, I
determined to make an excursion beyond the bounds of the forest to which I had
so long confined myself, in order if possible to shake off that rust and
melancholy which is apt to gather upon the mind, when too closely employed in
one track of thought or business. -- After traveling a few hours, as chance
directed, I found myself in the vicinity of a farm-house, beautifully situated
on the south side of a fine grove of poplar trees. The mansion, it is true, had
not in itself the appearance of elegance, grandeur or magnificence, but at the
same time every thing manifested that use and convenience had been principal
objects in the view of the projector.

INDUCED by this favorable appearance of things, and considering that plenty
has in all ages and among every people been accounted the mother of
hospitality, I walked up to the door, which I found shut, and guarded by a
large dog, who, upon my near approach, almost deafened me with his barking, and
more than once endeavored to seize upon the fleshy part of my right thigh with
a set of teeth that grinned rage, vengeance and desperation.

AT first it gave me some uneasy sensations to be laid under a necessity of
acting offensively against an animal for whose whole species I entertain a most
extravagant regard; but when I considered that he had violated the rights of
hospitality, in attacking me at such an hour of the day, and in circumstances,
as to myself, every was justifiable, I became less solicitous about what might
be the event. -- Things, however, were not to come to extremities. A venerable
old man soon appeared at the door, whom I took to be the master, or rather some
gray headed ancestor of the family. But it gave me not a little dissatisfaction
that this ancient person, instead of inviting me, as a stranger, to enter the
house with him, came out himself, and shutting the door after him, made a sign
to me to follow him to an out building that stood at some considerable distance
from the farm house, where we sat down together on a bench placed on a ground
floor.

AFTER the common preliminary conversation which may be supposed to have passed
at the first interview between two men of different nations, wholly strangers
to each other, and both far advanced in life, I requested him to inform me
whether he was not the owner and master of the estate upon which we then were?

I SOON perceived, that my question embarrassed the rustic veteran a good deal,
and after making several attempts to turn the conversation into a different
channel, which I as constantly frustrated, he at length gave me the following
little history of himself and the possessions that surrounded us.

"I WAS born on the second year of the present century in one of those grand
divisions of this country formerly denominated British Provinces, and adjacent
to that government in which we now are. My father was not a husbandman, but a
plain mechanic, who had long maintained a large family by dint of his industry.
When I had arrived to the age of twenty-one years, finding me averse to
pursuing the art or trade, in the practice of which he had passed the best part
of his own days, he put twenty pounds into my hands, and turned me out into the
world to provide for myself in the best manner I could. After striking out a
variety of plans and schemes, most of which were founded upon the idea of
living in the world without personal hard labor, I was at length convinced of
the futility of my ideas, expectations, and opinions; and being naturally of a
robust constitution, resolved within myself to procure, if possible, a
comfortable independency in life by a faithful and severe attention to
business, while youth, good health and a vigorous arm afforded me the means.
With such views I came into this part of the country, which was at that time
one entire forest, and having traveled through it and spent several days in
thoroughly investigating it, I at length pitched upon this spot, which
particularly pleased my fancy for its fine stream of transparent water, tall
groves of beautiful trees, level meadows, gentle ascents, and other ornaments
and advantages which may yet occur to every beholder, even after time and
unremitted labor have considerably changed the original prospect and scenery.
-- Having made sufficient observations upon the situation and nature of the
soil, I returned once more to the city, and finding out the proprietor of this,
at that time, wild and savage territory, I made a purchase of a few acres,
reserving to myself only money enough to provide the tools necessary for
agriculture, and some coarse clothes for my own apparel. I then packed up my
small property, and with considerable fatigue once more reached the bank of
yonder stream, which is now planted with beautiful willows, but at that time
was bordered with an almost I^^penetrable wilderness of ash-trees, red oaks and
walnuts. My first care was to erect a small cabin, which I covered and
enclosed with the bark of trees, and made sufficient to defend me from the
storms and snows of the winter, and the rains and unwholesome dews of the
nights. At the intervals of labor my gun supplied me with provisions of the
animal kind, and as to bread, my next neighbor, who lived at the distance of
at least five miles from my hut, furnished me with small quantities of maize at
different times, for which I paid him with the labor of my hands in the
harvest season of the year. The pure water of the stream was at first my only
drink, but I afterward discovered an excellent spring, which has never been
known to fail in the most dry and parched seasons that this territory has
experienced.

"I CONTINUED ten years in this way of employment, incessantly engaged in the
innocent toils of the ru^al life, and at the conclusion of that period found
(...) prospect (...) enlarged. M^ me^dows yielded a most (...) burden of grass,
a small though heavy harvest grew yellow upon my fields, and great part of my
little purchase was already handsomely fenced in. I had also in this time
become master of several oxen and horses, with other domestic animals, at least
a dozen hives of bees, and an abundance of tame poultry of almost every kind.
With the profits accruing from all these, I made repeated additions to my
original purchase, not forgetting in the mean time to build what I supposed to
be a convenient house from stone dug out of a neighboring quarry; and most of
the other materials were also supplied from my own estate. At length I married,
in the thirty-second year of my age. I chose for my companion in this state a
young woman six years less advanced in life than myself, a native of a village
about twelve miles from hence, sprung from parents of the middling class; and a
girl whose character and temper was such as not to be likely to pester me with
the follies and fopperies of a town; nor yet one who was only fit to be placed
with other useless lumber in the corner of a parlour.

"EVERY thing fell out equal to my expectations. We lived together extremely
happy for about thirty years, and during that interval were the parents of
several fine children. -- God of nature, why could not this happy state have
been prolonged to me without alteration or alloy! -- About seven years ago,
however, my dear wife died, an event which consigned me over to a state of
melancholy for a long time, insomuch that I resigned up my plantation and the
care of it into the hands of my eldest son, only reserving to myself what
should be considered a decent maintenance for the remaining days of my life. As
soon as my son found himself legal master of the possessions I had acquired by
the sweet of my brow, instead of continuing to improve the farm^ or make
additional purchases, (...) set him by his father, the first thing he thought
of was to provide himself with a wife. Finding him determined and fixed in this
resolution at rather an early age of life, I advised him to copy from his
father's conduct in this matter, and match himself in some plain family, of
honest manners, not used to extravagance, and, if possible, such as had gained
a decent competency in the world by their own proper care and industry.

"THE boy, I am willing to believe, followed my advice as far as he knew how.
The family with which he soon after connected himself, were of good repute, and
of decent character and circumstances; but times and manners are strangely
altered within twenty or thirty years last past, and the fopperies and
extravagancies, introduced in the time of the late war, have entirely turned
the brains of many thousands of honest people. You must know, my friend, my
son's wife is extremely fond of grandeur and gay company. She sees nothing but
vulgarity in my house and furniture. Upon her first entering the kitchen she
ordered the wooden trenchers to be thrown aside, upon which her mother-in-law
and myself had made many a comfortable and contented meal. My beds were abused
for their coarse homespun ticking and sheets, and coverlets of the same home
manufacture. My chairs with rush bottom^ were pronounced execrable, and long
since had the fate to give place to others of a new and more expensive
construction, seated with cushions of red velvet. Instead of a plain wagon
with a light wooden cover, my son is hourly importuned, or rather, peremptorily
commanded, to purchase a new coach and phaeton for the more genteel conveyance
of my lady on her visits. In short, every thing I ever possessed is, in her
(...) mean and unfashionable; nay, I believe I myself am also considered as an
old fashioned despicable piece of furniture, as it was but the other day I
heard her ask my son, "why that old man presumed to sit down in the dining room
at a time when he could not but know genteel visitors were there?"

"THE very structure of my old mansion house is a standing occasion of ill
nature and morose reflection; ^he sees nothing in it but inconvenience, and at
least once a day execrates the builder or projector for the rusticity of his
taste, and has prevailed upon my son already to contract with a person for
erecting a large, new and more elegant structure. What all this will end in, is
not difficult to foresee! My son's fortune will never support so much vanity
and expense for any considerable length of time. I was a foolish old dotard to
yield up the fruits of my long and laborious industry out of my own hands, to
be expended before my face in the walks of idleness and folly. Should I live
two or three years longer, I have now the melancholy prospect of being turned
out in an extreme old age to the mercy of the world, or of being once more
compelled to build a cabin in the woods at a time when the nerves of my arm
cannot possibly be of the same use to me as formerly. My good friend,
(continued he) you appear to be a stranger, and in times past my heart would
have leaped with joy to have invited you to a participation of my table, my
bed, and (if the season demanded it) my fireside; but, as your whole appearance
is, according to my daughter-in-law's ideas, unfashionable and outlandish, I
dare not introduce you into the presence of the family, as I am positive it
would be considered in the light of an insult to the house, and most probably
some disagreeable consequences, both to yourself and me, might take place."

HERE the old man ended his story, and then bidding me adieu, retired into a
small out building, where I had sufficient reason to suspect he was victualled
and lodged, and passed most of his time, for fear of bringing disgrace upon the
master and mistress of the family by his uncouth appearance.

[Written 1783.]

THE PHILOSOPHER OF THE FOREST. NUMB. VIII.
UPON my return homeward, I halted, several miles short of the out skirts of
the forest I inhabit, at a solitary cottage a very small distance from the high
way, where a painted board, suspended from the branch of a tree, projecting
horizontally, advertised me that hospitality was to be sold in that place for
money. Upon my entering the inn, I found every thing in uproar and confusion.
It seems a wedding was to be held there the same evening for a young couple of
the neighborhood, and this event, which is by far the most important of their
whole lives among the bulk of mankind, in respect to themselves, had occasioned
these preparations for the festivity of the approaching night. -- I should have
passed on without delay from this fantastic scene of momentary mirth, had not
the importunities of a certain blind musician (who was hired to regulate the
music, according to an ancient custom still kept up on such occasions) in a
manner compelled me to sit down on a bench at the door, and tell him the news
of the day. After gratifying him as well as my scanty knowledge of the affairs
of the great world would at that moment allow, he further requested me to
inform him what might be the opinions of the people in the capital in regard to
his own late performances on the violin? -- Upon my honor, friend, replied I*
to the best of my knowledge the people in the capital, at least those with whom
I have happened to be conversant, are not as yet sufficiently acquainted with
your merits to have made your performances the subject of public conversation:
possibly, however, I may be mistaken; I am but very slightly known in the city,
and those few with whom I associate are, for the most part, wholly disconnected
with, as well as entirely ignorant of music in all its branches and modes of
expression. -- "Not acquainted with my merits." replied the musician -- "Is it
possible there are any people in Philadelphia that have not heard of David
Quiverstring, the famous blind fiddler, who can at any time play more than
three hundred of the newest and most fashionable tunes without the assistance
of the book of Notes! -- I would wish you to understand, Mr. Traveller,
(continued he, somewhat angrily) that I am not only known but well respected
throughout this continent, and even in Europe I have good reason to think my
merits are not altogether disregarded or unnoticed!"

WHEN he had uttered these words, he swaggered back to the company, and began
to strike up some miserable airs as a specimen of his transcendent abilities.
Being now at liberty, I pursued my journey homewards, not without reflecting by
the way on this unaccountable fondness in mankind for fame and extensive
reputation. To acquire the esteem and good will of valuable men is certainly an
innocent as well as a laudable endeavor, but to pass sleepless nights and
anxious days, to toil in the walks of science, or to exhaust the spirits on the
rack of invention, and our principal aim in all this being nothing more than
merely to become popular, is certainly absurd in itself, at least so far as
regards the peace and happiness of an individual, but is without doubt a
principle implanted in us by nature for the general advantage of the human
species, when formed into societies and civil connexions.

WHEN I had returned to my cavern, after refreshing myself with a mess of roots
and a draught of pure water from the adjacent rivulet, I at length fell
unexpectedly into a gentle slumber, when the blind fiddler once more intruded
himself upon me in a dream, and I now imagined he had arrived to such an
insufferable degree of conceit and impertinence, as to request me to recommend
him as one qualified for the place of first musician to the royal family of
France.

VEXED at his forward and arrogant behavior, I instantly turned him out of my
cave; at the same time desiring him to recollect that merit and modesty have
ever been inseparable companions, and that he who is employed in trumpeting
forth his own praises, has already anticipated that return, be his merits what
they may, which he might have had pretensions to expect from the world.

AFTER the dismission of this visionary personage, I conceived myself to be
suddenly transported to a large plain, which was called the Walk of human life.
I found myself, I cannot tell how, placed in the midst of this plain, which
extended east and west, and was sufficiently enlightened; but what most
surprised me was, that it began and ended in darkness. I was now apparently
carried westward by a propensity of selfactuating motion, which I could neither
resist nor account for; and, in my way, saw at a distance a large black
building, over the marble gate of which was written in capital letters, THIS IS
THE TEMPLE OF OBLIVION. The spirit that superintended the affairs of this
melancholy edifice, appeared soon after at the middle gate, and fixing his eyes
full upon me, beckoned to me to advance toward him. A strange horror
immediately took possession of my soul; notwithstanding which, I obeyed his
intimation, advancing toward him with a trembling step. He then made an
attempt to take me by the hand, as if to welcome me to the environs of his
dreary abode, when I shrunk back from his grasp, alarmed at the idea of any of
my limbs coming into contact with the cold substance of an inhabitant of the
world of spirits. He smiled at my fears, bidding me, at the same time, to
attend to what he should say, and he would teach me wisdom. "This plain (said
he) is the passage of all mankind into the ocean of forgetfulness, and through
this temple, which is dedicated to oblivion, every individual without exception
is once doomed to pass. That other spacious building which you see at a
distance, and situated some miles off to the right, is called the Palace of
Fame. Cast your eyes eastward, and observe what millions of the human race are
traveling this way! They are, to a man, conscious that the palace of oblivion
may finally receive them all: and yet, strange to behold, there is not a single
individual among them that does not make use of his utmost endeavors to take
the Temple of Fame in his way, notwithstanding the distance is much more
considerable, and the road full of sharp rocks and other dangerous obstacles,
with which the direct path to the Palace of Oblivion is not in the least
encumbered. Let us go toward them, and observe their designs and motions." --
After a long walk we at last came to the place where the two roads separated,
one leading directly west, and following the course of the sun, to the Palace
of Oblivion; the other, by a circuitous and difficult rout, to the Temple of
Fame. The road to the latter appeared to be very little worn, being almost
overrun with briar and thorn bushes; and I could not help taking notice of a
number of sour looking spirits, in the several shapes of owls, asses, monkies
and wolf-dogs, inhabiting the confines of this region, whose whole employment
seemed to be the driving back, and otherwise ill treating, such as attempted to
pass this way. In consequence of their malicious activity, most of those who
had entered the road, and had even made some progress toward the Temple of
Fame were soon discouraged by so much ill usage, re-measured their steps to the
spot where the two roads separated, and then passed quietly on with the
innumerable multitude that were irresistibly hurrying away to the Palace of
Oblivion. -- There were some few, however, who, either by a daring and animated
perseverance, undaunted fortitude, a native pride and dignity of soul, or by
some fortunate circumstance, evaded the activity of these morose spirits, and
with immense difficulty reached the Palace of Fame.

"LET us walk thither, said the superintending spirit, and we shall soon
discover whether their entertainment in the airy Temple of Fame is at all worth
the trouble, anxiety and vexation they experienced and underwent in attaining
to it." He had no sooner uttered these words, than we were at the place he
mentioned.

I WAS surprised on our first approach, when I observed that this spacious
building consisted of scarce any thing else than doors and windows. No
refreshment of any kind was offered, and the only person we could hold any
conversation with was the Genius of the Temple, who was almost constantly
employed in blowing upon a trumpet, and looked so miserably meagre and gaunt,
that I could have sworn that, from all appearance, a meal of solid food had not
entered his stomach in half century.

THE rooms within were all arched and circular, and the least whisper was
re-echoed a thousand times from wall to wall, and from chamber to chamber. Here
and there, labels of paper were suspended, inscribed with the names and titles
of former visitants; and I saw a very few persons loitering about in different
parts of the palace, whose countenances bespoke hearts full of disappointment
and chagrin. -- "These are some of the few, said the superintending spirit, who
with so much difficulty and vexation surmounted all obstacles and
discouragements, and foolishly imagined they should be completely happy if they
could but by any means attain to these abodes: Alas, they are as discontented
as ever! here is nothing that can sufficiently reward them for their nights of
labor and days of anguish, for their pains, and solicitudes, and loss of
pleasures which might have been better seized while opportunity permitted.
First image and reflection of the Deity, O Virtue; such shall be the lot of all
who do not make thee, simply, the end and basis of all their actions. -- How
happy would they have been had they passed contentedly with the herd of mankind
in the short and easy road to the dark valley of oblivion! But the spirit of
deception had been busy among them, and not a few were persuaded that their
final and most felicitous abode would be in this place. -- That was delusion
indeed! I shall permit them to remain here but a small number of hours, they
shall have time given them to inscribe their names upon a few bits of paper,
and suspend them from the wall -- this is in reward for their perseverance and
heroism -- they shall then pass through the back part of the Palace of Fame,
and disappear with the rest of mankind in the dark cloud that verges on the
Palace of Oblivion." -- The superintending spirit had scarcely uttered these
words when a violent wind began to blow through the temple, and tore away a great
number of the paper labels that had been tacked to the walls, cielings,
doorposts, and other parts of the building, inscribed with the names of
celebrated men of different ages. -- "It is thus, continued the spirit, that
even the memory of these candidates for everlasting fame is dissipated and lost
forever: Those vain labels of paper are mostly blown away with their owners
into yonder dark and impenetrable cloud, and those that remain will, by some
future commotion of the elements, be treated precisely in the same manner."

THUS it is then, said I, that mankind are the sport of endless deceptions!
Tell me, kind spirit, for what wise purpose could man have been (...) and ^hy
is he continued in his present (...) of (...) to be actuated by desires which
(...) ^ever meant to be gratified, and tormented with expectations which, in
the end, are answered only by delusions?

"THE miseries of your species, replied the spirit, are principally owing to
the suggestions of the spirit of pride. What is the race of man, that they
should be panting for habitations beyond the stars! You imagine yourselves the
most curious work of the Deity because you possess five distinct senses --
Believe me, there are beings in the universe that possess as many thousands.
The qualifications that Nature designed for man in his present state, are ever
in his power. It is by seeking for things that are beyond him, and incompatible
with his abilities for enjoyment, that he becomes miserable. While the horse is
satisfied with the herbage of the plain and the wholesome spring or rivulet of
clear (...) he is happy, because he has the full enjoyment of all that Nature
intended for him; but should he once loath his natural food, and be only
anxious to attain the fruits that hang on the boughs of lofty trees, or strong
spirits produced by the arts of distillation, he would instantly become
wretched, because he would desire what his station and condition did by no
means entitle him to. At the same time, I could wish you to understand and
remember, that this discontent with himself and his situation, so peculiar to
man, ought to be an undoubted evidence with you that there is something within
him different from mere material mechanism, totally distinct from the
elementary principles, and which shall live again in after ages in the bright
regions you see beyond the skies. -- Yet to himself, continued the spirit, man
is an absolute mystery: he emerged from yonder cloud of darkness in the east,
and in a similar state of obscurity he must be again involved. The wisest among
you have never yet been able to unravel the designs and views of the great
original Spirit in permitting existence to man: I will, however, be so candid
as to acknowledge that some few have been born possessed of souls of so much
sagacity as to be able to look through yonder dark cloud that bounds the visible
existence of man, so far at least as to have some faint glimmerings of the real
intentions of the Deity in this matter: but whenever I discover any such I am
obligated by a most sacred (...) to kill them in their infancy, lest the
secrets of the Creator should be unseasonably revealed.

"YOU must know that this plain lay, for a prodigious succession of ages, a
mere lifeless mass of matter. There was not a tree nor a bush to be seen, not a
blade of grass, nor an animal, nor running streams, nor vegetables, much less
the majestic race of man. At last Volatilio, the spirit of activity, came to
spend some ages in these remote parts of the universe, after having passed
twelve thousand years of the first order in traversing the immensity of space,
and in erecting a prodigious variety of mundane systems in the course of his
travels. One day, in looking around him, he cast his eyes upon this plain, but
it did not please him. The perpetual solitude that reigned here did not agree
with his active and sprightly imagination; and he soon after applied to the
first principle of animation for leave to people it with several ranks of
beings compounded of the soil of the plain and the water of the ponds; the
whole end of whose existence should be his own amusement, in the same manner as
the characters on a theatrical stage are employed to entertain their evening
audience. It is but just, said he, that I should have something to divert my
fancy after so many ages of fatigue and wandering through the cold and
comfortless regions of inanity.

"THE spirit of animation had never been averse to gratify every reasonable
request of the spirit of activity, who was exceedingly dear to him, but could
not on this occasion reconcile himself to the notion, that creatures compounded
of two such mean principles as dust and water, should be admitted to a
knowledge of the harmony and beauty of the universe, and to a view of those
operations of Nature which he suspected would afford them too clear an idea of
the DEITY, for beings of their wretched and despicable origin. At last,
however, upon repeated solicitations, he complied with the request of
Volatilio, on condition that the faculties of the principal creature should be
extremely limited and narrow; that they should have a glimpse of the wonders
around them only through a medium of (...) and that, after displaying a little
while on the stage of human life, they should, as the law of their nature,
individually revert into the identical substances of which they were originally
composed; after passing through the Temple of Oblivion, where the perceptive
faculties, according to their present organization, should forever be
destroyed, and the principle of REASON alone remain.

"VOLATILIO accordingly formed numberless animated substances of various shapes
and qualities; but man he contrived with a particular view to his own
amusement, a compound of contradictions and absurdities, virtues and vices,
sorrows and joys, wisdom and folly. All their disputes in philosophy, their
ideas of the operations of the superior nature, their systems of astronomy,
their legislation, their commerce, their wars, their massacres, their bloody
devastations, their religions -- all were to him matter of laughter and
merriment. He saw nothing in the affairs of mankind that ever cost him a sigh
or a tear, or one uneasy sensation; as some compensation, however, for the
amusement they afforded him, he gave them every enjoyment that could in any way
be deemed suitable or necessary to their natures; and if they still chose to
perplex themselves with aiming at more than he intended for them, it only added
to his pleasure, or at most excited his pity. -- But I will be so candid also
as to acknowledge, they were not designed to be completely happy. This gave the
spirit of animation a momentary idea of sorrow, not could it be otherwise,
since he is benevolence itself. He, therefore, as some alleviation of their
misery, bestowed upon them the divine present of sleep, by the influence of
which, one third at least of their sufferings in annihilated before the final
and unalterable sleep is brought upon them. Moved, also, with compassion at the
view of those evils which, in some sense, are unavoidable, as being casual and
incidental to the nature of man, he has deigned to relieve them further by
different means. Cast your eyes over the plain, and you will see two
personages, designed for consolation."

IN compliance with his request I looked among the crowd, and saw two females
of the most enchanting beauty, playing upon harps, and lutes, and other musical
instruments, and reciting songs and airs, which every now and then seemed to
brighten up the countenances of those that paid their attention to them.

"THESE, said the superintending spirit, are the heavenly arts of Music and
Poetry. Without them, how dull and tedious would be this journey of human life!
The spirit of animation has not given the heavenly Muse invain, except to (...)
who, incapable of tasting the consolation she affords, are amusing themselves
with the grunting of swine, and the croakings of ravens."

BUT was it not cruel, replied I, in the spirit of Activity to tantalize the
human race with a view of those wonderful realities of Nature they are so
capable of admiring, and which they must nevertheless forever part with after
gazing at and admiring them but a moment? -- "You wrong the spirit of
animation, said my attendant, in calling it cruelty. What honor could there be
in remaining in the torpid state of the clods of the valley? Who would not
prefer a momentary illumination into life and perception, to an eternity of
unconscious sleep? This sun, this moon, these stars, this beautiful fabric of
land and water, this whole system of animation; are they not well worth the
trouble of beholding, though it be but for a moment? -- What are all the
miseries and perplexities of life when put in competition with a single glance
of these stupendous wonders, that are continually passing before you on the
great ocean of matter? But what am I saying! Are not the pleasures that always
attend upon virtuous actions a full recompense for the shortness, the
wretchedness, and the uncertainty of life? The Deity is pleased with the
exercise of virtue, because that is the essence of his nature; and the reward
of virtue is constantly found in the composure and felicity that is, or ought
to be, enjoyed by every virtuous mind.

"I MUST now return to the Palace of Oblivion, continued the superintending
spirit, to give those their eternal dismission into the abyss of darkness who
have been collecting and loitering at the portal since I have been talking with
you. Your time of dismission is not yet come, so that I must once more leave
you in the region of human life, where I would, however, wish you to be as
happy as you possibly can: Give me your hand, then, and I will conduct you into
that charming part of the country that is dedicated to silence and solitude;
abodes where the men of sentiment and virtue were ever inclined to dwell, and
where I, as the superintending spirit of this fantastical region, would wish to
leave you."

HAVING spoke these words, he offered to take me by the hand, but I shuddered
at the idea. -- I had ever (said I) a secret dread of the inhabitants of the
spiritual world: your hand must be so cold! Kind spirit, you are of so strange
an aspect I tremble to touch you. Grant me at least one of my own species to
direct me to the charming solitudes you mention, and there I will remain till I
am destined to behold you once more in the palace of forgetfulness.

"BE not afraid," said the spirit, with a good natured smile; "all the
inhabitants of the world of spirits are, without exception, friendly to
mankind: you are your own enemies in affixing ideas of mischief and malevolence
to a class of beings that would cease to exist the moment they ceased to be
virtuous."

HAVING said this, he seized me by the left hand to conduct me to the
habitations of virtuous men, when the fright, occasioned by the sudden grasp of
so formidable a spirit, awakened me just as the dawning of the day began to
glimmer through the apertures of my cavern.

THE PHILOSOPHER OF THE FOREST. NUMB. IX.
DISTANCE has a strange delusive effect upon the mind, and its errors and
deceptions can only be corrected by the strictest severity of judgment. A
traveller on the brow of a lofty hill sees nothing but deformity around him.
Shapeless rocks, caverns of tremendous depth, rugged roads, and solitary echoes
are his only companions. When he has gained the summit he looks forward over an
immense valley, and sees other mountains at the distance of several leagues. --
The prospect is delightful. The woods appear to be of a beautiful blue. The
rays of the sun are reflected in colors of gold, and every object that can be
discerned on these distant hills awakens the idea of enchanted groves and
retreats of felicity. -- The traveller descends rapidly from the gloomy scene
around him, hurries over the intervening valley in all the raptures of
expectation, but has no sooner approached these painted objects than the
enchantment vanishes, and a similar group of rocks, caverns and other
disagreeable objects, are once more presented to his nearer but disappointed
view.

THESE ideas were suggested to my mind in attending to the history of a
traveller with whom I happened to meet some days ago at the house of my friend,
the rural clergyman. He was a peasant from the remote corners of Poland; not,
by his appearance, more than thirty years of age; and frankly assured me he
had, while at home, entertained the absurd imagination from his very childhood,
that if he could once find means to cross the Atlantic and set his foot on the
shores of this western world, he should without any other trouble become at
once completely happy, and sit down at his ease.

BUT I will give his history in his own words. -- "What first bewildered my
ideas, and misled me in regard to my notions of this country was hearing my
mother read certain books giving a detail of the first discovery and settlement
of the British Provinces in America. As my father was only a vassal or tenant
to a certain great man, possessing no more than three acres of ground, and had
never been and never expected to be in a better situation, I was perfectly
charmed to hear him tell of immense tracts of the most fertile territory,
totally uninhabited and unoccupied, except by the natives of the soil, who now
and then ran over it in small parties for the purpose of hunting deer and other
wild animals of the forest. -- When to this description was added the prospect
of beautiful rivers abounding with the most delicious fish of every kind; wild
turkeys wandering in prodigious flocks over plains covered with luxuriant
herbage, and yet so weary of life as to offer their throats almost voluntarily
to the knife of any person that wanted his supper; when I heard of buffaloes
rambling in the forests, thousands in a herd, and so tame and gentle as to
suffer themselves to be knocked down by a lad with a small club whenever my
appetite should relish a beef steak -- when I heard all this and had convinced
myself of the reality of these and a thousand other particulars of the same
delusive nature, by having read, or heard them read, in print, (and what was in
print was the same to my father's family as the evidence of their senses) my
fancy was fairly captivated by the alluring prospects. I could no longer go out
to work on our little garden spot with a contented mind. Our landlord became my
utter aversion; I considered him in the light of a detestable tyrant whose
business and interest it was to restrain and detain us forever from these
glorious scenes of liberty and affluence, and out of the little we could extort
by hard labor from the surface of his three acres could retain to ourselves
but a very small ^h^re, to prolong a miserable existence. At last, in my
eighteenth year, I disclosed my intentions to my father, and desired his
permission to leave our little habitation, where there were also several of my
junior brothers growing up to be the support of his old age; as it was my whole
desire and inclination to visit and settle in that distant charming country of
which I had heard both him and my mother read such enchanting descriptions in
the long winter evenings, after the labors of the loom or the spinning-wheel
were laid aside.

ALAS, my son, said the good old man, what an unreasonable inclination are you
cherishing in your bosom! cannot you be satisfied with the simple lot of your
ancestors, who have always been happy in the humble vale of life, and through
several generations have peaceably possessed this little spot of territory,
paying ten golden ducats of Poland yearly to the Lord of the Soil, as an
acknowledgement that our tenure is of him?

THIS does not at all satisfy me, replied I. I am anxious, exceedingly anxious,
to set my foot in those vast and unbounded regions, where I can also assume the
native dignity of man, and become likewise the Lord and Possessor of many
fertile lands, where none can come in to demand a share of my labors against
my consent, and where my descendents may, in time, arrive to a condition of
opulence and esteem.

ALL I could say, however, did not obtain my father's consent that I should
leave him, and I soon after set out privately with a design to travel to
Hamburg, and there take shipping for America; having only three rix dollars in
my possession, upon which were founded the whole fabric of these mighty designs.

THERE was, at that time, a law in force throughout the kingdom of Poland, that
no subject should leave the dominion without a permit signed by the intenda^t
of the province to which he should belong. As I had neglected this precaution,
and indeed could not have made sufficient interest to obtain any such
permission, I consequently became liable to all the penalties to be inflicted
in case of discovery. I was, accordingly, apprehended, before I had crossed the
river Odor, and not being able to give a satisfactory account of myself, was
committed to prison, where I lay several weeks, and after it was discovered to
what family I belonged (for I was obstinate enough to confess nothing) I
received the punishment of the strappado, and was sent back to my father, who
soon after hired me out to the landlord, and in this service, which was very
severe, I continued upwards of four years.

BUT finding slavery more intolerable every day, I once more bade adieu to my
native country, my tyrant, my father and my friends. Small indeed are my
obligations to the latter, said I, if they brought me into the world and
nourished me up only to be a slave. I will quit them forever, and boldly assume
the rights of man. -- I once more set my face toward Hamburg, and with better
success than formerly. I took care to avoid all high roads, traveling for the
most part only in the night, ventured into no public ferry, or passage boats,
for fear of examination, and swam over all creeks and rivers that lay in my
way, till at last, by repeated efforts, and using all the cunning I was master
of, I had the good fortune to reach the free city of Hamburg in safety. Here I
wrought by the day for such as would employ me, till I could find an
opportunity to embark for the country I had so long considered as the true seat
of human felicity, and where I supposed the fables of the golden age were
realized upon earth. After essaying several disappointments, and making many
fruitless applications to masters of vessels employed in the western
navigation, I was fortunate enough, after three months unremitted endeavors,
to ship myself on board a vessel bound to Philadelphia, upon condition of
working on the passage and paying sixteen dollars, the fruits of my day-labour,
while detained in the rich and flourishing city of Hamburg.

I LOST sight of all European shores without the least sentiment or idea of
regret. I had long considered my native continent as a region where, in
general, the rights of men are slighted or forgotten; where the principal care
and concern of the directors is to enslave the mind, as they well know that the
more substantial slavery of the body must speedily and inevitably follow; where
superstition has made ravages which the most exalted exercise of human reason
will not be able to repair for centuries to come, and where every thing is for
sale if a sufficient price is but once offered. -- With these ideas I lost
sight of the Danish and German shores, and thought I beheld even on the
inhospitable and unnatural wastes of the ocean something more favorable to the
spirit of LIBERTY, than in the wretched plains and valleys of the countries I
had now left behind me.

NEAR three weeks had elapsed before we were quite clear of the English
channel, our progress having been much interrupted during this interval by
contrary winds. The first land we saw after leaving the land's end of England,
was the islands called Salvages; we had also a view of several of the Canaries,
and in the course of the next month found ourselves on the coast of Carolina. A
gentle westerly breeze now blew from the shore, and brought with it certain
strong effluvia from the forests of the pine trees. The gales of Arabia,
impregnated with all the odours of the east, were never half so grateful to the
Barbarian in the sandy deserts of Africa. These (said I with myself) are indeed
the gales of Paradise: how happy must those persons be who are at this instant
wandering in the delectable groves from whence these divine perfumes are
momently wafted on the wings of refreshing zephyrs! Here are no taskmasters,
whose merciless fangs are employed in wresting the pitiful morsel from the
desperate clench of poverty! all are happy because all have enough. Nature has
showered down her stores of abundance upon them; pining hunger, and severity of
labor, and dejection of spirit, and dread of poverty, are totally unknown in
yonder happy scenes! It is not possible I can be unhappy when once I shall have
acquired a property among, and have formed an acquaintance with, the virtuous
people of these delightful and ever joyous climes!

IN the midst of these luxuriant ideas of a permanent felicity, we reached the
bay and river of Delaware. I saw nothing to cast a shade upon the scenes
wrought up into so much excellence by my distempered imagination, till we
dropped anchor opposite a small village on the water side of the great river,
where by order of the ship master I was sent on shore, with several others, to
purchase poultry and other fresh provisions, our stock of which was already
wholly consumed. Although the inhabitants of this place appeared to live much
at their ease, they still complained bitterly of poverty and the unparallelled
hardness of the times, and to the best of my observation were as dexterous in
the little arts of overreaching, and putting off indifferent provisions at an
extravagant price, as any I had seen on the other side of the water. This
circumstance was no confirmation of the opinions I had hitherto entertained in
regard to the happiness and virtuous dispositions of the people on the western
shores of the Atlantic. Upon a little further inspection I was struck with the
view of a jail at a small distance from me, through the iron grates of which a
great number of confined persons were bawling aloud to every passenger for
charity. Upon enquiry I was told that the greater part of these were villains,
guilty of the blackest crimes, and that it was expected a number of them would
be hanged soon after the next assizes. As to the others, I was informed they
were for the most part unfortunate debtors, detained there till time, chance,
or death, should accomplish their deliverance. -- This last scene convinced me
I had been pursuing a phantom, and that virtue, honesty, sincerity and complete
felicity are not to be discovered in any country, without a very large mixture
of the dregs of baseness, villainy and misery. Upon my arrival in Philadelphia,
nothing occurred that came up to my original idea of the American cities,
excepting the regularity and convenience of its streets and buildings.
Friendship I found to be little more than a name, merely selfish and
interested; and as to Brotherly Love, the term was understood here in a very
limited sense. Hospitality was sold for ready money; sheriffs and constables
were as busy and as brutal as in Europe; landlords as oppressive and rigorous
as can be imagined; and, in short, I found at last that mankind were the same
here as on the other side of the ocean, a few refinements in vice only
excepted, in favor of the people of the west. I soon after determined to bid
adieu to the city, and fix upon some unappropriated spot of land in the remote
parts of the western territory, which I might cultivate by my own industry, as
the likeliest means to make some approaches to that happy state of life which
has been ever uppermost in my thoughts, the life of a free and independent
farmer, or tiller of the earth. Indeed I am convinced that man was never
designed for a state of inactivity; if we are not industriously employed we by
no means answer the design of the Creator in giving us an existence. -- I am
now on my way toward the waters of the Ohio, and as I advance, I think I can
perceive that things alter for the better. The first twenty or thirty miles of
my journey were rather disagreeable. The farmer's sons would now and then set
their dogs upon me, when I attempted to walk over their fields of wheat, and if
I asked at a farm-house for a draught of milk and water, the good woman would
always take care to charge me threepence before I left her. But I am happy to
find that I am now considerably to the westward of this odious and paltry
custom, for I am of opinion that country is not worth possessing, nor that soil
worth the trouble of cultivating, which cannot, or does not, enable the
industrious inhabitant to bestow a night's lodging, or a meal of victuals, or a
draught of milk and water, on a friendless and moneyless stranger, without
expectation and condition of a pecuniary reward." --

"THIS is all folly," said the benevolent clergyman; "you are indeed wrong, my
friend, because you are seeking in the great world for that felicity which is
not to be found or enjoyed at all, if a man's own bosom is not its occasional
repository in all possible situations and circumstances of life. What are to me
the valleys of Euphrates, or the blooming gardens of the star of the morning,
if I do not possess^ taste and relish for those divine abodes? What are the
sounds of the organ when addressed to the ear of deafness; what are the
beauties of material nature to the eye that, since its formation, has never
imbibed a ray of light? -- Such is the felicity of the world to him that has
not a capacity to enjoy it. I want words to express how much I pity the man who
cannot be gay in adversity and sincerely cheerful even when banished into the
gloomy deserts of Tartary. God and Nature never meant to limit the happiness of
the mind to the fortuitous circumstances of place or condition. He has rather
placed its felicity beyond the power of chance and accident. The virtuous man
cannot be entirely miserable unless he lays aside his confidence in virtue and
reposes it in shadows and objects of delusion. How wretched is that man who
expects full content from external things! -- he will most certainly find
himself deceived at last when this transitory world slips from under him, and
the invisible wonders appear!"

HERE the poor stranger looked somewhat confused, and I felt really sorry for
him. -- The beauties of virtue, her consolation, and virtue considered as its
own reward, are undoubtedly pleasing subjects of discourse to men of innocent
lives and little acquaintance with the nature of the world; but, after all, as
virtue has but a small share in the general composition of man, her real
rewards may be hoped for, but are not often completely enjoyed in the present
state of being. The senses can only be acted upon by material objects; how then
is it possible that we can at pleasure abstract our affections entirely from
matter, and fix them on idle objects of which we know nothing, and which were
never yet explained, nor pretended to be explained, except by comparisons drawn
from the visible world? A man perishing with hunger cannot be satisfied with a
lecture on the virtues of abstinence, however excellent it may be in itself;
and pride, I am convinced, is at the root of most religions in the world, since
they agree in supposing a certain perfection in mankind which the author of
nature has imparted to a much nobler order of beings.

REFLECTIONS, NARRATIVES, AND IDEAS OF THE LATE ROBERT SLENDER.
1. THE great advances which the moderns have made in the walks of art, in
these latter ages of the world, I imagine to have arisen not so much from any
natural superiority of intellect they possess over the ancients, as from the
circumstance of every individual being laid under a necessity to confine
himself to the practice of some particular branch of business. When the whole
attention of a man's life is bestowed upon the formation of a pin or a needle,
a button or a bracelet, how can it be otherwise than that these articles will
soon be brought to their utmost state of perfection? Society at large has
profited by this regulation, but the individual suffers miserably whenever
accident or necessity obliges him to step out of his accustomed path. Set the
pin-maker to build a house, or the carpenter to make a needle, and they are
equally awkward and helpless. -- Early antiquity proceeded in a very different
manner. The education of their youth was upon such a plan that they should not
be at a loss how to be useful upon every emergency. Homer, I remember, gives
the hero of the Odyssey several different trades, to that when he was cast
ashore on the solitary island where Calypso afterward detained him, he was not
at a loss how to build and rig a vessel with his own hands, after the Goddess
had taken pity of him and supplied him with the necessary instruments of
labor, cordage and sail cloth. What a pitiful figure would a modern of the
same rank exhibit on a similar occasion!

2. ISBECK-IMAN, the celebrated Indian poet, during the wars between the tribe
to which he belonged, called Raja-kol, and that of Samar-ban, originally from
the deserts of Thibet, had composed many verses to the disparagement of the
latter, bitterly satyrizing their chiefs and adherents, and not even sparing
Melek-Muli, the prince of the tribe, who usually rode upon a great white
elephant. Isbeck-Iman being at last taken prisoner by the enemy, was conducted
to a dungeon seven fathoms deep in the earth, and was there treated in the
severest manner for a long time, in revenge for the liberties be had taken with
the character of Melek-Muli, and those of some other great men that had fought
under his standard. When the tribe of Raja-kol had, however, at length
conquered their inveterate country, and peace was restored in those parts, they
remembered the sufferings of Isbeck-Iman, and promised to bestow on him a small
piece of land, upon which he might end his days in peace, and as a recompense
for the many miseries he had experienced on account of his patriotic
attachment. This benevolent design was, nevertheless, forgotten, and a brother
poet having one day reproached him for his neglecting to urge this matter with
the great men, "Let them first reward the maimed soldier, replied Isbeck-Iman,
and do justice to the widows and orphans of those who have perished in their
service; as to myself, my verses will always gain me a subsistence as long as
the sound of the harp is heard with pleases on the plains of Jess^lmere, and
when these fail, the art that was taught me by Ha^^un, the fisherman and sailor
of Bengal, will still secure me from beggary."

ISBECK, no doubt, intimated by this answer, that men of genius and literature
ought to be the last persons in the world to consider themselves as fit
subjects for public benevolence, and that an independency of spirit should at
all events be preserved, particularly in men of his profession, if they would
wish to support and act consistently with the divinity of their character. How
few are there in these days that possess the independent spirit of Isbeck-Iman!
Most men of ability at this day in Europe choose rather to shadow themselves
under the wing of the great, or subsist by the mean arts of flattery and
sycophantism, than to rely upon themselves and their own exertions for support.

3. COUNTRIES newly settled, or such as may have lately emerged from the
horrors and devastations occasioned by war, are rarely much troubled with
polite authors or other retainers to the fine arts. It is not that Nature is
more niggardly of her gifts in such situations than elsewhere, but it is the
general want of taste and encouragement that occasions this artificial scarcity
of genius. Long peace, opulence, and leisure beget taste in a nation, and it is
the prerogative of taste to distinguish true excellence from its mere
resemblance.

STRANGE as it may seem, want of reflection has pestered the world with more
authors than any other cause whatever, and more particularly so for a century
or two past. Did every man that sits down to write a book for the public
consider, that in the space of one hundred years both himself and his book must
perish and be forgotten, I do not say he would weep like the Persian general
when he observed the same thing of his immense army, but I am positive he would
throw aside the pen forever, unless some prospect of immediate advantage
overbalanced the whimsies of fame and immortality. The world is at present
overrun with book-makers rather than authors: finding compilation a much easier
task than striking out new and original ideas, they go on serving up the old
mess under a variety of disguises, every thing remaining the same, except the
style and manner, which may possibly be adapted to the humor and fancy of the
age in which they live.

I HAVE ever been of opinion that good fortune is no less necessary to the
success of an author than to that of a great military commander. How many poems
of equal, and perhaps superior merit to the Iliad or Odyssey have wholly
perished from the knowledge and remembrance of mankind, only for want of the
accidental advantage of being expressed in so beautiful a language as the
Greek. The Arabians, as well as the Indians of the east, are people of a strong
and vigorous fancy, the soul of poetry lives and breathes through their
writings, but the uncouth languages in which these divine ideas are contained
are disgusting to an European ear, and thus these sublime productions are
confined to the perusal of a few tribes wandering up and down in woods and
deserts, or to the studious and unsocial Bramins in the solitary recesses of
the mountains. Time, like distance, paints imaginary colors of excellence upon
some objects, which in reality they do not possess. A piece of writing upon the
most ordinary occasion, which we could be assured upon decisive evidence was
penned by the hand of Alexander, the son of Philip, would at this day be
reckoned inestimable, and, were matters properly managed, would procure a
comfortable living, if not an immense estate, to its owner. In the same manner,
many things that have been really handed down to us from remote antiquity are
idolized and admired, not so much for any internal excellence, as because they
are, simply; ancient. Sir Richard Blackmore's poem of Prince Arthur is at
present held in detestation by the readers of English Poetry, and is indeed
almost wholly neglected and forgotten, except when mentioned in ridicule. Let
some great revolution in literature take place, suppose Europe to be once more
overrun by the most savage and wasteful barbarians, and continue a scene of
havoc and confusion for eight or nine centuries; suppose farther, that every
book of poetry perishes in this long interval of ruin except Blackmore's poem
just mentioned, which by some strange accident is preserved till the revival of
science and taste; in such case, I make no doubt this execrated poem would be
read, admired, commented upon, and extolled by all, as a most divine
performance in itself; and recommended as a valuable fragment of antiquity, --
Such is the silly caprice of mankind. -- The discovery of the passage to India
by the Cape of Good Hope has not proved more fatal to the commercial prosperity
of Egypt and Venice than the invention of the art of printing has proved to
authors, I mean those really such. The world is at present so entirely
surfeited with books on every subject, that a reader's attention is confined a
very short time to any one in particular, This was not the case two thousand
years ago. One favorite author (and almost every author was such to somebody)
then formed a complete library, books being both very scarce and very dear. By
continually poring on this volume beauties were discovered which the author
never intended, and the defects overlooked as bearing no proportion to the
beauties. We that live in this late age can lay claim to no such attention.
After an immensity of labor we publish our book to the world; if it takes, a
crowd of cotemporary authors instantly set their brains to work to produce
something better on the same plan, and thus the resemblances soon eclipse the
original, or at least go shares in the honor. If it is of no value, it falls
to the ground of course, because no one will read an indifferent book when
thousands of better ones may (...) read at the next library for a trifle. Every
subject has been ransacked to the bottom, and even the dregs have not been
refused.

4 THE influence of riches has more to do in bringing an author into reputation
as times are now, than almost any other cause. A countryman of my own once
heartily told me that he had ever found an additional, specific pleasure in
reading the works of Horace, from a consideration that this elegant poet was
intimate with Augustus, the master of the world, and his first minister
Mecenas. Preposterous as this may seem, I am of opinion almost every man is
influenced more or less by similar prejudices. I remember when I lived some
years ago at Leyden I published a treatise, entitled, The Harmony of the
visible Creation illustrated. At the time I was employed in writing that book I
lodged in a small house belonging to a widow woman, near the military barracks,
and I will be so ingenuous as to acknowledge it was in the garret or upper
apartment thereof, an apartment in a house that I prefer to all others when I
engage in works of deep research and intricate speculation. To my great
mortification, I found that my book lay dead upon the printer's hands,
notwithstanding our utmost and united endeavors to get it off. Not a dozen of
them sold in as many weeks, and I began to conclude that either my ideas of
harmony were very absurd, or that it was a subject not understood by the
college or citizens. I was at last, however, relieved from my perplexity by a
sympathizing news-hawker, who whispered me one morning as he handed me the
Gazette, that nobody would read books written by an author in the upper story
of a small wooden building. This hint was sufficient: although I could ill
afford it, I instantly took new lodgings in a house five stories high, bowed to
great men in public with whom I had not the least acquaintance, and began a
correspondence with the governors of the college, who were utterly unknown to
me, when to my great surprise as well as satisfaction the whole impression was
sold off in less than twelve weeks after this change of situation and behavior.

5. AN author should always study the turn and humor of the age in which he
lives, before he sits down to write, especially if his views terminate in his
own personal interest and emolument. If a man belonged to a nation of fanatics
and enthusiasts, he would be a madman to publish discourses on the efficacy and
supremacy of human reason; and if none but boys and girls were to be his
readers, he would hardly trouble himself with Aristotelian metaphysics and
philosophical researches. In short, if he would effect his purposes, he must
find out who are the majority of readers, and accommodate his works to the
taste of those who are most likely to peruse them. A too great regard to the
reigning taste is nevertheless oftentimes attended with fatal effects to
reputation in a subsequent age. The most shinning abilities, if employed only
in superficial speculation or on mysterious and perplexing subjects, meet
finally with but little regard from the bulk, by which I mean the busy part of
mankind. It is only when an author is employed in reducing speculation into a
sort of mechanical practice, and visible and permanent advantages accrue from
his studies, that they can lay claim to a lasting and universal attention.

6. THE northern nations of the eastern continent have ever succeeded in their
attempts against those of the south, as being of more robust bodies and hardy
constitutions, and consequently invigorated by an undaunted daring spirit that
seems peculiar to most nations inhabiting cold climates. We might bring
numerous instances from history to support this opinion. The northern tribes of
Asia and Europe have, in different ages, overrun and subjugated the people in
more southern situations, forced them to receive their laws, often their
habits, languages and customs, till insensibly incorporating with them, they
became through the influence of climate the same soft, voluptuous and enervated
people they had conquered, and perhaps again submitted in their turn to another
swarm of northern invaders. -- Whatever truth the foregoing remark may have in
respect to the eastern world, it is considerably corroborated by the amazing
difference of genius, that, with a few exceptions, is observable in certain
points, between the northern and southern American United States -- What a
superior spirit of activity, boldness and enterprise inspires that former? --
With a resolution and ardour, undaunted by discouraging or vexatious obstacles,
they plan and execute what an inhabitant of Georgia or Florida imagines himself
and his countrymen naturally disqualified from attempting. -- It has
nevertheless been questioned by some whether the climate of a country alone,
that is, the different degrees of heat or cold, dryness or moisture, have any
real agency on the constitution and economy of the human frame, so as thereby
to influence its actions. I must confess I am a retainer to the affirmative of
the question.

We know very well that the oak tree only grows naturally in the more northern
latitudes, but as we advance south another race of vegetables, and a different
species of trees constitutes the groves of the torrid zone. Several new sorts
of birds, insects, quadrupeds, and reptiles, also meet our view. Nature has not
a less vigorous vegetation there than here; she has only changed her mode of
acting, in some particulars, and instead of the oak or the pine raises trees
equal in bulk, but different in quality the cypress, the mahogany, the cabbage
tree, or the cinnamon. They are still, however, trees, though in some things
varying from ours -- they have roots, trunk, and branches, but those juices
that are continually flowing upwards produce different leaves, flowers and
fruits. It is the same with the race of man; at least, a very striking analogy
is to be observed. The mind is influenced by the body; and the body, as it is a
mere animal production, and draws its nutriment from the earth, as well as
animal and vegetable substances of an inferior kind, must in some measure be
influenced by soil and climate, and be varied accordingly, or we must allow
that the complexion of the body has nothing to do with that of the mind.

THE PHILOSOPHER OF THE FOREST. NUMB. X.
WHEN nature first brought forth her infant, the American world, to enjoy the
blessings and vivifying influences of the new created sun, as if conscious of
the injuries this part of her creation was to suffer in future ages, she seemed
particularly industrious, she took especial care to plant it in such a
situation that many hundreds of centuries, an immense number of years must
elapse, before it could possibly be discovered by the greedy natives of the
eastern continent. -- "Till more than five thousand years have passed away
(said she) it shall be inaccessible to all, except a few tribes of wandering
Tartars, who from time to time may find their way thither by accident;
literally the children of nature, wild as the wind and waves, and free as the
animals that wander in the woody or the watery waste. The magnet alone,
continued she, shall enable the polished people of the eastern regions to
discover and ravage the delectable lands I have formed in the opposite
hemisphere; but that fossil, the invaluable loadstone, I will bury deep in the
earth, unobserved its wonderful properties, till destiny and overruling fate,
whose decrees no one can obviate, to my extremest grief, shall disclose it to
the eye of avarice, ambition, and scrutinizing curiosity, and prompt a bold and
daring Columbus to go in quest of those shores which it will not be in my power
any longer to conceal." --

So spoke NATURE, the mother of all men, and all things. In the mean time ages
rolled away: the old world was peopled, unpeopled, and peopled again. Nations
grew and flourished: they quarrelled, they fought, and made peace: the four
great monarchies succeeded each other, and fell again into decay, with their
emperors, kings and heroes, by far less durable than the lifeless marble
columns which to this day mark the spot where their proudest capitals stood, or
where their most famous battles were fought. These nations had their ages of
politeness and barbarism, ignorance and science, mis^ry and felicity: the
follies of one age were acted over again by another, and each retired in its
turn to the receptacles of silence, solitude and darkness, to make room for
succeeding generations.

BUT still America lay unknown and undiscovered, with all her islands, lakes,
mountains, woods, piains, capacious harbors and extended shores. Here the fish
sported in the waters, undisturbed by hooks or nets, and the beasts of the
forest enjoyed a secure repose. The poets of the eastern world were in the mean
time amusing their iron hearted cotemporaries with the fictions of a golden
age; their fabulous Arcadias and Saturnian kingdoms; the ideas and notions of
which must have owed their existence to the magic power of fancy alone, as they
were wholly ignorant that the happy scenes, the innocent people and pastoral
ages, of which they sung, were at that moment realizing in another quarter of
the globe, as yet unexplored and unknown. -- But, in process of time, as nature
had for seen, this immense continent was at length raised from its long night
of obscurity to the view of astonished nations: the inhabitants, like the
country, seemed to be a new race of mortals, of different natures, ideas and
inclinations from those already known. They, also, gazed at the Europeans as a
species of men differing in all respects from themselves, and, as far as
regarded power and abilities, beings of a superior nature.

As the Europeans had the means, they of course conceived they had also the
right to extirpate the innocent natives, or drive them from the sea coasts to
the interior parts of the country. The most specious pretext for this procedure
seems to have been, that the Aborigines, or old inhabitants of America, did not
sufficiently exert themselves to cultivate and improve the lands nature had so
liberally bestowed upon them: they were content with the productions of the
simple genius of the earth, and therefore were scarcely to be considered,
according to these casuists, as legal proprietors of the immense territories
that were now discovered.

FULL of this idea, the Europeans flocked over, and carefully examined the soil
and productions of this newfound region: the best lands in North America were
observed to lie in a temperate climate, and the new-comers soon found it their
interest to cultivate and improve a soil that promised so much to the hand of
industry. This roused the jealousy of the natives, who, unwilling to part with
their pleasant abodes in the neighborhood of the sea, made many attempts, (and
sometimes not unsuccessfully) to annihilate these intruding strangers; but, as
the several divisions of the old world were at that time overstocked with
inhabitants, who constantly waged bloody wars with each other, notwithstanding
the devastation and destruction of the human species occasioned thereby, it
became absolutely necessary that many should emigrate. Providence gave
permission to the arm of tyranny to expel thousands from their native lands;
and many, in hopes of bettering their fortunes, submitted to become voluntary
exiles. Among the rest, Britain seemed very busy in virtually banishing and
expelling her subjects to this remote region, who chose the northern coast, as
knowing of no other asylum, excepting the grave, from the scourge of
oppression. These, with a mixture of adventurers from various nations, at
length humbled the savage tribes, and by the mere force of industry rendered a
large proportion of this new country rich and flourishing. Britain soon cast a
greedy eye upon the hard-earned possessions of this exiled race; she claimed
them as subjects, and took them under her protection; but at the same time said
in her heart, They shall hereafter be my slaves.

THE children of the first emigrants immediately forgot the wrongs and injuries
their forefathers had experienced, and strictly united themselves to her, not
as yet aware of her insidious designs: but nature disregarded the connection;
and whispering in the ear of reason, was heard to say, "The union cannot be
lasting."

HER words have proved true: the people of the present age have seen the
unnatural bonds in a moment dissolved, the union broken, and the connection at
an end! Tell me, ye advocates for the dependence of these states upon the
remote island of Britain; ye who assert that their happiness, their interest,
and their glory is bound up in such a dependence, would you not esteem him a
madman who should attempt amidst the rage of contending winds and waves to bind
together two bulky ships with a single thread of silk for their mutual safety?
Just as reasonable is it to suppose that America and the comparatively paltry
and oppositely interested island of Britain can be happily united under one and
the same sovereign.

WHAT a spectacle of derision do the infatuated Britons now exhibit to the
world. in seriously attempting to subjugate a country to which nature never
gave them a shadow of right, and whose immense extent is, of itself, a standing
and insurmountable obstacle to their success! An island, situated on the
extremities of the ocean, on the verge of polar darkness, incumbered with
rugged mountains, traversed by uncouth savages of horrid mien; barren heaths,
and useless, broken lands; a spot, whose strength is merely artificial, sending
out on impracticable conquests her fleets and armies, the flower of her youth
and her ablest commanders, who, the moment they come within the vortex, the
sphere of attraction of this huge unwieldy body, the American world, are
instantly swallowed up, like straws in a whirlpool, and irrecoverably lost!

WHAT a nation of numerous and ingenious mechanics and manufacturers were the
English only ten years ago! With the fleeces of their sheep they warmed the
inhabitants of either frigid zone: the fine linnens of their island were in
high estimation in every clime; but in order to prosecute their mad scheme of
reducing to unconditional submission or desolating a country naturally
invincible, they have taken the weaver from the loom and the cobbler from his
stall; the back of the pedlar is released from its burden, and he who of y^re
was honestly and profitably occupied in fitting garments to the shoulders of
his brethren, fancying himself on a sudden an Alexander or an Hernando C^r^ez;
in search of glory, in quest of neverfading laurels, and for the support of his
idol, Royalty, traverses the wide extended ocean, and leads to imaginary
conquests and devastations in the trans-Atlantic world!

IT is not easy to conceive what will be the greatness and importance of North
America in a century or two to come, if the present fabric of Nature is upheld,
and the people retain those bold and manly sentiments of freedom, which actuate
them at this day. Agriculture, the basis of a nation's greatness, will here,
most probably, be advanced to its summit of perfection; and its attendant,
commerce, will so agreeably and usefully employ mankind, that wars will be
forgotten; nations, by a free intercourse with this vast and fertile continent,
and this continent with the whole world, will again become brothers after so
many centuries of hatred and jealousy, and no longer treat each other as
savages and monsters. The iron generation will verge to decay, and those days
of felicity advance which have been so often wished for by all good men, and
which are so beautifully described by the prophetic sages of ancient times.

MY friend, the clergyman, informs me, that after passing a ridge of lofty
mountains extending on the western frontiers of these republics, a new and most
enchanting region opens, of inexpressible beauty and fertility. The lands are
there of a quality far superior to those situated in the neighborhood of the
sea coast: the trees of the forest are stately and tall, the meadows and
pastures spacious, supporting vast herds of the native animals of the country;
which own no master, nor expect their sustenance from the hands of men. The
climate, he says, is moderate and agreeable; there the rivers no longer bend
their courses eastward to the Atlantic, but inclining to the west and south,
and moving with a gentle current through the channels that Nature has opened,
fall at length into that grand repository of a thousand streams, Mississippi,
who collecting his waters, derived from a source remote and unknown, rolls
onward through the frozen regions of the north, and stretching his prodigiously
extended arms to the east and west, embraces those savage groves and dreary
solitudes, as yet uninvestigated by the traveller, unsung by the poet, and
unmeasured by the chain of the geometrician; till uniting with the Obio and
turning due south, receiving afterward the Miss^ri and a hundred others, this
prince of rivers, in comparison of whom the Nile is but a small rivulet, and
the Danube a ditch hurries with his immense flood of waters into the Mexican
sea, laving the shores of many f^rt^^ countries in his passage, inhabited by
savage nations to this day almost unknown and without a name.

IT is a standing rule in philosophy, that Nature does nothing invain. A potent
nation, now at war with these republics, has proclaimed her resolution to lay
waste what she cannot reclaim by conquest, and schemes are projected to oblige
such to re-emigrate to Europe as shall escape the fury of the destroyer:. But
if this new world was not to become at some time or another the receptacle of
numerous civilized nations, from one extremity to the other, for what visible
purpose could Nature have formed these vast lakes in the bosom of her infant
empire, which surprise and astonish the traveller, who, leaving the salt ocean
behind him to the east, finds, unexpectedly, new oceans of a prodigious extent
in those tracts where Fancy would have surmised nothing but endless hills,
inhospitable wilds and dreary forests existed? These lakes having, severally, a
communication with each other, and lastly with the Atlantic ocean, toward the
north-east; approaching also very near, by the west, to several of the
navigable branches of the Mississippi, from an easy communication through a
long tract of country, the intercourse between the various parts of which
would, in future times, at least for the purposes of commerce, be extremely
difficult and laborious, were it not for this continuation of waters, that for
ages have been waiting to receive the barque of traffic, urged forward by the
sail or the stroke of the springy oar; as the soil bordering thereon has no
less impatiently expected the operations of the industrious plough.

DURING a very considerable part of the year, the south west wind blows
unremittedly on the face of this serpentine river, the Ohio; and even at other
times, the current of air is more prevalent in that direction than in any
other, which being directly opposed to the course of the stream, moving at the
rate of one mile hourly, is it not evident that Providence, Nature, of Fate,
has so ordered this matter, that the commercial vessels hereafter sailing
northward thereon may have favorable gales to make an answerable progress
against a current that is still contrary and the same, and that those bound to
the south may have the assistance of the ebbing stream to combat the adverse
winds with more advantage. -- It would carry me far beyond the bounds of a
short essay, to point out every particular, indicating the future importance of
this newly discovered country; and it is really astonishing, as I intimated
before, that a nation endued with the divine gift of reason, if they would
exercise that gift, should at this day entertain a serious thought of reducing,
by force of a^ms, this immense continent to their absolute sway; a continent
beholding two hemispheres, abounding with a hardy and active race of
inhabitants, producing every thing within itself proper for its own maintenance
and desence; a continent extending through such a number of degrees of latitude
and longitude, from the limits of the torrid zone, the circle of the northern
tropic, to those frozen streams and icy mountains, where, chilled with the
extreme rigours of perpetual winter, Nature seems to have lost her vegetative
powers; and where a few of the human race, the natives of the polar regions,
that are found to exist in those unjoyous climes, bears so little resemblance
in the features of the mind to what the civilized world calls a man, that they
scarcely deserve the name.

(First published in Philadelphia, Jan. 9, 1782.)
A DISCOURSE UPON WHIGS AND TORIES, BY MR. SLENDER.
FROM what I have observed, I will undertake to affirm there are no two parties
or descriptions of men in any country, that entertain a more sincere antipathy
for each other, than those denominated Whig and Tory, in North America. It
seems as if Fortune, willing, on her part, to carry the affair to the utmost,
had so ordered, that the very words which symbolize those two characters should
be totally dissimilar both in aspect, composition, and pronunciation. In the
words whig and tory there is not a letter alike. If the one is a monosyllable,
the other is a dissyllable; and the sounds of the two words, when pronounced,
are as different as can be well conceived: one is short and smart, the other
long and tremulous. -- Whatever may be the radical derivation, or the primitive
meaning and import of these terms, whether Whig is formed from a Saxon word,
signifying sour milk, or from the horse-driving Whiggamores of Scotland, who,
upon a certain occasion, in the days of the first Charles, opposed themselves
to the royal party; or whether the appellation, Tory, owes its origin to the
miserable Irish banditti, or certain highway robbers so called; whichever of
these be right or not right, it is to be regretted that these opprobrious
terms, so far fetched, foreign and insignificant in themselves, are so
generally applied in these republics as I have frequently observed them to be.
Because the people of England, who are everlastingly at variance among
themselves, as well as quarreling with the rest of the world, thought fit in
the last century to stigmatize each other with contemptuous denominations of
this sort, must the American revolutionists of the present day for that reason
assume the appellative, Whig, a name they are no way concerned in, and the
origin of which is, at best, local and obscure? -- It is true, names are only
those arbitrary sounds or marks, by means of which we distinguish one thing,
individual, or collective body from another; and if that purpose be answered,
it is sufficient, as far as regards ^e mere purpose of discrimination: but, in
the present case, the terms Whig and Tory, from their former appropriation,
convey an idea that these two classes of men are liege subjects of one and the
same monarch, and are only at variance about some contested points of civil or
domestic polity. There was some reason, indeed, for distinguishing in this
manner the ministerial and royal party from the genuine assertors of liberty
prior to the immortal DECLARATION, which at one stroke severed this country
from the chains of despotism and dotage; but upon that event, these
appellations, as well as a hundred others of the same kind, should have been
instantaneously abolished. The free republican of America, and the base
mercenary adherent to the cause of tyranny and despotism, or two words
expressing those characters, should alone have formed the distinction.

FOR my own part, although I profess myself a citizen of the world, and am not
easily prejudiced against any man or body of men, merely for the sake, or on
account of the name that malice, ignorance, party-spirit, or ill nature may
have endeavored to fasten on them, yet I cannot but admire at the stupidity or
obstinacy of those, who, although born and educated in these States, and
favored with the blessing of reason to discern right from wrong, and their own
interest, with that of their country, from what would be ruinous to both, are
nevertheless to this hour faithful adherents to the infamous cause of Britain,
or in the common style, Tories.

SOME time ago I was overtaken in one of my excursions by a well dressed
person, pretty far advanced in years, mounted upon an elegant horse, whom I
afterward discovered to come properly under this description. -- Stopping his
horse short, he accosted me by the common and usual enquiry, What news? --
There was something in the man's countenance that immediately prepossessed me
with an unfavourable opinion of him, and not happening at that time to find
myself in a talking humor, I replied hastily, That "there was no news worth
mentioning that I knew of" -- hoping that by thus evading his question the
fellow would pass on, and leave me to my meditations. I was, however, fated to
be disappointed: whether he took me for a person of an uncommon reach of
understanding and profound knowledge, because I then wore a large gray wig, (a
mistake not unfrequent) or whether he was one of the two-legged, unfeathered
animals that cannot travel a mile on a road with any satisfaction unless they
have some other person in company, he seemed resolved to stick by me to the
last. Finding his determination, after traveling more than half a league by
the side of his horse, I thought it best to change my ground, and with an air
of quick recollection, said, "There is indeed one trifling piece of
intelligence that I accidentally picked up this orning at an inn on the
road-side -- Advice is received that the island of St. Eustatius has been
lately retaken by the French, together with he British garrison stationed
there, consisting of seven hundred effective men, or thereabouts." -- "Death
and the devil!" replied he, taking me up short (for he had not heard the news
before) "what do you talk of trifles? that is news of importance, if it be
really so; but I yesterday perused the Royal Gazette from beginning to end, and
it makes no mention of any such thing."

IT is in the Philadelphia papers, however, replied I.

"No man of sense, returned he, will give attention or credit to half they read
in the Philadelphia Gazettes. I wish the compilers of those papers would pay a
little more regard to truth and modestly, in future, than they have hitherto
done -- it is insufferable that the public should be thus imposed upon by those
fellows!" -- Whether the intelligence I give you be true or not, rejoined I, it
matters very little: if the island is not taken, things will only be as they
were; if it is taken, I hope the monarch of England is able enough to lose
seven or eight hundred men and a barren rock, which he hardly ever knew to be
his own, without feeling it very sensibly. -- "That is more than I know,
answered my new acquaintance, in a fit of ill humor -- these repeated losses
come damned heavy upon us -- eight or nine thousand men captured in Virginia
with their leader, Cornwallis, and seven or eight hundred in St. Eustatius, as
you report -- with these losses and discouragements, I do not see how the devil
we are to stifle the rebellion in such a hurry neither." -- You give credit
then, cried I, to the reports of the British army in Virginia having been made
prisoners of war? -- "Why, faith, betwixt you and me (said Mr. Tory) myself and
two or three of my next neighbors laughed heartily at the accounts of that
affair as published in Philadelphia, and for more than three weeks after the
day of Earl Cornwallis's surrender, considered the whole narrative as
fabricated by the journeymen of the Congress, and consequently fictitious; but,
when we saw it also in the Royal Gazette, uncontradicted, we began to think
there was some reality in the matter: For my own part I bore it patiently,
smoked my pipe, shook my head, looked wife, and sat still in the chimney
corner: but my wife took it hard enough, for she loves king George dearly; she
sighed and sobbed three whole days till her eyes were bloated with tears, and I
really thought she would have killed the parish schoolmaster with the
churn-stick for only coming to consult me on the true and genuine import of the
eighth article of the capitulation. As she had previously locked the door to
prevent his escape, he thought himself supremely happy to leave his newspaper
in my possession, and dart out of the window with whole bones, though not
without receiving several blows and bruises, which I think will firmly imprint
that unlucky article in his remembrance till his dying day."

HERE he paused, and I thus went on: -- "After the surrender of the island of
St. Eustatius to the arms of France, the prisoners were sent off under guard to
Martinique: the same day the Marquis de Bouille detached a number of vessels
and troops, who, in a few hours, with little or no opposition, made themselves
masters of Saba and St. Martin's." -- "Yes, replied my comrade hastily,
(coughing aloud at the same time that he might not be mortified with hearing
what I said) but have you not been notified that the whole continent of South
America has revolted from the crown of Spain, and proclaimed a new monarch of
its own? -- There is also a famous Indian priest, who, I hear, is likely to do
great matters. -- This revolt will so embarrass the persidious house of
Bourbon, that for the future it will be wholly out of their power to support
and abet the rebellion in these colonies as heretofore. But, do you hear any
thing new from Mr. Green, or from Count Rochambeau? -- the Royal Gazette
advises that the former is killed, and his army cut to pieces; and that the
last mentioned has hoisted the standard of France in Virginia, and taken
possession of that province in the name, and for the benefit, of the French
king, his master. The same paper asserts that Louis the sixteenth intends to
oblige us all to turn Roman Catholics. I hope he will be disappointed, for
neither my wife nor myself could ever think of worshipping wooden images and
paying homage to St. Gregory's beard. But the English nation is not reduced to
so low an ebb of consequence as many are willing to suppose. The natives of
South America have a predilection for Britons, and as soon as they begin to dig
in the mines of Potosi, upon their own account, will doubtless supply old
England with the bullion and dollars that were formerly transported to Spain in
the annual Flota and Flotilla." -- You need not be under any concern about the
mines, said I; for it is now almost a month since undoubted advices have been
received, that this revolt, so magnified by the English and their partisans, is
no more than a petty insurrection of a few turbulent and insignificant tribes
of Indians, that have been tampered with, and induced to take up arms, by the
emissaries of the British nation. The insurgents are already dispersed, and the
principal leaders put to death.

"YOUR intelligence must be ill founded, replied he, (remounting his horse in a
pet) the Royal Gazette mentions nothing of the sort. But, from my late perusal
of several numbers thereof I suspect terrible scenes will be exhibited next
summer on this continent? Britain is now thoroughly provoked, and the
thunderstorm is gathering that will speedily burst upon us. Nothing could have
happened more fortunately for her than the capture of Lord Cornwallis, and his
brave army. The nations that have hitherto appeared indifferent to her fate
will now up-rush, like a giant from his slumbers, take an active part in her
favor, and settle matters entirely to her satisfaction, and the confusion of
revolutionists."

THE disaffected man then dismounted from his horse a second time, and
whispered in my ear (although no one was in sight) that seventy-five thousand,
two hundred and fifteen Russian soldiers, embarked in four hundred and eleven
transports, convoyed by thirty-eight ships of the line, might be looked for on
these coasts about the middle of April next.

YOU must certainly have been misinformed, my friend, interrupted I; the
numbers you mention are far from being just -- here he looked confused -- I
have been told of sixty line of battle ships, one thousand one hundred
transports, and at least one hundred and ninety thousand land forces -- "Why,
indeed. replied my companion (his visage suddenly clearing up,) it is possible
I may have been mistaken in this matter -- let me see -- upon the whole, to the
best of my remembrance, you are right -- perfectly right -- one hundred and
ninety thousand -- I recollect that you are entirely and indisputably right!
The British Lion is not easily roused; but when he is, let rebels beware!"

THIS latter piece of intelligence put my companion into so good a humor,
that, to my inexpressible joy, he once more mounted his beast, bade me adieu,
and rode off on a gallop, I suppose to impart what he had heard to some
confidential friend.

THUS would these blind and obstinate men rejoice in the political downfall of
the country that gave them birth, and to which they are bound by every tie of
nature and honor. Men of this stamp would gladly see these promising republics
shackled in the chains of slavery, despotism and tyranny, not considering that
in pulling down this beautiful structure of liberty and virtue, raised with
immense toil an cemented with the blood of heroes and patriots, themselves and
their posterity must also be involved in the general and undistinguished ruin.
But, ye Republicans of America, as long as your British enemies are suffered to
occupy the least spot of territory among you, know that so long there will be
retainers to their cause: similarity of language, manners and customs, together
with old and rooted prejudices, will abundantly suffice for that purpose: while
your adversaries can poison the stream thousands will drink of it. Weak people
are the multitudinous offspring of every age, and credulous people are to be
met with every moment; timid people are seen in droves, and the prejudiced in
opinion are without number. It must be, however, some satisfaction to the
friends of universal liberty that the present race of Americans that are
disaffected to the independence, the freedom, the honor and the true interests
of their country, are comparatively few, are also for the most part well
stricken in years, and are daily and hourly disappearing from this great stage
of action: People of this character may justly be compared to those unbelieving
Jews mentioned in the records of Moses, who wandered forty years in the
wilderness and perished there at last, because, after a thousand miraculous
interpositions of Providence in their behalf, they still doubted that their
divine leader was able to conduct them to the promised land. They wished rather
to return, and be once more slaves in Egypt, than assert their right to Canaan.
Their hearts failed within them, because of the Giants, the sons of Anak.

(First published in Philadelphia, January 1782.)

THE PHILOSOPHER OF THE FOREST. NUMB. XI.
THERE is nothing that detracts so much from the character of rationality that
some men are perpetually talking of, as distinguishing the human species from
the inferior ranks of created beings, than the practice of the savage
profession of war, which has constantly vitiated the morals of mankind, misled
their understandings, promoted a spirit of pride and barbarity, and rendered
irksome and unwelcome to the far greater part of them that small portion of
time which was certainly lent us for nobler ends than to be employed in
violently driving each other from the borders of this material existence,
antecedent to the hour that nature may be supposed to have allotted. -- This
was the sentiment of Ho-ang chi-ampti, a Chinese pilgrim, and a strict i^herent
to the morality and opinions of Confucius, the famous ancient (...)
philosopher. -- They who are acquainted with the writings of Moses, the (...)
legislator, do there find that no sooner had man placed his foot upon this
earth, than he wantonly raised his arm against his brother, and basely slew
him; at a time, too, when the world was yet solitary, when unsolicited nature
poured out her stores in abundance, and necessity could feign no pretense of
hostility; and when he might have been expected, had he been influenced by
reason, to have considered his brother as a second self, and regarded the
welfare and safety of an individual of his own species as a point of the first
and greatest importance. But this was only a specimen of what was to come.
Every age has produced its Cains, whom divine Providence, in its unsearchable
designs, has often permitted to oppress, enslave and destroy the more peaceable
and well disposed part of the human race.

THERE is no man that thinks at all, but must have considered the intimate
resemblance that subsists between men as individuals, in respect to the
features of the mind and disposition, and those collective bodies called tribes
or nations.

EVERY town and village produces a person who endeavors to render himself
superior to his fellow townsmen or villagers, and accordingly, as they are weak
enough to submit, humor, and give way to him, his impudence and insolence
increases. Thus, too, it is with aggregates or bodies: such were the Romans and
Carthaginians two thousand years since; such are the modern British in Europe,
the Malays in Asia; the Dahonims in Africa (who are perpetually at war that
they may have prisoners to sacrifice to their gods) and such were the Mohawk
Indians in America, whose restless, warlike and overbearing spirit has produced
its natural effect, their almost universal extirpation.

SOME sentimental persons have passed half their lives in contriving plans of
universal and perpetual peace; and indeed some of their plans, at first view,
seem plausible enough and easy to be carried into execution; but till the
interests of all nations are the same, and till all mankind are brought to be
of one way of thinking, we may reasonably despair of such speculations being
realized. Discord and disorder are interwoven with the nature and constitution
of the human race; and I am well convinced that we may as rationally expect to
see an ocean unruffled by tempests, or the sky perpetually clear of the iron
glooms that so often infest it, or to find individuals without private
quarrels, jealousies, and bickerings, as the world at large delivered from
rapine, dissension, tyranny, discord, violence and bloodshed. -- This is a sad
prospect, but at the same time a real one. What has been will be again. The
rivers that flow to the ocean are also eventually supplied from thence; and
indeed all things are in a state of constant circumvolution, which caused a
sage of antiquity to remark, "That there was nothing new in the affairs of this
world." If one generation, wea^y of the little squabbles of their day, at
length returned to that mortifying dissolution common to all corporeal
substances, the same passions, interests and resentments rise with a succeeding
age from the ashes of the past, and produce, successively, the same tumults and
disorders.

SINCE then the seeds of di^cord are so unhappily sown on the soil of human
nature, fatally fertile in hastily rearing them to a rank maturity, every wise
nation will endeavor to smooth the rugged brow of war, so for at least as to
murder with decency, and by showing such little complaisances and civilities as
are nor incompatible with our sacred regard to virtue and liberty, convince the
dubious, that the nations of the earth have not entirely forgotten that they
are brethren, derived from ancestors, although not precisely of the same, yet
of a similar and kindred nature, and created alike rational beings by the
enlivening breath of the divine author of all things; from the immense ocean of
whose ideas the many myriads of mankind continually exhale their existence, and
to which, like drops of rain in a clouded atmosphere, they again as certainly
return.

How barbarous and shocking to humanity were the European wars several
centuries ago! A happy immortality is reserved only for those (said the
Scandinavians) who die bravely with their swords in their hands. They imagined
the principal pleasure of this immortality would be to drink beer out of bowls
made of the sculls of the enemies they had slain in battle, according to the
number of which every one was to be esteemed and honored in the mansions of
another world. Their war songs were particularly horrible to the imagination,
and full of those savage notions of valor and romantic heroism that is at this
day observable in the American Indians. What evil demon has been let loose
among mankind to defile the temple of REASON with the odious scenery of devils!
Is it possible that a being illuminated by the rays of that spiritual sun
could, in his senses, write the following lines: they were composed (with a
great deal more) by one of the warrior chiefs of the Scandinavians, more than
eight hundred years since, a few hours before he expired: Balderi patris scamna
parata scio in aula;
Bib^mus cerevisiam ex concavis crateribus craniorum.
Non gemit vir sortis contra mortem
Magnifici in Oaini domibus, etc.
Brave deeds achieved, at death's approach I smile,
In Baldur's hall I see the table spread;
The enlivening BEER shall now reward my toil,
Quaff'd from their sculls that by my faulchion bled.
The brave no more at death's approach shall groan;
In Odin's lofty dome all sighs forbear,
Conscious of bloody deeds, my fearless soul
Mounts to great Odin's hall, and revels there!


I THEREFORE admire and respect the Spanish nation for having introduced into
camps the good natured spirit and civilities of chivalry; a spirit of
courteousness which, although ridiculed by the inimitable pen of Michael
Cervantes, for the extravagance to which it was carried, has nevertheless
continued to this day to have a good effect in alleviating the horrors of war
among the more civilized nations of the world. -- And yet the civilities of war
have something extremely ridiculous in them. Would not an inhabitant of some
other more happy planet, suddenly arriving here, pronounce all warriors
lunatics, when he beheld them this hour tearing each other to pieces with their
diabolical machines of destruction; and the next, smiling upon and embracing
their vanquished opponent with all the tenderness of bosom-intimacy and
friendship! This, however, is an inconsistency that is praiseworthy: the
vanquished are ever entitled to kindness and compassion, and none but savage,
brutal, unprincipled and uncivilized communities treat persons in captivity in
a different manner.

ALL wars are in a great measure produced by regal pride originating in regal
power: monarchs are the children of discord. and to ^umour their ambition the
world is forever in a state of distraction. -- If the king of one country is
naturally a bad man, he of consequence makes it his business to excite
jealousies and promote encroachments; and, in the vulgar phrase, picks a
quarrel with his neighbor, that, by getting the better of him in battle, he
may have more slaves to bow down before him, while living, and more reason to
have something great said or written about him after his death. -- If another
be humane, honest, benevolent, and is possessed of all the public and private
virtues of a prince, the duty he owes his subjects compels him to resent such
injuries or encroachments; and thus, between the two characters of good and
bad, virtuous and vicious, the world is held eternally at variance. -- The
stupid notions also, of fame and unfading immortality, have incited many that
wore diadems to become monsters and murderers; but alas (...) the laurel wreath
and the cypress bough never yet flourished to perfection on the same tree; and
to whatever honor, emolument, or satisfaction the survivors and conquerors in
these bloody contests are entitled, I am convinced the dead have no
participation in that empty and visionary enjoyment. -- I shall pursue my ideas
on the irrationality of war at another time, for at present I am really in
doubt whether a man that is constitutionally a lover of fighting, if my such
there be, can be justly called a rational animal, or not, (for so Logicians
define him) whether he, as one of mankind, is an emanation from the all perfect
Spirit, as Plato and many later writers have asserted him to be; or, on the
contrary, a mere mass of those vexatious, discordant, chaotic atoms which are
doomed to be everlastingly at enmity with each other, till the soul of the
universe, the great principle of harmony and beauty, shall again move upon the
superficies of these troubled waters, and bring light our of darkness, beauty
and regularity from confusion, darkness and disorder.

INTERESTING THOUGHTS, DESIGNED FOR THE PUBLIC GOOD; By Christopher Clodhopper,
Yeoman.
AT the present time, when people in general find so much difficulty in paying
their taxes for the support of civil government, owing, as they say, to the
small chance the farmer has of selling the produce of his lands to any
advantage; I would beg leave to ask the public, or their representatives, what
impropriety there would be in laying duties, discouragements and imposts upon
the undoubted and indisputable articles of luxury and superfluity so much in
vogue amongst us, and imported so liberally from the British islands in Europe?

As to myself, I am a plain countryman possessed of about two hundred acres of
but tolerable land in the state of Pennsylvania, and do aver and assert, that
by proper economy, industry, and not suffering a single superfluous article,
really so, to come within my doors, I have hitherto been enabled to pay my
taxes cheerfully in specie, and could have done it, notwithstanding the small
demand there generally is for the produce of the lands, had they been half as
high again as they are. -- Many of my neighbors who complain the most, are
people, I observe, that must have their teas of different kinds, their coffees,
their sugars, their gauzes, laces, ribbons, etc, etc. regularly bought with
ready money, which, although seemingly trifles, amount in their cost to five or
six, or, I may say, often ten times the value of the taxes of which such heavy
complaints are made. -- But it will be said, "The consumption of these articles
encourages an intercourse with foreign countries, and employs a very
considerable number of seamen, and others, who would in all probability be a
burden to the community were it not for the trafficking spirit of the public,
which in all countries is founded rather on private vanity than any ideas of
general convenience."

To this I answer, that as to the seafaring men whom this traffic supports,
they are for the most part natives of foreign countries, and in the service of
other powers, so that upon the old principle of the head of every family taking
care for its own, we are no way interested or concerned in their support; and,
even if this were not the case, it would be pre^erable for every state to
maintain them, when out of business, at its own expense, than keep them
employed in a species of commerce so detrimental to the public and their
country.

I WAS lately at Philadelphia, and as I sat in my wagon, or traversed the
streets, I could not but observe, with some concern, the extravagantly rich
body dresses, as well as the idle imported fopperies upon the heads of both
sexes. The money, thought I, that has been needlessly thrown away (perhaps a
great part of it sent to the dominions of an inveterate enemy) for these
trinkets and ridiculous gewgaws, must be immense.

I AM certain, for I shall now descend to particulars, that a moderate tax
imposed upon all high-heeled shoes in use amongst the ladies of this state,
would build a frigate yearly (supposing the present fashion to continue) for
the protection of the trade of this port. If ladies are determined to walk upon
wooden pegs five or six inches in length, thereby risquing the breaking of
their necks and limbs every step they take, it is their own choice; but I say
let them be made to pay for their temerity. -- Again, an easy tax laid upon all
head dresses and high rolls in Pennsylvania (excepting those of a more moderate
size at present in use among the young Quaker ladies) would, I assert, produce
cash enough, supposing them not to decrease in consequence of the tax, to raise
and support a full and complete regiment of light dragoons.

THE CALASH ought also to pay something, as it is piece of furniture that, in
my poor opinion, is wholly unnecessary. A country housewife's plain bonnet,
made of homespun linen, serves all the purposes of the Calash, and being
manufactured amongst ourselves, would come cheap: add to this consideration,
the dangers and difficulties to which this unwieldy machine, the Calash,
exposes the wearer in high gales of wind, squalls, and sudden flaws; there
being no method yet discovered, as I am told, of diminishing its quantity of
surface by way of single, double, or balance reef, in proportion to the
increase and violence of the storm. -- However, far be it from me to discourage
the use of this monstrous production of art, even if it should increase to the
number of yards in the Royal Louis's mainsail, provided it be subjected to due
taxation. -- But the articles of vanity and needless expense are by no means
confined to the ladies. What is a tye-wig, or the tail thereof, that it should
contribute nothing toward carrying on the war? The double rows of gilt buttons
also upon coats and waistcoats ought to be taken notice of by those in
authority, because one single row is sufficient; and all wanton superfluity
should suffer sever taxation: a penny, or even a halfpenny imposed upon every
needless button, annually, would be but a trifle to the owner, but, in the
aggregate, a vast deal to the community at large. In the next place all laced
garments, except those worn by people belonging to the army, might, if properly
attended to, be made to produce something clever. He that can afford to
purchase a suit of laced or embroidered clothes for his own proper use, it is
to be supposed is also able to pay something handsome to his country for the
gratification he feels in displaying his peacock's feathers to the view of the
gazing multitude.

THERE are an hundred other supernumerary articles, both amongst men and women,
that ought to be timeously discouraged, altogether, or made to turn out to the
benefit of the public. Were these evils only to be found in towns and cities,
the consequences would not be so dangerous, but I am sorry to find from late
experience that the fancies of many young persons in the country also are
fascinated and bewildered by these new modes of dress and ornament. My girls,
indeed, having never yet been in town (and I hope they never will have an
opportunity) still retain their rural simplicity of dress and manners, and in
my eyes are more truly amiable in their plain attire than the gaudy cit with
her flowers and furbelows, and all the rustling geer that she so well knows how
to display to the best advantage. But my eldest son, having spent several weeks
in this city last fall, came home a mere baboon. His hair besprinkled as white
with powder as an old man's of eighty-five with extreme age; a pair of ruffles
reaching from his wrist-bands to the extremities of his nails; a strip of gold
lace encircling his hat with a loop and button of the same materials; a huge
stock on his neck containing almost muslin enough for his winding sheet; a suit
of superfine clothes wrought off in a wonderful glaring manner, and to complete
the jest a long piece of cold iron, that he called a sword, dangling after him,
in imitation, I suppose, of some coxcomb he had seen or been acquainted with in
town. -- My wife, my daughters and myself were quite out of humor at the sight
of this ridiculous metamorphosis, especially when we considered that the silly
fellow had put more upon his back in one superfluous suit than would pay our
taxes for two years. I remember one of my girls, his sister, looking at his
sword with a contemptuous sneer, asked him if he had brought us a new spit to
roast meat upon? -- This so mortified poor Jerry that he has hung up his sword
in the garret, (as the Hebrews of old time did their harps on the willows by
Babel's stream) and has never ventured to gird it upon his thigh from that day
to this.

Philadelphia, July 10, 1782.
PRISCILLA TRIPSTREET'S ANSWER TO CHRISTOPHER CLODHOPPER.
NOTWITHSTANDING all that has been said and remarked of the unparallelled rage
of the lower and middling classes of people in Britain, for planning and
scheming and breaking their rest for the advancement of the public good, and
the ardent desire they manifest upon all occasions to be instructed in the
depths and mysteries of political science; notwithstanding all this, I do not
believe there is a country in the world that produces more of these imaginary
Solons and Lycurgus's than this, called the United States of America. Every
common fellow that has been taught to snuffle a little over a school book, or
to make a scrawl or scratch he calls writing, thinks himself amply qualified to
reform and regulate the affairs of the great world. -- There was a striking
instance of this in a late performance, said to be the production of a certain
Mr. Clodhopper, a man from some remote part of the country, who, it seems,
whenever he comes to town, has the impudence to lie in his wagon, making
observations upon our dresses and fashions as we walk the streets or ride in
our carriages. How narrow and diminutive must that soul be, which can
voluntarily restrict itself merely to those articles (I pity his poor wife and
daughters) that may just keep soul and body together, as the saying is, and
cover them from the inclemency of the air and seasons, in contempt and
disregard of the comforts and conveniences of life. Avaunt, ye Clodhoppers of
the age! enjoy in peace your wretched fare and still more wretched attire, but
come not henceforward into public view with your execrable croakings, to do
your utmost to rob us of our teas and our sugars, our calashes and our shoe
heels, and other blessings, which, if withheld, as your niggardly hands are
itching to do, would render life itself an unsupportable burden, not worth
owning or enjoying on such miserable terms of deprivation.

HAVE the ladies of North America ever manifested themselves such bitter
enemies to the liberty of their country, or been so sparing in their
contributions to the support thereof, that the free and virtuous sons of
America should, at this period of the war, look to them alone for supplies to
build a navy? No -- it can only be the low and contemptible idea of some
narrow-minded miscrean, whose coarse soul of clay is incapable of enjoying the
pleasures of high life, or even a mediocrity of condition. -- Let me ask this
prating rustic how so vast a number of poor families could be supported in this
city were it not for the generous policy of the rich in encouraging
superfluity? -- Upon thirty married ladies of my acquaintance I know that
fourteen families, and they not the smallest, do from day to day depend for a
subsistence, not by way of presents or charity, but by honest labor and
industry. Supposing now these thirty ladies to conform to the blessed opinions
and advice of our venerable and amiable Mr. Clodhopper, what would become of
those same people and their poor innocents? Relentless savage! with a dry eye
and a hard unfeeling heart would thou see them perish by the most horrible of
all deaths, or, what is still worse, if possible, behold them forced into the
country to provide a hard earned subsistence upon new and untractable lands, by
the toil of their singers and the sweat of their brow!

I AM not ashamed to confess, that I am one of those who wear shoes suitable to
the mode of the times, and cannot see what difference it makes to the public
whether our heels be high or low; or what possible right the curious
impertinents can claim to be meddling with a fashion that is at least innocent
in itself, or if there be any ill consequences attending it, the damage of
which must inevitably fall upon our own persons. Now, as to high heeled shoes
being a luxury, I deny it in every sense; for any person who can afford to
purchase a pair of shoes at all, may as well have them high as low heeled,
considering the vast plenty of wood in this country, and it is the wood alone
that constitutes the difference. -- Again, in regard to the head dresses, I
allow they are rather more suitable objects of reprehension than the heels of
shoes, but supposing a tax to be laid upon, and collected from these, and a
regiment of dragoons raised, or a stout ship of war built therewith, would not
the enemy have good reason to deride, despise, and insult the Americans that
should navigate and man this great ship? -- There (they would no doubt say) is
a man of war, which the virtuous, spirited, and invincible sons of America have
been compelled to build at the expense of their ladies heads! -- May a tax be
speedily and effectually laid upon all the Christopher Clodheads and
Clodhoppers of this country, and I am convinced we shall soon be a thriving and
a happy people. -- That the calash is a piece of unnecessary furniture I
absolutely deny also. Would he wish to see us tanned by the sun in the same
manner as I suppose his unfortunate wife and daughters are with their
abominable and ever execrable homespun white linen bonnets? -- As to the
danger attending the use of the calash it is altogether imaginary, since ladies
that can afford to purchase this machine are supposed to be of some condition,
at least of such as not to lie under the necessity of being much exposed to
tempestuous weather; however, my husband, who has been any voyages to sea (and
is a warm friend to the calash) although he is very angry with Mr. Clodhopper
for his impertinent and ill advised publication, has, notwithstanding, taken a
hint from it, which he thinks may be the foundation of several considerable
improvements in this machine. He tells me, that to obviate all possibility of
my being blown off a horse, or out of an open carriage, or off my feet into the
river by the sudden gusts or flaws that are too frequent in this climate, he
intends to provide my calash with what he calls single, double and balance reef
eyelet holes, with reef-knittles (I know not what they are) knotted therein,
ready for use upon any emergency, together with certain things he calls sheets,
tacks, clew-garnets, clew-lines and reef-tackles running through a set of
small pullies, which, he says, will be of good use upon many occasions. --
Since he proposes this merely out of good will, I shall let him take hi^ head,
but were I to have my own way, I would only wish for a few stout corking pins,
and half a yard of ribbon, which I presume would be abundantly sufficient for
every purpose of safety. -- Mr. Clodhopper, after all his impertinence toward
the women and their fashions, has nevertheless shown some candor in mentioning
an article or two of needless extravagance amongst the men, which he thinks
ought to be subjected to an impost, annually. Why did he not point out several
others: the WATCH, for instance; why might it not pay half a dollar annually?
-- My husband, at a moderate calculation, finds there are one hundred and fifty
thousand gold and silver watches in the thirteen United States. Now, watches of
gold ought certainly to pay more than those of silver; but, to come below the
mark rather than go above it, let us suppose there are amongst us only one
hundred thousand silver watches: these, at half a dollar each, would raise the
very considerable sum of eighteen thousand seven hundred and fifty pounds,
currency of this state. This would be a very serious parcel of money, the
actual payment of which, too, would only fall upon such as are able to bear it;
for no one has a right to carry a watch (in my manner of thinking) who cannot
or will not pay three shillings and nine-pence annually for the privilege. That
a watch is for the most part an unnecessary article, I argue from hence: first,
that those persons seem fondest of owning watches that have the least to do;
and were it not for their favorite habit of squinting every two minutes at the
dial and indices, or twirling about the seal, usually appended, with their
fingers, would scarcely know how to employ their time: secondly, because the
scripture says, the two great lights in the firmament were made for signs; that
is, to let us know (among other uses) what time of day or night it is, without
the aid of artificial time-pieces.

IN the next place, is it at all becoming that ladies should pay tribute for
the use of a trifling ornament or two, and gentlemen be permitted to travel the
streets with a huge umbrella, of foreign fabrication, un^^xed? -- Let (...)
taxed immediately, say I. -- Again, Why should the men's large silver,
pinchbeck and plated shoe buckles, weighing sometimes a pound each, be passed
over in silence, when the use of a little gauze, or silk, or wire, is so
severely reprehended in us women? -- I shall now conclude this long answer to
Mr. Clodhopper, with humbly representing, that all those men should be severely
taxed who follow such effeminate trades and occupations as policy, justice, and
humanity ought long ago to have appropriated to the women. Does not common
reason teach, that the needle (sail needles only excepted) ought to be
inviolably the property of the female world! There sojourneth in our
neighborhood a man more than six feet in height, and of proportionable bulk
and corpulency, that singers no other instrument than the needle. Did not
Nature rather design this man for a shipwright or a ploughman? -- There is also
another, a hearty hale looking man, who entirely maintains himself by
Quilldriving, who, in the opinion of more than myself, might drive ox teams to
much better advantage, both to himself and the public. I cannot help saying,
now I am upon the subject, that I am sorry to see the pen so universally
slipped into the hands of men as it has. If girls possessed of no fortune were
properly instructed in the mere mechanical art of writing, and placed in those
offices where copying and transcribing is only necessary, it would turn out
thousands of rough looking fellows, able, though perhaps not willing, to serve
their country in some far more useful and manly way. -- In a word, true policy
ought long since to have corrected these ungenerous usurpations. Who, with the
least degree of patience, can behold the softer sex toiling from sunrise to
sunset in a corn or harvest field, and a huge lubberly fellow at the same time
enjoying himself under the shade of a painted cieling, or taken up with
employments that scarcely deserve the name of labor. These abuses and many
others ought to be reformed without delay; and, if the community wants money,
let it be raised and levied, not from an impost upon a few insignificant female
ornaments, as wife Mr. Clodhopper proposes, but, instead thereof, from those
idle persons who have shoved themselves into callings that are justly the
property of the more needy and friendless part of our sex.

PHILAD. July 17, 1782.
A SHORT REPLY TO THE ABOVE; BY MR. CLODHOPPER.
I WAS busily engaged in ploughing a piece of Indian corn when my son brought
to my hand the Newspaper containing an angry piece written against me by one
Priscilla Tripstreet. -- I do not snuffle over a school book, nor do I
altogether scratch and scrawl; though it is possible I may scribble, when I sit
down at my writing desk. I am no relentless hard hearted savage, neither do I
conceit myself so wonderfully wife as Madam Tripstreet supposes I do. -- I
thought townspeople had been better bred than to abuse us, simple country
folks, with such monstrous invectives and bitter, hand names.

HAD her answer to my silly performance (the first I ever sent to a printer)
affronted only myself, I should not have troubled the press with these few
lines, but all the people I have seen hereabouts declare, that if the
aforementioned Mrs. Tripstreet ever comes into or passes through our
neighborhood, her irreverent and degrading language, and so disrespectful to
the white linen bonnet, shall not pass unnoticed: I advise her, therefore, as
a friend, to take care how she comes near my plantation in particular, as my
wife and daughters are bitterly and violently exasperated against her, and if
ever they, or either of them, have it in their power, will most certainly
resent the affront, not indeed with the pen, (for that they know little about)
but, maybe, with the bridle reins, broom staff or churn stick. 1780.

A POLITICAL CATECHISM, FOR THOSE WHOM IT MAY SUIT.
QUEST. WHAT is your name?

ANSW. Titus Tax-grumbler.

Q. WHO gave you that name?

A. THE Assessor of our county.

Q. How long have you had that name?

A. EVER since I paid taxes with money of any real value.

Q. How much do you pay out of every hundred you are worth toward the general
tax!

A. TEN shillings and eight pence.

Q. Do you not labor under great hardships, in being thus taxed?

A. CERTAINLY I do.

Q. How do you spend your evenings?

A. CHIEFLY at the tavern, card, backgammon, or billiard table.

Q. WHAT are your outgoings there?

A. Two or three dollars a week in punch and other liquors, besides losses at
play, which I sometimes make up again.

Q. WHAT was you in the year seventeen hundred seventy five?

A. I WAS a violent Whig (as I thought) and roared dreadfully against the
British claim of binding America in all cases whatsoever.

Q. WHAT was the substance of your roarings?

A. I ROARED, that we must have a Congress, and engaged for myself that I would
support them with my life and fortune in a virtuous opposition to the unjust
claims of Great Britain, till those claims should be given up.

Q. HAVE these claims ever been given up in reality?

A. No, never,

Q. WERE you for the Declaration of Independence?

A. YES, heartily.

Q. DID you also engage to support the Congress in that Declaration, with your
life and fortune?

A. I DID.

Q. WHAT is your Life?

A. MY Life is to do mine honest endeavors to keep whole bones and a sound
skin.

Q. WHAT is your Fortune?

A. MY Fortune is, to prate and chatter a good deal about liberty, independence
and patriotism, but not to part with a single farthing, if I can help it, to
support any or either of them.

Q. IF this be the meaning of life and fortune, how is the war to be carried on
against our enemies?

A. In the same manner as we support the spiritual war against the world, the
flesh and the devil.

Q. How is that?

A. BY cursing them continually, and yet doing every thing they command us, or
want us to do.

Q. Is there no other way to carry on the war?

A. YES. verily.

Q. WHAT is that?

A. BY borrowing money from France, Spain and Holland, who are, individually,
under great and manifold obligations to Congress.

Q. WHAT is the meaning of the word Congress?

A. AN assembly of Alchymists, who possess the philosopher's stone, and can
transmute whatever they please into gold; yea, the whole Alleghany mountain, if
it so seems good unto them.

Q. Do you not secretly wish for old times again, even the times of obedience
to George?

A. Now and then my heart lusts a little that way.

Q. WHAT was the history of Lot's wife?

A. SHE looked back toward Sodom and became a pillar of salt.

Q. WHAT is the inward (...) or thing signified by salt?

A. SERVITUDE an dependence entailed upon our posterity.

PHILAD. Aug. 14, 1781.
NEW YEAR's VERSES FOR 1788.
[Supposed to be written by the Printer's lad, who supplies the customers with
his weekly paper.]

THOUGH past events are hourly read,
The various labors of the dead,
Invain their story we recall,
The rise of empires, or the fall;
Our modern men, a busy crew,
Must, in their turn, have something new.
BY moralists we have been told
That "TIME himself in time grows old;
" The seasons waste, the moons decay,
" The sun shines weaker every day,
" Justice is from the world withdrawn,
" Virtue and friendship almost gone,
" Religion fails (the clergy show)
" And we, alas, shall vanish too."
LET others such opinions hold,
Since grumbling has been always old;
All Nature must decay, it is true,
But Nature shall her face renew,
Her travels in a circle make,
Freeze but to thaw, sleep but to wake,
Die but to live, and live to die,
In summer smile, in autumn sigh,
Resume the garb that once she wore,
Repeat the words she said before
Bow down with age, or, fresh and gay,
Change only to prevent decay.
As up and down, with weary feet,
I travel each fatiguing street,
Meeting the frowns of party men,
Foes to the freedom of the pen,
And to your doors our sheets convey --
I sometimes think I hear you say,
"Ah, were it not for what he brings,
(This messenger of many things)
We should be in a sorry plight;
The wars of Europe out of sight,
No paragraphs of home affairs
To tell us how the fabric wears
Which Freedom built on Virtue's plan,
And Virtue only can maintain,"
BUT something father you pretend, --
From want of money, heaven defend!
Leave that to those who sleep in sheds,
Or on the pavement make their beds,
Who clean the streets, or carry news,
Repair old coats, or cobble shoes --
Of every ill with which we are cursed
This want of money is the worst:
This was the curse that fell on Cain,
The vengeance for a brother slain;
For this he quit his native sod,
Retreated to the land of Nod,
And, in the torture of despair,
Turned poet, pimp, or newsman there --
Divines have labored in the dark
To find the meaning of his mark:
How many idle things they wrote --
'Twas nothing but a ragged coat.
SHOULD money, now, be scarce with you,
With me, alas, it is nothing new
We news-boys always are in need,
So fate and nature have decreed;
And still your bounty shall implore
Till -- printing presses are no more! --
Did we not conjure up our strain
The year might come and go again,
Seasons advance and moons decay,
And life itself make haste away,
And news-boys only vex their brains
To have their labor for their pains --
Such usage I may find, it is true,
But then it would be -- something new!
A DISCOURSE ON ESQUIRES, WITH A SHORT NARRATIVE. By his honor the President of
the Debtor's Club.
THERE is nothing that, in my opinion, renders a man more truly little and
contemptible, or manifests a more limited understanding than the giving way to
a habit of peevish churlishness or moroseness of disposition, which, however
disgusting or injurious it may be to others, in its effects generally renders
the unhappy possessor of such a temper of mind, or customary ill habit, a
plague and a torment to himself.

AMONGST the lower classes of men, if an individual be of such a profession or
trade as compels him to depend upon the good will and favorable opinion of
others for a living, and happens to posses this morose turn of mind, he is
obliged out of a principle of policy to act the hypocrite, and either conceal
the venom that rankles in his heart, or discharge it upon such objects as are
incapable of revenging an insult or retorting an affront. I once had some
acquaintance with a mechanic, who not thinking it proper for his own interest
and safety to let this unfortunate and malevolent disposition of his be
generally known in his own street, used to give vent to it by now and then
locking up his wife, children, apprentice or dogs, and kicking or beating them
unmercifully whenever he happened to receive an affront abroad from a person
whom he dared not to treat with blows, abuse or scurrilous language.

ONE might, however, pardon a great deal in the inferior characters of mankind,
were their case and condition impartially considered. They labor under an
immense pressure of real necessities, and are constantly harrassed with great
and urgent difficulties in rubbing through the world. A first minister of state,
with all the business of a kingdom in his head, does not suffer more real
anxiety of mind than a poor tradesman with a wife and eight children.

BUT, of all insolence, that of men in high office is the most insufferable.
These, for the most part, though nothing more than servants of the community,
seem often to entertain a conceit that a high station, or an office of public
employment, places them beyond the obligations of common civility to a humble,
deserving, or perhaps an injured applicant, who, possibly, at the same time,
asks for nothing more than what is justly his own. The grandeur of appearance,
some remaining ideas of royalty, and the necessary consequence of these men,
gives them an imaginary patent to be morose and surly: It is certain that a
multiplicity of business, especially when of a difficult and intricate nature,
has a natural tendency to sour the temper, and this might serve as an excuse
for an ordinary fellow who had been raised to something great from a low and
piddling condition; but for a man of sense and ability to be constantly on the
fret, and bursting into expressions of rage at every interruption or difficulty
that may present itself, shows a little waspish mind indeed. The capacities of
some men are so very narrow, that it seems impossible for them to turn their
attention to more than one particular thing and subject in the course of a day,
a week, or a month; but men of this stamp are not fit for posts of consequence.
I know a cobbler that cannot make a shoe, a clergyman who can write nothing but
sermons, and a lawyer who can speak on no other subjects but such as are
commonly handled in courts of justice.

THE surliness of disposition, I have remarked upon above, strange as it may
seem, is more or less constantly attached to people in office, however
insignificant that office may be. When I walk the streets of this city, where,
by the by, I am a mere stranger, I can instantly (...) who are people in
authority, simply, by the assumed significant superiority of countenance,
displayed on these occasions by the great man. In some of these characters I
too often discern the soul of a mendicant, petitioning me for some token of
respect, which sometimes out of mere pity I condescend to bestow, if not to the
man, to the office and authority, however, that he has the honor to represent.
-- As to myself, when I was in office, which I do assure you, too, was a very
considerable one, no less than that of Letter-carrier to the Post Office, I do
not recollect that I ever took any insolent or forbidding airs upon myself, or
gave one applicant a single hard word, frown, or rough expression upon any
occasion, except once to a certain philosopher who had laid a deep scheme to
cheat me out of two pence. This condescension of mine, you will say, was owing
to a happy composure of mind and a certain natural evenness of temper and
disposition. -- Be it so -- and I sincerely wish all mankind were possessed of
a similar benevolent temper, whether natural or acquired.

SOME time since, in traveling through a distant part of the country, I was a
good deal diverted with a character of this sort, one who had been lately
created a justice of the peace, and being very ignorant of the world had no
less ideas of his own importance, power and dignity than I suppose Caesar,
Xerxes or Alexander had in their day of theirs.

THROUGH mere neglect I had left my home without procuring the proper pass or
permit for traveling any considerable distance, and, of consequence, had not
proceeded more than sixty or seventy miles on my journey, when I found my
progress interrupted by some countrymen, who informed me, for my comfort, I
must go to the 'squire along with them, and there give (...) account of myself
and my business in those parts. -- In these people's faces I immediately
discerned a consciousness of authority, and with as much certainty as if I had
been one of themselves. The law of the State had put them into power for a
moment; they were now all officers and great men, by virtue of having seized my
person; my carcass, such as it is, was in their power, and all the choice I had
left me wa^ to march quietly and slowly along with them, as guards, to the
aforesaid 'squire and Justice of the peace.

BY way of sudden digression, I would observe, that this visible consciousness
of superiority of condition, arising from accidental superior circumstances in
life, is not restrained to the human species. A stately coach horse, high fed,
duly currycombed, adorned from head to tail, with his spangled furniture, his
head full of the instructions of the groom, and perhaps having been used to be
taken more care of than his master's eldest son and heir, carries himself with
a much more stately demeanor, looks fiercer, and kicks at you with much more
virulence, contempt and ill nature than the humble, patient, abused,
hard-faring animal that travels with his squalid attire in a drayman's cart
through the dirt and mire of the ill-cleaned streets of this city -- But to
return -- (if I may use a pulpit expression, without profaning the phrase) --

As I traveled on with the before mentioned people, under whose direction I
now was, I was entertained by them, between whiles, with terrifying accounts of
the severity, sourness, and waspish disposition of the redoubtable Justice
Goslin (that was his name) before whom, and at whose seat of judgment, I, a
half-condemned and miserable culprit (in their opinions) was shortly to appear.
By their accounts, the sternness of 'squire Goslin's visage was such, and such
the terrifying keenness of his eye, that many people had been scared into
compunction and a confession of their guilt, and, more than that, had suffered
accordingly, who otherwise, and before a man of a common countenance, might, in
consequence of the depth of their plans, have defied the world, the devil, and
all his angels and ministers, to make any thing criminal appear against them.

AT last after many hours walking through very bad roads, and swimming several
rapid creeks, the fatal (...) appeared, in which it was my destiny to be called
to an account before this redoubtable personage. It was a wooden building, with
a white washed chimney top peeping out of the roof, and of such a structure
that it is possible the architect might have been inwardly composing
soliloquies on the bowl of a tobacco pipe at the time he was employed in
constructing it.

WHEN we had advanced to the door, which my conductors called the outer court,
Madam Goslin, the old 'squire's lady, as I afterward found her to be, made her
first appearance, and having looked at me with great eagerness, and seemingly
in anger, instantly retreated, calling out, there was a prisoner in the yard!

THIS personage was an elderly gentlewoman, near six feet in height, apparently
about sixty years of age, and the moment I saw her, I also saw she had
something official in her phiz. This is an officer in petticoats, said I, but
where is the officer in breeches!

ONE of the gu^rds then whispered me that it was not lawful for any prisoner to
mention the word petticoat, at least within hearing of the Esquire or his
family. -- The squire, however, was too great a man to appear at the door in
person, and therefore remained within till he was properly accoutred to receive
me. The guard had by this time ordered me into the kitchen, and while there I
heard a hoarse and angry voice call for Jacob's Law Dictionary, staff,
spectacles, and elbow chair. There were several servants in this homely
apartment, all of whom I could now and then observe peeping at me with a look
of commiseration, but at the same time there was something in the cast of their
eyes, that betokened them to be slaves of a man in power. But what do I talk?
In the face of the very house-dog there were some visible lineaments of
magistracy.

THE same voice which had called out so magisterially for Jacob's law
dictionary, the staff, spectacles and elbow chair, now bawled out a second
time, Let the prisoner be brought before me!

A NARROW door, which discovered the entrance into a dark passage, was then
thrown open, and I advanced along it with resignation, composure and respect
toward the great man in the chair, hoping at least to be invited to dine with
his honor after the elucidation of my innocence. But I was disappointed.
Inhospitality is a perquisite of magistrates and clergymen. -- Having
approached within two yards of him -- "Sirrah, said he, come not too near my
person, but stand off at a proper and respectful distance, that thou may be
(...) adjudged, and convicted for thy various and manifold misdemeanors!"

HEAVENS! thought I, does the man accuse me of crimes before he has heard a
word of my case, and at an instant when he knows as little of me as he does of
the Aga of the Janissaries at Constantinople!

BUT I will describe this man of consequence. -- He was a squat, big bellied,
chimney smoked figure, dressed in a long banyan and a buckskin jacket, much
soiled with snuff; and, according to my ideas, answered pretty nearly to the
descriptions of the little wooden household gods, of which so much is said in
the Roman authors. His wig, instead of the true magisterial gray, had now
become a dull yellow, by reason of its extreme age. His breeches were also of
leather dyed black, and might have once belonged to a far more respectable
animal. His hose -- but I could not see the hose, his legs being covered by a
pair of large boots, which it is by no means impossible might have served the
whole purpose of the hose, as is usual with the Knights of the Thimble.

AFTER the Esquire had examined and re-examined, questioned and
cross-questioned me, although I gave as clear and as satisfactory as account of
myself as it was possible for one in similar circumstances to give, I was
ordered in a tone of decisive authority to proceed on to the county jail with
the escort, as at least a person of dubious principles and character. Finding
it to no purpose to advance any thing more in my own behalf, to a person who
seemed resolved at any rate to make me feel the effects of his superior
consequence, I was then marched off, accompanied by the guard, to one of whom
the 'squire delivered a paper indorsed as follows: Mittymouse for P. Pennyless.

WHEN we arrived at the village, in which the county jail was, I had the good
fortune to fall in with a person of my acquaintance, a resident in that part of
the county, and formerly a member of our club, who rescued me from the fangs of
my paltry attendants, and thus enabled me to pursue my journey.

ON my return, some weeks after, being then mounted on a sorrel nag, I met the
good 'squire Goslin in the midst of a thick forest, traveling alone and on
foot. I immediately perceived a strange and surprising alteration in his whole
countenance and demeanor. The consequential grimace done away -- in short, he
looked altogether, and in every respect, simply -- like a man out of office;
but in the height of his confusion he made a shift to tell me, that he had been
robbed a little before, by a highwayman -- not only of the horse he had rode
on, but also of what money he had in his pocket; and concluded with meanly
requesting me, as he was no less than seven miles from home, to suffer him to
get up behind me. -- If you will condescend to ride upon the crupper, replied
I, you are heartily welcome, Mr. 'Squire, but I am sure a man of your
importance and knowledge in the law connot condescend so far as that.

He felt the force of the reply, and slunk away silent and ashamed into the
wood.

LET no man affront another wantonly, as he knows not how soon he may stand in
need of the assistance of the injured person; and let us remember that the
various inequalities of condition that chance and fortune has made amongst men,
ought by no means to make us forget that we are notwithstanding, at all times
and in all cases, under mutual obligations of good usage and civility.

PHILAD. Nov. 20, 1782.
ON CITY BURYING PLACES. A SPEECH, By a Member of the Lower House.
Simon Petrus, vir pius et probus
Qui, vivus, omnibus profuerat,
Sub dio sepeliri voluit,
Ne mortuus cuiquam noceret.
Epitaph. Monachi.
A certain man named Simon Peter
Honest by principle and nature,
Who, as he aimid while yet alive
To help his fellow men to thrive,
So in his will took special care
To give due orders to his heir
To place no piles of churchyard stones,
Or church floor paving over has bones;
Lest he who, living, was well bred
Should stink his friends to death -- when dead.
P. F.
IT is commonly and generally acknowledged, by all people of solid sense and
sober reflection, that when a man is once dead he is of no farther visible
importance or service in this world, at least worth mentioning or dwelling long
upon in the way of discourses. Were it necessary I might even produce
scriptural authority in support of this opinion. The Hebrew records tell us in
a certain place, that "a living dog is better than a deceased lion;" that is,
the most insignificant, worthless animal in a state of actual existence is far
superior to the noblest when in that state of torpid inactivity common called
(...). -- Since this is undeniably and universally true, how preposterous is it
to pay so much attention to the departed as is common and habitual among us. It
is indeed a piece of superstition of the most childish kind -- when a person
weeps a little over a deceased relative for two or three hours, or even for as
many days or weeks. I can readily forgive him, because it is the weakness of
human nature, and the effect of those passions that will not on all occasions
be immediately subjected to the control of sound reason; but when his regret
and affecttion carry him so far as to leave no scheme untried to procure his
deceased friend to be interred under a church floor, I am in a moment out of
all patience with him.

DEATH is but another name for insensibility, a change from what once had
perception to what can now no longer perceive. How therefore can the rains or
snows, the scorching sun, the blustering winds or the piercing frosts
materially affect that substance which is already out of the power of the
inclemencies of these hostile and vexatious elements! Does an inanimate corpse
require a shelter from the cold winds of the north in the winter, or from the
sultry gales of the south in the opposite season!

BUT the mischief of this practice does not altogether consist in its
irrationality. Its consequences are more serious than is commonly apprehended.
Forty or fifty corpses, and those perhaps none of the leanest neither,
putrefying at a little depth below the surface of the pavement of a church, let
me tell you, are seriour affairs. They have been the destruction, I make no
doubt, of many an honest man and well-meaning woman who perhaps went to church
or to the meeting with no other view than to pass an hour or two inoffensively,
if not to advantage; and were, in return, poisoned to death, or contracted some
fatal disorder from the scent of this worst of all carrion, the human body in a
state of putrofaction. -- This indecent and ridiculous custom of burying in
churches is no other than a relic of that Romish superstition which we, in
other particulars, pretend to hold in such ineffable contempt. Let it be
observed, however, that the practice of church-interment in Roman Catholic
countries is innocent in comparison to that in vogue with us. Amongst them,
when a fellow-citizen of note and consequence departs this life, as I have
observed in Portugal, and elsewhere, such honorable person (for it is well
known that few are suffered to be buried in cathedrals, except persons of rank
and fortune) is placed in the grave opened for the purpose and covered on all
sides with a sufficient quantity of strong lime: the dirt is then thrown upon
this layer of lime and carefully packed down with a stamper, so that it is
impossible that any pestilential vapors can arise from the deceased: that part
of the pavement which had been taken up is then replaced, and the very
interstices between the tiles new-plaistered. After some weeks, the powerful
operation of the lime leaves nothing but a dry skeleton, which is then
dislodged from this temporary place of rest, and the sculls, thigh-bones, etc.
sent away to the charnel house, or thrown into heaps in the fields, or placed
in walls that are in those countries often constructed out of such materials.

AND such is the force and power of custom, that the very people who, a few
weeks before, would have considered it as a very serious misfortune, and would
have wept and snivelled for years had not their relatives been interred in this
manner, can now look at the kindred bones without emotion and concern, when
they make a part of the monastery enclosure, or churchyard wall!

THERE is a practice very common in most, if not all the cities of these
states, of permitting large spaces for burying-grounds in the midst of them.
Hence, in those parts where curious strangers would be led to expect a neat
range of houses inhabited by wealthy merchants or industrious mechanics, their
eyes are offended with the melancholy view of a dreary uncomfortable solitude
incumbered with grave-stones, and swelling with the inhospitable turf of death.

HERE let me pause a moment, and ask, -- Are there not miseries enough in life,
are there not dreary prospects in abundance elsewhere, that our eyes must be
continually insulted and offended with the dismal view of the unsocial
habitations of the dead, and that too in the midst of our cities! But this yet
is not not the worst: These thousands of mouldering carcases, doubtless, hold a
real and fatal communication with those subterraneous springs and rivulets
which supply the wells of this town. -- Were I one whose ancestors had been
inhumed in these over-crowded squares, thus fatally allotted to the repose of
the departed, I am sure I should continually imagine, at least every time I
took a draught of pump-water, that I was swallowing down a part of the
substance, perhaps even the stamina vitoe of my grandfather, or possibly a
nearer relative -- Horrid idea -- through what new scenes and changes must we
pass!

FOR these and other reasons it were to be wished that the large parcels of
ground, now appropriated as burying places within the limits of this city, be
straitway, and forth with, taken from the dead, and appointed to the purposes
of the living -- But, you will say, are we to dig up the bones of our ancestors
that have been reposing in peace for so many age? -- I answer, verily,
brethren, by all means; for it does not appear to me but a dry skeleton or a
putrid mass may rest as safely and may sleep as sound a mile or two beyond the
Schuylkill as in the midst of this populous and beautiful city. As to the
Potters-field it is absurd to bury there, because, in a few years, it is more
than probable that place will be surrounded with buildings in the same manner
as those of which I make my complaint, are now.

AMERICA is a country, where (thanks be ^o the giver of all things) there is no
want of ground; why then should we incumber our cities with the bodies of the
departed! It would be well if we (...) the customs of the Chinese, and other
Asiatic nations in this particular, who invariably choose to inter their dead
far from towns, in remote and solitary places, in the caverns of the earth or
under the suspended cliffs of barren mountains. This also was the custom of
early antiquity, as appears from the book of Job, and numerous other passages
of sacred and profane history -- Give me a possession of a burying place (said
Abraham) that I may bury my dead out of my sight -- that is, at a distance from
the resort and abodes of living men.

BUT, some of the more ignorant and prejudiced among my hearers, will say, the
removal of so many thousands of dry and moist skeletons is a thing
unprecedented in civilized Christian countries. That I roundly deny: it is a
common practice in Europe; and that part of London now denominated St. Paul's
churchyard, and which is at present covered with elegant buildings, was once
literally a burying place, till necessity constrained the inhabitants to
disoblige the dead, the better to accommodate the living.

THERE is a strange and absurd idea current with some, that wherever there is a
place of Divine Worship, or, in other words, a church or meeting house, there
ought also to be a repository for dry bones; as if a mass of death and
corruption, matter reduced to its primitive insensibility, had any particular
or specific connection with that exalted principle of life, that sublime,
incomprehensible, and supremely intellectual being, to whom we approach, while
living, to pay our devotions.

YOU will tell me, the dead put us in mind of our mortality, and the wise will
lay it to heart -- But to be put in mind of death and sleep at the same time is
rather overdoing the matter; for I must confess that most of our pulpit orators
display so little of oratorial gesture in their persons, and so little of
energetic eloquence in their discourses, that between the dead men that
surround us in the adjacent graves, and the living man in the pulpit, I most
frequently return drowsy, discontented and melancholy from a place where I had
vainly hoped to have my spirits raised to enjoy a share of those agreeable,
those divine sensations, which never fail to exhilerate the soul, when the
rewards of virtue and the true felicity of a good life are set in a proper
point of view, and enforced with suitable gestures, and a glow of fine language
equal to the subject.

PHILAD. December. 4. 1782.
A JOURNEY FROM PHILADELPHIA TO NEW YORK, BY WAY OF BURLINGTON AND SOUTH-AMBOY.
BY THE LATE MR. ROBERT SLENDER.
-- These our Actors,
(As I foretell you) are all spirits, and
Shall vanish into air, into thin air,
Shakespeare.
PERSONS of the POEM.
WILLIAM SNIP -- a Philadelphia tailor. SAM -- -- his apprentice. Captain
O'KEEFE -- an Officer in the army. Monsieur TOUPEE -- a French barber. BILLY
O'BLUSTER -- an American seaman in the British service. EZZKIEL -- -- a Rhode
Island lawyer. BOB -- a Poet and Ballad-singer. ROBERT SLENDER -- stocking
weaver. SUSANNA SNIPINDAmdash;Snip's wife, CYNTHIA -- -- a young Milliner.
CANTO I. Characters of the TRAVELERS.
TORMENTED with critics, and pestered with care,
This life, I protest, is a tedious affair;
And, since I have got a few shillings to spare,
I Will even take a jaunt, for the sake of fresh air.
SINCE the day I returned to this vagabond shore
Where George and his cronies are masters no more,
And others are placed at the helm of affairs,
Relieving the weight of his majesty's cares;
Through many long years, it has still been my doom
To sit like a Mopus, confined to my loom, The stocking-loom was invented by a
young man who paid his addresses to a handsome stocking-knitter, and being
rejected, in revenge contrived this curious machine, which, it is said,
consists of no less than six thousand different pieces.

Who^^ damnable clatter so addles my brain,
That, say what they will, I am forced to complain.
OUR citizens think, when they sit themselves down
In the gardens that grow in the skirts of the town,
They think they have got in some rural retreat
Where the nymphs of the groves, and the singing birds meet,
When only a fence shuts them out from the street;
With the smoke of the city be-weeping their eyes
They sit in their boxes, and look very wise,
Take a sip of bad punch, or a glass of sour wine;
Conceiting their pleasures are equal to mine,
Who rove where I will, and wherever I roam,
In spite of new faces am always at home.
POOR Richard, the reel-man, had nothing to say;
He knew very well I would have my own way; --
When I said, "My dear Richard, I Am sick of the town,
"And Dutchmen that worry me, upstairs and down,
"A book of bad debts, and a score of bad smells,
"The yelping of dogs, and the chiming of bells;
"I am sick of the house, and the sight of small beer,
"And the loom may be going, though I am not here;
"I therefore shall leave you, and that, to be plain,
"'Till I feel in a humor to see you again." --
Poor Richard said nothing to all that I spoke,
But kindled his pipe, and redoubled his smoke.
YET it would have been nothing but friendship in him
To have said, -- "Robert Slender, it is only a whim; --
A trip to the Schuylkill, that nothing would cost.
Might answer your ends, and no time would be lost;
But if you are thinking to make a long stay,
Consider, good Robert, what people will say:
"His rent running on, and his loom standing still --
"The man will be ruined! -- he must, if he will --!
"If tradesmen will always be flaunting about,
"They may live to repent it -- before the year's out!"
As I never could relish to travel alone,
I looked round about, but could hit upon none
Whom Satan was tempting to leave their own houses
And travel to York with their daughters and spouses;
At last, by repeating my trouble and care,
And preaching, a month, on the sweets of fresh air,
And the curse, and the plague of remaining in town,
Where the heat was sufficient to melt a man down,
I got a small party to join in the trip;
And the first I shall mention was honest WILL. SNIP,
PHILADELPHIA the famous had owned to his birth,
The gravest of towns on the face of the earth;
Where saints of all orders their freedom may claim,
And poets, and painters, and girls of the game;
To him all its streets and its alleys were known,
But his travels had never exceeded the town: --
A tailor by trade (and a dabster was he
To make a silk knee-band set snug to the knee)
With his wife (and he says I may mention her name)
SUSANNA SNIPINDA; so charming a dame,
The sun had with pleasure looked down on her head,
So freckled was she, and her tresses so red.
To wait on the will of so handsome a lady
A youngster was ordered to hold himself ready,
A sly looking lad that was 'prentice to Snip,
And long had been learning to cabbage and clip; --
When Snip was in sight, he was mild as a lamb;
When absent, the devil could hardly rule SAM.
THE next I describe is one Captain O'KEEFE,
A killer of men, and a lover of beef:
With the heroes of old he had put in his claim,
And caught at their mantles, and rose into fame:
To the sound of a fife and the tune of no song
With his Andra Ferrara A large kind of sword, in use among the Italians.
he paddled along:
From his manners so rough, and his dealing in ruin,
The ladies would often miscall him Sir Bruin:
He was, among women, a man of great parts
And often had traveled the road to their hearts:
He had a sweet creature put under his care,
And he was so gallant, and she was so fair,
A Milliner's girl, with a bundle of lace,
Whom CYNTHIA Cynthia (...) also a poetical name for the Moon.
he called, from the shape of her face
At a ball or a frolic how glib his tongue ran,
He was, I may say, an unparalleled man,
Very apt to harangue on the hosts he has slain
Of people -- most surely created in vain --
Yet so kind to the sex of the feminine make
By his words he would venture to die for their sake,
Whence some have suspected that some he adored
Have more than made up for the wastes of his sword.
THE third in succession was Monsieur TOUPPEE,
A barber from Paris, of noble degree,
(For often when he takes up his razor, to strap it,
He tells his decent from the line of Hugh Capet; A popular French nobleman,
who, A. D. 987, usurped the crown of France, and was the first of a new race of
monarchs.

Though soft in the head, his discourses were long,
Now counting his honors, and now his l'argent.)
This barber, though willing for pleasure to stray,
Yet had some pomatum to sell by the way,
Perfumes, and fine powders, and essence of roses,
And liquids in vials, to cheer up our noses,
Some printed receipts, and some choice can-de-vie French brandy.

And such was the cargo of Monsieur Touppee.
A SINGER of ballads was next in our train,
Who long had been dealing in ballads invain:
He sometimes would sing in a musical tone,
And sometimes would scribble a song of his own;
Yet never was seen with his brethren to mix --
And laughed at your poets in coaches and six;
Who sing, like the birds, when the weather is fine;
Whose verses the ladies pronounce "so divine;"
Who ride with Augustus, wherever he goes,
And, meeting old Homer, would turn up the nose --
As to those, like himself, that were held to the ground,
He knew it was folly to feed them with sound --
He knew it was nonsense, to crown them with bays,
And was too much their friend to insult them with praise.
FOR a dozen long years he had lived by the mob;
On the word of a weaver I pitied poor BOB!
The Babes in the wood was his favorite song,
Or Barbara Allan, or Johnny Armstrong;
Yet so bad was his luck, or so poor was the trade,
And the Muses, he thought, were so sneakingly paid,
That if times didn't alter, and that very soon,
He said and he swore, he must sing his last tune.
SOME devil had put it, somehow, in his head
If he traveled through Jersey his fortune was made:
Some devil had told him (but whether in dreams
Or waking, I know not) some devil, it seems,
Had made him believe that the nymphs and the swains
Were fairly at war with their old fashioned strains,
That the tunes which the kirk or the curates had made
(And which always had ruined the balladman's trade)
were wholly disused, and that now was the time
For singers of catches and dealers in rhyme
To step from their stalls, where they long were disgraced,
Reform the old music, and fix a new taste.
A MATE of a schooner, bespattered with tar,
Who had lately come in from Savanna-la-Mar, A seaport town in the S. W.
quarter of Jamaica.

Was the next I prevailed on to step from his deck
And venture a jaunt, at the risque of his neck,
His name, I remember (unless I mistake)
Was BILLY O'BLUSTER, and much of a rake;
From morning till night he was still on the move,
Was always in taverns, or always in love:
His life was sustained by the virtues of grog,
And many long miles he had sailed by the log. --
Of battles and storms he had known a full share,
And his face, it was plain, was the worse for the wear;
To see a mean fellow, lord, how it would fret him;
And he hated a puppy, wherever he met him --
He was ready to bleed for the good of each STATE,
But since they had left the poor seamen to fate;
Themselves in the suds, and their fair ones in tears,
And many brave fellows detained in Algiers --!
Had spirit sufficient to make themselves free,
But not to be equal with Britain at sea! --
As this was the case -- he must give us the bag. A phrase common among seamen;
importing to abscond or slip out of the way.

Adhere to Old England, and sail with her flag.
AT cursing and swearing the played a good hand,
But never was easy a minute on land;
If the wind was ahead, or his Kitty untrue,
Why, patience was all the relief that he knew --
In the midst of misfortune he still was serene,
And Kitty, he said, was a feeble machine;
His heart was too hard for a lady to sigh,
Yet I gues'd him a rogue by the leer in his eye;
"The world (he would say) is a whimsical dance --
And reason had taught him to leave it to chance.
In chase of dame Fortune his prime he had passed,
And now was beginning to fail very fast,
But thought it was folly his heart to perplex,
As Fortune was just like the rest of her sex: --
Designing, and fickle, and taken with show,
Now fond of a monkey, and now of a beau: --
Yet, still, as the goddess was made up of whim,
He meant to pursue till she smiled upon him."
And though he was always deceived in the chase,
He smoothed up his whiskers, and wore a bold face.
ON horseback he first had attempted to go,
But the horse was no fool, and had lent him a throw:
He fell in a pond, and with not a dry rag on
The horse brought him back to the sign of the wagon,
Where three times he called for a dram of their best,
And three times the virtues of brandy confessed;
Then took some tobacco, and soberly said,
" De'il take such a vessel, she is all by the head,
" Broached to on a sudden, and then, d' ye see,
" Myself and the saddle went over the lee."
HIS head was so full of his ragged command
He could scarcely believe he was yet on dry land;
He would rise in his sleep; call the watch up at four,
Ask the man at the helm how Lewes-town bore;
Then, rubbing his eyes, bawl out, "By my soul,
" We are bearing right down on the Brandywine (...) in the Bay of Delaware.
shoal;
" The devil may trust to such pilots as you:
" We are close on Joe Flogger (...) in the Bay of Delaware.
-- the breakers -- halloo!"
THE sixth, and the last, that attended our Journey,
Was a man of the law, a Rhode Island attorney,
As cunning as Satan to argue or plead,
To break an entailment, or cancel a deed:
They called him EZEKIEL -- I cannot tell what --
Perhaps I forget it -- perhaps I do not --
He had once been a parson, and studied at Yale, Yale College in New Haven.

But took to the law, when his preaching grew stale;
In his system of thinking, not well understood,
I wandered about, like a man in a wood,
For he wickedly thought that religion and law
Were meant for the vulgar, to keep them in awe,
Ant often asserted, and proved it beside,
That pleading and preaching were nearly allied.
That the church and the bar, like a man and a maid,
Might, just when they pleased, lend each other their aid;
And brought some examples -- take one, if you please,
If they let me sell butter, why may not I sell cheese?"
CANTO II. The Chapter of DEBATES.
HAVING pitched don our party, the first thing, of course,
Was how we should travel, by water or horse?
" For my part, said Snip, I was always afraid
" Of sailors, and ships, and the shallopman's trade,
" And the reason thereof I will heartily tell,
" My grandmother, Mopsy, was drowned in a well;
" I therefore entreat you, and fervently pray
" We may go with the wagons the Burlington way."
" HOLD, puppy," the sailor replied in a fret,
" The devil's not ready at bait for you yet:
Even this way you know there is water to pass,
And twenty long miles we should sail with an ass;
But, gentlemen all, will you take my advice?
Here Is Albertson's Commanders of Philadelphia and New York p^ckets.
sloop; she is so new and so nice,
Her bottom so sleek, and her rigging so trim,
Not Bailey Commanders of Philadelphia and New York p^ckets.
or Hyde Commanders of Philadelphia and New York p^ckets.
can be mentioned with him;
In her cabin and steerage is plenty of room,
And how clever she looks with her flying-jib-boom,
A topsail aloft that will stand by the wind,
And a yard rigged athwart, for a squresail designed.
" ODDS fish! I would sooner some little delay
Then go, like a booby, the fresh water way,
Where your cream-colour'd captains never swear a bad [word
And sail without compass or quadrant on board,
See catfish and sturgeons, but never a whale,
Nor balance a mizen, to sight with the gale!
But Albertson goes by the rout of Cape May,
Dares tempests, and see the bold porpusses play;
Where the shore of the coast the proud ocean controuls
He travels, nor strikes on the Barnegat shoals."
" YOU tar-painted monster! (Snipinda rejoined)
Your jargon has almost disordered my mind:
If Snip should be drownded, and lost in the sea,
You never once think what a loss it would be!
I should then be a widow, dejected and sad,
And where should I find such another sweet lad!
And Captain O'Blunder Mr. Slender has left us holly in the dark in regard to
any knowledge of this person. We are apt to suspect he was some intimate friend
or acquaintance of Mr. Snip's, in Pennsylvania.
a letter has wrote,
As how, in three weeks, he will want a new coat.
SNIP'S heart, at her answer, seemed ready to break;
" Snipinda," said he, "I would live for your sake!
If I should be drownded, indeed, it is true,
It would be a bad bargain for Sam and for you!" --
FOR fear they should hear him, Sam whispered, In Troth
I would give my new hat that the devil had both.
" IF Snip should be drowned," said Captain O'Keefe,
" The widow, I promise, should soon have relief;
However, for aught that a soldier can see,
There are dozens as brisk at the needle as he,
And, though it were hard that the seafish should tear him,
I am fully convinced that his brethren can spare him;
" BUT were I to mention the very best way,
And the quickest to boot, (for they go in a day)
I would sleep overnight at the sign of the Queen, Indian Queen,

(Where the wine is so good, and the beds are so clean)
Then starting by daybreak, and riding in state,
Arriving in Bristol, we breakfast at eight,
Then push on our way with a rapid career,
With nothing to hinder, and nothing to fear,
Till Trenton, and Princeton, and Brunswick are passed,
And safe on the Hudson they drop us at last."
WHEN the captain had finished, the Frenchman arose,
And, shaking his noddle, cried out, Me dispose
To go by the way of the Burlington town,
Where one friseur does live, to whom I am known,
And some lady, that dress up their hair alamode,
At the sign of the crown, by the side of the road!
" HOLD, varlet, be still" -- said the Yankee attorney,
" Are you to decide on the rout of our journey?
These run-a-bout fellows, I cannot but hate 'em,
With their rings, and their ruffles, and rolls of pomatum:
But, gentlemen, (if I may venture to speak
In the style I was wont when I dabbled in Greek,
When I blew on my trumpet, and called up my pack,
Who thought I was holy because I was black;
Or, if you permit me to quote, in my way,
Some words that were frequent with parson Dushay)
" We all have in view to arrive at one town,
" Yet each one would find out a way of his own;
" What a pity it is that we cannot agree
" To march all together to heaven!" -- said he --
But, since I Am convinced that it cannot be so,
(For his journey resembles our journey below)
Like the sects in religion, I heartily pray
That each, as he pleases, may have his own way,
Let Snip, and the Captain, adventure by land,
The sailor by sea -- he can reef, steer, and hand;
Let the Frenchman setout in a flashy balloon,
He Will either be there, or be dead, very soon,
For my own part, I Am fond of the Burlington boat,
But still, if you're willing, I Will put it to vote,"
THE hint was sufficient -- he put it to vote,
And fate bade us go with the Burlington boat.
CANTO III. The PASSAGE to Burlington.
THE morning was fair, and the wind was at west,
The flood coming in, and the ladies were dressed;
At the sign of the Billet we all were to meet,
And Snip was the first that appeared in the street;
He strut^ed along with a mighty brisk air,
While Sam and Snipinda walked slow in the rear.
DRESSED, booted, and buttoned, and cutting a shine,
The Captain came next, with his loaded carbine,
Then handed on board the Milliner's maid;
The Barber and Ballad-man longer delayed,
For one had some ballads to sing and to play,
And one had some beards to take off by the way;
At last they arrived, and the sailor along,
But he was besotted -- his dram had been strong;
The lawyer Ezekiel was last to appear,
And Snip, on the quarter deck, welcomed him there.
BUT just as we all were prepared to embark,
The wind came ahead, and the weather looked dark;
So, while they were busy in hoisting the sails,
And trimming close aft, to contend with the gales,
Snip wished himself home, with his needle and sheers,
Then whispered the sailor, and told him his fears: --
Our seaman advised them to take in a reef,
As the vessel was light; but the skipper was deaf: --
" It Is not for myself I Am afraid," said the sailor,
But here is in your care an unfortunate tailor -- "
" PEACE, peace, cried the skipper, you salt water gander,
At sea you may talk, but here I Am the commander:
The worst of all puppies are puppies from sea; --
Your braces, and bowlines, are nothing to me;
Clue-garnets, and clue-lines, and courses, and stays --
I wish, from my heart, they were all in a blaze:
Your topmasts, and yards, and your studding sail booms
Are sweet pretty things -- for the handles of brooms;
For your back-stays and bob-stays I care not a pin,
Nor when you went out, or when you came in: --
Away to the cabin, and look out a seat,
And touch, at your peril, a halyard or sheet?" --
" YOU ague-cheek'd, cream-colour'd son of a bitch,
Who have sailed all your life on a fresh water ditch,
Whose mate (answered Billy) might be an old wise,
Who never have rattled a shroud in your life,
Whose guts would come up if a ship were in motion,
Whose barque never looked at the foam of the ocean,
Whose whole navigation must follow your nose,
Since that is her pilot wherever she goes; --
In sight of your dock you can talk very glib,
But I know what you are by the cut of your jibb. -- "
" HOLD your jaw, said the skipper, or else go ashore:
Here Is a cann of strong grog if you will say nothing more."
THEN a storm coming on, we stowed away snug,
And Snip in the cabin lay wrapped in a rugg:
Snipinda and Sam were inclining to sleep,
And the lawyer harangu'd on the risques of the deep,
O'Bluster was busy in looking for squalls,
And Cynthia discoursed upon dances and balls;
And, while the poor Ballad-man gave us a song,
The Frenchman complained that his stomach was wrong.
OUR travels, at length, in the boat being past,
And arriving at Burlington safely at last,
While the Quakers came down to welcome us there,
And the lads and the lasses, to laugh and to stare,
The first thing we did was to settle our fare;
To the sign of the Anchor we then were directed.
Where Captain O'Keefe a fine turkey dissected,
And Billy O'Bluster would give us a jog.
And pestered the ladies to taste of his grog:
"Without it (said Billy) I never can dine,
It Is better, by far, than your balderdash wine;
It braces the nerves, and it strengthens the brain; --
A world -- and no grog -- is a prison of pain,
And MAN, the most wretched of all that are found
To creep in the dust, or to move on the ground! --
It is, of all physic, the best I have seen
To keep out the cold, and to cut up the spleen:
Here, madam -- miss Cynthia -- it is good, you will confess:
Now, taste; or you will wish you had been in my mess --
With grog, I Am as great as a king on his throne,
The worst of all climates is -- where there is none;
New Holland, New Zealand -- these islands accursed --
Here Is a health to the man that invented it first?"
NEXT morning, by three, the wagon was geer'd --
The Frenchman and I were the first that appeared:
The tailor came next and demanded a dram,
Then wakened Snipinda, and cudgelled up Sam.
All drowsy and lazy, each had his complaint,
Snipinda declared she was ready to faint,
And Cynthia protested, she thought it not right
That people should thus be disturbed in the night:
The Frenchman was fretting, and cursing the moon
That always was rising or setting too soon;
The Lawyer was vexed to be rout'd before day,
And swore by his docket it was n't fair play;
The captain advanced with the milliner's maid,
"Take care of my bundle, dear captain" -- she said;
Then, full of importance, stepped out in the street,
Marched up to the wagon, and took the best seat:
The singer of ballads was last in advancing,
He had paid for his supper with singing and dancing.
CANTO IV. The Chapter of VEXATIONS and DISASTERS.
COOPED up in a wagon, the curtains let down,
At three, in the morning, we drove out of town;
A morning more dark I never saw in my life,
And the fog was so think -- it would cut with a knife;
In a morning like this were the Trojans undone,
When the Horse was admitted, that never could run: --
It was a fit season for murders and rapes,
For drunken adventures, and narrow escapes: --
So, with something to think of, and little to say,
The driver drove on, looking out for the day,
'Till we came to the brow of a damnable hill
Six miles on our way, when the cattle stood still;
"Are you sure you are right with the wagon?" cried Snip:
"I am" -- said the driver, and cracked with his whip;
Then away ran the horses, but took the wrong road,
And down went the wagon, with all its full load;
Down, deep in a valley -- rolled over and over,
Fell the flying machine, with its curtains and cover;
Where shattered and wounded, no glimpse, yet, of day,
A mass of perdition together we lay! --
THEN howlings were heard that would frighten a stone;
" Morbleu! cried the Frenchman, me quite be undone;
Mon poudre perdu, and my fine eau-de-vie;
Diable take him for one bon fricassee!"
NEXT rose from his ruins tall Captain O'Keefe,
The first thing he thought of was Cynthia's relief,
Then felt for his sword, but chanced on a cane,
And rushed at the stageman, to smite him in twain.
As fortune would have it, the stageman had fled,
And Snip the whole vengeance received on his head: --
The staff had been aimed with so hellish a sweep,
Poor Will. in a moment was all in a heap; --
We had room to suppose that his senses were hurt,
For, in spite of our bruises, he gave us some sport;
His head, he conceited, "was made of new cheese;"
And asked, "if the sexton would give up his fees?"
Then rolling away, on the side of the hill
With his head in a puddle he lay very still;
At last he bawled out -- "I am sick at my heart!
Come hither, Snipinda, and see me depart!
I am hasting away from the Delaware streams,
To make no more coats, and to sew no more seams,
A phantom I see, with a needle and sheers,
He clips at my coat, and he threatens my ears!
Snipinda, Snipinda! alas! I must leave her!
And all for the sake of this rascally weaver,
Who never would give me a moment of rest,
'Till I left my dear shop-board -- and thus am distressed!
But a time will arrive (if I deem not amiss)
When Robert, the weaver, shall suffer for this --
May his breeches, hereafter, be always too wide,
Or so narrow and scant, as to torture his hide;
May his jerken be ever too long or too short,
And the skirts of his tunic not two of a sort!
And, when from this horrible jaunt you return,
Tell Captain O'Blunder it is needless to mourn:
Ah, tell him I firmly believed I was going
Where people no longer are stitching or sewing,
Where white linen stockings will ever be clean,
And ge'mmen go dressed in your black bombazeen;
Where, with old continental our debts we can pay,
And the BUDS OF his BEAUTY -- no blossoms display!
Where with pretty brass thimbles the streets are all paved
And a remnant, at least, I am told, shall be saved;
Where cloth may be cabbag'd, and that without fear,
And journeymen work, thirteen months to the year!"
SNIPINDA was moved at so dismal a yell,
And groping about, to find where he fell,
She cried, "I have got a sad bruise on one hip,
But matters, I fear, are far worser with Snip."
"YES, yes, (answered Snip) I Am preparing to go!
Be speedy, Snipinda, my pulse is so low!" --
THEN she came where he lay, and took hold of his head
And whispered the captain -- "How much he has bled!"
(For she thought, as he lay with his nose in the puddle,
The water was blood that had flowed from his noddle)
"Ah, where is the Doctor, to give him a pill,
And where is the Lawyer to scribble his will?
Ezekiel, Ezekiel --! attend to his words; --
If I am his widow -- I will have my thirds!
But can you (and here she reclined on his breast)
And can you resolve to forsake me distressed!
Is it thus you would quit me, my love, and my joy,
And leave me alone with this cursed bad boy?
Is it thus you consign me to trouble and woe!
When you are departed -- ah, where shall I go!
I shall then be a widow -- forsaken and sad! --
And where shall I find such another sweet lad!
Who then will provide me a mint-water dram,
Gallant me to meeting, and who will flog Sam!"
BY this time the story was currently spread,
And most were convinced that the tailor was dead:
" The tailor is dead, beyond all relief;
" The tailor is dead -- cried Captain O'Keefe --
" To fetch up a fashion, or trump up a whim,
" Not a knight of the thimble was equal to him!"
" THE tailor is dead (the lawyer exclaimed)
God speed him! it is better to die than be maimed;
If life is a race, as the clergy pretend,
God help him! his racing is soon at an end --
His anchor is cast, and his canvas is furled!
A creature he was so attached to the world,
So eager for money! -- I say it with grief,
He hardly considered the fall of the leaf! --
He has come, we may say, to the end of his tether,
Where the maid and her master shall lay down together,
And where, I am certain, no children or wife
Shall make him uneasy -- the rest of his life!
For the place where he is gone, may we also prepare,
Where the mind, when admitted, shall rest from her care;
And fiddles -- the finest that ever were seen,
Shall play for his comfort a new Bonny Jean,"
" THE tailor is dead" -- said the company round --
The tailor is dead" -- the dark sorests resound --
" He is dead!" blubbered Sam, with a counterfeit sigh,
When the sailor bawled out -- "By the l -- d, it is a lie --
The fellow is only contriving some fun,
His blood is not cold, and his race is not run --:
If a vessel is crank, and exposes her keel,
Are we frightened to death at a parlement-heel?
If he chances to tumble, and bruises his pate,
Is that a good reason to quarrel with fate? --
His head, it is true, may have had a small shock:
I Will bind it: -- 't will only be strapping a block --
Here, give us a neckloth, a napkin, a clout;
Now heave up his noddle, and frap it about:
Success to the scull that can bear a good jirk --
They only have damaged his ginger-bread work: The carved work in general about
a ship is distinguished, among sailors, by this name.

The symptoms of life are exceedingly plain,
And Captain O'Blunder shall see him again!"
THE matter turned out as he said and he swore,
And the tailor threw open his peepers once more.
WHEN the morning appeared, it is horrid to tell
What mischiefs the most of our crew had befell,
A bundle lay here, and a budget lay there,
The Frenchman was cursing, and pulling his hair:
The horses were feeding about on the hill,
And Snip, with his head on a hassock, lay still:
The driver beseech'd us the fault to excuse,
"The night had been dark, and he lost both his shoes."
THEN, he raised up his wagon, rejoicing to find
That, by leaving the top, and the curtains behind,
We still might proceed; for the body was sound,
And the wheels, upon searching, uninjur'd all round.
BUT, dull and disheartened, we traveled along,
Our wagon dismantled, our harness all wrong.
The Lawyer was vexed that we went a snail's pace,
And Cynthia was sure she had ruined her lace;
While Billy O'Bluster, who Snip had restored,
Asserted that Snip was the Jonas on board,
And often declared to captain and me,
"He would give him a souse if he had him at sea."
SNIPINDA repented not yet of the trip;
She said, that she "only was sorry for Snip,
Whose virtues were many; and, if he were dead,
How Sam, the vile varlet, would have his own head"
AT length, we arrived, with the marks of our fall,
And halted to dine with the man at Read-Hall;
Honest David has always a dish of the best,
But Snipinda declared there was nothing well dressed;
"And, Snip, (she exclaimed) I would ask him to eat,
But I know that he never could relish roast meat:
I think it were better to get him some tea,
He always was fond of slop-dinners, like me,
But then -- he could never put up with Bohea,
La, Madam! is this the best tea that you keep? --
By the taste and the smell you have purchased it cheap:
No Hyson or Congo to give a sick stranger;
Poor Snip, I Am afear'd that his life is in danger!"
" LET him die and bed -- d (said the sailor) who is he
That his lean-looking paunch should be pampered with tea? --
If I had him at sea, with the rest of our crew,
I Would burn out his guts with a bowl of burgoo!"
"FROM what I can gather (cried Captain O'Keefe)
I am sure he might venture to taste of the beef;
Nay, I think I can guess from the cast of his eye,
That he longs to have hold of the baked mutton pie."
"WHY, captain (she cried) would you kill the poor sinner?
If he cannot have tea, he shall go without dinner.
AT length to the ferry we safely arrive --
The Frenchman was thankful he still was alive --
Poor Cynthia complained of abundance of harms,
The black on her face, and the blue on her arms --
Snipinda exclaimed that she wanted a patch
Since Snip, in his ravings, had give her a scratch --
The corpse of the captain was all in a wreck,
And the sailor was plagued with a kink in his neck,
He had a contusion, he said, on his thing,
And the balladman talked of a bruise on his eye,
Then told me, how much he was vexed at the heart
That no one regarded the song-singing art;
Yet the world was in love with his music (he said)
But never considered he lived by the trade;
That affronts and neglect were forever his lot,
And the lovers of music respected him -- not;
He had sung for the nymphs, and had sung for the swains,
But they were unwilling to purchase his strains,
When he put up his ballads, and called for his pay,
The swains turned about, and the nymphs ran away."
SO, I said what I could to encourage poor Bob,
And told him, "the world was no more than a mob;
That reptiles and wretches were all the world over,
The wonder was only there were not some more;
He should treat them alike if advanced to a crown,
Arrayed in a rag, or disguised in a gown;
That the time might arrive when we both should rejoice,
And weaving and singing be matters of choice;
That a poet of genius (all history shows)
Never wanted a puppy to bark at his muse;
And, though their productions were never twice read,
Yer Bavius and Mevius must also be fed."
THEN, looking across to the city of Perth,
I wonder (said he) if those people love mirth:
A steeple I see, and that is a bad sing,
As I was once informed by a cousin of mine;
For the parson holds none to be worthy of grace
If the gloom of December is not in their face;
And a church and a clerk are always together,
And a clerk and myself are not birds of one feather:
While I am reduced to depend upon alms
He thrives by retailing his old fashioned psalms;
And so, my dear comrades, I think it is invain
Any longer to meddle with ballads profane;
A double advantage these fellows possess,
In this wicked world they hold a good place,
And when they go hence, there is room to surmise
To the regions above, with their psalters, they rise,
While I, with a load of unsanctify'd rhyme,
In the service of Satan, am spending my time,
If here I Am rewarded with wailing and woe
When dead -- to perdition, no doubt, I shall go!"
WHEN supper was over we hurried to bed,
But I slept not a wink for a bruise on my head,
And the balladman's story was fresh in my brain,
For I was unhappy that he should complain.
THE waiter was ordered to rouse us at five --
When the sailor demanded, if Snip was alive?
"Alive, (answered Sam) and alive like to be;
He talked the whole night about flogging of me."
THEN the skipper came in, with a horrible noise,
Exclaiming, "The stage-boat is ready, my boys!
The wind is a head, and the ebb is a making,
The devil is in you not yet to be waking!" --
NOW, all were embarked, and the boat under sail
With a dark cloudy sky and a stiff blowing gale:
The wind at north-east made a hollow head sea,
Snip puk'd up his supper on Monsieur Toupee;
The Frenchman roared out -- "Diable! ah peste!
I wish he was dead, in his coffin at rest;
Good captain, tell me -- ah foutre, morbleu! --
If the wing should blow tempest, de vat vill vee do?"
POOR Cynthia was frightened, and pale in the face,
And begged of O'Keefe to take care of her lace;
"For if I should chance to be drownded (said she)
It would be a great loss to my madam and me!"
THE lawyer replied -- "Sweet creature, don't fear;
The skipper has been to New England, my dear,
He knows very well when to take in a reef:
Be quiet, and fit down by master O'Keefe," --
SNIP offered the skipper five dollars, and more,
And a pair of new trowsers, to run us on shore;
"And, if I was there (said the saint-hearted swain)
No devils, or weavers, should tempt me again!
On foot, it were better to trudge the world through,
No shirt to my back, and no soal to my shoe!
I had rather, by far, I had broken both legs,
Been hurried to jail, or been pelted with eggs!
Now comrades, and captains, I bid you-good night --
And you, Mr. Slender, our journey will write! --
A journey so recent -- on doubt -- will attract,
Related in meter, and founded on fact!" --
BUT the mate of the schooner did nothing but laugh,
And called him a puppy, and fresh water calf;
The worse was the weather, the bolder he grew,
And swore at the wind^ as he swore at his crew;
All, all but himself were inclining to fear --
But it is time that our actors should now disappear.
SNIPINDA was sorry she ever left home:
Ezekiel allowed it was madness to roam:
Toupee was alarmed at the break of the seas,
And you, Robert Slender, were not at your ease,
Yet could n't help laughing at Captain O'Keefe,
Who shunned little Cynthia -- and cast up his beef;
(And Bruin, she said, I am sick at my heart --!
Come hither -- and ^ug me -- before I depart!
What wretches ever trvell'd so rugged a rout!
Alas! I am sorry that ever we set out!
The world will so laugh at the wounds of our crew,
And Slender, the weaver, no mercy will show!)
And Sam, while he owned what a thief he had been,
O'Bluster made love to a bottle of gin;
Bob's ballads and poems lay scattered about,
Himself in the suds, and his music run out:
Snip lay with his head by the side of a pot,
In doubt if his soul was departing or not! --
Complaining, and spewing, and cursing his luck,
Then looked at Snipind^, and called her his duck.
AT length, to relieve us, when looked for the least,
The wind came about to the south of south-east;
The barque, that was buried in billows before,
Now scudded away for the Manhattan The ancient name of the Island on which the
city of New York stands.
shore,
And, gaining the port where we wished to arrive,
Was safe in the basin, precisely at five.
FINIS.

