THE WHOLE DUTY OF WOMAN, COMPRISED IN THE FOLLOWING SECTIONS; VIZ.

1 INTRODUCTION. 2 CURIOSITY. 3 REFLECTION. 4 VANITY. 5 KNOWLEDGE. 6
REPUTATION. 7 APPLAUSE. 8 CENSURE. 9 INSINUATION. 10 AFFECTATION. 11 MODESTY.
12 CHASTITY. 13 COMPLACENCE. 14 ACQUAINTANCE. 15 FRIENDSHIP. 16 ELEGANCE. 17
FRUGALITY. 18 EMPLOYMENT. 19 VIRGINITY. 20 MARRIAGE. 21 EDUCATION. 22
AUTHORITY. 23 WIDOWHOOD. 24 RELIGION.
BY A LADY.

Written at the Desire of a noble LORD.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN MARKET-STREET.
MDCCLXXXVIII.

TO THE READER.
IT is a reproach, too often justly, cast on writers of morality, that their
names prefixed in the title-pages of their books, are little else than a
confutation of the precepts that follow.

For as the morals of a divine, add no little weight to the doctrine he would
inculcate from the pulpit; so the life of a writer equally diminishes, or adds
to, the regard the public pay his works.

It is for this reason, as I should be sorry sentiments, whose truth and
importance I am so fully convinced of, should meet with less regard from a
knowledge of their author, that this little piece comes into the world without
a name, which on other occasions has been made so public.

I am sensible of the curiosity naturally arising in every reader, the desire
of knowing who, and what is the author: but for the above mentioned reason, not
to say there is a rudeness in striving to know what is industriously concealed,
I presume my denial of gratifying such curiosity, will not be imputed to my
having less ambition to appear, in the theory, a persuader of the fair sex to
virtue, than I have been, by example, to afford them dissuasives from vice.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE EARL of ****.
MY LORD,
IF it were possible to suspect your Lordship of ever speaking without design,
the compliment you once honored me with, might be reckoned, as most compliments
are, attended with no meaning: you was pleased to say, with an air of
pleasantry, you thought me the most proper person of my whole sex, to write the
Duty of a Woman; yet, as the occasion of your Lordship's making this remark was
a very particular one, it was impossible for me to construe it into mere
raillery. I am persuaded, if the world were sensible to whom I now address
myself, no other apology would be necessary for my presumption in the following
work than the knowledge of your private opinion, in my behalf; but as I have no
right, at this distance, to transgress so far on your Lordship's complacence, I
must submit to the censure of the few, who may make any discovery concerning
the author.

But if a perfect knowledge of the subject, be qualification sufficient to
entitle a writer to the exercise of the pen; I presume, as the knowledge dearly
bought by experience, is universally esteemed the most just, I have been
greatly, though not sufficiently, qualified to venture on compiling the Duty of
Woman.

A very material objection may, indeed, arise, in respect to my capacity in
conveying those sentiments, the accidents of my life have so deeply implanted.
I have, therefore, followed an inimitable original, in the style of the Sacred
Dictates of Wisdom, whose beauties, if I have justly, though faintly, copied, I
am satisfied, the whole Duty of Woman will need no other recommendation.

I am with all due respect, My LORD, Your LORDSHIP'S Most obedient, humble
Servant.

THE WHOLE DUTY OF WOMAN.
SECTION I. INTRODUCTION.
GIVE ear, O ye daughters of beauty, attend to the voice of your sister, for
experience has taught her wisdom, and length of days virtue and understanding.

My father was the brother of tenderness; my mother was the sister of love.

As the rose-bud opening to the morn, as the dew-drop on the lily, so was the
loveliness of my youth.

I awoke at the rising of the dawn; my salutation was that of joy and gladness.
Pleasure beckoned me forth, and I sported in the sunshine of plenty.

The hours were swift, and ran smiling away; but the lightness of my heart
outlived the going down of the sun.

The day departed with the mildest breeze, and the night but invited me to the
bed of repose.

My pillow was the softest down, my slumbers attended with golden dreams.

Thus one day passed away, and the morning of the next found me happy.

Happy are the hours of artless innocence! happy the days of virgin simplicity,
while the bosom is a stranger to deceit, and the heart inconscious of the
painful sigh!

O that I could overtake the wings of time! O that I could recall the pleasures
of my youth! for the days of my womanhood have been days of many sorrows; the
tears of misfortune have bedimmed the luster of mine eye; the lily is fallen,
and the rose-bud is blown and withered on my cheek.

For I listened to the voice of adulation, and her bewitching blandishments
allured me to destruction.

The silver tongue of flattery is hollow, and laden with guile; the manna that
drops from her lips, is corrosive poison to the heart.

Hear then, O daughter of Britain. O fairest of the fair among women! let my
precepts be treasured in thy bosom, and walk in the ways of my counsel; so
shall thou shun the thorn of reproach, more keen than the bite of the asp, more
venomous than the sting of the scorpion.

The hand of scorn shall point its finger from thee; the tear of misery shall
never bedew thy cheek; thy life shall be replete with good things, and peace
and honor shall satisfy thy soul.

SECTION II. CURIOSITY.
AS the first of all evils, as the source of calamity, as the beginning of
pain, avoid, O daughter of Eve, the bewitching charm of curiosity.

Seek not to know what is improper for thee; thirst not after prohibited
knowledge; for happier is she who but knows a little, than she who is
acquainted with too much.

Remember thy mother, the daughter of heaven, arrayed in the whitest robes of
innocence; forget not the fatal consequence of her disobedience.

How much happier in the bowers of paradise, feasting on the luscious grape of
gladness, than wandering in the wilderness of care to chew the bitter weed of
repentance!

Be thou contented, therefore, with knowledge fitting for thee; for in the
acquaintance of many things, lies not wisdom; but in the knowledge of that
which is meet.

Let the threshold of thy neighbor's door secure her family, let her window
tempt not thine eye to see, nor the open casement thine ear to hear the secrets
of her house.

The prying eye is a foe to itself, and the listening ear will hear itself
slandered.

Art thou inquisitive after deeds of scandal and reproof, enquire of thyself,
and thou will find employment within.

Art thou a virgin, does the bloom of health grow lively on thy cheek, study
not to know the ways of man.

As the way of a serpent in the grass, or a traveller over the waste, in a dark
night, so the ways of man are dangerous and hard to find out.

Thy ignorance of his cunning may lay thee open to his deceit; but the
knowledge thereof must be the consequence of thy being deceived.

Learn therefore, O woman, what thou should know before thou seek farther
knowledge.

SECTION III. REFLECTION.
AS the way of a man who walks, yet knows not whither he is going, so is
the discourse of one who weighs not his words.

As the chattering daw, that prateth without understanding; as the young
magpie, with its double tongue, talks by rote; as the monkey jabbers, as the
green parrot squalls without ceasing, so is a woman, who regards not her
speech.

Before thou openest thy lips to speak, reflect whether thou know the truth
of what thou art about to say, or understandest the matter thereof.

Else thou may be detected in a falsehood, and thy assertions may be an
impeachment to thy understanding.

So shall the stranger, and the acquaintance, repeat thy words to thy
disadvantage; the sincere will despise thee, and the wiser than thou, laugh thy
folly to scorn.

Let thy promises be few, and such as thou can perform; lest thou art reduced
to break thy word, and it be hereafter reckoned of no account.

Be not less circumspect over thy actions; for the sayings of thy mouth may be
forgotten; but the work of thine hands will make a deeper impression, and may
be lasting causes of remorse.

Consider what thou art about to do, before thou beginnest thy work; lest thou
labor in vain, and the fruit of thy endeavors turn to no end.

Weigh thy strength and thy design; lest thou faint under thy burden and fall
short of the recompense of thy toil.

Would thou attempt to reach up to the moon, the nurse would laugh and the
young child hold thee in derision; yet as well may thou undertake a work thou
can not perform.

Examine also the price of thy labor, the consequence of thy deeds; lest, when
thou have finished thy task, thou art dissatisfied with thy wages.

For the consequence of precipitancy is repentance at leisure.

The price of folly is reproach, and the wages of sin is death.

SECTION IV. VANITY.
THOU art fair as the snow-drop of the spring, the rose of June blows on thy
damask cheek, thine eye out-sparkles the blue luster of the sapphire, thou art
stately as the tall firtree, and thy presence is commanding as majesty itself.

The east and the west pour forth their treasures to deck thee; the sea and
land give up the pearl and the precious stone; thy array is the finest silk;
the diamond is a star on thy bosom, and the ruby and the emerald are interwoven
with the hair on thy temples.

Therefore vanity has lifted thee up, thou flutterest on the wings of thine
own conceit, thou despisest even the ground where the vulgar tread, thy chariot
is drawn by white horses, and thy feet are hardly conscious of their own burden.

O deluded woman! the butterfly and the gaudy tulip are emblems of thy fancied
importance.

They are decked in the pride of summer, they enjoy the sunshine a while, but
shortly fade and attract the eye no more.

Is thy breath perfume, is thy taste rich? the parti-colored carnation and the
speckled rose are sweet, and the juice of the ripe grape as delicious as thy
taste.

But the rude hand of the spoiler comes, both in the opening of the bud and at
the fullness of the bloom, and the untimely frost turns sour the rich flavor of
the vine.

So misfortune may crop thy imaginary greatness, in the bud of thy joys, or in
the full bloom of thy splendour; and the clay-cold hand of disease convert thy
exquisite taste to undistinguishing bitterness.

Does gold pamper thee with dainties, does the smiling aspect of full-fed
plenty delight thee:

Be not exalted beyond measure, for thou know not how soon they may forsake
thee: when starving poverty shall provide scraps for thy table, and meagre
want, with famine on her hollow cheek, shall stare thee in the face.

Art thou quick of invention, is thy mind stored with the talents of wit and
understanding, does the power of elocution sit on thy tongue, do thy periods
flow like honey from thy lips; be not vainglorious of these, nor boast them in
thy possession.

For the fool will take a pleasure to peck at thee; thy words will be sifted,
and thy speeches examined with the nicest severity.

The malicious and the ignorant will catch at the opening of thy mouth; neither
shall the justest of thy sayings escape their criticism.

Nay, they will condemn thee unheard, yea, censure when thou speak not.

If thou say thou will act wisely and eschew evil, and the frailties of
human nature should overcome thee to do ill, they will then point at thee and
cry out, This is the wise woman who builds her house on a rock, who is
sagacious to do good; let us profit by her example, let us take pattern by her
wondrous wisdom.

Avoid therefore, vainglory and self-conceit; for she who lifts herself up,
will others take a pride to pull down; and, if the day of calamity should come,
her fall will be their triumph and their rejoicing.

But the humble shall be honored in prosperity; they shall find favor in
adversity; and compassion shall invite them to her home, in the day of trouble
and distress.

SECTION V. KNOWLEDGE.
WHO is she that travelleth from the farthest parts of the earth, who crosses
the mighty waters, to find out the ways of the children of men?

Who changes her habitation daily, who dwells in the fields and in the
populous cities, beneath the straw-crowned cottage, and the golden roofs of the
king's palaces?

Fatigue has wrinkled her forehead, her head is silvered over with age; yet
she walks upright, for experience is her support and her strength.

Her name is Knowledge: she is the daughter of Enquiry, and the mother of many
children.

For pleasure and profit, and experience, and sorrow and pain are the fruit of
her womb.

Would thou, O fair one, be the guest of her house, be satisfied with what
her table affords.

For pleasure stands at the door and inviteth thee with smiles, and profit
spreads the best on the board; but if thou desire what she hides from
thee, and pryest into the secrets of her closet, experience will embitter thy
drink, and sorrow, like a churl, make thy cheer and thy welcome, naught.

It is not for thee, O woman, to undergo the perils of the deep, to dig in the
hollow mines of the earth, to trace the dark springs of science, or to number
the thick stars of the heavens.

Let the kingdom rule itself, let the wisemen and the counselors enact laws,
and correct them; the policy of government is a hidden thing, like a well of
water in the bottom of a deep pit.

Thy kingdom is thine own house, and thy government, the care of thy family.

Let the laws of thy condition be thy study, and learn only to govern thyself
and thy dependants.

SECTION VI. REPUTATION.
BRIGHTER than polished silver, more valuable than Peruvian ore, more precious
than the pearl in the sea, than the diamond in the bowels of the earth, or all
the shining treasures of the mines of Potosi, is reputation to a woman.

As the time that is past is gone for ever; as the word that escapes thy lips,
returns not again; so is the good-name of a woman, when it goes from her.

Art thou beautiful as the morning, art thou comely as the evening, do
strangers speak thy praise, and thy acquaintance pour their encomiums on thee;
yet thy way is a narrow path, from which, if thou strayest, thou will never
more find it out, thy praises will be turned into revilings, and thy encomiums
into keen reproach.

Art thou placed on an eminence, among the daughters of women, do thou sit at
the head of the board, do crowds of admirers bow down before thee with
reverence; yet thou sit on a slender pinnacle, from which the sudden breath
of indiscretion, or the strong blast of envy, may cast thee down; so shall thy
fall be that of a falling meteor: thou shall be despised in the dust, and gazed
at on high, no more.

Would thou preserve this jewel of an high price; let not the boaster, nor
the professed betrayer, come near thine house.

Be not frequent in the walks, nor in the thronged parts of the city, nor in
the high places of the theater.

Let not thy foot often leap at the sound of music, lest in thy dancing-days,
thy reputation forsake thee.

Encourage not a train of admirers, lest their envy and jealousy of each other,
cast an odium on thy conduct.

As the way of a man on the ridge of an house, so is the fame of a woman among
a crowd of fools; but the coquet is light of heart, and danceth along; no
wonder, therefore, she falls.

Yet affect not to despise temptation; for the prude loses her good-name by
the means she takes to preserve it.

As a man, on the brow of a precipice, trembles at the depth below, and,
fearing to fall, his head swimmeth, and he is gone; so is a woman who boasts
her reputation.

Keep the appearance of evil at a distance; for the show of a crime may be as
fatal to thy reputation, as the reality of a transgression.

Sport not with thy good name, nor run it heedlessly into danger; for the
consciousness of thine own innocence, will not protect thee from reproach.

SECTION VII. APPLAUSE.
APPLAUD not on slight acquaintance; be not over hasty in thy commendations.

For the deed that speaks for thy sister, may not be owing to a deserving
motive; nor the words of her mouth proceeding from the sincerity of her heart.

By giving applause rashly, thou may be reduced to recall thy opinion; and
thy praises hereafter, will not avail thy deserving friend.

Commend not thyself with thy lips; but let thine actions speak in thy behalf.

Yet the merit of thy deeds may be lost in ostentation, and she that seeks
praise, will be disappointed therein.

Also, if thou disclaimest the encomiums to which thou art fully entitled, they
shall be justly taken from thee again.

For she who affects to despise commendation, shall not enjoy the privilege
thereof.

Be not exalted, though all men commend thee; for thou know not but the
breath of a whisper may convert their eulogies into revilings.

Give not applause to another, because she bestows it on thee; lest the world
detect thy motive, and thy words be held in derision.

Do thou commend another for virtues more conspicuous in thyself, take heed
lest thou art accounted the trumpeter of thine own deservings.

Be not too cold in the general applause, yet utter not thy praise without due
deliberation.

Praise not a woman to the skies; for her most consummate perfection, is
inferior to the angels.

Thy friend will not thank thee for the extravagance of thy praise; for
undeserved commendation is the severest satire.

Rather at all times approve than applaud; for the child, and the
undistinguishing fool, clappeth his hand in ecstasy; but the judgment of the
understanding examineth and approves.

SECTION VIII. CENSURE.
BE not fond of reproving, for she who assumeth the place of a censor, will be
esteemed arrogant; and she who reproves others, must look well to her own
conduct.

For the ill example of the reprover is a scandal to her office, as the
malconduct of the preceptor brings his precepts into contempt.

Beware how thou censurest, lest in like manner thou art censured.

Trust not to the appearance of a crime, nor to the breath of report.

For as the specious show of virtue may be hypocrisy, so the appearance of ill
may be sometimes deceit.

The news of the day may awaken suspicion, but justice condemns not without
strict examination.

The report that prevails, may be the workings of envy; and envy is
uncharitable and delights in false accusations.

Prejudice is unjust; for the look is not the true index of the mind; neither
does a day, or a week, discover the behavior of a stranger.

Be tender of the good name of others, so may thou find the same tenderness
toward thine own indiscretions.

If thou art forced to condemn, condemn with gentleness and compassion; so
shall thy praises last longer than thy beauty, and thy reputation, from the
ornament of thy youth, become the comfort of thy age.

SECTION IX. INSINUATION.
LET not thy praises savor of irony; nor thy compassion be mixed with evil
reflections.

Insinuation is sly; the breath of her mouth is subtle, and penetrateth
unobserved into the heart of her that hears.

It is sharp as the east wind; it blasteth wherever it blows.

It is poisonous as the breath of the slow-worm; it is venomous as the lick of
the young adder.

She affects to pity the backslidings of her friend; yet she takes an
opportunity to spread the knowledge of them abroad.

She speaks in all gentleness of her neighbor, and concludes wishing things
were otherwise with her.

She cries, it is hard to judge; but says, can every body be deceived?

The glance of her eye conveyeth evil thoughts, and the motion of her head
gives room for the apprehension of ill.

If she points with her finger, yet says nothing; her looks are more
significant than the strongest phrase of speech.

Her silence is more destructive than the clamours of the loudest calumny.

Insinuation is barbarous and full of guile, she puts on the face of
friendship to abuse.

She smileth while she stabbeth to the heart; she wounds where she pretends
love.

Be open in thy censure, or censure not; for he who deserves not reproof,
should be free from the breath of suspicion.

SECTION X. AFFECTATION.
WHO is she that comes tripping with nice, mincing steps; whose tongue lispeth
sweetness, and whose form is not her own;

She has put off herself, and decked her with the borrowed plumes of others,
by whom she is despised.

She affects melody of voice, and harmony of speech, and wisdom, and
importance, and dignity of deportment.

Her dress is antic and singular, her attire is gaudy or rich to excess.

She has forgotten how to tread; she neither danceth nor walks along.

She distorteth her features to appear lovely, she laugheth at nothing to show
the beauty of her teeth.

She washes her cheeks till the native bloom departs away; then painteth
with the artificial rose.

She places herself in the midst of an assembly; she delights to dance
alone, she sits in the foremost seat of the theater.

She is pleased to hear herself speak; she listneth not to the voice of another.

She breaks in upon the discourse of her sister, and finisheth the sentence
her neighbor has begun.

She takes on her to instruct the wiser than herself, and to teach what she
understands not.

Do thou laugh at her folly, she will pity thy ignorance, and go on in her
own way.

She is incorrigible till she sees herself in the form of another; yet even
that may not make her sensible of her error.

Beware, O daughter of beauty, lest thou art misled by affectation; for thou will be neglected by others, till by reflection thou discoverest the cause, and
art led to despise thyself.

SECTION XI. MODESTY.
BEHOLD the daughter of innocence! how beautiful is the mildness of her
countenance! how lovely is the diffidence of her looks!

Her cheek is dyed with the deep crimson of the rose; her eye is placid and
serene, and the gentleness of her speech is as the melting softness of the
flute.

Her smiles are as the enlivening rays of the sun; the beauty of her presence
as the silver light of the moon.

Her attire is simple; her feet tread with caution, and she fears to give
offense.

The young and the old are enamoured with her sweetness; she carries her own
commendation.

She speaks not the first in the conversation of women, neither is her tongue
heard above her companions.

She turns not her head to gaze after the steps of men; she enquireth not of
them whither they are going.

She gives not her opinion unasked, nor stops her ears to that of another

She frequenteth not the public haunts of men, she enquireth not after the
knowledge improper for her condition.

So becoming is the behavior of modesty, so lovely among the daughters of
women!

Is there who has forgotten to blush, who plays with the wanton glances of
her eyes, who replenisheth the cup when the toast goes round, and despises the
meekness of her sister.

Shame shall overtake her in the prime of her days, and the years of her
widowhood shall be infamous as they are many.

SECTION XII. CHASTITY.
WOULD thou be honored of thy Creator, would thou be happy in thyself,
would thou be lovely in the eye of man; without chastity thou will be neither
of these

For its loss is the loss of peace and satisfaction to thy soul; and the
consequences too often the worst that can befall thee.

He that robbed thee of it, will despise thee, and expose thy want; and she
that has in secret forfeited her own, will hold thee in much contempt.

Behold the house of incontinence; the mark of infamy is indelibly stamped on
the threshold, and on the posts of the door.

At the window sits misfortune forcing a smile; and within are remorse and
disease, and irretrievable misery.

The children of her house are the curse of their mothers, and their lives the
growing monuments of their infamy.

Art thou chaste, boast not therefore; the security of thy possession is as
brittle glass, that may be accident fall and be broken.

Be on thy guard, for thou know not the weakness of thy nature, nor the
power of temptation.

Is there a man with whom thou delightest to talk; let not thine ear be too
familiar with his discourse.

Does he teach philosophy, and entertain thee with the researches of knowledge;
yet beware lest he instruct thee too far.

Is he accounted modest, and sober, and virtuous; depend not on the truth of
these pretenses.

Does he promise thee fair, does he protest in the sincerity of his heart he
means no harm, yet believe him not, neither put confidence in his discretion.

Does he only ask a kiss of thy cheek, indulge not his frequent request; lest
the sweetness thereof inflame him to desire, and the poison of his lips descend
into thine own bosom.

Taste not the wine, when the bowl goes a second time round: join not often
with him in the sprightly dance; nor suffer opportunity to overtake thee.

By avoiding temptation thou may preserve thy chastity; but man is the
serpent of deceit, and woman is the daughter of Eve.

SECTION XIII. COMPLACENCE.
TIMOROUS as the tender fawn, pliant as the bending osier, gentle as the young
turtle, and assable as courtesy itself, is the daughter of complacence.

She makes friends wherever she goes, she is loved by all the children of men.

Her behavior wins the stranger, and endeareth her to those of her
acquaintance.

Do her steps lead to the house of mourning, she comes not in dancing; neither
does the lightness of her heart disgust the wedded to call unity.

She weepeth with those that weep, she laugheth with those who laugh; she
sings in the house of gladness, and rejoiceth in the joy of her neighbors.

She gives not her advice to the stranger, nor opens her lips among a crowd
of visitors, till after the rest have spoken.

She fashioneth her behavior to the model of others; wherefore, all must
approve the resemblance of themselves.

In the strait betwixt two, she is silent; she divulgeth not herself, that
either may know to condemn or approve.

Art thou deceived, she will mildly endeavor to set thee right; but if thou
art froward to be instructed, she will permit thee to enjoy thy opinion
undisturbed: so shall thou praise her when thou find out thy error, for
having so modestly left thee in thy deception.

She is the sister of moderation; she denies none the privilege of thinking
for themselves.

She urges not belief where a doubt is remaining, nor denies a scruple the
power of conviction.

Do thou admire her steps, would thou reap the advantages thereof; yet be
cautious lest she lead thee astray.

Follow not a multitude till they lead thee into evil, nor fear to draw back
when thy sister goes wrong, though she be offended at thy singularity.

Be not over courteous, lest thy modesty suffer; fear not being accounted
unfashionably virtuous, lest thou afterward reproach thyself.

Better is the reviling of the world to the innocent, than the reflections of
self-reproach to the guilty.

Complacence will endear thee to the world, but virtue to thyself and thy
Creator.

The love of many brings gladness to the heart; but happiness is only the
companion of the upright.

SECTION XIV. ACQUAINTANCE.
WHO is she that bids thee good morrow, that kisseth thy cheek at parting,
and gives thee an invitation to her house?

She is an acquaintance, believe her not; go thou to her home, tarry a while
and thou will find her out.

The coldness of her respect will appear in thy welcome, and the distance of
her behavior will pall thine entertainment.

Does she promise thee much in thy prosperity, and wish an opportunity to
oblige thee; thou shall see her avoid thee in the day of thy trouble, her door
will be shut against thee, and thy name estranged from her knowledge.

Does she sympathize in thy misfortune, does she tell her sorrow for thy
present distress; yet her cheek is dry, and she forgets thee the moment she
turns from thee.

Does she rejoice to see thee, yet her eye sparkleth not; is she sorry for thy
departure, yet her countenance alters not.

Good offices are familiar to her tongue, but if thou claimest her promises,
she is astonished and knows not what thou meanest.

She calls herself thy friend to thy face, and owneth to a third person, she
has some knowledge of thee.

Trust her not with thy dealings, let her have no knowledge of thy ways; for
she is the spreader of scandal, and enquireth after news to divulge it.

A void also the number of her sisters, nor let them find out the way of thine
house.

SECTION XV. FRIENDSHIP.
AS the tenderness of a mother in the hour of thy distress, as the love of a
father in the day of thy trouble, so is the help of a friend in the time of
need.

Do thou think thou have many friends, do they profess much love, are they
lavish in their promises of kindness; be not credulous, nor rely on the form of
set speeches.

The breath of the mouth is cheap and costeth nothing, and the tongue moves
slippery within, but the heart is often unacquainted therewith.

Have thou tried their sincerity, have thou experienced the veracity of their
promises, have they served thee when thou stoodst in need of their assistance;
yet, for all this, beware how far thou confidest in them.

Try them once and again, and at the third time they may cast thee off, and say
thou troublest them too often.

Have thou a friend, put it not in her power to be much thine enemy, if thou
can avoid the necessity thereof; for thou know not how slight an occasion
may turn her heart against thee.

Thy bent of inclination, thy agreeable accomplishments, may excite many to a
show of amity, for a while; but friendship dwells not in outward appearance.

Thou art not indebted for their kindness, the favor thou receivest is but the
price of thy talents, and their own interest the motive of their good will
toward thee.

There are those who make friendships on purpose to betray; who confer
obligations, that they may exact obedience.

Who think they have a right to command thee; thy life and thy reputation, they
will boast as the effect of their tenderness, and thy success as their care
toward thee.

Have no confidence in these; neither desire to be entrusted with the privacies
of their actions.

Who gives thee a secret and enjoineth thy silence, she does it that she may
have the pleasure of telling it herself.

Yet let not thy distrust stir up ingratitude. The favor of the day deserves
the thanks thereof, till the injury of to morrow cancels the obligation.

Is there a friend indeed, thou will know her when thy acquaintance forsake
thee: will she defend thy innocence when all men accuse thee falsely, will she
bear reproach unjustly, for thy sake? take her to thy bosom; she is a jewel of
an high price, a diamond of inestimable value.

SECTION XVI. ELEGANCE.
AS the diamond is an ornament to beauty, so is elegance, to the behavior of a
woman.

Art thou modest, art thou chaste, is thy reputation unsullied, is thy fame
spotless as the new-fallen snow; yet elegance will make thee still more worthy
admiration.

As the crow or the raven, which devour carrion on the hills of the north,
differ from the singing bird of the Canaries, so differs the elegant woman
from her who is wanting therein.

As the elegance of dress adds grace to beauty itself, so delicacy in behavior
is the ornament of the most beautiful mind.

Discover not the knowledge of things, it is not expected thou should
understand; for as the experience of a matron ill becomes the lips of a
virgin, so a pretended ignorance is often better than a show of real knowledge.

Undistinguishing levity gives hourly offense, and the form of solemnity
becomes unseemly when it lasts too long.

Is there a word that will offend, is there a tale thy companion chooses not to
hear; avoid it in thy discourse; so shall she honor thy prudence, and applaud
thy goodnature.

Art thou lettered, let not the difficulty of thy speech puzzle the ignorant;
lest, instead of admiring thy knowledge, they condemn thee for pride and
affectation.

Yet let thy words be choice as the matter of thy speech, nor pervert the
elegance of thy phrase to suit the gross apprehension of the weak and
injudicious.

Perspicuity will never force thee to be indelicate, or to forget thou should
support the elegance of a woman.

Let thy actions be proportioned to thy speech, so shall thou gain respect; for
whosoever sets a watch over the breath of her lips, will preserve the work of
her hands free from blame.

SECTION XVII. FRUGALITY.
GIVE nothing foolishly away.

Whosoever scatters abroad, will find herself the loser; who throws her
substance away, shall lift up her hands empty in the day of necessity.

The hand which lavishly distributeth its goods, will at length close its
singers in emptiness.

Profusion lasts not for ever; the daughters of riot will become the children
of poverty.

Who streweth her money in the streets is not generous; who gives it vainly
away is as guilty of waste.

Have thou enough, preserve it for thine own use; have thou too much, bestow
it, that those who merit, may not want bread.

What thou bestowest on the deserving, is not the voluntary gift of thine
hands, but a debt thou owe, and art bound in justice to pay.

The meritorious are entitled to thy superfluities: if thou keep it from
them, thou committest an act of injustice, and wrongest thy neighbor of his
right.

If thou give it to the undeserving stranger, thou give away the property
of another: it is no charity.

Say thou, these things are mine, I may use them as I list:

Can thou employ them to thy comfort, thy honor, or thy advantage, thou have
then no superfluity: if otherwise, they are not thine, they are put into thy
hands for the use of others, and they will be required of thee.

Be frugal therefore in that which thou employest for the use of those who
need, as in that which thou keep for thyself.

Waste not the substance of the deserving poor, nor wrong him of his
inheritance.

His merit is a right, and as just as thy immediate possession.

Who has riches that are a burden to herself, she is not frugal.

Does she waste them by hoarding them in secret, does she cast them away in
riot and profuseness; she cheateth herself, and abuses her trust: for the
miser and the prodigal defraud both the world and themselves.

SECTION XVIII. EMPLOYMENT.
FROM whom comes evil? from whom poverty and dejection of spirit?

Idleness is the mother of mischief: idleness is the parent of shame and
disease.

The slothful spends the day in slumber, she waketh at noon, she drinks her
cordial, and enquireth the time of the morning.

She turns again to sleep, and awaketh not till the dinner of the evening.

She converteth the night into day, and keeps the light of the sun hid from
her eyes.

Her house is a scene of riot and confusion, she has eye-servants.

Her appetite fails, and the physician is daily set down at her door.

Industry is up with the sun, she awaketh at the crowing of the cock, and
walks abroad to taste the sweetness of the morning.

She is ruddy as the daughter of health: her ears are delighted with the music
of the shrill lark.

Her garment sweepeth the dew-drop from the new stubble and the green grass,
and her path is by the murmuring of the purling brook.

Her appetite is keen; her blood is pure and temperate, and her pulse beats
even.

Her house is elegant, her handmaids are the daughters of neatness, and plenty
smileth at her table.

She saunters not; neither stretches herself out on the couch of indolence.

She cries not, what have I to do? but the work of her hands is the thought of
a moment.

She listeneth not to the gossip's tale, she sippeth not her tea in scandal;
but employment is the matter of her discourse

Her work is done at the evening, but the work of the slothful is put off till
tomorrow.

SECTION XIX. VIRGINITY.
THE coronet of glory decketh the head of the young vestal, she sits in
respect, her steps are attended with reverence, and the words of her mouth are
held in high estimation.

She approaches the excellence of angels, her state is that of the most
perfect innocence of mortality.

The Heathen consecrated her to divinity, her trust was esteemed an inviolable
security, and her intercession gave life to those who had forfeited it unto
death.

The Christian calls the mother of salvation by her name, she is honored
throughout the whole earth.

Art thou enamoured with the beauty of her condition, would thou honor
thyself in her situation; attend to the voice of instruction, and shun the
rock, on which the vessel of thy sister has been dashed to pieces.

Presume not on a vow of chastity, nor be transported with the zeal of
voluntary virginity; there is no merit in constraint, there is no virtue in
forced obedience.

Be cautious lest thou sully the whiteness of innocence; the least speck is
seen on the new-fallen snow.

Let not curiosity mislead thee; for curiosity is unseemly in a woman, but in a
virgin, dangerous as the breath of evil.

Let thy conversation be with the sisters of elegance; listen not to the levity
of the daughters of indiscretion.

Do they say there is no harm, we may talk, for the words of our lips are air,
and not criminal; these are the snares of the licentious; the breath of their
mouth is malignant, the sparkling of their eyes is contagious.

They will infect thee to do ill, thou will fall into the snare before thou art
aware thereof.

As the ladder descends by degrees, so many are the intermediate steps
between the modesty of the virgin, and the boldness of a prostitute.

Let not thine ear listen to the tale of the wanton, nor be privy to the amor
of thy sister, even with her sworn spouse.

Delight not in the romantic tales of love; the triumphant beauty and the
captive knight, are deluding images to thy passions.

A fictitious tale, may awaken a real curiosity, and that may prove fatal to
thy peace.

Learn not wisdom of thy companions, nor endeavor to overreach the sagacity
of thy mother.

Let thy toilette claim thy morning hours, but dress not a second time in a day.

Thy elegance will be an ornament, but thy frequent change of apparel will
favor of profuseness and uncertainty of temper.

Let not thy servants fly thick with invitations, neither be thou much affected
if the rout be put off till tomorrow.

Be not perpetually gadding abroad, neither let the gadder abroad be often
invited to thine own home.

In thy father's house, learn the economy of a wife from thy mother; so shall
thou carry it into life, and be the comfort of thy future husband.

Is there who delights in assemblies, who prideth herself in the pleasures of
the mask, who staketh her fortune on a dye; she puts her honor in the hands
of a sharper, and places the jewel of her reputation on the next hazard.

The days of her virginity shall want the honor thereof; and the man who
gives his freedom for her embraces, shall repent of his bargain.

Gray hairs are uncomely to the virgin, the ancient maiden is a byword with
her sisters, and is accounted ill conditioned among women.

Does she strive to hide her years, does she assume the gaiety of her youth;
her celibacy will not appear the effect of choice, but of necessity.

Reject not the ordinance of marriage, nor put the day afar off, when it
promises thee happiness.

Yet trust not a man, on thine own knowledge; confide not in his appearance
before thee.

Deceit is familiar to his ways, and flattery and hypocrisy the fruits of his
tongue.

Is he obsequious, ceremonious, and full of words; though the honey of the wild
be is on his lips, yet the sting of the hornet lies hid in his bosom.

Be not taken with the appearance of gaiety: the painted butterfly is an emblem
of the coxcomb.

Be not deceived by the high opinion of heroism, by the empty braggard; he is
as the sound of a drum, and the security he promises thee but the defense of a
coward.

Neither is the valor of a man, or the strength of his arm, an indication of
the integrity of his heart.

Has he slain his friend in defense of thy beauty, is his sword loose in its
scabbard; join not thy hand with his, lest thou repent the magnanimity of thine
husband.

Take not a man absorbed in study, the philosopher is not a man of this world;
he will be absent even in thy company, he will be as a child to be taught the
common forms of ceremony.

He will hold thee inferior to his profound wisdom, he will regard thy
remonstrances as the conceptions of a weak woman.

Thou will have no companion in him; he will be wanting in the duties of his
family.

Listen not to the servile, who cringeth low and is a beggar in his
solicitations; for when he has command, he will be imperious; thou will
perceive he knows not himself.

Avoid the libertine as the fiery serpent; he is the destroyer among the
daughters of women.

Thou will be wedded to him, yet have no husband; thy bed will be barren, and
thy nights comfortless and forsaken.

Does he promise reformation, yet thou have no security.

Do thou flatter thyself thy charms will engage him for ever, thou will find
thyself deceived ever the waning of the moon be over.

Give not thy youth to the embraces of age, nor the treasure of thy beauty to
enrich the poverty of the decrepid.

The gravity of age ill suiteth the levity of youth, and disparity of years is
the source of many inquietudes.

Sell not thyself for gold; for contentment is not the portion of riches.

Let the voice of a parent sanctify thy choice, but let thy director thereto be
thine own happiness.

SECTION XX. MARRIAGE.
HAVE thou taken to thyself an husband after the institution of heaven, have
thou consented to be bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh?

Love him as the partner of thy happiness, as the sharer of the pleasures and
pains of mortality.

Without love the husband is a tyrant, and the woman is a slave.

The matrimonial vow is a commercial contract without affection; it is the
shadow of marriage, and not the substance thereof.

Does he respect thee; do thou nourish and improve his affections.

Art thou perverse and froward, so shall thou extinguish the flame of love, and
raze the traces of kindness from his bosom.

Art thou enamoured with his accomplishments, yet let not thy affections outrun
his desires; lest thy fondness too openly disgust him.

Neglect not the little arts of endearment; but let the charm which captivated
the lover, secure the attachment of the husband.

Forget not the elegance of thy virginity, but appear every morning as at the
morning of the bridal day.

Let not jealousy come near thy bosom; it is the monster that feeds upon its
own entrails.

It is called the child of love; but as the viper whose birth is the death of
its parents, so is the conception of jealousy the destruction of the mother
that bears it.

Be thou cautious to destroy suspicion in the breast of thine husband, lest it
prove as fatal to thy peace, as if the fruit of thine own conception.

Suspicion goes about whispering lies, she will fill thy brain with waking
dreams, thy sleep shall forsake thee, and thou will have no rest night nor day.

Her companions are wrath and anger, and malice and revenge, for jealousy is
the rage of a man, and the madness of a woman.

Has thy husband deceived thee, does he proclaim it aloud, does he publish it
in the streets, and boast his shame as an act of glory; pour not vinegar on
nitre, neither apply corrosives, where the balsam of tenderness is wanting.

Neither the thunder, nor the storm of hail, closes the openings of the dry
earth, but the soft dew and the gentle showers of heaven.

Return his injustice with mildness of reproof, that his guilt may not have to
reproach thee with bitterness; so shall thy meekness sting him deeper than the
sharpest venom of the clamorous tongue.

The roaring of the stuck swine exciteth not our pity; but the patience of the
bleeding lamb awakeneth to compassion.

Art thou suspected, yet have thou been solicitous to approve thyself virtuous;
patience will heal the wounds of his unkindness.

Tempt not the weakness of his suspicion by unwonted levity; thou shall but
inflame him the more, for his mind is distempered.

Would thou urge a madman when he stareth, would thou give him a sword that
he may wound himself?

Make not thine husband a stranger to thy friends, lest the fashion of the
times make you strangers to each other.

Be thou obedient, for the law of superiority is given to man from above, and
subjection is the portion of the daughters of Eve.

The imperious woman raises a storm for her own shipwreck, and she that
affects dominion should be made the slave of her husband.

As rebellion lifts up its head against its sovereign, and thereby adds
weight to the yoke it attempted to shake off; so the subjection of a wife when
she usurpeth to govern, should be converted into servitude.

Expose not the infirmities of thine husband, neither contemplate on his
imperfections; cast thou a luster on his virtues, for the beauty of his conduct
is an honor to thine own head.

Be not luxurious nor extravagant lest thou convert the riches of thy husband
into toys that avail not, and trinkets that are of no profit.

Affect not beyond thy sphere, nor think the honor of thy family is in the
appearance of great things.

Preserve thy vow inviolated, for the strayings of thy husband absolve thee not.

SECTION XXI. EDUCATION.
ART thou a mother, let thy child be the darling of thy affections, let the
fruit of thy womb be the first partaker of thy tenderness.

Are thy pleasures dearer than thine offspring, do thou become cruel like the
ostrich of the wilderness, art thou hardened against thy young ones as though
they were not thine; they shall live to look coldly on thee, they shall not
regard thee as a mother, in the days of thy widowhood.

Do thou refuse them nourishment from the fountain of their life, the sea
monsters draw out the breast and give suck to their young, but the milk of
human kindness is denied to her children.

Dote not on the idol of thy womb, for the extreme fondness of a mother is as
dangerous as the violence of her hate.

Thy darling shall be taken from thee in the excess of thy love; or if it live,
it shall grieve thine eye and consume thine heart, it shall bring a curse upon
thee, and not a blessing.

In the morning of infancy, when the dawn of reason appears, learn thy child
obedience.

On this foundation thou may build high towers; this clay thou may mould
into what form thou please.

An obedient mind is ductile and tender, but a stubborn breast takes no
impression.

As the young osier grows as it is bent, as the shoot of the vine curleth as
we list; so is a young child in the hands of its mother.

Correct betimes; lest thy indulgence be cruel, and evil become habitual.

Trust not a servant with the education of thy son, nor a maid servant with the
tuition of thy daughter.

Study the temper and capacity of thine offspring, and model thy reproof and
severity in proportion thereto.

Let not the austerity of a parent deny complacence to its own child; lest it
descend to familiarity with servitude, and listen to mischiefs of flattery and
insinuation.

Make thy daughter thy companion, so shall she become thy friend, the yoke of
duty will be light, and the obligations of the child become the voluntary
offices of good will toward thee.

Is thy daughter beautiful, lead her not into the public haunts for admiration;
for the way of a virgin, just rising to the estate of woman, is a path where
the nicest foot will slip, if the hand bears not on the staff of education.

Let not the bowels of the mother petrify against her child, let her not cast
off her daughter to misery.

Sell her not; neither make a sacrifice of her youth to the power of gold.

As those who offer immolations to Moloch, so are the idolaters of Mammon.

Let not thy conduct be a reproach to thy precepts; lest thy daughter disregard
thee, and say, thou teach others, but teach not thyself.

SECTION XXII. AUTHORITY.
ART thou supreme in thine own house, or art thou second, in delegated
authority; trust not the concerns of thy family to a servant.

Tempt not thy domestics, by putting confidence in them; give them not room to
be merely eye-servants.

Do thou raise one above the rest; let him be such whose merit is
conspicuous; so shall thou excite commendable emulation in his fellows.

Let not the number of thy servants exceed the business of the day; for the
hand that wants employment, is ready to lay hold on mischief.

An unprofitable servant is a scandal to his master, he bewrays the hand that
provideth him bread.

The vice of thy servant will be a reproach to thine house, for he goes by the
name of his mistress.

If he serve thee faithfully, cast not off thy servant in distress; neither let
him ask thee for his wages.

The detention of the price of the hireling is injustice, and exciteth him to
be his own play master.

Let not the deserving feel the weight of his servitude; neither bid the best
of thine household sit down at thy table.

The reward of a good servant should be much favor, but familiarity will bring
thy kindness into contempt.

SECTION XXIII. WIDOWHOOD.
IS thy love stronger than death, do thy affections survive the decease of
thine husband? does thy flame burn unextinguished, even as the funeral lamp of
the sepulcher?

The obligations thou lie under, are sacred to the remains of him thou love.

Be not pompous in the burial of the body, but embalm his memory and perfume it
with fragrance of his virtues.

Let his frailties sleep with him in the grave, let his offenses be remembered
no more.

The care of a husband's honor is honor to a wife, and the tenderness to
preserve it is most comely to the widow.

Art thou guardian to thy children, wrong not the fatherless.

The orphan and the widow, are joined in calamity; therefore let them not rise
up against each other.

Art thou young and seek a second espousal, experience has not made thee
wise.

Thou art as a galley-slave, who, in the madness of joy for his liberty,
runs himself again into bondage.

Art thou ancient, yet seek the embraces of a young spouse, he will be the
bane of thy latter days; he will bring jealousy to thine heart, and misery to
thy gray hairs.

He will think himself a living body tied to a dead carcass, and hold thee
loathed in his sight.

Do thou think to fix the giddy appotite of youth? thou may buy beauty, but
it will not become thee; thou may paint, but it will not make thee fair.

When thou art dressed for the bridal morn, men shall say, is this decking for
the living, thou deceivest thyself; if for the dead, make haste to follow him.

SECTION XXIV. RELIGION.
BRIGHT as the morning star, dressed in the radiance of the sunbeams, comes
the seraph of immortality.

She approaches in white robes, her eye is fixed on the heavens, her knee is
humbled in the dust, she gives laws to the daughters of women.

She teaches the way of virtue, her precepts are simplicity and truth.

Her profession is pure and undefiled, her temple is not filled with priests.

The duties she enjoineth, are plain and easy; she deals not in the systems
of speculation and vain philosophy.

She perplexeth not the mind with the hypotheses of skepticism, neither the
cavillers nor the sophists are the teachers of her precepts.

Attend to her counsel, and abide by her instructions; so shall peace be the
companion of thy reflections, and happiness the partner of thy contemplations.

In the practice of piety is satisfaction on earth, and its reward is on high,
in the regions of bliss and immortality.

FINIS.
American Editions OF THE FOLLOWING BOOKS, TO BE SOLD BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK.
GILBERT's Law of Evidence: a necessary work for those whose offices require
them to examine witnesses.

Conductor Generalis: or the office, duty, and authority of justices of the
peace, sheriffs, coroners, constables, goalers, jurymen, overseers of the poor,
etc. etc.

Buchan's Family Physician: or a treatise on the prevention and cure of most
diseases, by regimen and simple medicines.

Wesley's Primitive Physic: or an easy and natural method of curing most
diseases.

Reid's Essay on the nature and cure of the consumption of the lungs.

American Selection of Lessons, in reading and speaking. By N. Webster.

Grammatical Institute and Spelling-book. By N. Webster.

Adventures of Alphonso, after the destruction of Lisbon.

Young Gentleman and Lady's Monitor and Teacher's Assistant, being a collection
from the best modern writers; calculated to improve the understanding, rectify
the will, purify the passions, and to direct the minds of youth to the pursuit
of proper objects.

Art of Speaking; in which are given rules for expressing properly the
principal passions and humors, which occur in public speaking.

Milton's Paradise Lost.

Young's Night Thoughts.

History of Joseph, a poem. By E. Row.

A small Collection of Poems; containing, Pope's Messiah and Universal Prayer,
Parnell's Hermit, Cotton's Fireside, Blair's Grave, Gray's Elegy written in a
country churchyard, Merrick's Benedicite paraphrased, Goldsmith's Traveller nd
Deserted Village.

Moore's Fables for the Female Sex; to which is added, Dr. Langhorne's Fables
of Flora.

Ash's Grammatical Institutes; or an easy introduction to English grammar; to
which is added, an Essay on Punctuation.

Chapone's Letters on the Improvement of the Mind -- on the first principles of
religion, on the study of the Holy Scriptures, on the regulation of the heart
and affections, on the government of the temper, on economy, on politeness and
accomplishments, on geography and chronology, and on the manner and course of
reading history.

The Task; a poem in six books; to which is added, Tirocinium, or a review of
schools. By William Cowper, esquire.

Fordyce's Sermons to young Women.

Lord Chesterfield's Advice to his Son, on men and manners; to which is
annexed, the Polite Philosopher; or an essay on the art which makes a man happy
in himself, and agreeable to others.

Advantages and Disadvantages of the Marriage State, as entered into with
religious or irreligious persons.

Gesner's Death of Abel.

Jefferson's Notes on Virginia.

Gibson's Treatise on Practical Surveying; wherein every thing that is useful
and curious in that art, is fully considered and explained. With alterations
and amendments particularly adapted to the use of American surveyors.

Robertson's Traverse Tables, constructed to every quarter degree of the
quadrant.

Pocket Farrier; showing how to use a horse on a journey, and what remedies are
proper for common accidents that may befall him; with directions for purchasing
a horse, in which rules are laid down for discovering the perfections and
blemishes of that animal.

Bartlet's Farrier's Repository of elegant and approved receipts for the
diseases of horses.

Whittenhall's Latin Grammar.

Latin Grammar for the use of the college in Philadelphia.

Adminiculum Puerile; or fundamental exercises for schoolboys.

Clarke's Cordery and Erasmus.

Philadelphia Vocabulary.

Selectae e Profanis.

Selectae e Veteri.

Sheridan's Rhetorical Grammar.

The Psalms of David (an improvement of the old versions) allowed by the synod
of New York and Philadelphia.

Watt's Hymns and Spiritual Songs.

Fry's Poems; with his History of Elijah and Elisha.

Thomas a Kempis on the Imitation of Christ, translated by John Pain.

Pike's new and complete System of Arithmetic, for the use of the citizens of
the United States.

Law's humble and affectionate Address to the Clergy.

Lyttleton's Observations on the conversion and apostleship of St. Paul, in a
letter to Gilbert West, esquire.

Narrative of the Captivity of Benjamin Gilbert and his family.

Ellwood's Davideis, or life of David king of Israel.

Bachmair's German Grammar, for Englishmen to learn German.

Anthony Benezet's Collection of religious Tracts.

A Journal of the Life and Travels of John Griffith, formerly of Derby in
Pennsylvania.

The Economy of Human Life.

The History of the Life of Thomas Ellwood; or an account of his birth,
education, etc. with diverse observations on his life and manners when a youth,
and how he came to be convinced of the truth; with his many sufferings and
services for the same; also several other remarkable passages and occurences,
etc.

An Account of that ancient servant of Jesus Christ, John Richardson; giving a
relation of many of his trials and exercises in his youth, and his services in
the ministry, in England, Ireland, America, etc.

The Grounds of a Holy Life: or the way by which many who were heathens came to
be renowned christians, and such as are now sinners, may come to be numbered
with saints; by little preaching; to which is added, Paul's Speech to the
bishop of Cretia: as also a true Touchstone or Trial of Christianity. By Hugh
Turford.

The Glory of the Heavenly City, and Blessedness of departed Saints; graciously
manifested in a vision, to a young woman of Bristol.

Some Memoirs of the Life of John Roberts, written by his son Daniel Roberts.

The Necessity and divine Excellency of a Life of Purity and Holiness, set
forth with pathetic energy, in seven discourses, three prayers, and an epistle.
By Samuel Fothergill. Now collected and published, that the instructive and
important truths therein contained, may be spread and become more generally
useful.

An Essay on the Slavery and Commerce of the Human Species, particularly the
African, translated from a Latin dissertation which was honored with the first
prize in the university of Cambridge, for the year 1785; with additions.

Poems on various Subjects, religious and moral. By Phillis Wheatley,
Negroservant to Mr. John Wheatley of Boston in New England.

Fruits of Retirement; or miscellaneous poems, moral and divine; being
contemplations, letters, etc. written on various subjects and occasions. By
Mary Mollineaux; to which is prefixed some account of the author.

The Friendly Instructor; or a companion for young ladies and gentlemen, in
which their duty to God and their parents, their carriage to superiors and
inferiors, and several other very useful and instructive lessons are
recommended, in plain and familiar dialogues.

Select Fables of Esop and other Fabulists; in three books: containing, I.
Fables from the ancients. II. Fables from the moderns. III. Original fables
newly invented. By Robert Dodsley. A new edition.

Fruits of a Father's Love; being the advice of William Penn, to his children,
relating to their civil and religious conduct.

Some Brief Remarks upon sundry Important Subjects, necessary to be understood
and attended to, by all professing the Christian religion: principally
addressed to the people called Quakers. By John Griffith.

A short History of a long Travel from Babylon to Bethel.

Divine Songs, attempted in easy language; for the use of children. By I.
Watts, D. D.

Dissertations on the Nature and Effect of christian baptism, christian
communion, and religious waiting upon God; to which are added, a few
reflections on the observance of public fasts and festivals. By Joseph Phipps.
II. Reasons for the Necessity of Silent Waiting, in order to the solemn worship
of God; to which are added, several quotations from Barclay's Apology. By Mary
Brook. Stitched together.

Some Principles and Precepts of the Christian Religion; by question and
answer: recommended to parents and tutors for the use of children. By Samuel
Fuller.

Some Account of the Life and Gospel Labors of William Reckitt late of
Lincolnshire in Great Britain. II. Memoirs of the Life, Religious Experiences,
and Gospel Labors of James Gough, late of Dublin, deceased. Bound together.

Nicholson's Natural Philosophy.

Hutcheson's Moral Philosophy.

Dilworth's Schoolmaster's Assistant; being a compendium of arithmetic, both
practical and theoretical.

Fisher's Young Man's best Companion; or American Instructor.

The Christian, a poem; in four books; to which is prefixed, a preface in
prose, in defense of christianity; with an address to the people of America. By
Charles Crawford.

Testaments, Psalters, Spelling-books, Primers, etc.


