Conformity to Truth, in Knowledge and Practice, essential to Happiness. A
FAREWELL SERMON, DELIVERED AT TINMOUTH, OCTOBER 28, 1787.

By BENJAMIN OSBORN, A. B.

O that there were such a heart in them that they would fear me, and keep all
my commandments, always, that it might be WELL with them, and with their
children forever. JEHOVAH. Whoever hears these sayings of mine and DOES them,
I will liken him unto a wise man, who built his house upon a rock. JESUS
CHRIST. Be ye DOERS of the word, and not hearers ONLY. ST. JAMES. Our needful
knowledge, like our needful food,
Unhedg'd, lies open in life's common field,
And bids ALL WELCOME to the vital feast.
If wrong our HEARTS, our HEADS are right in vain.
Dr. YOUNG. STATE OF VERMONT. Printed in BENNINGTON, by HASWELL and RUSSELL, In
the Year M, DCC, LXXXVIII.

Conformity to Truth, in Knowledge and Practice, essential to Happiness. A
Farewell SERMON.
INTRODUCTION.
I NOW rise to speak on a very solemn and important subject; in the pro^^^^ion
of which I shall not adopt the method or language of any one (except in a few
lines of poetry) but shall make those observations and reflections which my own
views and feelings, on this affecting occasion, have suggested to my mind.

THE variety of things that I shall have occasion to mention, will render it
necessary for me to be very brief on each particular.

I WOULD now ask your serious, patient, and candid attention, while I attempt,
through divine assistance, to speak from those words of our Savior to his
disciples, recorded in JOHN, xiii.17. " If ye know these things, happy are ye
if ye do them."



IN the course of divine providence, I am, this day, called, my dear friends,
to bid you farewell -- You are, this day, to hear my parting address. To bid
you farewell (if it is any thing more than mere compliment; if there is any
significancy in the phrase) implies a sincere wish that you may be truly happy;
happy in time, and happy through eternity.

But you never can be happy; you cannot farewell in the present world, much
less can you farewell in the world to come without the knowledge and practice
or those things, which he, upon whom all your temporal and eternal welfare
entirely depends, has commanded you to know and observe. If you are diligent in
obtaining the knowledge, and faithful in pursuing the practice of those
important truths, which the God of nature and the God of grace has revealed in
his works and in his word, then I can not only bid you farewell (i. e.
sincerely wish your welfare) but also assure you that you actually will forever
farewell. That you will farewell while traveling through this vale of tears.
That you will farewell when passing through the valley of the shadow of death.
That you will farewell in your intermediate state: That you will farewell in
the morning of the resurrection. That you will farewell in the solemn process
of the last great decisive day: That you will farewell through the revolution
of numberless millions of ages: That you will farewell amidst all the new,
surprising, and infinitely various scenes that even a whole eternity can
produce.

If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. These words were spoken
by the benevolent Jesus, just before his crucifixion, to his disciples. See the
context, ver. 1 -- 12.

IN the prosecution of the present subject we shall, through divine assistance,
attempt to exhibit a brief view of the doctrines you must know, and the duties
you must do, in order that you may be happy; that you may farewell.

We shall not pretend in this discourse, to give a complete methodical system
of all the doctrines and duties of religion: but shall only mention some
important, essential things, which if you know, happy are you if you do them.
It is proposed,

I. To exhibit a brief view of the doctrines which you must know.

That peculiar kind of existence which we call KNOWLEDGE, and which is no where
to be found but only in the mind of a thinking, intelligent being, always has
truth for its object.

So happily are things constituted by the great author of nature; the supreme
source of all intelligence -- That it is impossible that any thing which is not
really true, should be certainly known to be true: admitting this principle,
then it necessarily follows, That whatever is certainly known to be true, is
really true. Hence it is evident, That if five, ten, twenty, an hundred or a
thousand persons (be the number greater or less) know any thing to be true,
then they will, in this respect, not only all agree with each other, but they
will also all agree, or harmonize with the object of knowledge. This being the
case, there is a foundation for complete happiness in the intellectual world.
Let all the individuals of the whole intelligent system, according to their
respective capacities, know the truth, and all embrace the truth they know,
then there will not only be a harmony between the understanding and the heart
in each individual, considered by himself, and a harmony among all the
individuals considered with relation to each other, but also each individual
separately, and all the individuals collectively, will harmonize with one
common object; all their views and affections will have one common center. They
will consequently all be happy, -- they will all farewell.

If any number of persons certainly know any thing to be true, then these
persons do, in this respect, perfectly agree together in their ideas; and not
only so, but also the ideas of each individual, perfectly agree with the object
of knowledge. There is, therefore, in this case, a perfect harmony of
sentiment: a harmony founded in immutable truth, and the eternal nature of
things. Hence it is evident, that all disputes and difference of sentiment
originate in the ignorance of one or both of the contending parties. For as has
been already intimated, knowledge universally implies an agreement in
sentiment, difference in sentiment, therefore, universally proceeds from
ignorance.

Should any one be so bold as to assert, -- "That there is no such thing as
truth:" or (supposing that there is truth) "that there is no such thing as
knowledge:" I should think myself authorized to be equally bold to tell such a
person, in reply, that there was no truth in his assertion: or, at least, that
he was ignorant of what he said. For any one to say "That it is true there is
no such thing as truth:" or, "That he knows there is no such thing as
knowledge," is to say that which is self-contradictory, and therefore utterly
unworthy of any regard. No one can deny the existence of truth, without
appearing in the character of a complete liar. For he that adopts the
principle, "That there is no such thing as truth:" can claim no right to the
character of a man of truth, sincerity, or honesty. He can claim no right to be
regarded as being true in any of his words or actions. Neither can any one deny
the existence of knowledge, without appearing in the character of a perfect
fool. For he that adopts the principle "that there is no such thing as
knowledge," never can, consistently, pretend to be a man of any knowledge or
good sense. All, therefore, who would not appear in the character of perfect
knaves or fools must necessarily admit that there is in nature immutable truth
and infallible knowledge.

Truth is the foundation of knowledge, and knowledge the foundation of
practice. In the knowledge and practice of truth; or in other words expressive
of the same idea, in a complete harmony of sentiments and actions, all having
relation to one common object, consists the perfection of the whole intelligent
system, and of all the individuals of which the whole system is composed. In
the knowledge and practice of those things, which the great author of your
nature has injoined, and in this way only, you may obtain happiness: happiness
which has a foundation as extensive as universal truth, and lasting as your
immortal souls.

We shall now, as was proposed, immediately proceed to exhibit a brief view of
some important essential doctrines, which, in order that you may be happy, you
must know.

Without entering on a long detail of particulars, we shall only just mention
some things relative to the being and perfections of God; the nature of the
divine law, the beauty of holiness; the deformity of sin; the necessity of
regeneration; the death of the body; the immortality of the soul; the general
resurrection; the final judgment; the eternal states of rewards and punishments.

We shall not attempt, at present, to give a formal proof, nor enter on a
curious and critical demonstration, but shall only briefly remind you of these
things, taking it for granted that you know them already: Or to use the
language of the Apostle Peter, To put you in remembrance of these things though
ye know them, and be established in the present truth. 2 Pet. i, 12.


THAT THERE IS A GOD, "all nature cries aloud through all her works." The
invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead.
Romans i.20.
He has not left himself without witness, in that he does good and gives rain
from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.
Acts xiv, 17.
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy
work. Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge.
Psa. x^x, 1.


The existence of the deity is so evident that it never can with any pretense
of reason be denied. It never has, and never will be said by any but fools,
"that there is no God." There can be no effect without a cause. Nor can there
be any particular, secondary cause, without a universal first cause. If,
therefore, there is no God, that is, no creator, then there are no creatures,
and, consequently, no beings to affirm or deny the existence of a God.
Therefore, if there are any beings to affirm or deny the existence of a God,
then a God exists. To say "there is no God," is the same as to say "there is no
truth," and to say, "there is no truth" is a lie.

God is that awful and glorious Being, who immutably and eternally possesses,
in the highest degree, all possible perfection. His proper name is JEHOVAH:
which signifies an eternal self-existent being: or, as it is expressed in the
Revelation of St. John, a being who was is, and is to come. God is a spirit,
infinite, eternal, immutable, self-existent, self-sufficient, omnipotent,
omniscient: possessing unsearchable wisdom, boundless goodness, immaculate
holiness, impartial justice, and infallible truth. There are three persons in
the divine nature. The Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. These three
persons are ONE GOD. All the sacred Three are engaged in the redemption of
fallen man. We are to conceive of this glorious redemption as being contrived
by the Father, executed by the Son, and applied by the Holy Spirit.

THE DIVINE LAW is, like its author, absolutely perfect; being holy, just and
good; requiring complete uninterrupted, perpetual obedience of every
intelligent moral agent in the universe. It is summed up in the following
words: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as
thyself. Luke x, ^.


Rational beings, by being made capable of moral action, become the proper
subjects of the moral law, and are rendered accountable to the moral governor
of the world. Every moral action is either conformable or not conformable to
the moral law. Hence there are two species of moral action. Every moral action,
which is conformable to the moral law, is called HOLINESS. Holiness is, in its
own nature, most excellent, beautiful, and amiable, and displays, to every
unprejudiced mind, the most captivating charms. It is the very image of the
Deity.

The other species of moral action, viz. that which is not conformable to the
moral law, is called SIN. Sin is of a most deformed and hateful nature -- it is
a horrid monster, pregnant with woe -- it is the fruitful source of all the
confusion and misery that ever has, or ever will take place in Jehovah's
dominions. But though sin has a most destructive t^^^ency, is, in its own
nature, calculated to disturb the whole system of intelligent beings, throw the
universe into the utmost disorder, and shake the foundations of nature even to
the throne of God; yet being under the absolute control of the supreme
Governor, all the terrible effects of its operation are entirely confined to
the SINNER, i. e. the Author of sin: so that it never can, in the final result
of things, be, in the least degree, injurious to any holy beings. Sin is
essentially different (not in degree, but) in its nature from holiness. All who
are the servants, must receive the wages of sin, which is DEATH -- DEATH
temporal and eternal.

Man is a moral agent. His first moral actions, in his primeval state, were
perfectly conformable to the unerring rule that was given him by his Maker. But
he soon transgressed the bounds that God prescribed, and thereby subjected
himself to the curse of his holy law. For it is written, Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things which are written in the book of the law to
do them. Gal. iii.10.
Lo, this only have I found, that GOD made man upright; but they have sought
many inventions. Eccl. vii.29.
We are all, by nature, the children of disobedience, and, consequently, the
children of wrath. Ephesians. ii.2 3.
We must, therefore, be renewed in the spirit of our mind. Ephesians. iv.23.
WE MUST BE BORN AGAIN Joh. iii, 27.
For without holiness we never can see the Lord. Heb. xii, 14.
i. e. can never enjoy his favorable presence. God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him might not perish,
but have everlasting life Jo^: iii, 16.
He that believes -- shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be
damned. Mark xvi, 16.
Repent, ye, and believe the gospel, is now the great command of our universal
Sovereign. Mark i, 15.
It is, therefore, our highest interest and indispensible duty to exercise
repentance toward God, and faith toward the Lord Jesus Christ. And this must
be the object of our immediate attention. Delays, in this case, are infinitely
dangerous. Our longest opportunity is but short, and this short opportunity of
very uncertain continuance. The soul, unless it is united to Christ before it
is separated from the body, will inevitably be ruined forever: but the present
union of soul and body, is one of the most precarious things in nature. We are
continually exposed to DEATH. It is appointed unto men once to dis. Heb. ix, 27.
Every individual of mankind is now under the same awful sentence that was
originally denounced upon the first of the human race: Dust thou art, and unto
dust shall thou return. Genesis iii, 19.
Therefore, there is no man that has power over the spirit, to retain the
spirit; neither has the power in the day of death, and there is no discharge
in that war. Ecclesiastes viii.8.
But though the silver cord will soon be loosed, the golden bowl be broken, the
vital union be dissolved, and the body mingle with its native dust; yet the
soul surviving this dissolution, will exist forever.

The SOUL is, in its own nature, or at least by divine constitution IMMORTAL.
While it is in this world, united to the body, it has (if I may be allowed the
phrase) a kind of equilibrium or balance; floating, as it were, on the surface
of a wide extended ocean: but as soon as death dissolves the union, it will
begin and eternally continue to rise and fall in pleasure or pain; still
advancing on from stage to stage, in endless progression. We are so formed by
the great author of our natures, the father of our spirits, that we have,
within ourselves, irresistible evidence of the immortality of the soul:

It Is the Divinity that stirs within us;
It Is Heaven itself that points out an hereafter,
And intimates eternity to man.
Eternity! thou pleasing, dreadful thought!
Through what variety of untried being,
Through what new scenes and changes must we pass!
The wide, the unbounded prospect lies before me. Addison.

O that unfathomable sea!
Those deeps without a shore;
Where living waters gently play,
Or fiery billows roar. --
There we shall swim in heavenly bliss,
Or sink in flaming waves;
While the pale carcass, thoughtless, lies
Amongst the silent graves. Watts.

But it will not lie there forever: For there will be a RESURRECTION of the
dead, both of the just and unjust Acts xxiv, 15.
The hour is coming, when all that are in their graves shall hear the voice of
their final Judge, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the
resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of
damnation John v, 28, 29.
The scattered dust of every human body, that ever walked the solid ground, or
sailed the liquid deep, will be collected, and every separate spirit,
respectively, re enter its former habitation. -- By a mighty Angel the last
trumpet will be blown; the sound of which will awake all the sleeping dead,
open every grave, and collect, in numerous millions, the inhabitants of the
upper, lower, and middle worlds, in one vast assembly. Then God will bring
every work into JUDGMENT, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or
whether it be evil Eccl. xii, 14.
For he has appointed a day, in which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained; whereof he has given
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead. Act. xvii, 31.
We shall then all be brought to our final trial, before that grand and awful
Court, from whose decisive sentence there can be no appeal. For we must all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ; that every one may receive the
things done in his body, according to what he has done, whether it be good or
bad 2 Cor. v, 10.
The trial being ended, and the irrevocable sentence past on all, according to
their respective characters; the great Judge then, rising majesty from his
throne, surveys, with angry look, his rebellious subjects -- Inexpressible
horror fills their guilty souls. -- Beneath the terror of his frown -- a frown
which kindles hell -- they all sink, at once -- down -- down -- down -- to
their destined habitation; which is

A dungeon, horrible on all sides round;
As one great furnace flamed -- yet from these flames
No light, but rather darkness visible,
Serves only to discover sights of woe!
Regions of sorrow! doleful shades! where peace
And rest can never dwell; hope never comes
That comes to all; but torture without end
Still urges, and a fiery deluge fed
With ever-burning sulphur, unconsum'd. Milton.

To this dismal place must all the finally impenitent be confined in eternal
darkness, and punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power. 2 Thessalonians. i, 9.
Saints and Angels, with unruffled calmness and serene tranquillity, beholding
the solemn scene, with united voices, cry, Hallelujah! the Lord reigns; let
Heaven rejoice!

Then Heaven's eternal King, with looks ineffably sweet, and accent mild,
invites the shining armies who surround his throne, to follow him. He leads the
way, while they, in raptures of joy, all accompany their dearest Lord,
ascending high, and higher still, through unmeasured tracts of ether pure, far
beyond the utmost reach of present thought -- to the heaven of heavens -- to
seats of perfect bliss, and mansions of endless undisturbed repose! -- But
language fails -- imagination drops her wing -- and pious hope, in solemn
silence, waits the actual accomplishment of those glorious things, which mortal
eye has never seen, nor ear heard, nor heart of man conceived.

If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. If those solemn scenes,
which I have been attempting to exhibit to your view, affect your hearts
according to their true nature and real importance, then I can, with a cheerful
confidence, assure you, that you will be happy for ever -- that you will for
ever fare well.

In order to true happiness, it is necessary that the moral affections of the
mind, and exercises of the HEART should correspond to the dictates of a well
regulated understanding. My son, give me thine HEART, is the great command.
Prove. xxiii* 26.
As far as the heart is right, a regular external conduct will follow of
course; as far, therefore, as the external conduct is irregular, so far the
heart is wrong. But, "If wrong the HEART, the HEAD is right in vain."

Let it be observed, that our Savior, in the text, does not say, Happy are ye
if ye KNOW these things, but, If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye DO
them. In vain, therefore, is the highest degree of doctrinal knowledge, without
a correspondent PRACTICE. This leads me,

II. To improve the subject, by briefly pointing out the duties, which, if you
would be happy, you must do.

The pastoral relation to you, my dear friends, which I have, for seven years
past, sustained, is now dissolved -- I am now called to give you my parting
advice -- would earnestly desire your serious attention, and humbly hope, that,
through divine assistance, such advice may be given, as will leave a lasting
impression on your minds, and be attended with happy effects.

Under much infirmity of body, and many peculiar difficulties and
embarrassments, I have labored among you; and, in the course of my labors,
have not (designedly) shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God. Acts
xx, 27.
That is, all those important and essential truths, the knowledge and practice
of which imply the eternal salvation of all those who know and embrace them.
What regard has been paid to what has been, from time to time, dispensed, is
known to God and your own consciences The solemn period will shortly arrive,
when every one of us shall give an account of himself to God Romans xiv* 12.
I, for what I have spoken, and you, for what you have heard. -- May God
prepare us all for that infinitely important day! " Great day, for which all
other days were made!"

Permit me to give you a word of exhortation, my friends and brethren, in your
several characters and relations.

Let me advise those of you who are PARENTS, to let your concern for your
children manifest itself not merely in providing for their perishing bodies,
but also, and more especially, in taking care of their immortal souls. Bring
them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Ephesians. vi.12.
Pray with and for them. By precept and example, teach them to engage in this
important duty. Let every master of a family adopt, and put into practice,
Joshua's pious resolution, As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.
Josh. xxiv.15.
Let me earnestly entreat you never to attempt to satisfy yourselves with any
excuses whatever for the neglect of the stated worship of God in your families.
For God will pour out his fury upon the heathen that know him not, and upon the
FAMILIES THAT CALL NOT ON HIS NAME. Jer. x, 25.


CHILDREN obey your parents in the Lord; for this is right. Ephesians. vi.1.
Give them that honor and respect which is their due* -- Be careful to ask,
and willing to receive their advice. Listen to their pious instructions, and
follow their good examples* -- Be ever mindful of the great God that made you,
constantly preserves you, and supplies all your wants. -- Consider that you
have offended God by sinning against him. You must be truly sorry for your
sins, and ask God, for Christ's sake, to forgive you. Christ died for sinners
-- he died for children -- he died for you. You must love God, and pray to him;
be obedient to your parents, and kind to one another; then God will take care
of you while you live in this world; receive you to himself when you die; and
make you happy for ever.

Parents and children, the endearing relation now subsisting between you, must
quickly be dissolved. Death will, ever long, separate you from each other; but
you must shortly meet again -- meet at the solemn bar of your final Judge.
Happy, inexpressibly happy will be your condition, if you should meet at the
right hand of the blessed Savior. In order that you may have such a joyful
meeting, it is absolutely necessary that you now sincerely repent of your sins,
and by a living faith, be united to the Lord Jesus Christ.

To you that are YOUNG, I speak with a friendly voice, when I advise you to
remember now your Creator, in the days of your youth Eccl. xii, 1.
Permit me earnestly to exhort you to devote the prime of your lives, and
consecrate the best of your days to the service of your God. Hear the heart
melting declaration of that kind Being, whose smile is of more value than the
wealth of ten thousand worlds: I love them that love me; and those that seek me
EARLY shall find me. Prove. viii, 17.
Seek the Lord in his appointed way. Take the great Jehovah for your
all-sufficient, eternal portion. Take the Father for your friend -- the Son for
your savior -- and the Holy Spirit for your sanctifier.

It is my ardent wish and earnest prayer with respect to you, who are in the
MIDDLE STAGE of life, that amidst the multiplicity of cares and business of the
present world, you may not be unmindful of the infinitely important concerns of
the world to come* Remember, ONE THING is needful. Luke x, 42.


Permit me to remind you, my honored FATHERS, of your approaching dissolution
-- Your lamp of life, already grown dim, will shortly be extinguished. God
grant that the hoary head, being found in the way of righteousness, may be a
crown of glory Prove. xvi, 31.
While your bodies are bending downward to the grave, may your souls be
aspiring upward to that glorious world, where he, who has conquered death, for
ever reigns triumphant.

HUSBANDS and WIVES, of every age, a sincere regard for your temporal and
eternal welfare now excites the warm desire, that you may, by divine
assistance, be enabled to fulfill the various duties of the conjugal state --
that you may live in peace and mutual love -- ever strive to promote each
other's good -- be united to Christ -- walk together as heirs of the grace of
God -- and then, though death should part you for a while, yet you will shortly
meet again, in a happier world, to part no more.

WIDOWS and FATHERLESS CHILDREN, I leave you with my friendly wishes that you
may be enabled and disposed to trust in the Lord -- be the objects of his kind
and constant care -- have your wants supplied from his bounty -- your hearts
comforted with his love -- and always rejoice in the light of his countenance.

To you, my dear Brethren and Sisters of THIS CHURCH, for the kind regard you
have ever shown to me, I now return my most grateful acknowledgements. Animated
with the warmest wishes for your highest happiness, let me beseech ye to walk
worthy of the vocation wherewith you are called; with all lowliness and
meekness, with long suffering, forbearing one another in love; endeavoring to
keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace Ephesians. iv, 1.
Be careful to walk circumspectly Ephesians. v, 15.
-- to walk in wisdom toward them that are without, redeeming the time Col. iv,
5.
That you may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things* Tit. ii, 10.
and manifest to the world that you have been with Jesus. Acts iv.13.
Be followers of God, as dear children, and walk in love. Ephesians. v.1.
Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, be
put away from among you, with all malice. And be ye kind to one another;
tenderhearted, forgiving one another, as you hope that God, for Christ's sake,
has forgiven you. Ephesians. iv.31.


Let me remind you, that it is of infinite importance that you be really
sincere in your profession -- that your lips and hearts agree: For the heart
searching God will receive none to his favor, but only those who are actually
and personally interested in the merits of his Son.

Often have I endeavored to warn you of the danger, and point out the fatal
consequences of resting in the outward form of godliness, without feeling its
inward power. Let me entreat you to remember, as far as you are able, what has
been said upon this, and all other important and interesting subjects, which I
have, in times past, attempted to suggest to your minds -- for now my pastoral
relation to you, my dear brethren, is dissolved.

After various concurring circumstances had rendered a separation unavoidable,
I frequently anticipated the affecting scene -- but never felt, I must confess,
before it actually took place, the full weight of the solemn transaction -- a
transaction, which, though it really is, at least in my view, attended with many
melancholy circumstances, yet is what I have conceived, and do still conceive,
all things considered, to have been necessary.

I now leave you, my dear brethren, in a situation, which is, in some respects,
very disagreeable. It affords me, however, an animating prospect to consider,
that I leave you under the indulgent care of an infinitely powerful, wise, and
kind PROVIDENCE. May the God of all grace and consolation comfort and support
you under every trial; relieve you in every difficulty; direct and assist you
in every duty. May he supply you with a Pastor more worthy than myself, and
better qualified for the important character -- One in whom you may all be
happily united. and under whose ministry you may be greatly instructed, and
edified; and long enjoy, in love and peace, the precious ordinances of the
blessed gospel.

I am now, my dear brethren, separated from you; but we shall certainly meet
again on a future day -- and where shall we meet --?

Though by some, perhaps, I may be thought to transgress the bounds of modesty,
yet I will venture to make the declaration, That I humbly hope in divine mercy,
through the merits of the Savior, to find a happy seat on the right hand of my
final Judge -- and God grant that you may be my joy and crown of rejoicing in
the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming. 1 Thessalonians. ii.19.
May the supreme Dispenser of every blessing, by his efficacious influence and
heavenly grace, prepare both you and me to meet together in that glorious
world, where all tears will be wiped from every eye, and where holiness and
happiness will reign in full perfection for ever and ever.

Permit me now, my dear friends, to make an address to you ALL who have been
the people of MY CHARGE.

Some of you, during the course of my ministry here, have been peculiarly kind;
and I hope I may ever retain on my mind, the grateful impression that has been
made by your friendly regard. The real welfare of you all is the object of my
sincere desire. If there are any of you whom I have injured, I now ask your
forgiveness -- and those, who have either done or meant an injury to me, I
heartily forgive.

From the time of my settlement in the town, you have known my manner of life.

I have ever been as far from the inclination, as the ability, of making that
splendid appearance, and shining figure in the world, which captivates the
attention, and gains the applause of the generality of mankind -- I have not
aspired after superfluous wealth or grandeur. You are my witnesses, that I have
never wished, at least, that I have never desired of you, any thing more than a
comfortable subsistence; or such means of support as might enable me to apear
and conduct with a decency and dignity becoming the character I sustained --
and this, you must be sensible, was not an unreasonable demand.

With regard to the complaint that some have made, of my being "too much
reserved in conversation," (...) would just observe, that I have, even myself,
sometimes, considered this as an unhappiness -- an unhappiness resulting, at
least in a great measure, from my natural constitution, and peculiar
circumstance in life. I do not mean, however, to wholly justify myself in this
respect. We are all liable to err -- some on the right hand, and some on the
left -- some use their tongues too little, and some too much. -- In many things
we all offend. If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, and
able also to bridle the whole body. Jam. iii.2.


My circumstances have been, in various respects, peculiarly difficult. Being
naturally of a slender constitution -- living remote from my brethren in the
ministry -- But I have not time, at present, nor, if I had, would it be proper
now to improve it in enumerating the particulars relative to my singular
situation, since I have sustained the relation of a Pastor to this people.

As to my sentiments; though I have not the confidence to say that I have, in
every instance, been absolutely free from error (for I pretend not to
infallibility) yet this I can say, that through the whole course of my
preaching, I always endeavored to deliver such doctrines, as I did then, and
do now, solemnly believe to be true: doctrines, which, being clearly viewed by
the understanding, sincerely embraced in the heart, and consequently practiced
in the life, imply the eternal salvation of the soul.

I consider myself as being accountable to God for the doctrines which I have
embraced myself, and which I have delivered to you. And if I have delivered to
you the truth, then you are accountable, not only for what you actually have,
but also, for what you might have heard.

In the former part of this discourse, I mentioned some important things, which
it is necessary for you to KNOW, and which, if you do know, happy are you if
you DO them. Happy are you if the exercises of your hearts correspond to the
dictates of a well regulated understanding. Would you be truly happy in this
world or the next -- would you FARE WELL in time and through eternity -- then

Be sincere friends to the God that made you -- Learn to contemplate, with
increasing wonder and delight, his glorious perfections -- Fear, love,
reverence, adore and praise him -- Make application to the Father, in the name
of the Son, for the influences of the Holy Spirit -- Constantly attend to
secret and family prayer -- Attentively observe, and carefully improve, the
various dispensations of divine Providence -- Study the divine law, and make it
the only rule of all your conduct -- With diligence and impartiality, search
the sacred scriptures -- Follow after holiness -- Strive against sin -- Be
renewed in the spirit of your mind -- exercise repentance toward God, and faith
toward the Lord Jesus Christ -- Ever feel your infinite obligations to God;
your constant and entire dependence upon him; and the necessity of your having
the special influences of his Holy Spirit -- Be not anxious in providing for
your bodies, which must shortly return to the dust; but attend to the one thing
needful -- Take care of the infinitely important concerns of your souls, which
must exist for ever. Persevere in a course of holy obedience to the divine will
-- always depending entirely on the grace and mercy of God, through the merits
of his Son, for the acceptance of your persons and performances.

In this way, and in this way only, you may be eternally happy. On condition
that you do, in reality, pursue the course that is here recommended, and on
this condition only, I with the greatest confidence assure you, that you ^^ll
die in peace -- be raised again in glory -- be seated on the right hand of the
blessed Savior -- escape hell's everlasting horrors, and possess the complete
and endless joys of heaven.

Let me entreat you all, my dear friends, to attend to the things that belong
to your eternal peace, even NOW, without any delay. It is infinitely dangerous
to procrastinate or put off to a future time.

In human hearts, what bolder thought can rise,
Than man's presumption on tomorrow's dawn!
Where is tomorrow? -- In another world.
For numbers this is certain; the reverse
Is sure to none --
Be wise today; it is madness to defer;
Next day the fatal precedent will plead;
Thus on, 'till wisdom is pushed out of life:
Procrastination is the thief of time;
Year after year it steals, till all are fled,
And to the mercies of a moment leaves
The vast concerns of an eternal scene. Young.

You have had many opportunities, which are now irrecoverably gone; and even
those which you now enjoy, are continually passing away. Life is fast spending,
and Death is swiftly approaching.

See, with what speed the fleeting minutes fly,
And teach this lesson, -- Mortals, learn to die.
Each beating pulse leads on to certain death,
And life is shortened by each heaving breath.
All your opportunities for securing a state of eternal happiness in the future
world, will for ever cease, as soon as your present life is ended. But what is
your life? It is a VAPOR that appears for a little while, and then vanishes
away. James iv, 14.


Your life is ever on the wing,
And death is ever nigh:
The moment when your lives begin,
You all begin to die Watts.

Yet on so precarious a thing, the life of the body, depends the eternal state
of the soul.

Good God! on what a slender thread
Hang everlasting things!
The eternal states of all the dead,
Upon life's feeble strings. Watts.

Now, while the union between the soul and body continues, you must, by faith,
be united to Christ -- It must be NOW or NEVER. The least delay in this matter,
is not only perfectly unreasonable in itself, but also infinitely dangerous in
its consequences.

The NOW that flies, may be the last;
Seize the salvation ere it is past,
Nor mourn the blessing gone:
A THOUGHT'S delay is ruin here;
A closing eye, a gasping breath,
Shuts up the golden scene in death,
And drowns you in despair! Watts.

I have a few words of special advice to give you, and then shall take my leave
of you all.

Attend strictly to the duties of the SABBATH, and constantly maintain the
public worship of God; Not forsaking the assembling yourselves together, as the
manner of some is Heb. x, 25.
Put forth your utmost exertions, in the use of all proper means and regular
methods to procure, as soon as lies within your power, a pious, faithful,
judicious PASTOR. And if, through the divine blessing, you should obtain such a
one, be careful to pray for him -- diligently attend on his ministry -- treat
him with kindness tenderness, and candor -- endeavor, as far as possible, to
comfort, support, encourage, and assist him in his arduous work; and give him
such honor and respect as is suitable to his character. For you must be
sensible, that one, who, from whatever cause, is slighted and despised, can
have but a very small influence in speaking; even though what he says should be
of the greatest importance in itself, and most interesting to those to whom it
is spoken. Endeavor, therefore, to obtain one who is really worthy of your
regard, and then be careful to pay him that regard of which he is worthy.

And should you be so happy as to have one among you, who (to use the language
of the Apostle) sows unto you spiritual things. You must not think it a great
thing that he should reap your carnal things -- For who goes a warfare, any
time, at his own charges? Who planteth a vineyard, and eats not of the fruit
thereof? Or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? -- Do
ye not know that they who minister about holy things, live of the things of the
temple? and they who wait at the altar, are partakers with the altar? Even so
(i. e. in the same way) has the LORD ordained (for it is not the mere invent
on of men) that they who preach the gospel, should live of the gospel. For the
labourer is worthy of his hire.

Let me entreat you, my dear friends and brethren, to cultivate, among
yourselves, to the utmost of your power, a spirit of love and friendship,
union, peace, and harmony. Let all contentions and angry disputes be laid
aside, and all prejudices and animosities be buried in lasting oblivion.
Forgetting those things that are behind and reaching forth unto those things
that are before, press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God
in Christ Jesus Phil. iii, 13.
Lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset you, and run
with patience the race that is set before you. Looking unto Jesus, the author
and finisher of your faith: who, for the joy that was set before him, endured
the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne
of God. Heb. xii 1.


Animated by the glorious motives, which are set before you by him, who is the
author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him. Heb. v, 9.
Vigorously pursue your duty in all its various branches.

Be much engaged in sincere and fervent prayer -- in secret, private, and
public. Frequently read, and seriously meditate in the word of God -- being
always deeply sensible of your constant need of special divine influence,
continually apply to the Father, in the name of the Son, for the direction and
assistance of the Holy Spirit. Ever keep in view that solemn and important day,
when we must all meet at the awful bar of our final JUDGE, to give an account,
each one for himself, of the improvement of our time, and all the opportunities
we here enjoy.

Finally, brethren, whatever things are true, whatever things are honest,
whatever things are just, whatever things are pure, whatever things are lovely,
whatever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any
praise, think on THESE THINGS. Phil. iv, 8.


I have now finished what I proposed to say at this time, on the doctrines you
must know, and the duties you must do, in order to be happy.

What now remains is, asking an interest in the prayers of all the true
children of God -- committing myself, through the merits of the Savior, to the
divine care and protection; and commending you to God, and the word of his
grace -- to solemnly bid you all FAREWELL.

Farewell, parents and children.

Farewell, husbands and wives.

Farewell, my honored fathers.

Farewell, middle-aged and youth.

Farewell, widows and fatherless.

Farewell, my dear brethren and sisters of this church.

Farewell, ALL, who have been the people or my charge, of every age and sex, of
every relation and character.

Be perfect; be of good comfort; be of one mind; live in peace: and may the God
of love and peace be with you, 2 Cor. xiii, 14.
while traveling through this vale of tears -- and prepare us ALL to meet in a
happier world, for the REDEEMER's sake; to whom, with GOD the FATHER, and the
HOLY SPIRIT, be ascribed all honor, glory, and praise, for ever and ever. AMEN


