THE CASE OF THE Commonwealth against Eleazer Oswald; FOR A CONTEMPT OF THE
SUPREME COURT of Pennsylvania. ADJUDGED THE FOURTEENTH DAY OF JULY, 1783. WITH
A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS in the GENERAL ASSEMBLY, upon the MEMORIAL
of the DEFENDANT against three of the JUSTICES of that Court, for the JUDGMENT
and SENTENCE pronounced against him.

Reported by a Gentleman of the Law.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY WILLIAM SPOTSWOOD, FRONT-STREET. M.DCC.LXXXVIII.

The COMMONWEALTH against OSWALD.
To gratify the general curiosity which has been excited; to comply with the
request of a particular friend; and, above all, to dissipate error, and to
establish truth, have been the inducements for publishing this Case in its
present form. If these motives do not entitle the Reporter to praise, he hopes
they will, at least, shelter him from censure.

THE COMMONWEALTH against OSWALD. In the SUPREME COURT, July Term, 1788.
PRINCIPLES.
I. An attachment lies for endeavoring to prejudice the public mind in
writings respecting a cause depending in the court.

II. When the defendant is present on a rule to show cause why an attachment
should not issue, the court will not make the rule absolute, but proceed to
give judgment for the offense.

12th July.
UPON the opening of the court this morning, Lewis moved for a rule to show
cause why an attachment should not issue against Eleazer Oswald, the printer
and publisher of the Independent Gazetieer. The case was this: Oswald having
inserted in his newspapers several anonymous pieces against the character of
Andrew Brown, the master of a female academy, in the city of Philadelphia,
Brown applied to him to give up the authors of those pieces; but being refused
that satisfaction, he brought an action for the libel against Oswald,
returnable into the supreme court, on the 2d. day of July; and therein demanded
bail for L1000. Previously to the return day of the (...), the question of bail
being brought by citation before Mr. Justice BRYAN* at his chambers, the Judge,
on a full hearing of the cause of action, in the presence of both the parties,
ordered the defendant to be discharged on common bail; and the plaintiff
appeared from this order to the court. Afterward (on the 1st of July) Oswald
published under his own signature, an address to the public, which contained a
narrative of these proceedings, and the following passages, which, I conceive,
to have been the material grounds of the present motion.

"When violent attacks are made upon a person under pretext of justice, and
legal steps are taken on the occasion, not perhaps to redress the supposed
injury, but to feed and gratify partisaning and temporising resentments, it is
not unwarrantable in such person to represent the real statement of his case,
and appeal to the world for their sentiments and countenance.

"Upon these considerations, principally, I am now emboldened to trespass on
the public patience, and must solicit the indulgence of my friends and
customers, while I present to their notice, an account of the steps lately
exercised with me; from which it will appear that my situation as a printer,
and the rights of the press and of freemen, are fundamentally struck at; and an
earnest endeavor is on the carpet to involve me in difficulties to please the
malicious dispositions of old and permanent enemies.

"But until the news had arrived last Thursday, that the ninth state had
acceded to the new federal government, I was not called upon; and Mr. Page in
the afternoon of that day visited me in due form of law with a writ. Had Mr.
Brown pursued me in this line, "without loss of time," agreeably to his
lawyer's letter, I should not have supposed it extraordinary -- but to arrest
me the moment the federal intelligence came to hand, indicated that the
commencement of this suit was not so much the child of his own fancy, as it has
been probably dictated to and urged on him by others, whose sentiments upon the
new constitution have not in every respect coincided with mine. In fact, it was
my idea, in the first progress of the business, that Mr. Brown was merely the
handmaid of some of my enemies among the federalists; and in this class I must
rank, his great patron Doctor Rush (whose brother is a judge of the Supreme
Court) I think Mr. Brown's conduct has since confirmed the idea beyond a doubt.

"Enemies I have had in the legal profession, and it may perhaps add to the
hopes of malignity, that this action is instituted in the Supreme Court of
Pennsylvania However, if former prejudices should be found to operate against
me on the bench, it is with a jury of my country, properly elected and
empannelled, a jury of freemen and independent citizens, I must rest the suit.
I have escaped the jaws of persecution through this channel on certain
memorable occasions, hope I shall never be a sufferer, let the blast of faction
blow with all its furies!

"The doctrine of libels being a doctrine incompatible with law and liberty,
and at once destructive of the privileges of a free country in the
communication of our thoughts, has not hitherto gained any footing in
Pennsylvania: and the vile measures formerly taken to lay me by the heels on
this subject only brought down obloquy upon the conductors themselves. I may
well suppose the same love of liberty yet pervades my fellow citizens, and that
they will not allow the freedom of the press to be violated upon any refined
pretense, which oppressive ingenuity or courtly study caninvent.

"Upon trial of the cause, the public will decide for themselves, whether Mr.
Browne's motives have been laudable and dignified; whether his conduct in
declining an acquittal of his character in the paper, and suing me in the
mariner he did, was decent and consistent; and, in a word, whether he is not
actuated by some of my inveterate foes and opponents, to lend his name in their
service for the purpose of harrassing and injuring me."

A transcript from the records was read to show that the action between Brown
and Oswald was depending in the court. James Martin proved that the paper
containing Oswald's address, was bought at his printing office, fresh and damp
from the press; and a deposition, made by Brown, was read to prove the
preceding facts relative to the cause of action, the hearing before Mr. Justice
BRYAN, and the appeal from his order.

Lewis then adverted to the various pieces, which were charged as libellous in
the depending action; and argued, that, though the liberty of the press was
invaluable in its nature, and ought not to be infringed; yet, that its value
did not consist in a boundless licentiousness of slander and defamation. He
contended, that the profession of Brown, to whom the education of more than a
hundred children was sometimes entrusted, exposed him, in a peculiar manner, to
be injured by wanton aspersions of his character; and he interred the necessity
of the action, which had been instituted, from this consideration, that if
Brown were really the monster which the papers in question, described him to
be, he ought to be hunted from society; but, that if he had been falsely
accused, if he had been maliciously traduced, it was a duty that he owed to
himself and to the public, to vindicate his reputation, and to call upon the
justice of the laws, to punish so gross a violation of truth and decency. For
this pupose, he continued, a writ had been issued, and bail was required. The
defendant, if not before, was, certainly, on the hearing at the Judge's
chambers, apprized of the cause of action: The order of Mr. Justice BRYAN on
that occasion, and the appeal to the court, were circumstances perfectly within
his knowledge; and yet, while the whole merits of the cause were thus in
suspense, he thought proper to address the public in language evidently
calculated to excite the popular resentment against Brown; to create doubts
and suspicions of the integrity and impartiality of the Judges who must preside
upon the trial; and to promote an unmerited compassion in his own favor. He
has described himself as the object of former persecutions upon similar
principles; he has asserted that, in this instance, an individual is made the
instrument of a party to destroy him; and he artfully calls upon his fellow
citizens to interest themselves to preserve the freedom of the press, which he
considers as attacked in his person. Nay, in order to cast an odium upon the
new government of the United States, he insinuates, that his arrest was
purposely protracted 'till the ratification of nine states had given stability
to that system: -- a falsehood, as unwarrantable as it is insidious; for, it
will be proved that this delay took place at his own request, communicated by
Col. Proctor.

Col. Proctor being examined on this point, said, that he, at first, desired
the action might not be brought, in hopes of accomplishing a compromise between
the parties; that, afterward, he requested Mr. Lewis to defer issuing the writ
'till as near the term as it was possible: but that all this interference was
of his own accord, and not at the instance of the defendant. He acknowledged,
however, that he had informed Oswald, that the commencement of the action would
be postponed as long as possible, after having obtained a promise to that
effect from Mr. Lewis.

Lewis said he was very much mistaken indeed, if Col. Proctor had not mentioned
the request as coming from the defendant; and Col. Proctor answered, if ever I
told you so, he certainly sent me; but I cannot remember that ever he asked me
to do a thing of the kind.

Lewis then added, that the address to the public manifestly tended to
interrupt the course of justice; it was an attempt to prejudice the minds of
the people in a cause then depending, and, by that means, to defeat the
plainiff's claim to justice, and to stigmatize the Judges, whose duty it was to
administer the laws. There could be no doubt, therefore, that it amounted to a
contempt of the court; and it only remained, in support of his motion, to show
that an attachment was the legal mode of proceeding against the offender. For
this he cited 4 Black. Com. 280. 2 Atk. 469.

BY THE COURT: Take a rule to show cause on Monday next, at 9 o'clock in the
morning.

THE SAME CAUSE.
14th July.
THE defendant, appearing agreeably to the rule to show cause, etc. obtained on
Saturday, prayed that the rule might be enlarged, as he had not had a
reasonable time to prepare for the argument. But Lewis opposed the enlargement
of the rule, observing that the defendant would be heard in extenuation, or
excuse, of the contempt, after the attachment had issued.

By M'KEAN, C. J. I know not of any instance where a delay of a term has been
allowed in the case of an attachment: one reason for such a summary proceeding
is to prevent delay. Let cause be now shown.


Sergeant, in showing cause against the attachment, contended that the
doctrine, in 4 Black. Com. 280. was laid down much too wide; that in 2 Atk.
469, the Chancellor expressly assigns this reason, for his determining without
a jury, that he was a judge of fact; and in 1 Burr. 510* 513, an information is
granted on this principle, that courts of common law will not decide upon facts
without the intervention of a jury.

M'KEAN, C. J. This was not the reason that influenced tne court in their
decision.


But whatever the law might be in England, Sergeant insisted, that it could not
avail in Pennsylvania. Even in England, indeed, though it is said to be a
contempt to report the decisions of the courts, unless under the imprimatur of
the judges; yet, we find Burrow and all the subsequent reporters proceeding
without that sanction. But the constitution of Pennsylvania authorizes many
things to be done which in England are prohibited. Here the press is laid open
to the inspection of every citizen, who wishes to examine the proceedings of
the government; of which the judicial authority is certainly to be considered
as a branch. Constable. Penn. sect. 35.

M'KEAN, C. J. Could not this be done in England? certainly it could: for, in
short, there is nothing in the constitution of this state, respecting the
liberty of the press, that has not been authorized by the constitution of that
kingdom for near a century past.


Sergeant. The 9th section of the Bill of Rights, however, puts this supposed
offense into such a form, as must entitle the defendant to a trial by jury; and
precludes every attempt to compel him to give evidence against himself. It
declares that in all prosecutions for criminal offenses, a man has a right to
be heard by himself and his council, to demand the cause and nature of his
accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses, to call for evidence in his
favor, and a speedy public trial, by an impartial jury of the country, without
the unanimous consent of which jury he cannot be found guilty; nor can he be
compelled to give evidence against himself; nor can any man be justly deprived
of his liberty except by the laws of the land, or the judgment of his peers. --
Now, the present proceeding against the defendant it for a criminal offense;
and, yet, if the attachment issues, the essential parts of this section must be
defeated: for, in that case, the defendant cannot be tried by a jury; and,
according to the practice upon attachments, he will be compelled to answer
interrogatories; in doing which, he must either he guilty of perjury, or give
evidence against himself. The proceeding by attachment is, indeed, a novelty in
this country, except for the purpose of enforcing the attendance of witnesses.
Those contempts which are committed in the face of a court stand upon a very
different ground. Even the court of Admiralty (which is not a court of record)
possesses a power to punish them; and the reason arises from the necessity,
that every jurisdiction should be competent to protect itself from immediate
violence and interruption. But contempts which are alleged to have been
committed out of doors, are not within this reason; they come properly within
the class of criminal offenses; and, as such, by the 9th sect. of the bill of
rights, they can only be tried by a jury.


M'KEAN, C. J. Do you then apprehend that the 9th sect. of the bill of rights
introduced something new on the subject of trials? I have always understood it
to be the law, independent of this section, that the twelve jurors must be
unanimous in their verdict, and yet this section makes this express provision.


Sergeant said, that he had discussed the subject as well as the little
opportunity afforded him would admit. He pressed the court to give further time
for the argument, or, at once, to direct a trial. This he contended was, at
least, discretionary: and, considering the defendant's protestation of
innocence Col. Oswald repeatedly declared that he meant no contempt of the
court in what he had published.
, his readiness to give ample security for his future appearance, the magnitude
of the question as arising from the constitution, and its immense consequences
to the public, he thought a delay, that was essential to deliberation and
justice, ought not to be refused.

Heatly and Lewis, in support of the motion, contended, that under the
circumstances of the case, Oswald's publication, whether true or false,
amounted to a contempt of the court, as it respected a cause theu de, ending to
judgment, and reflected upon one of the Judges in his official capacity; that
the argument of the adverse counsel went so far as to assert, that there could
be no such offense as a contempt even in England, since the very words inserted
in the constitution of Pennsylvania, were used in the Magna Charta of that
kingdom; that, in truth, neither the bill of rights nor the constitution
extended to the case of contempts, for they meant only to secure to every
citizen the right of expressing his sentiments with a manly freedom, but not to
authorize wanton attacks upon private reputation, or to deprive the court of a
power essential to its own existence, and to the due administration of justice;
that the court were as competent to judge of the fact and the law, upon the
inspection of the publication in question, as the chanceilor was in the
authority cited from Atkins; and that although the prosecutor could, perhaps,
proceed either by indictment or information, yet that the abuses of the Star
Chamber had rendered the process by information odious, and an attachment,
which was sanctified by immemorial usage, was the most expeditious, and,
therefore, the most proper remedy for the evil complained of.

The Chief Justice delivered the opinion of the court to the following (...).
Judge BRYAN having shortly before taken his seat.

M'KEAN, C. J. -- This is a motion for an attachment against Eleazer Oswald,
the printer and publisher of the Independent Gazetteer, of the 1st of July
last. No. 796. As a ground for granting the attachment, it is proved, that an
action for a libel had been instituted in this court, in which Andrew Brown is
the plainest, and Eleazer Oswald the defendant; that a question with respect to
bail in that action had been agitated before one of the Judges, from whose
order, discharging the defendant on common bail, the plaintiff had appealed to
the court; and that Mr. Oswald's address to the public, which is the immediate
subject of complaint, relates to the action thus depending before us. The
counsel in support of their motion, have argued, that this address was intended
to prejudice the public mind upon the merits of the cause, by propagating an
opinion that Brown was the instrument of a party to prejudice and destroy the
defendant; that he acted under the particular influence of Dr. Rusa, whose
brother is a judge of this court; and, in short, that from the ancient
prejudices of all the judges, the defendant did not stand a chance of a fair
trial.

Assertions and imputations of this kind are certainly calculated to defeat and
discredit the administration of justice Let us, therefore, enquire, first,
whether they ought to be considered as a contempt of the court; and secondly,
whether, if so, the offender is punishable by attachment.

And here I must be allowed to observe, that libelling is a great crime,
whatever sentiments may be entertained by those who live by it. With respect to
the heart of the libeller, it is more dark and base than that of the assassin,
or than his who commits a midnight arson. It is true, that I may never discover
the wretch who has burned my house, or set fire to my barn; but these losses
are easily reparted, and bring with them no portion of ignominy or reproach.
But the attacks of the libeller admit not of this consolation: the injuries
which are done to character and reputation seldom can be cured, and the most
innocent man may in a moment be deprived of his good name, upon which, perhaps,
he depends for all the prosperity, and all the happiness of his life. To what
tribunal can be then resort? how shall he be tried, and by whom shall he be
acquitted? It is in vain to object, that those who know him will disregard the
slander, since the wide circulation of public prints must render it
impracticable to apply the antedote as far as the poison has been extended. Nor
can it be fairly said, that the same opportunity is given to vindicate, which
has been employed to desame him; for, many will read the charge, who may never
see the answer; and while the object of accusation is publicly pointed at, the
malicious and malignant author, rests in the dishonorable security of an
anonymous signature Where much has been said, something will be believed; and
it is one of the many artifices of the libeller, to give to his charges an
aspect of general support, by changing and multiplying the style and name of
his performances. But shall such things be transacted with impunity in a tree
country, and among an enlightened people? Let every honest man make this appeal
to his heart and understanding, and the answer must be -- no!

What then is the meaning of the Bill of Rights, and the Constitution of
Pennsylvania, when they declare, "That the freedom of the press shall not be
restrained," Declar. of Rights, s. 12.
and that "the printing presses shall be free to every person who undertakes to
examine the proceedings of the legislature, or any part of the government
Constit. of Penn. s. 35.
." However ingenuity may torture the expressions, there can be little doubt of
the (...) sense of these sections: they give to every citizen a right of
investigating the conduct of those (...) are entrusted with the public
business; and they effectually preclude any attempt to fetter the press by the
institution of a licenser. The same principles were settled in England, so far
back as the reign of William the Third, and since that time, we all know, there
has been the freest animadversion upon the conduct of the ministers of that
nation. But is there any thing in the language of the constitution (much less
in its spirit and intention) which authorizes one man to impute crimes to
another, for which the law has provided the mode of trial, and the degree of
punishment? Can it be presumed that the slanderous words, which, when spoken to
a few individuals, would expose the speaker to punishment, become sacred, by
the authority of the constitution, when delivered to the public through the
more permanent and diffusive medium of the press? Or, will it be said that the
constitutional right to examine the proceedings of government, extends to
warrant an anticipation of the acts of the legislature or the judgments of the
court? and not only to authorize a candid commentary upon what has been done,
but to permit every endeavor to biass and intimidate with respect to matters
still in suspense? The futility of any attempt to establish a construction of
this sort, must be obvious to every intelligent mind. The true liberty of the
press is amply secured by permitting every man to publish his opinions; but it
is due to the peace and dignity of society to enquire into the motives of such
publications, and to distinguish between those which are meant for use and
reformation, and with an eye solely to the public good, and those which are
intended merely to delude and desame. To the latter description, it is
impossible that any good government should afford protection and impunity.

If, then, the liberty of the press is regulated by any just principle, there
can be little doubt, that he, who attempts to raise a prejudice against his
antagonist, in the minds of those that must ultimately determine the dispute
between them; who, for that purpose, represents himself as a persecuted man,
and asserts that his judges are influenced by passion and prejudice, --
wilfully seeks to corrupt the source, and to dishonor the administration of
justice.

Such is evidently the object and tendency of Mr Oswald's address to the
public. Nor can that artifice prevail, which insinuates that the decision of
this court will be the effect of personal resentment; for, if it could, every
man might evade the punishment due to his offenses, by first pouring a torrent
of abuse upon his judges, and then asserting that they act from passion,
because their treatment has been such as would naturally excite resentment in
the human disposition. But it must be remembered, that judges discharge their
functions under the solemn obligations of an oath; and, if their virtue
entitles them to their station, they can neither be corrupted by favor to
swerve from, nor influenced by fear to desert their duty. That judge, indeed,
who courts popularity by unworthy means, while he weakens his pretensions,
diminishes, likewise, the chance of attaining his object; and he will
eventually find that he has sacrificed the substantial blessing of a good
conscience, in an idle and visionary pursuit.

Upon the whole, we consider the publication in question, as having the
tendency which has been ascribed to it, that of prejudicing the public (a part
of whom must hereafter be summoned as jurors) with respect to the merits of a
cause depending in this court, and of corrupting the administration of justice:
We are, therefore, unanimously of opinion, on the first point, that it amounts
to a contempt.

It only remains then to consider, whether the offense is punishable in the way
that the present motion has proposed. It is certain that the proceeding by
attachment is as old as the law itself, and no act of the legislature, or
section of the constitution, has interposed to alter or suspend it. Besides the
sections which have been already read from the constitution, there is another
section which declares, that "trials by jury shall be "as heretofore;" and
surely it cannot be contended, that the offense, with which the defendant is
now charged, was heretofore tried by that tribunal. If a man commits an outrage
in the face of the court, what is there to be tried? -- what further evidence
can be necessary to convict him of the offense, than the actual view of the
Judges? A man has been compelled to enter into security for his good behavior,
for giving the lie in the presence of the Judges in Westminster Hall. On the
present occasion, is not the proof, from the inspection of the paper, as full
and satisfactory as any that can be offered? And whether the publication
amounts to a contempt, or not, is a point of law, which, after all, it is the
province of the judges, and not of the jury, to determine. Being a contempt, if
it is not punished immediately, how shall the mischief be corrected? Leave it
to the customary forms of a trial by jury, and the cause may be continued long
in suspense, while the party perseveres in his misconduct. The injurious
consequences might then be justly imputed to the court, for refusing to
exercise their legal power in preventing them.

For these reasons we have no doubt of the competency of our jurisdiction; and
we think, that justice and propriety call upon us to proceed by attachment.


BRYAN, Justice, observed, that he did not mean to give an opinion as to the
mode of proceeding; but added, that he had always entertained a doubt with
respect to the legality of the process by attachment, in such cases, under the
constitution of Pennsylvania.

M'KEAN, C. J. Will the defendant enter into a recognizance to answer
interrogatories, or will he answer gratis?


Oswald. I will not answer interrogatories. Let the attachment issue At this
period of the cause, I am informed by a gentleman of great learning and
accuracy, that the court called for the sheriff in order to commit the
defendant; but the transition from that idea to the advice which fell from the
bench, must have been so instantaneous, that, if I heard that call, I presume I
did not consider it it as a part of the proceedings, and therefore omitted it
in my notes. If it is of any importance, I am happy in the opportunity of
supplying this defect.
.


M'KEAN, C. J. His counsel had better advise him to consider of it.


Sergeant said that the defendant had not had time, even to peruse what had
been sworn against him; for only Sunday had intervened since the obtaining the
rule to show cause, and that was an improper day for applying to the records of
the court.

M'KEAN, C. J. In criminal matters Sunday has always been deemed a legal day.
There has been as ample time for consideration as could well be allowed; the
term will end tomorrow. Will he answer, or not?


Sergeant prayed the court would grant 'till tomorrow morning to form a
determination on the subject, and offered bail for the defendant's appearance
at that time.

M'KEAN, C. J. Be it so. Let the bail be taken, himself in L. 200, and one
surety in the like sum, for his appearance tomorrow morning.


THE SAME CAUSE.
15th July.
THE defendant appearing in discharge of the recognizance entered into
yesterday, the CHIEF JUSTICE again asked, whether he would answer
interrogatories or not?

Bankson, for the defendant, requested that the interrogatories might be
reduced to writing before he was called upon to determine.


M'KEAN, C. J. Is that your advice to him? He must now say whether he will
answer them or not; they will be filed according to the usage of the court, and
all just exceptions to them will be allowed.


Bankson. He instructs me to declare that he will not answer interrogatories;
and he then began to urge, that there was no contempt committed, but was told
by the Chief Justice, that as that point had been determined by an unanimous
opinion of the four judges yesterday, it was not now open for argument.


Lewis said, that as a misrepresentation had been industriously spread abroad
respecting the conduct of the court, he thought it proper, at this time,
concisely to state the real nature of the present proceedings. It has been
asserted that the court were about to compel Mr. Oswald to convict himself of
the offense with which he is charged: but the fact is this, that it is
incumbent upon the person who suggests the contempt to prove it by
disinterested witnesses; and then, indeed, the defendant is allowed by his own
oath to purge and acquit himself, in spite of all the testimony which can
possibly be produced against him. It appears clearly therefore, that Mr.
Oswald's being called upon to answer interrogatories, is not meant to establish
his guilt (for that has been already done) but to enable him to avoid the
punishment which is the consequence of it. The court employ no compulsion in
this respect. He may either answer, or not, as he pleases: if he does answer,
his single oath, in his own favor, will countervail the oaths of a thousand
witnesses; and if he does not answer, his silence corroborates the evidence
which has been offered of the contempt, and the judgment of the court must
necessarily follow.

M'KEAN, C. J. Your statement is certainly right, and the misrepresentation,
which is attempted, must either be the effect of wickedness, or ignorance.


Lewis now prayed, that the rule might be made absolute; but remarked, that,
according to the authorities, the court might either do that; or, as the
defendant was present, they might proceed at once to pass sentence upon him.

M'KEAN, C. J. There can be no occasion, when the party is present, to make the
rule for the attachment absolute: the court will proceed to give judgment.


BRYAN, Justice. I was not here when the complaint was made to the court, when
the evidence in support of the motion was produced, or the arguments against it
were delivered: I consider myself therefore totally incapacitated for taking
any part in this business.


Lewis. We can immediately furnish the court with the proofs.


BRYAN, Justice. Can you furnish me likewise, with Mr. Sergeant's arguments?


Lewis said, that he had not penetration enough to discover any argument in
what had been said for the defendant; and having again read all the evidence
which had been produced, he recapitulated what he had before said in support of
the motion.

Page, the undersheriff, was then called upon to prove that the writ in the
action of Brown us. Oswald had been in his possession, at least twelve days
before it was served; and that the delay in serving it arose, at first, from
the defendant's being at Baltimore; and, afterward, from his not being at home
when the witness had repeatedly called upon him

BRYAN, Justice. I still say, that not having heard what has been offered in
extenuation of the offense, I am incompetent to join in any opinion respecting
the punishment. I cannot surely be suspected of partiality to libellers: I have
had my share of their malevolence. But, it is true, I have not suffered much;
for these trifles do not wrankle in my mind.


The CHIEF JUSTICE pronounced the judgment of the court in the following words:

M'KEAN, C. J. -- Eleazer Oswald:

Having yesterday considered the charge against you, we were unanimously of
opinion, that it amounted to a contempt of the court. Some doubts were
suggested, whether, even a contempt of the court, was punishable by attachment:
but, not only my brethren and myself, but, likewise, all the judges of England,
think, that without this power no court could possibly exist; -- nay, that no
contempt could, indeed, be committed against us, we should be so truly
contemptible. The law upon the subject is of immemorial antiquity; and there is
not any period when it can be said to have ceased, or discontinued. On this
point, therefore, we entertain no doubt: but some difficulty has arisen with
respect to our sentence; for, on the one hand, we have been informed of your
circumstances, and on the other, we have seen your conduct: your circumstances
are small, but your offense is great and persisted in. Since, however, the
question seems to resolve itself into this, whether you shall bend to the law,
or the law shall bend to you, it is our duty to determine that the former shall
be the case. Upon the whole, therefore, THE COURT pronounce this sentence: That
you pay a fine of 10l. to the commonwealth; that you be imprisoned for the
space of one month, that is, from the 15th day of July to the 15th day of
August next; and, afterward, till the fine and costs are paid. -- Sheriff he
is in your custody.


A SUMMARY of the PROCEEDINGS in the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of PENNSYLVANIA, upon the
Complaint of Col. ELEAZER OSWALD against the JUSTICES of the SUPREME COURT.
ON the 5th of September 1788, Col. Oswald, the defendant, presented a memorial
to the general assembly, in which he complained of the decision of the supreme
court; stated the above proceedings against him; and likewise represented, that
the Chief Justice had directed the Jailer not to discharge him, after his
sentence was expired; -- finally calling upon the house to determine, whether
the Judges did not infringe the constitution in direct terms in the sentence
they had pronounced; and whether, of course, they had not made themselves
proper objects of impeachment.

The assembly, having previously appointed a committee to report the order of
proceeding on Col. Oswald's memorial, resolved itself into a committee of the
whole, to hear the evidence in support of the charges exhibited. Three days
were consumed in the examination of witnesses, during which, the preceding
report was substantially proved; and it was also given in evidence, that,
though the sentence of imprisonment was pronounced for the space of one month,
that is from the 15th day of July to the 15th day of August, yet, that the
record merely stated it to be for one month (which is only 28 days in law)
without taking notice of the explanatory words used by the court; and that
notwithstanding this, the CHIEF JUSTICE, when the month was expired, had, at
first, directed the Jailor not to release Col. Oswald, till the morning of the
15th day of August; though he, afterward, wrote to the sheriff, that it would
be proper to discharge his prisoner agreeably to the record.

Mr. Lewis, as a member of the house, then delivered a very elaborate argument,
in vindication of the conduct of the judges. It is impossible to pursue this
gentleman's tract of reasoning, with any degree of justice to his eloquence, or
the subject in discussion; but it may not be unprofitable to those who, either
now or hereafter, may wish to understand the principles of this interesting
case, to delineate the leading features of the doctrine which he maintained.

He began with stating the inestimable character of true liberty, which is
equally endangered by tyranny on the one hand, and by licentiousness upon the
other. He said, it did not consist in the uncontrouled power of doing whatever
the will might prompt an individual to attempt; but, while it was independent
of arbitrary and despotic rule, it was happily regulated by the laws and
constitution of the state. Having rescued Sir William Blackstone, from the
stigma of being a courtly writer, by showing the enthusiasm of that author in
favor of the trial by jury, Mr. Lewis referred to the celebrated Commentaries
in support and illustration of his sentiments upon liberty. 1 Black. Com. 125.
2 Black. Com. 4 Black. Com. 3 42.

He then commented upon the origin, nature, and purposes of a state of society,
which, he said, was principally formed to protect the rights of individuals;
and, of those rights, he pathetically described, the right of enjoying a good
name, to be the most important and most precious. He observed, that the
injuries which could be done to any other property, might be repaired; but
reputation was not only the most valuable, but, likewise, the most delicate of
human possessions. It was the most difficult to acquire; when acquired, it was
the most difficult to preserve; and when lost, it was never to be regained. If,
therefore, it was not as much protected, as any other right, the aged matron,
and the youthful virgin, (since purity of character is the palladium of female
happiness) while they are fettered by the habits and expectations of society,
are exposed and abandoned by its laws and institutions. But this evil is
effectually removed, when we consider the bill of rights as precluding any
attempt to restrain the press, and not as authorizing insidious falsehoods and
anonymous abuse. The right of publication, like every other right, has,
therefore, its natural and necessary boundary; for, though the law allows a man
the free use of his arm, or the possession of a weapon, yet it does not
authorize him to plunge a dagger in the breast of an inoffensive neighbor.

Mr. Lewis then proceeded to consider the immediate subject of complaint. He
stated it to be twofold; 1 st. That the CHIEF JUSTICE had protracted Col.
Oswald's imprisonment, beyond the legal expiration of his sentence, and, 2dly.
That the imprisonment itself, was unconstitutional, illegal, and tyrannical.

On the first point, he observed, that it was, indeed a serious charge, if Col.
Oswald could prove that a single justice, had arbitrarily altered, or
counteracted, the record of the court, in order to accomplish the imprisonment
of a citizen. But how was the charge supported? The opinion given by the Chief
Justice to the Jailer, was not given in his judicial capacity; and though a
paper, said to be a transcript from the records, was shown to him, yet it was
not subscribed by the Prothonotary, nor was it under the seal of the court.
This, therefore, could not be a sufficient document to set aside his
recollection of the sentence; it was no legal evidence of the fact which it
stated, ( Gi^. law of Ev. 23) and the little time that elapsed between the
opinion given to the Jailer, and the directions for Col. Oswald's release, we
may fairly presume to have been consumed in examining the records.

On the second point, he engaged in a long and ingenious disquisition upon the
nature of what is called the liberty of the press; he represented the shackles
which had been imposed upon it during the arbitrary periods of the English
government; and thence deduced the wisdom and propriety of the precaution,
which declares in the bill of rights, that the press shall not be subject to
restraint. He gave an historical narrative of the British acts of parliament
and proclamations, which debarred every man of the right of publication without
a previous license obtained from cancers* established by the government, to
inspect and pronounce upon every literary performance; but observed, that this
oppression (which was intended to keep the people in a (...) ignorance of the
conduct of their rulers) expired in the year 1694, when the dawn of true
freedom rose upon that nation. 9 (...), p 190. Since that memorable period, the
liberty of the (...) stood on a firm and rational basis. On the one hand, it is
not subject to the tyranny of previous (...), and, on the other, it affords no
^^^tion to ribaldry and slander: -- so true it is. (...) to censure the
licentiousness is to maintain the liberty of the press. (...) 1^0.151.152.
Here, (...) is to be discerned the genuine (...) of this section in the bill of
rights, which (...) opposite construction would prostitute to the most ignoble
purposes. Every man may publish what he pleases; but, it is at his peril, if he
publishes any thing which violence the rights of another, or interrupts the
peace and order of society; -- as every man may keep poisons in his closet, but
(...) that he may (...) them to the people for (...)? If, indeed, this (...) of
the bill of rights find not circumscribed the authority of the legislature,
this house, being a single branch, might in a de^^^ paroxism, revive all (...)
restraints, which disgraced the early annals of the British government Hence,
arises the great fundamental advantage of the provision, which the authors of
the constitution have wisely interwoven with our political system; not, it
appears, to tolerate and indulge the passions and animosities of individuals,
but effectually to protect the citizens from the encroachments of men in power.

It has been asserted, however, that Col. Oswald's address was of a harmless
texture; that is was no abuse of the right of publication, to which, as a
citizen, he was entitled: and, in short, that in considering it as a contempt
of the court, the judges have acted tyrannically, illegally, and
unconstitutionally. But let us divest the subject of these high-sounding
epithets, and the reverse of this assertion will be evident, to every candid
and unprejudiced mind: For, such publications are certainly calculated to draw
the administration of justice from the proper tribunals; and in their place to
substitute newspaper altercations, in which the most skilful writer will
generally prevail against all the merits of the case. But it is moreover the
duty of the judges to protect suitors, not only from personal violence, but
from insidious attempts, to undermine their claims to law and justice. Hence,
Lord Chancellor Hardwicke, (who was an ornament to his country, and not one of
whose decrees during the period of twenty years which he sat as chancellor, was
ever reversed) has described three sorts of contempts -- 1st. Scandalizing the
court itself. 2dly. Abusing parties who are concerned in causes there; and
3dly. Prejudicing mankind against persons, before the cause is heard. 2 Atk.
471. And in 2 Vesey 520, though no reflection was cast upon the court, and the
offender pleaded ignorance of the law, yet it is expressly laid down, that
ignorance was not an excuse, and that the reason for punishing was, not only
for the sake of the party injured, but also for the sake of the public
proceedings in the court to hinder such advertisements, which tend to
propossess people as to those proceedings. A similar doctrine is maintained in
1 P. Williams 675. and 4 Black. Com. 282. pronounces the printing, even true,
accounts of a cause depending in judgment, to be a contempt of the court.

But it has been said, that this cause was not depending in court, when the
offense was committed, because the address was published on the first of July,
and the writ against Mr. Oswald was not returnable 'till the succeeding day.
This idea originates in an ignorance of the constitution of our courts, which,
in this respect, differs essentially from the constitution of the courts of
England. There all original process issues out of the Court of Chancery, and is
made returnable into the King's Bench or Common Pleas; so that, in truth, the
writ gives the jurisdiction, and, of course, 'till it is returned, the court
cannot take cognizance of the cause. Here, however, the original process issues
out of the very court into which it is returnable, and is usually tested the
last day of the preceding term. It is absurd, therefore, to say that the
jurisdiction of a court, by whose authority a suit is actually instituted, can
be thus suspended and parcelled out.

With respect to the address itself, Mr. Lewis annalysed its offensive parts,
in order to show that it treated the judges with indecent opprobrium; that, in
some respects, it was inconsistent with truth, and that, in its general
operation, it was intended, and could not fail, to excite resentment against
Brown, the plaintiff, and compassion for Oswald, the defendant, in the cause

He now proceeded to consider the mode of punishment, which formed a material
part of Col. Oswald's complaint; and, in support of its legality, referred,
generally, to the authorities which he had already cited. He observed that much
declamation had been wasted upon this topic; and that the proceeding by
attachment had been vehemently reprobated as the creature of the Court of Star
Chamber. Though that court might have employed the process of attachment (of
which, however, he did not recollect an instance) yet, he insisted, that it was
idle and absurd to consider it as the creature of a jurisdiction, whose own
existence was of a much later date, than that of the subject to which we are
told it gave birth. To prove this, he stated that the court of Star Chamber was
not instituted 'till the year 1368; that Magna Charta was confirmed, at least,
113 years before that time; and, as all the authorities concur in declaring
that the process by attachment is as ancient as the laws themselves, and that
it was confirmed by Magna Charta, its origin is consequently long antecedent to
that of the Court of Star Chamber. 4 Black. Com. 280.281.282.283.284.285.

But he argued, with great strength and perspicuity, that the process of
attachment, which in practice was multiplied into innumerable uses, was
essential to the administration of justice; and that if the exercise of this
power was suppressed, the courts themselves might as well be annihilated. He
represented, that it was an established principle in law, that one court could
not punish a contempt committed against another; then, continued he, how shall
the Common Pleas repel an injury of that nature? It is not vested with any
criminal jurisdiction; it cannot impannel a grand Jury, nor try an indictment;
the only remedy therefore which the case can admit, is by an attachment. He
applied the same reasoning to the supreme court; and with respect to the
orphan's courts, the court of admiralty, and the courts of the registers of
wills, etc. he observed that their proceedings, according to the civil law,
were totally independent of juries; and that consequently if they were deprived
of the process of attachment, it was in vain for them to decide and to decree,
for they would then be without any means to enforce obedience to their
decisions and decrees. Nay, he added, that, without this power, the legislature
itself would be exposed to wanton insult and interruption; and that letters,
such as he had received, menacing his existence for his conduct on the present
occasion, might be written and avowed with absolute impunity. He then
enumerated many instances in which gross injustice would take place, but for
the intervention of this summary proceeding. Where a sheriff refuses, or
neglects, to return a writ; or to pay money which he has received upon an
execution; where an inferior court refuses to transmit a record; a witness, or
juryman, to attend or to be sworn; and where a defendant in ejectment refuses
to pay costs, after a nonsuit, for want of a confession of lease entry and
ouster; -- in all these (and many other) cases he demonstrated, that the great,
efficient remedy, was by an attachment to be issued against the delinquent.

In tracing the antiquity of the process by attachment, he remarked, that, it
was admitted to be a part of the common law by the most authoritative writers;
and that the common law was a compound of the Danish, Saxon, Norman, Pict and
Civil law. 1 Black. Com. 63. As, therefore, the attachment is derived from the
civil law, and the civil law was introduced into England by the Romans, early
in the first century, he thought it impracticable at this day to ascertain its
source; but insisted that enough appeared to prove it to be of immemorial
usage, and a part of the law of the land.

He then adverted to the leading objection made by the advocates for Col.
Oswald, that, however the process of attachment might be legal in England, it
was not so in Pennsylvania. From a decision in the time of Judge Kinsey, he
showed that, before the revolution, an attachment had issued for a contempt,
and that the party had, in fact, answered certain interrogatories filed by
order of the court; so that it only remained to enquire, whether any alteration
had been introduced by the constitution of the state. In the 24th sect. of that
instrument, it is declared that, the supreme court, and the several courts of
common pleas of this commonwealth, shall, besides the powers usually exercised
by such courts, have the powers of a court of chancery, so far as relates, etc.
Now, as it appears by the case which occurred while Mr Kinsey was chief
justice, that the power of issuing attachments was usually exercised by the
supreme court, so far from altering the law, this is a direct confirmation of
the jurisdiction of the court; for, the greater naturally includes the less;
and if the court is vested with all its former powers, by what possible
construction can we deprive it of this? But it is answered, that a section in
the bill of rights provides, that "In all prosecutions for criminal offenses
the trial shall be by jury, etc." True; but the whole system must be taken
together; or, if we examine a particular part, it must be with a recollection
of the immediate subject to which that part relates For, otherwise, this very
section might as properly be brought to prove, that the judges could not be
impeached (since surely that is not a trial by jury) as that they have not the
power of issuing attachments. All cases proper for a trial by jury, the bill of
rights clearly meant to refer to that tribunal; but can any thing more
explicitly demonstrate, that the framers of the constitution were aware of some
cases, which required another mode of proceeding, than their declaration, that
"Trials shall be by jury as heretofore?" -- Who will assert that contempts were
ever so tried? who will hazard an opinion, that it is possible so to try them?

But does not the constitution of Pennsylvania further distinguish between the
laws of the land, and the judgment of our peers; furnishing a striking
alternative, by the disjunctive particle or? This very sentiment, expressed in
the same words, appears in the Magna Charta of England; and yet Blackstone
unequivocally informs us, that the process of attachment was confirmed by that
celebrated instrument. In the 14 chap. of Magna Charta, it is also said, that
no amercement shall be assessed, but by lawful men of the vicinage; and who,
that is at all acquainted with the law, or with the reason of the law, can
think it possible, in that case, to pursue the generality of the expression?
From these analogous principles, therefore, and the construction of ages, we
may safely argue on the present occasion. But the wild and hypothetical
interpretations, which some men have offered, would inevitably involve us in a
labyrinth of error, and eventually endanger that liberty, which they profess,
and every honest citizen must wish, to preserve.

As to the manner of proceeding upon the attachment, the court on this occasion
have followed the precedent in Mosley's rep 250. where it is liberally said,
that the defendant shall not be permited to be examined to bring himself into
contempt; but upon proof of the contempt, he shall be allowed to purge himself
upon his oath.

Upon the whole, Mr. Lewis concluded, that the only grounds of impeachment,
were bribery, corruption, gross partiality, or wilful and arbitrary oppression;
and that as none of these had been proved, Col. Oswald's memorial ought to be
dismissed. He said, indeed, that it would be preferable to return to the state
of nature, than to live in a state of society upon the terms which that
memorial presented; -- terms which left the weak and the innocent a prey to the
powerful and the wicked; and which gave to falsehood and licentiousness, all
that was due to freedom and to truth.

When Mr. Lewis's argument was closed, Mr. Findley rose, and delivered his
sentiments, with his usual abilities and precision. He acknowledged, that he
had received great information and pleasure, from the learned and eloquent
speech of the member who preceded him; but he thought it was unnecessary, upon
the present occasion, to explore the dark and distant periods of juridical
history. The rights and immunities which formed the great object of the
revolution, he contended, were capable of an easy and unequivocal definition;
they were not of such remote antiquity as to be lost even to the feelings of
the people; and the constitution of the state was the only proper criterion, by
which they could be judged and ascertained. He did not, therefore, intend to
pursue Mr. Lewis, in the tract of legal disquisition; but, appealing
confidently to the instrument itself, he deemed it to be his duty to pronounce,
that the decision of the supreme court was a deviation from the spirit and the
letter of the frame of government. In doing this, he observed, that he did not
mean to assert, that any ground had been shown for the impeachment of the
judges. But, on the contrary, he agreed with Mr. Lewis, that bribery,
corruption, or a wilful and arbitrary infraction of the law, were the only true
causes for instituting a prosecution of that nature; and his candor readily
induced him to believe, that as none of these had been proved, neither did any
of them actually exist on this occasion. But, he said, it was due to the
dearest interests of posterity, that the legislature should act with that
circumspection, should decide with that wisdom, which, leading on the one hand,
to an acquittal of the judges, did not tend, on the other, to establish a
baneful and destructive precedent. It was in this point of view, that the
present proceeding presented itself to his mind, as a matter of the greatest
magnitude and importance; and he said it were better far that Col. Oswald had
suffered in silence and obscurity, than that the attention of the legislature
should be awakened, only to give additional strength and authority to the
mistaken judgment of the court.

That it was a mistaken judgment, every man, he alleged, who possessed a
competent share of common sense, and understood the rules of grammar, was able
to determine on a bare perusal of the bill of rights and constitution. With
these aids, he defied all the sophistry of the schools, and the jargon of the
law, to pervert or corrupt the explicit language of the text; and therefore he
regretted, that in listening to the ingenuity of Mr. Lewis's paraphrase, his
admiration was not necessarily followed by conviction.

He then discussed the 9 sect. of the bill of rights, which provides, that in
all prosecutions for criminal offenses a man has a right to be heard by
himself and his council, to demand the cause and nature of his accusation, to
be confronted with the witnesses, to call for evidence in his favor, and a
speedy public trial, by an impartial jury of the country, without the unanimous
consent of which jury he cannot be found guilty, nor can he be compelled to
give evidence against himself, nor can any man be justly deprived of his
liberty except by the laws of the land or the judgment of his peers. He said,
that in these expressions, there was nothing ambiguous or uncertain; they
contained a recapitulation of the most valuable privileges, in the most
positive language; and they did not require to be illustrated, or explained, by
the Roman institutions, or the British practice. Hither, he observed, every man
could safely resort, in order to be taught the nature and extent of his rights
and obligations; and it would be fatal indeed to the cause of liberty, if it
was once established, that the technical learning of a lawyer, is necessary to
comprehend the principles, laid down in this great political compact between
the people and their rulers. Even with respect to that clause on which the
proceedings of the Judges are particularly vindicated, he did not perceive a
reasonable ground for the distinction that was attempted; but thought, with
many other characters of superior information and abilities, that the law of
the land was not, in fact, contra-distinguished from the judgment of his peers,
but merely a diversity in the mode of expressing the same thing. He admitted,
however, that cases did exist in which it was necessary, for the sake of
justice, to empower the judges to exercise a summary authority. For outrages
committed in the face of the court, for the misconduct of its officers, and for
a disobedience or resistance of its process, there seemed, he said, to be a
propriety in establishing an immediate remedy. But, this did not extend, in his
opinion, to the case of constructive contempts; to criminal offenses
perpetrated out of the view of the court; nor to such acts, as in their nature,
did not call for a sudden punishment, and which, in their operation, involved a
variety of facts, that a jury were only competent to investigate and determine.

With respect to the argument offered by Mr. Lewis, that as attachments had
issued in Pennsylvania before the revolution; and as the 24 sect. of the
constitution, declares, that the courts shall have all the powers which they
usually exercised, therefore the power of proceeding by attachment is
confirmed, Mr. Findley observed, that the fallacy of this interpretation, would
be notorious, by recollecting that the last sentence of that very section,
stipulates that such powers shall not be inconsistent with the constitution.
Nor would he admit the inference which had been drawn from the next section,
that says, "trials shall be by jury as heretofore; for, he said, it appeared by
its context and immediate subject, that was related to the forms and modes of
proceeding upon the trial, and not to the cases in which the trial ought to be
allowed.

Having expatiated, with great energy, upon the different points of the
constitution, which the subject brought into view; having asserted the right of
every man to publish his sentiments on public proceedings; and having urged the
danger of permitting the judges, by implication, to punish for offenses against
themselves (observing, that if it was a contempt to write, it was also a
contempt to speak of a cause depending in the courts) he concluded with
intimating, that he should take an opportunity of submitting a resolution to
the house, which might serve to avert the pernicious consequences of allowing
the case of Col. Oswald to grow into precedent.

Mr. Fitzsimons, now moved the following resolution.

"Resolved, That this house, having, in a committee of the whole, gone into a
full examination of the charges exhibited by Eleazer Oswald, of arbitrary and
oppressive proceedings in the justices of the supreme court against the said
Eleazer Oswald, are of opinion, that the charges are unsupported by the
testimony adduced, and, consequently, that there is no just cause for
impeaching the said justices."

The proposition contained in this resolution, gave rise to a short but
animated conversation. On the one hand, it was said, that, in admitting that
there was no ground of impeachment, it was not intended to concede, that the
facts represented in the memorial had not been proved: and, on the other hand,
it was answered, that, if there had been proof that the memorialist, according
to the complaint, was immured in prison, without even the shadow of a trial,
for an imaginary offense, it would have been the indispensable duty of the
legislature to vote for an impeachment. A compromise, at length, took place,
and the commit of the whole agreed to report the following resolution.

"Resolved, That the charges exhibited by Colonel Eleazer Oswald against the
justices of the supreme court, and the testimony given in support of them, are
not a sufficient ground of impeachment."

But when this report was called up for the decision of the house, it was
postponed (and consequently lost) on motion of Mr. Clymer, in order to
introduce the resolution originally proposed by Mr. Fitzsimons in the
committee. Mr. Findley then claimed the attention of the members, and after a
judicious introduction, presented the following resolutions to the chair, to
supercede Mr. Clymer's motion.

"Resolved, That the proceedings of the supreme court against Col. Eleazer
Oswald, in punishing him by fine and imprisonment, at their discretion, for a
constructive or implied contempt, not committed in the presence of the court,
nor against any officer, or order thereof, but for writing and publishing
improperly, or indecently, respecting a cause depending before the supreme
court, and respecting some of the judges of said court, was an unconstitutional
exercise of judicial power, and sets an alarming precedent, of the most
dangerous consequence, to the citizens of this commonwealth."

"Resolved, That it be specially recommended to the ensuing General Assembly,
to define the nature and extent of contempts, and direct their punishment."

An interesting debate arose upon these resolutions, in the course of which,
much that had been said in the committee was repeated, and many new ideas were
suggested, upon the general question of the jurisdiction of the court in cases
of attachment. With respect to Mr. Findley's propositions, that gentleman ably
supported them upon the spirit of the constitution, and the expediency of the
thing itself. But it seemed to be satisfactorily answered by Mr. Lewis, 1st.
That the legislative power is confined to making the law, and cannot interfere
in the interpretation; which is the natural and exclusive province of the
judicial branch of the government: and 2dly, That the recommendation to the
succeeding assembly would be nugatory; for the courts of justice derive their
powers from the constitution, a source paramount to the legislature; and,
consequently, what is given to them by the former, cannot be taken from them by
the latter.

Mr. Findley's motions were lost by a considerable majority; and Mr. ^ymer's
revived resolution, adopted by the house:

Yeas 34. Nays 23.

Thus terminated a business which for several weeks agitated the public mind;
and which was considered of so important a nature, that the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of
Pennsylvania, at the very close of the last sessions of their political
existence, and while solicited by a multiplicity of other objects of great
national concern, devoted all their attention to hear the evidence with
impartiality, to discuss the arguments with candor, and to decide upon the
merits with integrity and wisdom.

Of the advantages derived from this scrutiny, the most apparent, and the most
immediately interesting, are the certainty which it has given to a title of the
law, not, perhaps, sufficiently understood before; and the testimony which it
has supplied in favor of those who are enrusted with the administration of
justice, and whose characters, like the chastity of Caesar's wife, should be
free even from suspicion. But there is another point of view, in which the
patriotic eye will regard the beneficial influence of these transactions; for,
when we behold the legislative authority of the state, listening, as in an act
of duty, to the complaints of an individual citizen against a sister branch of
the government, and not only able, but willing, to redress any wrongs that have
been sustained; the emotions of gratitude and veneration will naturally swell
the mind; every man must feel a pride and interest in supporting those laws
which so amply protect him; and, while he contemplates the system of freedom
under which he lives, he will at length be taught to convert a pious wish, into
an efficient rule of action: ESTO PERPETUA!


