FOUR SERMONS, ON IMPORTANT SUBJECTS; Delivered in SAINT GEORGE'S and SAINT
PAUL'S CHAPELS, in the CITY of NEW YORK.

By the Reverend UZAL OGDEN.

ELIZABETH-TOWN: PRINTED BY SHEPARD KOLLOCK, M,DCC,LXXXVIII.

THE RIGHT REVEREND SAMUEL PROVOST D. D. BISHOP of the PROTESTANT EPISCOPAL
CHURCH in the STATE of NEW YORK; THE ENSUING SERMONS, as a TESTIMONY of ESTEEM
and AFFECTION, ARE RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED, BY THE AUTHOR.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE SERMON on the holy rite of CONFIRMATION, was delivered in New York, in
Saint George's chapel, on Sunday May the 4th inst. and (with a little
variation) in the afternoon of that day, in Saint Paul's chapel.

This sacred rite was administered in the first mentioned of these chapels, on
Sunday, April the 27th last, and in the other chapel, the day the sermon was
preached. The author hopes that it is publication may be of utility,
(especially, as not any thing, to his knowledge, has been published, in this
country, on the subject^ of which it treats) and conceives, there will be a
propriety in prefixing it to the sermon on the holy sacrament of the LORD'S
SUPPER.

Those persons who subscribed for the publication of the four discourses, which
accompany the sermon, above mentioned, and were not informed that it would be
printed, have it at their option to receive it gratis, or to pay eight pence,
to defray the expenses of the press.

May 15, 1788.
SERMON I.
MICAH vi. 8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly; and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God?


SERIOUS is the truth, that those who enjoy the greatest spiritual privileges,
are not always the most distinguished for the practice of virtue!

How highly favored, for instance, were the people of Israel? -- "Unto them,"
it is said, "pertained the adoption; and the glory; and the covenants; and the
giving of the law; and the service of God; and the promises." Romans ix. 4.


But were they, in general, obedient to the will of Heaven? How often did the
Almighty complain of their impieties?

"I have spread out my hands," said he, "all the day, unto a rebellious people,
who walk in a way that is not good, after their own thoughts; who provoke me to
anger continually to my face." Isai. lxv. 2, 3.


"This people of Jerusalem is slidden back with a perpetual backsliding; they
hold fast deceit; they refuse to return. I hearkened and heared, but they spoke
not aright. No man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done?
Every one turned to his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle." Jer.
viii. 5, 6.


Often did God inflict judgments on his people to reclaim them from vice; and
often, to accomplish this end, did he address them in language of threatening
and reproof, by the voice of his prophets.

In the chapter before us, this people were thus addressed by the prophet Micah.

"Hear ye now what the Lord says: Arise, contend thou before the mountains,
and let the hills hear thy voice!"

Or, as the sense is; plead openly, vehemently; let there be witnesses to hear
the case, which is so favorable on God's part, and so full against his people,
that the very mountains and hills, on which they have publicly sinned against
him, and on which he greatly blessed them, had they eyes to see, ears to hear,
and a voice of utterance, would testify that God planted them with vines and
olives; clothed them with grass and flocks; stored them with springs of water,
and beautified them with cedars and all pleasant trees of the forest; -- but on
these places have these people made their groves; set up their idols;
sacrificed to devils, and committed impieties not to be named! Speak,
therefore, O Micah, as though thou would make the mountains and hills hear,
that they may witness for God against this people!

"Hear ye, O mountains, the Lord's controversy, and ye strong foundations of
the earth; for the Lord has a controversy with his people, and he will plead
with Israel;" -- no longer forbear to punish them for their iniquities. -- "O
my people, what have I done unto thee? And wherein have I wearied thee? Testify
against me!" -- If I have ever been doing thee good; if I have imposed on thee
nothing grievous nor unjust, why art thou weary of me? Or, if thou have found
any injustice in me, hesitate not to declare it; witness against me!

The Almighty then recounted the favors he had conferred on the people of
Israel, and, particularly, the deliverance he gave them from Egyptian bondage,
and from their enemies, while passing through the wilderness to the land of
Canaan; and also, the instruction communicated to them by Moses.

This address of the prophet, seems to have awakened in the people a sense of
guilt; a disposition to return to obedience. They enquire what sacrifice they
shall render God as an atonement for their sins; and express their willingness
to offer the most costly in their power; -- even the lives of their CHILDREN,
if these to God would be acceptable.

"Wherewith shall I come before the Lord and bow myself before the high God?
Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves of a year old? --
Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams? Or with ten thousands of
rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression; the fruit of my
body for the sin of my soul?"

To these enquiries, the prophet answers in the words of our text. -- "He HAS
showed thee, O Man! what is GOOD. And what does the Lord require of thee, but
to do justly; and to love mercy; and to walk humbly with thy God?"

The Almighty, it is here said, HAD SHOWED the people of Israel "what was
GOOD;" or what was their DUTY. -- It is probable the prophet alluded to the
following passage in the tenth chapter of the book of Deuteronomy, wherein the
duty of men is expressed.

"And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the
Lord thy God; to walk in all his ways; and to love him; and to serve the Lord
thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul: To keep the commandments of
the Lord, and his statutes, which I command thee this day, for thy good?" Deuteronomy.
x. 12, 13.


There are many other passages, indeed, in the sacred writings, in which the
whole of our duty is declared. And the children of Israel were informed, in the
text, that all their sacrifices to God would be unacceptable to him, if they
were regardless of VIRTUE.

"What does the Lord require of thee but to do justly, and to love mercy, and
to walk humbly with thy God?" Or, what service can thou render him, that will
be acceptable, whilst thou do not obey his will?

"Has the Lord as great delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifices, as in
obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice and to
hearken than the fat of rams!" 1 Samuel xv. 22.


As sacrifice, or external worship, is not pleasing to God, unless we are
possessed of righteousness; -- and as the WHOLE of our duty consists, it is
said, in "doing justice; loving mercy, and walking humbly with God;" we beg
leave to pay a little attention to these particulars.

It cannot be said we "DO JUSTLY," if, in any sort, we injure our fellow
creatures. And, in how many respects, may they be injured?

They may be robbed of their VIRTUE, which is, of all things, the most
estimable.

They may be deprived of their REPUTATION; be pierced by the tongue of
detraction, and receive thereby a wound more injurious than death itself.

By artifice, fraud or power, they may be divested of their PROPERTY; and, by
the hand of violence, they may be maimed in their PERSONS, or deprived of LIFE.

It cannot be said, that we "DO JUSTLY," if we are regardless of the duty we
owe to our COUNTRY, by duly honoring IT IS LAWS.

Public justice is explicitly enjoined on us. We are required "to render unto
all their dues; tribute to whom tribute is due; custom to whom custom; fear to
whom fear; honor to whom honor." Romans xiii. 7.


Nor can it be said that we "DO JUSTLY," while we perform not all the relative
duties we owe to each other. What injustice may legislators, magistrates,
ministers of religion, parents, and diverse other characters, be chargeable
with, when they are inattentive to the discharge of the trust reposed in them?

We do not, indeed, properly revere this precept of justice, except we "do unto
all men, as we would they should do unto us;" Luke vi. 31.
or unless all our actions, toward each other, are governed by the principles
of uprightness and ^ntegrity.

There is not, we conceive, any virtue that so contributes to the happiness of
society, as JUSTICE. And it is no small testimony, in favor of our religion,
that JUSTICE, as well as MERCY, is so forcibly and repeatedly enjoined on us.

"That," says God, "which is altogether just, shall thou follow." Deuteronomy. xvi. 20.


"Ye shall not steal; nor deal falsely; nor lie one to another." Lev. xix. 2.


"Thou shall not defraud thy neighbor; nor rob him." ibid. ver. 13.


"Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment; in weight; nor in measure. Just
balances, and just weights shall ye have." ibid. ver. 35, 36.


"Remove not the ancient land-mar^^ which thy fathers have set up. -- Enter not
into the fields of the fatherless; for their Redeemer is mighty, he shall plead
their cause with thee." Prove. xxii. 28. xxiii. 2.


"Woe unto him that builds his house by unrighteousness; that uses his
neighbor's service without wages." Jer. xxii. 13.


"Let no man defraud his brother, in any matter; because the Lord is the
avenger of all such." 1 These. iv. 6.


To JUSTICE, it is required, that we add MERCY.

He who is truly merciful, is free from malice, hatred and revenge. -- If
injured, "he avengeth not himself; but rather gives place to wrath; knowing
that vengeance belongs to God." Romans ^ii. 19.


Such a person, not only forgives his enemy; forbears "to recompense to him
evil for evil;" ibid. ver. 17.
but, "if he hungers, he feeds him; if he thirsts, he gives him drink," ibid.
ver. 20.
and therefore, "is not overcome of evil, but overcomes evil with good." ibid.
ver. 2^.


"As he has opportunity, he does good to ALL men;" Gal. vi. 10.
"to ALL he is compassionate, pitiful and courteous;" 1 Pet. iii. 8.
-- he uses no severity toward any, though legal justice might warrant the
action.

His deeds of benevolence are not performed to gain human applause; as far as
possible, they are done in secret, and he is stimulated to them by love to God
and love to man.

This is the character that, (in the most exalted sense of the expression*) may
be said to "LOVE MERCY;" he is, in this instance, an ornament to human nature
and religion, and a blessing to mankind; and he enjoys a pleasure, in
consequence of his benevolence, truly sublime, and altogether unexperienced by
the man of avarice, hatred or revenge.

We cannot but highly approve ourselves to the deity when we "show mercy." And
those who are devoid of mercy, cannot but be the objects of God's displeasure.

It was said by our Lord; "If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly
father will also forgive you; but if ye forgive not men their trespasses,
neither will your heavenly father forgive your trespasses." Matt. vi. 15.


"And he," says Saint James, "shall have judgment without mercy, that has
showed no mercy." Jam. ii. 13.


The other particular demanded of us, is, to "WALK HUMBLY WITH GOD;" or to
"humble ourselves, to walk with him."

HUMILITY certainly becomes sinful men. -- The psalmist, contemplating the
excellence of God, and the depravity of our nature, exclaims: "Lord what is man
that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that thou visitest him!" Psalm.
viii. 4.


"Before honor," says Solomon, "is humility." Prove. xv. 33.


Our Savior was a most perfect example of humility, and he exhorts us to
"learn of him to be meek and lowly in heart." Matt. xi. 29.


PRIDE, the sin of Lucifer, 1 Timothy iii. 6.
is most hateful to God; reproachful to men, and will terminate in their
abasement and destruction.

"A proud look," we are assured, "is an abomination to God." Prove. vi. 16, 17.


"The lofty looks of man," says a prophet, "shall be humbled, and the
haughtiness of man shall be brought down; for the day of the Lord of hosts
shall be upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low." Isai.
ii. 11, 12.


But however becoming humility is to mankind; and how pleasing soever our
humble demeanor may be to God, we cannot conclude that he requires of us
nothing more than the virtue of humility, when he enjoins us to "walk humbly
with him."

JUSTICE, MERCY, and HUMILITY, are, indeed, cardinal virtues; but should they,
(in the common acceptance of the words) be possessed by us, we might,
notwithstanding, be defective in our duty; be the slaves of vice; polluted by
sin; devoid of the Almighty's affection.

A person may be merciful, just and humble, while he continues in a state of
INFIDELITY; rejects the dispensation of the gospel; is destitute of sobriety;
temperance, and chastity, and indulges himself in many vices.

The phraze, therefore, "to walk humbly with God," is very comprehensive, and
is designed to include here, the whole of our duty; except our "doing justice
and loving mercy."

Agreeable to the tenor of the sacred writings, can it be said that we "walk
humbly with God;" perform all our duty, or are entitled to salvation, unless we
give our assent to the truths of divine revelation; -- are penitent for our
sins; -- rely on the merits of Christ for the absolution of our offenses; --
revere all the divine precepts, to the utmost of our ability, and are possessed
of all the graces and virtues of christianity; holiness, RENOVATION of HEART,
and a meetness to participate of celestial enjoyments?

"He that believes not," says our Lord, "shall be damned." Mark xvi. 16.
It is "the blood of Christ," we are informed, appropriated to us by faith,
"that cleanses us from sin." 1 John 1.7.


Without "repentance," we are assured we "shall perish." Luke xiii. 3.


"The workers of iniquity," it is declared, shall finally be rejected by
Christ. Matt. vii. 23.
"Without holiness," it is said, "no man shall see the Lord," Heb. xii. 14.
and except we are BORN," says our Savior, "of WATER and of the SPIRIT, we
cannot enter into the kingdom of God." John iii. 5.


Those who are the heirs of salvation, or who properly "receive" Christ, are
said to be "BORN, not of blood; nor of the will of the flesh; nor of the will
of man, but of GOD." ibid. i. 13.


Such, "cleanse themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and are
perfecting holiness in the fear of God;" 2 Cor. vii. 1.
and as they are obedient to the dictates of the divine spirit; are influenced
and governed by it, -- of THEM, it may be truly said, that THEY "walk humbly
WITH God."

"As many," says St. Paul, "as are led by the spirit of God, are the sons of
God;" Romans viii. 14.
and if "we live," says this apostle, "after the flesh, we shall die; but if
through the spirit, we mortify the deeds of the body, we shall live." ibid.
ver. 13.


Thus extensive and spiritual, are the demands of our religion; nothing less
than a due regard to these things, can be meant by "fearing God and keeping his
commandments;" Eccl. xii. 13.
or, by "doing justly; loving mercy, and walking humbly with him."

And such virtue, we presume, was possessed by "ENOCH," when "he walked with
God;" Genesis v. 22.
by "NOAH, who was a just man, and perfect in his generations, when he walked
with God, according to all his commandments;" ibid. vi. 9.
and by ABRAHAM, when the Lord appeared to him and said; "walk before me, and
be thou perfect." Genesis xvii. 1.


From what has been said, on this interesting subject, we perceive how
delusive it must be, to rely on the external worship of God, or on some moral
virtues only, for salvation!

These things are demanded of us; but they are far from comprehending ALL that
duty we owe to God, our neighbor, and ourselves!

It is the design of the gospel to restore our FALLEN NATURE; to teach us
wisdom; to inspire us with principles of virtue; to reform the WHOLE LIFE; --
to give us purity of heart; -- to reconcile us to God, and prepare us for the
enjoyments of his presence.

And, if thus, we also perceive how vain it must be to hope for salvation,
though possessed of the highest degrees of FAITH in Christ, while we are
destitute of MORAL GOODNESS; -- justice; mercy, and humility; sincerity,
integrity, chastity, and those other virtues, which are required of us!

How grateful should we be to GOD, that HE HAS "SHOWED US what is GOOD;" --
that he has made a discovery of his will to us; that we are not left to
fruitless efforts to discover our duty, by the dim light of nature, but that we
are blessed with the perfect effulgence of divine revelation!

While this consideration should excite in us gratitude to the Almighty, it
teaches us to reject the pretended revelations from above, communicated by
enthusiasts, As the canon of sacred scripture has long since been perfected,
it is truly astonishing, that, in this enlightened age, the very extraordinary
reveries of BARON SWEDENBORG, should be received as divine revelations by so
many respectable characters in Europe!

How opposite is the conduct of some men to each other! How striking the
contrast between the Deist and Enthusiast! The one, most credulous; the other,
totally devoid of faith! Enthusiasts, however, in general, are regarded as
honest, well-meaning persons; (the moral character of this gentleman is
amiable) happy would it be for Deists, if as much could be said in their favor!


or impostors!

A moment's reflection must convince us of the IMPORTANCE of duly submitting to
that dispensation of grace which God has favored us with; or of properly
honoring the requisition of the text!

As it is declared, that "blessed are those who hear the word of God and keep
it;" Luke xi. 28.
and that the "Lord Jesus will be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty angels,
in flaming fire, to take vengeance on those who know not God, and obey not the
gospel of Christ;" 2 These. i. 7, 8.
-- shall we not, therefore, from the present moment, if we have any concern
for the honor of God; the interests of virtue; our own honor, and present and
future felicity, be most sedulous to regard our duty; -- to "do justly; to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with our God?"

That such may be our wisdom; such our virtue and happiness, will God Almighty
of his infinite mercy, be pleased to grant; for the sake of the merits of
Christ; to whom with the Father and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all honor and
glory, adoration and praise, now and for ever!

SERMON II.
ROMANS vii. 9. For I was alive without the law once; but when the commandment
came, sin revived, and I died.


WITHOUT attending to that important relation which these words have with the
context, we will consider in what sense Saint Paul was " alive without the law."

NEXT, show, what we are to understand by the " coming of the commandment" to
him.

And, lastly, the effects of this to our apostle; -- "Sin revived, and he died."

FIRST, we are to notice in what sense Saint Paul "was alive without the law
once."

There were three kinds of laws which the Almighty delivered to the people of
Israel. -- The ceremonial law, which prescribed the rituals of their religion;
-- the judicial law, by which justice was administered among them, -- and that
law which is styled moral, which enjoined the whole of their duty to God, their
neighbors and themselves. -- And it was this last mentioned law that our
apostle had in view, when he said, that he was "alive without the law."

Very frequent, in the sacred writings, we perceive that a state of SIN or
IMPIETY, is compared to a state of DEATH. And also, that a return to VIRTUE, o^
RIGHTEOUSNESS, is compared to LIFE.

In this sense we are to understand our Lord, when, in the parable of the
prodigal son, it is said; "this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was
lost, and is found." Luke xv. 24.


The same ideas are conveyed by our Savior in these words. "I am the
resurrection and the life. He that believes on me, though he were dead, -- yet
shall he live. And whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall never die;"
John xi. 25.
or not eternally perish.

In such language, Saint Paul often expressed himself. In his epistle to the
Romans, he says; "Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead, indeed, unto
sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Lord." Romans vi. 11.


"Neither yield ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin; but
yield yourselves unto God, as those who are alive from the dead." ibid. ver. 13.


"And you," said he to the Ephesians, "has God quickened, who were dead in
trespasses and sins." Ephesians. ii. 1.


In this same mode of speech, in the Revelations of Saint John, was the church
in Sardis reproved for their declension in goodness; or defect in righteousness.

"These things says he that has the seven spirits of God, and the seven
stars; I know thy works, that thou have a name that thou live, and art dead."
Rev. iii. 1.


When Saint Paul, therefore, agreeable to this manner of expression, "was alive
without the law," -- we must conclude that he thought most favorably of his
spiritual condition; that he assured himself he was in a state of grace, and an
heir of salvation.

At that period, he says he was " alive without the law;" -- not without a
knowledge of the LETTER of it; but of it is SPIRIT; of it is DEMANDS; the
extension and purity of it is precepts: -- Or, he then flattered himself he duly
honored the law, and was entitled to justification before God, through an
observance of it is commands.

He was then "alive;" free from the terrors of guilt; free from all doubts and
fears respecting his title to immortal happiness.

At that moment we behold him as a PHARISEE of the first character; priding
himself in his OWN RIGHTEOUSNESS; -- his strict observance of the Sabbath; his
frequent fastings and deeds of mortification; -- his payment of tithes of all
things tythable which he possessed; -- his zeal for the propagation of the
jewish religion; -- his extraordinary acts of devotion, and almsgiving to the
distressed.

He then could solace himself with the reflection, that he was not chargeable
with any gross vice; and "thank God that he was not as other men were;
extortioners, unjust, adulterers;" Luke xviii. 11.
but that, in his own esteem, and in his own words, "as touching the
righteousness of the law, he was blameless. Phil. iii. 6.


While in this situation, he was raising the superstructure of his hopes of
salvation upon the unstable foundation of the merit of his GOOD WORKS.

Being entirely ignorant of the necessity of the RIGHTEOUSNESS of CHRIST, to be
appropriated to him by FAITH, he was endeavoring to establish his OWN
RIGHTEOUSNESS; not attending to this great truth of the gospel, that "CHRIST is
the end of the law, for RIGHTEOUSNESS to every one who believes in him." Romans
x. 4.


Thus was Saint Paul in the "wide and broad way, that leads to destruction,"
while he flattered himself he was in the "strait and narrow path which conducts
to salvation!"

Elevated he was to the pinnacle of danger, while he apprehended he was resting
on the rock of ages! -- Most dangerous, indeed, was his situation; though, to
him, pleasing was the delusion!

Had he been arrested by the hand of death, while thus trusting to his own
goodness, for acceptance with God, -- how wretched would have been his state!

But it pleased the Almighty to behold him in compassion; to awaken him to a
sense of his danger. And this was effected, by the " coming of the commandment"
to his mind, through the efficacy of the spirit of grace. "When the commandment
came, sin revived, and I died."

In strictness of speech, it may be said the "commandment came" to men, when it
was delivered by the Almighty to Moses, on Mount Sinai. But it could not, in
this manner, come to our apostle; as the law was given more than fifteen
hundred years before he existed.

In one sense, it may be said, "the commandment came" to him, when he was
taught it in his youth. But we cannot suppose the commandment thus came to
Saint Paul, agreeable to his meaning in the text. As he was educated a
Pharisee, he, in the early part of his life, became acquainted with the letter
of the law; -- but several years elapsed, after he thus attained a knowledge of
the commandment, before he uttered the words before us.

We, therefore, conclude, that when "the commandment came" to him, he beheld
it, in ALL its FORCE, EXTENT, and SPIRITUALITY; -- he was then convinced, that
it was designed, not only to regulate his external demeanor, but to reform,
govern, and purify his HEART. He then became sensible of that important truth,
inculcated by our Savior, in his exposition of the law, that " out of the
heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts,
false-witness, blasphemies." Matt. xv. 19.


Our apostle then beheld the imperfection that attended even his most righteous
acts, and how far he was from the heavenly kingdom. He then, indeed, had a just
view of himself in the glass of the law; he had an eye to see that it is "holy,
just and good;" Romans vii. 12.
to discern, that it "requires truth in the inward parts," Psalm. li. 6.
and he had an ear to hear it is denunciation of divine wrath against the person
who shall violate even the least of its precepts. Gal. iii. 10.


When the commandment thus came to Saint Paul, the scene was changed; he was no
longer a proud PHARISEE; but became an humble PENITENT; -- his understanding
was enlightened; the veil of ignorance and delusion was withdrawn from his
eyes; his conscience was alarmed; he felt the pressure of sin, the terrors of
guilt. -- In him "sin revived;" -- not to be indulged; to reign; to live; but
to die; -- he endured it is anguish, and beheld it is ingratitude, baseness and
demerits.

Until that period, the viper of iniquity, if we may be indulged the
similitude, lay in his breast, as in ^ state of DEATH; -- but then it became
animated; it pie^ced him to the heart with its sting; which not only occasioned
pain, but was productive of the pangs of death.

"Sin revived, and he died." -- All his hopes of salvation, by virtue of his
own righteousness, were then no more; -- he then perceived that he was
obnoxious to the curse of the divine law; -- justly exposed to eternal
condemnation; -- his heart was then truly contrite, and the language of his
soul was, "what he should do to be saved?" Acts xvi. 30.
-- He could then supplicate Heaven in the language of penitence; "God be
merciful to me a sinner!" Luke xviii. 13.


Then those deeds of righteousness which he regarded as " gain to him, he
counted," as he says, " loss, for CHRIST." Phil. iii. 7.
-- Then "he resolved to be found in Christ, not having on his own
righteousness which was of the law, but that which was through faith in the
divine Savior." ibid. verse. 9.
-- And then it was, that "the commandment which was ordained unto LIFE, (to
those who should perfectly obey it) he "found," as he himself expresses it, "to
be unto DEATH." Romans vii. 10.


Happy was it for Saint Paul, that he thus died, that he might live forever! --
From that moment, he felt in himself the pulse of a spiritual life; -- he was
delivered from the burden of sin; -- he enjoyed the smiles of Heaven; -- he
became most studious to please God; -- he had a just detestation of vice; --
his soul was enamoured with the love of virtue; -- his affections were
supremely fixed on the Almighty, -- he served him with cheerfulness, and from
principle; -- the great object of his pursuit was, the promotion of the glory
of God, and the salvation of men; -- his pleasures were holy, and his hopes of
redemption, scriptural.

Then it was, indeed, that he "passed from death unto life;" John v. 24.
-- that he was "turned from darkness unto LIGHT; from the power of Satan unto
God:" Acts xxvi. 18.
-- And then too it was, to speak in his own language, that he "received the
Spirit of adoption, whereby he could cry, Abba, Father;" Romans viii. 15.
that "the Spirit itself bore witness with his spirit, that he was a child of
God; an heir of God, and a joint heir with Christ of immortal happiness!" ibid.
verse. 16, 17.


How great, how blessed are the effects of Christianity! -- We perceive it is
designed to humble our PRIDE; to divest us of all dependence on OUR OWN
RIGHTEOUSNESS for salvation, that we may rely only on the MERITS of CHRIST for
eternal happiness; -- that it is intended to illume the understanding; to give
us contritions of heart; to reconcile us to the Almighty; -- to renovate our
souls; to restore us to holiness; the love, service, favor, and enjoyment of
God!

How great was the CHANGE Saint Paul experienced, when he embraced the gospel!
-- And SUCH a CHANGE must WE experience, if by US it has not been experienced,
or we cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven!

As Saint Paul was "alive without the law," it is feared, there are many, at
present, in a similar situation. But unless they shall suffer the " Commandment
to come" to them; to penetrate their hearts; -- to awaken in them a sense of
guilt; -- to cause sin in their minds to revive, and, in consequence thereof,
themselves in this manner, to expire in death; to relinquish their delusive
hopes of salvation, they must perish for ever!

For "the wages of sin is death;" Romans vi. 23.
-- the impenitent will be deprived of salvation; -- there is "no other name;"
no other righteousness, "by which we can be saved, but that of CHRIST;" Acts
iv. 12.
-- and except we are regenerate, or " born of the SPIRIT," we are assured, "we
cannot see the kingdom of God!" John iii. 5.


From the religious experience of SAINT PAUL, that we have noticed; or the
progress of grace in his heart, which he has left upon record, and no doubt
for our spiritual advantage, we may make the following practical observations.

FIRST: As Saint Paul, even while he was a zealous professor of religion, and a
rigid observer of its external duties, was indulging fallacious hopes of
redemption, -- we may notice the propensity mankind have to entertain unjust
conceptions of their title to salvation; or the probability there is of their
being deceived, with respect to their religious state.

Our apostle was far from being singular, in this instance. -- The Jews in
general vainly expected to attain salvation by their imperfect observance of
the precepts of the law; and this occasioned them to reject the RIGHTEOUSNESS
of CHRIST.

"But Israel," says Saint Paul, "which followed after the law of
righteousness, has not attained to the law of righteousness," (or to the
righteousness that God accepts.) Wherefore? Because, they sought it, not by
faith; but, as it were, by the works of the law; for they stumbled at that
stumbling stone." Romans ix. 31, 32.


The law demands a perfect obedience of each of its injunctions; and as all men
are sinful, "by the deeds of the law, therefore, we are assured, no flesh shall
be justified before God;" Romans iii. 20.
or obtain salvation.

It was the unhappiness of too many of the people of Israel, previous to the
promulgation of the gospel, that, in like manner, they were deceiving
themselves; saying in their hearts, in the words of the prophet Jeremiah,
"Peace, peace, when there was no peace!" Jer. vi. 14.


And is there not too much reason to apprehend, that great numbers, even of the
professors of Christianity, cherish the same spirit of delusion; that some
flatter themselves they are the heirs of salvation, by reason they have felt,
perhaps, some compunction for sin; have experienced a partial reformation of
their lives; are just in their dealings, and are observant of the devotional
parts of religion? -- That others, willing to magnify the grace of God, promise
themselves immortal happiness, by virtue of their faith only in Christ, while
they are almost wholly regardless of his commands?

It cannot reasonably be doubted, but that, in a variety of ways, many persons
countenance erroneous hopes of salvation; and, painful is the reflection, it is
not improbable, but that great numbers, even leave the world in this state of
deception!

Our Lord assures us, that in the day of judgment, many, in vain, will claim a
title to salvation. They will say to him, "Lord! Lord! have we not prophesied
in thy name; in thy name cast out devils, and in thy name done many wonderful
works?" But he will then say unto them; "I never knew you; depart from me, ye
that work iniquity!" Matt. vii. 22, 23.


Will it not, therefore, be wisdom in us to regard the apostolic council, to "
examine ourselves whether we are in the faith?" 2 Cor. xiii. 5.


" Try me, O God!" said the Psalmist, "and seek the ground of my heart! prove
me, and examine my thoughts! Look well if there be any wickedness in me!" Psalm.
cxxxix. 23, 24.


How worthy is such conduct of our imitation! -- And most true it is, that if
we indulge ourselves in "any wickedness," we are not entitled to salvation.
"For he," says St. John, "who is born of God, sins not; but he keeps
himself and the wicked one touches him not!" 1 John v. 18.


SECONDLY: As "by the law, we are informed, is the knowledge of sin;" Romans iii.
20.
as "the law, it is said, is a SCHOOL MASTER to bring us to Christ," Gal. iii.
24.
-- how grateful should we be to God, for dispensing to us the law?

And that it may be instrumental in giving us a proper sense of sin, we
perceive the propriety of preaching the LAW, in ALL IT IS EXTENT, PURITY and
TERROR.

Thus was it preached by the prophets, by our Lord and his apostles. And never
will mankind be properly disposed to listen to the invitation of MERCY, offered
in the GOSPEL, until they shall suffer themselves to pay due attention to the
voice of the LAW.

Until Saint Paul did thus, he was "a live;" disesteemed the righteousness of
Christ; but "when the commandment came," he was sensible of his unhappiness,
and duly prized the salvation of the gospel. We discern, therefore, the
importance of cherishing convictions for sin, that we may be inclined to repair
to Christ, by faith, for redemption.

THIRDLY: As the law is thus subservient to our salvation, it should, on this
account, be highly reverenced by us.

And we should also greatly esteem it, for its moral excellence. Though we are
"saved by grace, through faith," Ephesians. ii. 8.
our Savior most forcibly enjoins on us a sincere and universal observance of
the precepts of the law. Without which, indeed, or "without holiness," it is
declared, we cannot enjoy salvation. Heb. xii. 14.


What a reverential and affectionate regard had DAVID, for the LAW of GOD?

"O how I love," said he, "thy law! It is my meditation all the day! How sweet
are thy words unto my taste! Yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth." Psalm. cxix.
97, 103.
"I love thy commandments above gold! Yea, above fine gold!" ibid. verse. 127.


How did Saint Paul inculcate the commands of the law, and regard them in his
life?

"Shall we continue in sin," said he, "that grace may abound? God forbid! How
shall we, who are dead to sin, live any longer therein?" Romans vi. 2.


And, it is affirmed by him, that "those who are Christ's, have crucified the
flesh, with the affections and lusts." Gal. v. 24


LASTLY: Most happy was it for our apostle, that he did not suppress his
convictions for sin, but suffered "the commandment" to have access to his
HEART; as these convictions terminated in his salvation!

If WE regard OUR Redemption, let such be OUR CONDUCT!

Let us not be wedded to iniquity!

Let us break off our sins by righteousness!

Let us not indulge delusive hopes of salvation!

Now to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all honor and glory,
henceforth, and for ever!

SERMON III.
2 CORINTHIANS v. 7. We walk by faith, not by sight.


IT is no inconsiderable recommendation of Christianity, that it is benevolent
intention is to advance the present and future happiness of mankind. In this
life, it affords the highest satisfaction our nature is capable of; and, at
death, opens to our view, the pleasing prospect of a blessed immortality.

This future felicity, our holy apostle contemplates; reflects on with
pleasure, and pants after; as we are informed in the beginning of the chapter
we have named. "For we know," says he, "that if our earthly house of this
tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God; an house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens. For in this we groan earnestly, desiring rather
to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven."

Saint Paul then ascribes the aspirations which Christians have after immortal
happiness, and their capability to participate of celestial joys, to the
influences of the divine SPIRIT. -- "Now he that has wrought us for the
self-same thing is God, who has given us the earnest of his SPIRIT."

Our apostle next considers the professors of Christianity, while here, as in a
state of pilgrimage, and, in the words before us, mentions what it is that
directs their steps; governs, and influences them in this world. "We walk by
FAITH: not by sight."

As, in these words, it is declared, that FAITH directs our conduct; and as
great virtue is ascribed to faith, in the sacred writings, we will beg leave to
attend to it is nature, and to regard the truth, that it is "by faith," the
sincere professors of the gospel "walk," and "not by sight."

Faith, in general, may be said to be a persuasion of the truth of those
things, of which we are informed, but of which we have no ocular nor sensible
demonstration.

As such is the nature of faith, it may pertain to the things which are of this
world, as well as of the world above; or, it may be said, there is a faith
which is earthly, and that which is heavenly, or religious.

The objects of earthly faith, are innumerable: What men of distinguished
character; what cities; what kingdoms; what empires have existed, and do now
exist, at a distance from us? -- How many events have happened? What changes
have there been in the natural and political world? How numerous, indeed, are
the things, of which we are informed, but which are not within the circle of
our observation?

The objects of religious faith, are also many. They include the being of a
God, and all his attributes, as revealed to us in the holy scriptures; the
plurality of persons in the Godhead, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; the
formation of the universe; -- divine providence; -- the economy of our
redemption, as exhibited in the gospel; -- the immortality of our souls; -- the
resurrection of our bodies; -- the dissolution of the world; -- a day of
judgment; -- everlasting rewards or punishments, according to our actions in
the present state.

Or, in other words, the objects of this faith, are all the doctrines and
precepts; promises and threatenings, and particulars contained in the sacred
writings.

In one sense, when we give our assent to the truths of divine Revelation, it
may be said, we are possessed of faith; but as the scriptures enumerate several
kinds of faith, it will be proper to notice them, that we may have a just
apprehension of that faith, which is essential to our salvation.

Does a person believe the gospel? Does he take upon him the Christian
profession?

But does he continue in his sins; a slave of vice? -- Is his faith
uninfluential on his conduct; is it merely speculative?

If thus, it is not the faith specified in the text; -- but that which Saint
James alludes to, when be says; "Show me thy faith without thy works, and I
will show thee my faith by my works; Thou believe there is one God; thou do
well; the devils also believe and tremble. But will thou know, O vain man, the
faith without works is dead?" James ii. 19, 20.
-- Unavailable; insufficient to thy salvation.

A sect of libertine Christians, (the disciples of Simon Magus, termed
Gnostics) arose in the days of the apostles; they pretended to extraordinary
illuminations from Heaven, and taught that nothing more was required of men to
obtain salvation, than faith only, in Christ; and thus they encouraged the most
licentious practices.

Saint James confutes their impious doctrine; evinces the necessity of moral
goodness, as the fruits of faith, and affirms, that "as the body without the
spirit is dead; so faith, without works, is dead also. ibid. verse. 26.


Our Lord, in the parable of the Sower, speaks of a faith that is temporary.

Those who have it, "hear the word with joy; they receive the gospel, even with
rapture, and make a splendid profession of virtue; but not being established in
goodness, "they believe for a while and in time of temptation fall away;" Matt.
viii. 13.
-- they are such as "put the hand to the plough and look back;" Luke ix. 62.
in the words of Saint Paul, they "make shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience;" 1 Timothy i. 19.
-- or "cast off their first faith." 1 Timothy v. 12.


This temporary faith, as well as that which is merely speculative, we have too
often exemplified among the professors of Christianity. It is a serious truth,
indeed, that vast numbers of those who assume the Christian name, are, in no
sort, or, but very little influenced by their faith, to the reproach of
Christianity, and to the great increase of their guilt!

The holy scriptures also mention a faith by which miracles were wrought.

The apostles performed miracles, but, as they acknowledged, not by their own
power, but by virtue of their faith in Christ.

Saint Peter gave healing to an object of distress, a cripple from his infancy,
"who was daily laid at the beautiful gate of the temple," to excite charity
from the benevolent. When the multitude saw the man "walking, leaping and
praising God, they were filled with wonder and amazement." And unto them, said
the apostle, "Why marvel ye at this? Or why look ye so earnestly on us, as
though, by our own power, or holiness, we had made this man to walk? The God of
our Fathers has glorified his Son Jesus, whom ye delivered up. And his name,
through faith in his name, has made this man strong, whom ye see and know."
Acts iii.


Such faith some men may have had, who did not obtain salvation; for our Lord
assures us, that many who shall have "prophesied in his name; and in his name
shall have cast out Devils, and done many wonderful works," shall, at last, be
rejected by him, because they were "workers of iniquity." Matt. vii. 22, 23.
"And," says Saint Paul, "though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand
all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith; so that I could
remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing." 1 Cor. xiii. 2.


The sacred writings likewise mention those who had faith to rely on the power
of Christ to work miracles.

"Speak the word only," said the Centurion to Christ, "and my servant shall be
healed." "As thou have believed," it was answered by our Savior, "so be it
done unto thee." Matt. viii. 8, 13.


"A woman of Canaan," we are informed, solicited Christ in behalf of her
daughter, who was "grievously vexed with a Devil." "O woman," said our Lord to
her, "great is thy faith! Be it unto thee even as thou will." Matt. xv. 22, 28.


But we have not evidence sufficient to induce us to believe, that all those
who had this faith in Christ, received him as the Savior of the world, or
submitted to his dispensation of grace. For, it is probable, that some who thus
believed in Christ, regarded him as a Prophet only. "Many of the people," says
Saint John, "believed on him, and said; When Christ comes will he do more
miracles than these which this man has done? John vii. 31.
And of the ten Lepers who believed that our Lord was able to heal them, but
"one returned to give glory to God." Luke xvii. 13, 15.


The faith that entitles us to salvation, is preceded by repentance. "Repent
ye," said our Savior, "and believe the gospel," Matt. i. 15.
And Saint Paul, "testified both to the Jews and also to the Greeks, repentance
toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ." Acts xx. 21.
By this faith, men are reconciled to God; delivered from the punishment due to
their sins, and* through the operations of the divine Spirit, restored to
holiness, to a meetness for the kingdom of Heaven.

It is the declaration of the divine word, that our salvation is "of grace
through faith." Ephesians. ii. 5.


"The just," says the prophet Habakkuk, "shall live by faith." Habak. ii. 4.


"Abraham's faith," we are assured, "was imputed to him for righteousness."
James ii. 23.


"He that believes and is baptized," says our Lord, "shall be saved." Mark
vi. 16.


"By him," says Saint Paul, (that is by Christ) "all that believe are justified
from all things from which they could not be justified by the law of Moses."
Acts xiii. 39.


The sacrifice of the death of Christ, was the great atonement for human guilt;
-- "he gave himself a ransom for all;" 1 Timothy ii. 6.
he "tasted death for every man;" Heb. ii. 9.
-- and, therefore it is, that the apostle, last mentioned, affirms, that "we
are justified freely by the grace of God, through the redemption that is in
Jesus Christ; whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in
his blood; to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are
past, through the forbearance of God; that he might be just, and the justifier
of him who believes in Jesus." Romans iii. 24, 25, 26.


And "being justified," says the same apostle, "by faith, we have peace with
God, through our Lord Jesus Christ." Romans v. 1.


It is manifest, however, that the faith, by which we obtain reconciliation
with God, and a title to Heaven, is in us an active principle; -- the parent of
virtue.

It is declared, that it "works by love;" Gal. v. 6.
-- that it "purifieth the heart," Acts xv. 9.
-- and that by it we "walk;" -- make progress in holiness.

It may be justly said, indeed, of this faith, that it not only gains us
admittance into the heavenly world, and is productive of righteousness; but
that it is to us the source of consolation; and that we experience it is happy
effects in various circumstances and conditions of life; -- "for we walk;" are
influenced, "by faith, not by sight."

Does the world exhibit it is allurements to rob us of virtue?

What but faith occasions us to rise superior to it is temptations; to behold,
with holy indifference, the glare of riches; the tinsel of vanity, and causes
us duly to govern our passions?

The effect of faith was very visible in the conduct of MOSES, when in Egypt.
By virtue of his faith, he rejected all the pomp and power; all the wealth and
pleasures, even of a kingdom, and chose a state of humiliation and affliction,
that he might enjoy immortal happiness.

"By faith," says Saint Paul, " Moses, when he came to years, refused to be
called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with
the people of God; than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming
the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt; for he had
respect to the recompense of reward." Heb. xi. 24, 25, 26.


Most just, indeed, is the assertion of Saint John, that "This is the victory
that overcomes the world, even our faith." 1 John v. 4,


Do we love GOD supremely? Do we render him the oblation of our hearts?

But should we do thus, unless, through faith, we realized to our Minds, the
excellence of his nature; his wisdom and purity; his justice and mercy; his
goodness and truth, and other perfections?

Impossible is it to love an object, that does not appear to us amiable or
lovely. As the divine Being is possessed of every possible excellence, and as
we naturally love beauty and perfection, we are almost unavoidably inclined to
love God, when, by faith, with ^^sposition of virtue, we behold his perfections.

What is it, but faith, tha^ renders the divine SAVIOR of the world an object
to us so attractive? -- Faith beholds CHRIST astonishing the whole heavenly
world with his LOVE; laboring; toiling; bleeding; dying, that we may live for
ever!

The tragic scene of his death, sensibly affects us; excites sensations of
gratitude in our breasts; "constrains" us to adore, love and serve him! 2 Cor.
v. 14.


And what obedience is so perfect; so acceptable to God, as that which
originates from gratitude and love?

Are we assailed by the Prince of darkness? -- Does he cast his fiery darts
around us for our destruction? -- And are we not exhorted to "take the shield
of faith, that we may be enabled to repel these assaults, and be preserved from
his power? Ephesians. vi. 16.


Have any of the professors of the gospel suffered persecution? Rather than
temporize, or relinquish their faith, have they, with cheerfulness, sustained
the loss of all their worldly goods; endured bonds and imprisonment, and even
death itself, in' it is most terrific form?

What was it, but faith, that inspired them with patience and resignation;
equanimity and cheerfulness; fidelity and fortitude, under these trials so
painful to human nature?

It was through faith, Saint Paul informs us, that some of the worthies of old,
"took joyfully the spoiling of their goods; that others, were tortured, not
accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection; that
others had trial of cruel mockings, and scourgings; bonds and imprisonment;
that they were stoned; sawn asunder; tempted, and slain with the sword." Heb.
x. 34. xi. 35, 36, 37.


Do we endure afflictions without repining; with a disposition of patience and
meekness?

Is it not faith in the goodness of God; that "he afflicts not willingly;" Lam.
iii. 33.
that he will cause the tears of sorrow, of the righteous, to be changed into
waters of joy; all their distress to terminate for their advantage, Romans viii.
28.
that occasions them to be perfectly submissive to all the dispensations of
providence toward them?

"I had fainted," said the Psalmist, when overwhelmed with sorrow "unless I had
believed to see the goodness of the Lord; in the land of the living!" Psalm.
xxvii. 13.


Do some men relinquish their worldly expectations of emolument? Do they
content themselves with a very scanty pittance for their support, through life,
and even to be distressed by poverty; to endure toil and reproach, and to
sacrifice the pleasures arising from the society of their connections and
friends, that they may publish the glad-tidings of salvation to mankind; invite
them to accept of the overtures of mercy declared in the gospel? -- What is it
but faith that influences this their conduct, so opposed to human policy; to
worldly wisdom?

What was it but faith, in it is full operation on the apostles, that caused
them to disseminate the truths of Christianity, in distant regions, through
incredible fatigue, and sufferings; and at the expense of every thing estimable
in life, and even of life itself?

What is it but faith in the merits of the compassionate Savior, that gives
consolation to the breast of guilt, and occasions us to "rejoice evermore," 1
These. v. 16.
as well as "in every thing to give thanks?" Ibid. verse. 18.


Is it any thing but faith that causes us to revere, to delight in, the divine
precepts; to trust in the divine promises, and to fear the divine threatenings?

Is it not faith that gives efficacy to our prayers, and enables us to render
the Almighty an acceptable service? Heb. xi. 6. Jam. i. 6.


Was it not faith that gave virtue to the sacrifice of Abel; while that of Cain
was rejected? Heb. xi. 4.


What enables us to persevere in righteousness, but faith? "The life that I now
live in the flesh," said Saint Paul, "I live by faith in the Son of God." Gal.
ii. 20.


Was it not through faith, that this holy apostle triumphed over every
impediment in the path of his duty; "fought the good fight," and received "a
crown of life?" 2 Timothy iv. 7, 8.


And what but faith can console us in the hour of our dissolution; disarm death
of it is terrors; occasion us to meet it, not only without fear, but with
serenity, and even with joy?

As FAITH thus affects and governs us; -- is the spring of virtue; sustains us
in afflictions; inspires us with ardor to promote the glory of God and the
salvation of mankind; causes us to render our hearts an acceptable offering to
the Almighty; gives efficacy to our devotions; enables us to retain our
integrity; to rejoice in tribulations; supports no in death, and, at all times,
and in all places, influences our thoughts, words and actions, and occasions us
to be solicitous to approve ourselves to Heaven; we therefore perceive the
propriety of the apostolic assertion, that the sincere Christian " walks by
FAITH, and not by SIGHT."

He is not governed by worldly maxims; he is not influenced by worldly objects,
fashions, vanities and pleasures. "He is crucified to the world, and the world
to him;" Gal. vi. 14.
"he looks," says an apostle, "not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen;" -- knowing, that "the things which are seen, are
temporal; but that the things which are not seen, are eternal." 2 Cor. iv. 18.
Though while here, DUTY occasions him to pay attention to earthly objects, on
these he fixes not his affections; "if riches increase, he sets not his heart
upon them;" Psalm. lxii. 10.
his enjoyments are spiritual; his hopes and expectations are most exalted; and
as "he has here no continuing city, he therefore, seeks a better country, even
an heavenly one." Heb. xiii. 14.


Thus we have paid some attention to the nature of faith, and shown that by it
the worthy professors of Christianity " walk, and not by sight."

From what has been said, we behold the importance of evangelical FAITH; that
devoid of IT, we must be devoid of the religion of the gospel; destitute of
it is holiness; it is promises; it is consolations, and pleasures.

How becoming, therefore, is it for us to adopt the language of the apostles;
"Lord, increase our faith!" Luke xvii. 5.


How proper to pay a due attention to the devotional parts of religion; the
reception of the Lord's supper; public and private prayer, by which ou^ hearts
are molified, and our faith is invigorated, established, and rendered
influential on our conduct?

From what has been delivered, we also perceive the purity of our religion,
that if we indulge our evil propensities, or "walk by sight," we have no claim
to that faith which our Savior demands as necessary to our salvation.

A life of impiety, is a life of virtual infidelity; a denial in our deeds, of
what we profess with our lips. Such conduct is not only most reproachful, but
renders us obnoxious to the severity of the divine displeasure!

Will it not, therefore, be wisdom in those who are regardless of virtue,
through divine aid, so to realize to their minds the various objects of faith,
and the importance of religion, that, in future, their conduct may be worthy of
their Christian character; that they may escape that awful doom, which will be
pronounced against those who believe not the gospel of Christ?

Happy are those who are duly influenced by ^^ith! By persevering in the way of
righteousness, how felicitous will be the reward of their toil!

Soon will not faith be exchanged for vision! -- Soon will they not behold, not
"as through a glass darkly; but face to face!" 1 Cor. xiii. 12.


And what beauteous objects; -- what dazzling glories; what scenes of bliss,
will open to their view for their everlasting possession and enjoyment?

That WE may be the blessed number of those who shall participate of the effects,
the unspeakable rewards of FAITH, will God Almighty of his infinite mercy be
pleased to grant; for the sake of the merits of the divine, compassionate
Jesus; to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all honor and
glory, adoration and praise, now, henceforth, and for ever!

SERMON IV.
ACTS xi. 22, 23, 24. Then tidings of these things came unto the ears of the
church which was at Jerusalem; and they sent forth Barnabas, that he should go
as far as Antioch. Who when he came, and had seen the grace of God, was glad,
and exhorted them all, that, with purpose of heart, they would cleave unto the
Lord. For he was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost, and of faith; and much
people was added unto the Lord.


AS the sacred rite of CONFIRMATION, has this day been admistered to many of
this congregation, In Saint Paul's Chapel, there were about five hundred and
fifty who were confirmed, and among these, many of the most respectable members
of the congregation.
it will not be improper to pay some attention to this institution.

Anciently, it was styled, the perfection; the unction; ob^ignation; the
imposition of hands; the sign, or seal, of the Lord; -- but, in modern ages, it
has generally obtained the name of confirmation; See Bingham's Antiquities of
the Christian Church, Vol. I. Fol. 527. Also Camfield on Confirmation.
which epithet happily expresses the intention of the ordinance, which is to
confirm and establish us in the Christian faith; and, by the goodness of God,
in answer to our prayers, to obtain grace and ability, properly to regard our
Christian obligations.

This rite was administered only by those of the Episcopal character; except in
extraordinary cases, when a Presbyter, by a Bishop's authority, was empowered
to confirm, See Eusebius's Eccles. Hist. Lib. vi. Cap. xlii. Fleury's Eccles.
Hist. vol. I. p. 59. vol. III. p. 293. vol. IV. p. 330. vol. V. p. 670. D^
Pin's Eccles. Hist. vol. I. page 182.
and it immediately succeeded the sacrament of baptism, if a Bishop was present
when it was administered. If he was absent, as he generally was, when baptism
was received by those in churches at a distance from the mother church; or by
such as were baptized in haste, on beds of sickness, confirmation was deferred
until the bishop could have a convenient opportunity to visit them.

This information we receive from St. Jerome, Saint Jerome was born about the
year of our Lord 340. He is esteemed to have been the most learned and eloquent
of all the fathers. See Lives of the Fathers, vol. II. page 455.
who says; "That it was customary in the church, for bishops to go and invocate
the Holy Spirit, by imposition of hands, on such as were baptized by presbyters
and deacons, in villages and places remote from the mother church." Hieron.
cout. Lucifer. Cap. iv.


As it often happened that such persons died before the bishop could attend
them for this purpose, to prevent this inconvenience, as far as possible, the
canons, in some places, required that bishops should visit their diocesis
annually; and if they were so extensive that this could not be effected, their
diocesis were to be reduced into smaller districts. Se Bingham's Antiquities,
Vol. I. Fol. 526.


It is required, by our church, that those to be confirmed, shall have arrived
to years of discretion, and attained a knowledge of the essential doctrines of
Christianity; understand the nature of this institution, and receive it with
freedom and deliberation.

Our catechism is styled "An instruction to be learned of every person, before
he be brought to be confirmed by the bishop;" -- which is appointed to be done,
"so soon as he can say the Creed, the Lord's prayer, and the ten commandments,
in the vulgar tongue, and be farther instructed in the church catechism, set
forth for that purpose."

The preface to our office of confirmation, very clearly expresses the
knowledge that is demanded of those who shall be confirmed, and declares also,
the nature and end of confirmation. After reading of which, the following very
serious and important question is addressed to those who wish to be confirmed.

"Do ye here, in the presence of God, and of this congregation, renew the
solemn promise and vow that was made in your name at your baptism; ratifying
and confirming the same in your own persons, and acknowledging yourselves bound
to believe, and do all those things which your Godfathers and Godmothers then
undertook for you?" It cannot, we imagine, be improper for those members of our
churches to be confirmed who have arrived even to old age, and who have not had
an opportunity to submit to this holy rite.

Very probably, the greater number of such persons, were baptized in their
infancy, and with respect to these, there are the same reasons to be offered
why they should be confirmed, as those in youth. Indeed, such persons who are
advanced in life, should, we conceive, with alacrity, embrace the first
opportunity to partake of the benefits of confirmation.

And such too, we apprehend, should be the conduct of those communicants among
us, who have not been confirmed.

The holy sacrament of the Lord's supper, is entirely distinct from the sacred
rite of confirmation, and was instituted to answer a very different end, viz.
to maintain in us a lively sense of gratitude for the death and passion of our
Savior. How different is this from the solemn dedication of ourselves to GOD;
the ratification of our baptismal vows and promises, in confirmation?

As it was not intended that the reception of the eucharist should release us
from an observance of the sacrament of baptism, we can discern no reason why
such an act should free us from a submission to that rite which is a
recognition and confirmation of our baptism.

He who communicates, performs an act of devotion; expresses his thankfulness
for the death of Christ; acknowledges his belief in him, and obligations to
revere his precepts. And does not the non-communicant THUS, when he repeats the
Creeds, and joins in the Liturgy of our church?

But as neither of these persons, by such conduct, formally takes on himself
his baptismal obligations, no sufficient reason, we presume, can be rendered,
why both of them should not be confirmed, if they have not received
confirmation.

As this is an institution of our church; as it is, in itself, most solemn and
edifying, and cannot, with the least impropriety, be regarded by any worthy
communicant, for the sake of EXAMPLE, if for no other end, communicants, we are
of opinion, would act with piety and wisdom, should they honor this sacred rite.

Such, we are happy to mention, has been the conduct of communicants in
general, of the CLERGY, as well as of the (...) ^^ragations, in the states of
New York and New Jersey, (and we know not but in the other states.) wherein
this rite has been administered; and hereby, they have e^^^ed their
disposition to regard ALL the ordinances of their church; to be consistent
episcopalians; to "fulfill all righteousness."




To which, each person solemnly and audibly answers in the affirmative.

As in this ordinance we so fully recognize our baptismal obligations, and so
solemnly dedicate ourselves to the service of God, we, therefore, perceive that
confirmation obviates several of the objections made to infant baptism, and
greatly enervates the plea of necessity, of those who deny it is validity, for
rebaptizing such as were baptized in their infancy.

It is worthy of observation, that, in the Jewish church, a practice prevailed,
which, to the Jews, was something similar to confirmation, with us.

An author of eminence mentions, "That, in the Jewish church, when a child
attained the age of thirteen years, the father, having taught him the
principles of his religion, presented him, in a sacred assembly, to undertake,
in his own person, to become a son of the precept; -- that is, one who takes
upon himself, from that period, obedience to the law of God, and to answer for
his sins; and that, thereafter, prayer was made for his improvement in grace."
Buxtorf. Synag. Judaic.


It must be acknowledged that this ceremony, with great propriety, followed the
rite of circumcision; which was a figure of baptism; as was the paschal-supper,
a symbol of the eucharist.

The imposition of hands and prayer, by the bishop, always attended
confirmation; and it was customary to anoint those who were confirmed with oil,
to denote that heavenly unction that was received by them from above; See
Bingham's antiquities, Vol. I, Fol. 535, 536*
but this practice has been discontinued by the church, since the miraculous
gifts of the Holy Ghost have ceased to be conferred in confirmation.

The sanctifying and more ordinary influences, however, of the divine Spirit,
may reasonably be expected to be communicated, when this rite is duly
administered. Our Savior has been graciously pleased to promise, that the Holy
Ghost shall be given to those who ask it: Luke xi. 13.
And at what time can we so rationally hope to receive this blessing, as in
confirmation, when, agreeable to the will of God, and, with hearts of purity,
we solemnly and publicly dedicate ourselves to him, and when, to our own
prayers for his blessing, we have the prayers of the bishop of the church, and
of the whole congregation?

The imposition of hands was a ceremony used in all sorts of benedictions; --
but more especially in ordination, the reconciliation of penitents, and in
confirmation.

Saint Augustine This learned and pious Father was born in 355. Lives of the
Fathers, Vol. II. Page 458.
derives the imposition of hands, for conveying the holy Spirit, from the
practice of the apostles; Aug. de Trin. Lib. xv. Cap. xxvi.
though there were very different effects from this ordinance, when
administered by them, from what there were in the age in which he lived.

It is observed, by a celebrated author, "That though men have not in
confirmation, the gift of tongues conferred on them, as in the days of the
apostles, they may, notwithstanding, have other gifts, sufficient to testify
the presence of the divine Spirit; and also, to entitle the act of the
imposition of hands to the dignity of an apostolic institution." See Bingham's
Antiquities, Vol. I. Fol, 538.


As baptism, in the primitive church, preceded confirmation; so this rite was
administered, previous to the reception of the Lord's supper; and this practice
is enjoined by our church.

It was the general custom of the church, in the first ages of christianity,
for those who were confirmed, immediately to partake of the EUCHARIST. If,
however, there were any who had received confirmation, but did not communicate,
they were, on that account, exposed to the censures of the church, which were
severe.

No reasonable objection can be made against that person's approaching the
table of the Lord who has worthily received confirmation; -- on the contrary,
it is, unquestionably, most proper; and it may be of great utility for those
who have been confirmed, to partake of the Lord's supper; -- that the grace
they have received in confirmation, may thereby be augmented; that they may be
confirmed in goodness, and, in due time, "arrive to perfect men; -- to the
fullness of stature in Christ Jesus." Ephesians. iv. 13.


It is said by a judicious author; "That the grace which we obtain by the
reception of the Eucharist, does not begin, but continue life. No man,
therefore, receives this sacrament before baptism; because no dead thing is
capable of nourishment."

"Salvation," he adds, "is proposed to all men as their end; and those who, by
baptism, have laid the foundation, and attained the first beginnings of a new
life, have, in the Lord's supper, nourishment and food provided, for the
preservation and perfection of that life." Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity, Lib.
v. Page 306.


The usefulness of confirmation, when properly received, cannot justly be
questioned. It, probably, will not only confirm us in our religious principles;
cause us to "hold fast," what, upon mature reflection, and due examination, we
justly esteem to "be good," 1 Thessalonians. v. 21.
but convey to us the grace of God; awaken in us serious reflections; excite in
us resolutions of virtue; occasion us duly to revere the divine precepts; to be
circumspect in our actions; introduce us to the table of the Lord, and, indeed,
greatly contribute to the advancement of our salvation.

"Confirmation," says a pious author, "would highly promote the truth and power
of godliness and religion. It would bring good instructions to an happy effect,
and cause every one who should receive it, and sin thereafter, to blush and
hang down his guilty head, when he should call to mind that good confession
which he, in this ordinance, had openly made, before so many witnesses. With
what face could he devo^e himself to atheism and impiety, who, before God, and
his holy angels; the bishop, and an assembly of christians, had personally
acknowledged his belief of the christian faith, and solemnly promised obedience
to all God's commandments; to renounce the devil and all his works? Justice and
honesty must, from thenceforth, continually admonish such a person, not to
violate this sacred engagement; but to beware of the enormous sin of
sacrilegious perjury. He must reflect, that many will appear as witnesses
against him, if he shall transgress; that if he is regardless of his duty, he
will, at last, bear testimony against himself, be condemned out of his own
mouth; and that, if he shall continue to live in a course, contrary to his holy
profession, he can expect no other than that awful sentence, mentioned in the
gospel, which Christ will pronounce against hypocrites, and all impenitent
sinners, in the day of judgment," See Dr. Patrick's exhortation to confirmation.


"Confirmation," says an excellent prelate of the church of England, "is the
consummation and perfection; the corroboration and strength of baptism, and
baptismal grace. In baptism, we undertake to do our duty; in confirmation, we
receive further aid to perform it. In baptism, others promise for us; in
confirmation, we engage for ourselves; we release our sponsers from their
obligations made, at the font, in our behalf, and take them on ourselves; and
we receive the advantage of the prayers of the bishop, and all the church,
offered up in our favor. In baptism, we give up our names to Christ, in
confirmation, we put our seal to our profession, and God affixes his seal to
his promise." Bishop Tailor, on confirmation.


It was, therefore, with great reason that a learned and pious author, thus
expressed himself on this subject. "There is no cause." said he, "wherefore we
would doubt that we shall not receive benefit from confirmation; but certainly
cause to complain of the neglect of this christian institution." Hooker's
Eccles. Polity, Lib. v. Page 305.


Though the ancient fathers of the church, did not esteem confirmation
essentially necessary to salvation, to those who had been baptized; they,
however, entertained so high an idea of the utility of this rite, that if by
any persons it was treated with neglect or contempt, such, we are informed,
were ordinarily denied ecclesiastical promotion and holy orders. Bingham's
Antiquities, Vol. I. Fol. 540.


This institution is, by all ancient writers, regarded to be co-eval with the
apostles, and derived from their example and practice; and there are several
passages of sacred writ which are adduced in it is favor; particularly, the
eighth chapter of the acts of the apostles; wherein mention is made of the
laying on of hands, of two of them, upon those whom Philip, of the order of
deacons, had baptized; the words are these.

"But when they (the Samaritans) believed Philip, preaching the things
concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, they were
baptized both men and women. Now when the apostles, which were at Jerusalem,
heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and
John; who, when they were come down, prayed for them that they might receive
the Holy Ghost. (For as yet He was fallen upon none of them: Only they were
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.) Then they laid their hands on them,
and they received the Holy Ghost."

SAINT CYPRIAN, on this text, thus expressed himself. Saint Cyprian, so much
distinguished for his humility, fortitude, zeal, charity, and other good
qualities, was constituted bishop of Carthage, about 248, and suffered
martyrdom in 258. Lives of the Fathers, Vol. I. P. 1^5, 132.
"The faithful, in Samaria," said he, "had already been baptized; that which
was wanting, Peter and John supplied, by prayer and imposition of hands, to the
end the Holy Ghost might be poured upon them. Which also is done among
ourselves, when those who have been baptized, are brought to the prelates of
the church, to obtain by their prayer and imposition of hands, the Holy Ghost."
Cypr. Ep. 73.


SAINT JEROME was of opinion that this act of the apostles, at Samaria, fully
authorized the practice of the church in administering confirmation to those
who had been baptized. Hieron. cout. Lucifer. Cap. IV.


SAINT AUGUSTINE also, was of the same sentiment. Aug. de Trin. Lib. xv. Cap.
xxvi.
And because some might object, that this apostolical practice was designed to
obtain a very different end from tha^ which is expected from the imposition of
the bishop's hands at present, the ordinary gifts only, of the divine spirit,
-- he replies to this objection, and observes, that notwithstanding any such
difference in the effects of confirmation, it may truly be said to have
descended from the apostles.

"For," says he, "by the Holy Ghost which is given in the catholic church by
the imposition of hands, our forefathers would have us understand that which
Saint Paul alludes to when he says, 'The love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given us.' Romans v. 5.
This is that charity which those have not who are cut off from the communion
of the church; and though such 'should speak with the tongues of men and
angels; and understand all mysteries; and all knowledge, it would profit them
nothing;' for those have not the LOVE of GOD, who love not the UNITY of the
CHURCH."

"The Holy Spirit," he adds "that is now given by the imposition of hands, does
not appear by any sensible and miraculous effects attending it, as was the case
in the infant state of the church, and necessary to it is extension and support.
Who now expects that those who receive the imposition of hands, should
immediately speak with new tongues? The love of God, however, is supposed to be
diffused into their hearts, invisibly and latently; so that they may truly say,
'That the love of God is shed abroad in their hearts by the Holy Ghost that is
given them.' Aug. de Bap. Lib. III. Cap. xvi.


On this subject he further says. "Hereby we know that God abides in us, by the
spirit which he has given us. 1 John III. 24.
If thou art sensible that thou have in thy heart the love of God, thou have
this knowledge from the divine spirit. In the first age of the church the Holy
Ghost fell on those who believed, and they spoke tongues they had never
learned, as the spirit gave them utterance. These were signs proper for that
period; it was then necessary the Holy Ghost should enable men to speak all
languages; because the gospel was to be propagated through the world in every
tongue; which having been effected, through the miraculous gifts of the Holy
Ghost, these gifts have ceased." Aug. Tract. vi. in 1. Joan. III. Tom. ix. p.
254.


Another evidence in support of confirmation, is deduced from Saint Paul's
confirming those disciples he met with at Ephesus, who had received only the
baptism of John.

"They were baptized," says the sacred text, "in the name of the Lord Jesus;
and when Paul laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them; and they
spoke with tongues and prophesied." Acts xix. 5, 6.


These persons, who in "number were about twelve," were first instructed into
the principles of christianity; they next made a public acknowledgment of their
faith, by being baptized in the name of Christ; and, immediately thereafter, by
imposition of the apostles hands, were confirmed in their christian profession,
by the reception of the Holy Ghost, in it is visible and extraordinary gifts;
accommodated to the necessity of those early days of christianity, and
therefore, of them, it may, with great truth be affimed, in the language of
Saint Paul to the Ephesians; "That after they believed, they were sealed with
the Holy Spirit of promise." Ephesians. i. 1^.


We shall mention but one text more which has been often cited to evince that
confirmation has the evidence of apostolical practice.

Saint Paul, in the sixth chapter of his epistle to the Hebrews, in the first
and second verses, exhorts them to holiness and steadfastness in the christian
faith.

"Therefore" says he, "leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ [though
your small proficiency in them makes it seem almost necessary to discourse anew
of them to you,] let us go on unto perfection, [that is, to the doctrines which
will render you perfect men in the knowledge of Christ,] not laying again the
foundation of [Christianity in the doctrines of] repentance from dead works,
[that is, from works deserving death, Romans vi. 23. viii. 13.] and of faith
toward God. [And] of the doctrine of baptisms, [that of water and of the
spirit, by which those who repent and believe, are initiated into the church of
Christ] and of laying on of hands, [after baptism, for receiving of the Holy
Ghost] and of the resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment; [the great
motives to engage all christians herein to exercise themselves, to have always
consciences void of offense toward God and toward men, Acts xxxiv. 15, 16.]
These words are thus paraphrazed by the learned Dr. Whitby.


BISHOP TAILOR, on this passage, observes, "that here are six fundamental
points of Saint Paul's catechism, which he regarded as the foundation of the
christian church; and among these, imposition of hands, (which the apostles
used in confirming those who were baptized, and invocating the Holy Ghost upon
them) is reckoned as a part of the foundation; and, therefore, those who
acknowledge it not, may be said to dig up this foundation. -- Where Saint Paul
calls it the doctrine of the laying on of hands, it not only appears to be a
lasting ministry, as no part of the christian doctrine can be changed nor
abolished; but also, to be of divine institution. -- If it was not so, the
apostle would have been guilty of that, for which our Savior reproved the
scribes and pharisees; 'The teaching for doctrines, the commandments of men;'
which, as we cannot suppose him chargeable with, we must, therefore, infer,
that this doctrine of imposition of hands, or confirmation, is apostolical and
divine." See Bishop Taylor's discourse on Confirmation.


That celebrated reformer, JOHN CALVIN, on this text, delivered his sentiments
in the following manner. It is worthy of notice, that several of the reformed
churches which do not retain the rite of confirmation, make use of a ceremony,
which, in a great degree, appears designed to answer it is salutary intention,
viz. That, which by them is styled, THE OWNING OF THE COVENANT; which, it is
conceived, is unnecessary here to explain.


"Those, without the church, did not come to baptism before they had made
confession of their faith, in these, therefore, catechism was wont to precede.
But the children of the faithful, because adopted from the womb, and by right
of promise belonging to the church, were baptized while infants; but their
infancy being past, after they were instructed in the faith, they did also
offer themselves to catechism; and then another symbol was added, namely,
imposition of hands. This one place, therefore, does abundantly testify, that
the original of this ceremony proceeded from the APOSTLES; though afterward it
was turned into superstition; as the world does commonly degenerate from the
best institutions, to corruptions. Let us therefore know," said he, "that it
was instituted by the first authors to be a solemn rite of prayer, as Saint
Augustine also calls it. They designed indeed, by this symbol, to approve the
confession of faith made by youth; but thought of nothing less than thereby to
render void the sacrament of baptism. Wherefore, the pure institution of this
rite is to be retained; but the superstition of it corrected." De Baptismo,
Lib. iii. Cap. xvi.


In his book of institutions, Lib. iv. Cap. xix. 4.
he says; "This was the custom of old, that the children of christians, after
they were grown up, were presented before the bishop to fulfill that office
which was required of adults at their baptism; for these sat among the
Catechumens, 'till being duly instructed in the mysteries of the faith, they
were able to make a confession of the same before the bishop and people. They
were examined by the bishop, according to a certain and common form of
catechism, which they then had; and that this action, which otherwise
deservedly ought to be grave and holy, might have the more reverence and
honor, the ceremony of imposition of hands was added. And thus the child, his
faith being approved of, was dismissed with a solemn benediction. Of this
custom the ancients often make mention. -- Such an imposition of hands
therefore," continues he, "as is done barely in the room of benediction, I
commend, and would it was restored to a pure use." Ibid. 5, etc.


"The apostle," says BEZA, Theodorus Beza was much esteemed by Calvin, (whom
he succeeded in the church of Geneva,) he wrote learnedly against the errors of
the church of Rome; he was born in 1519 and lived 86 years. See Bail Hist.
Dict.
"numbers here five heads of catechism, viz. The profession of amendment of
life, (that is repentance from dead works) the sum of faith concerning God; the
compendious explication of doctrine that was wont to be delivered to the
unlearned, especially at baptism, and the imposition of hands; the head of the
resurrection of the dead, and of future judgment."

"This doctrine," says PISCATOR, John Piscator, was a protestant German
divine; he commented on the New Testament, and died at Strasburgh in 1546.
Collier's Historical, etc. Dict.
of repentance from dead works, and faith toward God, was delivered to the
Catechumens before they were baptized, or confirmed in the Christian faith, by
the imposition of hands. -- When children have been taught the doctrine of
repentance and faith, they are to make a profession thereof before the church,
and to be confirmed by the imposition of hands." Observe. in loc.


We shall conclude the observations on these words of Saint Paul, in the
language of a modern and justly esteemed expositor of the English church.
Burkett.


"The doctrine of laying on of hands," says he, "is to confirm baptized persons
in the faith, and to oblige and enable them to keep the covenant they entered
into with God, when they were baptized; which was done before their admission
to the Lord's table. Imposition, or laying on of hands, was an ancient and
venerable ri^^ used in the primitive church on several occasions; particularly,
in ordination and absolution of penitents; in healing the sick; in conferring
the gifts of the Holy Ghost. (Acts vii. 17.) And, lastly, in confirmation, when
baptized persons were brought before the church, to acknowledge, confirm, and
renew their baptismal covenant with God; and to receive the benefit of public
prayer, and episcopal benediction, in order to further endowments of grace,
that they might perform their vows; adorn their profession, and be admitted to
the Lord's table, as complete members of the visible church of Christ." See, on
this text, Stackhouse's Body of Divinity, Vol. II. Fol. 751. Hammond's works,
Vol. III. Fol. 700.

There are several other texts which have been cited in favor of confirmation;
for an explication of which, the reader is referred to the authors on
confirmation who have been quoted in this discourse, and in these notes; and
also, to a treatise of Doctor Hammond on this subject.

One of these passages of sacred writ, is Acts ii. 4. A writer, who is
generally regarded to be Eusebius Emissenus; but whom some learned men suppose
to be Eucherius, of Lions; or Hilary, of Arles, about the year 450, in this
manner expresses his sentiments on confirmation from this text.

"That which imposition of hands," says he, "now gives to every one in
confirming neophytes, (those regenerated) the same did the descent of the Holy
Ghost then confer on all believers. But because we have said, that imposition
of hands, in confirmation, confers something on him who is born again and
regenerated in Christ, perhaps some one will be ready to say, 'What can the
ministry of confirmation profit me, after the mystery of baptism? -- If, after
baptism, we want the addition of a new office, then ^^^e we not received all
that was necessary at the font.' -- ^^^s not so, beloved. For, if you observe,
in the military h^^, when the emperor has chosen one to be a soldier, he does
not only affix a mark or character on him, but furnishes him with competent
arms for fighting; -- thus it is with a baptized person, the benediction is his
armor. Thou have made him a soldier; give him also the weapons of warfare.
What does it profit, though a father confers a great estate upon a child, if he
does not also provide him a tutor? The Holy Ghost is the keeper, and comforter,
and tutor of those who are regenerated in Christ. If we shall ask, 'What
advantage did the apostles receive by the coming of the Holy Ghost, after the
passion and resurrection of Christ?' The Lord himself evidently showed us, when
he said, 'I have many things to say unto you, but ye cannot hear them now.
Howbeit, when he the spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all
truth.' When the Holy Ghost is given, the heart of a believer is dilated and
enlarged with prudence and constancy. Before the descent of the Holy Ghost, the
apostles were terrified, even to the denial of Christ; but after his
visitation, they were armed with a contempt of death, even to suffer martyrdom
for his sake." Eusebius. Emissen. Hom. de Penticost.

It may not be amiss to mention here, a few other testimonies from the ancients
in support of confirmation, and also the sentiments of some foreign divines of
reformed churches, who were not in communion with the church of England.

EUSEBIUS (in his Eccles. Hist. Lib. iii. book xx.) mentions, from SAINT
CLEMENS, (who in 188 was made catechist in the school of Alexandria, and who
was tutor to Origin) that SAINT JOHN, when he returned to Ephesus, from his
banishment by Domitian, to the isle of Patmos, going into the adjacent country,
to discharge the duties of his function, he was smitten with the goodly
appearance of a young man, and commended him to the care of an Asian bishop,
who paid great attention to the youth, and instructed him in the principles of
christianity. Some time thereafter, however, the young man, by evil companions,
suffered himself to become very dissolute, and even to be guilty of theft, and
several enormous crimes. Saint John, returning to that country, sought out the
youth; pathetickly addressed him; reclaiming him from vice, and confirmed him.

TERTULLIAN, a presbyter of Carthage, who was converted to christianity about
196, says; that "after baptism hands are laid on by way of benediction; calling
to, and inviting down, the holy spirit." De Baptismo, Cap. VI, VIII.

FIRMILIAN, bishop of Caesarea in Capadocia, and who in 256, assisted at the
council of Iconium, compares the imposition of the b^shop's hands, on such as
were baptized, to invocate the holy spirit, to that of Saint Paul upon those he
baptized at Ephesus. Firmil. Ep. 75. ap. Cyp. 2. P. 221.

In the COUNCIL of ELVIRA, in Spain, which was held, about 305, it was
determined, "that the bishop should confirm those who had not been baptized in
his presence." Canon XXXVIII, LXXVII.

MELCHIADES, who succeeded Eusebius, in the Pontificate 311, in his letter to
the bishops of Spain, shows the propriety and utility of confirmation.

SAINT AMBROSE, who was bishop of Milan, and born about 333, upon Heb. vi. 2.
where the apostle joins imposition of hands with baptism, notes; "That it means
the imposition of hands, which is supposed to confer the Holy Ghost, and that
this rite was administered by bishops after baptism, for the confirmation of
men in the unity of the church of Christ."

In confirmation, (said GREGORY NAZIANZEN, who was bishop of Constantinople,
and born about 324,) we receive the Holy Ghost, as the earnest of our
inheritance; as the seal of our salvation."

SAINT CHRYSOSTOM flourished also in the fourth century. "By the imposition of
hands, said he, on those who were baptized, they received the Holy Ghost."

Without quoting any thing more from the ancients, on this subject, it may not
be altogether superfluous to observe, that in 1691, Sir PETER KING, afterward
LORD CHANCELLOR of England, published his celebrated book, entitled, "An
Enquiry into the constitution, discipline, unity and worship of the primitive
church, that flourished within the first 300 years after Christ, faithfully
collected out of the extant writings of those ages, by an impartial hand." And
that, in this work, he more than once mentions, that the rite of confirmation
was regarded by the primitive church; Page 83, 84, 88.

A church, or diocese, in the valies of Piedmont, from the days of the
apostles, to the period of the reformation, preserved a very considerable
degree of purity, both in faith and manners. See Dr. Allix's remarks on the
history of the ancient churches of Piedmont. And Mosheim's Eccles. Hist. Vol.
II. Page 452. [Note g.] It appears from these remarks of Dr. Allix, page 8.
that the church of Piedmont, in it is very early state, administered
confirmation to those who were baptized.

The doctrines of that distinguished reformer, PETER WALDUS who lived in the
twelfth century, with incredible rapidity, though greatly opposed, diffused
itself through Europe. In 1504, the WALDENSES, in their confession of faith
exhibited to Uladislaus, king of Hungary, speak thus with respect to the rite
of confirmation.

"We confess, with a faith taken out of the divine scriptures, that, in the
times of the apostles, this was observed. Those, who being come to the ripeness
of years, and who had not received the promised gifts of the Holy Ghost,
received them afterward by prayer and imposition of hands, for the
confirmation of the faith. The same we think also of infants." Confess.
Waldens. de Confirm.

In their apology to the Marquess of Brandenburgh, in 1532, adverting to
infants who have been baptized, they say: "That when they shall have come to
years of discretion, and understand the faith, and begin truly to love Christ,
we bring them to the profession of those things, even whatsoever they have
attained to by the help of their parents, or godfathers, or by the ministry of
the church, that they may themselves, of their own accord, most freely own and
profess all those things before the whole church, to their own salvation, in
the celebration of the rite of imposition of hands; which being done, they are
confirmed. And there is forthwith given them full power and right to
communicate of the body and blood of Christ, with the faithful." Apolog. Part
IV.

The BOHEMIAN BRETHREN, (a remnant of the Slavonique church, and the disciples
of Wickliffe, Huss and Jerome of Prague) thus describe their mode of
administering confirmation, by their bishop, COMENIUS.

"The young ones," says he, "having been taught the heads of religion at home,
by their parents and sureties; or at school, by their masters, are publicly
delivered to the care of their pastors in the church, before the reception of
the Lord's supper, most usually at the time of pastoral visitation, after this
manner:

I. The words of Christ, Matt. xi. 28. "Come unto me all that labor," etc. are
read, with a short explication of them.

II. The youth of both sexes, appointed thereunto and preexamined by the
pastor, are placed in order in the middle of the church.

III. Then they are asked, whether they will renew the covenant they entered
into with God at baptism?

IV. This being consented to by them, the heads of the covenant are explained,
according to the form prescribed by the apostle to Titus, Chap. ii. 11, 12, 13.
"Denying ungodliness and worldly lusts; to live righteously, soberly, and godly
in this present world; looking for the blessed hope," etc. And they are
required openly, before the church, to renounce the world, the devil and the
flesh, etc.

V. Next, a profession of faith is demanded of them, so that they all repeat
aloud the apostles creed.

VI. Then, on their knees, saying after the minister, they pray unto God, to
forgive the sins of their youth, and strengthen them by his holy spirit, unto
all the good purpose of his will; which also the whole assembly does, praying
for them. After the prayers,

VII. There is a declaration, to these young disciples, of their right to
participate of the Lord's supper.

And, lastly, there is added the apostolical rite of imposition of hands, with
the invocation of the name of God upon them, to strengthen, (or confirm) the
hope of his heavenly grace."

The LEIDEN DIVINES, (in their synopsis pueroris theologiae, Dis. xlvii.)
observe, "That it is probable this doctrine of imposition of hands, is referred
to that care of the ancient church, whereby children, instructed in
catechetical doctrine, before they were admitted to partake of the Lord's
supper, were presented to the church, to answer concerning the faith, and
commended by prayer unto God, the rite of imposition of hands being added
thereunto; which was a gesture of those who pray and bless, even from the time
of the patriarchs."

CHEMNITIUS, a Lutheran clergyman of eminence, says; "Our divines have often
showed, that the rite of confirmation (unprofitable, superstitious, and
anti-scriptural traditions, being removed from it) might be piously used, and
to the edification of the church, according to the consent of scripture, after
this manner, viz. That those who have been baptized in their infancy, when come
to years of discretion, should be diligently instructed in a certain and plain
catechism, of the doctrine of the church; and when they seem competently to
have understood the principles of it, should afterward be presented to the
bishop and church; and there the child that was baptized in infancy, should,

I. Be admonished, in a short and plain manner, concerning his baptism, viz.
what, how, why, and into what, he was baptized: What the whole Trinity, in that
baptism, conferred upon him, and sealed to him; namely, the covenant of peace
and grace; and how there was then made a renunciation of satan; a profession of
faith, and promise of obedience.

II. The child himself should stand before the church; make ap^roper, and
public confession of this doctrine and ^aith.

III. He should be questioned about the chief heads of the christian religion,
and where he has not a proper knowledge of any doctrine, he should be more
fully informed respecting it.

IV. He should be put in mind, and declare by this profession, how he differs
from all heathen, heretical, fanatic, and profane opinions.

V There should be added, a grave and serious exhortation, out of the word of
God; that he should persevere in goodness, and by going forward therein, be
farther confirmed in the covenant of baptism, and in that doctrine and faith.
And next.

VI. Public prayer should be made for those children, that God, by his holy
spirit, would vouchsafe to govern, preserve and confirm them, in this
profession; Whereunto, without superstition, may be added imposition of hands.
Nor would that prayer be vain; for it is warranted by the promises concerning
the gift of perseverance, and grace of confirmation."

"Such a rite of confirmation," adds this author, "would very much profit
youth, and the whole church; for it would be agreeable both to scripture and
pure antiquity." Exam. Council. Trident. part II. de Confirm.

The ASSSEMBLY of DIVINES, held at WESTMINSTER in 1644, in their annotations on
2 Timothy i. 6. say; "That the laying on of hands, which is usually called
confirmation, stood. I, In examining those who had been baptized; what progress
they had made in the doctrine of christianity. And II, In praying for them;
that God would continue them in the faith, and give them more grace,
strengthening them by the Holy Ghost. Now when the chief pastor, or pastors of
the church, (say they) prayed for them, they laid their hands upon them; whence
the apostolic constitution was called laying on of hands. So Saint Augustine;
and so most of the Fathers, with one consent."




As the rite of confirmation, is thus sanctioned by the holy scriptures, and
the general practice of churches of Christ, in all ages; as it is, in itself,
most rational, and calculated to be productive of very happy effects, we
cannot, therefore, but applaud the piety and wisdom of the church of England,
at the time of the reformation, in retaining this institution; after having
separated from it, every practice that was offensive, or superstitious.

But while the English church was in the enjoyment of this sacred rite, how
many, in communion with her, in this country, were deprived of the privilege
and advantages of confirmation!

Their just title to the benefits which result from the administration of this
ordinance, together with the advantages they would have enjoyed, in consequence
of having a competent number of the prelatical order, resident among them, was
more than once, publicly mentioned, and insisted on, both in England and
America. Particularly, by Doctor Secker, Archbishop of Canterbury; and the Rev.
Doctor Chandler, of Elizabeth Town, in New Jersey. See his appeal to the
public, printed in 1767.


But this voice of reason, justice and religion, was not regarded! We are
willing, however, to bury in oblivion, the conduct of those whose DUTY it was
to have honored it with attention!

In the course of divine providence, the scene is now changed! With the entire
acquiescence, and sincere good wishes, we hope, of all denominations of
christians, here and in England, our church, at length, is perfectly organized;
we enjoy the benefits of the episcopal function, and, agreeable to our original
and uniform desires, in it is apostolic and primitive simplicity!

GRATITUDE to Heaven should be ours, for this favor! and we humbly assure
ourselves, that by us, it will be duly improved!

This congregation, but a few hours past, were, for the first time, invited to
participate of the advantages proceeding from the holy rite of confirmation!
Great numbers rejoiced in the opportunity to honor this institution, and to
partake of it is blessings!

How solemn and affecting was the scene! A worthy pastor, going before the
flock, to lead them to the altar of God, that they might renew their covenant
with him; ratify their baptismal vows and promises; anew devote themselves to
his service, and obtain his blessing!

The pious saint, beheld the sight with pleasure! Holy ^^gels, we trust,
contemplated it with rapture! And the GOD of grace, we may rationally believe,
indulged it with his smile of approbation; with his heavenly benediction!

He accepted, we trust, the holy offering, and, in gentle effusions, conveyed
his HOLY SPIRIT into the hearts of those who thus dedicated themselves to his
service; to enable them to revere his will; to prepare them for the enjoyments
of his presence!

Happy event! Shall we not hope to behold very salutary effects of this
consecration of themselves to God?

Were they made partakers of the HOLY GHOST? May we not therefore, in their
future conduct, expect to behold the blessed consequences of their reception of
the SPIRIT of unity and peace; wisdom and purity; harmony and love?

Superfluous, we hope, it is, to enforce on them, by arguments of persuasion,
the pious exhortation of SAINT BARNABAS, in our text!

"Upon the persecution that arose about Stephen, some of the disciples who were
scattered abroad, preached the gospel," with success, "at Antioch." "When
tidings thereof came to the ears of the church which was in Jerusalem, they
sent Barnabas to Antioch," to visit these proselites to christianity; to
establish them in the faith, and, probably, to confirm them.

When he "came and saw" the effects of "the grace of God," he "was glad;"
transported with holy joy; and, with great fervor, "exhorted them all, that,
with purpose of heart;" with the greatest sincerity; with invincible fortitude,
resolution and patience, notwithstanding the opposition they might meet with,
"they would cleave unto the LORD;" with firmness, adhere to his doctrines; with
piety, reverence his ordinances, and precepts; with diligence, endeavor to
promote his glory, and, in all their actions, to approve themselves to his eye
of omniscience!

We cannot doubt but these NEW DISCIPLES were obedient to this exhortation of
VIRTUE! That they discerned it is importance! That they were convinced their
present and future happiness, depended on their " cleaving to the LORD, with
full purpose of heart!"

That they also, reflected on the serious truths, that "GOD will not be
mocked;" Gal. vi. 7.
that RELIGION pertains to the HEART, which it is designed to reform, together
with the whole life, and that INSTABILITY in the faith, as well as actions of
vice, would be disgraceful to themselves, and reproachful to christianity!

How worthy of imitation is their EXAMPLE! As we have the same incentives to
holiness, as had these converts at Antioch, let us indulge the hope, that we
shall duly honor our christian profession!

What, indeed, shall tempt us to a different conduct? shall the infamy of vice;
the pangs of guilt; the dread of future misery; the displeasure of our God? Or
shall worldly riches; shadowy honors; momentary, unsatisfactory, sinful
enjoyments? Heaven forbid!

GOD, angels and men, will look for VIRTUE, for religious deportment, in those
especially who have now been consecrated to him!

And we humbly hope, that "pure and undefiled religion" will be theirs! That it
will shine forth in their lives and conversations; to their own honor; the
honor of christianity, in general, and of our community, in particular; and,
suffer us to add, to the peculiar honor of the apostolic institution of
CONFIRMATION!

We shall conclude with devoutly addressing the Almighty, in their behalf, in a
collect that is appointed by our church to be used when this rite is
administered.

"Almighty and everlasting God, who make us both to will and to do those
things that be good and acceptable unto thy divine majesty; we make our
supplications unto thee for these thy servants, upon whom (after the example of
thy holy apostles) hands have been laid, to certify them (by thi^ sign) of thy
favor and gracious goodness toward them. Let thy fatherly hand, we beseech
thee, ever be over them! Let thy HOLY SPIRIT ever be with them! And so lead
them in the knowledge and obedience of thy word, that, in the end, they may
obtain everlasting life, through our Lord Jesus Christ; who with Thee and the
Holy Ghost, lives and reigns ever one God, world without end! Amen.

SERMON V.
LUKE xxii. 19. This do, in remembrance of me.


THE sacraments of christianity were ordained in compassion to the weakness of
our nature; they are but few in number, baptism, and the Lord's supper; and,
when duly regarded, are attended with very essential advantages.

At present permit us to pay a little attention to the last-mentioned of these
ordinances now before us, which was instituted by our Savior, but a short time
before his passion.

In discoursing on this sacrament, we will,

FIRST, Explain it is nature.

SECONDLY, Show the obligations we are under to observe this institution.

THIRDLY, Regard the qualifications requisite to our due reception of it.

FOURTHLY, Notice some of the advantages which will attend a proper discharge
of this service.

LASTLY, We will pay attention to some of those particulars which prevent many
from receiving this ordinance.

FIRST, we are to explain the nature of the sacrament of the Lord's supper.

Though some authors have greatly perplexed and embarrassed this subject, we
apprehend it is, in itself, extremely simple; and that it may be fully, and
clearly explained in a few words.

Properly to understand this christian rite, it will be necessary to observe,
that it was typified under the Jewish economy.

The paschal supper was instituted to maintain in the minds of the Jews, a
sense of the goodness of God in preserving them from death, when the destroying
angel flew the Firstborn, in every dwelling of the Egyptians. -- That the
Jewish passover was ordained to effect this purpose, is very evident from the
words of it is institution, which are contained in the twelfth chapter of the
book of Exodus.

"Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel, and said unto them; draw out
and take unto you a lamb, according to your families, and kill the passover.
And ye shall take a bunch of hysop, and dip it into the blood that is in the
basin, and strike the lintel, and the two side-posts, with the blood that is in
the basin; and none of you shall go out at the door of his house until the
morning. For the Lord will pass through to smite the Egyptians, and when he
sees the blood upon the lintel, and on the two side-posts, the Lord will pass
over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer to come unto your houses to
smite you. And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee, and to thy
sons, for ever. And it shall come to pass, when ye be come to the land which
the Lord will give you, according as he has promised, that ye shall keep this
service. And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say unto you; what
mean you by this service? That ye shall say, it is the sacrifice of the Lord's
passover, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt, when
he smote the Egyptians and delivered our houses."

That this event was typical of a much greater deliverance that mankind should
receive, even a deliverance from eternal death, by virtue of the sacrifice of
Christ; and that the paschal lamb was a figure of our Savior, is manifest from
diverse passages of sacred writ.

Was the paschal lamb ordered to be slain on the fourteenth day, of the first
month, at even? -- On the same day, at even, of that month, did our Savior
offer himself a propitiatory sacrifice for our sins; and, in allusion to the
paschal lamb, he was styled, by John the baptist; "The Lamb of God, that takes
away the sins of the world." John i. 29.


Was there no deliverance from death, for any Israelite, who, on the night of
the passover, should not continue in his dwelling, the lintel and two
side-posts of which, were sprinkled with the blood of the paschal lamb? --
Neither are we delivered from everlasting death, unless we are under covert of
the blood of Christ; by it, "have our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience;" Heb. x. 22.
for it is this blood only, we are assured, "that cleanses us from sin." 1
John i. 7.


Was the paschal lamb slain before the Mosaic law and sacrifices were enjoined
on the people of Israel? -- This was expressive of the truth, that mankind
could not be redeemed by an observance of the law and the Mosaic rites, but by
virtue only of the true passover, "the lamb of God, slain, (in the divine
purpose,) from the foundation of the world." Rev. xiii. 8.


It is worthy of observation, that our Savior constantly celebrated the Jewish
passover at Jerusalem, (and when only twelve years old, we are informed, he
repaired to that city for this purpose Luke ii. 42.
until he abolished this rite, by instituting another ordinance in it is place.

Just before his death, he said to his apostles; "With desire I have desired to
eat this passover with you, before I suffer. For I say unto you, I will not any
more eat thereof, until IT be fulfilled in the kingdom of GOD;" -- or, as we
conceive, the sense is: 'I will no more partake of this ordinance; that which
IT typified, will soon be accomplished in the spiritual kingdom I have
established; and, after my resurrection, I will, in spirit, be present with
such worthy members of my church, as shall assemble to commemorate my passion,
and rejoice, with them, in the happy fruits and effects of my sufferings.'

That Saint Paul apprehended the paschal lamb, was an emblem of the sacrifice
of Christ, is very evident from the ensuing exhortation to the church at
Corinth. "CHRIST our passover is sacrificed for us; therefore, let us keep the
feast; not with old leaven; neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness;
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth."

As the principal intention of the Jewish passover, was, as has been noticed,
to occasion the Israelites, ever to be grateful to God for that signal instance
of his goodness, in preserving them from death, when the first born of the
Egyptians were slain; -- so the primary intention of the christian passover, or
of the sacrament of the Lord's supper, is, to preserve in our minds a lively
sense of gratitude for the sufferings of our Savior, to deliver us from death
eternal.

"This do, in remembrance of me."

As if our Lord should have said, 'this bread, by me broken, and given to you,
represents my body, which I shall now give to be broken on the Cross for your
redemption; often thus break bread, and partake of it, that you may not be
unmindful of my sufferings; but always retain sentiments of gratitude for that
testimony I shall give you of my affection; -- the purchase of your salvation,
at the expense of my death and passion.'

Such, we presume, is the nature of this sacrament. We proceed,

SECONDLY, to consider the obligations we are under to regard it.

As the Jewish passover was a type of this ordinance; the former, the shadow,
of which the latter, is the substance, we may rationally conclude, from this
consideration, that this sacrament is most forcibly enjoined on us by divine
authority; as the people of Israel were positively commanded to observe the
passover; and, indeed, upon their non-observance of it, without a just reason,
they were to be put to death. "The man," it is written, "that is clean; and is
not in a journey, and forbeareth to keep the passover, even the same soul shall
be cut off from his people."

The authority of our LORD to institute sacraments is unquestionable; for "all
power was given to him in Heaven and in earth." Matt. xxviii. 18.
And can any command be more explicit, than that which enjoins on us this
sacrament? "THIS DO, in remembrance of me."

This service, it may be remarked, is farther enjoined on us, not only by the
example of the primitive church, but also, by the words of Saint Paul.

"For I have received of the Lord," said he, to the Corinthians, " that which I
also delivered unto you; that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was
betrayed, took bread; and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said; Take
eat; this is my Body which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me.
After the same manner he took the cup, when he had supped, saying; This cup is
the New Testament in my blood; this do, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance
of me. For as often as you eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the
Lord's death until he comes." 1 Cor. xi. 23 to 26.


To prevent our unworthy reception of this sacrament, we are entreated
previously to examine whether we have that preparation which it requires. "But
let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that
cup." Ibid. ver. 28.


These, and other expressions of Saint Paul, clearly enforce on us this duty.
And as it is also enjoined on us by the law of gratitude, it may most justly be
affirmed, that there is not any precept of sacred writ more explicitly, nor
more forcibly, enjoined on us, than is the injunction, in the text, that
requires us to be partakers of this holy sacrament.

As this fact cannot, consistent with our religious principles, be questioned
by any of us, we shall now,

THIRDLY, attend to the qualifications requisite to our due observance of this
ordinance.

We perceive, from what has been said, that the principal intention of this
sacrament, is to preserve in our minds a sense of gratitude for the love of
CHRIST in effecting our salvation, by virtue of his death.

But is it possible our hearts can be duly impressed with a sense of
thankfulness to Christ, while we are in a state of impenitence; not entitled to
the blessings of the gospel, and regardless of it is sacred precepts?

Impossible is it for the person who is a stranger to repentance; destitute of
faith in Christ, and inattentive to the divine commands, to be an heir of
salvation; to be truly thankful for the mercies of Christ; or to render him an
acceptable service.

But when we are christians indeed, though our graces may be defective; our
religious seize imperfect, we are qualified to approach this ordinance;
we have that preparation, which, in the judgment of our church, is requisite to
our being worthy partakers of this sacrament; for then we "truly repent of our
former sins; steadfastly purpose to lead a new life; have a lively faith in
God's mercy, through Christ; a thankful remembrance of his death, and are in
charity with all men."

A moment's reflection would be sufficient to convince us, that it would be,
most absurd and criminal, for a professed INFIDEL to receive this sacrament.
But the person who professes to believe in the christian faith, but demes it in
practice, is, perhaps, more guilty than such a character; and as sinful, at
least, would it be, for an impious christian to par^ake of this holy ordinance,
as for one who does not pro^ess to believe in divine revelation.

The person, therefore, of impenitence; of practical infidelity; of impurity of
heart and life; destitute of righteousness, must be unprepared to celebrate the
passion of our Lord.

We hasten to the fourth proposition, which was to notice some of the
advantages which attend the worthy reception of this sacrament.

It may be said that it is beneficial to us, in several respects.

It will occasion our observance of the divine precepts to be more perfect, and
acceptable to the Almighty.

No obedience can be pleasing to God, that proceeds not from LOVE. The
obedience of SERVILITY and FEAR, cannot be acceptable to the Deity; who
requires the free will offering of the heart. Prove. xxiii. 26.
And impossible is it, that we should love God, unless we shall be convinced of
the excellence of his nature; or be sensible of his love to us. As, in this
sacrament, we commemorate the sufferings of Christ, we have the highest
testimony of the Almighty's affection for us, in giving the son of his love to
be a propitiatory sacrifice for our sins; our hearts, therefore, we may
reasonably hope, will be impressed with a sense of love to the God of
beneficence. And thus, while we are rendering to God a most rational tribute of
gratitude, we are excited and enabled, with greater perfection, and more
acceptably, to honor his laws.

When we duly commemorate the passion of our Lord, and have a lively sense of
the ignominy of his death; of his excruciating pangs, both of body and soul,
which he endured to atone for our guilt, can we be insensible of the demerits
of sin; of the punishment due to the violation of the divine law? And,
consequently, must not our hatred against sin be increased; our resolutions of
virtue be strengthened?

When, in this ordinance, we receive the symbols of our Savior's passion,
while our faith thereby shall be increased, will not our hearts be expanded
with CHARITY to all men, even to our enemies.

Is it possible to have proper conceptions of the love of Christ, manifested in
his death, to all men; to the most guilty and unworthy; to his greatest
enemies, even his murderers, and not feel compassion for our greatest foes;
not be desirous of advancing the felicity of all mankind?

Among other benefits, we might enumerate, which will be derived to us, by our
worthy reception of this sacrament, we shall only mention, that thereby we
shall obtain absolution for our sins; and also, have our hearts replenished
with grace; or, in the language of our communion office, we shall "spiritually
eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood; dwell in Christ, and Christ in
us; be one with Christ, and Christ with us;" and also, have our affection for
each other, as members of a religious community, greatly augmented and
established.

The primitive christians were justly distinguished, for their love and
benevolence "to all men; but especially to those of the household of faith."
Gal. vi. 10.
And it cannot reasonably be doubted, but their ardent affection for each
other; their unity, and distinguished piety, were, in a great degree, owing to
that attention which they paid to this sacred institution. The primitive
christians used to partake of this holy sacrament daily, or as often as they
assembled for public worship, and this practice continued a considerable time
in the church.

"We receive," says Saint Cyprian, "the Eucharist every day, as the food that
nourishes us to salvation."

Saint Ambrose mentions that this custom prevailed in the Diocese of Milan.

Saint Jerome informs us, that this practice obtained also in the church of
Rome.

And Saint Augustine intimates, that it was not uncommon in his time.

In the churches of the east, this custom began first to decline. Saint Basil
tells us, that, in his days, they communicated four times a week; on the Lord's
day, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, and also upon other days, if the memory or
festival of any martyr fell upon them.

Afterward, as the power of religion began more sensibly to decay, this
sacrament was received by the church once or twice only a week; in some time
thereafter, but once a month, and, in process of time, in most churches, but
three times in a year, viz. at Christmas, Easter and Witsuntide. See Cave's
Primitive Christianity, Chap. XI. Page 339, 340.

Originally, ALL the members of the church communicated; but as christians
increased in number, a more exact discipline, in this respect, became
necessary. None were admitted to this ordinance until they had arrived to the
degree of the faithful; for catechumens, and such as for some crime, were under
the censure and suspension of the church, and had not passed through the
several stages of penitents, were not allowed to communicate, but commanded to
depart from the church when this sacrament was administered. Ibid. P. 333.

All those, however, who were baptized, and against whose conduct no exception
was made, were not only permitted, but, by the rules of the church, obliged to
communicate, under pain of ecclesiastical censure.

The most ancient canons are very express to this purpose. Among those styled
the apostolical canons, there is one in the following words. "All such of the
faithful as come to church, and hear the scriptures read, but stay not to the
prayers, nor partake of the holy communion, ought to be suspended as authors of
disorder in the church."

Which canon the council of Antioch repeats with a little enlargement. "All
such as come into the church of God, and hear the holy scriptures read, but do
not communicate with the people in prayer, and refuse to partake of the
Eucharist, which is a disorderly practice, ought to be cast out of the church,
'till they confess their fault, and bring forth fruit of repentance; when they
do so, if they ask pardon, they may obtain it." See Bingham's Antiquities of
the christian church, Vol. I. Book XV. Chap. IV. Fol. 769.

In the first ages of christianity, not only catechumens and those under
penance, but all the other members of the church, except communicants, were
required to withdraw when this holy sacrament was dispensed.

But in the days of Saint Ch^^sostom, there were some who requested the
privilege to be present during the performance of the whole office of the
communion, without being obliged to communicate. They were not willing to be
accounted penitents, and to be shut out of the church with them; nor yet, would
they be communicants. Against such persons, this eloquent father inveighs with
a considerable degree of animation.

"Are you unworthy," said he to them, "of the sacrifice, and unfit to partake
of it? Neither then are you worthy of the prayers."

Do you not hear the church's herald proclaiming, "All ye who are penitents
withdraw!" All those who do not cummunicate, are penitents. If thou art of the
number of penitents, thou may not partake. For he who is not a partaker, is
a penitent.

Why does he say; "All ye who cannot pray, depart?" And why do you impudently
stay?

I am not one of those, will you say, but of such as may partake. Consider, I
pray you, and seriously weigh the matter. The royal table is prepared; angels
give their attendance; the Lord himself is present, and do you stand yawning as
an idle spectator only?

Your garments are defiled, and are you under no concern? But will you say,
they are clean. Then sit down and partake!

The king comes daily to see the guests, and discourses with them all. And now
he says in your consciences; friends, how came you to stand here, not having on
a wedding garment? He said not, why art thou set down? But before he was set
down, he pronounced him unworthy. For he said not, Why art thou set down? But,
Why came thou in hither? The same now he says to every one who stands here
with an impudent boldness. For every one who does not partake, is shameless and
impudent.

Those who are in sin, are for that, first cast out. As none of those who are
not initiated into the church by baptism, should be present; so neither should
any who are initiated, if they are defiled.

Tell me, if any one who is invited to a feast, washes his hands, and sits
down, and is prepared for the table, and yet eats not, does he not affront the
person who invited him? Were it not better that such an one should not be
present?

In like manner, thou art present; thou have sung the hymn, and made profession
with the rest, that thou art of those who are worthy, inasmuch as thou did
not depart with the unworthy. How is it that thou remainest, and yet do not
partake at the table? Art thou unworthy? Thou art then unworthy also of the
communion of prayers." Chrysostom. Hom. III. in Ephesians. Page 1051.




But however numerous and great are the advantages which we receive, when in a
proper manner, we are partakers of this holy ordinance, it is painful to
reflect, that, by great numbers of the professors of christianity, it is
disregarded. And as there are many who seem disposed to observe this duty; but
suffer themselves, to be diverted from it, through various impediments, we
shall, therefore, as we proposed,

LASTLY, Notice some of those obstacles which occasion numbers to omit this
service.

Some there are, who decline to communicate, by reason there is an interruption
of that affection and harmony which subsisted between them, and their
neighbor; and, in justification of their conduct, they adduce the following
requisition of our Savior.

"If thou bring thy gift to the altar and there rememberest that thy brother
has ought against thee, leave there thy gift before the altar and go thy way;
first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift."

These words suppose, that the person here alluded to, who "brings his gift to
the altar," is the aggressor; HE "there remembereth, that his brother has
ought against HIM." When this is the case, that the offending party may offer
an acceptable service to God, it is necessary he should make all reasonable
satisfaction, in his power, for the injury done to his neighbor. This is ALL
that is required in this case. And though the party offended should refuse to
be reconciled to him, he may, notwithstanding, "come and offer his gift."

But if those who make this objection, are not the aggressors; but have been
injured, they have only to forgive the injury, and then, agreeable to the
dictates of reason and religion, they are at liberty to attend on this
ordinance.

There are others, who absent themselves from the Lord's table, because they
apprehend it is approached by some persons of immoral character.

It may, indeed, some times, be thus. There may be those, who, as Saint
Augustine observes, "press the sacred elements with their teeth, when they do
not ^mbrace Christ with their hearts."

We should not, however, he hasty to censure our christian brother; but rather
be inclined, with an holy severity, to judge ourselves.

It must, notwithstanding, be the duty of the governors of every church, upon
proper information, to examine into the charge of immoral conduct against
communicants; and, if convinced of their impiety, to suspend them the privilege
of the communion, until they shall offer sufficient testimony of their
reformation.

Imperfect, indeed, must be the discipline of that church, which knowingly
admits unworthy characters to partake of this holy sacrament!

But it is most true, that such persons, pollute the ordinance only to
themselves; for, in the language of an apostle, "to the pure, all thing are
pure." Titus i. 15.
We cannot suppose, that our Lord would have suffered Judas to have received
this sacrament, had his presence polluted it to any but himself.

There are others, who, through FEAR, are prevented from commemorating the
death of Christ. They imagine they are unworthy to approach the Lord's table;
and that should they "eat and drink unworthily, they would eat and drink
damnation to themselves."

Such, are persons of vice, or virtue. If they are devoid of that religion the
gospel requires, "wherefore do they not repent, and amend? Why will they render
that as an excuse for not performing this duty, which reflects so much disgrace
on themselves; and, from which through divine aid, they can obtain deliverance?

Or why will they incline to continue in that state, which occasions them to be
unprepared for death; unfit indeed to offer the Almighty any act of devotion,
either of prayer, or praise? For "the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination
to the Lord."

If those who apprehend they are unworthy to commune, are possessed of
penitence for sin; faith in Christ; hearts of sincerity, and purity, and
unfeigned desires and resolutions, to obey the divine commands, to the utmost
of their ability, they will be acceptable guests at this holy banquet; for we
are assured, that "God accepts according to what a man has; and not
according to that which he has not." 2 Cor. viii. 12.


Such persons, therefore, should not be intimidated from discharging their
duty, in this instance. Practice, in all probability, will render them more
perfect in the performance of it; and, if in virtue, they have not arrived to
the greatest degree of perfection, the consideration, that the observance of
this duty will have a tendency to promote their growth in GRACE, and establish
them in GOODNESS, should be a forcible incentive to engage them in the practice
of this reasonable and advantageous service.

Those who receive this sacrament, while in a state of impenitence; or to
accomplish sinister views; or through the prevalence of custom; or with
dissimulation, or irreverance, unquestionably, receive it in an unworthy
manner, and without any benefit to themselves. And though the sin of such is
great, it is NOT unpardonable.

Some members of the church of Corinth, even while in a state of intoxication,
partook of this ordinance. This occasioned them "not to discern the Lord's
body." And such conduct, this gross profanation of this institution, was so
offensive to God, that he inflicted on them temporal judgments, that they might
not again be chargeable with such impiety.

"He that eats and drinks unworthily," said St. Paul, "eats and drinks
damnation to himself;" or provokes God to inflict some judgment upon him, that
he may be reclaimed from this sin; for the word rendered damnation, in the
original, signifies judgment. The word, in this passage of sacred writ, that is
translated damnation, is krima, which imports temporal judgment. The same word
is used by Saint Peter, 1 Ep. iv. 17. "The time is come that judgment must
begin at the house of God."


"For this cause," added our apostle, "many are weakly and sickly among you,
and many sleep," or are dead. "If we would judge ourselves we should not be
judged. But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord that we should not
be condemned with the world."

We shall mention but one particular more, which, we fear, prevents some from
attending on this holy ordinance; though there are not any, perhaps, so candid
as to acknowledge it; and this is an apprehension, that if, they shall partake
of this sacrament, they will be obliged to be more circumspect and holy in
their deportment; and that the same evil action would be more criminal in them,
should they become communicants, than it is while they do not receive this
sacrament.

Such conduct must evince great depravity of heart, as well as ignorance of the
nature of christianity.

What new obligation of virtue is enjoined upon us when we receive this
sacrament?

When we submit to the ordinance of baptism, are we not obligated to perform
each duty of our religion, to the utmost of our ability?

We hope however, for the honor of christianity, there are but few, who, from
this mistaken idea, decline the reception of this sacrament.

To conclude. Let such as are communicants, approach this holy ordinance with
reverence; with hearts of humility, faith, sincerity, charity, purity and
gratitude!

That they may be duly thankful for the love of Christ, which they will
recognize, let them reflect on the dignity of his character; upon "the length
and breadth, depth and height" of his sufferings; and upon the happy effects of
his passion; that it will not only deliver them from everlasting and
inexpressible infamy and woe, but exalt them to never ending and inconceivable
honor, glory and happiness!

And let such humbly assure themselves, that the divine Savior will graciously
condescend to meet them at his table; to indulge them with his smiles; to
replenish their hearts with grace; to favor them with his blessing!

Let the sincere christian, who, through groundless scruples and fears, has
been prevented from receiving this sacrament, rise superior to all opposition
in the performance of this duty!

From an ardent desire to render obedience to the will of Heaven; from an
humble reliance on the divine goodness to pity his infirmities, and from a
desire to make advancement in the christian life, let him resolve, in as
perfect a manner as possible, to commemorate the love of the merciful Savior!

Let those who have been inattentive to this sacred institution, who have not
perhaps, bestowed on it one serious thought, be entreated, without delay, to
take it into their serious consideration!

That this sacrament might be enforced on us in the most solemn manner, our
Savior, as it should seem, enjoined it upon us in his last moments, almost
with his latest breath! It is equally obligatory on all the members of his
church; and we have not the least intimation, that any apology will be admitted
for a disregard of this ordinance!

And let such persons be prevailed on to enter into the spirit of christianity;
to pay attention to each part of their duty, that they may enjoy the pleasures
arising from a good conscience; participate of the sublime enjoyments of
religion here, and of it is inexpressible rewards hereafter!

That such may be their wisdom and happiness, will God Almighty of his infinite
mercy, be graciously pleased to grant; for the sake of the merits of the divine
compassionate Jesus; to whom with the Father, and divine Spirit, be ascribed
all honor and glory, adoration and praise, now, henceforth, and for ever!


