Lessons in Elocution. OR, A SELECTION OF PIECE^ IN PROSE AND VERSE FOR THE
IMPROVEMENT OF YOUTH IN READING AND SPEAKING AS WELL AS FOR THE PERUSAL OF
PERSONS OF TASTE. With an APPENDIX, containing EXAMPLES OF THE PRINCIPAL
FIGURES OF SPEE^^ AND EMOTIONS OF THE MIND.

BY WILLIAM SCOTT, TEACHER OF ENGLISH READING, AND AUTHOR OF A (...) SPELLING
AND PRONOUNCING DICTIONARY, etc.

THE FIRST AMERICAN EDITION, FROM THE FOURTH BRITISH EDITION, GREATLY ALTERED
AND IMPROVED.

-- Resistless Eloquence
Wielded at will the fierce Democracy,
Shook the Arsenal, and fulmin'd over Greece
To Macedon, and Artaxerxes' Throne
MILTON. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by W. YOUNG, Bookseller and Stationer, at the
Corner of Chestnut and Second-streets. M.DCC.LXXXVIII.

PREFACE.
AN earnest desire of improving this Selection as much as possible, has engaged
the Compiler to make considerable alterations upon it in every succeeding
impression; and in none more than the present. For these liberties he hopes to
be forgiven; especially as they have been the means of giving it at last a
degree of excellence, which, he flatters himself, will render it highly
acceptable to every person of taste. To prevent, however, the inconveniences
which might attend the varying of it so much in future editions, it is
determined to allow it, henceforward, to remain the same, or nearly the same,
as it is now presented to the Public. -- Of the general plan and manner of
using it, the following is a short account.

PART I. is calculated to form the accurate and polished Reader. It is divided
into eight sections; five in Prose, and three in Verse. For several reasons, it
was thought proper to preserve the poetical pieces entirely distinct from the
prosaic; but, in teaching, it will, generally, be preferable to take the
sections in the order -- One, Two, Three, Six, Four, Seven, Five, Eight: by
which method, the learner will be well exercised in the reading of Prose before
entering upon that of Verse; and will, afterward, read a section of the latter
kind and one of the former alternately, till this Part be finished.

PART II. may be read with no less propriety than the preceding, by pupils of
every denomination; but is particularly adapted for such as may have occasion
to speak in public. This part is divided into five sections; the first three,
exhibiting specimens of eloquence suited respectively, to the Pulpit, the
Senate, and the Bar; the fourth, Speeches delivered on various occasions; the
fifth, Dramatic pieces. These may be gone regularly through by every student;
though, where a particular species of delivery is in view, one section will
deserve to be longer dwelt upon than another, as is manifest from their titles.
-- It need hardly be observed, that frequent reading in a standing posture, and
recitatation without book, are essentially necessary in forming the Public
Speaker, and extremely proper for youth in general.

IN the Appendix is given a course of Lessons on an original plan, by which the
Compiler has long taught with uncommon success. In particular cases, these may
be read wholly through, as an introduction to pieces of greater length and of a
more mixed nature; but, in general, it will answer better to make a few of them
a part of each day's reading, repeating them in the same manner as often as may
be thought necessary. As they exemplify particulars which enter into, and form
almost the whole of composition, it is evident the study of them must be highly
advantageous.

By casting the eye along the table of contents, the variety and merit of the
pieces contained in this volume will appear in a striking light. Almost every
emotion of the soul, and every mode of expression, will here be called forth
into exercise; while, at the same time, the pupil will be made acquainted with
the best authors, and, by the frequent peru^al of so many of their principal
beauties, acquire a t^ste for correct and elegant writing. As a further
recommendation of the work, nothing will be found in it which can in the
smallest degree be offensive to delicacy or hurtful to moral: on the contrary,
every ^esson will be found to be either innocently entertaining or agreeably
instructive.

Edinburgh, Nov. 1. 1786.
CONTENTS.
PART. I. -- LESSONS in READING.
SECTION I.
1. to 5. SELECT sentences, Art of Thinking, Page. 13 6. The fox and the goat,
Dodsley's Fables, Page. 18 7. The fox and the stork, ibid. Page. 19 8. The
court of death, ibid. Page. 20 9. The partial judge, ibid. Page. 20 10. The
sick lion, the fox, and the wolf, ibid. Page. 21 11. Dishonesty punished,
Kames's Hints, Page. 22 12. The picture, ibid. Page. 22 13. The two bees,
Dodsley's, Fables, Page. 22 14. Beauty and deformity, Percival's Tales, Page.
23 15. Remarkable instance of friendship, Art of Speaking, Page. 24 16.
Dionysius and Damocles, ibid. Page. 25 17. Character of Catiline, Sallust,
Page. 26 18. Avarice and Luxury, Spectator, Page. 26 19. Herculus's choice,
Tatler, Page. 28 20. Will Honeycomb's Spectator Spectator Page. 30 21. On good
breeding, Chesterfield, Page. 34 22. Address to a young student, Knox, Page. 37
23. Advantages of, and motives to, cheerfulness, Spectator, Page. 40

SECTION II.
1. THE bad reader, Percival's Tales, Page. 44 2. Respect due to old age,
Spectator, Page. 45 3. Piety to God recommended to the young, Blair, Page. 45
4. Modesty and docility, ibid. Page. 46 5. Sincerity, ibid. Page. 47 6.
Benevolence and humanity, ibid. Page. 48 7. Industry and application, ibid.
Page. 49 8. Proper employment of time, ibid. Page. 50 9. The true patriot, Art
of Thinking, Page. 51 10. On contentment, Spectator, Page. 51 11.
Transmigrations of a monkey, ibid. Page. 54 12. Journal of the life of
Alexander Severus, Gibbon, Page. 58 13. Character of Julius Caesar, Middleton,
Page. 59 14. On misspent time, Guardian, Page. 60 15. Character of Francis I.
Robertson, Page. 65 16. The supper and grace, Stern, Page. 68 17. Rustie
felicity, ibid. Page. 70 18. House of mourning, ibid. Page. 70

SECTION III.
1. THE honor and advantage of a constant adherence to truth, Percival's
Tales, Page. 73 2. Impertinence in di^course, Theophrastus, Page. 73 3.
Character of Addi^on as a writer, Johnson, Page. 74 4. Pleasure and Pain,
Spectator, Page. 75 5. Sir Roger de Coverly's family, ibid. Page. 77 6. The
folly of inconsistent expectations, Aitken, Page. 80 7. Description of the vale
of K^swick in Cumberland, Brown, Page. 82 8. Pity, an allegory, Aitk^n. Page.
85 9. Advantages of commerce, Spectator, Page. 86 10. On public speaking, ibid.
Page. 89 11. The Indian and British officer, Montboddo's Meta. Page. 90 12. On
the immortality of the soul, Spectat^r, Page. 92 13. Of the voyage round the
world by commodore Anson, Voltaire, Page. 95 14. On p^dantry, Mirror, Page. 100
15. On the death of a young lady, ibid. Page. 103

SECTION IV.
1. DESCRIPTION o^ the amphitheatre of Titus, Gilbon, Page. 106 2. Reflections
in Westminster Abbey, Spectator, Page. 107 3. The character of Mary queen of
Scots, Rob^rtson, Page. 109 4. The char^cter of queen Elizabeth, Hume, Page.
111 5. Charles V.'s resignation of his dominions, Robertson, Page. 113 6.
Importance of virtue, Price, Page. 116 7. Address to Art, Harris, Page. 118 8.
Flattery, Theophrastus, Page. 120 9. The absent man, Spectator, Page. 121 10.
The monk, Stern, Page. 122 11. On the head-dress of the ladies, Spectator,
Page. 125 12. On the present and a future state, Spectator, Page. 128 13. The
story of the siege of Calais, Fool of Quality, Page. 130

SECTION V.
1. ON grace in writing, Fitzsborne's Letters, Page. 136 2. On female oratory,
Spectator, Page. 137 3. On the being of a God, Cicero, Page. 140 4. Resignation
to Providence recommended, Bolingbroke, Page. 142 5. Advantages of history,
Hume, Page. 143 6. Battle of Pharsalia and the death of Pompey, Goldsmith,
Page. 145 7. Awkwardness in company, Chesterfield, Page. 154 8. Virtu^ man's
highest interest, Harris, Page. 155 9. On the pleasure arising from objects of
sight Spectator, Page. 157 10. Liberty and slavery, Stern, Page. 160 11. The
cant of criticism, ibid. Page. 161 12. The story of Le Fever, ibid. Page. 162

SECTION VI.
1. THE shepherd and the philosopher. Gay, Page. 172 2. Ode to Leven Water,
Smollet, Page. 174 3. Ode from the xixth psalm, Spectator, Page. 174 4. Rural
charms, Goldsmith, Page. 175 5. The painter who pleased every body and nobody,
Gay, Page. 176 6. Diversity in the human character, Pope, Page. 178 7. The
toilet, ibid. Page. 179 8. The hermit, Parnell, Page. 180 9. The double
transformation, Goldsmith, Page. 186 10. The judgment of Hercules, Spence,
Page. 188

SECTION VII.
1. THE father and Jupiter, Gay, Page. 196 2. (...) m^lion, Merrick, Page. 197
3. Description of a country alehouse, Goldsmith, Page. 198 4. Char^cter of a
country schoolmaster, ibid. Page. 109 5. Story of Palemon and Lavinia, Thomson,
Page. 200 6. Celadon and Amelia, ibid. Page. 203 7. Description of Mab queen of
the Fai^ies, Shakespeare, Page. 204 8. Inquiry concerning happiness, Pope,
Page. 205 9. Description of a game at cards, Pope, Page. 206 10. Elegy written
in a country churchyard, Gray, Page. 208 11. Scipio's restoring the captive
lady to her lover, Thomson, Page. 211 12. Humorous complaint to Dr Arbuthnot of
the impertinence of scribblers, Pope, Page. 213 13. Hymn to adversity, Gray,
Page. 215 14. The passions. An ode, Collins, Page. 216

SECTION VIII.
1. LAMENTATION for the loss of sight, Milton, Page. 219 2. L'Allegro, or the
merry man, ibid. Page. 220 3. On the pursuits of mankind, Pope, Page. 223 4.
Adam and Eve's morning hymn, Milton, Page. 225 5. Parting of Hector and
Andromache, Pope, Page. 226 6. Facetious history of John Gilpin, Cowper, Page.
229 7. Overthrow of the rebel angels, Milton, Page. 236 8. Alexander's feast,
or the power of music, Dryden, Page. 239

PART. II. -- LESSONS in SPEAKING.
SECTION I. ELOQUENCE OF THE PULPIT.
1. ON truth and integrity, Tillotson, Page. 24^ 2. On doing as we would be
done unto, Atterbury, Page. 245 3. On benevolence and charity, Seed, Page. 247
4. On happiness, Stern, Page. 250 5. On the death of Christ, Blair, Page. 254

SECTION II. ELOQUENCE OF THE SENATE.
1. SPEECH of the ^arl of Chesterfield, Page. 257 2. -- Lord Mansfield, Page.
262 3. -- Mr Pit (afterward Earl of Chatham), Page. 266 5. -- of Mr Fox,
Page. 269
SECTION III. ELOQUENCE OF THE BAR.
1. PLEADINGS of Lysias in favor of orphans, Page. 272 2. Cicero against
V^r^^s, Page. 277 3. -- for Milo, Page. 280
SECTION IV. SPEECHES DELIVERED ON VARIOUS OCCASIONS.
1. CAIUS M^^ius to the Romans, Ho^ke, Page. 287 2. (...) the Roman army, ibid.
Page. 290 3. Hannibal to the Carthaginian army, ibid. Page. 293 4. A^he^b^^ to
the Roman senators, S^ Page. 295 5. Canul^ias to the Roman consul Page. 298 6.
Junius Brutus over the dead body of Lucretia, ibid. Page. 301 7. Demosthenes to
the Athenians, Landsdown, Page. 302

SECTION V. DRAMATIC PIECES. --
I. DIALOGUES.
1. BELCOUR and St^ckwell, W^st Indian, Page. 308 2. Henry V. and C^ief
Justice, 2 Henr^ IV. Page. 310 3. Lady Townly and Lady Grace, Provok^d H^sband
Page. 311 4. P^ and J^ffier, Venice Preserved, Page. 316 5. B^^iface and
Aimwell, Beau^ Sratagem, Page. 318 6. Hamlet and Horatio, Trag. of Hamlet.
Page. 320 7. Lov^go^^ and Lappet, Miser, Page. 32^ 8. Brutus and C^ssius, Shak.
Julius Caesar Page. 327 9. C^ Mercury* and Ghosts, L^ci^n, Page. 330 10.
Ca^^inal Wolsey and Cromwell, Henry VIII. Page. 335 11. Sir Charles and Lady
Racket, Three W^aster Mar. Page. 338 12. Brutus and Cassius, Shak. Julius
Caesar, Page. 342

II. SPEECHES AND SOLILOQUIES.
1. HAMLET's advice to the players, Trag. of Hamlet, Page. 346 2. Douglas's
account of himself. Trag. of Douglas, Page. 346 3. -- of the Hermit, ibid.
Page. 347 4. S^mpro^'s speech for war, Trag. of Cato, Page. 348 5. Luci^^'^
^peech for peace, ibid. Page. 349 6. Hot^p^^'s account of the fop, 1 Henry IV.
Page. 349 7. -- soliloquy on the contents of a letter ibid, Page. 350 8.
Othello's apology for his marriage, Trag. of Othello, Page. 351 9. Henry IV's
soliloquy on sleep, 2 Henry IV. Page. 352 10. Bobadil's method of defeating an
army Every man in his hum. Page. 353 11. Soliloquy of Hamlet's uncle on the
murder of his brother, Trag. of Hamlet, Page. 354 12. Soliloquy of Hamlet on
death, ibid. Page. 355 13. Falstaff's encomiums on sa^k, 2 Henry IV. Page. 356
14. Prologue to the tragedy of Cato, Trag. of Cato, Page. 356 15. Cato's
soliloquy on the immortality of the soul, ibid. Page. 358 16. Richard III's
soliloquy on his deformity, Trag. of Richard, Page. 358 17. -- the night before
the battle of Bosworth, ibid. Page. 359 18. Soliloquy of Dick the apprentice,
F^rce of the A^pren. Page. 361 19. Brutus's harangue on the death of Caesar,
Shak. Julius Caesar, Page. 362 20. Antony's oration over Caesar's body, ibid.
Page. 363 21. The world compared to a stage, A ^ou lik^ Page. 365 APPENDIX:
containing examples of the principal figures of speech and the emotions of the
mind. Page. 367

BOOKS SOLD BY William Young, Bookseller and Stationer, The corner of Chestnut
and Second Streets, Philadelphia:
School Books and Classics.
PRIMERS Dilworth's Spelling-book Universal ditto Webster's ditto American
ditto Scot's Lessons American selection of Lessons in reading and speaking
Geography for Youth Webster's English Grammar Ash's ditto Dr. Lowth's ditto
Sheridan's ditto Art of Speaking Dodsley's Fables Croxal's ditto
Arithmetic, Surveying, Navigation.
Dilworth's Arithmetic Gough's ditto Mair's ditto Moor's Navigation --
Assistant Perry's Man of Business Fisher's Young Man's companion Mair's
Book-keeping Gordon's ditto Gibson's surveying Haselden's Assistant
Latin School Books and Classics.
Ruddiman's Rudiments with Prosody -- Latin Grammar Philadelphia Latin ditto
Wettenhall's ditto Grammatical Exercises Virgil delphini Ovid delphini Nepos
delphini Horace delphini Novum Testamentum Mair's Introduction Clark's ditto
Cornelius Nepos delphini Ditto with Clark's Translation Florus with ditto
Sallus^ with ditto Erasmus with ditto Fables with ditto Cicero delphini
Ainsworth's Dictionary Coles's ditto
Greek School Books and Classics.
Wittenhall's Grammar Dunlop's ditto Moo^'s ditto Sharp's ditto Westminster
ditto Homeri Ilias Hedericus Lexicon Luciar* Gr. et Lat. Clark' Homer, ditto
Hutch^^'s Xenophon Novum ^amentum Anacreon* Gr. et Lat. O Edipus Tyrannus
Schrivelius' Lexicon
JUST PUBLISHED BY William Young,
AN AMERICAN SELECTION of Lessons in Reading and Speaking; calcuated to improve
the Mind^ and refine the Taste of Youth: and also to inst^ them in the
Geography, History, and Politics of the Uni^^d States. To which is prefixed,
Rules in E^tion, and Directions for expressing the principal Passions of the
Mind.

INTRODUCTION to the History of Ameri^, for the use of Schools. Illustrated
with a Map of the United States.

PARADISE LOST: a Poem in twelve books, by JOHN MILTON. From the text of Dr.
Newton.

IN THE PRESS, A New accurate Edition of SHERIDAN's PRONOUNCING DICTIONARY, In
which the Definition of the Words will chiefly be according to that in SCOTT's
Pronouncing Dictionary, and the Book will be offered to the public for about
one half the price now required for the Dublin Octavo Edition.

PART I. LESSONS IN READING.
SECTION I The Elementary Lessons formerly prefixed to this and Part II. are
now inserted at the end of the book, considerably enlarged.
.
SELECT SENTENCES.
I.
MAN's chief good is an upright mind; which no earthly power can bestow, nor
take from him.

We ought to distrust our passions, even when they appear the most reasonable.

It is idle, as well as absurd, to impose our opinions upon others. The same
ground of conviction operates differently on the same man in different
circumstances, and on different men in the same circumstances.

Choose what is most fit; custom will make it the most agreeable.

A cheerful countenance betokens an good heart.

Hypocrisy is an homage that vice pays to virtue.

Anxiety and constraint are the constant attendants of pride.

Men make themselves ridiculous, not so much by the qualities they have, as by
the affectation of those they have not.

Nothing blunts the edge of ridicule so effectually as good humor.

To say little and perform much, is the characteristic of a great mind.

A man who gives his children a habit of industry, provides for them better
than by giving them a stock of money.

II.
OUR good or bad fortune depends greatly on the choice we make of our friends.

The young are slaves to novelty, the old to custom.

No preacher is so successful as time. It gives a turn of thought to the aged,
which it was impossible to inspire while they were young.

Every man, however little, makes a figure in his own eyes.

Self-partiality hides from us those very faults in ourselves which we see and
blame in others.

The injuries we do, and those we suffer are seldom weighed in the same balance.

Men generally put a greater value upon the favors they bestow, than upon those
they receive.

He who is puffed up with the first gale of prosperity, will bend beneath the
first blast of adversity.

Adversity borrows its sharpest sting from our impatience.

Men commonly owe their virtue or their vice to education as much as to nature.

There is no such fop as my young master of his lady-mother's making. She blows
him up with self-conceit, and there he stops. She makes a man of him at twelve,
and a boy all his life after.

An infallible way to make your child miserable, is to satisfy all his demands.
Passion swells by gratification; and the impossibility of satisfying every one
of his demands, will oblige you to stop short at last, after he has become
headstrong.

III.
WE esteem most things according to their intrinsic merit: it is strange MAN
should be an exception. We prize a horse for his strength and courage, not for
his furniture. We prize a man for his sumptuous palace, his great train, his
vast revenue; yet these are his furniture, not his mind.

The true conveniences of life are common to the king, with his meanest
subject. The king's sleep is not sweeter, nor his appetite better.

The pomp which distinguishes the great man from the mob, defends him not from
the fever nor from grief. Give a prince all the names of majesty that are found
in a folio dictionary, the first attack of the gout will make him forget his
palace and his guards. If he be in choler, will his princedom prevent him from
turning pale, and gnashing his teeth like a fool? The smallest prick of a nail,
the slightest passion of the soul, is capable of rendering insipid the monarchy
of the world.

Narrow minds think nothing right that is above their own capacity.

Those who are the most faulty, are the most prone to find faults in others.

The first and most important female quality is sweetness of temper. Heaven did
not give to the female sex insinuation and persuasion, in order to be surly: it
did not make them weak, in order to be imperious: it did not give them a sweet
voice, in order to be employed in scolding: it did not provide them with
delicate features, in order to be disfigured with anger.

Let fame be regarded, but conscience much more. It is an empty joy to appear
better than you are; but a great blessing to be what you ought to be.

Let your conduct be the result of deliberation, never of impatience.

In the conduct of life, let it be one great aim, to show that every thing you
do proceeds from yourself, not from your passions. Chrysippus rewards in joy,
chastises in wrath, does every thing in passion. No person stands in awe of
Chrysippus, no person is grateful to him. Why? because it is not Chrysippus who
acts, but his passions. We shun him in wrath as we shun a wild beast; and this
is all the authority he has over us.

Indulge not desire at the expense of the slightest article of virtue: pass
once its limits, and you fall headlong into vice.

Examine well the counsel that favors your desires.

The gratification of desire is sometimes the worst thing that can befall us.

IV.
To be angry is to punish myself for the fault of another.

A word dropped by chance from your friend offends your delicacy. Avoid a hasty
reply; and beware of opening your discontent to the first person you meet. When
you are cool, it will vanish, and leave no impression.

The most profitable revenge, the most rational, and the most pleasant, is to
make it the interest of the injurious person not to hurt you a second time.

It was a saying of Socrates, that we should eat and drink in order to live;
instead of living, as many do, in order to eat and drink.

Be moderate in your pleasures, that your relish for them may continue.

Time is requisite to bring great projects to maturity. Precipitation ruins the
best contrived plan; patience ripens the most difficult.

When we sum up the miseries of life, the grief bestowed on trifles makes a
great part of the account; trifles which, neglected, are nothing. How shameful
such a weakness!

The pensionary De Wit being asked how he could transact such variety of
business without confusion, answered, That he never did but one thing at a time.

Guard your weak side from being known. If it be attacked, the best way is to
join in the attack.

Francis I. consulting with his generals how to lead his army over the Alps
into Italy, Amarel his fool sprung from a corner, and advised him to consult
rather how to bring it back.

The best practical rule of morality is, Never to do but what you are willing
all the world should know.

Solicitude in hiding failings make them appear the greater. It is a safer and
easier course frankly to acknowledge them. A man owns that he is ignorant: we
admire his modesty. He says he is old: we scarce think him so. He declares
himself poor: we do not believe it.

When you discant on the faults of others, consider whether you be not guilty
of the same. To gain knowledge of ourselves, the best way is to convert the
imperfections of others into a mirror for discovering our own.

Apply yourself more to acquire knowledge than to show it. Men commonly take
great pains to put off the little stock they have; but they take little pains
to acquire more.

Never suffer your courage to be fierce, your resolution obstinate, your wisdom
cunning, nor your patience sullen.

To measure all reason by our own, is a plain act of injustice: it is an
encroachment on the common rights of mankind.

If you would teach secresy to others, begin with yourself. How can you expect
another will keep your secret, when you yourself cannot?

A man's fortune is more frequently made by his tongue than by his virtues; and
more frequently crushed by it than by his vices.

V.
EVEN self-interest is a motive for benevolence. There are none so low but may
have it in their power to return a good office.

To deal with a man, you must know his temper, by which you can lead him; or
his ends, by which you can persuade him; or his friends, by which you can
govern him.

The first ingredient in conversation is truth; the next, good sense; the
third, good humor; the last, wit.

The great error in conversation is, to be fonder of speaking than of hearing.
Few show more complaisance than to pretend to hearken, intent all the while
upon what they themselves have to say; not considering, that to seek one's own
pleasure so passionately is not the way to please others.

To be an Englishman in London, a Frenchman in Paris, a Spaniard in Madrid, is
no easy matter; and yet it is necessary.

A man entirely without ceremony has need of great merit.

He who cannot bear a jest ought never to make one.

In the deepest distress, virtue is more illustrious than vice in its highest
prosperity.

No man is so foolish, but he may give good counsel at a time: no man so wise,
but he may err, if he take no counsel but his own.

He whose ruling passion is love of praise, is a slave to every one who has a
tongue for detraction.

Alw^ys to indulge our appetites is to extinguish them. Abstain, that you may
enjoy.

To have your enemy in your power, and yet to do him good, is the greatest
heroism.

Modesty, were it to be recommended for nothing else, leaves a man at ease, by
pretending to little: whereas vainglory requires perpetual labor to appear
what one is not. If we have sense, modesty best sets it off; if not, best hides
the want.

When, even in the heat of dispute, I yield to my antagonist, my victory over
myself is more illustrious than over him had be yielded to me.

The refined luxuries of the table, besides enervating the body, poison that
very pleasure they are intended to promote: for, by soliciting the appetite,
they exclude the greatest pleasure of taste, that which arises from the
gratification of hunger.

VI. THE FOX AND THE GOAT.
A Fox and a Goat, traveling together in a very sultry day, found themselves
exceedingly thirsty; when, looking round the country in order to discover a
place where they might probably meet with water, they at length descried a
clear spring at the bottom of a well. They both eagerly descended; and, having
sufficiently allayed their thirst, began to consider how they should get out.
Many expedients for that purpose were mutually proposed and rejected. At last
the crafty Fox cried out with great joy -- I have a thought just struck into my
mind, which, I am confident, will extricate us out of our difficulty: Do you,
said he to the Goat, only rear yourself up upon your hinder-legs, and rest your
fore feet against the side of the well. In this posture I will climb up to your
head, from whence I shall be able, with a spring, to reach the top: and when I
am once there, you are sensible it will be very easy for me to pull you out by
the horns. The simple Goat liked the proposal well, and immediately placed
himself as directed; by means of which, the Fox, without much difficulty,
gained the top. And now, said the goat, give me the assistance you promised.
Thou old fool, replied the Fox, had thou but half as much brains as beard,
thou would never have believed that I would hazard my own life to save thine.
However, I will leave with thee a piece of advice, which may be of service to
thee hereafter, if thou should have the good fortune to make thy escape: --
Never venture into a well again, before thou have well considered how to get
out of it.

VII. THE FOX AND THE STORK.
THE Fox, though in general more inclined to roguery than wit, had once a
strong inclination to play the wag with his neighbor the Stork. He accordingly
invited her to dinner in great form; but, when it came upon the table, the
Stork found it consisted entirely of different soups, served up in broad
shallow dishes, so that she could only dip in the end of her bill, but could
not possibly sati^fy her hunger. The Fox lapped it up very readily; and, every
now and then addressing himself to his guest, desired to know how she liked her
entertainment; hoped that every thing was seasoned to her mind; and protested
he was very sorry to see her eat so sparingly. The Stork, perceiving she was
played upon, took no notice of it, but pretended to like every dish extremely;
and, at parting, pressed the Fox so earnestly to return her visit, that he
could not in civility refuse. The day arrived, and he repaired to his
appointment; but, to his great mortification, when dinner appeared, he found it
composed of minced meat, served up in long narrow-necked glasses; so that he
was only tantalized with the sight of what it was impossible for him to taste.
The Stork thrust in her long bill, and helped herself very plentifully; then,
turning to Reynard, who was eagerly licking the outside of a jar where some
sauce had been spilled -- I am very glad, said she; smiling, that you seem to
have so good an appetite; I hope you will make as hearty a dinner at my table
as I did the other day at yours. Reynard hung down his head, and looked very
much displeased. Nay, nay, said the Stork, don't pretend to be out of humor
about the matter; they that cannot take a jest should never make one.

VIII. THE COURT OF DEATH.
DEATH, the king of terrors, was determined to choose a prime minister; and his
pale courtiers, the ghastly train of diseases, were all summoned to attend;
when each preferred his claim to the honor of this illustrious office. Fever
urged the numbers he destroyed; cold Palsy set forth his pretensions by
shaking all his limbs; and Dropsy, by his swelled unwieldy carcass. Gout
hobbled up, and alleged his great power in racking every joint; and Asthma's
inability to speak was a strong, though silent, argument in favor of his claim.
Stone and Cholic pleaded their violence; Plague, his rapid progress in
destruction; and Consumption, though slow, insisted that he was sure. In the
midst of this contention, the court was disturbed with the noise of music,
dancing, feasting and revelry; when immediately entered a lady, with a bold
lascivious air, and a flushed and jovial countenance: she was attended on one
hand by a troop of cooks and Bacchanals; and, on the other, by a train of
wanton youths and damsels, who danced half-naked to the softest musical
instruments: her name was INTEMPERANCE. She waved her hand, and thus addressed
the crowd of Diseases; Give way, ye sickly band of pretenders, nor dare to vie
with my superior merits in the service of this great monarch. Am not I your
parent? the author of your beings? Do ye not derive the power of shortening
human life almost wholly from me? Who then so fit as myself for this important
office? -- The grisly monarch grinned a smile of approbation, placed her at his
right hand, and she immediately became his prime favorite and principal
minister.

IX. THE PARTIAL JUDGE.
A FARMER came to a neighboring lawyer, expressing great concern for an
accident which he said had just happpened. One of your oxen, continued he, has
been gored by an unlucky bull of mine: and I should be glad to know how I am to
make you reparation. Thou art a very honest fellow, replied the Lawyer, and
wilt not think it unreasonable that I expect one of thy oxen in return. It is
no more than justice, quoth the Farmer, to be sure: but what did I say? I
mistake. It is your bull that has killed one of may oxen. Indeed! says the
Lawyer; that alters the case: I must inquire into the affair; and if -- And IF!
said the Farmer -- the business I find would have been concluded without an IF,
had you been as ready to do justice to others as to exact it from them.

X. THE SICK LION, THE FOX, AND THE WOLF.
A LION having surfeited himself with seasting too luxuriously on the carcass
of a wild boar, was seized with a violent and dangerous disorder. The beasts of
the forest flocked in great numbers to pay their respects to him upon the
occasion, and scarce one was absent except the Fox. The Wolf, an ill-natured
and malicious beast, seized this opportunity to accuse the Fox of pride,
ingratitude, and dissaffection to his majesty. In the midst of this invective
the Fox entered: who, having heard part of the Wolf's accusation, and observing
the Lion's countenance to be kindled into wrath, thus adro^tly excused himself,
and retorted upon his accuser: I see many here, who, with mere lip service,
have pretended to show you their loyalty; but, for my part, from the moment I
heard of your majesty's illness, neglecting useless compliments, I employed
myself day and night to inquire among the most learned physicians an infallible
remedy for your disease, and have at length happily been informed of one. It is
a plaster made of part of a Wolf's skin, taken warm from his back, and laid to
your majesty's stomach. This remedy was no sooner proposed, than it was
determined that the experiment should be tried: and, whilst the operation was
performing, the Fox, with a sarcastic smile, whispered this useful maxim in the
Wolf's ear -- If you would be safe from harm yourself, learn for the future not
to meditate mischief against others.

XI. DISHONESTY PUNISHED.
AN usurer, having lost an hundred pounds in a bag, promised a reward of ten
pounds to the person who should restore it. A man having brought it to him,
demanded the reward. The usurer loath to give the reward now that he had got
the bag, alleged, after the bag was opened, that there were an hundred and ten
pounds in it when he lost it. The usurer being called before the judge,
unwarily acknowledged that the seal was broke open in his presence, and that
there were no more at that time but a hundred pounds in the bag. "You say,"
says the judge, "that the bag you lost had a hundred and ten pounds in it."
"Yes, my lord," "Then," replied the judge, "this cannot be your bag, as it
contained but a hundred pounds: therefore the plaintiff must keep it till the
true owner appears; and you must look for your bag where you can find it."

XII. THE PICTURE.
SIR WILLIAM LELY, a famous painter in the reign of Charles I. agreed
beforehand for the price of a picture he was to draw for a rich London
Alderman, who was not indebted to nature either for shape or face. The picture
being finished, the alderman endeavored to beat down the price, alleging, that
if he did not purchase it, it would ^ie on the painter's hand. "That Is your
mistake," says Sir William; "for I can sell it at double the price I demand."
"How can that be," says the alderman, "for it is like nobody but myself?"
"True," replied Sir William; "but I will draw a tail to it, and then it will be
an excellent monkey." Mr Alderman, to prevent being exposed, paid down the
money demanded, and carried off the picture.

XIII. THE TWO BEES.
ON a fine morning in May, two bees set forward in quest of honey; the one wise
and temperate, the other careless and extravagant. They soon arrived at a
garden enriched with aromatic herbs, the most fragrant flowers, and the most
delicious fruits. They regaled themselves for a time on the various dainties
that were spread before them; the one loading his thigh at intervals with
provisions for the hive against the distant winter; the other revelling in
sweets, without regard to any thing but his present gratification. At length
they found a wide-mouthed phial, that hung beneath the bough of a peach-tree,
filled with honey ready tempered, and exposed to their taste in the most
alluring manner. The thoughtless epicure, spite of all his friend's
remonstrances, plunged headlong into the vessel, resolving to indulge himself
in all the pleasures of sensuality. The philosopher, on the other hand, sipped
a little with caution; but, being suspicious of danger, flew off to fruits and
flowers; where, by the moderation of his meals, he improved his relish for the
true enjoyment of them. In the evening, however, he called upon his friend, to
inquire whether he would return to the hive; but found him surfeited in sweets,
which he was as unable to leave as to enjoy. Clogged in his wings, enfeebled in
his feet, and his whole frame totally enervated, he was but just able to bid
his friend adieu, and to lament with his latest breath, that though a taste of
pleasure might quicken the relish of life, an unrestrained indulgence is
inevitable destruction.

XIV. BEAUTY AND DEFORMITY.
A YOUTH, who lived in the country, and who had not acquired, either by reading
or conversation, any knowledge of the animals which inhabit foreign regions,
came to Manchester to see an exhib^^ion of wild beasts. The size and figure of
the elephant struck him with awe; and he viewed the rhinoceros with
astonishment. But his attention was soon drawn from these animals, and directed
to another of the most elegant and beautiful form; and he stood contemplating
with silent admiration the glossy smoothness of his hair; the blackness and
regularity of the streaks with which he was marked, the symmetry of his limbs,
and, above all, the placid sweetness of his countenance. What is the name of
this lovely animal, said he to the keeper, which you have placed near one of
the ugliest beasts in your collection, as if you meant to contrast beauty with
deformity? Beware, young man, replied the intelligent keeper, of being so
easily captivated with external appearance. The animal which you admire is
called a tiger; and, notwithstanding the meekness of his looks, he is fierce
and savage beyond description: I can neither terrify him by correction, nor
^ame him by indulgence. But the other beast, which you despise, is in the
highest degree docile, affectionate, and useful. For the benefit of man, he
traverses the sandy deserts of Arabia, where drink and pasture are seldom to be
sound; and will continue six or sev^ d^ys without sustenance, yet still patient
of labor. Hi^ ^ir is manufactured into clothing; his flesh is deemed wholesome
nourishment; and the milk of the female is much valued by the Arabs. The camel,
therefore, for ^uch is the name given to this animal, is more worthy of your
admiration than the tiger; notwithstanding the ineleg^nce of his make, and the
two bunches upon his back. For mere external beauty is of little estimation;
and deformity, when associated with amiable dispositions and useful qualities,
does not preclude our respect and approbation.

XV. REMARKABLE INSTANCE OF FRIENDSHIP.
DAMON and Pythias, of the Pythagorean sect in philosophy, lived in the time of
Dionysius the tyrant of Sicily. Their mutual friendship was so strong, that
they were ready to die for one another. One of the two (for it is not known
which) being condemned to death by the tyrant, obtained leave to go into his
own country to settle his affairs, on condition that the other should consent
to be imprisoned in his stead, and put to death for him, if be did not return
before the day of execution. The attention of every one, and especially of the
tyrant himself, was excited to the highest pitch, as every body was curious to
see what should be the event of so strange an affair. When the time was almost
clapsed, and he who was gone did not appear, the rashness of the other, whose
sanguine friendship had put him upon running so seemingly desperate a hazard,
was universally blamed. But he still declared, that he had not the least shadow
of doubt in his mind of his friend's ^ity. The event ^wed how well he knew him.
He (...) in due time, and surrendered himself to that fate which he had no
reason to think he should escape; and which he did not desire to escape by
leaving his friend to suffer it in his place. Such fidelity softened even the
savage heart of Dionysius himself. He pardoned the condemned; he gave the two
friends to one another, and begged that they would take himself in for a third.

XVI. DIONYSIUS AND DAMOCLES.
DIONYSIUS, the tyrant of Sicily, showed how far he was from being happy, even
whilst he abounded in riches, and all the pleasures which riches can procure.
Damocles, one of his flatterers, was complimenting him upon his power, his
treasures, and the magnificence of his royal state, and affirming that no
monarch ever was greater or happier than he. "Have you a mind, Damocles," says
the king, "to taste this happiness, and know by experience what my enjoyments
are, of which you have so high an idea?" Damocles gladly accepted the offer.
Upon which the king ordered, that a royal banquet should be prepared, and a
gilded couch placed for him, covered with rich embroidery, and side-boards
loaded with gold and silver plate of immense value. Pages of extraordinary
beauty were ordered to wait on him at table, and to obey his commands with the
greatest readiness and the most profound submission. Neither ointments,
chaplets of flowers, nor rich perfumes were wanting. The table was loaded with
the most exquisite delicacies of every kind. Damocles fancied himself amongst
the gods. In the midst of all his happiness, he sees let down from the roof,
exactly over his neck, as he lay indulging himself in state, a glittering sword
hung by a single hair. The sight of destruction thus threatening him from on
high, soon put a stop to his joy and revelling. The pomp of his attendance, and
the glitter of the carved plate, gave him no longer any pleasure. He dreads to
stretch forth his hand to the table; he throws off the chaplet of roses; he
hastens to remove from his dangerous situation; and at last begs the king to
restore him to his former humble condition, having no desire to enjoy any
longer such a dreadful kind of happiness.

XVII. CHARACTER OF CATILINE.
LUCIUS CATILINE, by birth a Patrician, was by nature endowed with superior
advantages both bodily and mental; but his dispositions were corrupt and
wicked. From his youth, his supreme delight was in violence, slaughter, rapine,
and intestine confusions; and such works were the employment of his earliest
years. His constitution qualified him for bearing hunger, cold, and want of
sleep, to a degree exceeding belief. His mind was daring, subtle, unsteady.
There was no character which he could not assume and put off at pleasure.
Rapacious of what belonged to others, prodigal of his own, violently bent on
whatever became the object of his pursuit. He possessed a considerable share of
eloquence, but little solid knowledge. His insatiable temper was ever pushing
him to grasp at what was immoderate, romantic, and out of his reach.

About the time of the disturbances raised by Sylla, Catiline was seized with a
violent lust of power; nor did he at all hesitate about the means, so he could
but attain his purpose of raising himself to supreme dominion. His restless
spirit was in a continual ferment, occasioned by the confusion of his own
private affairs, and by the horrors of his guilty conscience; both which he had
brought upon himself by living the life above described. He was encouraged in
his ambitious projects by the general corruption of manners which then
prevailed amongst a people infected with two vices, not less opposite to one
another in their natures than mischievous in their tendencies; I mean, Luxury
and Avarice.

XVIII. AVARICE AND LUXURY.
THERE were two very powerful tyrants engaged in a perpetual war against each
other: the name of the first was Luxury, and of the second Avarice. The aim of
each of them was no less than universal monarchy over the hearts of mankind.
Luxury had many generals under him, who did him great service; as Pleasure,
Mirth, Pomp, and Fashion. Avarice was likewise very strong in his officers,
being faithfully served by Hunger, Industry, Care, and Watchfulness: he had
likewise a privy-counsellor who was always at his elbow, and whispering
something or other in his ear: the name of this privy-counsellor was Poverty.
As Avarice conducted himself by the counsels of Poverty, his antagonist was
entirely guided by the dictates and advice of Plenty, who was his first
counselor and minister of state, that concerted all his measures for him, and
never departed out of his sight. While these two great rivals were thus
contending for empire, their conquests were very various. Luxury got possession
of one heart, and Avarice of another. The father of a family would often range
himself under the banners of Avarice, and the son under those of Luxury. The
wife and husband would often declare themselves on the two different parties;
nay, the same person would very often side with one in his youth, and revolt to
the other in his old age. Indeed the wise men of the world stood neuter; but,
alas! their numbers were not considerable. At length, when these two potentates
had wearied themselves with waging war upon one another, they agreed upon an
interview, at which neither of their counselors were to be present. It is said
that Luxury began the parley; and, after having represented the endless state
of war in which they were engaged, told his enemy, with a frankness of heart
which is natural to him, that he believed they two should be very good friends,
were it not for the instigations of Poverty, that pernicious counselor, who
made an ill use of his ear, and filled him with groundless apprehensions and
prejudices. To this Avarice replied, that he looked upon Plenty (the first
minister of his antagonist) to be a much more destructive counselor than
Poverty; for that he was perpetually suggesting pleasures, banishing all the
necessary cautions against want, and, consequently, undermining those
principles on which the government of Avarice was founded. At last, in order to
an accommodation, they agreed upon this preliminary; that each of them should
immediately dismiss his privy-counsellor. When things were thus far adjusted
toward a peace, all other differences were soon accommodated; insomuch that
for the future they resolved to live as good friends and confederates, and to
share between them whatever conquests were made on either side. For this
reason, we now find Luxury and Avarice taking possession of the same heart, and
dividing the same person between them. To which I shall only add, that since
the discarding of the counselors above mentioned, Avarice supplies Luxury in
the room of Plenty, as Luxury prompts Avarice in the place of Poverty.

XIX. HERCULES's CHOICE.
WHEN Hercules was in that part of his youth in which it was natural for him to
consider what course of life he ought to pursue, he one day retired into a
desert, where the silence and solitude of the place very much favored his
meditations. As he was musing on his present condition, and very much perplexed
in himself on the state of life he should choose, he saw two women of a larger
stature than ordinary approaching toward him. One of them had a very noble air
and graceful deportment; her beauty was natural and easy, her person clean and
unspotted, her eyes cast toward the ground with an agreeable reserve, her
motion and behavior full of modesty, and her raiment as white as snow. The
other had a great deal of health and floridness in her countenance, which she
had helped with an artificial white and red; and she endeavored to appear more
graceful than ordinary in her mien, by a mixture of affectation in all her
gestures. She had a wonderful confidence and assurance in her looks, and all
the variety of colors in her dress that she thought were the most proper to
show her complexion to advantage. She cast her eyes upon herself, then turned
them on those that were present, to see how they liked her; and often looked on
the figure she made in her own shadow. Upon her nearer approach to Hercules,
she stepped before the other lady, who came forward with a regular composed
carriage; and, running up to him, accosted him after the following manner:

"My dear Hercules," says she, "I find you are very much divided in your
thoughts upon the way of life that you ought to choose: be my friend, and
follow me; I will lead you into the possession of pleasure, and o^t of the
reach of pain, and remove you from all the noise and disquietude of business.
The affairs of either war or peace shall have no power to disturb you. Your
whole employment shall be to make your life easy, and to entertain every sense
with its proper gratifications. Sumptuous tables, beds of roses, clouds of
perfumes, concerts of music, crowds of beauties, are all in readiness to
receive you. Come along with me into this region of delights, this world of
pleasure, and bid farewell for ever to care, to pain, to business."

Hercules, hearing the lady talk after this manner, desired to know her name;
to which she answered, "My friends, and those who are well acquainted with me,
call me Happiness; but my enemies, and those who would injure my reputation,
have given me the name of Pleasure."

By this time the other lady was come up, who addressed herself to the young
hero in a very different manner.

"Hercules," says she, "I offer myself to you, because I know your are
descended from the gods, and give proofs of that descent by your love to
virtue, and application to the studies proper for your age. This makes me hope
you will gain, both for yourself and me, an immortal reputation. But, before I
invite you into my society and friendship, I will be open and sincere with you,
and must lay down this as an established truth, that there is nothing truly
valuable which can be purchased without pains and labor. The gods have set a
price upon every real and noble pleasure. If you would gain the favor of the
Deity, you must be at the pains of worshipping him; if the friendship of good
men, you must study to oblige them; if you would be honored by your country,
you must take care to serve it. In short, if you would be eminent in war or
peace, you must become master of all the qualifications that can make you so.
These are the only terms and conditions upon which I can propose happiness."
The goddess of Pleasure here broke in upon her discourse: "You see," said she,
"Hercules, by her own confession, the way to her pleasures is long and
difficult; whereas that which I propose is short and easy." "Alas." said the
other lady, whose visage glowed with passion, made up of scorn and pity, "what
are the pleasures you propose? To eat before you are hungry, drink before you
are athrist, sleep before your are tired; to gratify appetites before they are
raised, and raise such appetites as nature never planted. You never heard the
most delicious music, which is the praise of one's self; nor saw the most
beautiful object, which is the work of one's own hands. Your votaries pass away
their youth in a dream of mistaken pleasures, while they are hoarding up
anguish, torment, and remorse, for old age.

"As for me, I am the friend of gods and of good men, an agreeable companion to
the artizan, an household guardian to the fathers of families, a patron and
protector of servants, an associate in all true and generous friendships. The
banquets of my votaries are never costly, but always delicious; for none eat
and drink at them who are not invited by hunger and thirst. Their slumbers are
sound, and their wakings cheerful. My young men have the pleasure of hearing
themselves praised by those who are in years; and those who are in years, of
being honored by those who are young. In a word, my followers are favored by
the gods, beloved by their acquaintance, esteemed by their country, and, after
the close of their labors, honored by posterity."

We know, by the life of this memorable hero, to which of these two ladies he
gave up his heart; and I believe every one who reads this, will do him the
justice to approve his choice.

XX. WILL HONEYCOMB's SPECTATOR.
MY friend Will Honeycomb has told me, for above this half year, that he had a
great mind to try his hand at a Spectator, and that he would fain have one of
his writing in my works. This morning I received from him the following letter;
which, after having rectified some little orthographical mistakes, I shall make
a present of to the public.

"Dear Spec, -- I was about two nights ago in company which very agreeable
young people of both sexes, ^ere, talking of some of your papers which are
writ^n conjugal love, there arose a dispute among us, ^er there were not more
bad husbands in the world than bad wives. A gentleman, who was advocate for the
ladies, took this occasion to tell us the story of a famous siege in Germany;
which I have since found related in my historical dictionary after the
following manner. When the Emperor Conrade III. had besieged Guelphus, Duke of
Bavaria, in the city of Hensberg, the women, finding that the town could not
possibly hold out long, petitioned the Emperor that they might depart out of it
with so much as each of them could carry. The Emperor, knowing they could not
convey away many of their effects, granted them their petition; when the women,
to his great surprise, came out of the place with every one her husband upon
her back. The Emperor was so moved at the sight, that he burst into tears; and
after having very much extolled the women for their conjugal affection, gave
the men to their wives, and received the Duke into his favor.

"The ladies did not a little triumph at this story; asking us at the same
time, whether in our consciences we believed that the men in any town of Great
Britain would, upon the same offer, and at the same conjuncture, have loaded
themselves with their wives? or rather, whether they would not have been glad
of such an opportunity to get rid of them? To this my very good friend Tom
Dapperwit, who took upon him to be the mouth of our sex, replied, that they
would be very much to blame if they would not do the same good office for the
women, considering that their strength would be greater, and their burdens
lighter. As we were amusing ourselves with discourses of this nature, in order
to pass away the evening, which now begins to grow tedious, we fell into that
laudable and primitive diversion of questions and commands. I was no sooner
vested with the regal authority, but I enjoined all the ladies, under pain of
my displeasure, to tell the company ingenuously, in case they had been in the
siege abovementioned, and had the same offers made them as the good women of
that place, what every one of t^ would have brought off with her, and have
thoug^ (...) worth the saving? There were several merry (...) made to my
question, which entertained us till bedtime. This filled my mind with such a
huddle of ideas, that upon my going to sleep I fell into the following dream.

"I saw a town of this island, which shall be nameless, invested on every side,
and the inhabitants of it so straitened as to cry for quarter. The general
refused any other terms than those granted to the above mentioned town of
Hensberg, namely, that the married women might come out with what they could
bring along with them. Immediately the city gates flew open, and a female
procession appeared, multitudes of the sex following one another in a row, and
staggering under their respective burdens. I took my stand upon an eminence in
the enemy's camp, which was appointed for the general rendezvous of these
female carriers, being very desirous to look into their several ladings. The
first of them had a huge sack upon her shoulders, which she set down with great
care: upon the opening of it, when I expected to have seen her husband shot out
of it, I found it was filled with china-ware. The next appeared in a more
decent figure, carrying a handsome young fellow upon her back: I could not
forbear commending the young woman for her conjugal affection, when to my great
surprise, I found that she had left the good man at home, and brought away her
gallant. I saw the third, at some distance, with a little withered face peeping
over her shoulder, whom I could not suspect for any but her spouse, till, upon
her setting him down, I heard her call him dear pug, and found him to be her
favorite monkey. A fourth brought a huge bale of cards along with her; and the
fifth a Bologna lapdog; for her husband, it seems, being a very bulky man, she
thought it would be less trouble for her to bring away little cupid. The next
was the wife of a rich userer laden with a bag of gold; she told us that her
spouse was very old, and by the course of nature could not expect to live long;
and that to show her tender regard for him, she had saved that which the p^^r
man loved better than his life. The next came (...) us with her son upon her
back, who, we were (...) ^s the greatest rake in the place, but so much the
mother's darling, that she left her husband behind, with a large family of
hopeful sons and daughters, for the sake of this graceless youth.

"It would be endless to mention the several persons, with their several loads,
that appeared to me in this strange vision. All the place about me was covered
with packs of ribbands, brocades, embroidery, and ten thousand other materials,
sufficient to have furnished a whole street of toy-shops. One of the women,
having an husband who was none of the heaviest, was bringing him off upon her
shoulders, at the same time that she carried a great bundle of Flanders lace
under her arm; but finding herself so overloaden that she could not save both
of them, she dropped the good man, and brought away the bundle. In short, I
found but one husband among this great mountain of baggage, who was a lively
cobbler, that kicked and spurred all the while his wife was carrying him on,
and, as it was said, had scarce passed a day in his life without giving her the
discipline of the strap.

"I cannot conclude my letter, dear Spec, without telling thee one very odd
whim in this my dream. I saw, methought, a dozen women employed in bringing off
one man: I could not guess who it should be, till upon his nearer approach I
discovered thy short phiz. The women all declared that it was for the sake of
thy works, and not thy person, that they brought thee off, and that it was on
condition that thou should continue the Spectator. If thou think this
dream will make a tolerable one, it is at thy service, from, dear Spec,

Thine sleeping and waking, WILL HONEYCOMB."


The ladies will see by this letter, what have I often told them, that Will is
one of those old-fashioned men of wit and pleasure of the town, that shows his
parts by raillery on marriage, and one who has often tried his fortune that way
without success. I cannot however dismiss this letter, without observing that
the true story on which it is built does honor to the sex; and that in order to
abuse them, the writer is obliged to have (...) course to dream and fiction.

XXI. ON GOOD BREEDING.
A FRIEND of yours and mine has very justly defined good breeding to be, "the
result of much good sense, some good nature, and a little self-denial for the
sake of others, and with a view to obtain the same indulgence from them."
Taking this for granted, (as I think it cannot be disputed) it is astonishing
to me, that any body, who has good sense and good nature, can essentially fail
in good breeding. As to the modes of it, indeed, they vary according to
persons, places, and circumstances, and are only to be acquired by observation
and experience; but the substance of it is every where and eternally the same.
Good manners are, to particular societies, what good morals are to society in
general; their cement, and their security. And, as laws are enacted to enforce
good morals, or at least to prevent the ill effects of bad ones; so there are
certain rules of civility, universally implied and received, to enforce good
manners and punish bad ones. And, indeed, there seems to me to be less
difference, both between the crimes and punishments, than at first one would
imagine. The immoral man, who invades another's property, is justly hanged for
it; and the ill-bred man, who, by his ill manners, invades and disturbs the
quiet and comforts of private life, is by common consent as justly banished
society. Mutual complaisances, attentions, and sacrifices of little
conveniences, are as natural an implied compact between civilized people, as
protection and obedience are between kings and subjects; whoever, in either
case, violates that compact, justly forfeits all advantages arising from it.
For my own part, I really think that, next to the consciousness of doing a good
action, that of doing a civil one is the most pleasing: and the epithet which I
should covet the most, next to to that of Aristides, would be that of
well-bred. Thus much for good-breeding in general: I will now consider some of
the various modes and degrees of it.

Very few, scarcely any, are wanting in the respect which they should show to
those whom they acknowledge to be highly their superiors; such as crowned
heads, princes, and public persons of distinguished and eminent posts. It is
the manner of showing that respect which is different. The man of fashion and
of the world, expresses it in its fullest extent; but naturally, easily, and
without concern: whereas a man who is not used to keep good company, expresses
it awkwardly; one sees that he is not used to it, and that it costs him a great
deal; but I never saw the worst-bred man living, guilty of lolling, whistling,
scratching his head, and such like indecencies, in company that he respected.
In such companies, therefore, the only point to be attended to is, to show that
respect, which every body means to show, in an easy, unembarrassed, and
graceful manner. This is what observation and experience must teach you.

In mixed companies, whoever is admitted to make part of them, is, for the time
at least, supposed to be upon a footing of equality with the rest; and,
consequently, as there is no one principal object of awe and respect, people
are apt to take a greater latitude in their behavior, and to be less upon their
guard; and so they may, provided it be within certain bounds, which are upon no
occasion to be transgressed. But upon these occasions, though no one is
entitled to distinguished marks of respect, every one claims, and very justly,
every mark of civility and good breeding. Ease is allowed, carelessness and
negligence are strictly forbidden. If a man accosts you, and talk to you ever
so dully or frivolously, it is worse than rudeness, it is brutality, to show
him, by a manifest inattention to what he says, that you think him a fool or a
blockhead, and not worth hearing. It is much more so with regard to women; who,
of whatever rank they are, are entitled, in consideration of their sex, not
only to an attentive, but an officious, good breeding from men. Their little
wants, likings, dislikes, preferences, antipathies, and fancies, must be
officiously attended to, and, if possible, guessed at and anticipated, by a
well-bred man. You must never usurp to yourself those conveniences and
gratifications which are of common right; such as the best places, the best
dishes, etc. but, on the contrary, always decline them yourself, and offer them
to others; who, in their turns, will offer them to you; so that, upon the
whole, you will, in your turn, enjoy your share of the common right. It would
be endless for me to enumerate all the particular instances in which a
well-bred man shows his good breeding in good company; and it would be
injurious to you to suppose, that your own good sense will not point them ^ut
to you, and then your own good nature will recommend, and your self-interest
enforce, the practice.

There is a third sort of good breeding, in which people are the most apt to
fail, from a very mistaken notion that they cannot fail at all. I mean with
regard to one's most familiar friends and acquaintances, or those who really
are our inferiors; and there, undoubtedly, a greater degree of ease is not only
allowable but proper, and contributes much to the comforts of a private social
life. But ease and freedom have their bounds, which must by no means be
violated. A certain degree of neglience and carelessness becomes injurious and
insulting, from the real or supposed inferiority of the persons; and that
delightful liberty of conversation among a few friends, is soon destroyed, as
liberty often has been, by being carried to licentiousness. But example
explains things best; and I will put a pretty strong case. Suppose you and me
alone together; I believe you will allow that I have as good a right to
unlimited freedom in your company, as either you or I can possibly have in any
other; and I am apt to believe, too, that you would indulge me in that freedom
as far as any body would. But, notwithstanding this, do you imagine that I
should think there were no bounds to that freedom? I assure you I should not
think so; and I take myself to be as much tied down by a certain degree of good
manners to you, as by other degrees of them to other people. The most familiar
and intimate habitudes, connections, and friendships, require a degree of good
breeding both to preserve and cement them. The best of us have our bad sides;
and it is as imprudent as it is ill-bred, to exhibit them. I shall not use
ceremony with you; it would be misplaced between us; but I shall certainly
observe that degree of good breeding with you which is, in the first place,
decent, and which, I am sure, is absolutely necessary to make us like one
another's company long.

XXII. ADDRESS TO A YOUNG STUDENT.
YOUR parents have watched over your helpless infancy, and conducted you, with
many a pang, to an age at which your mind is capable of manly improvement.
Their solicitude still continues, and no trouble nor expense is spared in
giving you all the instructions and accomplishments which may enable you to act
your part in life, as a man of polished sense and confirmed virtue. You have,
then, already contracted a great debt of gratitude to them. You can pay it by
no other method but by using the advantages which their goodness has afforded
you.

If your own endeavors are deficient, it is in vain that you have tutors,
books, and all the external apparatus of literary pursuits. You must love
learning, if you would possess it. In order to love it, you must feel its
delights; in order to feel its delights, you must apply to it, however irksome
at first, closely, constantly, and for a considerable time. If you have
resolution enough to do this, you cannot but love learning; for the mind always
loves that to which it has been long, steadily, and voluntarily attached.
Habits are formed, which render what was at first disagreeable, not only
pleasant, but necessary.

Pleasant, indeed, are all the paths which lead to polite and elegant
literature. Yours, then, is surely a lot particularly happy. Your education is
of such a sort, that its principal scope is to prepare you to receive a refined
pleasure during your life. Elegance, or delicacy of taste, is one of the first
objects of a classical discipline; and it is this fine quality which opens a
new world to the scholar's view. Elegance of taste has a connection with many
virtues, and all of them virtues of the most amiable kind. It tends to render
you at once good and agreeable. You must therefore be an enemy to your own
enjoyments, if you enter on the discipline which leads to the attainment of a
classical and liberal education, with reluctance. Value duly the opportunities
you enjoy, and which are denied to thousands of your fellow creatures.

Without exemplary diligence you will make but a contemptible proficiency. You
may, indeed, pass through the forms of schools and universities, but you will
bring nothing away from them of real value. The proper sort and degree of
diligence you cannot possess, but by the effects of your own resolution. Your
instructor may indeed, confine you within the walls of a school a certain
number of hours. He may place books before you, and compel you to fix your eyes
upon them; but no authority can chain down your mind. Your thoughts will escape
from every external restraint, and, amidst the most serious lectures, may be
ranging in the wild pursuit of trifles or vice. Rules, restraints, commands,
and punishments, may, indeed, assist in strengthening your ^^solution; but,
without your own voluntary choice y^^r diligence will not often conduce to your
pleasure or advantage. Though this truth is obvious, yet it seems to be a
secret to those parents who expect to find their son's improvement increase in
proportion to the number of tutors and external assistances which their
opulence has enabled them to provide. These assistances, indeed, are sometimes
afforded, chiefly that the young heir to a title or estate may indulge himself
in idleness and nominal pleasures. The lesson is construed to him, and the
exercise written for him by the private tutor, while the hapless youth is
engaged in some ruinous pleasure, which, at the same time, prevents him from
learning any thing desirable, and leads to the formation of destructive
habits, which can seldom be removed.

But the principal obstacle to your improvement at school, especially if you
are too plentifully supplied with money, is a perverse ambition of being
distinguished as a body of spirit in mischievous pranks, in neglecting the
tasks and lessons, and for every vice and irregularity which the puerile age
can admit. You will have sense enough, I hope, to discover, beneath the mask of
gaiety and goodnature, that malignant spirit of detraction, which endeavors to
render the boy who applies to books, and to all the duties and proper business
of the school, ridiculous. You will see, by the light of your reason, that the
ridicule is misapplied. You will discover, that the boys who have recourse to
ridicule, are, for the most part, stupid, unfeeling, ignorant, and vicious.
Their noisy folly, their bold confidence, their contempt of learning, and their
defiance of authority, are, for the most part, the genuine effects of hardened
insensibility. Let not their insults and ill-treatment dispirit you. If you
yield to them with a tame and abject submission, they will not fail to triumph
over you with additional insolence. Display a fortitude in your pursuits, equal
in degree to the obstinacy in which they persist in theirs. Your fortitude will
soon overcome theirs, which is, indeed, seldom any thing more than the audacity
of a bully. Indeed, you cannot go through a school with ease to yourself, and
with success, without a considerable share of courage. I do not mean that sort
of courage which leads to battles and contentions, but which enables you to
have a will of your own, and to pursue what is right, amidst all the
persecutions of surrounding enviers, dunces, and detractors. Ridicule is the
weapon made use of at school, as well as in the world, when the fortresses of
virtue are to be assailed. You will effectually repel the attack by a dauntless
spirit and unyielding perseverance. Though numbers are against you, yet, with
truth and rectitude on your side, you may, though alone, be equal to an army.

By laying in a store of useful knowledge, adorning your mind with elegant
literature, improving and establishing your conduct by virtuous principles, you
cannot fail of being a comfort to those friends who have supported you, of
being happy within yourself, and of being well received by mankind. Honor and
success in life will probably attend you. Under all circumstances you will have
an internal source of consolation and entertainment, of which no sublunary
vicissitude can deprive you. Time will show how much wiser has been your choice
than that of your idle companions, who would gladly have drawn you into their
association, or rather into their conspiracy, as it has been called, against
good manners, and against all that is honorable and useful. While you appear in
society as a respectable and valuable member of it, they will, perhaps, have
sacrificed, at the shrine of vanity, pride, extravagance, and false pleasure,
their health and their sense, their fortunes and their characters.

XXIII. ADVANTAGES OF, AND MOTIVES TO, CHEERFULNESS.
CHEERFULNESS is, in the first place, the best promoter of health. Repining^
and secret murmurs of heart give imperceptible strokes to those delicate fibers
of which the vital parts are composed, and wear out the machine insensibly; not
to mention those violent ferments which they stir up in the blood, and those
irregular disturbed motions which they raise in the animal spirits. I scarce
remember, in my own observation, to have met with many old men, or with such
who (to use our English phrase) 'wear well,' that had not at least a certain
indolence in their humor, if not a more than ordinary gaiety and cheerfulness
of heart. The truth of it is, health and cheerfulness mutually beget each
other; with this difference, that we seldom meet with a great degree of health
which is not attended with a certain cheerfulness, but very often see
cheerfulness where there is no great degree of health.

Cheerfulness bears the same friendly regard to the mind as to the body: it
banishes all anxious care and discontent, soothes and composes the passions,
and keeps the soul in a perpetual calm.

If we consider the world in its subserviency to man, one would think it was
made for our use; but if we consider it in its natural beauty and harmony, one
would be apt to conclude it was made for our pleasure. The sun, which is as the
great soul of the universe, and produces all the necessaries of life, has a
particular influence in cheering the mind of man, and making the heart glad.

Those several living creatures which are made for our service or sustenance,
at the same time either fill the woods with their music, furnish us with game,
or raise pleasing ideas in us by the delightfulness of their appearance.
Fountains, lakes, and rivers, are as refreshing to the imagination, as to the
soil through which they pass.

There are writers of great distinction, who have made it an argument for
Providence, that the whole earth is covered with green, rather than with any
other color, as being such a right mixture of light and shade, that it comforts
and strengthens the eye instead of weakening or grieving it. For this reason,
several painters have a green cloth hanging near them, to ease the eye upon,
after too great an application to their coloring. A famous modern philosopher
accounts for it in the following manner: All colors that are more luminous,
overpower and dissipate the animal spirits which are employed in sight; on the
contrary, those that are more obscure do not give the animal spirits a
sufficient exercise: whereas the rays that produce in us the idea of green,
fall upon the eye in such a due proportion, that they give the animal spirits
their proper play, and by keeping up the struggle in a just balance, excite a
very pleasing and agreeable sensation. Let the cause be what it will, the
effect is certain; for which reason the poets ascribe to this particular color
the epithet of Cheerful.

To consider further this double end in the works of nature, and how they are
at the same time both useful and entertaining, we find that the most important
parts in the vegetable world are those which are the most beautiful. These are
the seeds by which the several races of plants are propagated and continued,
and which are always lodged in flowers or blossoms. Nature seems to hide her
principal design, and to be industrious in making the earth gay and delightful,
while she is carrying on her great work, and intent upon her own preservation.
The husbandman, after the same manner, is employed in laying out the whole
country into a kind of garden or landscape, and making everything smile about
him, whilst, in reality, he thinks of nothing but of the harvest, and increase
which is to arise from it.

We may further observe how Providence has taken care to keep up this
cheerfulness in the mind of man, by having formed it after such a manner, as to
make it capable of conceiving delight from several objects which seem to have
very little use in them; as from the wildness of rocks and deserts, and the
like grotesque parts of nature. Those who are versed in philosophy may still
carry this consideration higher, by observing, that, if matter had appeared to
us endowed only with those real qualities which it actually possesses, it would
have made but a very joyless and uncomfortable figure; and why has Providence
given it a power of producing in us such imaginary qualities, as tastes and
colors, sounds and smells, heat and cold, but that man, while he is conversant
in the lower stations of nature, might have his mind cheered and delighted with
agreeable sensations? In short, the whole universe is a kind of theater filled
with objects that either raise in us pleasure, amusement, or admiration.

The reader's own thoughts will suggest to him the vicissitude of day and
night, the change of seasons, with all that variety of scenes which diversify
the face of nature, and fill the mind with a perpetual succession of beautiful
and pleasing images.

I shall not here mention the several entertainments of art, with the pleasures
of friendship, books, conversation, and other accidental diversions of life,
because I would only take notice of such enticements to a cheerful temper, as
offer themselves to persons of all ranks and conditions, and which may
sufficiently show us, that Providence did not design the world should be filled
with murmurs and repinings, or that the heart of man should be involved in
gloom and melancholy.

I the more inculcate this cheerfulness of temper, as it is a virtue in which
our countrymen are observed to be more deficient than any other nation.
Melancholy is a kind of demon that haunts our island, and often conveys herself
to us in an easterly wind. A celebrated French novelist, in opposition to those
who begin their romances with the flowery seasons of the year, enters on his
story thus: In the gloomy month of November, when the people of England hang
and drown themselves, a disconsolate lover walked out into the fields, etc.

Every one ought to fence against the temper of his climate or constitution,
and frequently to indulge in himself those considerations which may give him a
serenity of mind, and enable him to bear up cheerfully against those little
evils and misfortunes which are common to human nature, and which, by a right
improvement of them, will produce a satiety of joy, and uninterrupted happiness.

At the same time that I would engage my reader to consider the world in its
most agreeable lights, I must own there are many evils which naturally spring
up amidst the entertainments that are provided for us; but these if rightly
considered, should be far from overcasting the mind with sorrow, or destroying
that cheerfulness of temper which I have been recommending. This interspersion
of evil with good, and pain with pleasure, in the works of nature, is very
truly ascribed by Mr. Lock, in his essay on human understanding, to a moral
reason, in the following words:

Beyond all this, we may find another reason why God has scattered up and down
several degrees of pleasure and pain, in all the things that environ and affect
us, and blended them together in almost all that our thoughts and senses have
to do with; that we, finding imperfection, dissatisfaction, and want of
complete happiness in all the enjoyments which the creatures can afford us,
might be led to seek it in the enjoyment of Him, 'with whom there is fullness of
joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore.

SECTION II.
I. THE BAD READER.
JULIUS had acquired great credit at Cambridge by his compositions. They were
elegant, animated, and judicious; and several prizes, at different times, had
been adjudged to him. An oration, which he delivered the week before he left
the university, had been honored with particular applause; and, on his return
home, he was impatient to gratify his vanity, and to extend his reputation, by
having it read to a number of his father's literary friends.

A party was therefore collected; and, after dinner, the manuscript was
produced. Julius declined the office of reader, because he had contracted a
hoarseness on his journey; and a conceited young man, with great forwardness,
offered his services. Whilst he was settling himself on his seat, licking his
lips, adjusting his mouth, hawking, hemming, and making other ridiculous
preparations for the performance which he had undertaken, a profound silence
reigned through the company, the united effect of attention and expectation.
The reader at length began; but his tone of voice was so shrill and dissonant,
his utterance so vehement, his pronunciation so affected, his emphasis so
injudicious, and his accents were so improperly placed, that good manners alone
restrained the laughter of the audience. Julius was all this while upon the
rack, and his arm was more than once extended to snatch his composition from
the coxcomb who delivered it. But he proceeded, with full confidence in his own
elocution; uniformly overstepping, as Shakespeare expresses it, the modesty of
nature.

When the oration was concluded, the gentlemen returned their thanks to the
author; but the compliments which they paid him were more expressive of
politeness and civility, than of a conviction of his merit. Indeed, The
beauties of his composition had been converted, by bad reading, into blemishes;
and the sense of it rendered obscure, and even unintelligible. Julius and his
father could not conceal their vexation and disappointment; and the guests,
perceiving that they laid them under a painful restraint, withdrew, as soon as
decency permitted, to their respective habitations.

II. RESPECT DUE TO OLD AGE.
IT happened at Athens, during a public representation of some play exhibited
in honor of the commonwealth, that an old gentleman came too late for a place
suitable to his age and quality. Many of the young gentlemen, who observed the
difficulty and confusion he was in, made signs to him that they would
accommodate him if he came where they sat. The good man bustled through the
crowd accordingly: but when he came to the seats to which he was invited, the
jest was, to sit close, and expose him as he stood out of countenance, to the
whole audience. The frolic went round all the Athenian benches. But on those
occasions there where also particular places assigned for foreigners. When the
good man skulked toward the boxes appointed for the Lacedaemonians, that honest
people, more virtuous than polite, rose up all to a man, and with greatest
respect received him among them. The Athenians being suddenly touched with a
sense of the Spartan virtue and their own degeneracy, gave a thunder of
applause; and the old man cried out, "The Athenians understand what is good,
but the Lacedaemonians practice it."

III. PIETY TO GOD RECOMMENDED TO THE YOUNG.
WHAT I shall first recommend, is piety to God. With this I begin, both as the
foundation of good morals, and as a disposition particularly graceful and
becoming in youth. To be void of it, argues a cold heart, destitute of some of
the best affections which belong to that age. Youth is the season of warm and
generous emotions. The heart should then spontaneously rise into the admiration
of what is great; glow with the love of what is fair and excellent; and melt at
the discovery of tenderness and goodness. Where can any object be found so
proper to kindle those affections as the Father of the universe, and the Author
of all felicity? Unmoved by veneration, can you contemplate that grandeur and
majesty which His works every where display? Untouched by gratitude, can you
view that profusion of good which, in this pleasing season of life, His
beneficent hand pours around you? Happy in the love and affection of those with
whom you are connected, look up to the Supreme Being, as the inspirer of all
the friendship which has ever been shown you by others; himself your best and
your first friend: formerly, the supporter of your infancy, and the guide of
your childhood; now, the guardian of your youth, and the hope of your coming
years. View religious homage as a natural expression of gratitude to him for
all his goodness. Consider it as the service of the God of your fathers; of him
to whom your parents devoted you; of him whom, in former ages, your ancestors
honored; and by whom they are now rewarded and blessed in heaven. Connected
with so many tender sensibilities of soul, let religion be with you, not the
cold and barren offspring of speculation, but the warm and vigorous dictate of
the heart.

IV. MODESTY AND DOCILITY.
To piety, join modesty and docility, reverence of your parents, and submission
to those who are your superiors in knowledge, in station, and in years.
Dependence and obedience belong to youth. Modesty is one of its chief
ornaments; and has ever been esteemed a presage of rising merit. When entering
on the career of life, it is your part not to assume the reins as yet into your
hands; but to commit yourselves to the guidance of the more experienced, and to
become wise by the wisdom of those who have gone before you. Of all the follies
incident to youth, there are none which either deform its present appearance,
or blast the prospect of its future prosperity, more than self-conceit,
presumption, and obstinacy. By checking its natural progress in improvement,
they fix it in long immaturity; and frequently produce mischiefs which can
never be repaired. Yet these are vices too commonly found among the young. Big
with enterprise, and elated by hope, they resolve to trust for success to none
but themselves. Full of their own abilities, they deride the admonitions which
are given them by their friends, as the timorous suggestions of age. Too wise
to learn, too impatient to deliberate, too forward to be restrained, they
plunge, with precipitant indiscretion, into the midst of all the dangers with
which life abounds.

V. SINCERITY.
IT is necessary to recommend to you sincerity and truth. These are the basis
of every virtue. That darkness of character, where we can see no heart; those
foldings of art, through which no native affection is allowed to penetrate,
present an object unamiable in every season of life, but particularly odious in
youth. If, at an age when the heart is warm, when the emotions are strong, and
when nature is expected to show herself free and open, you can already smile
and deceive, what are we to look for when you shall be longer hackneyed in the
ways of men; when interest shall have completed the obduration of your heart,
and experience shall have improved you in all the arts of guile? Dissimulation
in youth is the forerunner of perfidy in old age. Its first appearance is the
fatal omen of growing depravity and future shame. It degrades parts and
learning, obscures the luster of every accomplishment, and si^ks you into
contempt with God and man. As you value, therefore, the approbation of heaven
or the esteem of the world, cultivate the love of truth. In all your
proceedings be direct and consistent. Ingenuity and candor possess the most
powerful charm; they bespeak universal favor, and carry an apology for almost
every failing. The path of truth is a plain and safe path; that of falsehood is
a perplexing maze. After the first departure from sincerity, it is not in your
power to stop. One artifice unavoidably leads on to another; till, as the
intricacy of the labyrinth increases, you are left entangled in your own snare.
Deceit discovers a little mind, which stops at temporary expedients, without
rising to comprehensive views of conduct. It betrays, at the same time, a
dastardly spirit. It is the resource of one who wants courage to avow his
designs, or to rest upon himself. Whereas openness of character displays that
genero^ boldness which ought to distinguish youth. To set out in the world with
no other principle than a crafty attention to interest, betokens one who is
destined for creeping through the inferior walks of life: but to give an early
preference to honor above gain, when they stand in competition; to despise
every advantage which cannot be attained without dishonest arts; to brook no
meanness, and to stoop to no dissimulation; are the indications of a great
mind, the presages of future eminence and distinction in life. At the same
time, this virtuous sincerity is perfectly consistent with the most prudent
vigilance and caution. It is opposed to cunning, not to true wisdom. It is not
the simplicity of a weak and improvident, but the candor of an enlarged a noble
mind; of one who scorns deceit, because he accounts it both base and
unprofitable; and who seeks no disguise, because he needs none to hide him.

VI. BENEVOLENCE AND HUMANITY.
YOUTH is the proper season for cultivating the benevolent and humane
affections. As a great part of your happiness is to depend on the connections
which you form with others, it is of high importance that you acquire betimes
the temper and the manners which will render such connections comfortable. Let
a sense of justice be the foundation of all your social qualities. In your most
early intercourse with the world, and even in your youthful amusements, let no
unfairness be found. Engrave on your mind that sacred rule, of "doing in all
things to others according as you wish that they should do unto you." For this
end, impress yourselves with a deep sense of the original and natural equality
of men. Whatever advantages of birth or fortune you possess, never display them
with an ostentatious superiority. Leave the subordinations of rank, to regulate
the intercourse of more advanced years. At present it becomes you to act among
your companions as man with man. Remember how unknown to you are the
vicissitudes of the world; and how often they, on whom ignorant and
contemptuous young men once looked down with scorn, have risen to be their
superiors in future years. Compassion is an emotion of which you ought never to
be ashamed. Graceful in youth is the tear of sympathy, and the heart that melts
at the tale of woe. Let not ease and indulgence contract your affections, and
wrap you up in selfish enjoyment. Accustom yourselves to think of the
distresses of human life; of the solitary cottage, the dying parent, and the
weeping orphan. Never sport with pain and distress in any of your amusements,
nor treat even the meanest insect with wanton cruelty.

VII. INDUSTRY AND APPLICATION.
DILIGENCE, industry, and proper improvement of time, are material duties of
the young. To no purpose are they endowed with the best abilities, if they want
activity for exerting them. Unavailing, in this case, will be every direction
that can be given them, either for their temporal or spiritual welfare. In
youth, the habits of industry are most easily acquired: in youth, the
incentives to it are strongest, from ambition and from duty, from emulation and
hope, from all the prospects which the beginning of life affords. If, dead to
these calls, you already languish in slothful inaction, what will be able to
quicken the more sluggish current of advancing years? Industry is not only the
instrument of improvement, but the foundation of pleasure. Nothing is so
opposite to the true enjoyment of life as the relaxed and feeble state of an
indolent mind. He who is a stranger to industry may possess, but he cannot
enjoy. For it is labor only which gives the relish to pleasure. It is the
appointed vehicle of every good to man. It is the indispensable ^tion of our
possessing a sound mind in a sound body. Sloth is so inconsistent with both,
that it is hard to determine whether it be a greater foe to virtue, or to
health and happiness. Inactive as it is in itself, its effects are fatally
powerful. Though it appear a slowly-flowing stream, yet it undermines all that
is stable and flourishing. It not only saps the foundation of every virtue, but
pours upon you a deluge of crimes and evils. It is like water, which first
putrifies by stagnation, and then sends up no^ious vapors, and fills the
atmosphere with death. Fly, therefore, from idleness, as the certain parent
both of guilt and of ruin. And under idleness I include, not mere inaction
only, but all that circle of trifling occupations in which too many saunter
away their youth; perpetually engaged in frivolous society, or public
amusements; in the labors of dress, or the ostentation of their persons. -- Is
this the foundation which you lay for future usefulness and esteem? By such
accomplishments do you hope to recommend yourselves to the thinking part of the
world, and to answer the expectation of your friends and your country? --
Amusements youth requires; it were vain, it were cruel, to prohibit them. But,
though allowable as the relaxation, they are most culpable as the business, of
the young. For they then become the gulf of time and the poison of the mind.
They foment bad passions. They weaken the manly powers. They sink the native
vigor of youth into contemptible effeminacy.

VIII. PROPER EMPLOYMENT OF TIME.
REDEEMING your time from such dangeros waste, seek to fill it with employments
which you may review with satisfaction. The acquisition of knowledge is one of
the most honorable occupations of youth. The desire of it discovers a liberal
mind, and is connected with many accomplishments and many virtues. But, though
your train of life should not lead you to study, the course of education always
furnishes proper employments to a well-disposed mind. Whatever you pursue, be
emulos to excel. Generous ambition, and sensibility to praise, are, especially
at your age, among the marks of virtue. Think not that any affluence of
fortune, or any elevation of rank, exempts you from the duties of application
and industry. Industry is the law of our being; it is the demand of nature, of
reason, and of God. Remember always, that the years which now pass over your
heads leave permanent memorials behind them. From your thoughtless minds they
may escape; but they remain in the remembrance of God. They form an important
part of the register of your life. They will hereafter bear testimony, either
for or against you, at that day, when, for all your actions, but particularly
for the employments of youth, you most give an account to God. -- Whether your
future course is destined to be- long or short, after this manner it should
commence; and, if it continue to be thus conducted, its conclusion, at what
time soever it arrives, will not be inglorious or unhappy.

IX. THE TRUE PATRIOT.
ANDREW DORIA of Genoa, the greatest sea-captain of the age he lived in, set
his country free from the yoke of France. Beloved by his fellow-citizens, and
supported by the emperor Charles V. it was in his power to assume sovereignty
without the least struggle. But he preferred the virtuous satisfaction of
giving liberty to his countrymen. He declared in public assembly, that the
happiness of seeing them once more restored to liberty, was to him a full
reward for all his services: that he claimed no pre-eminence above his equals,
but remitted to them absolutely to settle a proper form of government. Doria's
magnanimity put an end to factions that had long vexed the state: and a form of
government was established with great unanimity, the same that, with very
little alteration, subsists at present. Doria lived to a great age, beloved and
honored by his countrymen; and, without ever making a single step out of his
rank as a private citizen, he retained to his dying hour great influence in the
republic. Power, founded on love and gratitude, was to him more pleasant than
what is founded on sovereignty. His memory is reverenced by the Genoese; and,
in their histories and public monuments, there is bestowed on him the most
honorable of all titles -- FATHER of his COUNTRY, and RESTORER of its LIBERTY.

X. ON CONTENTMENT.
CONTENTMENT produces, in some measure, all those effects which the alchymist
usually ascribes to what he calls the PHILOSOPHER'S STONE; and if it does not
bring riches, it does the same thing by banishing the desire of them. If it
cannot remove the disquietudes arising out of a man's mind, body, or fortune,
it makes him easy under them. It has indeed a kindly influence on the soul of
man, in respect of every being to whom he stands related. It extinguishes all
murmur, repining, and ingratitude toward that Being who has allotted him his
part to act in this world. It destroys all inordinate ambition, and every
tendency to corruption, with regard to the community wherein he is placed. It
gives sweetness to his conversation, and a perpetual serenity to all his
thoughts.

Among the many methods which may be made use of for the acquiring of this
virtue. I shall only mention the two following. First of all, a man should
always consider how much he has more than he wants; and secondly, how much more
unhappy he might be than he really is.

First of all, a man should always consider how much he has more than he wants.
I am wonderfully pleased with the reply which Aristippus made to one who
condoled him upon the loss of a farm: "Why," said he, "I have three farms
still, and you have but one; so that I ought rather to be afflicted for you,
than you for me." On the contrary, foolish men are more apt to consider what
they have lost than what they possess; and to fix their eyes upon those who are
richer than themselves, rather than on those who are under greater
difficulties. All the real pleasures and conveniences of life lie in a narrow
compass; but it is the humor of mankind to be always looking forward, and
straining after one who has got the start of them in wealth and honor. For this
reason, as there is none can be properly called rich, who have not more than
they want; there are few rich men in any of the politer nations but among the
middle sort of people, who keep their wishes within their fortunes, and have
more wealth than they know how to enjoy. Persons of a higher rank live in a
kind of splendid poverty; and are perpetually wanting, because, instead of
acquiescing in the solid pleasures of life, they endeavor to outvie one another
in shadows and appearances. Men of sense have at all times beheld with a great
deal of mirth this silly game that is playing over their heads; and, by
contracting their desires, enjoy all that secret satisfaction which others are
always in quest of. The truth is, this ridiculous chase after imaginary
pleasures cannot be sufficiently exposed, as it is the great source of those
evils which generally undo a nation. Let a man's estate be what it will, he is
a poor man if he does not live within it, and naturally sets himself to sale to
any one that can give him his price. When Pittacus, after the death of his
brother, who had left him a good estate, was offered a great sum of money by
the king of Lydia, he thanked him for his kindness, but told him he had already
more by half than he knew what to do with. In short, content is equivalent to
wealth, and luxury to poverty; or, to give the thought a more agreeable turn,
"Content is natural wealth," says Socrates; to which I shall add, Luxury is
artificial poverty. I shall therefore recommend to the consideration of those
who are always aiming after superfluous and imaginary enjoyments, and will not
be at the trouble of contracting their desires, an excellent saying of Bion the
philosopher, namely, "That no man has so much care, as he who endeavors after
the most happiness."

In the second place, every one ought to reflect how much more unhappy he might
be than he really is. The former consideration took in all those who are
sufficiently provided with the means to make themselves easy; this regards such
as actually lie under some pressure or misfortune. These may receive great
alleviation from such a comparison as the unhappy person may make between
himself and others, or between the misfortune which he suffers, and greater
mi^fortunes which might have befallen him.

I like the story of the honest Dutchman, who, upon breaking his leg by a fall
from the mainmast, told the standers by, it was a great mercy that it was not
his neck. To which, since I have got into quotations, give me leave to add the
saying of an old philosopher, who, after having invited some of his friends to
dine with him, was r^led by his wife that came into the room in a passion, and
threw down the table that stood before them: "Every one," says he, "has his
calamity, and he is a happy man that has no greater than this." We find an
instance to the same purpose in the life of Doctor Hammond, written by Bishop
Fell. As this good man was troubled with a complication of distempers, when he
had the gout upon him, he used to thank God that it was not the stone; and when
he had the stone, that he had not both these distempers on him at the same time.

I cannot conclude this essay without observing, that there was never any
system besides that of Christianity, which could effectually produce in the
mind of man, the virtue I have been hitherto speaking of. In order to make us
contented with our condition, many of the professed philosophers tell us, that
our discontent only hurts ourselves, without being able to make any alteration
in our circumstances; others, that whatever evil befalls us, is derived to us by
a fatal necessity, to which the gods themselves are subject; while others very
gravely tell the man who is miserable, that it is necessary he should be so to
keep up the harmony of the universe, and that the scheme of Providence would be
troubled and perverted were he otherwise. These and the like considerations
rather silence than satisfy a man. They may show him that his discontent is
unreasonable, but are by no means sufficient to relieve it. They rather give
despair than consolation. In a word, a man might reply to one of these
comforters, as Augustus did to his friend who advised him not to grieve for the
death of a person whom he loved, because his grief could not fetch him again:
"It is for that very reason," said the emperor, "that I grieve."

On the contrary, religion bears a more tender regard to human nature. It
prescribes to every miserable man the means of bettering his condition; nay, it
shows him, that the bearing of his afflictions as he ought to do, will
naturally end in the removal of them. It makes him easy here, because it can
make him happy hereafter.

XI. TRANSMIGRATIONS OF A MONKEY.
WILL HONEYCOMB, who loves to show upon occasion all the little learning he has
picked up, told us yesterday at the club, that he thought there might be a
great deal said for the transmigration of souls, and that the eastern parts of
the world believed in that doctrine to this day. Sir Paul Rycaut, says he,
gives us an account of several well-disposed Mahometans that purchase the
freedom of any little bird they see confined to a cage; and think they merit as
much by it, as we should do here by ransoming any of our countrymen from their
captivity at Algiers. You must know, says Will, the reason is, because they
consider every animal as a brother or sister in disguise; and therefore think
themselves obliged to extend their charity to them, though under such mean
circumstances. They will tell you, says Will, that the soul of a man, when he
dies, immediately passes into the body of another man, or of some brute, which
he resembled in his humor, or his fortune, when he was one of us.

As I was wondering what this profusion of learning would end in, Will told us
that Jack Freelove, who was a fellow of whim, made love to one of those ladies
who throw away all their fondness on parrots, monkeys, and l^^-dogs. Upon going
to pay her a visit one morning, he write a very pretty epistle upon this hint.
Jack, says he, was conducted into the parlor, where he diverted himself for
some time with her favorite monkey, which was chained in one of the windows;
till at length observing a pen and ink lie by him, he writ the following letter
to his mistress, in the person of the monkey; and upon her not coming down so
soon as he expected, le^t it in the window, and went about his business.

The lady, soon after coming into the parlor, and seeing her monkey look upon a
paper with great earnestness, took it up, and to this day is in some doubt,
says Will, whether it was written by Jack or the monkey.

"Madam, -- Not having the gift of speech, I have a long time waited in vain
for an opportunity of making myself known to you; and having at present the
convenience of pen, ink, and paper by me, I gladly take the occasion of giving
you my history in writing, which I could not do by word of mouth. You must
know, Madam, that about a thousand years ago I was an Indian Bramin, and versed
in all those mysterious secrets which your European philosopher, called
Pythagoras, is said to have learned from our fraternity. I had so ingratiated
myself by my great skill in the occult sciences with a demon whom I used to
converse with, that he promised to grant me whatever I should ask of him. I
desired that my soul might never pass into the body of a brute creature; but
this, he told me, was not in his power to grant me. I then begged, that into
whatever creature I should chance to transmigrate, I might still retain my
memory, and be conscious that I was the same person who lived in different
animals. This he told me was within his power; and accordingly promised, on the
word of a demon, that he would grant me what I desired. From that time forth I
lived so very unblameably, that I was made president of a college of Bramins;
an office which I discharged with great integrity till the day of my death.

"I was then shuffled into another human body, and acted my part so very well
in it, that I became first minister to a prince who reigned upon the banks of
the Ganges. I here lived in great honor for several years, but by degrees lost
all the innocence of the Bramin, being obliged to rifle and oppress the people
to enrich my sovereign; till at length I became so odious, that my master, to
recover his credit with his subjects, shot me through the heart with an arrow,
as I was one day addressing myself to him at the head of his army.

"Upon my next remove, I found myself in the woods, under the shape of a
jackall, and soon listed myself in the service of a lion; I used to yelp near
his den about midnight, which was his time of rousing and seeking after his
prey. He always followed me in the rear; and when I had run down a fair buck, a
wild goat, or a hare, after he had feasted very plentifully upon it himself,
would now and then throw me a bone that was but half picked for my
encouragement; but upon my being unsuccessful in two or three chaces, he gave
me such a confounded gripe in his anger that I died of it.

"In my next transmigration I was again set upon two legs, and become an Indian
tax-gatherer; but having been guilty of great extravagancies, and being married
to an expensive jade of a wife, I ran so cursedly in debt, that I durst not
show my head. I could no sooner step out of my house, but I was arrested by
some body or other that lay in wait for me. As I ventured abroad one night in
the dusk of the evening, I was taken up and hurried into a dungeon, where I
died a few months after.

"My soul then entered into a flying fish; and in that state led a most
melancholy life for the space of six years. Several fishes of prey pursued me
when I was in the water; and if I betook myself to my wings, it was ten to one
but I had a flock of birds aiming at me. As I was one day flying amidst a fleet
of English ships, I observed a huge sea-gull whetting his bill, and hovering
just over my head: upon my dipping into the water to avoid him, I fell into the
mouth of a monstrous shark that swallowed me down in an instant.

"I was, some years afterward to my great surprise, an eminent banker in
Lombard Street; and remembering how I had formerly suffered for want of money,
become so very sordid and avaricious, that the whole town cried Shame on me. I
was a miserable little old fellow to look upon; for I had in a manner starved
myself, and was nothing but skin and bone when I died.

"I was afterward very much troubled and amazed to find myself dwindled into
an e^met. I was heartily concerned to make so insignificant a figure; and did
not know but, some time or other, I might be reduced to a mite, if I did not
mend my manners. I therefore applied myself with great diligence to the offices
that were allotted me, and was generally looked upon as the notablest ant in
the whole molehill. I was at last picked up, as I was groaning under a burden,
by an unlucky cock sparrow that lived in the neighborhood, and had before made
great depredations upon our commonwealth.

"I then bettered my condition a little, and lived a whole summer in the shape
of a be; but, being tired with the painful aad penurious life I had undergone
in my two last transmigrations, I fell into the other extreme, and turned
drone. As I one day headed a party to plunder a hive, we were received so
warmly by the swarm which defended it, that we were most of us left dead upon
the spot.

"I might tell you of many other transmigrations which I went through: how I
was a town rake, and afterward did penance in a bay gelding for ten years; as
also how I was a tailor, a shrimp, and a tom-^it. In the last of these my
shapes, I was shot in the Christmas holidays by a young jac^anapes, who would
needs try his new gun upon me^

"But I shall pass (...) ^hese and several other stages of life, to remind you
of the young bean who made love to you about six years since. You may remember,
Madam, how he masked and danced, and sung and played a thousand tricks to gain
you; and how he was at last carried off by a cold that he got under your window
one night in a serenade. I was that unfortunate young fellow, whom you were
then so cruel to. Not long after my shifting that unlucky body, I found myself
upon a hill in Aethiopia, where I lived in my present grotesque shape, till I
was caught by a servant of the English factory, and sent over into Great
Britain: I need not inform you how I came into your hands. You see, Madam, this
is not the first time that you have had me in a chain: I am, however, very
happy in this my captivity, as you often bestow on me those kisses and caresses
which I would have given the world for when I was a man. I hope this discovery
of my person will not tend to my disadvantage, but that you will still continue
your accustomed favors to your most devoted humble servant,

PUG.
"P. S. I would advise your little shock-dog to keep out of my way; for as I
looked upon him to be the most formidable of my rivals, I may chance one time
or other to give him such a snap as he will not like."




XII. JOURNAL of the LIFE of ALEXANDER SEVERUS.
ALEXANDER rose early. The first moments of the day were consecrated to private
devotion: but, as he deemed the service of mankind the most acceptable worship
of the gods, the greatest part of his morning hours was employed in council;
where he discussed public affairs, and determined private causes, with a
patience and discretion above his years. The dryness of business was enlivened
by the charms of literature; and a portion of time was always set apart for his
favorite studies of poetry, history, and philosophy. The works of Virgil and
Horace, the republics of Plato and Cicero, formed his taste, enlarged his
understanding, and gave him the noblest ideas of man and of government. The
exercises of the body succeeded to those of the mind; and Alexander, who was
tall, active, and robust, surpassed most of his equals in the gymnastic arts.
Refreshed by the use of the bath, and a slight dinner, he resumed, with new
vigor, the business of the day; and, till the hour of supper, the principal
meal of the Romans, ^e was attended by his secretaries, with whom he read and
answered the multitude of letters, memorials, and petitions, that must have
been addressed to the master of the greatest part of the world. His table was
served with the most frugal simplicity; and whenever he was at liberty to
consult his own inclination, the company consisted of a few select friends, men
of learning and virtue. His dress was plain and modest; his demeanor courteous
and affable. At the proper hours, his palace was open to all his subjects: but
the voice of a crier was heard, as in the Eleusinian mysteries, pronouncing the
same salutary admonition, -- "Let none enter these holy walls, unless he is
conscious of a pure and innocent mind."

XIII. CHARACTER OF JULIUS CAESAR.
CAESAR was endowed with every great and noble quality that could exalt human
nature, and give a man the ascendant in society: formed to excel in peace as
well as war, provident in council, fearless in action, and executing what he
had resolved with an amazing celerity; generous beyond measure to his friends,
placable to his enemies; and for parts, learning, eloquence, scarce inferior to
any man. His orations were admired for two qualities, which are seldom found
together, strength and elegance. Cicero ranks him among the greatest orators
that Rome ever bred: and Quintilian says, that he spoke with the same force
with which he fought; and if he had devoted himself to the bar, would have been
the only man capable of rivaling Cicero. Nor was he a master only of the
politer arts, but conversant also with the most abstruse and critical parts of
learning; and among other works which he published, addressed two books to
Cicero on the analogy of language, or the art of speaking and writing
correctly. He was a most liberal patron of wit and learning, wheresoever they
were found; and out of his love of those talents, would readily pardon those
who had employed them against himself; rightly adjudging, that by making such
men his friends, he should draw praises from the same fountain from which he
had been aspersed. His capital passions were ambition and love of pleasure;
which he indulged in their turns to the greatest excess: yet the first was
always predominant; to which he could easily sacrifice all the charms of the
second, and draw pleasure even from toils and dangers, when they ministered to
his glory. For he thought Tyranny, as Cicero says, the greatest of goddesses;
and had freque^tly in his mouth a verse of Euripides, which expressed the image
of his soul, That if right and virtue were ever to be violated, they were to be
violated for the sake of reigning. This was the chief end and purpose of his
life; the scheme that he had formed from his early youth: so that, as Cato
truly declared of him, he came with sobriety and meditation to the subversion
of the republic. He used to say, that there were two things necessary to
acquire and to support power -- soldiers and money; which yet depend mutually
(...) each ^ther: with money, therefore, he provided soldiers, and with
soldiers extorted money; and was, of all men, the most rapacious in plundering
both friends and foes; sparing neither prince nor state, nor temple, nor even
private persons, who were known to possess any share of treasure. His great
abilities would necessarily have made him one of the first citizens of Rome;
but disdaining the condition of a subject, he could never rest till he had made
himself a monarch. In acting this last part, his usual prudence seemed to fail
him; as if the height to which he was mounted had turned his head, and made him
giddy: for, by a vain ostentation of his power, he destroyed the stability of
it; and, as men shorten life by living too fast, so, by an intemperance of
reigning, he brought his reign to a violent end.

XIV. ON MISSPENT TIME.
I WAS yesterday comparing the industry of man with that of other creatures; in
which I could not but observe, that, notwithstanding we are obliged by duty to
keep ourselves in constant employ, after the same manner as inferior animals
are prompted to it by instinct, we fall very short of them in this particular.
We are here the more inexcusable, because there is a greater variety of
business to which we may apply ourselves. Reason opens to us a large field of
affairs, which other creatures are not capable of. Beasts of prey, and, I
believe, of all other kinds in their natural state of being, divide their time
between action and rest. They are always at work or sleep. In short, their
waking hours are wholly taken up in seeking after their food, or in consuming
it. The human species only, to the great reproach of our natures, are filled
with complaints, that "the day hangs heavy or them," that "they do not know
what to do with themselves," that "they are at a loss how to pass away their
time;" with many of the like shameful murmurs, which we often find in the
mouths of those who are styled reasonable beings. How monstrous are such
expressions among creatures who have the labors of the mind, as well as those
of the body, to furnish them with proper employments; who, besides the business
of their proper callings and professions, can apply themselves to the duties of
religion, to meditation, to the reading of useful books, to discourse; in a
word, who may exercise themselves in the unbounded pursuits of knowledge and
virtue, and every hour of their lives make themselves wiser or better than they
were before!

After having been taken up for some time in this course of thought, I diverted
myself with a book, according to my usual custom, in order to unbend my mind
before I went to sleep. The book I made use of on this occasion was Lucian,
where I amused my thoughts for about an hour among the dialogues of the dead;
which in all probability produced the following dream:

I was conveyed, methought, into the entrance of the infernal regions, where I
saw Rhadamanthus, one of the judges of the dead, seated on his tribunal. On his
left hand stood the keeper of Erebus, on his right the keeper of Elysium. I was
told he sat upon women that day, there being several of the sex lately arrived,
who had not yet their mansions assigned them. I was surprised to hear him ask
every one of them the same question, namely, What they had been doing? Upon
this question being proposed to the whole assembly, they stared one upon
another, as not knowing what to answer. He then interrogated each of them
separately. Madam, says he to the first of them, you have been upon the earth
about fifty years: what have you been doing there all this while? Doing, says
she; really I do not know what I have been doing; I desire I may have time
given me to recollect. After about half an hour's pause, she told him that she
had been playing at crimp; upon which Rhadamanthus beckoned to the keeper on
his left hand to take her into custody. And you, Madam, says the judge, that
look with such a soft and languishing air: I think you set out for this place
in your nine-and-twentieth year, what have you been doing all this while? I had
a great deal of business on my hands, says she, being taken up the first twelve
years of my life in dressing a jointed baby, and all the remaining part of it
in reading plays and romances. Very well, says he, you have employed your time
to good purpose. Away with her. The next was a plain country-woman: Well,
mistress, says Rhadamanthus, and what have you been doing? An't please your
worship, says she, I did not live quite forty years; and in that time brought
my husband seven daughters, made him nine thousand cheeses, and left my eldest
girl with him to look after his house in my absence; and who, I may venture to
say, is as pretty a housewife as any in the country. Rhadamanthus smiled at the
simplicity of the good woman, and ordered the keeper of Elysium to take her
into his care. And you, fair lady, says he, what have you been doing these
five-and-thirty years? I have been doing no hurt, I assure you, Sir, said she.
That is well, said he; but what good have you been doing? The lady was in great
confusion at this question; and not knowing what to answer, the two keepers
leaped out to seize her at the same time; the one took her by the hand to
convey her to Elysium, the other caught hold of her to carry her away to
Erebus. But Rhadamanthus observing an ingenuous modesty in her countenance and
behavior, bid them both let her loose, and set her aside for re-examination
when he was more at leisure. An old woman, of a proud and sure look, presented
herself next at the bar; and being asked what she had been doing? Truly, said
she, I lived threescore and ten years in a very wicked world, and was so angry
at the behavior of a parcel young flirts, that I passed most of my last years
in condemning the follies of the times. I was every day blaming the silly
conduct of people about me, in order to deter those I conversed with from
falling into the like errors and miscarriages. Very well, says Rhadamanthus,
but did you keep the same watchful eye over your own actions? Why truly, says
she, I was so taken up with publishing the faults of others, that I had no time
to consider my own. Madam, says Rhadamathus, be pleased to file off to the
left, and make room for the venerable matron that stands behind you. Old
gentlewoman, says he, I think you are fourscore; you have heard the question;
what have you been doing so long in the world? Ah, Sir, says she, I have been
doing what I should not have done; but I had made a firm resolution to have
changed my life, if I had not been snatched off by an untimely end. Madam, says
he, you will please to follow your leader: and, spying another of the same age,
interrogated her in the same form. To which the matron replied, I have been the
wife of a husband who was as dear to me in his old age as in his youth. I have
been a mother, and very happy in my children, whom I endeavored to bring up in
every thing that is good. My eldest son is blessed by the poor, and beloved by
every one that knows him. I lived within my own family, and left it much more
wealthy than I found it. Rhadamanthus, who knew the value of the old lady,
smiled upon her in such a manner, that the keeper of Elysium, who knew his
office, reached out his hand to her. He no sooner touched her, but her wrinkles
vanished, her eyes sparkled, her cheeks glowed with blushes, and she appeared
in full bloom and beauty. A young woman, observing that this officer who
conducted the happy to Elysium, was so great a beautifier, longed to be in his
hands; so that, pressing through the crowd, she was the next that appeared at
the bar: and being asked what she had been doing the five and twenty years that
she had passed in the world? I have endeavored, says she, ever since I came to
years of discretion, to make myself lovely, and gain admirers. In order to it,
I past my time in bottling up May-dew, inventing whitewashes, mixing colors,
cutting out patches, consulting my glass, suiting my complexion --
Rhadamanthus, without hearing her out, gave the sign to take her off. Upon the
approach of the keeper of Erebus, her color faded, herface was puckered up with
wrinkles, and her whole person lost in deformity.

I was then surprised with a distant sound of a whole troop of females that
came forward, laughing, singing, and dancing. I was very desirous to know the
reception they would meet with, and withal was very apprehensive that
Rhadamanthus would spoil their mirth: but at their nearer approach, the noise
grew so very great that it awakened me.

I lay some time reflecting in myself on the oddness of this dream; and could
not forbear asking my own heart, what I was doing? I answered myself that I was
writing GUARDIANS. If my readers make as good a use of this work as I design
they should, I hope it will never be imputed to me as work that is vain and
unprofitable.

I shall conclude this paper with recommending to them the same short
self-examination. If every one of them frequently lays his hand upon his heart,
and considers what he is doing, it will check him in all the idle, or, what is
worse, the vicious, moments of life; lift up his mind when it is running on in
a series of indifferent actions, and encourage him when he is engaged in those
which are virtuous and laudable. In a word, it will very much alleviate that
guilt which the best of men have reason to acknowledge in their daily
confessions, of "leaving undone those things which they ought to have done, and
of doing those things which they ought not to have done."

XV. CHARACTER OF FRANCIS I.
FRANCIS died at Rambouillet, on the last day of March, in the fifty-third year
of his age, and the thirty-third of his reign. -- During twenty-eight years of
that time, an avowed rivalship subsisted between him and the Emperor: which
involved, not only their own dominions, but the greater part of Europe, in
wars, prosecuted with more violent animosity, and drawn out to a greater
length, than had been known in any former period. Many circumstances
contributed to both. Their animosity was founded in opposition of interest,
heightened by personal emulation, and exasperated, not only by mutual injuries,
but by reciprocal insults. At the same time, whatever advantage one seemed to
possess toward gaining the ascendant, was wonderfully balanced by some
favorable circumstance peculiar to the other. The Emperor's dominions were of
great extent; the French King's lay more compact: Francis governed his kingdom
with absolute power; that of Charles was limited, but he supplied the want of
authority by address: the troops of the former were more impetuous and
enterprising; those of the latter, better disciplined, and more patient of
fatigue.

The talents and abilities of the two monarchs were as different as the
advantages which they possessed, and contributed no less to prolong the contest
between them. Francis took his resolutions suddenly; prosecuted them, at first,
with warmth; and pushed them into execution with a most adventurous courage:
but, being destitute of the perseverance necessary to surmount difficulties, he
often abandoned his designs, or relaxed the vigor of pursuit, from impatience,
and sometimes from levity. Charles deliberated long, and determined with
coolness: but, having once fixed his plan, he adhered to it with inflexible
obstinacy; and neither danger, nor discouragement, could turn him aside from
the execution of it.

The success of their enterprises was as different as their characters, and was
uniformly influenced by them. Francis, by his impetuous activity, often
disconcerted the Emperor's best-laid schemes; Charles, by a more calm, but
steady prosecution of his designs, checked the rapidity of his rival's career,
and baffled or repulsed his most vigorous efforts. The former, at the opening
of a war or of a campaign, broke in upon his enemy with the violence of a
torrent, and carried all before him; the latter, waiting until he saw the force
of his rival began to abate, recovered, in the end, not only all that he had
lost, but made new acquisitions. Few of the French monarch's attempts toward
conquest, whatever promising aspect they might wear at first, were conducted to
an happy issue; many of the Emperor's enterprises even after they appeared
desperate and impracticable, terminated in the most prosperous manner.

The degree, however, of their comparative merit and reputation, has not been
fixed, either by a strict scrutiny into their abilities for government, or by
an impartial consideration of the greatness and success of their undertakings;
and Francis is one of those monarchs, who occupy a higher rank in the temple of
fame, than either their talents or performances entitle them to hold. This
pre-eminence he owed to many different circumstances. The superiority which
Charles acquired by the victory of Pavia, and which, from that period, he
preserved through the remainder of his reign, and was so manifest, that
Francis's struggle against his exorbitant and growing dominion, was viewed by
most of the other powers, not only with the partiality which naturally arises
from those who gallantly maintain an unequal contest, but with the favor due to
one, who was resisting a common enemy, and endeavoring to set bounds to a
monarch equally formidable to them all. The characters of princes, too,
especially among the cotemporaries, depend, not only upon their talents for
government, but upon their qualities as men. Francis, notwithstanding the many
errors conspicuous in his foreign policy and domestic administration, was,
nevertheless, humane, beneficent, generous. He possessed dignity without pride,
affability free from meanness, and courtesy exempt from deceit. All who had
access to know him, and no man of merit was ever denied that privilege,
respected and loved him. Captivated with his personal qualities, his subjects
forgot his defects as a monarch; and, admiring him as the most accomplished and
amiable gentleman in his dominions, they hardly murmured at acts of
mal-administration, which, in a prince of less engaging dispositions, would
have been deemed unpardonable.

This admiration, however, must have been temporary only, and would have died
away with the courtiers who bestowed it; the illusion arising from his private
virtues must have ceased, and posterity would have judged of his public conduct
with its usual impartiality; but another circumstance prevented this; and his
name has been transmitted to posterity with increasing reputation. Science,
and the arts, had, at that time, made little progress in France. They were just
beginning to advance beyond the limits of Italy, where they had revived, and
which had hitherto been their only seat. Francis took them immediately under
his protection, and vied with Leo himself in the zeal and munificence with
which he encouraged them. He invited learned men to his court, he conversed
with them familiarly, he employed them in business, he raised them to offices
of dignity, and honored them with his confidence. That race of men, not more
prone to complain when denied the respect to which they fancy themselves
entitled, than apt to be pleased when treated with the distinction which they
consider as their due, thought they could not exceed in gratitude to such a
benefactor, and strained their invention, and employed all their ingenuity, in
panegyric.

Succeeding authors, warmed with their descriptions of Francis's bounty,
adopted their encomiums, and refined upon them. The appellation of FATHER OF
LETTERS, bestowed upon Francis, has rendered his memory sacred among
historians; and they seem to have regarded it as a sort of impiety, to uncover
his infirmities, or to point out his defects. Thus Francis, notwithstanding his
inferior abilities, and want of success, has more than equalled the fame of
Charles. The virtues which he possessed as a man, have entitled him to greater
admiration and praise, than have been bestowed upon the extensive genius, and
fortunate arts, of a more capable, but less amiable rival.

XVI. THE SUPPER AND GRACE.
A SHOE coming loose from the fore-foot of the thill-horse, at the beginning of
the ascent of mount Taurira, the postillion dismounted, twisted the shoe off,
and put it in his pocket: as the ascent was of five or six miles, and that
horse our main dependence, I made a point of having the shoe fastened on again,
as well as we could; but the postillion had thrown away the nails, and the
hammer in the chaise-box being of no great use without them, I submitted to go
on.

He had not mounted half a mile higher, when, coming to a flinty piece of road,
the poor devil lost a second shoe, and from off his other fore-foot. I then got
out of the chaise in good earnest; and, seeing a house about a quarter of a
mile to the left hand, with a great deal to do I prevailed upon the postilion
to turn up to it. The look of the house, and every thing about it, as we drew
nearer, soon reconciled me to the disaster. It was a little farm-house,
surrounded with about twenty acres of vineyard, about as much corn; and close
to the house, on one side, was a potagerie of an acre and a half, full of every
thing which could make plenty in a French peasant's house: and, on the other
side, was a little wood which furnished wherewithal to dress it. It was about
eight in the evening when I got to the house: so I left the postillion to
manage his point as he could; and, for mine, I walked directly into the house.

The family consisted of an old gray headed man and his wife, with five or six
sons and sons-in-law and their several wives, and a joyous genealogy out of
them.

They were all sitting down together to their lentil-soup; a large wheaten loaf
was in the middle of the table; and a flagon of wine at each end of it promised
joy through the stages of the repast -- 'twas a feast of love.

The old man rose up to meet me, and, with a respectful cordiality, would have
me sit down at the table. My heart was set down the moment I entered the room:
so I sat down at once like a son of the family; and to invest myself in the
character as speedily as I could, I instantly borrowed the old man's knife, and
taking up the loaf, cut myself a hearty luncheon; and, as I did it, I saw a
testimony in every eye, not only of an honest welcome, but of a welcome mixed
with thanks that I had not seemed to doubt it.

Was it this; or tell me, Nature, what else it was that made this morsel so
sweet -- and to what magic I owe it, that the draught I took of their flagon
was so delicious with it, that it remains upon my palate to this hour?

If the supper was to my taste, the grace which followed was much more so.

When supper was over, the old man gave a knock upon the table with the haft of
his knife, to bid them prepare for the dance. The moment the signal was given,
the women and girls ran altogether into the back apartment to tie up their
hair, and the young men to the door to wash their faces, and change their
sabots, (WOODEN SHOES;) and in three minutes every soul was ready, upon a
little esplanade before the house, to begin. The old man and his wife came out
last, and placing me betwixt them, sat down upon a sopha of turf by the door.

The old man had some fifty years ago been no mean performer upon the vielle;
and at the age he was then of, touched it well enough for the purpose. His wife
sung now-and-then a little to the tune, then intermitted, and joined her old
man again, as their children and grandchildren danced before them.

It was not till the middle of the second dance, when, for some pauses in the
movement wherein they all seemed to look up, I fancied I could distinguish an
elevation of spirit different from that which is the cause or the effect of
simple jollity. In a word, I thought I beheld religion mixing in the dance;
but, as I had never seen her so engaged, I should have looked upon it now as
one of the illusions of an imagination which is eternally misleading me, had
not the old man, as soon as the dance ended, said, that this was their constant
way; and that all his life long, he made it a rule, after supper was over, to
call out his family to dance and rejoice; believing, he said, that a cheerful
and contented mind was the best sort of thanks to heaven that an illiterate
peasant could pay. -- Or a learned prelate either, said I.

XVII. RUSTIC FELICITY.
MANY are the silent pleasures of the honest peasant, who rises cheerfully to
his labor. -- Look into his dwelling, -- where the scene of every man's
happiness chiefly lies: -- he has the same domestic endearments, -- as much joy
and comfort in his children, and as flattering hopes of their doing well, -- to
enliven his hours and glad his heart, as you could conceive in the most
affluent station. -- And I make no doubt, in general, but if the true account
of his joys and sufferings were to be balanced with those of his betters, --
that the upshot would prove to be little more than this; -- that the rich man
had the more meat, -- but the poor man the better stomach; -- the one had more
luxury, -- more able physicians to attend and set him to rights; -- the other,
more health and soundness in his bones, and less occasion for their help; --
that after these two articles betwixt them were balanced, -- in all other
things they stood upon a level: -- that the sun shines as warm, -- the air
blows as fresh, -- and the earth breathes as fragrant upon the one as the
other; and that they have an equal share in all the beauties and real benefits
of nature.

XVIII. HOUSE OF MOURNING.
LET us go into the house of mourning, made so by such afflictions as have been
brought in merely by the common cross accidents and disasters to which our
condition is exposed, -- where, perhaps, the aged parents sit broken hearted,
pierced to their souls with the folly and indiscretion of a thankless child --
the child of their prayers, in whom all their hopes and expectations centered:
-- perhaps a more affecting scene -- a virtuous family lying pinched with want,
where the unfortunate support of it having long struggled with a train of
misfortunes, and bravely sought up against them, -- is now piteously borne down
at the last -- overwhelmed with a cruel blow which no forecast or frugality
could have prevented. -- O God! look upon his afflictons -- Behold him
distracted with many sorrows, surrounded with the tender pledges of his love,
and the partner of his cares -- without bread to give them; unable, from the
remembrance of better days, to dig -- to beg, ashamed.

When we enter into the house of mourning such as this -- it is impossible to
insult the unfortunate even with an improper look -- Under whatever levity and
dissipation of heart such objects catch our eyes, -- they catch likewise our
attentions, collect and call home our scattered thoughts, and exercise them
with wisdom. A transient scene of distress, such as is here sketched, how soon
does it furnish materials to set the mind at work? how necessarily does it
engage it to the consideration of the miseries and misfortunes, the dangers and
calamities, to which the life of man is subject? By holding up such a glass
before it, it forces the mind to see and reflect upon the vanity -- the
perishing condition and uncertain tenure, of every thing in this world. From
reflections of this serious cast, how insensibly do the thoughts carry us
farther? -- and from considering what we are, -- what kind of world we live in,
and what evil befalls us in it, how naturally do they set us to look forward at
what possibly we shall be? -- for what kind of world we are intended -- what
evils may befall us there -- and what provision we should make against them here
whilst we have time and opportunity? If these lessons are so inseparable from
the house of mourning here supposed -- we shall find it a still more
instructive school of wisdom when we take a view of the place in that more
affecting light in which the wise man seems to confine it in the text; in
which, by the house of mourning, I believe he means that particular scene of
sorrow, where there is lamentation and mourning for the dead. Turn in hither, I
beseech you, for a moment. Behold a dead man ready to be carried out, the only
son of his mother, and she a widow. Perhaps a still more affecting spectacle, a
kind and indulgent father of a numerous family lies breathless -- snatched away
in the strength of his age -- torn in an evil hour from his children and the
bosom of a disconsolate wife. Behold much people of the city gathered together
to mix their tears, with settled sorrow in their looks, going heavily along to
the house of mourning, to perform that last melancholy office, which, when the
debt of nature is paid, we are called upon to pay to each other. If this sad
occasion which leads him there, has not done it already, take notice, to what a
serious and devout frame of mind every man is reduced the moment he enters THIS
gate of affliction. The busy and fluttering spirits, which in the house of
mirth were wont to transport him from one diverting object to another -- see
how they are fallen! how peaceably they are laid! In this gloomy mansion, full
of shades and uncomfortable damps to seize the soul -- see, the light and easy
heart, which never knew what it was to think before, how pensive it is now, how
soft, how susceptible, how full of religious impressions, how deeply it is
smitten with a sense and with a love of virtue! Could we, in this crisis,
whilst this empire of reason and religion lasts, and the heart is thus
exercised with wisdom and busied with heavenly contemplations -- could we see
it naked as it is -- stripped of its passions, unspotted by the world, and
regardless of its pleasures -- we might then safely rest our cause upon this
single evidence, and appeal to the most sensual, whether Solomon has not made a
just determination here, in favor of the house of mourning? not for its own
sake, but as it is fruitful in virtue, and becomes the occasion of so much
good. Without this end, sorrow, I own, has no use but to shorten man's days --
nor can gravity, with all its studied solemnity of look and carriage, serve any
end but to make one half of the world merry, and impose upon the other.

SECTION III.
I. THE HONOR AND ADVANTAGE OF A CONSTANT ADHERENCE TO TRUTH.
PETRARCH, a celebrated Italian poet, who flourished about four hundred years
ago, recommended himself to the confidence and affection of Cardinal Colonna,
in whose family he resided, by his candor and strict regard to truth. A violent
quarrel occurred in the household of this nobleman; which was carried so far,
that recourse was had to arms. The Cardinal wished to know the foundation of
this affair; and, that he might be able to decide with justice, he assembled
all his people, and obliged them to bind themselves, by a most solemn oath on
the Gospels, to declare the whole truth. Every one, without exception,
submitted to this determination; even the bishop of Luna, brother to the
Cardinal, was not excused. Petrarch, in his turn, presenting himself to take
the oath, the cardinal closed the book, and said, AS TO YOU, PETRARCH, YOUR
WORD IS SUFFICIENT.

II. IMPERTINENCE IN DISCOURSE.
THIS kind of impertinence is a habit of talking much without thinking.

A man who has this distemper in his tongue shall entertain you, though he
never saw you before, with a long story in praise of his own wife; give you the
particulars of his last night's dream, or the description of a feast he has
been at, without letting a single dish escape him. When he is thus entered into
conversation, he grows very wise; descants upon the corruption of the times and
the degeneracy of the age we live in; from which, as his transitions are
somewhat sudden, he falls upon the price of corn, and the number of strangers
that are in town. He undertakes to prove, that it is better putting to sea in
summer than in winter, and that rain is necessary to produce a good crop of
corn; telling you, in the same breath, that he intends to plough up such a part
of his estate next year, that the times are hard, and that a man has much ado
to get through the world. His whole discourse is nothing but hurry and
incoherence. He acquaints you, that Demippus had the largest torch at the feast
of Ceres; asks you, if you remember how many pillars are in the music-theatre;
tells you that he took physic yesterday; and desires to know what day of the
month it is. If you have patience to hear him, he will inform you what
festivals are kept in August, what in October, and what in December.

When you see such a fellow as this coming toward you, run for your life. A
man had much better be visited by a fever; so painful is it to be fastened upon
by one of this make, who takes it for granted that you have nothing else to do
but to give him a hearing.

III. CHARACTER OF ADDISON AS A WRITER.
As a describer of life and manners, Mr Addison must be allowed to stand
perhaps the first in the first rank. His humor is peculiar to himself; and is
so happily diffused, as to give the grace of novelty to domestic scenes and
daily occurrences. He never O'ERSTEPS THE MODESTY OF NATURE, nor raises
merriment or wonder by the violation of truth. His figures neither divert by
distortion, nor amaze by aggravation. He copies life with so much fidelity,
that he can hardly be said to invent; yet his exhibitions have an air so much
original, that it is difficult to suppose them not merely the product of
imagination.

As a teacher of wisdom, he may be confidently followed. His religion has
nothing in it enthusiastic or superstitious; he appears neither weakly
credulous nor wantonly skeptical; his morality is neither dangerously lax, nor
implacably rigid. All the enchantments of fancy, and all the cogency of
argument, are employed to recommend to the reader his real interest, the care
of pleasing the Author of his being. Truth is shown sometimes as the phantom of
a vision, sometimes appears half-veiled in an allegory, sometimes attracts
regard in the robes of fancy, and sometimes steps forth in the confidence of
reason. She wears a thousand dresses, and in all is pleasing.

His prose in the model of the middle style; on grave subjects not formal, on
light occasions not grovelling; pure without scrupulosity, and exact without
apparent elaboration; always equable, and always easy, without glowing words or
pointed sentences. His page is always luminous, but never blazes in unexpected
splendour. It seems to have been his principal endeavor to avoid all harshness
and severity of diction; he is therefore sometimes verbose in his transitions
and connections, and sometimes descends too much to the language of
conversation; yet, if his language had been less idiomatical, it might have
lost somewhat of its genuine Anglicism. What he attempted he performed: he is
never feeble, and he did not wish to be energetic; he is never rapid, and he
never stagnates. His sentences have neither studied amplitude nor affected
brevity; his periods, though not diligently rounded, are voluble and easy. --
Who ever wishes to attain an English style, familiar but not coarse, and
elegant but not ostentatious, must give his days and nights to the volumes of
Addison.

IV. PLEASURE AND PAIN.
THERE were two families, which, from the beginning of the world, were as
opposite to each other as light and darkness. The one of them lived in heaven,
and the other in hell. The youngest descendant of the first family was
Pleasure; who was the daughter of Happiness, who was the child of Virtue, who
was the offspring of the Gods. These, as I said before, had their habitation in
heaven. The youngest of the opposite family was Pain; who was the son of
Misery, who wa^ the child of Vice, who was the offspring of the Furies. The
habitation of this race of beings was in hell.

The middle station of nature between these two opposite extremes was the
earth, which was inhabited by creatures of a middle kind; neither so virtuous
as the one, nor so vicious as the other, but partaking of the good and bad
qualities of these two opposite families. Jupiter, considering that this
species, commonly called MAN, was too virtuous to be miserable, and too vicious
to be happy, that he might make a distinction between the good and the bad,
ordered the two youngest of the above mentioned families (Pleasure, who was the
daughter of Happiness; and Pain, who was the son of Misery) to meet one another
upon this part of nature; having promised to settle it upon them both, provided
they could agree upon the division of it, so as to share mankind between them.

Pleasure and Pain were no sooner met in their new habitation, but they
immediately agreed upon this point. That Pleasure should take possession of the
virtuous, and Pain of the vicious part of that species which was given up to
them. But, upon examining to which of them any individual they met with
belonged, they found each of them had a right to him; for that, contrary to
what they had seen in their old places of residence, there was no person so
vicious who had not some good in him, nor any person so virtuous who had not in
him some evil. The truth of it is, they generally found, upon search, that in
the most vicious man, Pleasure might lay claim to an hundredth part, and that
in the most virtuous man Pain might come in for at least two thirds.. This they
saw would occasion endless disputes between them, unless they could come to
some accommodation. To this end, there was a marriage proposed between them,
and at length concluded. Hence it is that we find Pleasure and Pain are such
constant yoke-fellows, and that they either make their visits together, or are
never far asunder. If Pain comes into a heart, he is quickly followed by
Pleasure; and if Pleasure enters, you may be sure Pain is not far off.

But notwithstanding this marriage was very convenient for the two parties, it
did not seem to answer the intention of Jupiter in sending them among mankind.
To remedy, therefore, this inconvenience, it was stipulated between them by
article, and confirmed by the consent of each family, that, notwithstanding
they here possessed the place indifferently, upon the death of every person, if
he were fond to have in him a certain proportion of evil, he should be
dispatched into the infernal regions by a passport from Pain, there to dwell
with Misery, Vice, and the Furies; or, on the contrary, if he had in him a
certain proportion of good, he should be dispatched into heaven by a passport
from Pleasure, there to dwell with happiness, Virtue, and the Gods.

V. SIR ROGER DE COVERLY'S FAMILY.
HAVING often received an invitation from my friend Sir Roger de Coverly to
pass away a month with him in the country, I last week accompanied him thither,
and am settled with him for some time at his country house, where I intend to
form several of my ensuing speculations. Sir Roger, who is very well acquainted
with my humor, lets me rise and go to bed when I please, dine at his own table
or in the chamber as I think fit, sit still and say nothing without bidding me
be merry. When the gentlemen of the country come to see him, he only shows me
at a distance. As I have been walking in his fields, I have observed them
stealing a sight of me over the hedge, and have heard the knight desiring them
not to let me see them, for that I hated to be stared at.

I am the more at ease in Sir Roger's family, because it consists of sober and
staedy persons; for as the knight is the best master in the world, he seldom
changes his servants; and as he is beloved by all about him, his servants never
care for leaving him; by which means his domestics are all in years, and grown
old with their master. You would take his valet-de-chambre for his brother, his
butler is gray headed, his groom is one of the gravest men I have ever seen,
and his coachman has the looks of a privy-counsellor. You see the goodness of
the master even in the old house-dog, and in a gray pad that is kept in the
stable with great care and tenderness out of regard to his past services,
though he has been useless for several years.

I could not but observe, with a great deal of pleasure, the joy that appeared
in the countenances of these ancient domestics upon my friend's arrival at his
country-seat. Some of them could not refrain from tears at the sight of their
old master; every one of them pressed forward to do something for him, and
seemed discouraged if they were not employed. At the same time the good old
knight, with a mixture of the father and the master of the family, tempered the
inquiries after his own affairs with several kind questions relating to
themselves. This humanity and goodnature engages every body to him; so that
when he is pleasant upon any of them, all his family are in good humor, and
none so much as the person whom he diverts himself with: on the contrary, if he
coughs, or betrays any infirmity of old age, it is easy for a stander-by, to
observe a secret concern in the looks of all his servants.

My worthy friend has put me under the particular care of his butler, who is a
very prudent man, and, as well as the rest of his fellow servants, wonderfully
desirous of pleasing me, because they have often heard their master talk of me
as of his particular friend.

My chief companion, when Sir Roger is diverting himself in the woods or the
fields, is a very venerable man, who is ever with Sir Roger, and has lived at
his house, in the nature of a chaplain above thirty years. This gentleman is a
person of good sense and some learning, of a very regular life and obliging
conversation: he heartily loves Sir Roger, and knows that he is very much in
the old knight's esteem; so that he lives in the family rather as a relation
than a dependant.

I have observed in several of my papers, that my friend Sir Roger, amidst all
his good qualities, is something of a humorist; and that his virtues, as well
as imperfections, are as it were tinged by a certain extravagance, which makes
them particularly HIS, and distinguishes them from those of other men. This
cast of mind, as it is generally very innocent in itself, so it renders his
conversation highly agreeable, and more delightful than the same degree of sense
and virtue would appear in their common and ordinary colors. As I was walking
with him last night, he asked me how I liked the good man whom I have just now
mentioned? and, without staying for my answer, told me, that he was afraid of
being insulted with Latin and Greek at his own table; for which reason he
desired a particular friend of his at the university to find him out a
clergyman rather of plain sense than much learning, of a good aspect, a clear
voice, a sociable temper; and, if possible, a man that understood a little of
back-gammon. My friend, says Sir Roger, found me out this gentleman; who,
besides the endowments required of him, is, they tell me, a good scholar,
though he does not show it. I have given him the parsonage of the parish; and
because I know his value, have settled upon him a good annuity for life. If he
outlives me, he shall find that he was higher in my esteem than perhaps he
thinks he is. He has now been with me thirty years; and though he does not know
I have taken notice of it, has never in all that time asked any thing of me for
himself, though he is every day soliciting me for something in behalf of one or
other of my tenants his parishioners. There has not been a lawsuit in the
parish since he has lived among them. If any dispute arises, they apply
themselves to him for the decision: if they do not acquiesce in his judgment,
which I think never happened above once or twice at most, they appeal to me. At
his first settling with me, I made him a present of all the good sermons which
have been printed in English; and only begged of him, that every Sunday he
would pronounce one of them in the pulpit. Accordingly he has digested them
into such a series, that they follow one another naturally, and make a
continued system of practical divinity.

As Sir Roger was going on in his story, the gentleman we were talking of came
up to us; and upon the Knight's asking him who preached tomorrow (for it was
Saturday night,) told us the Bishop of St Asaph in the morning, and Dr South in
the afternoon. He then showed us his list of preachers for the whole year;
where I saw, with a great deal of pleasure, Archbishop Tillotson, Bishop
Saunderson, Dr Barrow, Dr Calamy, with several living authors who have
published discourses of practical divinity. I no sooner saw this venerable man
in the pulpit, but I very much approved of my friend's insisting upon the
qualifications of a good aspect and a clear voice; for I was so charmed with
the gracefulness of his figure and delivery, as well as with the discourses he
pronounced, that I think I never passed any time more to my satisfaction. A
sermon repeated after this manner, is like the composition of a poet in the
mouth of a graceful actor.

VI. THE FOLLY OF INCONSISTENT EXPECTATIONS.
THIS world may be considered as a great mart of commerce, where fortune
exposes to our view various commodities, riches, ease, tranquillity, fame,
integrity, knowledge. Every thing is marked at a settled price. Our time, our
labor, our ingenuity, is so much ready money which we are to lay out to the
best advantage. Examine, compare, choose, reject: but stand to your own
judgment; and do not, like children, when you have purchased one thing, repine
that you do not possess another which you did not purchase. Such is the force
of well-regulated industry, that a steady and vigorous exertion of our
faculties, directed to one end, will generally insure success. Would you, for
instance, be rich? Do you think that single point worth the sacrificing every
thing else to? You may then be rich. Thousands have become so from the lowest
beginnings, by toil, and patient diligence, and attention to the minutest
articles of expense and profit. But you must give up the pleasures of leisure,
of a vacant mind, of a free unsuspicious temper. If you preserve your
integrity, it must be a coarse-spun and vulgar honesty. Those high and lofty
notions of morals which you brought with you from the schools must be
considerably lowered, and mixed with the baser alloy of a jealous and
worldly-minded prudence. You must learn to do hard, if not unjust things; and,
for the nice embarrassments of a delicate and ingenuous spirit, it is necessary
for you to get rid of them as fast as possible. You must shut your heart
against the muses, and be content to feed your understanding with plain
household truth. In short, you must not attempt to enlarge your ideas, or
polish your taste, or refine your sentiments; but must keep on in one beaten
track, without turning aside either to the right hand or to the left. -- "But I
cannot submit to drudgery like this -- I feel a spirit above it." It Is well: be
above it then; only do not repine that you are not rich.

Is knowledge the pearl of price? That, too, may be purchased -- by steady
application, and long solitary hours of study and reflection. Bestow these, and
you shall be learned. "But," say the man of letters, "what a hardship is it,
that many an illiterate fellow, who cannot construe the motto of the arms of
his coach, shall raise a fortune and make a figure, while I have little more
than the common conveniences of life!" Was it in order to rais^ a fortune that
you consumed the sprightly hours of youth in study and retirement? Was it to be
rich that you grew pale over the midnight-lamp, and distilled the sweetness
from the Greek and Roman spring? You have then mistaken your path, and ill
employed your industry. "What reward have I then for all my labors?" What
reward! A large comprehensive soul, well purged from vulgar fears, and
perturbations, and prejudices; able to comprehend and interpret the works of
man -- of God. A rich, flourishing, cultivated mind, pregnant with
inexhaustible stores of entertainment and reflection. A perpetual spring of
fresh ideas, and the consciou^ dignity of superior intelligence. Good Heaven!
and what reward can you ask besides?

"But is it not some reproach upon the economy of Providence that such a one,
who is a mean dirty fellow, should have amassed wealth enough to buy half a
nation?" Not in the least. He made himself a mean dirty fellow for that very
end. He has paid his health, his conscience, his liberty, for it; and will you
envy his bargain? Will you hang your head and blush in his presence, because he
outshines you in equipage and show? Lift up your brow with a noble confidence,
and say to yourself, "I have not these things, it is true; but it is because I
have not sought, because I have not desired them; it is because I possess
something better: I have chosen my lot; I am content and satisfied."

You are a modest man -- you love quiet and independence, and have a delicacy
and reserve in your temper which renders it impossible for you to elbow your
way in the world, and be the herald of your own merits. Be content, then, with
a modest retirement, with the esteem of your intimate friends, with the praises
of a blameless heart, and a delicate ingenuous spirit; but resign the splendid
distinctions of the world to those who can better scramble for them.

The man whose tender sensibility of conscience and strict regard to the rules
of morality make him scrupulous and fearful of offending, is often heard to
complain of the disadvantages he lies under in every path of honor and profit.
"Could I but get over some nice points, and conform to the practice and opinion
of those about me, I might stand as fair a chance as others for dignities and
preferment." And why can you not? What hinders you from discarding this
troublesome scrupulosity of yours, which stands so grievously in your way? If
it be a small thing to enjoy a healthful mind, (sound at the very core, that
does not shrink from the keenest inspection; inward freedom from remorse and
perturbation; unsullied whiteness and simplicity of manners; a genuine
integrity, Pure in the last recesses of the mind; if you think these advantages
an inadequate recompense for what you resign, dismiss your scruples this
instant, and be a slave-merchant, a director -- or what you please.

VII. DESCRIPTION OF THE VALE OF KESWICK IN CUMBERLAND.
THIS delightful vale is thus elegantly described by the late ingenious Dr
Brown, in a letter to a friend.

In my way to the north from Hagley, I passed through Dovedale; and, to say the
truth, was disappointed in it. When I came to Buxton, I visited another or two
of their romantic scenes; but these are inferior to Dovedale. They are all but
poor miniatures of Keswick; which exceeds them more in grandeur than you can
imagine; and more, if possible, in beauty than in grandeur.

Instead of the narrow slip of valley which is seen at Dovedale, you have at
Keswick a vast amphitheatre, in circumference above twenty miles. Instead of a
meagre rivulet, a noble living-lake, ten miles round, of an oblong form,
adorned with a variety of wooded islands. The rocks indeed of Dovedale are
finely wild, pointed, and irregular; but the hills are both little and
unanimated; and the margin of the brook is poorly edged with weeds, morass, and
brushwood. But at Keswick, you will, on one side of the lake, see a rich and
beautiful landscape of cultivated fields, rising to the eye in fine
inequalities, with noble groves of oak, happily dispersed, and climbing the
adjacent hills, shade above shade, in the most various and picturesque forms.
On the opposite shore, you will find rocks and cliffs of stupendous height,
hanging broken over the lake in horrible grandeur, some of them a thousand feet
high, the woods climbing up their steep and shaggy sides, where mortal foot
never yet approached. On these dreadful heights the eagles build their nests; a
variety of water-falls are seen pouring from their summits, and tumbling in
vast sheets from rock to rock in a rude and terrible magnificence: while on all
sides of this immense amphitheatre the lofty mountains rise round; piercing the
clouds in shapes as spiry and fantastic as the very rocks of Dovedale. To this
I must add the frequent and bold projection of the cliffs into the lake,
forming noble bays and promontories: in other parts they finely retire from it,
and often open in abrupt chasms or clefts, through which at hand you see rich
and uncultivated vales; and beyond these, at various distance, mountain rising
over mountain; among which, new prospects presents themselves in mist, till the
eye is lost in an agreeable perplexity; Where active fancy travels beyond sense,
And pictures things unseen. --


Were I to analyze the two places in their constituent principles, I should
tell you, that the full perfection of Keswick consists of three circumstances;
beauty, horror, and immensity, united; the second of which alone is found in
Dovedale. Of beauty it has little, nature having left it almost a desert:
neither its small extent, nor the diminutive and lifeless form of the hills,
admit magnificence; but to give you a complete idea of these three perfections,
as they are joined in Keswick, would require the united powers of Claude,
Salvator, and Poussin. The first should throw his delicate sunshine over the
cultivated vales, the scattered cots, the groves, the lake, and wooded islands*
the second should dash out the horror of the rugged cliffs, the steeps, the
hanging woods, and foaming water-falls; while the grand pencil of Poussin
should crown the whole with the majesty of the impending mountains.

So much for what I would call the permanent beauties of this astonishing
scene. Were I not afraid of being tiresome, I could now dwell as long on its
varying or accidental beauties. I would sail round the lake, anchor in every
bay, and land you in every promontory and island. I would point out the
perpetual change of prospect; the woods, rocks, cliffs, and mountains, by turns
vanishing or rising into view: now gaining on the sight, hanging over our heads
in their full dimensions, beautifully dreadful: and now, by a change of
situation, assuming new romantic shapes; retiring and lessening on the eye, and
insensibly losing themselves in an azure mist. I would remark the contrast of
light and shade, produced by the morning and evening sun; the one gilding the
western, the other the eastern, side of this immense amphitheatre; while the
vast shadow projected by the mountains buries the opposite part in a deep and
purple gloom, which the eye can hardly penetrate. The natural variety of
coloring which the several objects produce, is no less wonderful and pleasing:
the ruling tints in the valley being those of azure, green, and gold; yet ever
various, arising from an intermixture of the lake, the woods, the grass, and
cornfieldsd: these are finely contrasted by the gray rocks and cliffs; and the
whole heightened by the yellow streams of light, the purple hues and misty
azure of the mountains. Sometimes a serene air and clear sky disclose the tops
of the highest hills; at other times, you see the clouds involving their
summits, resting on their sides, or descending to their base, and rolling among
the valleys, as in a vast furnace. When the winds are high, they roar among the
cliffs and caverns like peals of thunder; then, too, the clouds are seen in
vast bodies sweeping along the hills in gloomy greatness, while the lake joins
the tumult, and tosses like a sea. But, in calm weather, the whole scen^
becomes new: the lake is a perfect mirror, and the landscape in all its beauty:
islands, fields, woods, rocks, and mountains, are seen inverted, and floating
on its surface. I will now carry you to the top of a cliff, where, if you dare
approach the ridge, a new scene of astonishment presents itself; where the
valley, lake, and islands, seem lying at your feet; where this expanse of water
appears diminished to a little pool, amidst the vast and immeasurable objects
that surround it; for here the summits of more distant hills appear beyond
those you have already seen; and, rising behind each other in successive ranges
and azure groups of craggy and broken steeps, form an immense and awful
picture, which can only be expressed by the image of a tempestuous sea of
mountains. Let me now conduct you down again to the valley, and conclude with
one circumstance more; which is, that a walk by still moonlight (at which time
the distant water-falls are heard in all their variety of sound) among these
enchanting dales, opens such scenes of delicate beauty, repose, and solemnity,
as exceed all description.

VIII. PITY, AN ALLEGORY.
IN the happy period of the golden age, when all the celestial inhabitants
descended to the earth, and conversed familiarly with mortals, among the most
cherished of the heavenly powers, were twins, the offspring of Jupiter, LOVE
and JOY. Wherever they appeared, the flowers sprung up beneath their feet, the
sun shone with a brighter radiance, and all nature seemed embellished by their
presence.

They were inseparable companions; and their growing attachment was favored by
Jupiter, who had decreed, that a lasting union should be solemnized between
them so soon as they were arrived at maturer years. But, in the mean time, the
sons of men deviated from their native innocence; vice and ruin overran the
earth with giant strides; and Astrea, with her train of celestial visitants,
forsook their polluted abodes. Love alone remained, having been stolen away by
Hope, who was his nurse, and conveyed by her to the forests of Arcadia, where
he was brought up among the shepherds. But Jupiter assigned him a different
partner, and commanded him to espouse SORROW the daughter of Ate. He complied
with reluctance; for her features were harsh and disagreeable, her eyes sunk,
her forehead contracted into perpetual wrinkles, and her temples were covered
with a wreath of cypress and wormwood.

From this union sprung a virgin, in whom might be traced a strong resemblance
to both her parents; but the sullen and unamiable features of her mother were
so mixed and blended with the sweetness of her father, that her countenance,
though mournful, was highly pleasing. The maids and shepherds of the
neighboring plains gathered round, and called her PITY. A red-breast was
observed to build in the cabin where she was born: and, while she was yet an
infant, a dove, pursued by a hawk, flew into her bosom. This nymph had a
dejected appearance; but so soft and gentle a mien, that she was beloved to a
degree of enthusiasm. Her voice was low and plaintive, but inexpressibly sweet;
and she loved to lie, for hours together, on the banks of some wild and
melancholy stream, singing to her lute. She taught men to weep, for she took a
strange delight in tears; and often, when the virgins of the hamlet were
assembled at their evening sports, she would steal in amongst them, and
captivate their hearts by her tales, full of a charming sadness. She wore on
her head a garland, composed of her father's myrtles, twisted with her mother's
cypress.

One day, as she sat musing by the waters of Helicon, her tears by chance fell
into the fountain; and ever since, the Muse's spring has retained a strong
taste of the infusion. Pity was commanded by Jupiter to follow the steps of her
mother through the world, dropping balm into the wounds she made, and binding
up the hearts she had broken. She follows with her hair loose, her bosom bare
and throbbing, her garments torn by the briars, and her feet bleeding with the
roughness of the path. The nymph is mortal, for her mother is so; and when she
hes fulfilled her destined course upon the earth, they shall both expire
together, and LOVE be again united to JOY, his immortal and long-betrothed
bride.

IX. ADVANTAGES OF COMMERCE.
THERE is no place in town which I so much love to frequent as the Royal
Exchange. It gives me a secret satisfaction, and in some measure gratifies my
vanity as an Englishman, to see so rich an assembly of my countrymen and
foreigners consulting together upon the private business of mankind, and making
this metropolis a kind of emporium for the whole earth. I must confess, I look
upon High Change to be a grand council, in which all considerable nations have
their representatives. Factors, in the trading world, are what ambassadors are
in the politic world. They negociate affairs, conclude treaties, and maintain a
good correspondence between those wealthy societies of men that are divided
from one another by seas and oceans, or live on the different extremities of a
continent. I have often been pleased to hear disputes adjusted between an
inhabitant of Japan and an alderman of London, or to see a subject of the Great
Mogul entering into a league with one of the Czar of Muscovy. I am infinitely
delighted in mixing with these several ministers of commerce, as they are
distinguished by their different walks and different languages. Sometimes I am
jostled among a body of Armenians; sometimes I am lost in a crowd of Jews; and
sometimes make one in a group of Dutchmen. I am a Dane, a Swede, or Frenchman,
at different times; or rather fancy myself like the old philosopher, who, upon
being asked what countryman he was, replied, That he was a citizen of the world.

Nature seems to have taken a particular care to disseminate her blessings
among the different regions of the world, with an eye to this mutual
intercourse and traffic among mankind, that the natives of the several parts of
the globe might have a kind of dependence upon one another, and be united
together by their common interests. Almost every degree produces something
peculiar to it. The food often grows in one country and the sauce in another.
The fruits of Portugal are corrected by the products of Barbados; the infusion
of a China plant sweetened with the pith of an Indian cane. The Philippine
islands give a flavor to our European bowls. The single dress of a woman of
quality is often the product of an hundred climates. The muff and the fan come
together from the different ends of the earth. The scarf is sent from the
torrid zone, and the tippet from beneath the pole. The brocade petticoat rises
out of the mines of Peru, and the diamond necklace out of the bowels of
Ind^stan.

If we consider our own country in its natural prospect, without any of the
benefits and advantages of commerce, what a barren uncomfortable spot of earth
falls to our share? Natural historians tell us, that no fruit grows originally
among us besides hips and haws, acorns and pig-nuts, with other delicacies of
the like nature: that our climate, of itself, and without the assistance of
art, can make no farther advances toward a plum than a sloe, and carries an
apple to no greater perfection than a crab: that our melons, our peaches, our
figs, our apricots, and our cherries, are strangers among us, imported in
different ages, and naturalized in our English gardens; and that they would all
degenerate and fall away into the trash of our own country, if they were wholly
neglected by the planter, and left to the mercy of our sun and soil.

Nor has traffic more enriched our vegetable world than it has improved the
whole face of nature among us. Our ships are laden with the harvest of every
climate; our tables are stored with spices, and oils, and wines; our rooms are
filled with pyramids of china, and adorned with the workmanship of Japan; our
morning's draught comes from the remotest corners of the earth: we repair our
bodies by the drugs of America, and repose ourselves under Indian canopies. My
friend Sir Andrew calls the vineyards of France our gardens; the spice-islands,
our hot-beds; the Persians, our silk-weavers; and the Chinese, our potters.
Nature, indeed, furnishes us with the bare necessaries of life; but traffic
gives us a great variety of what is useful, and at the same time supplies us
with every thing that is convenient and ornamental. Nor is it the least part of
this our happiness, that, while we enjoy the remotest products of the north and
south, we are free from those extremities of weather which give them birth;
that our eyes are refreshed with the green fields of Britain, at the same time
that our palates are feasted with fruits that rise between the tropics.

For these reasons, there are not more useful members in a commonwealth than
merchants. They knit mankind together in a mutual intercourse of good offices,
distribute the gifts of nature, find work for the poor, add wealth to the rich,
and magnificence to the great. Our English merchant converts the tin of his own
country into gold, and exchanges his wool for rubies. The Mahom^tans are
clothed in our British manufacture, and the inhabitants of the frozen zone
warmed with the fleeces of our sheep.

X. ON PUBLIC SPEAKING.
MOST foreign writers who have given any character of the English nation,
whatever vices they ascribe to it, allow, in general, that the people are
naturally modest. It proceeds, perhaps, from this our national virtue, that our
orators are observed to make use of less gesture or action than those of other
countries. Our preachers stand stock-still in the pulpit, and will not so much
as move a finger to set off the best sermons in the world. We meet with the
same speaking statues at our bars, and in all public places of debate. Our
words flow from us in a smooth continued stream, without those strainings of
the voice, motions of the body, and majesty of the hand, which are so much
celebrated in the orators of Greece and Rome. We can talk of life and death in
cold blood, and keep our temper in a discourse which turns upon every thing
that is dear to us. Though our zeal breaks out in the finest tropes and
figures, it is not able to stir a limb about us.

It is certain that proper gestures and exertions of the voice cannot be too
much studied by a public orator. They are a kind of comment to what he utters;
and enforce every thing he says, with weak hearers, better than the strongest
argument he can make use of. They keep the audience awake, and fix their
attention to what is delivered to them; at the same time that they show the
speaker is in earnest, and affected himself with what he so passionately
recommends to others.

We are told, that the great Latin orator very much impaired his health by the
vehemence of action with which he used to deliver himself. The Greek orator was
likewise so very famous for this particular in rhetoric, that one of his
antagonists, whom he had banished from Athens, reading over the oration which
had procured his banishment, and seeing his friends admire it, could not
forbear asking them, If they were so much affected by the bare reading of it,
how much more they would have been alarmed, had they heard him actually
throwing out such a storm of eloquence?

How cold and dead a figure, in comparison of these two great men, does an
orator often make at the British bar, holding up his head with the most insipid
serenity, and stroking the sides of a long wig that reaches down to his middle?
Nothing can be more ridiculous than the ^tures of most of our English speakers.
You see some of them running their hands into their pockets as far as ever they
can thrust them, and others looking with great attention on a piece of paper
that has nothing written on it: you may see many a smart rhetorician turning
his hat in his hands, moulding it into several different cocks, examining
sometimes the lining of it, and sometimes the button, during the whole course
of his harangue. A deaf man would think he was cheapening a beaver, when
perhaps he is talking of the fate of the British nation. I remember, when I was
a young man, and used to frequent Westminster Hall, there was a counselor who
never pleaded without a piece of packthread in his hand, which he used to twist
about a thumb or finger all the while he was speaking: the wags of those days
used to call it the thread of his discourse, for he was not able to utter a
word without it. One of his clients, who was more merry than wise, stole it
from him one day in the midst of his pleading; but he had better have let it
alone, for he lost his cause by the est.

XI. THE INDIAN AND BRITISH OFFICER.
DURING the last war in America, a company of the Delaware Indians attacked a
small detachment of the British troops, and defeated them. As the Indians had
greatly the advantage of swiftness of foot, and were eager in the pursuit, very
few of the fugitives escaped; and those who fell into the enemy's hands were
treated with a cruelty of which there are not many examples even in that
country. Two of the Indians came up with a young officer, and attacked him with
great fury. As they were armed with a kind of battle-axe, which they call a
tomahawk, he had no hope of escape, and thought only of selling his life as
dearly as he could: but just at this crisis another Indian came up, who seemed
to be advanced in years, and was armed with a bow and arrows. The old man
instantly drew his bow; but after having taken his aim at the officer, he
suddenly dropped the point of his arrow, and interposed between him and his
pursuers, who were about to cut him in pieces. They retired with respect. The
old man then took the officer by the hand, soothed him into confidence by
caresses; and, having conducted him to his hut, treated him with a kindness
which did honor to his professions. He made him less a slave than a companion,
taught him the language of the country, and instructed him in the rude arts
that are practiced by the inhabitants. They lived together in the most cordial
amity; and the young officer found nothing to regret, but that sometimes the
old man fixed his eyes upon him, and, having regarded him for some minutes with
a steady and silent attention, burst into tears. In the mean time the spring
returned; and the Indians having recourse to their arms, again took the field.
The old man, who was still vigorous, and well able to bear the fatigues of war,
set out with them, and was accompanied by his prisoner. They marched above 200
leagues across the forest, and came at length to a plain where the British
forces were encamped. The old man showed his prisoner the tents at a distance;
at the same time remarked his countenance with the most diligent attention.
"There," says he, "are your countrymen; there is the enemy who wait to give us
battle. Remember that I have saved thy life, that I have taught thee to
construct a canoe, and to arm thyself with a bow and arrows; to surprise the
beaver in the forest, to wield the tomahawk, and to scalp the enemy. What wast
thou when I first took thee to my hut? Thy hands were those of an infant; they
were fit neither to procure thee sustenance nor safety. Thy soul was in utter
darkness; thou wast ignorant of every thing; and thou owe all things to me.
Will thou then go over to thy nation, and take up the hatchet against us?" The
officer replied, "That he would rather lose his own life than take away that of
his deliverer." The Indian then bending down his head, and covering his face
with both his hands, stood some time silent; then looking earnestly at his
prisoner, he said, in a voice that was at once softened by tenderness and
grief, "Have thou a father?" "My father," said the young man, "was alive when I
left my country." "Alas," said the Indian, "how wretched must he be!" He paused
a moment, and then added, "Do thou know that I have been a father? -- I am a
father no more -- I saw my son fall in battle -- he fought at my side -- I saw
him expire; but he died like a man. -- He was covered with wounds when he fell
dead at my feet -- but I have revenged him!" He pronounced these words with the
utmost vehemence; his body shook with an universal tremor; and he was almost
stifled with sighs that he would not suffer to escape him. There was a keen
restlessness in his eye; but no tear would flow to his relief. At length he
became calm by degrees; and turning toward the east, where the sun was then
rising, "Do thou see," said he to the young officer, "the beauty of that sky,
which sparkles with prevailing day? and have thou pleasure in the sight?"
"Yes," replied the young officer, "I have pleasure in the beauty of so fine a
sky." "I have none," said the Indian; and his tears then found their way. A few
minutes after he showed the young man a magnolia in full bloom. "Do thou see
that beautiful tree?" says he: "and do thou look upon it with pleasure?" "Yes
replied the officer, "I do look with pleasure upon that beautiful tree." -- "I
have pleasure in looking upon it no more," said the Indian hastil^; and
immediately added, "Go, return to thy countrymen, that thy father may still
have pleasure when he sees the sun rise in the morning, and the trees blossom
in the spring."

XII. ON THE IMMORTALITY OF THE SOUL.
AMONG other excellent arguments for the immortality of the soul, there is one
drawn from the perpetual progress of the soul to its perfection, without a
possibility of ever arriving at it; which is a hint that I do not remember to
have seen opened and improved by others who have written on this subject,
though it seem^ to me to carry a great weight with it. How can it enter into
the thoughts of man, that the soul, which is capable of such immense
perfections, and of receiving new improvements to all eternity, shall fall away
into nothing almost as soon as it is created! Are such abilities made for no
purpose? A brute arrives at a point of perfection that he can never pass: in a
few years he has all the endowments he is capable of; and were he to live ten
thousand more, would be the same thing he is at present. Were a human soul thus
at a stand in her accomplishments; were her faculties to be full blown, and
incapable of farther enlargements; I could imagine it might fall away
insensibly, and drop at once into a state of annihilation. But can we believe a
thinking being, that is in a perpetual progress of improvements, and traveling
on from perfection to perfection, after having just looked abroad into the
works of its Creator, and made a few discoveries of His infinite goodness,
wisdom, and power, must perish at her first setting out, and in the very
beginning of her inquiries?

Man, considered in his present state, does not seem born to enjoy life, but to
deliver it down to others. This is not surprising to consider in animals, which
are formed for our use, and can finish their business in a short life. The
silkworm, after having spun her task, lays her eggs and dies. But in this life
man can never take in his full measure of knowledge; nor has he time to subdue
his passions, establish his soul in virtue, and come up to the perfection of
his nature, before he is hurried off the stage. Would an infinitely wise Being
make such glorious creatures for so mean a purpose? Can he delight in the
production of such abortive intelligences, such short-lived reasonable beings?
Would he give us talents that are not to be exerted? capacities that are never
to be gratified? How can we find that wisdom which shines through all his
works, in the formation of man, without looking on this world as only a nursery
for the next; and believing that the several generations of rational creatures,
which rise up and disappear in such quick successions, are only to receive
their first rudiments of existence here, and afterward to be transplanted into
a more friendly climate, where they may spread and flourish to all eternity.

There is not, in my opinion, a more pleasing and triumphant consideration in
religion than this, of the perpetual progress which the soul makes toward the
perfection of its nature without ever arriving at a period in it. To look upon
the soul as going on from strength to strength; to consider that she is to
shine, with new accessions of glory, to all eternity; that she will be still
adding virtue to virtue, and knowledge to knowledge; carries in it something
wonderfully agreeable to that ambition which is natural to the mind of man.
Nay, it must be a prospect pleasing to God himself, to see his creation for
ever beautifying in his eyes, and drawing nearer to him, by greater degrees of
resemblance.

Methinks this single consideration, of the progress of a finite spirit to
perfection, will be sufficient to extinguish all envy in inferior natures, and
all contempt in superior. That cherubim, which now appears as a God to a human
soul, knows very well that the period will come about in eternity, when the
human soul shall be as perfect as he himself now is; nay, when she shall look
down upon that degree of perfection as much as she now falls short of it. It is
true, the higher nature still advances, and by that means preserves his
distance and superiority in the scale of being; but he knows, that, how high
soever the station is of which he stands possessed at present, the inferior
nature will at length mount up to it, and shine forth in the same degree of
glory.

With what astonishment and veneration may we look into our souls, where there
are such hidden stores of virtue and knowledge, such inexhausted sources of
perfection! We know not yet what we shall be, nor will it ever enter into the
heart of man to conceive the glory that will be always in reserve for him. The
soul, considered in relation to its Creator, is like one of those mathematical
lines that may draw nearer to another for all eternity, without a possibility
of touching it: and can there be a thought so transporting, as to consider
ourselves in these perpetual approaches to Him who is not only the standard of
perfection but of happiness?

XIII. OF THE VOYAGE ROUND THE WORLD BY COMMODORE ANSON.
WHENEVER France or Spain happens to be at war with England, the shock given to
Europe is felt at the extremities of the earth. If the industry and boldness of
the modern nations of Europe give them an advantage over the rest of the world,
and over the ancients in general, it is owing to their maritime expeditions.
Men are not so much surprised, as perhaps they should be when they see come out
of the ports of a few inconsiderable provinces, unknown to the civilized
nations of antiquity, fleets of such a construction, that a single vessel of
them would have utterly destroyed all the shipping of the ancient Greeks and
Romans. On the one hand, these fleets go beyond the Ganges, in order to engage
each other in the view of the most powerful empires, who stand by, the
unconcerned spectators of the dire effects of an art which they have not
hitherto acquired: On the other, they go beyond America, to contend with each
other for slaves in the New World.

The success is rarely proportionable to the greatness of the enterprises; not
only because it is impossible to see all the obstacles which may arise, but
because adequate means are scarce ever made use of.

Admiral Anson's expedition proves, how much a man of sense and resolution may
perform, though his preparations may be very inadequate to the danger of his
undertaking.

Before so many nations had engaged in a war in order to decide whether the
daughter of the Emperor Charles VI. should succeed her father, there subsisted
a war between Spain and England about a ship: That war cost both parties ten
thousand times more than the worth of what had given rise to it.

The ministry of London, in the year 1739, sent Admiral Vernon to Mexico. He
there destroyed Porto-Bello; but he failed in his attempt upon Carthagena. It
was intended, at the same time, that George Anson should fall upon Peru by the
South Sea, in order, if possible, to ruin, or at least to weaken, the vast
empire which Spain had acquired in that part of the world, by both ends. Anson
was created commodore, that is, commander of a squadron; there were given to
him five vessels, a sort of a small frigate of eight guns with about one
hundred men on board, and two ships loaded with provisions and merchandise:
these two ships were intended to carry on commerce, under the protection of the
convoy; for it is peculiar to the English nation to mix traffic with warlike
operations. Aboard the squadron were fifteen hundred seamen, with two hundred
and sixty superannuated invalids, and two hundred new-raised recruits. He
steers his course to the island of Madeira, which belongs to Portugal; he
advances to the isles of Cape Verde, and sails by the coast of Brazil. His crew
refreshed themselves in a little island named St. Catharine, which is covered
with never fading verdure, and abounds with fruit through every season of the
year. This island is twenty-seven degrees beyond the tropic of Cancer. The
commodore, after having coasted along the cold and uncultivated country of
Patagonia, entered the Straits Le Maire about the end of February 1741; thus
did he pass above a hundred degrees of latitude in less than five months. The
little sloop or frigate of eight guns, named the Trial, was the first vessel of
the kind that ventured to double Cape Horn: She afterward seized, in the South
Sea, a Spanish ship of six hundred tons, the crew of which little expected to
have been taken in the Pacific Ocean by a ship from England.

However, upon doubling Cape Horn, after having passed the Straits Le Maire,
Anson's squadron was shattered and dispersed by violent tempests. One half of
the men aboard perished by an inveterate scurvy. The vessel of the commodore,
being separated from the rest, put in at the desert island of Fernandes, which
lies higher up the South Sea toward the tropic of Capricorn. A rational
reader, who beholds with horror the prodigious efforts which mortals make in
order to render themselves and their fellow creatures unhappy, will perhaps
receive some satisfaction upon being informed that George Anson, finding the
climate of this island exceeding mild, and the soil equally fertile, sowed in
it pulse and fruits, the seed of which he brought with him from England; by
which means it, in a short time, became a plentiful country. Certain Spaniards,
who touched there some time after, being, in the course of the war carried
prisoners into England, formed an opinion, that Anson alone was capable of
repairing the ravages of war by such an attention to the general good of
mankind, and returned him thanks as their benefactor. Let me be allowed to
soften, by such circumstances as these, the melancholy tenor of history, which
is almost one continued narrative of murders and calamities.

Anson, whose vessel carried sixty guns, being joined by another of his ships
of war, and by the little frigate called the Trial, took several considerable
prizes in cruising near the island of Fernandes; but, having soon after
advanced toward the Equator, he ventured to attack the town of Paita, upon the
coast of America. He neither made use of his ships of war, nor of his men, in
executing this bold and hazardous attempt: The expedition was performed by
fifty soldiers in a boat with oars. They landed during the night. The sudden
surprise, the confusion, and the darkness, redoubled, multiplied, and increased
the danger. The governor, the garrison, and the inhabitants, fled on every
side. In the mean time, the fifty English, without molestation, carried off the
treasures which they found in the custom-house, and in private houses, during
the space of three days. Some black slaves, a species of animals who always
become the property of the first that seize them, not having fled, assisted the
English in carrying off the wealth of their former masters. Anson caused Paita
to be burnt to ashes, and then set sail; having plundered the Spnaiards with as
much ease as they, in past ages, plundered the Americans. Spain loft fifteen
hundred thousand piasters by the fire; the English gained about one hundred and
eighty thousand; which, added to the former captures, greatly enriched the
squadron. The great number of men carried off by the scurvy, left the bulk of
the treasures to the survivers. This little squadron came afterward opposite
to Panama, upon the coast where pearls are dived for, and advanced to Acapulco,
at the back of Mexico. The government of Madrid was then not aware of the risk
it ran of losing that vast region of the world. If Admiral Vernon, who besieged
Carthagena upon the opposite sea, had succeeded, he might have assisted
Commodore Anson. Thus, the isthmus of Panama would have been taken by the
English, both upon the right and left, and the Spaniards deprived of the very
center of their American dominions.

Anson, who had but two ships remaining, the rest having been destroyed by
tempests, confined all his enterprises, and his sanguine hopes, to the taking
of a large galleon which Mexico sends every year to the island of Manilla in
the Chinese seas. Manilla is one of the Philippine islands, so called because
they were discovered during the reign of Philip II.

This galleon, laden with silver, would not have set sail if the English had
been seen upon the coasts; and it did not leave the port till a considerable
time after their departure. The commodore, therefore, crossed the Pacific
ocean, and all the climates between the Tropic and the Equator. Avarice,
rendered honorable by fatigue and danger, made him traverse the globe with his
two remaining men of war. The scurvy continued to afflict the sailors upon
these seas; and, as one of the two vessels leaked on every side, they were
obliged to abandon and set fire to it, lest the wreck should be thrown upon
some of the Spanish islands, and become of use to the inhabitants: The soldiers
and sailors belonging to this vessel were taken on board Anson's. At that time
the only vessel that was left of his whole squadron was his own ship, called
the Centurion, which carried sixty guns, and was accompanied by two tenders.
The Centurion escaped alone from so many dangers, but in a very shattered
condition; and, having none but sick men on board, very fortunately touched at
one of the Marianne islands called Tinian, which was at that time quite
uninhabited. Not long before, it contained no less than thirty thousand souls;
but the greatest part of the inhabitants had been swept away by an epidemic
disease, and the survivers had been removed to another island by the Spaniards.

The crew owed its preservation to the island of Tinian. That island, which
surpassed Fernandes in fertility, abounded on all sides with wood, springs, and
rivulets, tame animals, fruits, pulse, and every thing necessary for food, the
conveniences of life, and for refitting the vessel. But the most extraordinary
thing found there, was a sort of a tree, the taste of whose fruit resembled
that of the best bread, a real treasure, which, if it could be transplanted to
our climate, would be greatly preferable to those riches, which owe all their
worth to opinion, and which men go in quest of to the end of the earth, through
so many dangers and difficulties.

From this island he went to that of Formosa; he then bent his course toward
China, to Macao, at the entrance of the river Canton, in order to repair his
only remaining vessel.

The commodore, having completely refitted his ship at Macao by the assistance
of the Chinese, and having taken on board some Indian sailors, and some
Hollanders, whom he thought to be useful men, put to sea again.

At length, upon the ninth of June, 1743, the so much wished-for Spanish ship
was descried. It advanced toward Manilla, having but sixty-four guns; the crew
consisted of five hundred and fifty men fit for action: the treasure which it
carried amounted only to about fifteen hundred thousand piasters in silver,
with cochineal and other merchandise; because the whole treasure, which is
generally double that sum, had been divided into two equal parts, and one half
was carried by another galleon.

The commodore had but two hundred and forty men on board the Centurion. The
captain of the galleon, perceiving the enemy, chose rather to venture the
treasure, than forfeit his reputation by flying before an Englishman; for which
reason, he hoisted as much sail as possible, in order to come up with and
engage him.

The eager desire of seizing riches, a passion much stronger than the principle
of duty, which directs to preserve them for the sovereign, the experience of
the English, and the skilful operations of the commodore, procured him the
victory. Only two of his men were killed in the fight; the galleon lost
sixty-seven, who were slain upon deck, and eighty-four were wounded. The number
of his crew still surpassed that of the commodore's: however, he thought proper
to strike. The conqueror returned to Canton with this rich prize. He there
maintained the honor of his country, by refusing to pay the imposts exacted by
the Emperor of China from all foreign ships: he insisted that a man of war was
not subject to them. His conduct overawed the Chinese. The governor of Canton
gave him audience, to which he was conducted through two ranks of soldiers,
whose number amounted to ten thousand; after which he returned to his own
country, by the Sunda islands and the Cape of Good Hope. Having thus sailed
round the world victorious, he landed in England the 4th of June 1744, after a
voyage of three years and a half.

XIV. ON PEDANTRY.
PEDANTRY, in the common sense of the word, means an absurd ostentation of
learning, and stiffness of phraseology, proceeding from a misguided knowledge
of books, and a total ignorance of men.

But I have often thought, that we might extend its signification a good deal
farther; and, in general, apply it to that failing, which disposes a person to
obtrude upon others subjects of conversation relating to his own business,
studies, or amusements.

In this sense of the phrase, we should find pedants in every character and
condition of life. Instead of a black coat and a plain shirt, we should often
see pedantry appear in an embroidered suit and Brussels lace; instead of being
bedaubed with snuff, we should find it breathing perfumes; and, in place of a
book-worm, crawling through the gloomy cloisters of an university, we should
mark it in the state of a gilded butterfly, buzzing through the gay region of
the drawing room.

Robert Daisy, Esquire is a pedant of this last kind. When he tells you that his
ruffles cost twenty guineas a pair; that his buttons were the first of the
kind, made by one of the most eminent artists in Birmingham; that his buckles
were procured by means of a friend at Paris, and are the exact pattern of those
worn by the Comte d' Artois; that the loop of his hat was of his own
contrivance, and has set the fashion to half a dozen of the finest fellows in
town: when he descants on all these particulars, with that smile of
self-complacency which sits for ever on his cheek, he is as much a pedant as
his quondam tutor, who recites verses from Pindar, tells stories from
Herodotus, and talks for an hour on the energy of the Greek particles.

But Mr. Daisy is struck dumb by the approach of his brother Sir Thomas, whose
pedantry goes a pitch higher, and pours out all the intelligence of France and
Italy, whence the young Baronet is just returned, after a tour of fifteen
months over all the kingdoms of the continent. Talk of music, he cuts you short
with the history of the first singer at Naples; of painting, he runs you down
with a description of the gallery at Florence; of architecture, he overwhelms
you with the dimensions of St Peter's, or the grand church at Antwerp; or, if
you leave the province of art altogether, and introduce the name of a river or
hill, he instantly deluges you with the Rhine, or makes you dizzy with the
height of Aetna, or Mount Blanc.

Miss will have no difficulty of owning her great aunt to be a pedant, when she
talks all the time of dinner on the composition of the pudding, or the
seasoning of the mince-pies; or enters into a disquisition on the figure of the
damask table-cloth, with a word or two on the thrift of making one's own linen:
but the young lady will be surprised when I inform her, that her own history of
last Thursday's assembly, with the episode of Lady Di's feather, and the
digression to the qualities of Mr Frizzle the hair-dresser, was also a piece of
downright pedantry.

Mrs Caudle is guilty of the same weakness, when she recounts the numberless
witticisms of her daughter Emmy, describes the droll figure her little Bill
made yesterday at trying on his first pair of breeches, and informs us, that
Bobby has got seven teeth, and is just cutting an eighth, though he will be but
nine months old next Wednesday at six o'clock in the evening. Nor is her
pedantry less disgusting, when she proceeds to enumerate the virtues and good
qualities of her husband; though these last species is so uncommon, that it
may, perhaps, be admitted into conversation for the sake of novelty.

There is pedantry in every disquisition, however masterly it may be, that
stops the general conversation of the company. When Silius delivers that sort
of lecture he is apt to get into, though it is supported by the most extensive
information and the clearest discernment, it is still pedantry; and, while I
admire the talents of Silius, I cannot help being uneasy at his exhibition of
them. In the course of this dissertation, the farther a man proceeds, the more
he seems to acquire strength and inclination for the progress. Last night,
after supper, Silius began upon Protestantism, proceeded to the Irish massacre,
went through the Revolution, drew the character of King William, repeated
anecdotes of Schomberg, and ended at a quarter past twelve, by delineating the
course of the Boyne, in half a bumper of port, upon my best table; which river,
happening to overflow its banks, did infinite damage to my cousin Sophy's white
satin petticoat.

In short, every thing, in this sense of the word, is pedantry, which tends to
destroy that equality of conversation which is necessary to the perfect ease
and good-humor of the company. Every one would be struck with the unpoliteness
of that person's behavior, who should help himself to a whole plate of pease or
strawberries which some friend had sent him for a rarity in the beginning of
the season. Now, conversation is one of those good things of which our guests
or companions are equally entitled to a share, as of any other constituent part
of the entertainment; and it is as essential a want of politeness to engross
the one as to monopolize the other.

Besides, it unfortunately happens, that we are very inadequate judges of the
value of our own discourse, or the rate at which the dispositions of our
company will incline them to hold it. The reflections we make, and the stories
we tell, are to be judged of by others, who may hold a very different opinion
of their acuteness or their humor. It will be prudent, therefore, to consider,
that the dish we bring to this entertainment, however pleasing to our own
taste, may prove but moderately palatable to those we mean to treat with it;
and that, to every man, as well as ourselves (except a few very humble ones,)
his own conversation is the PLATE OF PEASE OR STRAWBERRIES.

XV. ON THE DEATH OF A YOUNG LADY.
THE consideration of death has always been made use of, by the moralist and
the divine, as a powerful incentive to virtue and piety. From the uncertainty
of life, they have endeavored to sink the estimation of its pleasures; and if
they could not strip the seductions of vice of their present enjoyment, at
least to load them with the fear of their end.

Voluptuaries, on the other hand, have, from a similar reflection, endeavored
to enhance the value, and persuade to the enjoyment, of temporal delights. They
have advised us to pluck the roses which would otherwise soon wither of
themselves; to seize the moments which we could not long command; and, since
time was unavoidably fleeting, to crown its flight with joy.

Of neither of these persuasives, whether of the moral or the licentious, the
severe or the gay, have the effects been great. Life must necessarily consist
of active scenes, which exclude from its general tenor, the leisure of
meditation and the influence of thought. The schemes of the busy will not be
checked by the uncertainty of their event, nor the amusements of the
dissipated, be either controlled or endeared by the shortness of their
duration. Even the cell of the anchorite, and the cloister of the monk, have
their business and their pleasures; for study may become business, and
abstraction pleasure, when they engage the mind and occupy the time. A man may
even enjoy the present and forget the future, at the very moment in which he is
writing of the insignificancy of the former and the importance of the latter.

It were easy to show the wisdom and benignity of Providence -- Providence ever
wise and benign -- in this particular of our constitution; but it would be
trite to repeat arguments too obvious not to have been often observed, and too
just not to have been always allowed.

But though neither the situation of the world, nor the formation of our minds,
allow the thoughts of futurity or death a constant or prevailing effect upon
our lives, they may surely sometimes, not unseasonably, press upon our
imagination; even exclusive of their moral or religious use, there is a
sympathetic enjoyment which often makes it not only 'better,' but more
delightful, 'to go the house of mourning, than to the house of feasting.'

Perhaps I felt it so, when, but a few days since, I attended the funeral of a
young lady, who was torn, in the bloom of youth and beauty, from the arms of a
father who doted on her, of a family by whom she was adored: I think I would
not have exchanged my feelings at the time for all the mirth which gaiety could
inspire, or all the pleasure which luxury could bestow.

Maria was in her twentieth year. To the beauty of her form, and excellence of
her natural disposition, a parent equally indulgent and attentive had done the
fullest justice. To accomplish her person, and to cultivate her mind, every
endeavor had been used; and they had been attended with that success which they
commonly meet with when not prevented by mistaken fondness or untimely vanity.
Few young ladies have attracted more admiration; none ever felt it less: with
all the charms of beauty, and the polish of education, the plainest were not
less affected, nor the most ignorant less assuming. She died when every tongue
was eloquent of her virtues, when every hope was ripening to reward them.

It is by such private and domestic distresses, that the softer emotions of the
heart are most strongly excited. The fall of more important personages is
commonly distant from our observation; but even where it happens under our
immediate notice, there is a mixture of other feelings by which our compassion
is weakened. The eminently great, or extensively useful, leave behind them a
train of interrupted views and disappointed expectations, by which the distress
is complicated beyond the simplicity of pity. But the death of one who, like
Maria, was to shed the influence of her virtues over the age of a father, and
the childhood of her sisters, presents to us a little view of family
affliction, which every eye can perceive and every heart can feel. On scenes of
public sorrow and national regret, we gaze as upon those gallery-pictures which
strike us with wonder and admiration: domestic calamity is like the miniature
of a friend, which we wear in our bosoms, and keep for secret looks and
solitary enjoyment.

The last time I saw Maria was in the midst of a crowded assembly of the
fashionable and the gay, where she fixed all eyes by the gracefulness of her
motion, and the native dignity of her mein; yet so tempered was that
superiority which they conferred with gentleness and modesty, that not a murmur
was heard, either from the rivalship of beauty or the envy of homeliness. From
that scene, the transition was so violent to the hearse and the pall, the grave
and the sod, that once or twice my imagination turned rebel to my senses: I
beheld the objects around me as the painting of a dream, and thought of Maria
as still living.

I was soon, however, recalled to the sad reality. The figure of her father
bending over the grave of his darling child; the silent suffering composure in
which his countenance was fixed; the tears of his attendants, whose grief was
light, and capable of tears; these gave me back the truth, and reminded me that
I should see her no more. There was a flow of sorrow with which I suffered
myself to be borne along, with a melancholy kind of indulgence; but when her
father dropped the cord with which he had helped to lay his Maria in the earth,
its sound on the coffin chilled my heart, and horror for a moment took place of
pity!

It was but for a moment. -- He looked eagerly into the grave; made one
involuntary motion to stop the assistants who were throwing the earth into it;
then suddenly recollecting himself, clasped his hands together, threw up his
eyes to heaven; and then first I saw a few tears drop from them. I gave
language to all this. It spoke a lesson of faith, and piety, and resignation. I
went away sorrowful; but my sorrow was neither ungentle nor unmanly: cast on
this world a glance rather of pity than of enmity; on the next, a look of
humbleness and hope!

SECTION IV.
I. DESCRIPTION of the AMPHITHEATRE of TITUS.
POSTERITY admires, and will long admire, the awful remains of the amphitheatre
of Titus, which so well deserved the epithet of Colossal. It was a building of
an elliptic figure, five hundred and sixty-four feet in length, and four
hundred and sixty-seven in breadth; founded on fourscore arches; and rising,
with four successive orders of architecture, to the height of one hundred and
forty feet. The outside of the edifice was encrusted with marble, and decorated
with statues. The slopes of the vast concave which formed the inside, were
filled and surrounded with sixty or eighty rows of seats of marble, covered
with cushions, and capable of receiving with ease above fourscore thousand
spectators. Sixty-four vomitories (for by that name the doors were aptly
distinguished) poured forth the immense multitude; and the entrances, passages,
and stair-cases, were contrived with such exquisite skill, that each person,
whether of the s^natorial, the equestrian, or the plebeian order, arrived at
his destined place, without trouble or confusion.

Nothing was omitted which in any respect could be subservient to the
convenience and pleasure of the spectators. They were protected from the sun
and rain by an ample canopy, occasionally drawn over their heads. The air was
continually refreshed by the playing of fountains, and profusely impregnated by
the grateful scent of aromatics. In the center of the edifice, the arena or
stage was strewed with the finest sand, and successively assumed the most
different forms. At one moment, it seemed to rise out of the earth like the
garden of the Hesperides; at another, it exhibited the rugged rocks and caverns
of Thrace. The subterraneous pipes conveyed an inexhaustible supply of water;
and what had just before appeared a level plain, might be suddenly converted
into a wide lake, covered with armed vessels, and replenished with the monsters
of the de^*

In the decorations of these scenes, the Roman emperors displayed their wealth
and liberality; and we read, that, on various occasions, the whole furniture of
the amphitheatre consisted either of silver, or of gold, or of amber. The poet
who describes the games of Carinus, in the character of a shepherd attracted to
the capital by the fame of their magnificence, affirms, that the nets designed
as a defense against the wild beasts, were of gold wire; that the porticoes
were gilded; and that the belt or circle, which divided the several ranks of
spectators from each other, was studded with a precious mosaic of beautiful
stones.

II. REFLECTIONS IN WESTMINSTER ABBEY.
WHEN I am in a serious humor, I very often walk by myself in Westminster
Abbey; where the gloominess of the place, and the use to which it is applied,
with the sole^nity of the building, and the condition of the people who lie in
it, are apt to fill the mind with a kind of melancholy, or rather
thoughtfulness, that is not disagreeable. I yesterday passed a whole afternoon
in the churchyard, the cloisters, and the church, amusing myself with the
tomb-stones and inscriptions which I met with in those several regions of the
dead. Most of them recorded nothing else of the buried person, b^ that he was
born upon one day, and died upon another; the whole history of his life being
comprehended in these two circumstances, that are common to all mankind. I
could not but look upon those registers of existence, whether of brass or
marble, as a kind of satire upon the departed persons, who had left no other
memorial of themselves, but that they were born, and that they died.

Upon my going into the church, I entertained myself with the digging of a
grave; and saw, in every shovelful of it that was thrown up, the fragment of a
bone or skull intermixed with a kind of fresh-mouldering earth, that, some time
or other, had a place in the composition of an human body. Upon this, I began
to consider with myself, what innumerable multitudes of people lay confused
together, under the pavement of that ancient cathedral how men and women,
friends and enemies, priests and soldiers, monks and prebendaries, were
crumbled amongst one another, and blended together in the same common mass; how
beauty, strength, and youth, with old age, weakness, and deformity, lay
undistinguished in the same promiscuous heap of matter.

After having thus surveyed this great magazine of mortality as it were in the
lump, I examined it more particularly by the accounts which I found on several
of the monuments which are raised in every quarter of that ancient fabric. Some
of them were covered which such extravagant epitaphs, that, if it were possible
for the dead person to be acquainted with them, he would blush at the praises
which his friends have bestowed upon him. There are others so excessively
modest, that they deliver the character of the person departed in Greek or
Hebrew, and by that means are not understood once in a twelve month. In the
poetical quarter, I found there were poets who had no monuments, and monuments
which had no poets. I observed, indeed, that the present war had filled the
church with many of those uninhabited monuments, which had been erected to the
memory of persons whose bodies were perhaps buried in the pl^^^s of Blenheim,
or in the bosom of the ocean.

I could not but be very much delighted with several modern epitaphs, which are
written with great elegance of expression and justness of thought, and which
therefore do honor to the living as well as to the dead. As a foreigner is very
apt to conceive an idea of the ignorance or politeness of a nation from the
turn of their public monuments and inscriptions, they should be submitted to
the perusal of men of learning and genius, before they are put into execution.
Sir Cloudesly Shovel's monument has very often given me great offense. Instead
of the brave rough English admiral, which was the distinguishing character of
that plain ^lant man, he is represented on his his tomb by the fi^ure of (...),
dressed in a long periwig, and reposing himself upon velvet cushions under a
canopy of state. The inscription is answerable to the monument; for, instead of
celebrating the many remarkable actions he had performed in the service of his
country; it acquaints us only with the manner of his death, in which it was
impossible for him to reap any honor. The Dutch, whom we are apt to despise for
want of genius, show an infinitely greater taste in their buildings and works
of this nature, than we meet with in those of our own country. The monuments of
their admirals, which have been erected at the public expense, represent them
like themselves, and are adorned with rostral crowns and naval ornaments, with
beautiful festoons of sea-weed, shells, and coral.

I know that entertainments of this nature are apt to raise dark and dismal
thoughts* in timorous minds and gloomy imaginations: but, for my own part,
though I am always serious, I do not know what it is to be melancholy; and can
therefore take a view of nature in her deep and solemn scenes, with the same
pleasure as in her most gay and delightful ones. By these means, I can improve
myself with objects which others consider with terror. -- When I look upon the
tombs of the great, every emotion of envy dies in me; when I read the epitaphs
of the beautiful, every inordinate desire goes out; when I meet with the grief
of parents upon a tombstone, my heart melts with compassion; when I see the
tomb of the parents themselves, I consider the vanity of grieving after those
whom we must quickly follow. When I see kings lying by those who deposed them;
when I consider rival wits placed side by side, or the holy men that divided
the world with their contests and disputes; I reflect with sorrow and
astonishment on the little competitions, factions, and debates of mankind. When
I read the several dates of the tombs, of some that died yesterday, and some
six hundred years ago, I consider that great day when we shall all of us be
contemporaries, and make our appearance together.

III. The CHARACTER of MARY QUEEN of SCOTS.
To all the charms of beauty, and the utmost ^^egance of external form, Mary
added those accomplishments which render their impression irresistible. Polite,
affable, insinuating, sprightly, and capable of speaking and of writing with
equal ease and dignity. Sudden, however, and violent in all her attachments,
because her heart was warm and unsuspicio^^. Impatient of contradiction,
because she had been accustomed from her infancy to be treated as a queen. No
stranger, on some occasions, to dissimulation: which, in that perfidious court
where she received her education, was reckoned among the necessary arts of
government. Not insensible to flattery, or unconscious of that pleasure with
which almost every woman beholds the influence of her own beauty. Formed with
the qualities that we love, not with the talents that we admire, she was an
agreeable woman rather than an illustrious queen.

The vivacity of her spirit, not sufficiently tempered with sound judgment, and
the warmth of her heart, which was not at all times under the restraint of
discretion, betrayed her both into errors and into crimes. To say that she was
always unfortunate, will not account for that long and almost uninterrupted
succession of calamities which befell her; we must likewise add, that she was
often imprudent. Her passion for Darnly was rash, youthful, and excessive. And,
though the sudden transition to the opposite extreme was the natural effect of
her ill-requited love, and of his ingratitude, insolence, and brutality; yet
neither these, nor Bothwell's artful address and important services, can
justify her attachment to that nobleman. Even the manners of the age,
licentious as they were, are no apology for this unhappy passion; nor can they
induce us to look on that tragical and infamous scene which followed upon it,
with less abhorrence. Humanity will draw a veil over this part of her
character, which it cannot approve; and may perhaps prompt some to impute her
actions to her situation, more than to her disposition; and to lament the
unhappiness of the former, rather than accuse the perverseness of the latter.
Mary's sufferings exceed, both in degree and in duration, those tragical
distresses which fancy has feigned to excite sorrow and commiseration; and
while we survey them, we are apt altogether to forget her frailties: we think
of her faults with less indignation; and approve of our tears, as if they were
shed for a person who had attained much nearer to pure virtue.

With regard ^o the queen's person, a circumstance not to be omitted in writing
the history of a female reign, all contemporary authors agree in ascribing to
Mary the utmost beauty of countenance, and elegance of shape, of which the
human form is capable. Her hair was black, though, according to the fashion of
that age, she frequently wore borrowed locks, and of different colors. Her eyes
were a dark gray, her complexion was exquisitely fine, and her hands and arms
remarkably delicate both as to shape and color. Her stature was of an height
that rose to the majestic. She danced, she walked, and rode, with equal grace.
Her taste for music was just; and she both sung and played upon the lute with
uncommon skill. Toward the end of her life she began to grow fat; and her long
confinement, and the coldness of the houses in which she was imprisoned,
brought on a rheumatism, which deprived her of the use of her limbs. No man,
says Brantome, ever beheld her person without admiration and love, or will read
her history without sorrow.

IV. CHARACTER OF QUEEN ELIZABETH.
THERE are few personages in history who have been more exposed to the calumny
of enemies and the adulation of friends, than Queen Elizabeth; and yet there
scarce is any whose reputation has been more certainly determined, by the
unanimous consent of posterity. The unusual length of her administration, and
the strong features of her character, were able to overcome all prejudices;
and, obliging her detractors to abate much of their invectives, and her
admirers somewhat of their panegyrics, have at last, in spite of political
factions, and, what is more, of religious animosities, produced an uniform
judgment with regard to her conduct. Her vigor, her constancy, her magnanimity,
her penetration, vigilance, and address, are allowed to merit the highest
praises, and appear not to have been surpassed by any person who ever filled a
throne: a conduct less rigorous, less imperious, more sincere, more indulgent
to her people, would have been requisite to form a perfect character. By the
force of her mind, she controlled all her more active and stronger qualities,
and prevented them from running into excess. Her heroism was exempted from all
temerity, her frugality from avarice, her friendship from partiality, her
enterprise from turbulency and a vain ambition: she guarded not herself, with
equal care or equal success, from lesser infirmities; the rivalship of beauty,
the desire of admiration, the jealousy of love, and the sallies of anger.

Her singular talents for government were founded equally on her temper and on
her capacity. Endowed with a great command over herself, she soon obtained an
uncontrolled ascendant over the people, and while she merited all their esteem
by her real virtue^, she also engaged their affection by her pretended ones.
Few sovereigns of England succeeded to the throne in more difficult
circumstances, and none ever conducted the government with such uniform success
and felicity. though unacquainted with the practice of toleration, the true
secret for managing religious factions, she preserved her people, by her
superior prudence, from those confusions in which theological controversy had
involved all the neighboring nations: and though her enemies were the most
powerful princes of Europe, the most active, the most enterprising, the least
scrupulous, she was able, by her vigor, to make deep impressions on their
state; her own greatness, meanwhile, remaining untouched and unimpaired.

The wise ministers and brave warriors who flourished during her reign share
the praise of her success; but, instead of lessening the applause due to her,
they make great addition to it. They owed, all of them, their advancement to
her choice; they were supported by her constancy; and, with all their ability,
they were never able to acquire an undue ascendant over her. In her family, in
her court, in her kingdom, she remained equally mistress. The force of the
tender passions was great over her, but the force of her mind was still
superior; and the combat which her victory visibly cost her, serves only to
display the firmness of her resolution, and the loftiness of her ambitious
sentiments.

The fame of this princess, though it has surmounted the prejudices both of
faction and of bigotry, yet lies still exposed to another predjudice, which is
more durable, because more natural; and which, according to the different views
in which we survey her, is capable either of exalting beyond measure, or
diminishing, the luster of her character. This prejudice is founded on the
consideration of her sex. When we contemplate her as a woman, we are apt to be
struck with the highest admiration of her qualities and extensive capacity; but
we are also apt to require some more softness of disposition, some greater
lenity of temper, some of those amiable weaknesses by which her sex is
distinguished. But the true method of estimating her merit, is to lay aside all
these considerations, and to consider her merely as a rational being, placed in
authority, and entrusted with the government of mankind. We may find it
difficult to reconcile our fancy to her as a wife or a mistress; but her
qualities as a sovereign, though with some considerable exceptions, are the
object of undisputed applause and approbation.

V. CHARLES V.'s RESIGNATION of his DOMINIONS.
CHARLES resolved to resign his kingdoms to his son, with a solemnity suitable
to the importance of the transaction; and to perform this last act of
sovereignty with such formal pomp, as might leave an indelible impression on
the mind not only of his subjects, but of his successor. With this view, he
called Philip out of England; where the peevish temper of his queen, which
increased with her despair of having issue, rendered him extremely unhappy, and
the jealousy of the English left him no hopes of obtaining the direction of
their affairs. Having assembled the states of the Low Countries at Brussels, on
the twenty-fifth of October one thousand five hundred and fifty-five, Charles
seated himself for the last time in the chair of state; on one side of which
was placed his son, and on the other his sister the queen of Hungary, regent of
the Netherlands; with a splendid retinue of the grandees of Spain, and princes
of the empire standing behind him. The president of the council of Flanders, by
his command, explained, in a few words, his intention in calling this
extraordinary meeting of the states. He then read the instrument of
resignation, by which Charles surrendered to his son Philip all his
territories, jurisdiction, and authority in the Low Countries; absolving his
subjects there from their oath of allegiance to him, which he required them to
transfer to Philip his lawful heir, and to serve him with the same loyalty and
zeal which they had manifested, during so long a course of years, in support of
his government.

Charles then rose from his seat, and leaning on the shoulder of the prince of
Orange, because he was unable to stand without support, he addressed himself to
the audience; and, from a paper which he held in his hand in order to assist
his memory, he recounted with dignity, but without ostentation, all the great
things which he had undertaken and performed since the commencement of his
administration. He observed, that, from the seventeenth year of his age he had
dedicated all his thoughts and attention to public objects, reserving no
portion of his time for the indulgence of his ease, and very little for the
enjoyment of private pleasure: that, either in a pacific or hostile manner, he
had visited Germany nine times, Spain six times, France four times, Italy seven
times, the Low Countries ten times, England twice, Africa as often, and had
made eleven voyages by sea: that, while his health permitted him to discharge
his duty, and the vigor of his constitution was equal in any degree to the
arduous office of governing such extensive dominions, he had never shunned
labor, nor repined under fatigue: that, now, when his health was broken, and
his vigor exhausted by the rage of an incurable distemper, his growing
infirmities admonished him to retire; nor was he so fond of reigning as to
retain the scepter in an impotent hand, which was no longer able to protect his
subjects, or to render them happy: that, instead of a sovereign worn out with
diseases and scarcely half alive, he gave them one in the prime of life,
accustomed already to govern, and who added to the vigor of youth all the
attention and sagacity of maturer years: that if, during the course of a long
administration, he had committed any material error in government, or if, under
the pressure of so many and great affairs, and amidst the attention which he
had been obliged to give them, he had either neglected or injured any of his
subjects, he now implored their forgiveness: that, for his part, he should ever
retain a grateful sense of their fidelity and attachment, and would carry the
remembrance of it along with him to the place of his retreat, as his sweetest
consolation, as well as the best reward for all his services; and, in his last
prayers to Almighty God, would pour forth his ardent wishes for their welfare.

Then, turning toward Philip, who fell on his knees and kissed his father's
hand, "If," says he, "I had left you, by my death, this rich inheritance, to
which I have made such large additions, some regard would have been justly due
to my memory on that account; but now, when I voluntarily resign to you what I
might have still retained, I may well expect the warmest expressions of thanks
on your part. With these, however, I dispense; and shall consider your concern
for the welfare of your subjects, and your love of them, as the best and most
acceptable testimony of your gratitude to me. It is in your power, by a wise
and virtuous administration, to justify the extraordinary proof which I this
day give of my paternal affection, and to demonstrate that you are worthy of
the confidence which I repose in you. Preserve an inviolable regard for
religion; maintain the Catholic faith in its purity; let the laws of your
country be sacred in your eyes; encroach not on the rights and privileges of
your people; and, if the time shall ever come when you shall wish to enjoy the
tranquillity of private life, may you have a son, endowed with such qualities
that you can resign your scepter to him, with as much satisfaction as I give up
mine to you."

As soon as Charles had finished this long address to his subjects and to their
new sovereign, he sunk into the chair, exhausted and ready to die with the
fatigue of such an extraordinary effort. During his discourse, the whole
audience melted into tears; some, from admiration of his magnanimity; others,
softened by the expressions of tenderness toward his son and of love to his
people; and all were affected with the deepest sorrow at losing a sovereign,
who had distinguished the Netherlands, his native country, with particular
marks of his regard and attachment.

A few weeks thereafter, Charles, in an assembly no less splendid, and with a
ceremonial equally pompous, resigned to his son the crowns of Spain, with all
the territories depending on them, both in the old and in the new world. Of all
these past possessions, he reserved nothing for himself but an annual pension
of an hundred thousand crowns, to defray the charges of his family, and to
afford him a small sum for acts of beneficence and charity.

The place he had chosen for his retreat was the monastery of St Justus, in the
province of Estremadura. It was seated in a vale of no great extent, watered by
a small brook, and surrounded by rising grounds covered with lofty trees. From
the nature of the soil, as well as the temperature of the climate, it was
esteemed the most healthful and delicious situation in Spain. Some months
before his resignation, he had sent an architect thither to add a new apartment
to the monastery for his accommodation; but he gave strict orders that the
style of the building should be such as suited his present situation, rather
than his former dignity. It consisted only of six rooms; four of them in the
form of friars cells, with naked walls; the other two, each twenty feet square,
were hung with brown cloth, and furnished in the most simple manner. They were
all on a level with the ground; with a door on one side into a garden, of which
Charles himself had given the plan, and which he had filled with various
plants, intending to cultivate them with his own hands. On the other side they
communicated with the chapel of the monastery, in which he was to perform his
devotions. -- Into this humble retreat, hardly sufficient for the comfortable
accommodation of a private gentleman, did Charles enter with twelve domestics
only. He buried there, in solitude and silence, his grandeur, his ambition,
together with all those vast projects, which, during half a century, had
alarmed and agitated Europe, filling every kingdom in it by turns with the
terror of his arms, and the dread of being subjected to his power.

VI. IMPORTANCE OF VIRTUE.
VIRTUE is of intrinsi^ value and good desert, and of indispensable obligation;
not the creature of will, but necessary and immutable; not local or temporary,
but of equal extent and antiquity with the Divine mind; not a mode of
sensation, but everlasting truth; not dependent on power, but the guide of all
power. Virtue is the foundation of honor and esteem, and the fource of all
beauty, order, and happiness, in nature. It is what confers value on all the
other endowments and qualities of a reasonable being, to which they ought to be
absolutely subservient; and without which, the more eminent they are, the more
hideous deformities and the greater curses they become.

The use of it is not confined to any one stage of our existence, or to any
particular situation we can be in, but reaches through all the periods and
circumstances of our being. Many of the endowments and talents we now possess,
and of which we are too apt to be proud, will cease entire^y with the present
state; but this will be our ornament and dignity, in every future state to
which we may be removed. Beauty and wit will die, learning will vanish away,
and all the arts of life be soon forgot; but virtue will remain for ever. This
unites us to the whole rational creation; and fits us for conversing with any
order of superior natures, and for (...) place in any part of God's works. It
procures us the approbation and love of all wise and good beings, and ^enders
them our allies and friends. But what is of unspeakably greater consequence is,
that it makes God our friend, assimilates and unites our minds to him, and
engages his Almighty power in our defense. Superior beings of all ranks are
bound by it no less than ourselves. It has the same authority in all worlds
that it has in this. The further any being is advanced in excellence and
perfection, the greater is his attachment to it, and the more he is under its
influence. -- To say no more, it is the law of the whole universe, it stands
first in the estimation of the Deity, its original is his nature, and it is the
very object that makes him lovely.

Such is the importance of virtue. -- Of what consequence, therefore, is it
that we practice it! There is no argument or motive in any respect fitted to
influence a reasonable mind, which does not call us to this. One virtuous
disposition of soul is preferable to the greatest natural accomplishments and
abilities, and of more value than all the treasures of the world. -- If you are
wise, then, study virtue, and contemn every thing that can come in competition
with it. Remember, that nothing else deserves one anxious thought or wish.
Remember, that this alone is honor, glory, wealth, and happiness. Secure this,
and you secure every thing. Loss this, and all is lost.

VII. ADDRESS TO ART.
O ART! thou distinguishing attribute and honor of human kind! who art not only
able to imitate nature in her graces, but even to adorn her with graces of
thine own! Possessed of thee, the meanest genius grows deserving, and has a
just demand for a portion of our esteem: devoid of thee, the brightest of our
kind lie lost and useless, and are but poorly distinguished from the most
despicable and base. When we inhabited forests in common with brutes, nor
otherwise known from them than by the figure of our species, thou taughtest us
to assert the sovereignty of our nature, and to assume that empire for which
providence intended us. Thousands of utilities owe their birth to thee;
thousands of elegancies, pleasures, and joys, without which life itself would
be but an insipid possession.

Wide and extensive is the reach of thy dominion. No element is there, either
so violent or so subtle, so yielding or so sluggish, as, by the powers of its
nature, to be superior to thy direction. Thou dreadest not the fierce
impetuosity of Fire, but compellest its violence to be both obedient and
useful. By it thou softenest the stubborn tribe of minerals, so as to be formed
and molded into shapes innumerable. Hence weapons, armor, coin: and, previous
to these and other thy works and energies, hence all those various tools and
instruments, which empower thee to proceed to farther ends more excellent. Nor
is the subtle Air less obedient to thy power, whether thou willest it to be a
minister to our pleasure or utility. At they command, it gives birth to
sounds, which charm the soul with all the powers of harmony. Under thy
instruction, it moves the ship over seas; while that yielding element, where
otherwise we sink, even Water itself, is by thee taught to bear us; the vast
ocean, to promote that intercourse of nations which ignorance would imagine it
was destined to intercept. To say how thy influence is seen on Earth, would be
to teach the meanest what he knows already. Suffice it but to mention, fields
of arable and pasture; lawns, and groves, and gardens, and plantations;
cottages, villages, castles, towns; palaces, temples, and spacious cities.

Nor does thy empire end in subjects thus inanimate. Its power also extends
through the various race of Animals, who either patiently submit to become thy
slaves, or are sure to find thee an irresistible foe. The faithful dog, the
patient ox, the generous horse, and the mighty elephant, are content all to
receive their instructions from thee, and readily to lend their natural
instincts or strength to perform those offices which thy occasions call for. If
there be found any species which are serviceable when dead, thou suggestest the
means to investigate and take them: if any be so savage as to refuse being
tamed, or of natures fierce enough to venture an attack, thou teach us to
scorn their brutal rage, to meet, repel, pursue, and conquer.

Such, O Art! is thy amazing influence, when thou art employed only on these
inferior subjects, on nature inanimate, or at best irrational. But, whenever
thou choosest a subject more noble, and set to the cultivating of Mind
itself, then it is thou becomest truly amiable and divine, the ever-flowing
source of those sublimer beauties of which no subject but mind alone is
capable. Then it is thou art enabled to exhibit to mankind the admired tribes of
poets and orators, the sacred train of patriots and heroes, the god-like list
of philosophers and legislators, the forms of virtuous and equal polities,
where private welfare is made the same with public, where crowds themselves
prove disinterested, and virtue is made a national and popular characteristic.

Hail! sacred source of all these wonders! Thyself instruct me to praise thee
worthily; through whom, whatever we do, is done with elegance and beauty;
without whom, what we do is ever graceless and deformed. -- Venerable power! by
what name shall I address thee? Shall I call thee Ornament of mind, or art thou
more truly Mind itself! It Is Mind thou art, most perfect Mind; not rude,
untaught: but fair and polished: in such thou dwell: of such thou art the
form; nor is it a thing more possible to separate thee from such, than it would
be to separate thee from thine own existence.

VIII. FLATTERY.
FLATTERY is a manner of conversation very shameful in itself, but beneficial
to the flatterer.

If a flatterer is upon a public walk with you, "Do but mind," says he, "how
every one's eye is upon you. Sure there is not a man in Athens that is taken so
much notice of. You had justice done you yesterday in the portico. There were
above thirty of us together; and, the question being started who was the most
considerable person in the commonwealth? the whole company was of the same
side. In short, Sir, every one made familiar with your name" He follows this
whisper with a thousand other flatteries of the same nature.

Whenever the person to whom he would make his court begins to speak, the
sycophant begs the company to be silent, most impudently praises him to his
face, in raptures all the while he talks, and, as soon as he has done, cries
out, That is perfectly right! When his patron aims at being witty upon any man,
he is ready to burst at the smartness of his raillery, and stops his mouth with
his handkerchief that he may not laugh out. If he calls his children about him,
the flatterer has a pocket full of apples for them, which he distributes among
them with a great deal of fondness, wonders to see so many fine boys, and,
turning about to the father, tells him they are all as like him as they can
stare.

When he is invited to a feast, he is the first man that calls for a glass of
wine, and is wonderfully pleased with the deliciousness of the flavor; gets as
near as possible to the man of the house, and tells him with much concern that
he eats nothing himself. He singles out some particular dish, and recommends it
to the rest of the company for a rarity. He desires the master of the feast to
sit in a warmer part of the room, begs him to take more care of his health, and
advises him to put on a supernumerary garment in this cold weather. He is in a
close whisper with him during the whole entertainment, and has neither eyes nor
ears for any one else in the company.

If a man shows him his house, he extols the architect, admires the gardens,
and expatiates upon the furniture. If the owner is grossly flattered in a
picture, he outflatters the painter; and, though he discovers a great likeness
in it, can by no means allow that it does justice to the original. -- In short,
his whole business is to ingratiate himself with those who hear him, and to
wheedle them out of their senses.

IX. THE ABSENT MAN.
MENALCAS comes down in the morning: opens his door to go out* but shuts it
again, because he perceives he has his nightcap on; and, examining himself
further, finds that he is but half-shaved, that he has stuck his sword on his
right side, that his stockings are about his heels, and that his shirt is over
his breeches.

When he is dressed, goes to court; comes into the drawing room; and, walking
upright under a branch of candlesticks, his wig is caught up by one of them,
and hangs dangling in the air. All the courtiers fall alaughing; but Menalcas
laughs louder than any of them, and looks about for the person that is the jest
of the company. Coming down to the court-gate, he finds a coach; which, taking
for his own, he whips into it; and the coachman drives off, not doubting but he
carries his master. As soon as he stops, Menalcas throws himself out of the
coach, crosses the court, ascends the staircase, and runs through all the
chambers with the greatest familarity, reposes himself on a couch, and fancies
himself at home. The master of the house at last comes in. Menalcas rises to
receive him, and desires him to sit down. He talks, muses, and then talks
again. The gentleman of the house is tired and amazed. Menalcas is no less so;
but is every moment in hopes that his impertinent guest will at last end his
tedious visit. Night comes on, when Menalcas is hardly convinced.

When he is playing at backgammon, he calls for a full glass of wine and water.
It is his turn to throw. He has the box in one hand, and his glass in the
other; and, being extremely dry and unwilling to lose time, he swallows down
both the dice, and at the same time throws his wine into the tables. He writes
a letter, and flings the sand into the ink-bottle. He writes a second, and
mistakes the superscription. A nobleman receives one of them, and, upon opening
it, reads as follows: "I would have you, honest Jack, immediately upon the
receipt of this, take in hay enough to serve the winter." His farmer receives
the other, and is amazed to see in it, "My Lord, I received your Grace's
commands."

If he is at an entertainment, you may see the pieces of bread continually
multiplying round his plate: it is true the company want it, as well as their
knives and forks, which Menalcas does not let them keep long. Sometimes in a
morning he puts his whole family in a hurry, and at last goes out without being
able to stay for his coach or breakfast; and, for that day, you may see him in
every part of the town, except the very place where he had appointed to be upon
business of importance.

You would often take him for every thing that he is not -- For a fellow quite
stupid, for he hears nothing; for a fool, for he talks to himself, and has a
hundred grimaces and motions with his head which are altogether involuntary;
for a proud man, for he looks full upon you, and takes no notice of your
saluting him. The truth of it is, his eyes are open, but he makes no use of
them, and neither sees you, nor any man, nor any thing else. He came once from
his country house, and his own footmen undertook to rob him, and succeeded.
They held a flambeau to his throat, and bid him deliver his purse. He did so:
and coming home, told his friends he had been robbed. They desire to know the
particulars -- "Ask my servants," said Menalcas; "for they were with me."

X. THE MONK.
A POOR monk of the order of St Francis came into the room to beg something for
his convent. The moment I cast my eyes upon him, I was determined not to give
him a single sous; and accordingly I put my purse into my pocket -- buttoned it
up -- set myself a little more upon my center, and advanced up gravely to him:
there was something, I fear forbidding in my look: I have his figure this
moment before my eyes, and think there was that in it which deserved better.

The monk, as I judged from the break in his tonsure, a few scattered white
hairs upon his temples being all that remained of it, might be about seventy --
but from his eyes, and that sort of fire which was in them, which seemed more
tempered by courtesy than years, he could be no more than sixty -- Truth might
lie between -- He was certainly sixty-five; and the general air of his
countenance, notwithstanding something seemed to have been planting wrinkles in
it before their time, agreed to the account.

It was one of those heads which Guido has often painted -- mild, pale, --
penetrating; free from all commonplace ideas of fat contented ignorance
looking downwards upon the earth -- it looked forwards; but looked as if it
looked at something beyond this world. How one of his order came by it, Heaven
above, who let it fall upon a monk's shoulders, best knows; but it would have
suited a Bramin; and had I met it upon it the plains of Indostan, I had
reverenced it.

The rest of his outline may be given in a few strokes: one might put it into
the hands of any one to design; for it was neither elegant nor otherwise, but
as character and expression made it so; it was a thin, spare form, something
above the common size, if it lost not the distinction by a bend forwards in the
figure -- but it was the attitude of entreaty; and, as it now stands present to
my imagination, it gained more than it lost by it.

When he had entered the room three paces, he stood still; and, lying his left
hand upon his breast (a slender white staff with which he journeyed being in
his right) -- when I had got close up to him, he introduced himself with the
little story of the wants of his convent, and the poverty of his order -- and
did it with so simple a grace -- and such an air of deprecation was there in
the whole cast of his look and figure -- I was bewitched not to have been
struck with it --

-- A better reason was, I had pre-determined not to give him a single sous.

-- It Is very true, said I, replying to a cast upward* with his eyes, with
which he had concluded his address, -- it is very true -- and heaven be their
resource who have no other but the charity of the world; the stock of which, I
fear, is no way sufficient for the many GREAT CLAIMS which are hourly made upon
it.

As I pronounced the words GREAT CLAIMS, he gave a slight glance with his eye
downwards upon the sleeve of his tunic -- I felt the full force of the appeal
-- I acknowledge it, said I -- a coarse habit, and that but once in three
years, with meagre diet -- are no great matters: and the true point of pity is,
as they can be earned in the world with so little industry, that your order
should wish to procure them by pressing upon a fund which is the property of
the lame, the blind, the aged, and the infirm: the captive who lies down
counting over and over again the days of his afflictions, languishes also for
his share of it; and had you been of the ORDER OF MERCY instead of the order of
St. Francis, poor as I am, continued I, pointing at my portmanteau, full
cheerfully should it have been opened to you for the ransom of the unfortunate.
The monk made me a bow. -- But, resumed I, the unfortunate of our own country,
surely, have the first rights; and I have left thousands in distress upon the
English shore -- The monk gave a cordial wave with his head -- as much as to
say, No doubt, there is misery enough in every corner of the world, as well as
within our convent. -- But we distinguish, said I, laying my hand upon the
sleeve of his tunic, in return for his appeal -- we distinguish, my good
father, betwixt those who wish only to eat the bread of their own labor -- and
those who eat the bread of other people's, and have no other plan in life, but
to get through it in sloth and ignorance, FOR THE LOVE OF GOD.

The poor Franciscan made no reply: a hectic of a moment passed across his
check, but could not tarry -- Nature seemed to have done with her resentments
in him; he showed none -- but letting his staff fall within his arm, he pressed
both his hands with resignation upon his breast, and retired.

My heart smote me the moment he shut the door -- Pshaw! said I with an air of
carelessness, three several times -- But it would not do: every ungracious
syllable I had uttered, crowded back into my imagination; I reflected I had no
right over the poor Franciscan, but to deny him; and that the punishment of
that was enough to the disappointed, without the addition of unkind language --
I considered his gray hairs -- his courteous figure seemed to re-enter, and
gently ask me what injury he had done me? and why I could use him thus? -- I
would have given twenty livres for an advocate -- I have behaved very ill, said
I within myself; but I have only just set out upon my travels, and shall learn
better manners as I get along.

XI. ON THE HEAD-DRESS OF THE LADIES.
THERE is not so variable a thing in nature as a lady'^ head-dress: within my
own memory, I have known it rise and fall above thirty degrees. About ten years
ago it shot up to a very great height, insomuch that the female part of our
species were much taller than the men. The women were of such an enormous
stature, that 'we appeared as grasshoppers before them.' At present the whole
sex is in a manner dwarfed and shrunk into a race of beauties that seem almost
another species. I remember several ladies who were once very near seven feet
high, that at present want some inches of five: how they came to be thus
curtailed, I cannot learn; whether the whole sex be at present under any
penance which we know nothing of, or whether they have cast their head-dresses
in order to surprise us with something in that kind which shall be entirely
new; or whether some of the tallest of the sex, being too cunning for the rest,
have contrived this method to make themselves appear sizeable, is still a
secret; though I find most are of opinion, they are at present like trees new
lopped and pruned, that will certainly sprout up and flourish with greater
heads than before. For my own part, as I do not love to be insulted by women
who are taller than myself, I admire the sex much more in their present
humiliation, which has reduced them to their natural dimensions, than when they
had extended their persons and lengthened themselves out into formidable and
gigantic figures. I am not for adding to the beautiful edifices of nature, nor
for raising any whimsical superstructure upon her plans: I must therefore
repeat it, that I am highly pleased with the coiffure now in fashion, and think
it shows the good sense which at present very much reigns among the valuable
part of the sex. One may observe that women in all ages have taken more pains
than men to adorn the outside of their heads; and indeed I very much admire,
that those architects, who raise such wonderful structures out of ribbands,
lace, and wire, have not been recorded for their respective inventions. It is
certain there has been as many orders in these kinds of buildings, as in those
which have been made of marble; sometimes they rise in the shape of a pyramid,
sometimes like a tower, and sometimes like a steeple. In Juvenal's time, the
building grew by several orders and stories, as he has very humorously
described it. With curls on curls they build her head before,
And mount it with a formidable tower:
A giantess she seems: but look behind,
And then she dwindles to the pigmy kind.
But I do not remember, in any part of my reading, that the head-dress aspired
to so great an extravagance as in the fourteenth century; when it was built up
in a couple of cones or spires, which stood so excessively high on each side of
the head, that a woman, who was but a pigmy without her head-dress, appeared
like a Colossus upon putting it on. Monsier Paradin says, That these old
fashioned fontanges rose an ell above the head: that they were pointed like
steeples, and had long loose pieces of crape fastened to the tops of them,
which were curiously fringed, and hung down their backs like streamers.

The woman might possibly have carried this Gothic building much higher, had
not a famous monk, Thomas Connecte by name, attacked it with great zeal and
resolution. This holy man traveled from place to place to preach down this
monstrous commode; and succeeded so well in it, that, as the magicians
sacrificed their books to the flames upon the preaching of an apostle, many of
the women threw down their head-dresses in the middle of his sermon, and made a
bonfire of them within sight of the pulpit. He was so renowned, as well for the
sanctity of his life as his manner of preaching, that he had often a
congregation of twenty thousand people; the men placing themselves on the one
side of his pulpit, and the women on the other, they appeared, to use the
similitude of an ingenious writer, like a forest of cedars with their heads
reaching to the clouds. He so warmed and animated the people against the
monstrous ornament, that it lay under a kind of persecution; and whenever it
appeared in public, was pelted down by the rabble, who flung stones at the
persons who wore it. But, notwithstanding this prodigy vanished while the
preacher was among them, it began to appear again some months after his
departure, or, to tell it in Monsieur Paradin's own words, The women, that,
like snails in a fright, had drawn in their horns, shot them out again as soon
as the danger was over. This extravagance of the women's head-dresses in that
age is taken notice of by Monsieur d'Argentre in the history of Bretagne, and
by other historians as well as the person I have here quoted.

It is usually observed, that a good reign is the only proper time for the
making of laws against the exorbitance of power; in the same manner an
excessive head-dress may be attacked the most effectually when the fashion is
against it. I do therefore recommend this paper to my female readers by way of
prevention.

I would desire the fair sex to consider how impossible it is for them to add
any thing that can be ornamental to what is already the masterpiece of nature.
The head has the most beautiful appearance, as well as the highest station, in
the human figure. Nature has laid out all her art in beautifying the face; she
has touched it with vermilion, planted in it a double row of ivory, made it the
seat of smiles and blushes, lighted it up and enlivened it with the brightness
of the eyes, hung it on each side with curious organs of sense, given it airs
and graces that cannot be described, and surrounded it with such a flowing
shade of hair, as sets all its beauties in the most agreeable light: in short,
she seems to have designed the head as the cupola to the most glorious of her
works; and, when we load it with such a pile of supernumerary ornaments we
destroy the symmetry of the human figure, and foolishly contrive to call off
the eye from great and real beauti^, to childish gewgaws, ribbands, and bone
lace.

XII. ON THE PRESENT AND A FUTURE STATE.
A LEWD young fellow seeing an aged hermit go by him barefoot, "Father," says
he, "you are in a very miserable condition if there is not another world."
"True, son," said the hermit; "but what is thy condition if there is?" -- Man
is a creature designed for two different states of being, or rather for two
different lives. His first life is short and transient; his second permanent
and lasting. The question we are all concerned in is this, In which of these
two lives it is our chief interest to make ourselves happy? Or, in other words,
Whether we should endeavor to secure to ourselves the pleasures and
gratifications of a life which is uncertain and precarious, and at its utmost
length of a very inconsiderable duration; or to secure to ourselves the
pleasures of a life which is fixed and settled, and will never end? Every man,
upon the first hearing of this question, knows very well which side of it he
ought to close with. But, however right we are in theory, it is plain that in
practice we adhere to the wrong side of the question. We make provision for
this life as though it were never to have an end; and for the other life, as
though it were never to have a beginning.

Should a spirit of superior rank, who is a stranger to human nature,
accidentally alight upon the earth, and take a survey of its inhabitants; what
would his notions of us be? Would not he think that we are a species of beings
made for quite different ends and purposes than what we really are? Must not he
imagine that we were placed in this world to get riches and honors? Would not
he think that it was our duty to toil after wealth, and station, and title?
Nay, would not he believe we were forbidden poverty by threats of eternal
punishment, and enjoyed to pursue our pleasures under pain of damnation? He
would certainly imagine that we were influenced by a scheme of duties quite
opposite to those which are indeed prescribed to us. And, truly, according to
such an imagination, he must conclude, that we are a species of the most
obedient creatures in the universe; that we are constant to our duty; and that
we keep a steady eye on the end for which we were sent hither.

But how great would be his astonishment, when he learnt that we were beings
not designed to exist in this world above threescore and ten years; and that
the greatest part of these busy species fall short even of that age? How would
he be lost in horror and admiration, when he should know that this set of
creatures, who lay out all their endeavors for this life, which scarce deserves
the name of existence, when, I say, he should know that this set of creatures
are to exist to all eternity in another life, for which they make no
preparations? Nothing can be a greater disgrace to reason, than that men, who
are persuaded of these two different states of being, should be perpetually
employed in providing for a life of threescore and ten years, and neglecting to
make provision for that, which, after many myriads of years, will be still new
and still beginning; especially when we consider that our endeavors for making
ourselves great, or rich, or honorable, or whatever else we place our happiness
in, may after all prove unsuccessful; whereas if we constantly and sincerely
endeavor to make ourselves happy in the other life, we are sure that our
endeavors will succeed, and that we shall not be disappointed of our hope.

The following question is started by one of the schoolmen. Supposing the
whole body of the earth were a great ball or mass of the finest sand, and that
a single grain or particle of this sand would be annihilated every thousand
years? Supposing then that you had it in your choice to be happy all the while
this prodigious mass of sand was consuming by this slow method until there was
not a grain of it left, on condition you were to be miserable for ever after?
or, supposing that you might be happy for ever after, on condition you would be
miserable until the whole mass of sand were thus annihilated at the rate of one
sand in a thousand years; which of these two cases would you make your choice?

It must be confessed, in this case, so many thousands of years are to the
imagination as a kind of eternity, though in reality they do not bear so great
a proportion to that duration which is to follow them, as an unit does to the
greatest number which you can put together in figures, or as one of those sands
to the supposed heap. Reason therefore tells us, without any manner of
hesitation, which would be the better part in this choice. However, as I have
before intimated, our reason might, in such case, be so overset by the
imagination, as to dispose some persons to sink under the consideration of the
great length of the first part of this duration, and of the great distance of
that second duration which is to succeed it; the mind, I say, might give itself
up to that happiness which is at hand, considering that it is so very near, and
that it would last so very long. But when the choice we actually have before us
is this, Whether we will choose to be happy for the space of only threescore
and ten, nay perhaps of only twenty or ten years, I might say of only a day or
an hour, and miserable to all eternity; or, on the contrary, miserable for this
short term of years, and happy for a whole eternity; what words are sufficient
to express that folly and want of consideration which in such a case makes a
wrong choice!

I here put the case even at the worst, by supposing what seldom happens, that
a course of virtue makes us miserable in this life: but if we suppose, as it
generally happens, that virtue would make us more happy even in this life than
a contrary course of vice; how can we sufficiently admire the stupidity or
madness of those persons who are capable of making so absurd a choice?

Every wise man therefore will consider this life only as it may conduce to the
happiness of the other, and cheerfully sacrifice the pleasures of a few years
to those of an eternity.

XIII. STORY OF THE SIEGE OF CALAIS.
EDWARD III. after the battle of Cressy, laid siege to Calais. He had fortified
his camp in so impregnable a manner, that all the efforts of France proved
ineffectual to raise the siege, or throw succors into the city. -- The
citizens, under Count Vienne, their gallant governor, made an admirable
defense. -- France had now put the sickle into her second harvest, since
Edward, with his victorious army, sat down before the town. The eyes of all
Europe were intent on the issue. At length, famine did more for Edward than
arms. -- After suffering unheard of calamities, they resolved to attempt the
enemy's camp. -- They boldly sallied forth: The English joined battle; and,
after a long and desperate engagement, Count Vienne was taken prisoner, and the
citizens who survived the slaughter retired within their gates. The command
devolving upon Eustace St Pierre, a man of mean birth but of exalted virtue, he
offered to capitulate with Edward, provided he permitted them to depart with
life and liberty. Edward, to avoid the imputation of cruelty, consented to
spare the bulk of the plebeians, provided they delivered up to him six of their
principal citizens with halters about their necks, as victims of due atonement
for that spirit of rebellion with which they had inflamed the vulgar. When his
messenger, Sir Walter Mauny, delivered the terms, consternation and pale dismay
were impressed on every countenance. -- To a long and dead silence deep sighs
and groans succeeded, till Eustace St Pierre getting up to a little eminence,
thus addressed the assembly: -- "My friends, we are brought to great straits
this day. We must either yield to the terms of our cruel and ensnaring
conqueror, or yield up our tender infants, our wives, and daughters, to the
bloody and brutal lusts of the violating soldiers. Is there any expedient left,
whereby we may avoid the guilt and infamy of delivering up those (who have
suffered every misery with you) on the one hand, or the desolation and horror
of a sacked city on the other? There is, my friends, there is one expedient
left, a gracious, an excellent, a godlike expedient! Is there any here to whom
virtue is dearer than life? Let him offer himself an oblation for the safety of
his people! He shall not fail of a blessed approbation from that Power, who
offered up his only Son for the salvation of mankind." He spoke; -- but an
universal silence ensued. -- Each man looked around for the example of that
virtue and magnanimity which all wished to approve in themselves, though they
wanted the resolution. At length St Pierre resumed, "I doubt not but there are
many here as ready, nay, more zealous, of his martyrdom than I can be; though
the station to which I am raised, by the captivity of Lord Vienne, imparts a
right to be the first in giving my life for your sakes. I give it freely; I
give it cheerfully. Who comes next?" "Your son," exclaimed a youth not yet come
to maturity. -- "Ah, my child!" cried St Pierre; "I am then twice sacrificed.
-- But, no: I have rather begotten thee a second time. Thy years are few, but
full, my son. The victim of virtue has reached the utmost purpose and goal of
mortality. Who next, my friends? This is the hour of heroes." "Your kinsman."
cried John de Air. "Your kinsman," cried James Wissant. "Your kinsman," cried
Peter Wissant. -- Ah!" exclaimed Sir Walter Mauny, bursting into tears, "why
was not I a citizen of Calais!" The sixth victim was still wanting, but was
quickly supplied by lot from numbers who were now emulous of so ennobling an
example. The keys of the city were then delivered to Sir Walter. He took the
six prisoners into his custody; then ordered the gates to be opened, and gave
charge to his attendants to conduct the remaining citizens, with their
families, through the camp of the English. Before they departed, however, they
desired permission to take their last adieu of their deliverers. What a
parting! what a scene! They crowded, with their wives and children, about St
Pierre and his fellow prisoners. They embraced; they clung around; they fell
prostrate before them. They groaned; they wept aloud; and the joint clamor of
their mourning passed the gates of the city, and was heard throughout the
English camp. The English, by this time, were apprised of what passed within
Calais. They heard the voice of lamentation, and their souls were touched with
compassion. Each of the soldiers prepared a portion of his own victuals to
welcome and entertain the half-famished inhabitants; and they loaded them with
as much as their present weakness was able to bear, in order to supply them
with sustenance by the way. At length St Pierre and his fellow-victims appeared
under the conduct of Sir Walter and a guard. All the tents of the English were
instantly emptied The soldiers poured from all parts, and arranged themselves
on each side, to behold, to contemplate, to admire, this little band of
patriots as they passed. They bowed down to them on all sides. They murmured
their applause of that virtue, which they could not but revere even in enemies;
and they regarded those ropes which they had voluntarily assumed about their
necks, as ensigns of greater dignity than that of the British garter. As soon
as they had reached the presence, "Mauny," says the monarch, "are these the
principal inhabitants of Calais?" -- "They are," says Mauny: "they are not only
the principal men of Calais, they are the principal men of France, my Lord, if
virtue has any share in the act of ennobling." "Were they delivered peaceably?"
says Edward, "Was there no resistance, no commotion among the people?" "Not in
the least, my Lord; the people would all have perished, rather than have
delivered the least of these to your Majesty. They are self-delivered,
self-devoted, and come to offer up their inestimable heads as an ample
equivalent for the ransom of thousands." Edward was secretly piqued at this
reply of Sir Walter; but he knew the privilege of a British subject, and
suppressed his resentment. "Experience," says he, "has ever shown, that lenity
only serves to invite people to new crimes. Severity, at times, is
indispensibly necessary to compel subjects to submission by punishment and
example. Go," he cried to an officer, "lead these men to execution. Your
rebellion," continued he addressing himself to St. Pierre, "your rebellion
against me, the natural heir of your crown, is highly aggravated by your
present presumption and affront of my power." -- "We have nothing to ask of
your Majesty," said Eustace, "save what you cannot refuse us." -- "What is
that?" "Your esteem, my Lord," said Eustace; and went out with his companions.

At this instant a sound of triumph was head throughout the camp. The Queen had
just arrived with a powerful reinforcement of gallant troops. Sir Walter Mauny
flew to receive her Majesty, and briefly informed her of the particulars
respecting the six victims.

As soon as she had been welcomed by Edward and his court, she desired a
private audience. "My Lord," said she, "the question I am to enter upon, is not
touching the lives of a few mechanics -- it respects the honor of the English
nation; it respects the glory of my Edward, my husband, my king. -- You think
you have sentenced six of your enemies to death. No, my Lord, they have
sentenced themselves; and their execution would be the execution of their own
orders, not the orders of Edward.

"They have behaved themselves worthily; they have behaved themselves greatly:
and I cannot but respect, while I envy them, for leaving us no share in the
honor of this action, save that of granting a poor, an indispensible pardon. I
admit they have deserved every thing that is evil at your hands. They have
proved the most inveterate and obstinate of your enemies. They alone have
withstood the rapid course of your conquests, and have withheld from you the
crown to which you were born. Is it therefore that you would reward them? that
you would gratify their desires, that you would indulge their ambition, and
enwreath them with everlasting glory and applause? But if such a death would
exalt mechanics over the fame of the most illustrious heroes, how would the
name of Edward, with all his triumphs, be tarnished thereby? Would it not be
said, that magnanimity and virtue are grown odious in the eyes of the monarch
of Britain? and that the objects whom he destines to the punishment of felons,
are the very men who deserve the praise and esteem of mankind? The stage on
which they would suffer, would be to them a stage of honor, but a stage of
shame to Edward; a reproach to his conquests; an indelible disgrace to his
name. -- No, my Lord, let us rather disappoint these haughty burghers, who wish
to invest themselves with glory at our expense. We cannot wholly deprive them
of the merit of a sacrifice so nobly intended, but we may cut them short of
their desires; in the place of that death by which their glory would be
consummate, let us bury them under gifts; let us put them to confusion with
applauses. We shall thereby defeat them of that popular opinion, which never
fails to attend those who suffer in the cause of virtue." "I am convinced; you
have prevailed. Be it so," replied Edward: "Prevent the execution; have them
instantly before us." -- They came; when the Queen, with an aspect and accents
disfusing sweetness, thus bespoke them: "Natives of France and inhabitants of
Calais, ye have put us to a vast expense of blood and treasure in the recovery
of our just and natural inheritance: but you have acted up to the best of an
erroneous judgment; and we admire and honor in you that valor and virtue, by
which we are so long kept out of our rightful possessions. You noble burghers!
you excellent citizens! though you were tenfold the enemies of our person and
our throne, we can feel nothing on our part, save respect and affection for
you. You have been sufficiently tested. We loose your chains; we snatch you
from the scaffold; and we thank you for that lesson of humiliation which you
teach us, when you show us, that excellence is not of blood, of title, or
station; -- that virtue gives a dignity superior to that of kings; and that
those whom the Almighty informs with sentiments like yours, are justly and
eminently raised above all human distinctions. You are now free to depart to
your kinsfolk, your countrymen, to all those whose lives and liberties you have
so nobly redeemed, provided you refuse not the tokens of our esteem. Yet we
would rather bind you to ourselves, by every endearing obligation; and for this
purpose, we offer to you your choice of the gifts and honors that Edward has to
bestow. -- Rivals for fame, but always friends to virtue, we wish that England
were entitled to call you her sons." "Ah, my country!" exclaimed Pierre; "it is
now that I tremble for you; Edward only wins our cities, but Philippa conquers
hearts."

SECTION V.
I. ON GRACE IN WRITING.
I Will not undertake to mark out with any sort of precision, that idea which I
would express by the word Grace: and, perhaps, it can no more be clearly
described than justly defined. To give you, however, a general intimation of
what I mean when I apply that term to compositions of genius, I would resemble
it to that easy air which so remarkably distinguishes certain persons of a
genteel and liberal cast. It consists not only in the particular beauty of
single parts, but arises from the general symmetry and construction of the
whole. An author may be just in his sentiments, lively in his figures, and
clear in his expression; yet may have no claim to be admitted in the rank of
finished writers. The several members must be so agreeably united, as mutually
to reflect beauty upon each other; their arangement must be so happily disposed
as not to admit of the least transposition, without manifest prejudice to the
entire piece. The thoughts, the metaphors, the allusions, and the diction,
should appear easy and natural, and seem to arise like so many spontaneous
productions, rather than as the effects of art or labor.

Whatever, therefore, is forced or affected in the sentiments; whatever is
pompous or pedantic in the expression, is the very reverse of Grace. Her mien
is neither that of a prude nor a coquette; she is regular without formality,
and sprightly without being fantastical. Grace, in short, is to good writing
what a proper light is to a fine picture; it not only shows all the figures in
their several proportions and relations, but shows them in the most
advantageous manner.

As gentility (to resume my former illustration) appears in the minutest
action, and improves the most inconsiderable gesture; so grace is discovered in
the placing even a single word, or the turn of a mere expletive. Neither is
this inexpressible quality confined to one species of composition only, but
extends to all the various kinds; to the humble pastoral as well as to the
lofty epic; from the slightest letter to the most solemn discourse.

I know not whether Sir William Temple may not be considered as the first of
our prose authors, who introduced a graceful manner into our language. At least
that quality does not seem to have appeared early, or spread far, amongst us.
But wheresoever we may look for its origin, it is certainly to be found in its
highest perfection in the essays of a gentleman whose writings will be
distinguished so long as politeness and good sense have any admirers. That
becoming air which Tully esteemed the criterion of fine composition, and which
every reader, he says, imagines so easy to be imitated, yet will find so
difficult to attain, is the prevailing characteristic of all that excellent
author's most elegant performances. In a word, one may justly apply to him what
Plato, in his allegorical language, says of Aristophanes; that the Graces,
having searched all the world round for a temple wherein they might for ever
dwell, settled at last in the breast of Mr Addison.

II. ON FEMALE ORATORY.
WE are told by some ancient authors, that Socrates was instructed in eloquence
by a woman, whose name, if I am not mistaken, was Aspasia. I have indeed very
often looked upon that art as the most proper for the female sex; and I think
the universities would do well to consider whether they should not fill the
rhetoric chairs with she-professors.

It has been said in the praise of some men, that they could talk whole hours
together upon any thing; but it must be owned to the honor of the other sex,
that there are many among them who can talk whole hours together upon nothing.
I have known a woman branch out into a long extempore dissertation upon the
edging of a petticoat, and chide her servant for breaking a china-cup, in all
the figures of rhetoric.

Were woman admitted to plead in courts of judicature, I am persuaded they
would carry the eloquence of the bar to greater heights than it has yet arrived
at. If any one doubts this, let him but be present at those debates which
frequently arise among the ladies of the British fishery.

The first kind, therefore, of female orators which I shall take notice of, are
those who are employed in stirring up the passions; a part of rhetoric in which
Socrates's wife had perhaps made a greater proficiency than his abovementioned
teacher.

The second kind of female orators, are those who deal in invectives and who
are commonly known by the name of the censorious. The imagination and elocution
of this set of rhetoricians is wonderful. With what a fluency of invention, and
copiousness of expression, will they enlarge upon every little slip in the
behavior of another? With how many different circumstances, and with what
variety of phrases, they will tell over the same story? I have known an old
lady make an unhappy marriage the subject of a month's conversation. She blamed
the bride in one place, pitied her in another, laughed at her in a third,
wondered at her in the fourth, was angry at her in a fifth; and in short, wore
out a pair of coach-horses in expressing her concern for her. At length, after
having quite exhausted the subject on this side, she made a visit to the
new-married pair, praised the wife for the prudent choice she had made, told
her the unreasonable reflections which some malicious people had cast upon her,
and desired that they might be better acquainted. The censure and approbation
of this kind of women are therefore only to be considered as helps to discourse.

A third kind of female orators may be comprehended under the word Gossips.
Mrs. Fiddle-Faddle is perfectly accomplished in this sort of eloquence; she
launches out into descriptions of christenings, runs divisions upon an
head-dress, knows every dish of meat that is served up in her neighborhood, and
entertains her company a whole afternoon together with the wit of her little
boy, before he is able to speak.

The coquette may be looked upon as a fourth kind of female orator. To give
herself the larger field for discourse she hates and loves in the same breath,
talks to her lap-dog or parrot, is uneasy in all kinds of weather, and in every
part of the room; she has false quarrels and feigned obligations to all the men
of her acquaintance? sighs when she is not sad, and laughs when she is not
merry. The coquette is in particular a great mistress of that part of oratory
which is called action; and indeed seems to speak for no other purpose but as
it gives her an opportunity of stirring a limb or varying a feature, of
glancing her eyes or playing with her fan.

As for newsmongers, politicians, mimics, story-tellers, with other characters
of that nature which give birth to loquacity, they are as commonly found among
the men as the women; for which reason I shall pass them over in silence.

I have often been puzzled to assign a cause why women should have this talent
of a ready utterance in so much greater perfection than men. I have sometimes
fancied they that have not a retentive power, or the faculty of suppressing
their thoughts, as men have; but that they are necessitated to speak every
thing they think; and if so, it would perhaps furnish a very strong argument to
the Cartesians for the supporting of their doctrine, that the soul always
thinks. But as several are of opinion, that the fair sex are not altogether
strangers to the art of dissembling and concealing their thoughts, I have been
forced to relinquish that opinion; and have therefore endeavored, to seek after
some better reason. In order to it, a friend of mine, who is an excellent
anatomist, has promised me, by the first opportunity, to dissect a woman's
tongue, and to examine whether there may not be in it certain juices which
render it so wonderfully voluble or flippant; or whether the fibers of it may
not be made up of a finer or more pliant thread; or whether there are not in it
some particular muscles which dart it up and down by such sudden glances and
vibrations; or whether, in the last place, there may not be some certain
undiscovered channels running from the head and the heart to this little
instrument of loquacity, and conveying into it a perpetual affluence of animal
spirits. Nor must I omit the reason which Hudibras has given, why those who can
talk on trifles speak with the greatest fluency; namely, that the tongue is
like a race-horse, which runs the faster the less weight it carries.

Which of these reasons soever may be looked upon as the most probable, I think
the Irishman's thought was very natural, who, after some hours conversation
with a female orator, told her, that he believed her tongue was very glad when
she was asleep, for that it had not a moment's rest all the while she was awake.

That excellent old ballad of the Wanton Wife of Bath, has the following
remarkable lines: I think, quoth Thomas, women's tongues
Of Aspen leaves are made.


And Ovid, though in the description of a very barbarous circumstance, tells
us, That when the tongue of a beautiful female was cut out, and thrown upon the
ground, it could not forbear muttering even in that posture.

-- The blade had cut
Her tongue sheer off, close to the trembling root;
The mangled part still quiver'd on the ground,
Murmuring with a faint imperfect sound
And as a serpent wreaths his wounded train,
Uneasy panting, and possessed with pain.
If a tongue would be talking without a mouth, what could it have done when it
had all its organ's of speech, and accomplices of sound about it? I might here
mention the story of the pippin-women, had I not some reason to look upon it as
fabulous.

I must confess I am so wonderfully charmed with the music of this little
instrument, that I would by no means discourage it. All that I aim at by this
dissertation is, to cure it of several disagreeable notes, and in particular of
those little jarrings and dissonances which arise from anger, censoriousness,
gossipping, and coquetry. In short, I would always have it tuned by good
nature, truth, discretion, and sincerity.

III. On the BEING of a GOD.
THE regularity of the motions and revolutions of the sun, the moon, and
numberless stars; with the distinction, variety, beauty, and order of celestial
objects; the slightest observation of which seems sufficient to convin^e every
b^holder that they cannot be the effect (...) chance; these afford a proof of a
Deity, which seems irrefragable. If he, who surveys an academy, a palace, or a
court of justice, and observes regularity, order, and economy, prevailing in
them, is immediately convinced that this regularity, must be the effect of
authority and discipline, supported by persons properly qualified; how much
more reason has he, who finds himself surrounded by so many and such stupendous
bodies, performing their various revolutions without the least deviation from
perfect regularity, through the innumerable ages of past duration; how much
more reason has he to conclude, that such amazing revolutions are governed by
superior wisdom and power?

Is it not therefore astonishing, that any man should ever have dreamed of the
possibility that a beautiful and magnificent system might arise from the
fortuitous concourse of certain bodies, carried toward one another by I know
not what imaginary impulse? I see not why he who is capable of ascribing the
production of a world to a cause so inadequate, may not expect, from the
fortuitous scattering about of a set of letters of ivory or metal, a regular
history to appear. But I believe he who hopes to produce, in this way, one
single line, will find himself for ever disappointed. If the casual concourse
of atoms has produced a whole universe, how comes it that we never find a city,
a temple, or so much as a portico, produced in the same manner? One would
imagine they who prate so absurdly about the origination of the world, had no
eyes, or had never opened them, to view the glories of the immense theater.

The reasonings of Aristotle on this point are excellent. -- "Let us suppose,"
says he, "certain persons to have been born, and to have lived to mature age,
under ground, in habitations accommodated with all the conveniences and even
magnificences of life, except the sight of this upper world. Let us suppose
those persons to have heard, by fame, of superior beings, and wonderful effects
produced by them. Let the earth be imagined suddenly to open, and expose to the
view of those subterraneans this fair world which we inhabit. Let them be
imagined to behold the face of the earth, diversified with hills and vales,
with rivers and woods; the wide extended ocean, the lofty sky, and the clouds
carried along by the winds. Let them behold the sun, and observe his
transcendent brightness and wonderful influence as he pours down the flood of
day over the whole earth, from east to west. And when night covered the world
in darkness, let them behold the heavens adorned with innumerable stars. Let
them behold the various appearances of the moon; now horned, then full, then
decreasing. Let them have leisure to mark the rising and setting of the
heavenly bodies, and to understand that their established courses have been
going on from age to age. -- When they had surveyed and considered all these
things, what could they conclude, but that the accounts they had heard in their
subterranean habitation of the existence of superior beings must be true, and
that these prodigious works must be the effect of their power!"

Thus Aristotle. To which I will add, that it is only our being accustomed to
the continual view of these glorious objects that prevents our admiring them,
and endeavoring to come to right conclusions concerning the Authors of them; as
if novelty were a better reason for exciting our inquiries than beauty and
magnificence.

V. RESIGNATION to PROVIDENCE RECOMMENDED.
THE darts of adverse fortune are always levelled at our heads. Some reach us;
some graze against us, and fly to wound our neighbors. Let us therefore impose
an equal temper on our minds, and pay without murmuring the tribute which we
owe to humanity. The winter brings cold and we must freeze. The summer returns
with heat, and we must melt. The inclemency of the air disorders our health,
and we must be sick. Here we are exposed to wild beasts, and there to men more
savage than the beasts: and if we escape the inconveniences and dangers of the
air and the earth, there are perils by water and perils by fire. This
established course of things it is not in our power to change: but it is in our
power to assume such a greatness of mind as becomes wise and virtuous men, as
may enable us to encounter the accidents of life with fortitude, and to conform
ourselves to the order of Nature, who govern her great kingdom the world, by
continual mutations. Let us submit to this order; let us be persuaded that
whatever does happen ought to happen, and never be so foolish as to expostulate
with Nature. The best resolution we can take is to suffer with patience what we
cannot alter; and pursue without repining, the road which Providence, who
directs every thing, has marked out to us: for it is not enough to follow; and
he is but a bad soldier who sighs and marches on with reluctance. We must
receive the orders with spirit and cheerfulness, and not endeavor to slink out
of the post which is assigned us in this beautiful disposition of things,
whereof even our suffering make a necessary part. Let us address ourselves to
God, who governs all, as Cleanthes did in those admirable verses, which are
going to lose part of their grace and energy in my translation of them. Parent
of Nature! Master of the World!
Wherever thy Providence directs, behold
My steps with cheerful resignation turn.
Fate leads the willing, drags the backward on.
Why should I grieve, when grieving I must bear?
Or take with guilt, what guiltless I might share?
Thus let us speak, and thus let us act. Resignation to the will of God is true
magnanimity. But the sure mark of a pusillanimous and base spirit, is to
struggle against, to censure, the order of Providence, and, instead of mending
our own conduct, to set up for correcting that of our Maker.

V. ADVANTAGES of HISTORY.
THE advantages found in history seem to be of three kinds: as it amuses the
fancy, as it improves the understanding, and as it strengthens virtue.

In reality, what more agreeable entertainment to the mind than to be
transported into the remotest ages of the world, and to observe human society,
in its infancy, making the first faint essays toward the arts and sciences? To
see the policy of government and the civility of conversation refining by
degrees, and every thing that is ornamental to human life advancing toward its
perfection? To mark the rise, progress, and declension, and final extinction of
the most flourishing empires; the virtues which contributed to their greatness,
and the vices which drew on their ruin? In short, to see all the human race,
from the beginning of time, pass as it were in review before us, appearing in
their true colors, without any of those disguises, which, during their
lifetime, so much perplexed the judgments of the beholders? What spectacle can
be imagined so magnificent, so various, so interesting? What amusement, either
of the senses or imagination, can be compared with it? Shall those trifling
pastimes, which engross so much of our time, be preferred as more satisfactory,
and more fit to engage our attention? How perverse must that taste be which is
capable of so wrong a choice of pleasures?

But history is a most improving part of knowledge, as well as an agreeable
amusement; and indeed a great part of what we commonly call erudition, and
value so highly, is nothing but an acquaintance with historical facts. An
extensive knowledge of this kind belongs to men of letters; but I must think it
an unpardonable ignorance in persons, of whatever sex or condition, not to be
acquainted with the history of their own country along with the histories of
ancient Greece and Rome.

I must add, that history is not only a valuable part of knowledge, but opens
the door to many other parts of knowledge, and affords materials to most of the
sciences. And indeed, if we consider the shortness of human life, and our
limited knowledge, even of what passes in our own time, we must be sensible
that we should be for ever children in understanding, were it not for this
invention, which ex^ends our experience to all past ages, and to the most
distant nations: making them contribute as much to our improvement in wisdom,
as if they had actually lain under our observation. A man acquainted with
history may, in some respect, be said to have lived from the beginning of the
world, and to have been making continual additions to his stock of knowledge in
every century.

There is also an advantage in that knowledge which is acquired by history,
above what is learned by the practice of the world, that it brings us
acquainted with human affairs, without diminishing in the least from the most
delicate sentiments of virtue. And, to tell the truth, I scarce know any study
or occupation so unexceptionable as history in this particular. Poets can paint
virtue in the most charming colors? but, as they address themselves entirely to
the passions, they often become advocates for vice. Even philosophers are apt
to bewilder themselves in the subtilty of their speculations; and we have seen
some go so far as to deny the reality of all moral distinctions. But I think it
a remark worthy the attention of the speculative reader, that the historians
have been, almost without exception, the true friends of virtue, and have
always represented it in its proper colors, however they may have erred in
their judgments of particular persons. Nor is this combination of historians in
favor of virtue at all difficult to be accounted for. When a man of business
enters into life and action, he is more apt to consider the characters of men
as they have relation to his interest than as they stand in themselves, and has
his judgment warped on every occasion by the violence of his passion. When a
philosopher contemplates characters and manners in his closet, the general
abstract view of the objects leaves the mind so cold and unmoved, that the
sentiments of nature have no room to play, and he scarce feels the difference
betwixt vice and virtue. History keeps in a just medium betwixt these extremes,
and places the objects in their true point of view. The writers of history, as
well as the readers, are sufficiently interested in the characters and events,
to have a lively sentiment of blame or praise; and, at the same time, have no
particular interest or concern to pervert their judgment.

VI. BATTLE of PHARSALIA and DEATH of POMPEY.
CAESAR had employed all his art for some time in sounding the inclinations of
his men; and finding his army once more resolute and vigorous, he caused them
to advance toward the plains of Pharsalia, where Pompey was now encamped, and
prepared to oppose him.

The approach of these two great armies, composed of the best and bravest
troops in the world, together with the greatness of the prize for which they
contended, filled all minds with anxiety, though with different expectations.
Pompey's army, being most numerous, turned all their thoughts to the enjoyment
of the victory; Caesar's, with better aims, considered only the means of
obtaining it: Pompey's army depended upon their numbers and their many
generals; Caesar's, upon their own discipline, and the conduct of their single
commander: Pompey's partisans hoped much from the justice of their cause;
Caesar's alleging the frequent proposals which they had made for peace without
effect. Thus, the views, hopes, and motives of both seemed different, but their
hatred and ambition were the same. Caesar, who was ever foremost in offering
battle, led out his army in array to meet the enemy; but Pompey, either
suspecting his troops, or dreading the event, kept his advantageous situation
for some time: he drew indeed sometimes out of his camp, but always kept
himself under his trenches, at the foot of the hill near which he was posted.
Caesar, being unwilling to attack him at a disadvantage, resolved to decamp the
next day, hoping to harass out his antagonish, who was not a match for him in
sustaining the fatigues of duty. Accordingly the order for marching was given,
and the tents struck, when word was brought him that Pompey's army had quitted
their entrenchments, and had advanced farther into the plain than usual, so
that he might engage them at less disadvantage: whereupon he caused his troops
that were upon their march to halt, and with a countenance of joy, informed
them, that the happy time was at last come which they had so long wished for,
and which was to crown their glory and terminate their fatigues. Upon this he
drew up his troops in order, and advanced toward the place of battle. His
forces did not amount to above half those of Pompey; the army of the one
amounting to above forty-five thousand foot and seven thousand horse; that of
the other not exceeding twenty-two thousand foot and about a thousand horse.
This disproportion, particularly in the cavalry, had filled Caesar with
apprehensions: wherefore he had some days before picked out the strongest and
nimblest of his foot soldiers, and accustomed them to fight between the ranks
of his cavalry. By their assistance his thousand horse was a match for Pompey's
seven thousand, and had actually got the better in a skirmish that happened
between them some days before.

Pompey, on the other hand, had strong expectations of success: he boasted that
he could put Caesar's legions to flight without striking a single blow;
presuming, that, as soon as the armies formed, his cavalry, on which he placed
his greatest expectations, would outflank and surround the enemy. Labienus
commended this scheme of Pompey; alleging also that the present troops of which
Caesar's army was composed, were but the shadow of those old legions that had
fought in Britain and Gaul; that all the veterans were worn out, and had been
replaced by new levies made in a hurry in Cisalpine Gaul. To increase the
confidence of the army still more, he took an oath, which the rest of the
officers followed him in, never to return to the camp but with victory. In this
disposition, and under these advantageous circumstances, Pompey led his troops
to battle.

Pompey's order of battle was good and well judged. In the center, and on the
two flanks, he placed all his veterans, and distributed his new-raised troops
between the wings and the main body. The Syrian legions were placed in the
center, under the command of Scipio; the Spaniards, on whom he greatly relied,
were put on the right under Domitius Aenobarbus; and on the left were stationed
the two legions which Caesar had restored in the beginning of the war, led on
by Pompey himself; because from thence he intended to make the attack which was
to gain the day; and, for the same reason, he had there assembled all his
horse, slingers, and archers, of which his right wing had no need, being
covered by the river Enipius. Caesar likewise divided his army into three
bodies, under three commanders; Domitius Calvinus being placed in the center,
and Mark Anthony on the left, while he himself led on the right wing, which was
to oppose the left commanded by Pompey. It is remarkable enough that Pompey
chose to put himself at the head of those troops which were disciplined and
instructed by Caesar; an incontestible proof how much he valued them above any
of the rest of his army. Caesar, on the contrary, placed himself at the head of
his tenth legion, that had owed all its merit and fame to his own training. As
he observed the enemy's numerous cavalry to be all drawn to one spot, he
guessed at Pompey's intention; to obviate which he made a draught of six
cohorts from his rear line, and forming them into a separate body, concealed
them behind his right wing, with instructions not to throw their javelins on
the approach of Pompey's horse, as was customary, but to keep them in their
hands and push them directly in the faces and the eyes of the horsemen, who,
being composed of the younger part of the Roman nobility, valued themselves
much upon their beauty, and dreaded a scar in the face more than a wound in the
body. He lastly placed the little cavalry he had, so as to cover the right of
the tenth legion, ordering his third line not to march till they had received
the signal from himself.

As the armies approached, the two generals went from rank to rank, encouraging
their men, warming their hopes, and lessening their apprehensions. Pompey
represented to his men, that the glorious occasion which they had long besought
him to grant was now before them; "and indeed," cried he, "what advantages
could you wish over an enemy, that you are not now possessed of? Your numbers,
your vigor, a late victory, all assure a speedy and an easy conquest of those
harassed and broken troops, composed of men worn out with age, and impressed
with the terrors of a recent defeat: but there is still a stronger bulwark for
our protection than the superiority of our strength -- the justice of our
cause. You are engaged in the defense of liberty and of your country; you are
supported by its laws, and followed by its magistrates; you have the world
spectators of your conduct, and wishing you success; on the contrary, he whom
you oppose is a robber and oppressor of his country, and almost already sunk
with the consciousness of his crimes, as well as the bad success of his arms.
Show, then, on this occasion, all that ardor and detestation of tyranny that
should animate Romans, and do justice to mankind." Caesar, on his side, went
among his men with that steady serenity for which he was so much admired in the
midst of danger. He insisted on nothing so strongly to his soldiers as his
frequent and unsuccessful endeavors for peace. He talked with terror of the
blood he was going to shed, and pleaded only the necessity that urged him to
it. He deplored the many brave men that were to fall on both sides, and the
wounds of his country whoever should be victorious. His soldiers answered his
speech with looks of ardor and impatience; which observing, he gave the signal
to begin. The word on Pompey's side, was Hercules the invincible: that on
Caesar's, Venus the victorious. There was only so much space between both
armies as to give room for fighting; wherefore Pompey ordered his men to
receive the first shock without moving out of their places, expecting the
enemy's ranks to be put into disorder by their motion. Caesar's soldiers were
now rushing on with their usual impetuosity, when perceiving the enemy
motionless, they all stopped short as if by general consent, and halted in the
midst of their career. A terrible pause ensued, in which both armies continued
to gaze upon each other with mutual terror and dreadful serenity; at length,
Caesar's men, having taken breath, ran furiously upon the enemy, first
discharging their javelins, and then drawing their swords. The same method was
observed by Pompey's troops, who as vigorously opposed the attack. His cavalry
also were ordered to charge at the very onset, which, with the multitude of
archers and slingers, soon obliged Caesar's men to give ground; whereupon
Caesar immediately ordered the six cohorts that were placed as a reinforcement
to advance, with orders to strike at the enemy's faces. This had its desired
effect. The cavalry, that were but just now sure of victory, received an
immediate check: the unusual method of fighting pursued by the cohorts, their
aiming entirely at the visages of the assailants, and the horrible disfiguring
wounds they made, all contributed to intimidate them so much, that, instead of
defending their persons, their only endeavor was to save their faces. A total
rout ensued of their whole body, which fled in great disorder to the
neighboring mountains, while the archers and slingers, who were thus abandoned,
were cut to pieces. Caesar now commanded the cohorts to pursue their success,
and, advancing, charged Pompey's troops upon the flank. This charge the enemy
withstood for some time with great bravery, till he brought up his third line,
which had not yet engaged Pompey's infantry being thus doubly attacked in front
by fresh troops, and in rear by the victorious cohorts. could no longer resist,
but fled to their camp. The flight began among the strangers, though Pompey's
right wing still valiantly maintained their ground. Caesar, however, being
convinced that the victory was certain, with his usual clemency cried out, to
pursue the strangers, but to spare the Romans; upon which they all laid down
their arms and received quarters. The greatest slaughter was among the
auxiliaries, who fled on all quarters, but principally went for safety to the
camp. The battle ha^ ^ow lasted from the break of day till noon, although the
weather was extremely hot; the conquerors, however, did not remit their ardor,
being encouraged by the example of their general, who thought his victory not
complete till he became master of the enemy's camp. Accordingly, marching on
foot at their head, he called upon them to follow and strike the decisive blow.
The cohorts which were left to defend the camp, for some time made a formidable
resistance, particularly a great number of Thracians and other barbarians who
were appointed for its defense: but nothing could resist the ardor of Caesar's
victorious army; they were at last driven from their trenches, and all fled to
the mountains not far off. Caesar seeing the field and camp strewed with his
fallen countrymen, was strongly affected at so melancholy a prospect, and could
not help crying out to one that stood near him, "They would have it so." Upon
entering the enemy's camp, every object presented fresh instances of the blind
presumption and madness of his adversaries. On all sides were to be seen tents
adorned with ivy, and branches of myrtle, couches covered with purple, and
sideboards loaded with plate. Every thing gave proofs of the highest luxury,
and seemed rather the preparatives for a banquet, the rejoicings for a victory,
than the dispositions for a battle. A camp so richly furnished might have been
able to engage the attention of any troops but Caesar's; there was still
something to be done, and he would not permit them to pursue any other object
than their enemies, till they were entirely subdued. A considerable body of
them having retired to the adjacent mountains, he prevailed on his soldiers to
join him in the pursuit, in order to oblige these to surrender. He began by
enclosing them with a line drawn at the foot of the mountain; but they quickly
abandoned a post which was not tenable for want of water, and endeavored to
reach the city of Larissa. Caesar led a party of his army by a shorter way, and
intercepted their retreat, drawing up in order of battle between them and the
city. However, these unhappy fugitives once more found protection from a
mountain, at the foot of which a rivulet ran, which supplied them with water.
Now night approaching, Caesar's men were almost spent, and ready to faint with
their incessant toil since morning; yet still he prevailed upon them once more
to renew their labors, and to cut off the rivulet that supplied the defendents.
The fugitives, thus deprived of all hopes of succor or subsistence, sent
deputies to the conqueror, offering to surrender at discretion. During the
interval of negotiation, a few senators that were among them took the advantage
of the night to escape, and the rest next morning gave up their arms, and
experienced the conqueror's clemency. In fact, he addressed them with great
gentleness, and forbade his soldiers to offer them any violence, or take any
thing from them. Thus Caesar, by his conduct, gained the most complete victory
that had ever been obtained; and, by his great clemency after the battle,
seemed to have deserved it. His loss amounted to but two hundred men; that of
Pompey to fifteen thousand, as well Romans as auxiliaries: twenty-four thousand
men surrendered themselves prisoners of war, the greatest part of whom entered
into Caesar's a ^^y, and were incorporated with the rest of his forces. As to
the senators and Roman knights who fell into his hands, he generously gave
liberty to retire wherever they thought proper; and as for the letters which
Pompey had received from several persons who wished to be thought neutral, he
burnt them all without reading them as Pompey had done upon a former occasion.
Thus, having performed all the duties of a general and a statesman, he sent for
the legions which had passed the night in the camp, to relieve those which had
accompanied him in the pursuit, and arrived the same day ^ Larissa.

As for Pompey, who had formerly shown such instances of courage and conduct,
when he saw his cavalry routed, on which he had placed his sole dependence, he
absolutely lost his reason. Instead of thinking how to remedy this disorder, by
rallying such troops as fled, or by opposing fresh troops to stop the progress
of the conquerors, being totally amazed by this unexpected blow, he returned to
the camp, and, in his tent, waited the issue of an event, which it was his duty
to direct, not to follow. There he remained for some moments without speaking;
till, being told that the camp was attacked, "What," says he, "are we pursued
to our very entrenchments?" and immediately quitting his armor for a habit more
suitable to his circumstances, he fled on horseback to Larissa; from whence,
perceiving he was not pursued, he slackened his pace, giving way to all the
agonizing reflections which his deplorable situation must naturally suggest. In
this melancholy manner he passed along the vale of Tempe, and, pursuing the
course of the river Peneus, at last arrived at a fisherman's hut, in which he
passed the night. From thence he went on board a little bark, and, keeping
along the seashore, he descried a ship of some burden, which seemed preparing
to sail, in which he embarked, the master of the vessel still paying him the
homage which was due to his former station. From the mouth of the river Peneus
he sailed to Amphipolis; where, finding his affairs desperate, he ^^^ered to
Lesbos to take in his wife Cornelia, whom he ha^ left there at a distance from
the dangers and hurry of the war. She, who had long flattered herself with the
hopes of victory, felt the reverse of her fortune in an agony of distress. She
was desired by the messenger (whose tears more than words proclaimed the
greatness of her misfortunes) to hasten if she expected to see Pompey, with but
one ship, and even that not his own. Her grief, which before was violent,
became then insupportable; she fainted away, and lay a considerable time
without any signs of life. At length recovering herself, and reflecting it was
now no time for vain lamentations, she ran quite through the city to the
seaside. Pompey embraced her without speaking a word, and for some time
supported her in his arms in silent despair.

Having taken in Cornelia, he now continued his course, steering to the
south-east, and stopping no longer than was necessary to take in provisions at
the ports that occurred in his passage. He was at last prevailed upon to apply
to Ptolemy king of Egypt, to whose father Pompey had been a considerable
benefactor. Ptolemy, who was as yet a minor, had not the government in his own
hands, but he and his kingdom were under the direction of Photinus an eunuch,
and Theodotus a master of the art of speaking. These advised that Pompey should
be invited on shore, and there slain; and, accordingly, Achillas, the commander
of the forces, and Septimius, by birth a Roman, and who had formerly been a
centurion in Pompey's army, were appointed to carry their opinion into
execution. Being attended by three or four more, they went into a little bark,
and rowed off from land toward Pompey's ship that lay about a mile from the
shore. Pompey, after taking leave of Cornelia, who wept at his departure, and
having repeated two verses of Sophocles, signifying, that he who trusts his
freedom to a tyrant from that moment becomes a slave, gave his hand to
Achillas, and stepped into the bark, with only two attendants of his own. They
had now rowed from the ship a good way, and, as during that time they all kept
a profound silence, Pompey, willing to begin the discourse, accosted Septimius,
whose face he recollected. "Methinks, friend," cried he, "you and I were once
fellow soldiers together." Septimius gave only a nod with his head, without
uttering a word, or instancing the least civility. Pompey, therefore, took out
a paper, on which he had minuted a speech he intended to make to the king, and
began reading it. In this manner they approached the shore; and Cornelia, whose
concern had never suffered her to lose sight of her husband, began to conceive
hope, when she perceived the people on the strand crowding down along the
coasts, as if willing to receive him: but her hopes were soon destroyed; for
that instant, as Pompey rose, supporting himself upon his freed-man's arm,
Septimius stabbed him in the back, and was instantly seconded by Achillas.
Pompey, perceiving his death inevitable, only disposed himself to meet it with
decency; and, covering his face with his robe, without speaking a word, with a
sigh resigned himself to his fate. At this horrid sight, Cornelia shrieked so
loud as to be heard to the shore; but the danger she herself was in did not
allow the mariners time to look on: they immediately set sail, and, the wind
proving favorable, fortunately they escaped the pursuit of the Egyptian
galleys. In the mean time, Pompey's murderers having cut off his head, caused
it to be embalmed, the better to preserve its features, designing it for a
present to Caesar. The body was thrown naked on the strand, and exposed to the
view of all those whose curiosity led them that way. However, his faithful
freed-man Philip still kept near it; and when the crowd was dispersed, he
washed it in the sea: and looking round for materials to burn it with, he
preceived the wreck of a fishing-boat; of which he composed a pile. While he
was thus piously employed, he was accosted by an old Roman soldier who had
served under Pompey in his youth. "Who art thou," said he, "that art making
these humble preparations for Pompey's funeral?" Philip having answered that he
was one of his freed-men, "Alas," replied the soldier, "permit me to share in
this honor also: among all the miseries of my exile, it will be my last sad
comfort, that I have been able to assist at the funeral of my old commander,
and touch the body of the bravest general that ever Rome produced." After this
they both joined in giving the corpse the last rites; and, collecting his ashes,
buried them under a little rising earth, scraped together with their hands;
over which was a^^^rwards placed the following inscription: "He whose merits
deserve a temple, can now scarce find a tomb."

VII. AWKWARDNESS IN COMPANY.
WHEN an awkward fellow first comes into a room, he attemps to bow; and his
sword, if he wears one, gets between his legs, and nearly throws him down.
Confused and ashamed, he stumbles to the upper end of the room, and seats
himself in the very place where he should not. He there begins playing with his
hat, which he presently drops: and, recovering his hat, he lets fall his cane;
and, in picking up his cane, down goes his hat again. Thus, it is a considerable
time before he is adjusted.

When his tea or coffee is handed to him, he spreads his handkerchief upon his
knees, scalds his mouth, drops either the cup or saucer, and spills the tea or
coffee in his lap. At dinner, he seats himself upon the edge of the chair, at
so great a distance from the table, that he frequently drops his meat between
his plate and his mouth; he holds his knife, fork, and spoon, differently from
other people; eats with his knife, to the manifest danger of his mouth; and
picks his teeth with his fork.

If he is to carve, he cannot hit the joint; but, in laboring to cut through
the bone, splashes the sauce over every body's clothes. He generally daubs
himself all over; his elbows are in the next person's plate; and he is up to
the knuckles in soup and grease. If he drinks, it is with his mouth full,
interrupting the whole company with -- "To your good health, Sir," and "my
service to you:" perhaps coughs in his glass, and besprinkles the whole table.

He addresses the company by improper titles, as, SIR for MY LORD; mistakes one
name for another; and tells you of Mr What-d'ye-call-him, or You-know who, Mrs
Thingum, What's-her-name, or How-d'ye-call-her. He begins a story; but, not
being able to finish it, breaks off in the middle, with -- "I Have forgot the
rest."

VIII. VIRTUE MAN'S HIGHEST INTEREST.
I FIND myself existing upon a little spot, surrounded every way by an immense
unknown expansion. -- Where am I? What sort of a place do I inhabit? Is it
exactly accommodated in every instance to my convenience? Is there no excess of
cold, none of heat, to offend me? Am I never annoyed by animals, either of my
own kind or a different? Is every thing subservient to me, as though I had
ordered all myself? -- No -- nothing like it -- the farthest from it possible.
The world appears not then, originally made for the private convenience of me
alone? -- It does not. But is it not possible so to accommodate it, by my own
particular industry? If to accommodate man and beast, heaven and earth, if this
be beyond me, it is not possible. What consequence then follows? or can there
be any other than this -- If I seek an interest of my own detached from that of
others, I seek an interest which is chimerical, and can never have existence.

How then must I determine? Have I no interest at all? If I have not, I am a
fool for staying here: it is a smoky house, and the sooner out of it the better.
But why no interest? Can I be contented with none but one separate and
detached? Is a social interest, joined with others, such an absurdity as not to
be admitted? The be, the beaver, and the tribes of herding animals, are enough
to convince me that the thing is somewhere at least possible. How, then, am I
assured that it is not equally true of man? Admit it; and what follows? If so,
then honor and justice are my interest; then the whole train of moral virtues
are my interest; without some portion of which, not even thieves can maintain
society.

But, farther still -- I stop not here -- I pursue this social interest as far
as I can trace my several relations. I pass from my own stock, my own
neighborhood, my own nation, to the whole race of mankind, as di^persed
throughout the earth. Am I not related to them all, by the mutual aids of
commerce, by the general intercourse of arts and letters, by that common nature
of which we all participate?

Again -- I must have food and clothing. Without a proper genial warmth, I
instantly perish. Am I not related, in this view, to the very earth itself? to
the distant sun, from whose beams I derive vigor? to that stupendous course and
order of the infinite host of heaven, by which the times and seasons ever
uniformly pass on? Were this order once confounded, I could not probably
survive a moment; so absolutely do I depend on this common general welfare.
What* then, have I to do, but to enlarge virtue into piety! Not only honor and
justice, and what I owe to man, is my interest; but gratitude also,
acquiescence, resignation, adoration, and all I owe to this great polity, and
its greater Governor our common Parent.

IX. ON the PLEASURE ARISING from OBJECTS of SIGHT.
THOSE pleasures of the imagination which arise from the actual view and survey
of outward objects, all proceed from the sight of what is great, uncommon or
beautiful.

By greatness, I do not only mean the bulk of any single object, but the
largeness of a whole view considered as one entire piece. Such are the
prospects of an open champaign country, a vast uncultivated desert, of huge
heaps of mountains, high rocks and precipices, or a wide expanse of waters,
where we are not struck with the novelty, or beauty of the sight, but with that
rude kind of magnificence which appears in many of these stupenduous works of
nature. Our imagination loves to be filled with an object, or to grasp at any
thing that is too big for its capacity. We are flung into a pleasing
astonishment at such unbounded views, and feel a delightful stillness and
amazement in the soul at the apprehensions of them. The mind of man naturally
hates every thing that looks like a restraint upon it, and is apt to fancy
itself under a sort of confinement, when the sight is pent up in a narrow
compass, and shortened on every side by the neighborhood of walls or
mountains. On the contrary, a spacious horizon is an image of liberty, where
the eye has room to range abroad, to expatiate at large on the immensity of its
views, and to lose itself amidst the variety of objects that offer themselves
to its observation. Such wide and undetermined prospects are as pleasing to the
fancy as the speculations of eternity or infinitude are to the understanding.
But if there be a beauty or uncommonness joined with this grandeur, as in a
troubled ocean, a heaven adorned with stars and meteors, or a spacious
landscape cut out into rivers, woods, rocks, and meadows, the pleasure still
grows upon us, as it rises from more than a single principle.

Every thing that is new or uncommon raises a pleasure in the imagination,
because it fills the soul with an agreeable surprise, gratifies its curiosity,
and gives it an idea of which it was not before possessed. We are indeed so
often conversant with one set of objects, and tired out with so many repeated
shows of the same things, that whatever is new and uncommon, contributes a
little to vary human life, and to divert our minds for a while with the
strangeness of its appearance; it serves us for a kind of refreshment, and
takes off from that satiety we are apt to complain of in our usual and ordinary
entertainments. It is this that bestows charms on a monster, and makes even the
imperfections of nature please us. It is this that recommends variety, where
the mind is every instant called off to something new, and the attention not
suffered to dwell too long, and waste itself on any particular object: it is
this likewise, that improves what is great or beautiful, and makes it afford
the mind a double entertainment. Groves, fields, and meadows, are at any season
of the year pleasant to look upon; but never so much as in the opening of the
spring, when they are all new and fresh, with their first gloss upon them, and
not yet too much accustomed and familiar to the eye. For this reason there is
nothing that more enlivens a prospect than rivers, jetteaus, or falls of water
where the scene is perpetually shifting, and entertaining the sight every
moment with something that is new. We are quickly tired with looking upon hills
and valleys, where every thing continues fixed and sett^ed in the same place and
posture, but find our thoughts a little agitated and relieved at the sight of
such objects as are ever in motion, and sliding away from beneath the eye of
the beholder.

But there is nothing that makes its way more directly to the soul than beauty,
which immediately diffuses a secret satisfaction and complacency through the
imagination, and gives a finishing to any thing that is great or uncommon. The
very first discovery of it strikes the mind with an inward joy, and spreads a
cheerfulness and delight through all its faculties. There is not perhaps any
real beauty or deformity more in one piece of matter than another; because we
might have been so made, that whatsoever now appears loathsome to us might have
shown itself agreeable; but we find by experience, that there are several
modifications of matter, which the mind without any previous consideration,
pronounces at the first sight beautiful or deformed. Thus we see that every
different species of sensible creatures has its different notions of beauty,
and that each of them is most affected with the beauties of its own kind. This
is no where more remarkable than in birds of the same shape and proportion,
where we often see the male determined in his courtship by the single grain or
tincture of a feather, and never discovering any charms but in the color of its
species.

There is a second kind of beauty that we find in the several products of art
and nature, which does not work in the imagination with that w^ (...) and
violence as the beauty that appears in our proper species, but is apt however,
to raise in us a secret delight, and a kind of fondness for the places or
objects in which we discover it. This consists either in the gaiety or variety
of colors, in the symmetry and proportion of parts, in the arrangement and
disposition of bodies, or in a just mixture and concurrence of all together.
Among these several kinds of beauty the eye takes most delight in colors. We no
where meet with a more glorious or pleasing show in nature, than what appears
in the heavens at the rising and setting of the sun, which is wholly made up of
those different stains of light that show themselves in clouds of a different
situation. For this reason we find the poets, who are always addressing
themselves to the imagination, borrowing more of their epithets from colors
than from any other topic.

As the fancy delights in every thing that is great, strange or beautiful, and
is still more pleased the more it finds of these perfections in the same
object; so it is capable of receiving a new satisfaction by the assistance of
another sense. Thus any continued sound, as the music of birds, or the fall of
water, awakens every moment the mind of the beholder, and makes him more
attentive to the several beauties of the place that lie before him. Thus if
there arises a fragrancy of smells or perfumes, they heighten the pleasures of
the imagination, and make even the colors and verdure of the landscape appear
more agreeable: for the ideas of both senses recommend each other, and are
pleasanter together than when they enter the mind separately; as the different
colors of a picture, when they are well disposed, set off one another, and
receive an additional beauty from the advantage of their situation.

X. LIBERTY AND SLAVERY.
DISGUISE theyself as thou will, still Slavery! still thou art a bitter
draught; and though thousands in all ages have been made to drink of thee, thou
art no less bitter on that account. It is thou, Liberty! thrice sweet and
gracious goddess! whom all, in public or in private, worship; whose taste is
grateful, and ever will be so till nature herself shall change. No tint of
words can spot thy snowy mantle, or chymic power turn thy scepter into iron.
With thee to smile upon him as he eats his crust, the swain is happier than his
monarch, from whose court thou art exiled. Gracious Heaven! grant me but
health, thou great bestower of it! and give me but this fair goddess as my
companion; and shower down thy mitres, if it seem good unto thy divine
Providence, upon those heads which are aching for them.

Pursuing these ideas, I sat down close by my table; and leaning my head upon
my hand, I began to figure to myself the miseries of confinement. I was in a
right frame for it, and so I gave full scope to my imagination.

I was going to begin with the millions of my fellow creatures, born to no
inheritance but slavery; but finding, however affecting the picture was, that I
could not bring it near me, and that the multitude of sad groups in it did but
distract me, I took a single captive; and, having first shut him up in his
dungeon, I then looked through the twilight of his grated door, to take his
picture.

I beheld his body half wasted away with long expectation and confinement; and
felt what kind of sickness of the heart it is which arises from hope deferred.
Upon looking nearer, I saw him pale and feverish. In thirty years, the western
breeze had not once sanned his blood -- he had seen no sun, no moon, in all
that time -- nor had the voice of friend or kinsman breathed through his
lattice. His children -- But here my heart began to bleed -- and I was forced
to go on with another part of the portrait.

He was sitting upon the ground, upon a little straw in the farthest corner of
his dungeon, which was alternately his chair and bed. A little calender of
small sticks was laid at the head, notched all over with the dismal days and
nights he had passed there. He had one of these little sticks in his hand; and,
with a rusty nail, he was etching another day of misery, to add to the heap. As
I darkened the little light he had, he lifted up a hopeless eye toward the
door -- then cast it down -- shook his head -- and went on with his work of
affliction. I heard his chains upon his legs, as he turned his body to lay his
little stick upon the bundle. He gave a deep sigh -- I saw the iron enter his
soul. -- I burst into tears -- I could not sustain the picture of confinement
which my fancy had drawn.

XII. THE CANT OF CRITICISM.
-- AND how did Garrick speak the soliloquy last night? -- Oh, against all
rule, my Lord; most ungrammatically! Betwixt the substantive and adjective
(which should agree together in number, case, and gender) he made a breach thus
-- stoping as if the point wanted settling. And after the nominative case
(which your Lordship knows should govern the verb) he suspended his voice in
the epilogue, a dozen times, three seconds and three fifths, by a stop-watch,
my Lord, each time -- Admirable grammarian! -- But, in suspending his voice,
was the sense suspended likewise? Did no expression of attitude or countenance
fill up the chasm? Was the eye silent? Did you narrowly look? -- I looked only
at the stop-watch, my Lord. -- Excellent observer!

And what of this new book the whole world makes such a rout about? -- Oh! it is
out of all plumb, my Lord, -- quite an irregular thing! not one of the angles
at the four corners was a right angle. -- I had my rule and compasses, my Lord,
in my pocket. -- Excellent critic!

And, for the epic poem your Lordship bid me look at, -- upon taking the
length, breadth, height, and depth of it, and trying them at home upon an
exact scale of Bossu's -- it is out, my Lord, in every one of its dimensions. --
Admirable connoisseur!

And did you step in to take a look at the grand picture in your way back? --
It Is a melancholy daub, my Lord: not one principle of the pyramid in any one
group! -- And what a price! -- for there is nothing of the coloring of Titian
-- the expression of Rubens -- the grace of Raphael -- the purity of
Dominichino -- the corregiescity of Corregio -- the learning of Poussin -- the
airs of Guido -- the taste of the Carrrchis -- or the grand contour of Angelo!

Grant me patience! -- Of all the cants which are canted in this canting world
-- though the cant of hypocrites may be the worst -- the cant of criticism is
the most tormenting! -- I would go fifty miles on foot, to kiss the hand of
that man whose generous heart will give up the reins of his imagination into
his author's hands, be pleased, he knows not why, and cares not wherefore.

XIII. STORY OF LE FEVER.
IT was some time in the summer of that year in which Denderm^nd was taken by
the Allies; when my uncle Toby was one evening getting his supper, with Trim
sitting behind him at a small sideboard, -- I say sitting -- for in
consideration of the Corporal's lame knee (which sometimes gave him exquisite
pain) -- when my uncle Toby dined or supped alone he would never suffer the
Corporal to stand; and the poor fellow's veneration for his master was such,
that, with a proper artillery, my uncle Toby could have taken Dendermond
itself, with less trouble than he was able to gain this point over him; for
many a time when my uncle Toby supposed the Corporal's leg was at rest, he
would look back, and detect him standing behind him with the most dutiful
respect: this bred more little squabbles betwixt them, than all other causes
for five-and-twenty years together.

He was one evening sitting thus at his supper, when the landlord of a little
inn in the village came into the parlor with an empty phial in his hand, to beg
a glass or two of sack: It Is for a poor gentleman, -- I think of the army, said
the landlord, who has been taken ill at my house four days ago, and has never
held up his head since, or had a desire to taste any thing, till just now, that
he has a fancy for a glass of sack and a thin toast, -- "I think," says he,
taking his hand from his forehead, "it would comfort me." --

-- If I could neither beg, borrow, nor buy such a thing, -- added the
landlord, -- I would almost steal it for the poor gentleman, he is so ill. -- I
hope he will still mend, continued he; -- we are all of us concerned for him.

Thou art a good-natured soul, I will answer for thee, cried my uncle Toby; and
thou shall drink the poor gentleman's health in a glass of sack thyself, -- and
take a couple of bottles with my service, and tell him he is heartily welcome
to them, and to a dozen more, if they will do him good.

Though I am persuaded, said my uncle Toby, as the landlord shut the door, he
is a very compassionate fellow -- Trim, -- yet I cannot help entertaining a
high opinion of his guest too; there must be something more than common in him,
that in so short a time should win so much upon the affections of his host --
And of his whole family, added the Corporal, for they are all concerned for
him. -- Step after him, said my uncle Toby, -- do Trim, and ask if he knows his
name.

-- I have quite forgot it, truly, said the landlord, coming back into the
parlor with the Corporal, -- but I can ask his son again. -- Has he a son with
him then? said my uncle Toby. -- A boy, replied the landlord, of about eleven
or twelve years of age; -- but the poor creature has tasted almost as little as
his father; he does nothing but mourn and lament for him night and day: -- He
has not stirred from the bedside these two days.

My uncle Toby laid down his knife and fork, and thrust his plate from before
him, as the landlord gave him the account; and Trim, without being ordered,
took them away, without saying one word, and in a few minutes after brought him
his pipe and tobacco.

Trim! said my uncle Toby, I have a project in my head, as it is a bad night,
of wrapping myself up warm in my roquelaure, and paying a visit to this poor
gentleman. -- Your honor's roquelaure, replied the Corporal, has not once been
had on since the night before your honor received your wound, when we mounted
guard in the trenches before the gate of St. Nicholas; -- and besides, it is so
cold and rainy a night, that what with the roquelaure, and what with the
weather, it will be enough to give your honor your death. I fear so, replied my
uncle Toby: but I am not at rest in my mind, Trim, since the account the
landlord has given me -- I wish I had not known so much of this affair, --
added my uncle Toby, -- or that I had known more of it: -- How shall we manage
it? Leave it, an't please your honor, to me, quoth the Corporal; -- I Will take
my hat and stick, and go to the house and reconnoitre, and act accordingly; and
I will bring your honor a full account in an hour. -- Thou shall go, Trim, said
my uncle Toby, and here is a shilling for thee to drink with his servant. -- I
shall get all out of him, said the Corporal shutting the door.

It was not till uncle Toby had knocked the ashes out of his third pipe that
Corporal Trim returned from the inn, and gave the following account.

I despaired at first, said the Corporal, of being able to bring back your
honor any kind of intelligence concerning the poor sick Lieutenant -- Is he in
the army, then? said my uncle Toby -- He is, said the corporal -- and in what
regiment said my uncle Toby -- I Will tell your honor, replied the Corporal,
every thing straight forward, as I learnt it. -- Then, Trim, I Will fill another
pipe, said my uncle Toby, and not interrupt thee; so sit down at thy ease,
Trim, in the window seat, and begin thy story again. The Corporal made his old
bow, which generally spoke as plain as a bow could speak it, "Your honor is
good:" -- And having done that, he sat down, as he was ordered, -- and began
the story to my uncle Toby over again in pretty near the same words.

I despaired at first, said the Corporal, of being able to bring back any
intelligence to your honor about the Lieutenant and his son; for when I asked
where his servant was from whom I made myself sure of knowing every thing which
was proper to be asked, -- That Is a right distinction, Trim, said my uncle Toby
-- I was answered, an't please your honor, that he had no servant with him: --
that he had come to the inn with hired horses; which, upon finding himself
unable to proceed (to join, I suppose, the regiment), he had dismissed the
morning after he came. -- If I get better, my dear, said he, as he gave his
purse to his son to pay the man, -- we can hire horses from hence. -- But,
alas! the poor gentleman will never get from hence, said the landlady to me, --
for I heard the death watch all night long; -- and when he dies the youth, his
son, will certainly die with him; for he is brokenhearted already.

I was hearing this account continued the Corporal, when the youth came into
the kitchen, to order the thin toast the landlord spoke of; -- but I will do it
for my father myself said the youth. -- Pray let me save you the trouble, young
gentleman, said I, taking up a fork for the purpose, and offering him my chair
to sit down upon by the fire, whilst I did it. -- I believe, Sir, said he, very
modestly, I can please him best myself. -- I am sure, said I, his honor will
not like the toast the worse for being toasted by an old soldier. -- The youth
took hold of my hand, and instantly burst into tears. Poor youth! said my uncle
Toby, -- he has been bred up from an infant in the army, and the name of a
soldier, Trim, sounded in his ears like the name of a friend; I wish I had him
here.

-- I never in the longest march, said the Corporal, had so great a mind to my
dinner, as I had to cry with him for company: -- What could be the matter with
me an please your honor? Nothing in the world, Trim, said my uncle Toby,
blowing his nose, -- but that thou art a good-natured fellow.

When I gave him the toast, continued the Corporal, I thought it was proper to
tell him I was Captain Shandy's servant, and that your honor (though a
stranger) was extremely concerned for his father; and that if there was any
thing in your house or cellar -- (and thou might have added my purse too,
said my uncle Toby), -- he was heartily welcome to it: -- He made a very low
bow (which was meant to your honor), but no answer -- for his heart was full --
so he went up stairs with the toast; -- I warrant you, my dear, said I, as I
opened, the kitchen-door, your father will be well again -- Mr. Yorick's curate
was smoking a pipe by the kitchen-fire, -- but said not a word good or bad to
comfort the youth. -- I thought it wrong; added the corporal -- I think so too,
said my uncle Toby.

When the Lieutenant had taken his glass of sack and toast, he felt himself a
little revived, and sent down into the kitchen to let me know, that in about
ten minutes he should be glad if I would step up stairs. -- I believe, said the
Landlord, he is going to say his prayers, -- for there was a book laid upon the
chair by his bedside, and as I shut the door, I saw his son take up a cushion.
--

I thought, said the curate, that you gentlemen of the army, Mr. Trim, never
said your prayers at all. -- I heard the poor gentleman say his prayers last
night, said the landlady, very devoutly, and with my own ears, or I could not
have believed it. -- Are you sure of it, replied the curate. -- A soldier, an'
please your reverence, said I, prays as often (of his own accord) as a parson;
-- and when he is fighting for his king, and for his own life, and for his
honor too, he has the most reason to pray to God of any one in the whole world.
-- 'Twas well said of thee, Trim said my uncle Toby. -- But when a soldier,
said I, an' please your reverence, has been standing for twelve hours together,
in the trenches, up to his knees in cold water, -- or engaged, said I, for
months together in long and dangerous marches; harassed, perhaps, in his rear
today; harassing others tomorrow; -- detached here; -- countermanded there;
-- resting this night out upon his arms? -- beat up in his shirt the next: --
benumbed in his joints; -- perhaps without straw in his tent to kneel on; -- he
must say his prayers how and when he can -- I believe, said I, -- for I was
piqued, quoth the corporal, for the reputation of the army -- I believe, an'
please your reverence, said I, that when a soldier gets time to pray, -- he
prays as heartily as a parson, -- though not with all his fuss and hypocrisy.
-- Thou should not have said that, Trim, said my uncle Toby, -- for God only
knows who is a hypocrite, and who is not: -- At the great and general review of
us all, Corporal, at the day of judgment, (and not till then) -- it will be
seen who have done their duties in this world, -- and who have not; and we
shall be advanced, Trim, accordingly. -- I hope we shall, said Trim. -- It is
in the Scripture, said my uncle Toby; and I will show it thee tomorrow: -- In
the mean time we may depend upon it, Trim, for our comfort, said my uncle Toby,
that God Almighty is so good and just a governor of the world, that if we have
but done our duties in it, -- it will never be inquired into, whether we have
done them in a red coat or a black one: -- I hope not; said the Corporal. --
But go on, Trim, said my uncle Toby; with the story.

When I went up, continued the Corporal, into the Lieutenant's room, which I
did not do till the expiration of the ten minutes, -- he was lying in his bed,
with his head raised upon his hand, with his elbow upon the pillow, and a clean
white cambric hankerchief beside it: -- The youth was just stooping down to
take up the cushion, upon which I supposed he had been kneeling, -- the book
was laid upon the bed, -- and as he rose, in taking up the cushion with one
hand, he reached out his other to take the book away at the same time. Let it
remain there, my dear, said the Lieutenant.

He did not offer to speak to me, till I had walked up close to his bedside:
If you are Captain Shandy's servant said he, you must present my thanks to your
master, with my little boy's thanks along with them, for his courtesy to me; --
if he was of Levan's -- said he Lieutenant. -- I told him your honor was --
Then, said he, I served three campaigns with him in Flanders, and remember him,
-- but it is most likely, as I had not the honor of any acquaintance with him,
that he knows nothing of me. -- You will tell him, however, that the person his
good nature has laid under obligations to him, is one Le Fever, a Lieutenant in
Ang^s's -- but he knows me not, -- said he a second time, ^^sing; -- possibly
he may my story -- added he -- pray tell the Captain, I was the Ensign at
Breda, who^e w^^e was most unfortunately killed with a musket-s^ot, as she lay
in my arms in my tent. -- I remember the story, a^'t please your honor, said I,
very well. -- Do you s^? said he, wiping his eyes with his handkerchief, --
then well may I. -- In saying this, he drew a little ring out of his bosom,
which seemed tied with a black ribband about his neck, and kissed it twice --
Here, Billy, said he, -- the boy flew across the room to the bedside, -- and
falling down upon his knee, took the ring in his hand, and kissed it too, --
then kissed his father, and sat down upon the bed and wept.

I wish, said my uncle Toby, with ^ deep sigh, -- I wish, Trim, I was asleep.

Your honor, replied the Corporal, is too much concerned; -- shall I pour your
honor out a glass of sack to your pipe? -- Do, Trim, said my uncle Toby.

I remember, said my uncle Toby, sighing again, the story of the Ensign and his
wife, -- and particularly well that he, as well as she, upon some account or
other, (I forget what), was universally pitied by the whole regiment; -- but
finish the story: -- It Is finished already, said the Corporal, -- for I could
stay no longer, -- so wished his honor a good night; young Le Fever rose from
off the bed, and saw me to the bottom of the stairs; and as we went down
together, told me, they had come from Ireland, and were on their route to join
the regiment in Flanders. -- But alas! said the Corporal, -- the Lieutenant's
last day's march is over. -- Then what is to become of his poor boy? cried my
uncle Toby.

Thou have left this matter short, said my uncle Toby to the Corporal, as he
was putting him to bed, -- and I will tell thee in what, Trim -- In the first
place, when thou made an offer of my services to Le Fever, -- as sickness and
traveling are both expensive, and thou knew he was but a poor Lieutenant,
with a son to ^bsist as well as himself out of his pay, -- that thou did not
make an offer to him of my purse; because, had he stood in need, thou know,
Trim, he had been as welcome to it as myself. -- Your honor knows, said the
Corporal, I had no orders; -- True, quoth my uncle Toby, -- thou did very
right, Trim, as a soldier, -- but certainly very wrong as a man.

In the second place, for which, indeed, thou have the same excuse, continued
my uncle Toby, -- when thou offer^^st him whatever was in my ho^^e, -- thou
should have offered him my house too: -- a sick brother officer should have
the best quarters, Trim; and if we had him with us, -- we could tend and look
to him: -- Thou art an excellent nurse thyself, Trim; and what with thy care of
him, and the old woman's, and his boy's, and mine together, we might recruit
him again at once, and set him upon his legs. --

-- In a fortnight or three weeks, added my uncle Toby, smiling, -- he might
march. -- He will never march, an't please your honor, in this world, said the
Corporal: -- He will march; said my uncle Toby, rising up from the side of the
bed, with one shoe off: -- An't please your honor, said the Corporal, he will
never march, but to his grave. -- He shall march, cried my uncle Toby, marching
the foot which had a shoe on, though without advancing an inch, -- he shall
march to his regiment. -- He cannot stand it, said the Corporal; -- He shall be
supported, said my uncle Toby; -- He Will drop at last; said the Corporal, and
what will bec^me of his boy? -- He shall not drop, said my uncle Toby, firmly.
-- A-well-o'day, -- do what we can for him, said Trim, maintaining his point,
-- the poor soul will die: -- He shall not die, by H -- n, cried my uncle Toby.

-- The ACCUSING SPIRIT, which flew up to Heaven's chancery with the oath,
blushed as he gave it in: -- and the RECORDING ANGEL, as he wrote it down,
dropped a tear upon the word, and blotted it out for ever.

-- My uncle Toby went to his bureau, -- put his purse into his pocket, and
having ordered the Corporal to go early in the morning for a physician, -- he
went to bed and fell asleep.

The sun looked bright the morning after to every eye in the village but Le
Fever's and his afflicted son's; the hand of death pressed heavy upon his
eyelids, -- and hardly could the wheel at the cistern turn round its circle,
-- when my uncle Toby, who had got up an hour before his wonted time, entered
the Lieutenant's room, and without preface or apology, sat himself down upon
the chair by the bedside, and independently of all modes and customs, opened
the curtain in the manner an old friend and brother officer would have done it,
and asked him how he did, -- how he had rested in the night. -- what was his
complaint, -- where was his pain, -- and what he could do to help him? -- and
without giving him time to answer any one of the inquiries, went on and told
him of the little plan which he had been concerting with the Corporal the night
before for him --

-- You shall go home directly, Le Fever, said my uncle Toby, to my house, --
and we'll send for a doctor to see what is the matter, -- and we'll have an
apothecary, -- and the Corporal shall be your nurse, -- and I Will be your
servant, Le Fever.

There was a frankness in my uncle Toby, -- not the effect of familiarity, --
but the cause of it, -- which let you at once into his soul, -- and showed you
the goodness of his nature; to this, there was something in his looks, and
voice, and manner, superadded, which eternally beckoned to the unfortunate to
come and take shelter under him; so that before my uncle Toby had half finished
the kind offers he was making to the father, had the son insensible pressed up
close to his knees, and had taken hold of the breast of his coat, and was
pulling it toward him. -- The blood and spirits of Le Fever, which were waxing
cold and slow within him, and were retreating to their last citadel, the heart,
-- rallied back, -- the film forsook his eyes for a moment, -- he looked up
wishfully in my uncle Toby's face, -- then cast a look upon his boy. --

Nature instantly ebbed again, -- ^he film returned to its place, -- ^he pulse
flattered -- stopped -- went on -- throbb'd -- stopped again -- moved --
stopped -- shall I go on? -- No.

All that is necessary to be added is as follow --

That my uncle Toby, with young Le Fever in his hand, attended the poor
Lieutenant, as chief mourners, to his grave.

When my uncle Toby had turned every thing into money, and settled all accounts
betwixt the agent of the regiment and Le Fever, and betwixt Le Fever and all
mankind, -- there remained nothing more in my uncle Toby's hands than an old
regimental coat and a sword; so that my uncle Toby found little or no
opposition from the world in taking administration. The coat my uncle Toby gave
the Corporal; -- Wear it, Trim, said my uncle Toby, as long as it will hold
together, for the sake of the poor Lieutenant -- And this, said my uncle Toby,
taking up the sword in his hand, and drawing it out of the scabbard as he spoke
-- and this, Le Fever, I Will save for thee -- it is all the fortune, continued my
uncle Toby, hanging it up upon a crook, and pointing to it, -- it is all the
fortune, my dear Le Fever, which God has left thee; but if he has given thee a
heart to fight thy way with it in the world, -- and thou do it like a man of
honor, -- it is enough for us.

As soon as my uncle Toby had laid a foundation, he sent him to a public
school, where, excepting Whitsuntide and Christmas, at which times the Corporal
was punctually dispatched for him, -- he remained to the spring of the year
seventeen; when the stories of the Emperor's sending his army into Hungary
against the Turks, kindling a spark of fire in his bosom, he left his Greek and
Latin without leave, and throwing himself upon his knees before my uncle Toby,
begged his father's sword, and my uncle Toby's leave along with it, to go and
try his fortune under Eugene. -- Twice did my uncle Toby forget his wound, and
cry out, Le Fever? I will go with thee, and thou shall fight beside me -- And
twice he laid his hand upon his groin, and hung down his head in sorrow and
disconsolation. --

My uncle Toby took down the sword from the crook where it had hung untouched
ever since the Lieutenant's death, and delivered it to the Corporal to brighten
up; -- and having detained Le Fever a single fortnight to equip him, and
contract for his passage to Leghorn, -- he put the sword into his hand, -- If
thou art brave, Le Fever, said my uncle Toby, this will not fail thee; -- but
Fortune, said he (musing a little) -- Fortune may -- And if she does, -- added
my uncle Toby embracing him, come back again to me, Le Fever, and we will shape
thee another course.

The greatest injury could not have oppressed the heart of Le Fever more than
my uncle Toby's paternal kindness; -- he parted from my uncle Toby, as the best
of so^s from the best of farners -- both dropped tears -- and as my uncle Toby
gave him his last kiss, he slipped sixty guineas, tied up in an old purse of
his father's, in which was his mother's ring, into his hand, -- and bid God
bless him.

SECTION VI.
I. THE SHEPHERD AND THE PHILOSOPHER^.
REMOTE from cities lived a swain,
Unvex'd with all the cares of gain.
His head was silvered over with age,
And long experience made him sage:
In summer's heat, and winter's cold,
He fed his flock, and penned the fold:
His hours in cheerful labor flew,
Nor envy nor ambition knew:
His wisdom, and his honest fame,
Through all the country raised his name.
A deep philosopher (whose rules
Of moral life were drawn from schools)
The shepherd's homely cottage sought;
And thus explored his reach of thought. --
Whence is thy learning; Has thy toil
Over books consumed the midnight-oil?
Have thou old Greece and Rome surveyed,
And the vast sense of Plato weighed?
Has Socrates thy soul refined?
And have thou fathomed Tully's mind?
Or, like the wise Ulysses, thrown
By various fates on realms unknown,
Have thou through many cities strayed,
Their customs, laws, and manners weighed!
The shepherd modestly replied --
I never the paths of learning tried:
Nor have I roam'd in foreign parts,
To read mankind, their laws, and arts;
For man is practiced in disguise;
He cheats the most discerning eyes:
Who by that search shall wiser grow,
When we ourselves can never know?
The little knowledge I have gained
Was all from simple nature drained:
Hence my life's maxims took their rise;
Hence grew my settled hate to vice.
The daily labors of the be
Awake my soul to industry.
Who can observe the careful ant,
And not provide for future want?
My dog (the trustiest of his kind)
With gratitude inflames my mind:
I mark his true, his faithful way;
And in my service copy Tray.
In constancy and nuptial love,
I learn my duty from the dove.
The hen, who from the chilly air
With pious wing protects her care,
And every sowl that flies at large,
Instructs me in a parent's charge.
From Nature, too, I take my rule
To shun contempt and ridicule.
I never, with important air,
In conversation overbear:
Can grave and formal pass for wise,
When men the solemn owl despise?
My tongue within my lips I rein;
For who talks much must talk in vain:
We from the wordy torrent ^ly:
Who listens to the chatt'ring pie?
Nor would I, with felonious slight,
By stealth invade my neighbor's right:
Rapacious animals we hate;
Kites, hawks, and wolves, deserve their fate.
Do not we just abhorrence find
Against the toad and serpent kind?
But envy, calumny, and spite,
Bear stronger venom in their bite. --
Thus every object of creation
Can furnish hints for contemplation;
And, from the most minute and mean,
A virtuous mind can morals glean.
Thy fame is just, the sage replies:
Thy virtue proves thee truly wise.
Pride often guides the author's pen;
Books as affected are as men:
But he who studies nature's laws,
From certain truth his maxims draws,
And those, without our schools, suffice
To make men moral, good, and wise.
II. ODE TO LEVEN WATER.
ON Leven's banks, while free to rove,
And tune the rural pipe to love,
I envied not the happiest swain
That ever trod the Arcadian plain.
Pure stream! in whose transparent wave
My youthful limbs I wont to leave;
No torrents stain thy limpid source;
No rocks impede thy dimpling course,
That sweetly warbles over its bed,
With white, round, polished pebbles spread;
While, lightly poised, the scaly brood,
In myriads, cleave thy crystal flood;
The springing trout, in speckled pride;
The salmon, monarch of the tide;
The ruthless pike, intent on war;
The silver eel, and mottled par.
Devolving from the parent lake,
A charming maze thy waters make,
By bowers of birch and groves of pine,
And hedges flowered with eglantine.
Still on thy banks so gaily green,
May numerous herds and flocks be seen;
And lasses, chanting over the pail;
And shepherds, piping in the dale;
And ancient faith, that knows no guile;
And industry, embrown'd with toil;
And hearts resolved, and hands prepared,
The blessings they enjoy to guard.
III. ODE FROM THE 19th PSALM.
THE spacious firmament on high,
With all the blue etherial sky,
And spangled heavens, a shining frame,
Their great original proclaim.
The unwearied sun, from day to day,
Does his Creator's power display;
And publishes to every land
The work of an Almighty hand.
Soon as the evening shades prevail,
The moon takes up the wondrous tale,
And nightly, to the listening earth,
Repeats the story of her birth:
Whilst all the stars that round her burn,
And all the planets in their turn,
Confirm the tidings, as they roll,
And spread the truth from pole to pole.
What though, in solemn silence, all
Move round the dark terrestrial ball?
What though no real voice nor sound
Amid their radiant orbs be found?
In reason's ear they all rejoice,
And utter forth a glorious voice,
For ever singing as they shine,
"The hand that made us is divine."
IV. RURAL CHARMS.
SWEET Auburn! loveliest village of the plain!
Where health and plenty cheered the laboring swain;
Where smiling spring its earliest visit paid,
And parting summer's lingering blooms delayed:
Dear lovely bowers of innocence and ease!
Seats of my youth, when every sport could please!
How often have I loiter'd over thy green,
Where humble happiness endeared each scene!
How often have I paused on every charm!
The sheltered cot, the cultivated farm,
The never-failing brook, the busy mill,
The decent church that topt the neighboring hill;
The hawthorn bush, with seats beneath the shade.
For talking age and whispering lovers made.
How often have I blessed the coming day,
When toil remitting, lent its turn to play,
A lady came, ^ge-train, from labor free,
(...) their sports beneath the spreading tree!
While many a pastime circled in the shade,
The young contending as the old surveyed;
And many a gambol frolick'd over the ground,
And slights of art, and seats of strength, went round;
And still, as each repeated pleasure tired,
Succeeding sports the mirthful band inspired:
The dancing pair, that simply sought renown
By holding out to tire each other down;
The swain mistrustless of his smutted face,
While secret laughter titter'd round the place;
The bashful virgin's side-long looks of love;
The matron's glance, that would those looks reprove.
Sweet was the sound, when often, at ev'ning's close*
Up yonder hill, the village-murmur rose.
There, as I passed with careless steps and ^low,
The mingling notes came softened from below.
The swain, responsive as the milkmaid sung;
The sober herd, that lowed to meet their young;
The noisy geese, that gabbled over the pool;
The playful children, just let loose from school;
The watch-dog's voice, that bay'd the whispering wind;
And the loud laugh, that spoke the vacant mind:
These all, in soft confusion, sought the shade,
And filled each pause the nightingale had made.
V. The PAINTER who pleased NOBODY and every BODY.
LEST men suspect your tale untrue,
Keep probability in view.
The trav'ller, leaping over those bounds,
The credit of his book confounds;
Who with his tongue has armies routed,
Makes even his real courage doubted.
But flattery never seems absurd;
The flattered always take your word:
Impossibilities seem just;
They take the strongest praise on trust:
Hyperboles, though ever so great,
Will still come short of self-conceit.
So very like a painter drew,
That every eye the picture knew;
He hit complexion, feature, air,
So just, that life itself was there.
No flattery with his colors laid,
To bloom restored the faded maid;
He gave each muscle all its strength;
The mouth, the chin, the nose's length,
His honest pencil touched with truth,
And marked the date of age and youth. --
He lost his friends, his practice failed,
Truth should not always be revealed;
In dusty piles his pictures lay,
For no one sent the second pay.
Two busto's, fraught with every grace,
A Venus' and Apollo's face,
He placed in view: resolved to please,
Whoever sat, he drew from these;
From them corrected every feature,
And spirited each awkward creature.
All things were set; the hour was come,
His pallet ready over his thumb:
My Lord appeared, and, seated right
In proper attitude and light,
The painter looked, he sketch'd the piece;
Then dipped his pencil, talked of Greece,
Of Titian's tints, of Guido's air --
"Those eyes, my Lord, the spirit there
Might well a Raphael's hand require,
To give them all the native fire:
The features fraught with sense and wit,
You Will grant it very hard to hit;
But yet, with patience, you shall view
As much as paint or art can do;
Observe the work." -- My Lord replied
"Till now I thought my mouth was wide;
Besides, my nose is somewhat long;
Dear Sir, for me, it is far too young."
"Oh, pardon me," the artist cried,
"In this we painters must decide.
"The piece even common eyes must strike;
"I warrant it extremely like."
My Lord examined it anew --
No looking-glass seemed half so true.
A lady came. With borrowed grace
He from his Venus formed her face.
Her lover praised the painter's art,
So like the picture in his heart!
To every age some charm he lent;
Even beauties were almost content.
Through all the town his art they praised,
His custom grew, his price was raised.
Had he the real likeness shown,
Would any man the picture own?
But when thus happily he wrought,
Each found the likeness in his thought.
VI. DIVERSITY in the HUMAN CHARACTER.
VIRTUOUS and vicious every man must be,
Few in the extreme, but all in the degree;
The rogue and fool by fits is fair and wise,
And even the best, by fits, what they despise.
It Is but by parts we follow good or ill,
For, Vice or Virtue, Self directs it still;
Each individual seeks a several goal;
But Heaven's great view is one, and that the Whole:
That counter-works each folly and caprice?
That disappoints the effect of every vice:
That happy frailties to all ranks applied,
Shame to the virgin, to the matron pride,
Fear to the statesman, rashness to the chief,
To kings presumption, and to crowds belief.
That Virtue's ends from Vanity can raise,
Which seeks no interest, no reward but praise;
And build on wants, and on defects of mind,
The joy, the peace, the glory of mankind.
Heaven forming each on other to depend,
A master, or a servant, or a friend,
Bids each on other for assistance call,
'Till one man's weakness grows the strength of all.
Wants, frailties, passions, closer still ally
The common interest, or endear the tie.
To these we owe true friendship, love sincere,
Each home-felt joy that life inherits here:
Yet from the same we learn, in its decline,
Those joys, those loves, those interests to resign:
Taught half by Reason, half by mere decay,
To welcome death, and calmly pass away.
Whatever the passion, knowledge, fame, or pelf,
Not one will change his neighbor with himself.
The learned is happy nature to explore,
The fool is happy that he knows no more;
The rich is happy in the plenty given,
The poor contents him with the care of Heaven.
See the blind beggar dance, the cripple sing,
The sot a hero, lunatic a king;
The starving chemist in his golden views
Supremely blessed, the poet in his muse.
See some strange comfort every state attend,
And Pride bestowed on all, a common friend;
See some fit passion every age supply,
Hope travels through, nor quits us when we die.
Behold the child, by Nature's kindly law,
Pleased with a rattle, tickled with a straw:
Some livelier play-thing gives his youth delight,
A little louder, but as empty quite:
Scarfs, garters, gold, amuse his riper stage;
And cards and counters are the toys of age:
Pleased with this bauble still, as that before;
'Till tired he sleeps, and Life's poor play is over!
Mean while opinion gilds with varying rays
Those painted clouds that beautify our days;
Each want of happiness by Hope supplied,
And each vacuity of sense by Pride:
These build as fast as knowledge can destroy;
In Folly's cup still laughs the bubble, joy;
One prospect lost, another still we gain;
And not a vanity is given in vain;
Even mean self-love becomes, by force divine,
The scale to measure others wants by thine.
See! and confess one comfort still must rise;
It Is this: Though Man's a fool, yet GOD is wise.
VII. The TOILET.
AND, now, unveiled the toilet stands displayed,
Each silver vase in mystic order laid.
First, robbed in white, the nymph intent adores,
With head uncovered, the cosmetic powers.
A heavenly image in the glass appears:
To that she bends, to that her eye she rears.
The inferior priestess, at the altar's side,
Tremb'ling, begins the sacred rites of pride.
Unnumber'd treasures open at once, and here
The various offerings of the world appear:
From each, she nicely culls with curious toil,
And decks the goddess with the glittering spoil.
This casket India's glowing gems unlocks,
And all Arabia breathes from yonder box.
The tortoise, here, and elephant, unite,
Transformed to combs, the speckled and the white.
Here files of pins extend their shining rows,
Puffs, powders, patches, bibles, billet-doux.
Now awful beauty puts on all its arms;
The fair, each moment, rises in her charms,
Repairs her smiles, awakens every grace,
And calls forth all the wonders of her face.
VIII. THE HERMIT.
FAR in a wild, unknown to public view,
From youth to age, a reverend hermit grew.
The moss his bed, the cave his humble cell,
His food the fruits, his drink the crystal well,
Remote from man, with God he passed the days:
Prayer all his business, all his pleasure praise.
A life so sacred, such serene repose,
Seemed heaven itself, 'till one suggestion rose --
That vice should triumph, virtue vice obey:
This sprung some doubt of Providence's sway.
His hopes no more a certain prospect boast,
And all the tenor of his soul is lost.
So, when a smooth expanse receives, impressed,
Calm Nature's image on its watery breast,
Down bend the banks; the trees, depending grow;
And skies, beneath, with answering colors glow:
But if a stone the gentle sea divide,
Swift ruffling circles curl on every side;
And glimmering fragments of a broken sun,
Banks, trees, and skies, in thick disorder run.
To clear this doubt; to know the world by sight;
To find if books or swains report it right;
(For yet by swains alone the world he knew,
Whose feet came wandering over the nightly dew)
He quits his cell; the pilgrim-staff he bore,
And fixed the scallop in his hat before:
Then with the sun, a rising journey went,
Sedate to think, and watching each event.
The morn was wasted in the pathless grass,
And long and lonesome was the wild to pass;
But, when the southern sun had warmed the day,
A youth came posting over a crossing way;
His raiment decent, his complexion fair,
And, soft, in graceful ringlets, waved his hair.
Then near approaching, Father, hail! he cried;
And, Hail, my son! the reverend fire replied:
Words followed words; from question, answer flowed;
And talk of various kind deceived the road;
'Till, each with other pleased and loath to part,
While in their age they differ, join in heart.
Thus stands an aged elm in ivy bound;
Thus youthful ivy clasps an elm around.
Now sunk the sun: the closing hour of day
Came onward, mantled over with sober gray:
Nature, in silence, bid the world repose;
When, near the road, a stately palace rose:
There by the moon, through ranks of trees they pass,
Whose verdure crowned their stoping sides of grass.
It chanced the noble master of the dome
Still made his house the wandering stranger's home:
Yet still the kindness, from a thirst of praise,
Proved the vain flourish of expensive ease,
The pair arrive; the liv'ry'd servants wait;
Their lord receives them at the pompous gate:
The table groans with costly piles of food;
And all is more than hospitably good.
Then led to rest, the days long toil they drown,
Deep sunk in sleep, and silk, and heaps of down.
At length it is morn; and, at the dawn of day,
Along the wide canals the zephyrs play;
Fresh, over the gay parterres, the breezes creep,
And shake the neighboring wood, to banish sleep.
Up rise the guests, obedient to the call;
An early banquet decked the splendid hall;
Rich luscious wine a golden goblet graced,
Which the kind master forced the guests to taste.
Then, pleased and thankful, from the porch they go;
And, but the landlord, none had cause of woe --
His cup was vanished; for, in secret guise,
The younger guest purloin'd the glittering prize.
As one who sees a serpent in his way
Glist'ning and basking in the summer ray,
Disordered stops, to shun the danger near,
Then walks with faintness on, and looks with fear;
So seemed the sire, when far upon the road,
The shining spoil his wily part'ner showed.
He stopped with silence; walked with trembling heart;
And much he wished, but durst not ask, to part:
Murmuring, he lifts his eyes, and thinks it hard
That generous actions meet a base reward.
While thus they pas^, the sun his glory shrouds;
The changing skies hang out their sable clouds:
A sound in air presag^d approaching rain;
And beasts, to covert, scud across the plain.
Warned by the signs, these wandering pair retreat,
To seek for shelter at a neighboring seat.
'Twas built with turrets, on a rising ground;
And strong, and large, and unimprov'd around:
Its owner's temper, timorous and severe,
Unkind and griping, caused a desert there.
As near the miser's heavy doors they drew,
Fierce rising gusts, with sudden fury, blew;
The nimble lightning, mixed with showers, began;
And over their heads, loud-rolling thunder ran.
Here long they knock; but knock or call in v^in,
Driven by the wind and battered by the rain.
At length some pity warmed the master's breast;
('It Was then his threshold first received a guest);
Slow creaking turns the door, with jealous care;
And half he welcomes in the shivering pair.
One frugal faggot lights the naked walls,
And nature's fervor through their limbs recalls;
Bread of the coarsest sort with eager wine,
(Each hardly granted) served them both to dine;
And, when the tempest first appeared to cease,
A ready-warning bid them part in peace.
With still remark, the pond'ring hermit viewed,
In one so rich, a life so poor and rude:
And why should such (within himself he cried)
Lock the lost wealth a thousand want beside?
But, what new marks of wonder soon took place,
In every settling feature of his face,
When, from his vest, the young companion bore
That cup, the generous landlord owned before,
And paid profusely, with the precious bowl,
The stinted kindness of this churlish soul!
But, now, the clouds in airy tumult fly;
The sun, emerging, opes an azure sky;
A fresher green the smelling leaves display,
And glittering as they tremble, cheer the day:
The weather courts them from the poor retreat;
And the glad master, bolts the wary gate.
While hence they walk, the pilgrim's bosom wrought
With all the travel of uncertain thought.
His partner's acts without their cause appear;
'Twas there a vice, and seemed a madness here.
Detesting that, and pitying this, he goes,
Lost and confounded with the various shows.
Now night's dim shade again involve the sky;
Again the wand'rers want a place to lie;
Again they search, and find a lodging nigh.
The soil improved around; the mansion neat;
And, neither poorly low, nor idly great:
It seemed to speak its master's turn of mind;
Content, and, not for praise, but virtue kind.
Hither the walkers turn, with weary feet;
Then, bless the mansion and the master greet:
Their greeting fair, bestowed with modest guise,
The courteous master hears, and thus replies:
Without a vain without a grudging heart,
To him who gives us all, I yield a part:
From him you come; for him accept it here;
A frank and sober, more than costly cheer.
He spoke; and bade the welcome table spread:
Then talked of virtue till the time of bed;
When the grave household round his hall repair,
Warned by a bell, and close the hours with prayer.
At length, the world renewed by calm repose,
Was strong for toil; the dappled morn arose.
Before the pilgrims part, the younger crept
Near the clo^d cradle where an infant slept,
And writhed his neck: the landlord's little pride --
O strange return! -- grew black, and gasp'd, and died.
Horror of horrors! what! his only son!
How looked our hermit when the fact was done?
Not hell, though hell's black jaws in sunder part,
And breathe blue fire, could more assault his heart.
Confused and struck with silence at the deed,
He flies; but, trembling, fails to fly with speed.
His steps the youth pursues. The country lay
Perplexed with roads: The servant showed the way.
A river crossed the path. The passage over
Was nice to find: The servant trod before:
Long arms of oaks an open bridge supplied;
And, deep, the waves, beneath the bending, glide.
The youth, who seemed to watch a time to sin,
Approached the careless guide, and thrust him in:
Plunging, he falls; and, rising, lifts his head;
Then, flashing, turns, and sinks among the dead.
Wild sparkling rage inflames the father's eyes;
He bursts the bands of fear, and madly cries,
Detested wretch! -- But scarce his speech began,
When the strange partner seemed no longer man;
His youthful face grew more serenely sweet;
His robe turned white, and flowed upon his feet;
Fair rounds of radiant points invest his hair;
Celestial odors breathe through purpled air:
And wings, whose colors, glittered on the day,
Wide as his back, their gradual plumes display.
The form etherial burst upon his sight,
And moves in all the majesty of light.
Though loud at first, the pilgrim's passion grew,
Sudden he gazed, and wist not what to do;
Surprise, in secret chains, his words suspends;
And, in a calm, his settling temper ends.
But silence, here, the beauteous angel broke.
The voice of music ravished as he spoke.
Thy prayer, thy praise, thy life to vice unknown,
In sweet memorial, rise before the throne:
These charms, success in our bright region find,
And force an angel down to calm thy mind.
For this commissioned, I forsook the sky --
Nay, cease to kneel -- Thy fellow servants I.
Then know the truth of government divine;
And let these scruples be no longer thine.
The maker justly claims that world he made;
In this the right of Providence is laid:
Its sacred majesty through all depends
On using second means to work his ends.
It Is thus, withdrawn in state from human eye,
The Power exerts his attributes on high;
Your actions uses, nor controls your will;
And bids the doubting sons of men be still.
What strange events can strike with more surprise,
Than those which lately struck thy wondering eyes?
Yet, taught by these, confess the Almighty just*
And, where you cannot unriddle, learn to trust.
The great vain man, who fared on costly food;
Whose life was too luxurious to be good;
Who made his ivory stands with goblets shine;
And forced his guests to morning draughts of wine;
Has with the cup, the graceless custom lost;
And still he welcomes, but with less of cost.
The mean, suspicious wretch, whose bolted door
Never moved in duty to the wandering poor;
With him I left the cup, to teach his mind,
That heaven can bless, if mortals will be kind.
Conscious of wanting worth he views the bowl;
And feels compassion touch his grateful soul.
Thus artists melt the sullen ore of lead,
With heaping coals of fire upon its head:
In the kind warmth, the metal learns to glow;
And, loose from dross, the silver runs below.
Long had our pious friend in virtue trod,
But, now, the child half-wean'd his heart from God:
(Child of his age) -- for him he lived in pain,
And measured back his steps to earth again.
To what excesses had his dotage run!
But God, to save the father, took the son.
To all, but thee, in fits he seemed to go;
And 'twas my ministry to deal the blow.
The poor fond parent, humbled in the dust,
Now owns, in tears, the punishment was just.
But how had all his fortune felt a wreck,
Had that false servant speed in safety back!
This night his treasured heaps he meant to steal:
And what a fund of charity would fail!
Thus Heaven instructs thy mind. This trial over,
Depart in peace, resign, and sin no more.
On sounding pinions, here the youth withdrew:
The sage stood wondering as the seraph flew.
Thus looked Elisha, when, to mount on high,
His master took the chariot of the sky:
The fiery pomp, ascending, left the view;
The prophet gazed, and wished to follow too.
The bending hermit here a prayer begun --
"Lord! as in heaven, on earth thy will be done."
Then, gladly turning, sought his ancient place,
And passed a life of piety and peace.
IX. The DOUBLE TRANSFORMATION.
SECLUDED from domestic strife,
Jack Book-worm lived a college life;
A fellowship at twenty-five
Made him the happiest man alive;
He drank his glass, and cracked his joke,
And Freshmen wondered as he spoke;
Without politeness aimed at breeding,
And laughed at pedantry and reading.
Such pleasures, unallay'd with care,
Could any accident impair?
Could Cupid's shaft at length transfix
Our swain, arrived at thirty-six?
O had the archer never came down,
To ravage in a country town!
Or Flavia been content to stop!
At triumphs in in a Fleet Street shop!
O had her eyes forgot to blaze!
Or Jack had wanted eyes to gaze!
O! -- But let exclamation cease,
Her presence banished all his peace.
Our altered parson now began
To be a perfect ladies-man;
Made sonnets, lisp'd his sermons o'e^,
And told the tales he told before,
Of bailiffs pumped, and proctors bit,
At college how he showed his wit;
And as the fair one still approved;
He fell in love -- or thought he loved:
So, with decorum all things carried,
Miss frowned and blushed and then was -- married.
The honey-moon like lightning flew;
The second brought its transports too;
A third, a fourth, was not amiss;
The fifth was friendship mixed with bliss.
But when a twelve month passed away,
Jack found his goddess made of clay;
Found half the charms that decked her face
Arose from powder, shreds, or lace:
But still the worst remained behind,
That very face had robbed her mind.
Skilled in no other art was she,
But dressing, patching, repartee;
And, just as humor rose or fell,
By turns a slattern or a belle.
Could so much beauty condescend
To be a dull domestic friend?
Could any curtain-lectures bring
To decency so fine a thing?
In short by night, 'twas fits or fretting;
By day, 'twas gadding or coquetting.
Now tawdry Madam kept a bevy
Of powdered coxcombs at her levee;
The 'squire and captain took their stations,
And twenty other near relations.
Jack sucked his pipe, and often broke
A sigh in suffocating smoke:
She in her turn, became perplexing,
And found substantial bliss in vexing.
Thus every hour was passed between
Insulting repartee or spleen.
Each day, the more her faults were known,
He thinks her features coarser grown;
He fancies every vice she shows
Or thins her lips, or points her nose:
Whenever rage or envy rise,
How wide her mouth, how wild her eyes!
And, though her fops are wondrous civil.
He thinks her ugly as the devil.
Thus, to perplex the ravell'd noose,
While each a different way pursues,
While sullen or loquacious strife
Promised to hold on for life;
That dire disease, whose ruthless power
Wither's the beauty's transient flower --
Lo! the small pox, with horrid glare,
Levelled its terrors at the fair,
And, rifling every youthful grace,
Left but the remnant of a face.
The glass, grown hateful to her sight,
Reflected now a perfect fright;
Each former art she vainly tries.
To bring back luster to her eyes.
In vain she tries her pastes and creams,
To smooth her skin or hide its seams;
Her country beaux and city cousins,
Lovers no more, flew off by dozens:
The 'squire himself was seen to yield,
And even the captain quit the field.
Poor Madam, now condemned to hack
The rest of life with anxious Jack,
Perceiving others fairly flown,
Attempted pleasing him alone.
Jack soon was dazzled to behold
Her present face surpass the old;
With modesty her cheeks were died,
Humility displaces pride;
For tawdry finery is seen
A person ever neatly clean:
No more presuming on her sway
She learns goodnature every day.
Serenely gay and strict in duty,
Jack finds his wife a perfect beauty.
X. The JUDGMENT of HERCULES.
Now had the son of Jove, mature, attained
The joyful prime; when youth, elate and gay,
Steps into life; and follows unrestrained
Where passion leads, or prudence points the way.
In the pure mind, at those ambiguous years,
Or vice, rank weed, first strikes her poisonous root;
Or happily virtue's opening bud appears
By just degrees; fair bloom of fairest fruit:
For, if on youth's untainted thought impressed,
The generous purpose still shall warm the manly breast.
As on a day, reflecting on his age
For highest deeds now ripe, Alcides sought
Retirement, nurse of contemplation sage;
Step following step, and thought succeeding thought:
Musing, with steady path the youth pursued
His walk, and, lost in meditation, strayed
Far in a lonely vale, with Solitude
Conversing; while intent his mind surveyed
The dubious path of life: before him lay,
Here Virtue's rough ascent, there Pleasure's flowery way*
Much did the view divide his wavering mind:
Now glowed his breast with generous thirst of fame;
Now love of ease to softer thoughts inclined
His yielding soul, and quenched the rising flame.
When, lo! far off, two female forms he spies;
Direct to him their steps they seem to bear;
Both large and tall, exceeding human size;
Both, far exceeding human beauty, fair.
Graceful, yet each with different grace, they move:
This, striking sacred awe; that, softer winning love.
The first, in native dignity surpassed;
Artless and unadorned, she pleased the more:
Health over her looks a genuine luster cast;
A vest, more white than new-fall'n snow, she wore.
August she trod, yet modest was her air;
Serene her eye, yet darting heavenly fire.
Still she drew near; and nearer still more fair,
More mild appeared: yet such as might inspire
Pleasure corrected with an awful fear;
Majestically sweet, and amiably severe.
The other dame seemed even of fairer hue:
But bold her mein; unguarded roved her eye;
And her flushed cheeks confessed at nearer view
The borrowed blushes of an artful die.
All soft and delicate, with airy swim
Lightly she danced along; her robe betrayed
Through the clear texture every tender limb,
Height'ning the charms it only seemed to shade:
And as it flowed adown, so loose and thin,
Her stature showed more tall; more snowy-white her skin,
Often with a smile she viewed herself askance;
Even on her shade a conscious look she threw:
Then all around her cast a careless glance,
To mark what gazing eyes her beauty drew.
As they come near, before that other maid
Approaching decent, eagerly she pressed
With hasty step; nor of repulse afraid,
With freedom bland the wondering youth addressed:
With winning fondness on his neck she hung;
Sweet as the honey-dew flowed her enchanting tongue,
"Dear Hercules, whence this unkind delay?
Dear youth, what doubts can thus distract thy mind?
Securely follow where I lead the way;
And range through wilds of pleasure unconfined.
With me retire, from noise, and pain, and care;
Embath'd in bliss, and wrapped in endless ease:
Rough is the road to fame, through blood and war;
Smooth is my way, and all my paths are peace.
With me retire, from toils and perils free;
Leave honor to the wretch! pleasures were made for thee.
Then will I grant thee all thy soul's desire;
All that may charm thine ear, and please thy sight:
All that thy thought can frame, or wish require,
To steep thy ravished senses in delight.
The sumptuous feast, enhanc'd with music's sound,
Fittest to tune the melting soul to love;
Rich odors, breathing choicest sweets around;
The fragrant bower, cool fountain, shady grove;
Fresh flowers, to strew thy couch, and crown thy head:
Joy shall attend thy steps, and ease shall smooth thy bed.
These will I freely, constantly supply;
Pleasures, not earned with toil, nor mixed with woe:
Far from thy rest repining Want shall fly;
Nor Labor bathe in sweat thy careful brow.
Mature, the copious harvest shall be thine;
Let the laborious hind subdue the soil:
Leave the rash soldier spoils of war to win;
Won by the soldier thou shall share the spoil:
These softer cares my blessed allies employ --
New pleasures to invent; to ^ish, and to enjoy."
Her winning voice the youth attentive caught;
He gazed impatient on the smiling maid;
Still gazed, and listened: then her name besought.
"My name, fair youth, is Happiness," she said.
"Well can my friends this envied truth maintain:
They share my bliss; they best can speak my praise.
Though slander call me Sloth -- (detraction vain!)
Heed not what Slander, vain detracter, says:
Slander, still prompt true merit to defame;
To blot the brightest worth, and blast the fairest name."
By this, arrived the fair majestic maid:
(She all the while, with the same modest pace,
Composed advanced.) "Know, Hercules," she said
With manly tone, "thy birth of heavenly race:
Thy tender age, that loved instruction's voice,
Promised thee generous, patient, brave, and wise;
When manhood should confirm thy glorious choice.
Now expectation waits to see thee rise.
Rise, youth! exalt thyself, and me: approve
Thy high descent from heaven; and dare be worthy Jove.
But what truth prompts, my tongue shall not disguise:
The steep ascent must be with toil subdued:
Watchings and cares must win the lofty prize
Proposed by Heaven; -- true bliss, and real good.
Honor rewards the brave and bold alone:
She spurns the timorous, indol^nt, and base:
Danger and toil stand stren before her throne,
And guard (so Jove commands) the sacred place*
Who seeks her must the mighty cost sustain,
And pay the price of fame -- labor, and care, and pain.
Would thou engage the god's peculiar care?
O, Hercules, the immortal powers adore!
With a pure heart, with sacrifice and prayer,
Attend their altars; and their aid implore.
Or, would thou gain thy country's loud applause,
Loved as her father, as her god adored?
Be thou the bold assertor of her cause:
Her voice in council; in the fight, her sword.
In peace, in war, pursue thy country's good:
For her, bare thy bold breast, and pour thy generous blood.
Would thou, to quell the proud and lift the oppressed,
In arts of war and matchless strength excel?
First conquer thou thyself. To ease, to rest,
To each soft thought of pleasure, bid farewell.
The night alternate, due to sweet repose,
In watches waste; in painful march, the day:
Congealed amidst the rigorous winter's snows,
Scorched by the summer's thirst-inflaming ray;
Thy hardened limbs shall boast superior might:
Vigor shall brace thine arm, resistless in the fight."
"Hea^'st thou what monsters then thou must engage;
What danger, gentle youth, she bids thee prove?"
(Abrupt says Sloth.) "Ill fit thy tender age
Tumult and wars; fit age for joy and love.
Turn, gentle youth, to me, to love, and joy!
To these I lead: no monsters here shall stay
Thine easy course; no cares thy peace annoy:
I lead to bliss a nearer, smoother way.
Short is my way; fair, easy, smooth, and plain:
Turn, gentle youth; with me eternal pleasures reign."
"What pleasures, vain mistaken wretch, are thine?"
(Virtue with scorn replied) "who sleep'st in ease
Insensate; whose soft limbs the toil decline
That seasons bliss, and makes enjoyment please.
Draining the copious bowl, ere thirst require;
Feasting, ere hunger to the feast invite:
Whose tasteless joys anticipate desire:
Whom luxury supplies with appetite:
Yet Nature loathes; and you employ in vain
Variety and art to conquer her disdain.
The sparkling nectar cooled with summer snows;
The dainty board, with choicest viands spread;
To thee are tasteless all! sincere repose
Flies from thy flowery couch and downy bed.
For thou art only tired with indolence:
Nor is thy sleep with toil and labor bought;
The imperfect sleep that lulls thy languid sense
In dull oblivions interval of thought;
That kindly steals the inactive hours away
From the long lingering space, that lengthens out the day.
From bounteous Nature's unexhausted stores
Flows the pure fountain of sincere delights:
Averse to her, you waste the joyless hours;
Sleep drowns thy days, and riot rules thy nights.
Immortal though thou art, indignant Jove
Hurled thee from heaven, the immortals' blissful place;
For ever banished from the realms above,
To dwell on earth, with man's degenerate race:
Fitter abode! on earth alike disgraced;
Rejected by the wise, and by the fool embraced.
Fond wretch, that vainly weenest all delight
To gratify the sense reserved for thee!
Yet the most pleasing object to the sight,
Thine own fair actions, never did thou see.
Though lulled with sofest sounds thou lie along;
Soft music, warbling voices, melting lays:
Never did thou hear, more sweet than sweetest song
Charming the soul, thou never did hear thy praise!
No -- To thy revels let the fool repair:
To such, go smooth thy speech, and spread thy tempting snare.
Vast happiness enjoy thy gay allies!
A youth, of follies; and old age, of cares;
Young, yet enervate; old, yet never wise:
Vice wastes their vigor, and their mind impairs.
Vain, idle, delicate, in thoughtless ease,
Reserving woes for age, their prime they spend;
All wretched, hopeless, in the evil days,
With sorrow, to the verge of life they tend.
Grieved with the present, of the past ashamed;
They live, and are despised; they die, nor more are named.
But with the gods, and godlike men, I dwell:
Me, his supreme delight, the Almighty Sire
Regards well pleas^d: whatever works excel,
All, or divine or human, I inspire.
Counsel with strength, and industry with art,
In union meet conjoined, with me reside:
My dictates arm, instruct, and mend the heart;
The surest policy, the wisest guide.
With me true friendship dwells: she deigns to bind
Those generous souls alone whom I before have joined.
Nor need my friends the various costly feast;
Hunger to them the effects of art supplies;
Labor prepares their weary limbs to rest;
Sweet is their sleep: light, cheerful, strong they rise.
Through health, through joy, through pleasure and renown,
They tread my paths; and, by a soft descent,
At length to age all gently sinking down,
Look back with transport on a life well spent:
In which no hour flew unimprov'd away:
In which, some generous deed distinguished every day.
And when (the destined term at length complete)
Their ashes rest in peace, eternal fame
Sounds wide their praise: triumphant over fate,
In sacred song, for ever lives their name.
This, Hercules, is happiness! obey
My voice, and live. Let thy celestial birth
Lift and enlarge thy thoughts. Behold the way
That leads to fame, and raises thee from earth
Immortal! Lo, I guide thy steps. Arise,
Pursue the glorious path, and claim thy native skies."
Her words breathe fire celestial, and impart
New vigor to his soul; that sudden caught
The generous flame: with great intent his heart
Swells full; and labors with exalted thought:
The mist of error from his eyes dispelled,
Through all her fraud^ul arts in clearest light
Sloth in her native form he now beheld!
Unveiled she stood, confessed before his sight:
False Siren! -- All her wonted charms, that shone
So fresh erewhile and fair, now withered, pale, and gone.
No more the rosy bloom in sweet disguise
Masks her dissembled looks, each borrowed grace
Leaves her wan cheek; pale sickness clouds her eyes,
Livid and sunk, and passions dim her face.
As when fair Iris has a while displayed
Her watery arch, with gaudy painture gay;
While yet we gaze, the glorious colors fade;
And from our wonder gently steal away:
Where shone the beauteous phantom erst so bright,
Now lours the low-hung cloud; all gloomy to the sight.
But Virtue, more engaging, all the while
Disclosed new charms; more lovely, more serene:
Beaming sweet influence. A milder smile
Softened the terrors of her lofty mein.
"Lead, goddess, I am thine! (transported cried
Alcides:) O propitious power, thy way
Teach me! possess my soul; be thou my guide:
From thee, O never, never let me stray!"
While ardent thus the youth his vows addressed,
With all the goddess filled, already glowed his breast.
The heavenly maid, with strength divine endu'd
His daring soul; there all her powers combined:
Firm constancy, undaunted fortitude,
Enduring patience, armed his mighty mind.
Unmoved in toils, in dangers undismayed,
By many a hardy deed and bold emprize,
From fiercest monsters, through her powerful aid,
He freed the earth: through her he gained the skies.
'Twas virtue placed him in the blessed abode,
Crowned with eternal youth; among the gods a god.
SECTION VII.
I. THE FATHER AND JUPITER.
THE man to Jove his suit preferred.
He begged a wife: his prayer was heard.
Jove wondered at his bold addressing;
For how precarious is the blessing!
A wife he takes. And now for heirs
Again he worries heaven with prayers.
Jove nods assent. Two hopeful boys
And a fine girl reward his joys.
Now more solicitous he grew,
And set their future lives in view:
He saw that all respect and duty,
Were paid to wealth, to power, and beauty.
"Once more," he cries, "accept my prayer:
Make my loved progeny thy care.
Let my first hope, my favorite boy,
All fortune's richest gifts enjoy.
My next, with strong ambition fire,
My favor teach him to aspire,
Till he the step of power ascend,
And courtiers to their idol bend.
With every grace, with every charm,
My daughter's perfect features arm.
If Heaven approve, a father's blessed."
Jove smiles, and grants his full request.
The first, a miser at the heart,
Studious of every griping art,
Heaps hoards on hoards with anxious pain,
And all his life devotes to gain.
He feels no joy, his cares increase;
He neither wakes nor sleeps in peace:
In fancied want (a wretch complete)
He starves, and yet he dares not eat.
The next, to sudden honors grew;
The thriving art of courts he knew:
He reached the height of power and place,
Then fell the victim of disgrace.
Beauty with early bloom supplies
His daughter's cheek, and points her eyes:
The vain coquette each suit disdains,
And glories in her lover's pains.
With age she fades; each lover flies:
Contemned, forlorn, she pines and dies.
When Jove the father's grief surveyed,
And heard him Hea'ven and fate upbraid,
Thus spoke the god. "By outward show
Men judge of happiness and woe.
Shall ignorance of good and ill,
Dare to direct the eternal will?
Seek virtue; and, of that possessed,
To Providence resign the rest."
II. THE CAMELION.
OFTEN has it been my lot to mark
A proud, conceited, talking spark,
Returning from his finished tour,
Grown ten times perter than before:
Whatever word you chance to drop,
The traveled fool your mouth will stop --
"Sir, if my judgment you will allow --
I Have seen -- and sure I ought to know." --
So begs you would pay a due submission,
And acquiesce in his decision.
Two travelers of such a cast,
As over Arabia's wilds they passed,
And on their way, in friendly chat,
Now talked of this, and then of that;
Discoursed a while, amongst other matter,
Of the Camelion's form and nature.
"A stranger animal," cries one,
"Sure never lived beneath the sun:
A lizard's body lean and long,
A fish's head, a serpent's tongue,
Its tooth with triple claw disjoined;
And what a length of tail behind!
How slow its pace! and then its hue --
Whoever saw so fine a blue!"
"Hold there," the other quick replies,
"'It Is green: I saw it with these eyes,
As late with open mouth it lay,
And warmed it in the sunny ray;
Stretched at its ease the beast I viewed,
And saw it eat the air for food."
"I Have seen it, Sir, as well as you,
And must again affirm it blue.
At leisure I the beast surveyed,
Extended in the cooling shade."
"'It Is green, it is green, Sir, I assure ye" --
"Green!" cries the other in a fury --
"Why, Sir, do you think I Have lost my eyes?"
"'Twere no great loss," the friend replies;
"For if they always serve you thus,
"You Will find 'em but of little use."
So high at last the contest rose,
From words they almost came to blows;
When luckily came by a third:
To him the question they referred;
And begged he would tell them, if he knew,
Whether the thing was green or blue.
"Sirs," cries the umpire, "cease your pother
The creature's -- neither one nor the other.
I caught the animal last night,
And viewed it over by candlelight:
I marked it well -- 'twas black as jet --
You stare -- but, Sirs, I Have got it yet,
And can produce it." -- "Pray, Sir, do:
I Will lay my life the thing is blue." --
"And I Will be sworn, that when you have seen
The reptile, you will pronounce him green." --
"Well then, at once to ease the doubt,"
Replies the man, "I Will turn him out;
And when before your eyes I Have set him,
If you don't find him black, I Will eat him."
He said: then full before their sight
Produced the beast: and lo! -- 'twas white.
III. DESCRIPTION of a COUNTRY ALEHOUSE.
NEAR yonder thorn, that lifts its head on high,
Where once the sign-post caught the passing eye;
Low lies that house, where nut-brown draughts inspired;
Where gray-beard mirth, and smiling toil, retired;
Where village statesmen talked with looks profound,
And news much older than their ale went round.
Imagination fondly stoops, to trace
The parlor-splendors of that festive place:
The white-wash'd wall; the nicely-sanded floor;
The varnished clock, that click'd behind the door;
The chest, contrived a double debt to pay,
A bed by night, a chest of drawers by day;
The pictures placed for ornament and use,
The twelve good rules, the royal game of goose;
The hearth, except when winter chilled the day,
With aspen boughs, and flowers, and fennel, gay;
While broken tea-cups, wisely kept for show,
Ranged over the chimney, glisten'd in a row.
Vain transitory splendors! could not all
Reprieve the tottering mansion from its fall;
Obscure it sinks; nor shall it more impart
An hour's importance to the poor man's heart.
Thither no more the peasant shall repair
To sweet oblivion of his daily care;
No more the farmer's news, the barber's tale,
No more the woodman's ballad shall prevail;
No more the smith his dusky brow shall clear,
Relax his ponderous strength, and lean to hear;
The host himself no longer shall be found
Careful to see the mantling bliss go round;
Nor the coy maid, half willing to be pressed,
Shall kiss the cup, to pass it to the rest.
IV. CHARACTER of a COUNTRY SCHOOLMASTER.
BESIDE you straggling fence, that skirts the way
With blossomed furze unprofitable gay,
There, in his noisy mansion, skilled to rule,
The village-master taught his little school. --
A man severe he was, and stern to view:
I knew him well; and every truant knew.
Well had the boding tremblers learnt to trace
The day's disasters in his morning face:
Full well they laughed, with counterfeited glee,
At all his jokes -- for many a joke had he:
Full well the busy whisper, circling round,
Conveyed the dismal tidings when he frowned.
Yet he was kind; or, if severe in aught,
The love he bore to learning was in fault.
The village all declared how much he knew:
'Twas certain he could write -- and cipher too:
Lands he could measure; terms and tides presage;
And even the story ran, that he could gauge.
In arguing, too, the parson owned his skill;
For, even though vanquished, he could argue still:
While words of learned length and thundering sound
Amazed the gazing rustics ranged round;
And still they gazed; and still the wonder grew,
That one small head -- could carry all he knew.
V. STORY of PALEMON and LAVINIA.
THE lovely young Lavinia once had friends;
And fortune smiled, deceitful, on her birth.
For, in her helpless years, deprived of all,
Of every stay, save innocence and Heaven,
She, with her widowed mother, feeble, old,
And poor, lived in a cottage, far retired
Among the windings of a woody vale;
By solitude and deep surrounding shades,
But more by bashful modesty, concealed.
Together, thus they shunned the cruel scorn,
Which virtue, sunk to poverty, would meet
From giddy passion and low-minded pride:
Almost on Nature's common bounty fed;
Like the gay birds that sung them to repose,
Content, and careless of tomorrow's fare.
Her form was fresher than the morning-rose,
When the dew wets its leaves; unstained and pure.
As is the lily or the mountain-snow.
The modish virtues mingled in her eyes,
Still on the ground dejected, darting all
Their humid beams into the blooming flowers;
Or, when the mournful tale her mother told,
Of what her faithless fortune promised once,
Thrilled in her thought, they, like the dewy star
Of evening, shone in tears. A native grace
Sat fair-proportion'd on her polished limbs,
Veiled in a simple robe, their best attire,
Beyond the pomp of dress; for loveliness
Needs not the for^^gn aid of ornament,
But is, when unadorned, adorned the most.
Thoughtless of beauty, she was Beauty's self,
Recluse amid the close embow'ring woods.
As in the hollow breast of Appenine,
Beneath the shelter of encircling hills,
A myrtle rises, far from human eye,
And breathes its balmy fragrance over the wild;
So flourished, blooming, and unseen by all,
The sweet Lavinia; till at length, compelled
By strong Necessity's supreme command,
With smiling patience in her looks, she went
To glean Palemon's fields. -- The pride of swains
Palemon was; the generous, and the rich;
Who led the rural life in all its joy
And elegance, such as Arcadian song
Transmits from ancient uncorrupted times,
When tyrant Custom had not shackled man,
But free to follow nature was the mode.
He then, his fancy with autumnal scenes
Amusing, chanced beside his reaper train
To walk, when poor Lavinia drew his eye,
Unconscious of her power, and turning quick
With unaffected blushes from his gaze:
He saw her charming; but he saw not half
The charms her downcast modesty concealed
That very moment love and chaste desire
Sprung in his bosom, to himself unknown;
For still the world prevailed, and its dread laugh,
(Which scarce the firm philosopher can scorn)
Should his heart own a gleaner in the field:
And thus, in secret, to his soul he sighed.
"What pity, that so delicate a form,
By beauty kindled, where enlivening sense
And more than vulgar goodness seem to dwell,
Should be devoted to the rude embrace
Of some indecent clown! She looks, methinks,
Of old Acastos' line; and to my mind
Recals that patron of my happy life,
From whom my liberal fortune took its rise;
Now to the dust gone down, his houses, lands,
And once fair-spreading family, dissolved.
It Is said, that, in some lone, obscure retreat,
Urged by remembrance sad and decent pride,
Far from those scenes which knew their better days,
His aged widow and his daughter live,
Whom yet my fruitless search could never find.
Romantic wish! would this the daughter were!"
When, strict inquiring, from herself he found
She was the same, the daughter of his friend,
Of bountiful Acasto -- who can speak
The mingled passions that surprised his heart,
And through his nerves in shivering transport ran!
Then blaz^d his smothered flame, avowed, and bold;
And as he viewed her, ardent, over and over,
Love, gratitude, and pity, wept at once.
Confused, and frightened at his sudden tears;
Her rising beauties flushed a higher bloom;
And thus Palemon, passionate and just,
Poured out the pious rapture of his soul.
"And art thou, then, Acasto's dear remains?
She whom my restless gratitude has sought
So long in vain? -- O yes! the very same,
The softened image of my noble friend;
Alive, his every feature, every look,
More elegantly touched. Sweeter than spring!
Thou sole surviving blossom from the root
That nourished up my fortune! say, ah! where,
In what sequestered desert, have thou drawn
The kindest aspect of delighted heaven?
Into such beauty spread, and blown so fair,
Though poverty's cold wind and crushing rain
Beat keen and heavy on thy tender years.
Oh let me now into a richer soil
Transplant thee safe, where vernal suns and showers
Diffuse their warmest, largest influence;
And of my garden be the pride and joy.
Ill it befits thee, oh! it ill befits
Acasto's daughter, his, whose open store,
Though vast, were little to his ampler heart,
The father of a country, thus to pick
The very refuse of those harvest-fields
Which from his bounteous friendship I enjoy.
Then throw that shameful pittance from thy hand,
But ill applied to such a rugged task
The fields, the master, all, my fair, are thine;
If to the various blessings which thy house
Has on me lavished, thou will add that bliss,
That dearest bliss, the power of blessing thee!
Here ceased the youth; yet still his speaking eye
Expressed the sacred triumph of his soul,
With conscious virtue, gratitude and love,
Above the vulgar joy divinely raised.
Nor waited he reply. Won by the charm
Of goodness irresistible, and all
In sweet disorder lost -- she blushed consent.
The news immediate to her mother brought
While, pierced with anxious thought, she pined away
The lonely moments for Lavinia's fate:
Amazed, and scarce believing what she heard,
Joy seized her withered veins, and one bright gleam
Of setting life shone on her evening-hours;
Not less enraptured than the happy pair,
Who flourished long in tender bliss, and reared
A numerous offspring, lovely like themselves,
And good, the grace of all the country round.
VI. CELADON and AMELIA.
-- YOUNG Celadon
And his Amelia were a matchless pair,
With equal virtue formed, and equal grace;
The same, distinguished by their sex alone:
Hers, the mild luster of the blooming morn;
And his, the radiance of the risen day.
They loved. But such their guileless passion was,
As, in the dawn of time, informed the heart
Of innocence and undissembling truth.
'Twas friendship, heightened by the mutual wish:
The' enchanting hope, and sympathetic glow,
Beamed from the mutual eye. Devoting all
To love, each was to each a dearer self;
Supremely happy, in the awakened power
Of giving joy. Alone, amid the shades,
Still, in harmonious intercourse, they lived
The rural day, and talked the flowing heart;
Or sighed and looked -- unutterable things.
So passed their life; a clear united stream,
By care unruffled, till, in evil hour,
The tempest caught them on the tender walk,
Heedless how far and where its mazes strayed;
While, with each other blessed, creative love
Still bade eternal Eden smile around.
Presaging instant fate, her bosom heaved
Unwonted sighs; and, stealing often a look
Toward the big gloom, on Celadon her eye
Fell tearful, wetting her disordered cheek.
In vain assuming love and confidence
In heaven repressed her fear; it grew, and shook
Her frame near dissolution. He perceived
The unequal conflict, and, as angels look
On dying saints, his eyes compassion shed,
With love illumined high. "Fear not," he said,
"Sweet innocence! thou stranger to offense
And inward storm! He who you skies involves
In frowns of darkness, ever smiles on thee
With kind regard. Over thee the secret shaft,
That wastes at midnight, or the undreaded hour
Of noon, flies harmless; and that very voice
Which thunders terror through the guilty heart,
With tongues of seraphs, whispers peace to thine.
It Is safety to be near thee, sure, and thus
To clasp perfection!" -- From his void embrace
(Mysterious Heaven) that moment, to the ground,
A blackened corpse, was struck the beauteous maid.
But who can paint the lover, as he stood
Pierced by severe amazement, hating life,
Speechless, and fixed in all the death of woe.
VII. DESCRIPTION of MAB QUEEN of the FAIRIES.
SHE is the fancy's midwife: and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
On the forefinger of an alderman;
Drawn with a team of little atomies,
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep:
Her waggon-spokes, made of long spinners' legs;
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers;
The traces, of the smallest spider's web:
The collars, of the moonshine's watery beams;
Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film:
Her waggoner, a small gray-coated gnat;
Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut,
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Time out of mind the fairies coachmakers.
And in this stare she gallops, night by night,
Through lovers brains, and then they dream of love;
Over lawyers fingers, who straight dream on fees;
Over ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream:
And sometimes comes she with a tithe-pig's tail,
Tickling the parson as he lies asleep;
Then dreams he of another benefice.
Sometimes she drives over a soldier's neck:
And then he dreams of cutting foreign throats,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spainish blades;
Of healths five fathom deep: and then, anon,
Drums in his ears; at which he starts and wakes;
And, being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two --
And sleeps again.
VIII. ENQUIRY CONCERNING HAPPINESS.
OH HAPPINESS! our being's end and aim!
Good, Pleasure, Ease, Content! whatever thy name:
That something still which prompts the eternal sigh,
For which we bear to live, or dare to die;
Which still so near us, yet beyond us lies,
O'erlook'd, seen double, by the fool and wise.
Plant of celestial seed! if dropped below,
Say, in what mortal soil thou deign'st to grow?
Fair opening to some court's propitious shrine,
Or deep with diamonds in the flaming mine?
Twined with the wreaths Parnassian laurels yield,
Or reaped in iron harvests of the field?
Where grows; -- where grows it not? -- If vain our toil,
We ought to blame the culture, not the soil:
Fixed to no spot is happiness sincere,
It Is no where to be found, or every where.
Order is Heaven's first law; and this confessed,
Some are, and must be, greater than the rest,
More rich, more wise; but who infers from hence
That such are happier, shocks all common sense.
Heaven to mankind impartial we confess,
If all are equal in their happiness:
But mutual wants this happiness increase;
All Nature's difference keeps all Nature's peace.
Condition, circumstance, is not the thing;
Bliss is the same in subject or in king;
In who obtain defense, or who defend,
In him who is, or him who finds a friend.
Fortune her gifts may variously dispose,
And these be happy called, unhappy those;
But Heaven's just balance equal will appear,
While those are placed in hope, and these in fear*
Not present good or ill, the joy or curse,
But future views of better or of worse.
Oh sons of earth! attempt ye still to rise,
By mountains pil'd on mountains to the skies?
Heaven still with laughter the vain toil surveys,
And buries madmen in the heaps they raise.
Know, all the good that individuals find,
Or God and Nature meant to mere mankind;
Reason's whole pleasure, all the joys of sense,
Lie in three words -- Health, Peace, and Competence.
IX. DESCRIPTION OF A GAME AT CARDS.
BELINDA, now, whom thirst of same invites,
Burns to encounter two adventurous knights;
At ombre, singly, to decide their doom;
And swells her breast with conquests yet to come.
Behold four kings, in majesty revered,
With hoary whiskers, and a forky beard;
And four fair queens, whose hands sustain a flower,
The expressive emblem of their softer power;
Four knaves, in garbs succinct, a trusty band,
Caps on their heads, and halberds in their hand;
And party-color'd troops, a shining train;
Draw forth to combat on the velvet plain.
The skilful nymph reviews her force with care:
"Let spades be trumps!" she said -- and trumps they were
Now, move to war her sable matadors,
In show like leaders of the swarthy Moors.
Spadillio first, unconquerable lord!
Le^ off two captive trumps, and swept the board
As many more Manillio forced to yield,
And marched a victor from the verdant field.
Him Basto followed; but, his sat more hard,
Gained but one trump, and one Plebeian card.
With his broad sabre, next, a chief in years,
The hoary majesty of spades appears;
Puts forth one manly leg to sight revealed,
The rest his many-color'd robe concealed.
The rebel knave, who dares his prince engage,
Proves the just victim of his royal rage:
Even mighty Pam, that kings and queens o'erthrew,
And mowed down armies in the fights of Loo,
Sad chance of war! now destitute of aid,
Falls undistinguished by the victor spade.
Thus far both armies to Belinda yield:
Now, to the baron, fate inclines the field.
His warlike Amazon her host invades,
The imperial consort of the crown of spades.
The clubs' black tyrant first her victim died,
Spite of his haughty mien and barbarous pride.
What boots the regal circle on his head;
His giant limb^, in state unwieldy spread;
That long behind he trails his pompous robe;
And, of all monarchs, only, grasp the globe!
The baron, now, his diamonds pours apace:
The embroidered king, who shows but half his face,
And his refulgent queen, with powers combined,
Of broken troops, an easy conquest find;
Clubs, diamonds, hearts, in wild disorder seen,
With throngs promiscuous, strew the level green.
Thus, when, dispersed, a routed army runs,
Of Asia's troops, and Afric's sable sons,
With like confusion, different nations fly,
Of various habit, and of various die:
The pierced battalions, disunited, fall
In heaps on heaps; one fate o'erwhelms them all.
The knave of diamonds tries his wily arts;
And wins (oh shameful chance!) the queen of hearts.
At this, the blood the virgin's cheek forsook;
A livid paleness spreads over all her look;
She sees, and trembles at the approaching ill,
Just in the jaws of ruin and codille.
And, now (as often, in some distempered state,
On one nice trick depends the general fate)
An ace of hearts steps forth; the king, unseen,
Lurked in her hand, and mourned his captive queen --
He springs to vengence, with an eager pace,
And falls, like thunder, on the prostrate ace.
The nymph, exulting, fills with shouts the sky:
The walls, the woods, and long canals reply.
X. ELEGY WRITTEN in a COUNTRY CHURCHYARD.
THE curfew tolls the knell of parting day;
The lowing herd wind slowly over the lea;
The ploughman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world -- to darkness and to me.
Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,
And all the air a solemn stillness holds;
Save where the beetle wheels his droning flight,
And drowsy tinklings lull the distant folds;
Save, that, from yonder ivy-mantled tower,
The moping owl does to the moon complain
Of such, as wandering near her secret bower,
Molest her ancient solitary reign.
Beneath these rugged elms, that yew-tree's shade,
Where heaves the turf in many a mouldering heap,
Each in his narrow cell for ever laid,
The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep.
The breezy call of incense-breathing morn,
The swallow twitt'ring from the straw-built shed,
The cock's shrill clarion, or the echoing horn,
No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed.
For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn,
Or busy housewife ply her evening-care;
No children run to lisp their sire's return,
Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share.
Often did the harvest to their sickle yield;
Their furrow often the stubborn glebe has broke:
How jocund did they drive their team afield!
How bowed the woods beneath their sturdy stroke!
Let not ambition mock their useful toil,
Their homely joys, and destiny obscure;
Nor grandeur hear, with a disdainful smile,
The short and simple annals of the poor.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth, ever gave,
Await, alike, the inevitable hour:
The paths of glory lead -- but to the grave.
Nor you, ye proud, impute to these the fault,
If memory over their tomb no trophies raise,
Where, through the long-drawn isle and fretted vault,
The pealing anthem swells the note of praise:
Can story'd urn, or animated bust,
Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
Can honor's voice provoke the silent dust,
Or flattery sooth the dull cold ear of death?
Perhaps, in this neglected spot, is laid
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire;
Hands, that the rod of empire might have swayed,
Or waked to ecstacy the living lyre:
But Knowledge to their eyes her ample page,
Rich with the spoils of time, did never unroll;
Chill penury repressed their noble rage,
And froze the genial current of the soul.
Full many a gem of purest ray serene,
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
Some village Hampden, that, with dauntless breast,
The little tyrant of his fields withstood;
Some mute inglorious Milton here may rest;
Some Cromwell, guiltless of his country's blood.
The applause of listening senates to command,
The threats of pain and ruin to despise,
To scatter plenty over a smiling land,
And read their history in a nation's eyes,
Their let forbade; nor circumscribed alone
Their growing virtues, but their crimes confined;
Forbade to wade through slaughter to a throne,
And shut the gates of mercy on mankind;
The struggling pangs of conscious truth to hide;
To quench the blushes of ingenuous shame;
Or heap the shrine of luxury and pride,
With incense kindled at the muse's flame.
Far from the m^d^ing crowd's ignoble strife,
Their sober wishes never learned to stray;
Along the cool sequestered vale of life
They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.
Yet even these bones, from insult to protect,
Some frail memorial still erected nigh,
With uncouth rhimes and shapeless sculpture decked,
Implores the passing tribute of a sigh.
Their name, their years, spelt by the unlettered muse,
The place of fame and elegy supply;
And many a holy text around she strews,
That teach the rustic moralist to die.
For who, to dumb Forgetfulness a prey,
This pleasing anxious being ever resigned,
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Nor cast one longing lingering look behind?
On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
Some pious drops the closing eye requires;
Even from the tomb the voice of nature cries,
Even in our ashes live their wonted fires.
For thee, who, mindful of the unhonor'd dead,
Do in these lines their artless tale relate,
If, chance, by lonely Contemplation led,
Some kindred spirit will inquire thy fate,
Happily, some hoary-headed swain may say --
'Oft have we seen him, at the peep of dawn,
'Brushing, with hasty steps, the dews away,
'To meet the sun upon the upland lawn.
'There, at the foot of yonder nodding beech,
'That wreathes its old fantastic roots so high,
'His listless length at noontide would he stretch,
'And pore upon the brook that babbles by.
'Hard by yon wood, now smiling as in scorn,
'Muttering wayward fancies, he would rove;
'Now drooping, woeful wan, like one forlorn,
'Or crazed with care, or crossed in hopeless love.
'One morn I missed him on the' custom'd hill,
'Along the heath, and near his favorite tree;
'Another came, nor yet beside the rill,
'Nor up the lawn, nor at the wood, was he:
'The next, with dirges due, in sad array,
'Slow through the church way path we saw him borne --
'Approach, and read (for thou can read) the lay.
'Grav'd on the stone beneath yon aged thorn.'
The EPITAPH.
HERE rests his head upon the lap of earth,
A youth to fortune and to fame unknown.
Fair Science frowned not on his humble birth,
And Melancholy marked him for her own.
Large was his bounty, and his soul sincere:
Heaven did a recompense as largely send.
He gave to misery all he had -- a tear;
He gained from heaven ('it was all he wished) -- a friend.
No father seek his merits to disclose,
Or draw his frailties from their dread abode,
(There they, alike, in trembling hope repose),
The bosom of his Father and his God.
XI. SCIPIO restoring the CAPTIVE LADY to her LOVER.
WHEN, to his glorious first essay in war,
New Carthage fell; there, all the flower of Spain
Were kept in hostage; a full field presenting
For Scipio's generosity to shine. -- A noble virgin,
Conspicuous far over all the captive dames,
Was marked the general's prize. She wept, and blushed;
Young, fresh, and blooming like the morn. An eye,
As when the blue sky trembles through a cloud
Of purest white. A secret charm combined
Her features, and infused enchantment through them.
Her shape was harmony. -- But eloquence
Beneath her beauty fails; which seemed on purpose
By nature lavished on her, that mankind
Might see the virtue of a hero tried
Almost beyond the stretch of human force.
Soft as she passed along, with downcast eyes,
Where gentle sorrow swelled, and, now and then,
Dropped over her modest cheeks a trickling tear,
The Roman legions languish'd, and hard war
Felt more than pity: even their chief himself,
As on his high tribunal raised he sat.
Turned from the dangerous sight; and, chiding, asked
His officers, if, by this gift, they meant
To cloud his glory in its very dawn.
She, questioned of her birth, in trembling accents,
With tears and blushes, broken, told her tale.
But, when he found her royally descended;
Of her old captive parents the sole joy;
And that a hapless Celtiberian prince,
Her lover and beloved, forgot his chains,
His lost dominions, and for her alone
Wept out his tender soul; sudden the heart
Of this young, conquering, loving, godlike Roman,
Felt all the great divinity of virtue.
His wishing youth stood checked, his tempting power,
Restrained by kind humanity. -- At once
He for her parents and her lover called.
The various scene imagine. How his troops
Looked dubious on, and wondered what he meant;
While, stretched below, the trembling suppliants lay,
Racked by a thousand mingling passions -- fear,
Hope, jealousy, disdain, submission, grief,
Anxiety, and love in every shape.
To these as different sentiments succeeded,
As mixed emotions, when the man divine
Thus the dread silence to the lover broke.
"We both are young; both charmed. The right of war
Has put thy beauteous mistress in my power;
With whom, I could, in the most sacred ties,
Live out a happy life. But, know, that Romans,
Their hearts, as well as enemies, can conquer.
Then, take her to thy soul: and, with her, take
Thy liberty and kingdom. In return,
I ask but this -- When you behold these eyes,
These charms with transport, be a friend to Rome."
Ecstatic wonder held the lovers mute;
While the loud camp, and all the clust'ring crowd
That hung around, rang with repeated shouts.
Fame took the alarm, and through resounding Spain
Blew fast the fair report: which, more than arms,
Admiring nations to the Romans gained.
XII. POPE's humorous COMPLAINT to Dr. ARBUTHNOT of the IMPERTINENCE of
SCRIBBLERS.
SHUT, shut the door, good John! -- fatigued, I said
Tie up the knocker; say I Am sick, I Am dead.
The dog star rages! nay, it is past a doubt,
All bedlam, or Parnassus, is let out:
Fire in each eye, and papers in each hand,
They rave, recite, and madden round the land.
What walls can guard me, or what shades can hide?
They pierce my thickets; through my grot they glide*
By land, by water, they renew the charge;
They stop the chariot, and they board the barge.
No place is sacred; not the church is free;
Even Sunday shines no Sabbath Day to me:
Then from the mint walks forth the man of rhyme --
"Happy to catch me -- just at dinnertime."
Friend to my life! (which did not you prolong,
The world had wanted -- many an idle song)
What drop or nostrum can this plague remove?
Or which must end me, a fools wrath or love?
A dire dilemma! -- either way. I Am sped:
If foes, they write; if friends they read me d^ad.
Seized and tied down to judge, how wretched I!
Who cannot be silent, and who will not lie.
To laugh were want of goodness and of grace;
And to be grave exceeds all power of face.
I sit with sad civility; I read
With serious anguish and an aching head:
Then drop at last, but in unwilling ears,
This saying counsel -- "Keep your piece nine years." --
"Nine years!" (cries he, who, high in Drury Lane,
Lulled by soft zephyrs through the broken pane,
Rhymes ere he wakes, and prints before term ends,
Obliged by hunger -- and request of friends);
"The piece, you think is incorrect. Why, take it:
I Am all submission; what you would have it, make it."
Three things another's modest wishes bound --
My friendship, and a prologue, and ten pound.
Pitholeon sends to me -- "You know his Grace:
I want a patron, ask him for a place."
"Pitholeon libelled me" -- "But here is a letter
Informs you, Sir, 'twas when he knew no better."
Bless me! a packet! -- "'It Is a stranger sues;
A virgin tragedy, an orphan-muse."
If I dislike it -- "Furies, death and rage!"
I^ I approve -- "Commend it to the stage."
There, thank my stars! my whole commission ends:
The play'rs and I are, luckily, no friends.
Fired that the house reject him -- "'Sdeath I Will print it,
And shame the fools -- Your interest, Sir, with Lintot."
"Lintot (dull rogue!) will think your price too much."
"Not if you, Sir, revise it and retouch."
All my demurs but double his attacks:
At last he whispers -- "Do, and we go snacks."
Glad of a quarrel, straight I clap the door --
"Sir, let me see you and your works no more."
You think this cruel! take it for a rule,
No creature smarts so little as a fool.
Let peals of laughter, Codrus, round thee break,
Thou unconcerned, can hear the mighty crack:
Pit, box, and gallery, in convulsions hurled,
Thou stand'st unshook amidst a bursting world.
Who shames a scribbler? Break one cobweb through: --
He spins the slight self-pleasing thread anew.
Destroy his fib or sophistry: -- in vain --
The creature's at his dirty work again.
One dedicates in high heroic prose,
And ridicules beyond a hundred foes:
One from all Grubstreet will my fame defend;
And, more abusive, calls himself my friend:
This prints my letters; that expects a bribe;
And others roar aloud -- "Subscribe, subscribe."
There are who to my person pay their court:
I cough like Horace; and, though lean, am short:
Ammon's great son, one shoulder had too high;
Such Ovid's nose; and "Sir, you have an eye." --
Go on, obliging creatures; make me see
All that disgraced my betters met in me.
Say for my comfort languishing in bed,
Just so immortal Maro held his head;
And when I die, be sure you let me know
Great Homer died -- three thousand years ago.
XIII. HYMN to ADVERSITY.
DAUGHTER of Jove, relentless power,
Thou tamer of the human breast,
Whose iron scourge and torturing hour,
The bad affright, afflict the best!
Bound in thy adamantine chain,
The proud are taught to taste of pain,
And purple Tyrants vainly groan
With pangs unfelt before, unpitied and alone.
When first thy sire to send on earth
Virtue, his darling child, designed,
To thee he gave the heavenly birth,
And bade thee form her infant mind.
Stern rugged nurse! thy rigid lore
With patience many a year she bore:
What sorrow was, thou bad'st her know,
And from her own she learned to melt at others' woe.
Scared at thy frown terrific, fly
Self-pleasing Folly's idle brood,
Wild Laughter, Noise, and thoughtless Joy,
And leave us leisure to be good.
Light they disperse, and with them go
The summer Friend, the flattering Foe,
By vain Prosperity received;
To her they vow their truth, and are again believed.
Wisdom, in sable garb arrayed,
Immersed in rapturous thought profound,
And Melancholy, silent maid
With leaden eye, that loves the ground,
Still on thy solemn steps attend:
Warm charity, the general friend;
With justice, to himself severe;
And Pity, dropping soft the sadly-pleasing tear.
Oh, gently on thy suppliant's head,
Dread Goddess lay thy chast'ning hand!
Not in thy Gorgon terrors clad,
Nor circled with the vengeful band
(As by the impious thou art seen)
With thundering voice and threatening mien,
With screaming Horror's funeral cry,
Despair, and fell Disease, and ghastly Poverty.
Thy form benign, oh Goddess, wear;
Thy milder influence impart;
Thy philosophic train be there,
To soften not to wound my heart,
The generous spark, extinct, revive;
Teach me to love and to forgive;
Exact my own defects to scan;
What others are, to feel; and know myself a man.
XIV. The PASSIONS. An ODE.
WHEN Music, heavenly maid, was young,
While yet in early Greece she sung,
The passions often, to hear her shell,
Thronged around her magic cell,
Exulting, trembling, raging, fainting,
Possessed beyond the Muse's painting.
By turns, they felt the glowing mind
Disturbed, delighted, raised, refined:
Till once, it is said, when all were fired,
Filled with fury, rapt, inspired,
From the supporting myrtles round
They snatched her instruments of sound;
And, as they often had heard apart
Sweet lessons of her forceful art,
Each (for madness ruled the hour)
Would prove his own expressive power.
First, Fear, his hand, its skill to try,
Amid the chords bewildered laid;
And back recoiled, he knew not why,
Even at the sound himself had made.
Next, Anger rushed, his eyes on fire:
In lightenings, owned his secret stings,
In one rude clash, he struck the lyre --
And swept, with hurried hands, the strings.
With woeful measures, wan despair --
Low sullen sounds his grief beguiled:
A solemn, strange, and mingled air:
'Twas sad, by fits -- by starts, 'twas wild.
But thou, O hope! with eyes so fair,
What was thy delighted measure?
Still it whispered promised pleasure,
And bade the lovely scenes at distance hail!
Still would her touch the strain prolong;
And from the rocks, the woods the vale,
She called on Echo still through all her song:
And, where her sweetest theme she chose,
A soft responsive voice was heard at every close;
And Hope, enchanted, smiled and waved her golden hair
And longer had she sung -- but, with a frown,
Revenge impatient rose.
He threw his blood-stained sword in thunder down;
And, with a withering look,
The war-denouncing trumpet took,
And blew a blast, so loud and dread,
Were never prophetic sounds so full of woe:
And, ever and anon, he beat
The double drum, with furious heat.
And though sometimes, each dreary pause between,
Dejected Pity, at his side,
Her soul-subduing voice applied,
Yet still he kept his wild unaltered mien;
While each strained ball of sight -- seemed bursting from his head.
Thy numbers, jealousy, to naught were fixed;
Sad proof of thy distressful state.
Of differing themes the veering song was mixed:
And, now, it courted Love; now raving called on Hate.
With eyes up-rais'd, as one inspired,
Pale Melancholy sat retired;
And, from her wild sequestered seat,
In notes, by distance made more sweet,
Poured through the mellow horn her pensive soul;
And, dashing soft, from rocks around
Bubbling runnels joined the sound.
Through glades and glooms the mingled measure stole,
Or over some haunted streams, with fond delay,
(Round an holy calm diffusing,
Love of peace and lonely musing)
In hollow murmurs died away.
But, O, how altered was in sprightlier tone!
When Cheerfulness, a nymph of healthiest hue,
Her bow across her shoulder flung,
Her buskins gemm'd with morning dew,
Blew an inspiring air that dale and thicket rung,
The hunter's call, to Faun and Dryad known.
The oak-crown'd Sisters, and their chaste-ey'd Queen,
Satyrs, and sylvan Boys, were seen,
Peeping from forth their alleys green:
Brown Exercise rejoiced to hear;
And Sport leapt up, and seized his beechen spear.
Last came Joys ecstatic trial.
He, with viny crown advancing,
First to the lively pipe his hand addressed:
But soon he saw the brisk awak'ning viol,
Whose sweet entrancing voice he loved the best.
They would have thought who heard the strain,
They saw, in Tempe's vale, her native maids,
Amid the festal sounding shades,
To some unwearied minstrel dancing;
While as his flying fingers kissed the strings,
Love framed with Mirth a gay fantastic round,
(Loose were her tresses seen, her zone unbound)
And he, amidst his frolic play,
As if he would the charming air repay,
Shook thousand odors from his dewy wings*
SECT VIII.
I. MILTON's LAMENTATION for the LOSS of his SIGHT.
HAIL, holy light! offspring of heaven firstborn!
Or, of the Eternal, coeternal beam!
May I express thee unblam'd! since God is light,
And never but in unapproached light
Dwelt from eternity; dwelt then in thee,
Bright effluence of bright essence increate.
Or, hear'st thou, rather, pure etherial stream,
Whose fountain who shall tell? Before the sun,
Before the heavens thou were, and at the voice
Of God, as with a mantle did invest
The rising world of waters dark and deep,
Won from the void and formless infinite.
Thee I revisit now with bolder wing,
Escaped the Stygian pool, though long detained
In that obscure sojourn; while in my flight
Through utter and through middle darkness borne,
With other notes than to the Orphean lyre,
I sung of Chaos and eternal Night;
Taught by the heavenly Muse to venture down
The dark descent, and up to re-ascend,
Though hard and rare. Thee I revisit safe,
And feel thy sovereign vital lamp; but thou
Revisit'st not these eyes, that roll in vain
To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn;
So thick a drop serene has quenched their orbs,
Or dim suffusion veiled. Yet not the more
Cease I to wander, where the Muses haunt
Clear spring or shady grove, or sunny hill,
Smit with the love of sacred song; but chief
Thee, Sion, and the flowery brooks beneath
That wash thy hallowed feet and warbling flow,
Nightly I visit: nor sometimes forget
Those other two equaled with me in fate,
So were I equaled with them in renown,
Blind Thamyris, and blind Maeonides;
And Tyresias, and Phineus, prophets old:
Then feed on thoughts, that voluntary move
Harmonious numbers; as the wakeful bird
Sings darkling and, in shadiest covert hid,
Tunes her nocturnal note. Thus, with the year.
Seasons return; but not to me returns
Day, or the sweet approach of even or morn,
Or sight of vernal bloom, or summer's rose,
Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine;
But cloud instead, and ever-during dark
Surrounds me, from the cheerful ways of men
Cut off, and, for the book of knowledge fair,
Presented with an universal blank
Of nature's works, to me expunged and rased,
And wisdom, at one entrance, quite shut out.
So much the rather, thou celestial light,
Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers
Irradiate; there plant eyes; all mist from thence
Purge and disperse; that I may see and tell
Of things invisible to mortal sight.
II. L'ALLE^RO, or the MERRY MAN.
HENCE, loathed Melancholy!
Of Cerberus and blackest Midnight born,
In Stygian cave forlorn,
Amongst horrid shades, and shrieks, and sights unholy;
Find out some uncouth cell
Where brooding darkness spreads his jealous wings,
And the night-raven sings;
There, under ebon shades, and low-brow'd rocks,
As ragged as thy locks,
In dark Cimmerian desert ever dwell.
But come, thou goddess fair and free,
In heaven yclep'd Euphrosyne!
And, by men, heart-easing Mirth;
Whom lovely Venus, at a birth,
With two sister-graces more,
To ivy-crowned Bacchus bore.
Haste thee, nymph, and bring with thee
Jest and youthful jollity,
Quips and cranks, and wanton wiles,
Nods, and becks, and wreathed smiles?
Such as hang on Hebe's cheek,
And love to live in dimple sleek;
Sport, that wrinkled care derides;
And Laughter, holding both his sides.
Come! and trip it as you go
On the light fantastic toe;
And, in thy right hand, lead with thee
The mountain nymph sweet Liberty;
And, if I give thee honor due,
Mirth admit me of thy crew,
To live with her, and live with thee,
In unreproved pleasures free:
To hear the lark begin his flight,
And, singing, startle the dull Night,
From his watchtower in the skies,
Till the dappled dawn does rise;
Then, to come in spite of sorrow,
And, at my window, bid good morrow,
Through the sweet briar, or the vine,
Or the twisted eglantine:
While the cock, with lively din,
Scatters the rear of darkness thin,
And to the stack, or the barn door,
Stoutly struts his dames before:
Often listening how the hounds and horn
Cheerly rouse the slumbering morn,
From the side of some hoar hill,
Through the high wood echoing shrill:
Some time walking not unseen
By hedge-row elms, or hillocks green,
Right against the eastern gate,
Where the great sun begins his state,
Robbed in flames, and amber light,
The clouds in thousand liveries dight:
While the plough-man near at hand
Whistles over the furrowed land,
And the milk-maid sings blithe,
And the mower whets his scythe,
And every shepherd tells his tale
Under the hawthorn in the dale.
Straight mine eye has caught new pleasures,
Whilst the landscape round it measures;
Russet lawns, and fallows gray,
Where the nibbling flocks do stray;
Mountains, on whose barren breast
The laboring clouds do often rest;
Meadows trim, with daisies pied;
Shallow brooks, and rivers wide:
Towers and battlements it sees
Bosomed high in tufted trees,
Where, perhaps, some beauty lies,
The Cynosure of neighboring eyes.
Hard by a cottage chimney smokes,
From betwixt two aged oaks,
Where Corydon and Thyrsis met,
Are at their savory dinner set
Of herbs, and other country messes,
Which the neat-handed Phyllis dresses;
And then, in haste her bower she leaves,
With Thestylis to bind his sheaves;
Or, if the earlier season lead,
To the tanned hay-cock in the mead.
Tow'red cities please us then,
And the busy hum of men,
Where throngs of knights and barons bold,
In weeds of peace high triumphs hold;
With store of ladies, whose bright eyes
Rain influence, and judge the prize
Of wit or arms, while both contend
To win her grace, whom all commend.
There let Hymen often appear,
In saffron robe, with taper clear,
And pomp, and feast, and revelry,
With mask, and antique pageantry;
Such sights as youthful poets dream
On summer eve by haunted stream.
Then to the well trod stage anon,
If Johnson's learned sock be on,
Or sweetest Shakespeare, Fancy's child,
Warble his native wood-notes wild.
And ever, against eating cares,
Lap me in soft Lydian airs,
Married to immortal verse,
Such as the meeting soul may pierce,
In notes with many a winding bout
Of linked sweetness long drawn out,
With wanton heed, and giddy cunning,
The melting voice through mazes running;
Untwisting all the chains that tie
The hidden soul of Harmony:
That Orpheus' self may heave his head
From golden slumber on a bed
Of heaped Elysian flowers, and hear
Such strains as would have won the ear
Of Pluto, to have quite set free
His half regained Eurydice.
These delights if thou can give,
Mirth, with thee I mean to live.
III. ON the PURSUITS of MANKIND.
HONOR and shame from no condition rise:
Act well your part; there all the honor lies.
Fortune, in men, has some small difference made;
One flaunts in rags; one flutters in brocade;
The cobbler apron'd, and the parson gown'd;
The friar hooded, and the monarch crowned.
"What differ more," you cry, "than crown and cowl."
I Will tell you friend -- a wise man and a fool.
You Will find, if once the monarch acts the monk,
Or, cobler-like, the parson will be drunk,
Worth makes the man, and want of it the fellow:
The rest is all but leather or prunella.
Boast the pure blood of an illustrious race,
In quiet flow from Lucrece to Lucrece:
But, by your father's worth if yours you rate,
Count me those only, who were good and great*
Go! if your ancient, but ignoble blood,
Has crept through scoundrels ever since the flood;
Go! and pretend your family is young;
Nor own, your fathers have been fools so long.
What can enoble sots, or slaves, or cowards?
Alas! not all the blood of all the Howards.
Look next on greatness: say where greatness lies.
"Where, but among the heroes and the wise?"
Heroes are much the same, the point's agreed,
From Macedonia's madman to the Swede:
The whole strange purpose of their lives, to find
Or make -- an enemy of all mankind!
Not one looks backward; onward still he goes;
Yet never looks forward -- further than his nose.
No less alike the politic and wise:
All sly slow things, with circumspective eyes.
Men in their loose unguarded hours they take:
Not that themselves are wise, but others weak.
But, grant that those can conquer; these can cheat:
It Is phrase absurd, to call a villain great.
Who wickedly is wise, or madly brave,
Is but the more a fool, the more a knave.
Who noble ends by noble means obtains,
Or, failing, smiles in exile or in chains;
Like good Aurelius let him reign, or bleed
Like Socrates -- that man is great indeed.
What Is fame? -- a fancied life in others breath:
A thing beyond us, even before our death.
All fame is foreign, but of true desert;
Plays round the head, but comes not to the heart:
One self-approving hour whole years out-weighs
Of stupid starers, and of loud huzzas:
And more true joy, Marcellus, ex^l'd, feels,
Than Caesar, with a senate at his heels.
In parts superior what advantage lies?
Tell (for you can) what is it to be wise?
It Is but to know how little can be known;
To see all others faults, and feel our own;
Condemned in business, or in arts, to drudge
Without a second, or without a judge.
Truths would you teach, or save a sinking land?
All fear, none aid you, and few understand.
Painful Pre-eminence! yourself to view
Above life's weakness, and its comforts too.
Bring, then, these blessings to a strict account;
Make fair deductions; see to what they mount:
How much, of other, each is sure to cost;
How each, for other, often is wholly lost;
How inconsistent greater goods with these;
How sometimes life is risk'd, and always ease:
Think. And, if still such things thy envy call,
Say, would thou be the man to whom they fall?
To sigh for ribbands, if thou art so silly,
Mark how they grace Lord Umbra or Sir Billy.
Is yellow dirt the passion of thy life?
Look but on Gripus, or on Gripus' wife.
If parts allure thee, think how Bacon shined;
The wisest, brightest -- meanest of mankind.
Or, ravished with the whistling of a name,
See Cromwell damned to everlasting fame.
If all united thy ambition call,
From ancient story -- learn to scorn them all.
IV. ADAM and EVE's MORNING-HYMN.
THESE are thy glorious works! Parent of good!
Almighty! thine this universal frame,
Thus wondrous fair: Thyself how wondrous, then,
Unspeakable! who sit'st above these heavens,
To us invisible, or dimly seen
In these thy lowest works; yet these declare
Thy goodness beyond thought, and power divine --
Speak, ye who best can tell, ye sons of light,
Angels! for ye behold him, and, with songs
And choral symphonies, day without night,
Circle his throne rejoicing. Ye in heaven! --
On earth, join, all ye creatures, to extol
Him first, him last, him midst, and without end.
Fairest of stars! last in the train of night,
If better thou belong not to the dawn,
Sure pledge of day, that crown'st the smiling morn
With thy bright circlet, praise him in thy sphere,
While day arises, that sweet hour of prime.
Thou, Sun! of this great world both eye and soul,
Acknowledge him thy greater: sound his praise
In thy eternal course, both when thou climb'st,
And when high noon have gained, and when thou fall'st.
Moon! that now meet'st the orient sun, now fly'st,
With the fixed stars, fixed in their orb that flies;
And ye five other wandering fires! that move
In mysti^ dance, not without song; resound
His praise, who out of darkness called up light.
Air, and ye elements! the eldest birth
Of Nature's womb, that, in quaternion, run
Perpetual circle, multiform, and mix
And nourish all things, let your ceaseless change
Vary to our great Maker still new praise.
Ye mists and exhalations! that now rise
From hill or steaming lake, dusky or gray
Till the sun paint your fleecy skirts with gold,
In honor to the world's great Author rise;
Whether to deck with clouds the uncolor'd sky,
Or wet the thirsty earth with falling showers,
Rising or falling, still advance his praise.
His praise, ye winds! that from four quarters blow,
Breathe soft or loud: and wave your top^, ye pines!
With every plant, in sign of worship, wave.
Fountains! and ye that warble, as ye flow,
Melodious murmurs, warbling, tune his praise.
Join voices, all ye living souls. Ye birds,
That, singing, up to heaven-gate ascend,
Bear on your wings, and in your notes, his praise.
Ye that in waters glide! and ye that walk
The earth, and stately tread or lowly creep!
Witness if I be silent, morn or even,
To hill or valley, fountain or fresh shade,
Made vocal by my song, and taught his praise. --
Hail, universal Lord! Be bounteous still,
To give us only good; and, if the night
Have gathered ought of evil, or concealed --
Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark.
V. PARTING of HECTOR and ANDROMACHE.
HECTOR now passed, with sad presaging heart,
To seek his spouse, his soul's far dearer part.
At home he sought her; but he sought in vain:
She, with one maid of all her menial train,
Had thence retired; and, with her second joy
The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy,
Pensive she stood on Illion's tow'ry height,
Beheld the war, and sicken'd at the sight:
There her sad eyes in vain her lord explore,
Or weep the wounds -- her bleeding country bore.
Hector this heard, returned without delay;
Swift through the town, he took his former way,
Through streets of palaces and walks of state,
And meet the mourner at the Scaen gate.
With haste to meet him sprung the joyful fair,
His blameless wife, Aetion's wealthy heir.
The nurse stood near! in whose embraces pressed,
His only hope, hung, smiling at her breast;
Whom each soft charm and early grace adorn,
Fair as the newborn star that gilds the morn.
Silent, the warrior smiled; and, pleased, resigned
To tender passions all his mighty mind.
His beauteous princess cast a mournful look,
Hung on his hand, and then, dejected, spoke.
Her bosom labored with a boding sigh,
And the big tear -- stood trembling in her eye.
"Too daring prince! ah! whither do thou run?
Ah! too forgetful of thy wife and son!
And think thou not how wretched we shall be?
A widow I, an helpless orphan he!
For, sure, such courage length of life denies;
And thou must fall, thy virtue's sacrifice.
Greece in her single heroes strove in vain;
Now hosts oppose thee -- and thou must be slain.
Oh grant me, gods! ere Hector meets his doom,
All I can ask of heaven -- an early tomb!
So shall my days in one sad tenor run,
And end with sorrows as they first begun.
Thy wife, thy infant, in thy danger share --
Oh! prove a husband's and a parent's care.
That quarter most the skilful Greeks annoy,
Where yon wild fig trees join the wall of Troy:
Thrice our bold foes the fierce attack have given,
Or led by hopes, or dictated from heaven.
Let others in the field their arms employ;
But stay, my Hector, here, and guard his Troy."
The chief replied -- "That post shall be my care;
Nor that alone, but all the works of war.
How would the sons of Troy, in arms renowned,
And Troy's proud dames, whose garments sweep the ground,
Attaint the luster of my former name,
Should Hector basely quit the field of fame!
My early youth was bred to warlike pains:
My soul impels me to the martial plains.
Still foremost let me stand, to guard the throne,
To save my father's honors, and my own. --
Yet come it will! the day decreed by fates!
(How my heart trembles while my tongue relates!)
The day when thou, imperial Troy! -- must bend,
Must see thy warriors fall, thy glories end.
And, yet, no dire presage so wounds my mind,
My mother's death, the ruin of my kind,
Not Priam's hoary hairs defiled with gore,
Not all my brothers gasping on the shore,
As thine, Andromache! -- Thy griefs I dread!
I see thee trembling, weeping, captive led,
In Argive lo^ms our battles to design,
And woes, of which so large a part was thine.
There, while you groan beneath the load of life,
They cry -- "Behold the mighty Hector's wife!"
Some haughty Greek, who lives thy tears to see,
Embitters all thy woes, by naming me.
The thoughts of glory past, and present shame,
A thousand griefs, shall waken at the name!
May I lie cold before that dreadful day,
Pressed with a load of monumental clay!
Thy Hector, wrapped in everlasting sleep,
Shall neither hear thee sigh, nor see thee weep."
Thus having spoke, the illustrious chief of Troy
Stretched his fond arms to clasp the lovely boy.
The babe clung, crying, to his nurse's breast,
Scared with the dazzling helm and nodding crest.
With secret pleasure each fond parent smiled,
And Hector hasted to relieve his child;
The glittering terrors from his brows unbound,
And placed the beaming helmet on the ground.
Then kissed the child; and lifting high in air,
Thus to the gods preferred a parent's prayer.
"O Thou, whose glory fills the etherial throne!
And all ye deathless powers! -- protect my son!
Grant him, like me, to purchase just renown,
To guard the Trojans, to defend the crown,
Against his country's foes the war to wage,
And rise the Hector of the future age.
So, when, triumphant from successful toils,
Of heroes slain he bears the reeking spoils,
Whole hosts may hail him with deserved acclaim,
And say -- This chief transcends his father's fame;
While, pleased amidst the general shouts of joy,
His mother's conscious heart overflows with joy."
He spoke: and, fondly gazing on her charms,
Restored the pleasing burden to her arms.
Soft on her fragrant breast the babe she laid,
Hushed to repose, and with a smile surveyed:
The troubled pleasure, soon chastis'd with fear,
She mingled with the smile -- a tender tear.
The softened chief with kind compassion viewed,
And dried the falling drops; and thus pursued.
"Andromache! my soul's far better part!
Why with untimely sorrows heaves thy heart?
No hostile hand can antedate my doom,
Till fate condemn me to the silent tomb:
Fixed is the term of all the race of earth;
And such the hard condition of our birth.
No force can then resist, no flight can save;
All sink alike, the fearful and the brave.
No more -- but hasten to thy tasks at home;
There guide the spindle, and direct the loom.
Me glory summons to the martial scene;
The field of combat is the sphere for men:
Where heroes war, the foremost place I claim,
The first in danger, as the first in fame."
Thus having said, the undaunted chief resumes
His tow'ry helmet, black with shading plumes.
His princess parts with a prophetic sigh,
Unwilling parts, and often reverts her eye,
That streamed at every look; then, moving slow,
Sought her own palace, and indulged her woe.
There, while her tears deplored the god-like man,
Through all her train the soft infection ran;
The pious maids their mingled sorrows shed,
And mourned the living Hector as the dead.
VI. FACETIOUS HISTORY of JOHN GILPIN.
JOHN Gilpin was a citizen
Of credit and renown:
A train-band captain eke was he
Of famous London town.
John Gilpin's spouse said to her dear --
'Though wedded we have been
These twice ten tedious years, yet we
No holiday have seen.
Tomorrow is our wedding day,
And we will then repair
Unto the Bell at Edmonton
All in a chaise and pair.
My sister and my sister's child,
Myself and children three,
Will fill the chaise; so you must ride
On horseback after we.'
He soon replied -- 'I do admire
Of woman kind but one;
And you are she, my dearest dear,
Therefore it shall be done.
I am a linen-draper bold,
As all the world does know:
And my good friend Tom Callender,
Will lend his horse to go.'
Quoth Mrs. Gilpin -- 'That's well said:
And, for that wine is dear,
We will be furnished with our own,
Which is so bright and clear.'
John Gilpin kissed his loving wife;
Over joy'd was he to find,
T^^t though on pleasure she was bent,
^he had a frugal mind.
The morning came, the chaise was brought,
But yet was not allowed
To drive up to the door, lest all
Should say that she was proud.
So three doors off the chaise was staid,
Where they did all get in,
Six precious souls; and all agog
To dash through thick and thin.
Smack went the whip, round went the wheels,
Were never folks so glad;
The stones did rattle underneath,
As if Cheapside were mad.
John Gilpin at his horses' side,
Seized fast the flowing mane,
And up he got in haste to ride,
But soon came down again.
For saddle-tree scarce reached had he,
His journey to begin,
When, turning round his face, he saw
Three customers come in.
So down he came; for loss of time,
Although it grieved him sore,
Yet loss of pence, full well he knew,
Would grieve him still much more.
'Twas long before the customers
Were suited to their mind,
When Betty scream'd into his ears --
'The wine is left behind!'
'Good lack!' quoth he; 'yet bring it me,
My leathern belt likewise,
In which I bear my trusty sword
When I do exercise.'
Now Mrs. Gilpin -- careful soul!
Had two stone-bottles found,
To hold the liquor which she loved,
And keep it safe and sound.
Each bottle had two curling ears,
Through which the belt he drew;
He hung one bottle on each side,
To make his balance true.
Then, over all, that he might be
Equipped from top to toe,
His long red cloak, well brushed and neat,
He manfully did throw.
Now see him mounted once again
Upon his nimble steed,
Fully slowly pacing over the stones,
With caution and good heed.
But, finding soon a smoother road
Beneath this his well-shod feet,
The snorting beast began to trot,
Which galled him in his seat.
So 'fair and softly,' John did cry,
But John he cried in vain;
That trot became a gallop soon
In spite of curb or rein.
So stooping down, as he needs must
Who cannot sit upright,
He grasped the mane with both his hands,
And eke with all his might.
Away went Gilpin, neck or naught,
Away went hat and wig;
He little dreamt, when he set out,
Of running such a rig.
The horse, who never had before
Been handled in this kind,
Affrighted fled; and, as he flew,
Left all the world behind.
The wind did blow, the cloak did fly,
Like streamer long and gay;
Till loop and button failing both,
At last it flew away.
Then might all people well discern
The bottles he had slung;
A bottle swinging at each side,
As has been said or sung.
The dogs did bark, the children scream'd,
Up flew the windows all;
And every soul cried out, 'Well done!'
As loud as they could bawl.
Away went Gilpin -- who but he!
His fame soon spread around --
'He carries weight! -- he rides a race! --
It Is for a thousand pound!'
And still, as fast as he drew near,
'Twas wonderful to view,
How, in a trice, the turnpike-men
Their gates wide open threw.
And now, as he went bowing down
His reeking head full low,
The bottles twain, behind his back,
Were shattered at a blow.
Down ran the wine into the road,
Most piteous to be seen,
And made his horse's flanks to smoke,
As he had basted been.
But still he seemed to carry weight,
With leathern girdle braced;
For still the bottle necks were left
Both dangling at his waist.
Thus, all through merry Islington,
These gambols he did play,
And till he came unto the Wash
Of Edmonton so gay.
And there he threw the Wash about
On both sides of the way;
Just like unto a trundling mop,
Or a wild goose at play.
At Edmonton, his loving wife,
From the balcony, spied
Her tender husband, wondering much
To see how he did ride.
'Stop, stop, John Gilpin! here is the house!'
They all at once did cry;
'The dinner waits, and we are tired!'
Said Gilpin -- 'So am I!'
But, ah! his horse was not a whit
Inclined to tarry there;
For why? -- his owner had a house
Full ten miles off, at Ware.
So like an arrow swift he flew
Shot by an archer strong;
So did he fly -- which brings me to
The middle of my song.
Away went Gilpin, out of breath,
And sore against his will,
Till at his friend's, Tom Callender's,
His horse at last stood still.
Tom Callender, surpiz'd to see
His friend in such a trim,
Laid down his pipe, flew to the gate,
And thus accosted him --
'What news, what news! -- the tidings tell;
Make haste and tell me all!
Say, why bare-headed you are come,
Or why you come at all?'
Now Gilpin had a pleasant wit,
And loved a timely joke;
And thus unto Tom Callender,
In merry strains, he spoke --
'I come because your horse would come,
And, if I well forebode,
My hat and wig will soon be here;
They are upon the road.'
Tom Callender, right glad to find
His friend in merry pin,
Returned him not a single word,
But to the house went in.
Whence strait he came with hat and wig,
A wig that drooped behind,
A hat not much the worse for wear;
Each comely in its kind.
He held them up; and, in his turn,
Thus showed his ready wit --
'My head is twice as big as yours,
They therefore needs must fit.
But let me scrape the dirt away
That hangs about your face;
And stop and eat -- for well you my
Be in a hungry case!'
Said John -- 'It is my wedding day;
And folks would gape and stare,
If wife should dine at Edmonton,
And I should dine at Ware.'
Then, speaking to his horse, he said,
'I am in haste to dine:
'Twas for your pleasure you came here,
You shall go back for mine.'
Ah! luckless word and bootless boast,
For which he paid full dear;
For, while he spoke, a braying ass
Did sing most loud and clear:
Whereat his horse did snort, as if
He heard a lion roar;
And galloped off, with all his might,
As he had done before.
Away went Gilpin -- and away
Went Gilpin's hat and wig;
He lost them sooner than at first;
For why? -- They were too big.
Now, Gilpin's wife, when she had seen
Her husband posting down
Into the country far away,
She pulled out half-a-crown;
And thus unto the youth she said
That drove them to the Bell,
'This shall be yours, when you bring back
My husband safe and well.'
The youth did ride, and soon they met:
He tried to stop John's horse
By seizing fast the flowing rein;
But only made things worse:
For, not performing what he meant
And gladly would have done,
He, thereby, frighted Gilpin's horse,
And made him faster run.
Away went Gilpin -- and away
Went post-boy at his heels;
The post-boy's horse right glad to miss
The lumber of the wheels.
Six gentlemen upon the road,
Thus seeing Gilpin fly,
With post-boy scamp'ring in the rear,
They raised the hue-and-cry.
'Stop thief! -- stop thief! -- a highwayman!'
Not one of them was mute;
So they, and all that passed that way,
Soon joined in the pursuit.
But all the turnpike gates again
Flew open in short space;
The men still thinking, as before,
That Gilpin rode a race:
And so he did, and won it too,
For he got first to town;
Nor stopped till where he first got up
He did again get down.
Now let us sing -- 'Long live the King;
And Gilpin, long live he:
And when he next does ride abroad,
May I be there to see!'
VII. OVERTHROW OF THE REBEL ANGELS.
So said, he, over his scepter bowing, rose
From the right hand of glory, where he sat;
And the third sacred morn began to shine,
Dawning through heaven. Forth rushed, with whirlwind sound,
The chariot of paternal Deity,
Flashing thick flames; wheel within wheel undrawn,
Itself instinct with spirit, but convoyed
By four cherubic shapes: four faces each
Had wondrous; as with stars, their bodies all,
And wings, were set with eyes; with eyes the wheels
Of beril; and careering fires between:
Over their heads a crystal firmament,
Whereon a sapphire throne, inlaid with pure
Amber, and colors of the show'ry arch.
He in celestial panoply all armed
Of radiant Urim, work divinly wrought.
Ascended. At his right hand, victory
Sat eagle-wing'd: beside him, hung his bow
And quiver, with three-bolted thunder stored;
And from about him, fierce effusion rolled,
Of smoke, and bickering flame, and sparkles dire.
Attended with ten thousand thousand saints
He onward came; far off his coming shone:
And twenty thousand (I their number heard)
Chariots of God half on each hand, were seen.
He, on the wings of cherub, rode sublime
On the crystalline sky, in sapphire throned;
Illustrious far and wide, but by his own
First seen. Them unexpected joy surprised,
When the great ensign of Messiah blazed
Aloft, by angels borne, his sign in heaven:
Under whose conduct Michael soon reduced*
His army, circumfus'd on either wing,
Under their head embodied all in one.
Before him, power divine his way prepared.
At his command, the uprooted hills retired
Each to his place: they heard his voice, and went
Obsequious. Heaven his wonted face renewed;
And, with fresh flowerets, hill and valley smiled. --
This saw his hapless foes, but stood obdur'd;
And, now, to battle drew, disdaining flight,
Or faint retreat: when the great Son of God,
To all his host, on either hand, thus spoke.
Stand still in bright array, ye saints; here stand,
Ye angels armed: this day from battle rest.
Faithful has been your warfare, and of God
Accepted, fearless in his righteous cause:
And, as ye have received, so have ye done,
Invincibly. But of this cursed crew,
The punishment to other hand belongs.
Vengeance is his, or whose he sole appoints.
Number to this day's work is not ordained,
Nor multitude. Stand only, and behold
God's indignation on these godless poured
By me. Not you, but me, they have despised;
Yet envied. Against me is all their rage;
Because the Father, to whom, in heaven, supreme
Kingdom, and power, and glory, appertain,
Has honored me according to his will.
Therefore, to me their doom he has assigned;
That they may have their wish, to try with me,
In battle, which the stronger proves: they all,
Or I alone against them; since by strength
They measure all, of other excellence
Not emulous, nor care who them excels:
Nor other strife with them do I vouchsafe.
So spoke the Son: and into terror changed
His countenance, too severe to be beheld,
And full of wrath bent on his enemies.
At once, the four spread out their starry wings,
With dreadful shade contiguous, and the orbs
Of his fierce chariot rolled as with the sound
Of torrent floods, or of a numerous host.
He, on his impious foes, right onward drove,
Gloomy as night. Under his burning wheels
The steadfast empyrean shook throughout,
All but the throne itself of God. Full soon
Among them he arrived; in his right hand
Grasping ten thousand thunders, which he sent
Before him, such as in their souls infix'd
Plagues. They, astonished, all resistance lost,
All courage* down their idle weapons dropped:
Over shields, and helms, and helmed heads, he rode,
Of thrones and mighty seraphim prostrate,
That wished the mountains, now, might be again
Thrown on them, as a shelter from his ire.
Nor less, on either side, tempestuous sell
His arrows, from the fourfold-visag'd four
Distinct with eyes, and from the living wheels
Distinct alike with multitude of eyes:
One spirit in them ruled; and every eye
Glar'd lightning, and shot forth pernicious fire
Among the accursed, that withered all their strength,
And of their wonted vigor, left them drained,
Exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, fallen.
Yet half his strength he put not forth; but checked
His thunder in mid volley: for he meant,
Not to destroy, but root them out of heaven.
The overthrown he raised: and, as a herd
Of goats or timorous flock together thronged,
Drove them before him, thunderstruck, pursued
With terrors, and with furies, to the bounds
And crystal wall of heaven; which opening wide,
Rolled inward, and a spacious gap disclosed
Into the wasteful deep. The monstrous sight
Struck them with horror backward; but far worse
Urged them behind. Headlong themselves they threw
Down from the verge of heaven: eternal wrath
Burnt after them to the bottomless pit.
VIII. ALEXANDER's FEAST; or, The POWER of MUSIC. An ODE for St. CICILIA's DAY.
'TWAS at the royal feast, for Persia won
By Philip's warlike son --
Aloft, in awful state,
The god-like hero sat
On his imperial throne.
His valiant peers were placed around,
Their brows with roses and with myrtle bound:
So should desert in arms be crowned.
The lovely Thais by his side,
Sat like a blooming eastern bride,
In flower of youth, and beauty's pride.
Happy, happy, happy pair!
None but the brave,
None but the brave,
None but the brave, deserves the fair.
Timotheus placed on high
Amid the tuneful choir,
With flying fingers touched the lyre:
The trembling notes ascend the sky,
And heavenly joys inspire. --
The song began from Jove,
Who left his blissful seats above;
(Such is the power of mighty love!)
A dragon's fiery form belied the god:
Sublime on radiant spheres he rode,
When he to fair Olympia pressed,
And stamped an image of himself, a sovereign of the world.
The listening crowd admire the lofty sound;
A present deity, they shout around;
A present deity, the vaulted roofs rebound.
With ravished ears
The monarch hears,
Assumes the god:
Affects to nod,
And seems to shake the spheres.
The praise of Bacchus, then, the sweet musician sung;
Of Bacchus, ever fair and ever young,
The jolly god in triumph comes!
Sound the trumpets; beat the drums:
Flushed with a purple grace,
He shows his honest face.
Now give the hautboys breath -- he comes! he comes!
Bacchus, ever fair and young,
Drinking joys did first ordain:
Bacchus' blessings are a treasure;
Drinking is the soldier's pleasure;
Rich the treasure;
Sweet the pleasure;
Sweet is pleasure, after pain.
Soothed with the sound the king grew vain;
Fought all his battles over again;
And thrice he routed all his foes, and thrice he slew the slain.
The master saw the madness rise;
His glowing cheeks, his ardent eyes;
And while he heaven and earth defied,
Changed his hand and checked his pride. --
He chose a mournful muse,
Soft pity to infuse:
He sung Darius, great and good,
By too severe a fate,
Fallen, fallen, fallen, fallen,
Fallen from his high estate,
And weltering in his blood;
Deserted at his utmost need
By those his former bounty fed,
On the bare earth exposed he lies,
With not a friend to close his eyes. --
With downcast look the joyless victor sat,
Revolving, in his altered soul,
The various turns of fate below;
And, now and then, a sigh he stole,
And tears began to flow.
The mighty master smiled, to see
That love was in the next degree:
'Twas but a kindred sound to move;
For pity melts the mind to love.
Softly sweet, in Lydian measures,
Soon he soothed his soul to pleasures.
War, he sung, his toil and trouble;
Honor but an empty bubble;
Never ending, still beginning,
Fighting still, and still destroying.
If the world be worth thy winning,
Think, O think it worth enjoying!
Lovely Thais sits beside thee;
Take the good the gods provide thee. --
The many rend the skies with loud applause:
So love was crowned: but music won the cause. --
The prince unable to conceal his pain,
Gazed on the fair
Who caused his care,
And sighed and looked, sighed and look'^,
Sighed and looked, and sighed again:
At length, with love and wine at once oppressed,
The vanquished victor -- sunk upon her breast.
Now, strike the golden lyre again;
A louder yet, and yet a louder strain:
Break his bands of sleep asunder,
And rouse him like a rattling peal of thunder.
Hark! hark! -- the horrid sound
Has raised up his head,
As awaked from the dead;
And, amazed, he stares around.
Revenge, revenge! Timotheus cries --
See the furies arise!
See the snakes that they rear,
How they hiss in their hair,
And the sparkles that flash from their eyes!
Behold a ghastly band,
Each a torch in his hand!
These are Grecian ghosts, that in battle were slain,
And, unbury'd remain
Inglorious on the plain.
Give the vengeance due
To the valiant crew.
Behold! how they toss their torches on high,
How they point to the Persian abodes,
And glittering temples of their hostile gods! --
The princes applaud, with a furious joy;
And the king seized a flambeau, with zeal to destroy:
Thais led the way,
To light him to his prey;
And, like another Helen -- fired another Troy.
Thus, long ago,
Ere heaving bellows learned to blow,
While organs yet were mute;
Timotheus, to his breathing flute
And sounding lyre,
Could swell the soul to rage -- or kindle soft desire.
At last, divine Cicilia came,
Inventress of the vocal frame.
The sweet enthusiast, from her sacred store,
Enlarged the former narrow bounds,
And added length to solemn sounds,
With Nature's mother-wit, and arts unknown before*
Let old Timotheus yield the prize,
Or both divide the crown:
He raised a mortal to the skies;
She threw an angel down.
PART II. LESSONS IN SPEAKING.
SECTION I. ELOQUENCE OF THE PULPIT.
I. On TRUTH and INTEGRITY.
TRUTH and integrity have all the advantages of appearance, and many more. If
the show of any thing be good for any thing, I am sure the reality is better;
for why does any man dissemble, or seem to be that which he is not, but because
he thinks it good to have the qualities he pretends to? for to counterfeit and
dissemble, is to put on the appearance of some real excellency. Now, the best
way for a man to seem to be any thing, is really to be what he would seem to
be. Besides, it is often as troublesome to support the pretense of a good
quality, as to have it; and if a man have it not, it is most likely he will be
discovered to want it; and then all his labor to seem to have it is lost. There
is something unnatural in painting, which a skilful eye will easily discern
from native beauty and complexion.

It is hard to personate and act a part long; for, where truth is not at the
bottom, nature will always be endeavoring to return, and will betray herself at
one time or other. Therefore, if any man think it convenient to seem good, let
him be ^o indeed: and then his goodness will appear to every o^e's
satisfaction: for truth is convincing, and carries is own light and evidence
along with it; and will not ^nly commend us to every man's conscience, but,
which is much more, to God, who searches our hearts. So that, upon all
accounts, sincerity is true wisdom. Particularly, as to the affairs of this
world, integrity has many advantages over all the artificial modes of
dissimulation and deceit. It is much the plainer and easier, much the safer and
more secure way of dealing in the world; it has less of trouble and
difficulty, of entanglement and perplexity, of danger and hazard, in it; it is
the shortest and nearest way to our end, carrying us thither in a straight
line; and will hold out and last longest. The arts of deceit and cunning
continually grow weaker and less effectual and serviceable to those that
practice them: whereas integrity gains strength by use; and the more and longer
any man practices it, the greater service it does him, by confirming his
reputation, and encouraging those with whom he has to do, to repose the
greatest confidence in him; which is an unspeakable advantage in business and
the affairs of life.

A dissembler must always be upon his guard, and watch himself carefully, that
he do not contradict his own pretensions; for he acts an unnatural part, and
therefore must put a continual force and restraint upon himself: whereas he
that acts sincerely, has the easiest task in the world; because he follows
nature, and so is put to no trouble and care about his words and actions; he
needs not invent any pretenses before hand, nor make excuses afterward, for
any thing he has said or done.

But in sincerity is very troublesome to manage. A hypocrite has so many
things to attend to, as make his life a very perplexed and intricate thing. A
liar has need of a good memory, lest he contradict at one time what he said at
another. But truth is always consistent with itself, and needs nothing to help
it out; it is always near at hand, and sits upon our lips, and is ready to drop
out before we are aware; whereas a lie is troublesome, and one trick needs a
great many more to make it good.

Add to all this, that sincerity i^ the most compendious wisdom, and an
excellent inst^ument for the speedy dispatch of business. It creates ^onfidence
in those we have to deal with, saves the la^or of many inquiries, and brings
things to an issue in a few words. It is like traveling in a plain beaten
road, which commonly brings a man sooner to his journey's end than by-ways, in
which men often lose themselves. In a word, whatever convenience may be thought
to be in falsehood and dissimulation, it is soon over; but the inconvenience of
it is perpetual, because it brings a man under an everlasting jealousy and
suspicion, so that he is not believed when he speaks truth, nor trusted when
perhaps he means honestly. When a man has once forfeited the reputation of his
integrity, nothing will then serve his turn, neither truth nor falsehood.

Indeed, if a man were only to deal in the world for a day, and should never
have occasion to converse more with mankind, never more need their good opinion
or good word, it were then no great matter (as far as respects the affairs of
this world) if he spent his reputation all at once, and ventured it at one
throw. But, if he be to continue in the world, and would have the advantage of
reputation whilst he is in it, let him make use of sincerity in all his words
and actions, for nothing but this will hold out to the end. All other arts will
fail; but truth and integrity will carry a man through, and bear him out to the
last.

II. ON DOING AS WE WOULD BE DONE UNTO.
HUMAN laws are often so numerous as to escape our memories; so darkly
sometimes, and inconsistently worded, as to puzzle our understandings; and
their original obscurity is not seldom improved by the nice distinctions and
subtle reasonings of those who profess to clear them: so that, under these
several disadvantages, they lose much of their force and influence; and, in
some cases, raise more disputes than, perhaps, they determine. But here is a
law, attended with none of these inconveniences; the grossest minds can scarce
misapprehend it; the weakest memories are capable of retaining it; no
perplexing comment can easily cloud it; the authority of no man's gloss upon
earth can (if we are but sincere) sway us to make a wrong construction of it.
What is said of all the gospel precepts by the evangelical prophet, is more
eminently true of this: "It is an highway; and the wayfareing man, though a
fool, shall not err therein."

It is not enough that a rule, which is to be of general use, is suited to all
capacities, so that, wherever it is represented to the mind, it is presently
agreed to; it must also be apt to offer itself to our thoughts, and lie ready
for present use, upon all exigencies and occasions. And such, remarkably such,
is that which our Lord here recommends to us, we can scarce be so far surprised
by any immediate necessity of acting, as not to have time for a short recourse
to it, room for a suddden glance as it were upon it, in our minds; where it
rests and sparkles always, like the Urim and Thummim on the breast of Aaron.
There is no occasion for us to go in search of it to the oracles of law, dead
or living: to the code or pandects: to the volumes of divines or moralists: We
need look no further than ourselves for it: for (to use the apposite
expressions of Moses), "This commandment which I command thee this day, is not
hidden from thee, neither is it far off. It is not in heaven, that thou
should say, Who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we
may hear it, and do it? Neitheir is it beyond the sea, that thou should say,
Who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it,
and do it? But the (...) is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy
heart, that thou may do it."

It is, moreover, a precept particularly fitted for practice; as it involves in
the very notion of it a motive stirring us up to do what it enjoins. Other
moral maxims propose naked truths to the understanding, which operate often but
faintly and slowly on the will and passions, the two active principles of the
mind of man: but it is the peculiar character of this, that it addresseth
itself equally to all these powers; imparts both light and heat to us; and at
the same time that it informs us certainly and clearly what we are to do,
excites us also, in the most tender and moving manner to the performance of it.
We can see our neighbor's misfortune, without a sensible degree of concern;
which yet we cannot forbear expressing, when we have once made his condition
our own, and determined the measure of our obligation toward him, by what we
ourselves should, in such a case, expect from him: our duty grows immediately
our interest and pleasure, by means of this powerful principle; the seat of
which is, in truth, not more in the brain, than in the heart of man: it appeals
to our very senses; and exerts its secret force in so prevailing a way, that it
is even felt, as well as understood by us.

The last recommendation of this rule I shall mention, is its vast and
comprehensive influence: for it extends to all ranks and conditions of men, and
to all kinds of action and intercourse between them; to matters of charity,
generosity, and civility, as well as justice; to negative no less than positive
duties. The ruler and the ruled are alike subject to it; public communities can
no more exempt themselves from its obligation than private persons: "All
persons must fall down before it, all nations must do it service." And, with
respect to this extent of it, it is, that our blessed Lord pronounces it in the
text to be "the law and the prophets." His meaning is, that whatever rules of
the second table are delivered in the law of Moses, or in the larger comments
and explanations of that law made by the other writers of the Old Testament
(here and elsewhere styled the prophets), they are all virtually comprised in
this one short significant saying, "Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto
you, do ye even so unto them."

III. ON BENEVOLENCE AND CHARITY.
FORM as amiable sentiments as you can, of nations, communities of men, and
individuals. If they are true, you do them only justice; if false, though your
opinion does not alter their nature and make them lovely, you yourself are more
lovely for entertaining such sentiments. When you feel the bright warmth of a
temper thoroughly good in your own breast, you will see something good in every
one about you. It is a mark of littleness of spirit to confine yourself to some
minute part of a man's character: a man of generous, open, extended views, will
grasp the whole of it; without which he cannot pass a right judgment on any
part. He will not arraign a man's general conduct for two or three particular
actions; as knowing that man is a changeable creature, and will not cease to be
so, till he is united to that Being who is "the same yesterday, today and for
ever." He strives to out do his friends in good offices, and overcome his
enemies by them. He thinks he then receives the greatest injury when he returns
and revenges one: for then he is "overcome of evil." Is the person young who
has injured him? He will reflect, that inexperience of the world, and a warmth
of constitution, may betray his unpractised years into several inadvertencies,
which a more advanced age, his own good sense, and the advice of a judicious
friend, will correct and rectify. Is he old? The infirmities of age and want of
health may have set an edge upon his spirits, and made him "speak unadvisedly
with his lips." Is he weak and ignorant? He considers that it is a duty
incumbent upon the wise to bear with those that are not so. "Ye suffer fools
gladly," says St Paul, "seeing ye yourselves are wise." In short, he judges of
himself, as far as he can, with the strict rigor of justice; but of others,
with the softenings of humanity,

From charitable and benevolent thoughts, the transition is unavoidable to
charitable actions. For wherever there is an inexhaustible fund of goodness at
the heart, it will, under all the disadvantages of circumstances, exert itself
in acts of substantial kindness. He that is substantially good, will be doing
good. The man that has a hearty determinate will to be charitable, will seldom
put men off with the mere will for the deed. For a sincere desire to do good,
implies some uneasiness till the thing be done: and uneasiness sets the mind at
work, and puts it upon the stretch to find out a thousand ways and means of
obliging, which will ever escape the unconcerned, the indifferent, and the
unfeeling.

The most proper objects of your bounty are the necessitious. Give the same sum
of money, which you bestow on a person in tolerable circumstances, to one in
extreme poverty; and observe what a wide disproportion of happiness is
produced. In the latter case, it is like giving a cordial to a fainting person;
in the former, it is like giving wine to him who has already quenched his
thirst. Mercy is seasonable in time of affliction, like clouds of rain in the
time of drought.

And among the variety of necessitous objects, none have a better title to our
compassion, than those, who, after having tasted the sweets of plenty, are, by
some undeserved calamity, obliged, without some charitable relief, to drag out
the remainder of life in misery and woe; who little thought they should ask
their daily bread of any but of God: who, after a life led in affluence,
"cannot dig, and are ashamed to beg." And they are to be relieved in such an
endearing manner, with such a beauty of holiness, that, at the same time that
their wants are supplied, their confusion of face may be prevented.

There is not an instance of this kind in history so affecting, as that
beautiful one of Boaz to Ruth. He knew her family, and how she was reduced to
the lowest ebb; when therefore she begged leave to glean in his fields, he
ordered his reapers to let fall several handfuls with a seeming carelessness,
but really with a set design, that she might gather them up without being
ashamed. Thus did he form an artful scheme, that he might give, without the
vanity and ostentation of giving; and she receive, without the shame and
confusion of making acknowledgments. Take the history in the words of
scripture, as it is recorded in the book of Ruth. "And when she was risen up to
glean, Boaz commanded his young men, saying, Let her glean even among the
sheaves, and rebuke her not: and let fall also some of the handfuls of purpose,
and leave them that she may glean them, and reproach her not." This was not
only doing a good action; it was doing it likewise with a good grace.

It is not enough we do no harm, that we be negatively good; we must do good,
positive good, if we would "enter into life." When it would have been as good
for the world, if such a man had never lived; it would perhaps have been better
for him, "if he had never beer born." A scanty fortune may limit your
beneficence, and confine it chiefly to the circle of your domestics, relations
and neighbors; but let your benevolence extend as far as thought can travel, to
the utmost bounds of the world: just as it may be only in your power to
beautify the spot of ground that lies near and close to you; but you could
wish, that, as far as your eye can reach, the whole prospect before you was
cheerful, that every thing disagreeable was removed, and every thing beautiful
made more so.

IV. ON HAPPINESS.
THE great pursuit of man is after happiness: it is the first and strongest
desire of his nature; -- in every stage of his life he searches for it as for
hid treasure; -- courts it under a thousand different shapes; -- and, though
perpetually disappointed, -- still persists -- runs after and enquires for it
afresh -- asks every passenger who comes in his way, "Who will show him any
good?" -- who will assist him in the attainment of it, or direct him to the
discovery of this great end of all his wishes?

He is told by one, to search for it among the more gay and youthful pleasures
of life; in scenes of mirth and sprightliness, where happiness ever presides,
and is ever to be known by the joy and laughter which he will see at once
painted in her looks.

A second, with a graver aspect, points out to him the costly dwellings which
pride and extravagance have erected: -- tells the enquirer that the object he
is in search of inhabits there; -- that happiness lives only in company with
the great, in the midst of much pomp and outward state. That he will easily
find her out by the coat of many colors she has on, and the great luxury and
expense of equipage and furniture with which she always sits surrounded.

The miser wonders how any one would mislead and wilfully put him upon so wrong
a scent -- convinces him that happiness and extravagance never inhabited under
the same roof: -- that, if he would not be disappointed in his search, he must
look into the plain and thrifty dwelling of the prudent man, who knows and
understands the worth of money, and cautiously lays it up against an evil hour:
that it is not the prostitution of wealth upon the passions, or the parting
with it at all, that constitutes happiness -- but that it is the keeping it
together, and the having and holding it fast to him and his heirs for ever,
which are the chief attributes that form this great idol of human worship, to
which so much incense is offered up every day.

The epicure, though he easily rectifies so gross a mistake, yet at the same
time he plunges him, if possible, into a greater; for, hearing the object of
his pursuit to be happiness, and knowing of no other happiness than what is
seated immediately in his senses -- he sends the enquirer there; -- tells him
it is in vain to search elsewhere for it, than where nature herself has placed
it -- in the indulgence and gratification of the appetites, which are given us
for that end: and in a word -- if he will not take his opinion in the matter --
he may trust the word of a much wiser man, who has assured us -- that there is
nothing better in this world, than that a man should eat and drink and rejoice
in his works, and make his soul enjoy good in his labor -- for that is his
portion.

To rescue him from this brutal experiment -- ambition takes him by the hand
and carries him into the world, -- shows him all the kingdoms of the earth and
the glory of them -- points out the many ways of advancing his fortune and
raising himself to honor, -- lays before his eyes all the charms and bewitching
temptations of power, and asks if there be any happiness in this world like
that of being caressed, courted, flattered, and followed?

To close all, the philosopher meets him bustling in the full career of this
pursuit -- stops him -- tells him, if he is in search of happiness, he is far
gone out of his way: -- that this deity has long been banished from noise and
tumults, where there was no rest found for her, and was fled into solitude far
from all commerce of the world; and, in a word, if he would find her, he must
leave this busy and intriguing scene, and go back to that peaceful scene of
retirement and books from which he first set out.

In this circle, too often does a man run, tries all experiments, and generally
sits down wearied and dissatisfied with them all at last -- in utter despair of
ever accomplishing what he wants -- nor knowing what to trust to after so many
disappointments -- or where to lay the fault, whether in the incapacity of his
own nature, or the insufficiency of the enjoyments themselves.

In this uncertain and perplexed state -- without knowledge which way to turn
or where to betake ourselves for refuge -- so often abused and deceived by the
many who pretend thus to show us any good -- Lord! says the Psalmist, lift up
the light of thy countenance upon us. Send us some rays of thy grace and
heavenly wisdom, in this benighted search after happiness, to direct us safely
to it. O God! let us not wander for ever without a guide, in this dark region,
in endless pursuit of our mistaken good; but enlighten our eyes that we sleep
not in death -- open to them the comforts of thy holy word and religion -- lift
up the light of thy countenance upon us, -- and make us know the joy and
satisfaction of living in the true faith and fear of Thee, which only can carry
us to this haven of rest where we would be -- that sure haven, where true joys
are to be found, which will at length not only answer all our expectations --
but satisfy the most unbounded of our wishes for ever and ever.

There is hardly any subject more exhausted, or which at one time or other has
afforded more matter for argument and declamation, than this one, of the
insufficiency of our enjoyments. Scarce a reformed sensualist, from Solomon
down to our own days, who has not, in some fits of repentance or
disappointment, uttered some sharp reflection upon the emptiness of human
pleasure, and of the vanity of vanities which discovers itself in all the
pursuits of mortal man. -- But the mischief has been, that, though so many good
things have been said, they have generally had the fate to be considered,
either as the overflowings of disgust from sated appetites which could no
longer relish the pleasures of life, or as the declamatory opinions of recluse
and splenetic men, who had never tasted them at all, and, consequently, were
thought no judges of the matter. So that it is no great wonder, if the greatest
part of such reflections, however just in themselves, and founded on truth and
a knowledge of the world, are found to leave little impression where the
imagination was already heated with great expectations of future happiness; and
that the best lectures that have been read upon the vanity of the world, so
seldom stop a man in the pursuit of the object of his desire, or give him half
the conviction, that the possession of it will, and what the experience of his
own life, or a careful observation upon the life of others, do at length
generally confirm to us all.

I would not be understood as if I was denying the reality of pleasures, or
disputing the being of them, any more than one would the reality of pain -- yet
I must observe, that there is a plain distinction to be made betwixt pleasures
and happiness. For though there can be no happiness without pleasure -- yet the
reverse of the proposition will not hold true. -- We are so made, that, from
the common gratifications of our appetites, and the impressions of a thousand
objects, we snatch the one like a transient gleam, without being suffered to
taste the other and enjoy the perpetual sunshine and fair weather which
constantly attend it. This, I contend, is only to be found in religion -- in
the consciousness of virtue -- and the sure and certain hopes of a better life,
which brightens all our prospects, and leaves no room to dread disappointments
-- because the expectation of it is built upon a rock whose foundations are as
deep as those of heaven and hell.

And though, in our pilgrimage through this world -- some of us may be so
fortunate as to meet with some clear fountains by the way that may cool, for a
few moments, the heat of this great thirst of happiness -- yet our Savior, who
knew the world, though he enjoyed but little of it, tells us, that whosoever
drinks of this water will thirst again: -- and we all find by experience it
is so, and by reason that it always must be so.

I conclude with a short observation upon Solomon's evidence in this case.

Never did the busy brain of a lean and hectic chemist search for the
philosopher's stone with more pains and ardor than this great man did after
happiness. He was one of the wisest enquirers into nature -- had tried all her
powers and capacities; and, after a thousand vain speculations and vile
experiments, he affirmed at length, it lay hid in no one thing he had tried:
like the chymist's projections, all had ended in smoke, or, what was worse, in
vanity and vexation of spirit. -- The conclusion of the whole matter was this
-- that he advises every man who would be happy, to fear God and keep his
commandments.

V. ON THE DEATH OF CHRIST.
THE Redemption of man is one of the most glorious works of the Almighty. If
the hour of the creation of the world was great and illustrious; that hour,
when, from the dark and formless mass, this fair system of nature arose at the
Divine command; when "the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God
shouted for joy;" -- no less illustrious is the hour of the restoration of the
world; the hour, when, from condemnation and misery, it emerged into happiness
and peace. With less external majesty it was attended, but is, on that account,
the more wonderful, that, under an appearance so simple, such great events were
covered.

In the hour of Christ's death the long series of prophecies, visions, types,
and figures, was accomplished. This was the center in which they all met; this
the point toward which they had tended and verged, throughout the course of so
many generations. You behold the Law and the Prophets standing, if we may so
speak, at the foot of the cross, and doing homage. You behold Moses and Aaron
bearing the ark of the covenant; David and Elijah presenting the oracle of
testimony. You behold all the priests and sacrifices, all the rites and
ordinances, all the types and symbols, assembled together to receive their
consummation. Without the death of Christ, the worship and ceremonies of the
law would have remained a pompous, but unmeaning institution. In the hour when
he was crucified, "the book with the seven seals" was opened. Every rite
assumed its significancy; every prediction met its event; every symbol
displayed its correspondence.

This was the hour of the abolition of the Law, and the introduction of the
Gospel; the hour of terminating the old, and of beginning the new dispensation
of religious knowledge and worship throughout the earth. Viewed in this light,
it forms the most august era which is to be found in the history of mankind.
When Christ was suffering on the cross, we are informed by one of the
Evangelists, that he said, "I thirst;" and that they filled a sponge with
vinegar, and put it to his mouth. "After he had tasted the vinegar, knowing
that all things were now accomplished, and the scripture fulfilled, he said,
"It is finished;" that is, This offered draught of vinegar was the last
circumstance predicted by an ancient prophet that remained to be fulfilled. The
vision and the prophecy are now sealed: the Mosaic dispensation is closed. "And
he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost." -- Significantly was the veil of the
temple rent in this hour; for the glory then departed from between the
cherubims. The legal high priest delivered up his Urim and Thummim, his
breast plate, his robes, and his incense; and CHRIST stood forth as the great
High Priest of all succeeding generations. By that one sacrifice which he now
offered, he abolished sacrifices for ever. Altars on which the fire had blazed
for ages were now to smoke no more. Victims were no more to bleed. "Not with
the blood of bulls and goats, but with his own blood, he now entered into the
Holy Place, there to appear in the presence of God for us"

This was the hour of association and union to all the worshippers of God. When
Christ said "It is finished," he threw down the wall of partition which had so
long divided the Gentile from the Jew. He gathered into one all the faithful,
out of every kindred and people. He proclaimed the hour to be come, when the
knowledge of the true God should be no longer confined to one nation, nor his
worship to one temple; but over all the earth, the worshippers of the Father
should "serve him in spirit and in truth." From that hour, they who dwelt in
the "uttermost ends of the earth, strangers to the covenant of promise," began
to be "brought nigh." In that hour, the light of the gospel dawned from afar on
the British islands.

This was the hour of Christ's triumph over all the powers of darkness; the
hour in which he overthrew dominions and thrones, "led captivity captive, and
gave gifts unto men. The contest which the kingdom of darkness had long
maintained against the kingdom of light, was now brought to its crisis. The
period was come, when "the seed of the woman should bruise the head of the
serpent." For many ages, the most gross superstition had filled the earth. "The
glory of the incorruptible God was" every where, except in the land of Judea,
"changed into images made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and beasts,
and creeping things." The world, which the Almighty created for himself, seemed
to have become a temple of idols. Even to vices and passions altars were
raised; and, what was entitled Religion, was, in effect, a discipline of
impurity. In the midst of this universal darkness, Satan had erected his
throne; and the learned and polished, as well as the savage nations, bowed down
before him. But at the hour when Christ appeared on the cross, the signal of
his defeat was given. His kingdom suddenly departed from him; the reign of
Idolatry passed away: He was "beheld to fall like lightening from heaven." In
that hour, the foundation of every Pagan temple shook; the statute of every
false god tottered on its base. The priest fled from his falling shrine; and
the heathen oracles became dumb for ever.

Death also, the last foe of man, was the victim of this hour. The formidable
appearance of the spectre remained, but his dart was taken away: for, in the
hour when Christ expiated guilt, he disarmed death, by securing the
resurrection of the just. When he said to his penitent fellow-sufferer, "Today
thou shall be with me in paradise," he announced to all his followers the
certainty of heavenly bliss. He declared "the cherubims" to be dismissed, and
the "flaming sword" to be sheathed, which had been appointed at the fall "to
keep from man the way of the Tree of life." Faint, before this period, had been
the hope, indistinct the prospect, which even good men enjoyed of the heavenly
kingdom. "Life and immortality were now brought to light." From the hill of
Calvary, the first clear and certain view was given to the world of the
everlasting mansions. Since that hour, they have been the perpetual consolation
of believers in Christ. Under trouble, they soothe their minds; amidst
temptations they support their virtue; and, in their dying moments, enable them
to say, "O death! where is thy sting? O grave! where is thy victory?"

SECTION II. ELOQUENCE OF THE SENATE.
I. SPEECH of the EARL of CHESTERFIELD, in the HOUSE of LORDS, FEB. 22. 1740,
on the PENSION BILL.
MY LORDS,
IT is now so late, and so much has been said in favor of the motion for the
second reading of the Pension Bill, by Lords much abler than I am, that I shall
detain you but a very short while with what I have to say upon the subject. It
has been said by a Noble Duke, that this bill can be looked on only as a bill
for preventing a grievance that is foreseen, and not as a bill for remedying a
grievance that is already felt; because it is not asserted, nor so much as
insinuated in the preamble of the bill, that any corrupt practices are now made
use of, for gaining an undue influence over the other House. My Lords, this was
the very reason for bringing in the bill. They could not assert, that any such
practices are now made use of, without a proof; and the means for coming at
this proof, is what they want, and what they propose to get by this bill. They
suspect there are such practices, but they cannot prove it. The crime is of
such a secret nature, that it can very seldom be proved by witnesses; and
therefore they want to put it to the trial, at least, of being proved by the
oath of one of the parties; which is a method often taken in cases that can
admit of no other proof. This is, therefore, no argument of the grievance not
being felt; for a man may, very sensibly, feel a grievance, and yet may not be
able to prove it.

That there is a suspicion of some such practices being now made use of, or
that they will soon be made use of, the many remonstrances from all parts of
the united kingdoms are a sufficient proof. That this suspicion has crept into
the other House, their having so frequently sent up this bill is a manifest
demonstration, and a strong argument for its being necessary to have some such
bill passed into a law. The other house must be allowed to be better judges of
what passes, or must pass, within their own walls, than we can pretend to be.
It is evident, they suspect that corrupt practices have been, or soon may be,
made use of, for gaining an undue influence over some of their measures; and
they have calculated this bill for curing the evil if it is felt, for
preventing it if it is only foreseen. That any such practices have been
actually made use of, or are now made use of, is what I shall not pretend to
affirm; but I am sure I shall not affirm the contrary. If any such are made use
of, I will, with confidence, vindicate his Majesty. I am sure he knows nothing
of them. I am sure he will disdain to suffer them: but I cannot pass such a
compliment upon his ministers, nor upon any set of ministers that ever was, or
ever will be, in this nation; and, therefore, I think I cannot more faithfully,
more effectually, serve his present Majesty, as well as his successors, than by
putting it out of the power of ministers to gain any corrupt influence over
either House of Parliament. Such an attempt may be necessary for the security
of the minister, but never can be necessary, for it must always be inconsistent
with the security of his Master: and the more necessary it is for the
minister's security, the more inconsistent it will always be with the King's,
and the more dangerous to the liberties of the nation.

To pretend, my Lords, that this bill diminishes, or any way encroaches upon
the prerogative, is something very strange. What prerogative, my Lords? Has the
Crown a prerogative to bribe, to infringe the law, by sending its pensioners
into the other House? To say so, is destroying the credit, the authority of the
Crown, under the pretense of supporting its prerogative. If his Majesty knew
that any man received a pension from him, or any thing like a pension, and yet
kept his seat in the other House, he would himself declare it, or withdraw his
pension, because he knows it is against law. This bill, therefore, no way
diminishes or encroaches upon the prerogatives of the Crown, which can never be
exercised but for the public good. It diminishes only the prerogatives usurped
by ministers which are never exercised but for its destruction. The Crown may
still reward merit in the proper way, that is openly. The bill is intended, and
can operate only against clandestine rewards or gratuities given by ministers.
These are scandalous, and never were, nor will be, given but for scandalous
services.

It is very remarkable, my Lords, it is even diverting, to see such a
squeamishness about perjury upon this occasion, amongst those, who, upon other
occasions, have invented and enacted multitudes of oaths, to be taken by men
who are under great temptations, from their private interest, to be guilty of
perjury. Is not this the case of almost every oath that relates to the
collection of the public revenue, or to the exercise of any office? Is not this
perjury one of the chief objections made by the Dissenters against the Test and
Corporation Act? And shall we show a less concern for the preservation of our
constitution, than for the preservation of our church? The reverend bench
should be cautious of making use of this argument; for if they will not allow
us an oath for the preservation of the former, it may induce many people to
think they ought not to be allowed an oath for the preservation of the latter.

By this time, I hope my Lords, all the inconveniences pretended to arise from
this bill have vanished; and therefore I shall consider some of the arguments
brought to show that it is not necessary. Here I must observe, that most of the
arguments made use of for this purpose, are equally strong for a repeal of the
laws we have already in being against admitting pensioners to sit and vote in
the other House. If it be impossible to suppose, that a gentleman of great
estate and ancient family, can, by a pension, be influenced to do what he ought
not to do; and if we must suppose, that none but such gentlemen can ever get
into the other House, I am sure the laws for preventing pensioners from having
seats in that House are quite unnecessary, and ought to be repealed. Therefore,
if these arguments prevail with your Lordships to put a negative upon the
present question, I shall expect to see that negative followed by a motion for
the repeal of those laws; nay, in a few sessions, I shall expect to see a bill
brought in for preventing any man's being a member of the other House but such
as have some place or pension under the Crown. As an argument for such a bill,
it might be said, that his Majesty's most faithful subjects ought to be chosen
members of Parliament, and that those gentlemen will always be most faithful to
the King that receive the King's money. I shall grant, my Lords, that such
gentlemen will be always the most faithful, and the most obedient to the
minister; but for this very reason, I should be for excluding them from
Parliament. The king's real interest, however much he may be made by his
ministers to mistake it, must always be the same with the people's; but the
minister's interest is generally distinct from, and often contrary to both:
therefore I shall always be for excluding, as much as possible, from
Parliament, every man who is under the least inducement to prefer the interest
of the minister to that of both king and people: and this I take to be the case
of every gentleman, let his estate and family be what they will, that holds a
pension at the will of the minister.

Those who say, they depend so much upon the honor, integrity and impartiality
of men of family and fortune, seem to think our constitution can never be
dissolved, as long as we have the shadow of a Parliament. My opinion, my Lord,
is so very different, that if ever our constitution be dissolved, if ever an
absolute monarchy be established in this kingdom, I am convinced it will be
under that shadow. Our constitution consists in the two Houses of Parliament
being a check upon the Crown, as well as upon one another. If that check should
ever be removed, if the Crown should, by corrupt means, by places, pensions,
and bribes, get the absolute direction of our two Houses of Parliament, our
constitution will, from that moment, be destroyed. There would be no occasion
for the Crown to proceed any farther. It would be ridiculous to lay aside the
forms of Parliament; for under that shadow our King would be more absolute, and
might govern more arbitrarily, than he could do without it. A gentleman of
family and fortune, would not, perhaps, for the sake of a pension, agree to lay
aside the forms of government; because, by his venal service there, he earns
his infamous pension, and could not expect the continuance of it if those forms
were laid aside: but a gentleman of family and fortune may for the sake of a
pension, whilst he is in Parliament, approve of the most blundering measures,
consent to the most excessive and useless grants, enact the most oppressive
laws, pass the most villainous accounts, acquit the most heinous criminals, and
condemn the most innocent persons at the desire of that minister who pays him
his pension. And, if a majority of such House of Parliament consisted of such
men, would it not be ridiculous in us to talk of our constitution, or to say we
had any liberty left? -- This misfortune, this terrible condition, we may be
reduced to by corruption: as brave, as free a people as we, the Romans, were
reduced to it by the same means; and to prevent such a horrid catastrophe, is
the design of this bill.

If people would at all think, if they would consider the consequence of
corruption, there would be no occasion, my Lords, for making laws against it.
It would appear so horrible, that no man would allow it to approach him. The
corrupted ought to consider, that they do not sell their vote, or their country
only: these, perhaps, they may disregard; but they sell like ^ise themselves:
they become the bond shaves of the corrupter, who corrupts them, not for their
sakes, but for his own. No man ever corrupted another for the sake of doing him
a service. And, therefore, if people would but consider, they would always
reject the offer with disdain. But this is not to be expected. The histories of
all countries, the history even of our own country, shows it is not to be
depended on. The proffered bribe, people thinks will satisfy the immediate
cravings of some infamous appetite; and this makes them swallow the alluring
bait, though the liberties of their country, the happiness of their posterity,
and even their own liberty, evidently depend upon their refusing it. This makes
it necessary, in every free state, to contrive, if possible, effectual laws
against corruption, and, as the laws we now have for excluding pensioners from
the other House, are allowed to be ineffectual, we ought to make a trial, at
east, of the remedy now proposed; for, though it should prove ineffectual, it
will be attended with this advantage, that it will put us upon contriving some
other remedy that may be effectual; and the sooner such a remedy is contrived
and applied, the less danger we shall be exposed to of falling into that fatal
distemper from which no free state, where it has once become general, has ever
yet recovered.

II. LORD MANSFIELD's SPEECH in the HOUSE of LORDS, 1770, on the BILL for the
further preventing the delays of JUSTICE by reason of PRIVILEGE of PARLIAMENT.
MY LORDS,
WHEN I consider the importance of this bill to your Lordships, I am not
surprised it has taken up so much of your consideration. It is a bill, indeed,
of no common magnitude; it is no less than to take away from two thirds of the
legislative body of this great kingdom, certain privileges and immunities of
which they have been long possessed. Perhaps there is no situation the human
mind can be placed in, that is so difficult and so trying, as when it is made a
judge in its own cause. There is something implanted in the breast of man, so
attached to self, so tenacious of privileges once obtained, that, in such a
situation, either to discuss, with impartiality, or decide with justice, has
ever been held as the summit of all human virtue. The bill now in question puts
your Lordships in this very predicament; and I doubt not but the wisdom of your
decision will convince the world, that where self-interest and justice are in
opposite scales the latter will ever preponderate with your Lordships.

Privileges have been granted to legislators in all ages and in all countries.
The practice is founded in wisdom: and, indeed, it is peculiarly essential to
the constitution of this country, that the members of both Houses should be
free in their persons in cases of civil suits; for there may come a time when
the safety and welfare of this whole empire may depend upon their attendance in
Parliament. God forbid that I should advise any measure that would in future
endanger the state: but the bill before your Lordships has, I am confident, no
such tendency; for it expressly secures the persons of members of either House
in all civil suits. This being the case, I confess, when I see many noble
Lords, for whose judgment I have a very great respect, standing up to oppose a
bill which is calculated merely to facilitate the recovery of just and legal
debts, I am astonished and amazed. They, I doubt not, oppose the bill upon
public principles: I would not wish to insinuate, that private interest had the
least weight in their determination.

This bill has been frequently proposed, and as frequently miscarried: but it
was always lost in the Lower House. Little did I think, when it had passed the
Commons, that it possibly could have met with such opposition here. Shall it be
said, that you, my Lords, the grand council of the nation, the highest judicial
and legislative body of the realm, endeavor to evade by privilege those very
laws which you enforce on your fellow subjects? -- Forbid it justice! -- I am
sure, were the noble Lords as well acquainted as I am with but half the
difficulties and delays occasioned in the courts of justice under pretense of
privilege, they would not, nay they could not, oppose this bill.

I have waited with patience to hear what arguments might be urged against the
bill, but I have waited in vain: the truth is, there is no argument that can
weigh against it. The justice and expediency of the bill are such as render it
self-evident. It is a proposition of that nature, that can neither be weakened
by argument, nor entangled with sophistry. Much, indeed, has been said by some
noble Lords on the wisdom of our ancestors, and how differently they thought
from us. They not only decreed, that privilege should prevent all civil suits
from proceeding during the sitting of parliament, but likewise granted
protection to the very servants of members. I shall say nothing on the wisdom
of our ancestors; it might perhaps appear invidious: that is not necessary in
the present case. I shall only say, that the noble Lords who flatter themselves
with the weight of that reflection, should remember, that as circumstances
alter, things themselves should alter. Formerly, it was not so fashionable
either for masters or servants to run in debt as it is at present. Formerly we
were not that great commercial nation we are at present; nor formerly were
merchants and manufacturers members of Parliament as at present. The case now
is very different: both merchants and manufacturers are, with great propriety,
elected members of the Lower House. Commerce having thus got into the
legislative body of the kingdom, privilege must be done away. We all know, that
the very soul and essence of trade are regular payments; and sad experience
teaches us, that there are men, who will not make their regular payments
without the compulsive power of the laws. The law then ought to be equally open
to all: any exemption to particular men, or particular ranks of men, is, in a
free and commercial country, a solecism of the grossest nature.

But I will not trouble your Lordships with arguments for that which is
sufficiently evident without any. I shall only say a few words to some noble
Lords, who forsee much inconveniency from the persons of their servants being
liable to be arrested. One noble Lord observes, That the coachman of a peer may
be arrested while he is driving his master to the House, and, consequently, he
will not be able to attend his duty in Parliament. If this were actually to
happen, there are so many methods by which the member might still get to the
House, that I can hardly think the noble Lord is serious in his objection.
Another noble Peer said, That by this bill one might lose their most valuable
and honest servants. This I hold to be a contradiction in terms: for he can
neither be a valuable servant, nor an honest man who gets into debt which he is
neither able nor willing to pay, till compelled by law. If my servant, by
unforeseen accidents, has got in debt, and I still wish to retain him, I
certainly would pay the debt. But upon no principle of liberal legislation
whatever, can my servant have a title to set his creditors at defiance, while,
for forty shillings only, the honest tradesman may be torn from his family and
looked up in a gaol. It is monstrous injustice! I flatter myself, however, the
determination of this day will entirely put an end to all such partial
proceedings for the future, by passing into a law the bill now under your
Lordships consideration.

I come now to speak, upon what, indeed, I would have gladly avoided, had I not
been particularly pointed at for the part I have taken in this bill. It has
been said by a noble Lord on my left hand, that I likewise am running the race
of popularity. If the noble Lord means by popularity, that applause bestowed by
after ages on good and virtuous actions, I have long been struggling in that
race; to what purpose, all trying time can alone determine: but if the noble
Lord means that mushroom popularity that is raised without merit and lost
without a crime, he is much mistaken in his opinion. I defy the noble Lord
to-point out a single action of my life, where the popularity of the times ever
had the smallest influence on my determinations. I thank God I have a more
permanent and steady rule for my conduct, -- the dictates of my own breast.
Those that have forgone that pleasing adviser, and given up their mind to the
slave of every popular impulse, I sincerely pity: I pity them still more, if
their vanity leads them to mistake the shouts of a mob for the trumpet of fame.
Experience might inform them, that many who have been saluted with the huzzas
of a crowd one day, have received their execrations the next; and many, who, by
the popularity of their times, have been held up as spotless patriots, have,
nevertheless, appeared upon the historian's page, when truth has triumphed over
delusion, the assassins of liberty. Why then the noble Lord can think I am
ambitious of present popularity, that ^cho of folly, and shadow of renown, I am
at a loss to determine. Besides, I do not know that the bill now before your
Lordships will be popular; it depends much upon the caprice of the day. It may
not be popular to compel people to pay their debts; and, in that case, the
present must be a very unpopular bill. It may not be popular neither to take
away any of the privileges of Parliament: for I very well remember, and many of
your Lordships may remember, that not long ago the popular cry was for the
extension of privilege; and so far did they carry it at that time, that it was
said that the privilege protected members even in criminal actions; nay, such
was the power of popular prejudices over weak minds, that the very decisions of
some of the courts were tinctured with that doctrine. It was undoubtedly an
abominable doctrine; I thought so then and think so still: but, nevertheless,
it was a popular doctrine; and came immediately from those who are called the
friends of liberty; how deservedly time will show. True liberty, in my opinion,
can only exist when justice is equally administered to all; to the king, and to
the beggar. Where is the justice then, or where is the law, that protects a
member of parliament more than any other man, from the punishment due to his
crimes? The laws of this country allow of no place, nor no employment, to be a
sanctuary for crimes; and where I have the honor to sit as judge, neither royal
favor nor popular applause shall ever protect the guilty.

I have now only to beg pardon for having employed so much of your Lordships
time; and I am sorry a bill, fraught with so many good consequences, has not
met with an abler advocate: but I doubt not your Lordships determination will
convince the world, that a bill calculated to contribute so much to the equal
distribution of justice as the present, requires with your Lordships but very
little support.

III. Speech of Mr. PIT (created afterward EARL of CHATHAM) in the House of
Commons, Dec. 17th, 1765, on the AMERICAN STAMP ACT.
I HAVE been charged with giving birth to sedition in America. Sorry I am to
hear the liberty of speech in this House, imputed as a crime. But the
imputation shall not discourage me. It is a liberty I mean to exercise. No
gentleman ought to be afraid to exercise it. It is a liberty by which the
gentleman (Mr. Grenville) who calumm^tes it, might have profited. He ought to
have desisted from his project. The gentleman te^l^ us America is obstinate;
America is almost in open rebellion. I rejoice that America has resisted. Three
millions of people, so dead to all the feelings of liberty, as voluntarily to
submit to be slaves, would have been fit instruments to make slav^s of the
rest. I come not here armed at all points, with law cases and acts of
parliament, with the statute-book doubled down in dog-ears, to defend the cause
of liberty: if I had, I myself would have cited the two cases of Chester and
Durham. I would have cited them to have shown, that even under any arbitrary
reigns, parliaments were ashamed of taxing a people without their consent, and
allowed them representatives. Why did the gentleman confine himself to Chester
and Durham? He might have taken a higher example in Wales; Wales that never was
taxed by Parliament till it was incorporated. I would not debate a particular
point of law with the gentleman: I know his abilities. I have been obliged to
his diligent researches. But, for the defense of liberty upon a general
principle, upon a constitutional principle, it is a ground on which I stand
firm; on which I dare meet any man. The gentleman tells us of many that are
taxed, and are not represented. The India Company, merchants, stock-holders,
manufacturers. Surely many of these are represented in other capacities, as
owners of land, or as freemen of boroughs. It is a misfortune that more are not
actually represented. But they are all inhabitants, and, as such, are virtually
represented. Many have it in their option to be actually represented. They have
connections with those that elect, and they have influence over them.

When I had the honor to serve his Majesty, there were not wanting some, to
propose to me to burn my fingers with an American stamp act. With the enemy at
their back, with our bayonets at their breasts, in the day of their distress,
perhaps the Americans would have submited to the imposition; but it would have
been taking an ungenerous and unjust advantage. The gentleman boasts of his
bounties to America! Are not these bounties intended finally for the benefit of
this kingdom? If they are not, he has misapplied the national treasures. I am
no courtier of America; I stand up for this kingdom: I maintain that the
Parliament has a right to bind, to restrain America. Our legislative power over
America is sovereign and supreme. When it ceases to be sovereign and supreme, I
would advise every gentleman to sell his lands, if he can, and embark for that
country. When two countries are connected together, like England and her
colonies, without being incorporated, the one must necessarily govern; the
greater must rule the less; but so rule it, as not to contradict the
fundamental principles that are common to both.

If the gentleman does not understand the difference between internal and
external taxes, I cannot help it; but there is a plain distinction between
taxes levied for the purposes of raising a revenue, and duties imposed for the
regulation of trade, for the accommodation of the subject; although, in the
consequences, some revenue might incidentally arise from the latter.

The gentleman asks, when were the colonies emancipated? But I desire to know,
when they were made slaves? But I dwell not upon words. When I had the honor of
serving his Majesty, I availed myself of the means of information which I
derived from my office: I speak, therefore, from knowledge. My materials were
good. I was at pains to collect, to digest, to consider them; and I will be
bold to affirm, that the profits to Great Britain from the trade of the
colonies, through all its branches, is two millions a year. This is the fund
that carried you triumphantly through the last war. The estates that were
rented at two thousand pounds a year, threescore years ago, are at three
thousand pounds at present. Those estates sold them from fifteen to eighteen
years purchase; the same may be now sold for thirty. You owe this to America.
This is the price that America pays you for her protection. And shall a
miserable financier come with a boast, that he can fetch a pepper-corn into the
exchequer, to the loss of millions to the nations? I dare not say how much
higher these profits may be augmented. Omitting the immense increase of people
by natural propagation in the northern-colonies, and the migration from every
part of Europe, I am convinced the whole commercial system of America may be
altered to advantage. You have prohibited where you ought to have encouraged,
and you have encouraged where you ought to have prohibited. Improper restraints
have been laid on the continent in favor of the islands. Much is wrong, much
may be amended for the general good of the whole.

A great deal has been said out of doors of the power, of the strength of
America. It is a topic that ought to be ca^^iously meddled with. In a good
cause, on a found bottom, the force of this country can crush America to atoms.
I know the valor of your troops. I know the skill of your officers. There is
not a company of foot that has served in America, out of which you may not pick
a man of sufficient knowledge and experience to make a governor of a colony
there. But, on this ground, on the stamp act, when so many here will think it a
crying injustice, I am one who will lift up my hands against it.

In such a cause your success would be hazardous. -- America, if she fell,
would fall like a strong man. She would embrace the pillars of the state, and
pull down the constitution along with her. Is this your boasted peace? not to
sheath the sword in its scabbard, but to sheath it in the bowels of your
countrymen? Will you quarrel with yourselves, now the whole House of Bourbon is
united against you? While France distu^b^ your fisheries in Newfoundland,
embarrasses your trade to Africa, and withholds from your subjects in Canada
their property stipulated by treaty; while the ransom for Manillas is denied by
Spain, and its gallant conqueror basely traduced into a mean plunderer, a
gentleman (colonel Draper) whose noble and generous spirit would do honor to
the proudest grandee of the country. The Americans have not acted in all things
with prudence and temper. They have been wronged. They have been driven to
madness by injustice. Will you punish them for the madness you have occasioned?
Rather let prudence and temper come first from this side. I will undertake for
America that she will follow the example.

IV. SPEECH of Mr. FOX in the HOUSE of COMMONS, Nov. 25, 1779, on the loss of
AMERICA.
THERE is not, in the whole history of this country, a period that resembles
the present, except the reign of the unfortunate Henry VI. His family, like
that of his present Majesty, did not claim the crown as their hereditary right;
it was by revolutions they both obtained it. Henry was an amiable and pious
prince; so is his present Majesty: Henry was the son of the most renowned
monarch that ever sat upon the throne; George was the grandson of a hero: Henry
lost all his father's conquests, and all his hereditary provinces in France:
George has already seen the conquests of his grandfather wrested from him in
the West Indies, and his hereditary provinces of America erected into an
empire, that disclaimed all connection.

His Majesty set out in life with the brightest prospects that a young man
could have wished for: possessed of immense dominions, and the warmest
affections of his people, his acc^ssion to the crown was completely flattering
both to himself and his subjects. How sadly is the scene reversed! -- his
empire ^embered, his councils distr^cted, and his people falling off in their
affection for his person. I only speak with^^ doors the language that is held
without: the people are beginning to murmur, and their patience is not
unlimited: they will at last do themselves justice; there certainly will be
insurrection^: and, though it is imposs^ble that the calamities that will
attend them can be justified, or compensated by any good that can be obtained
by them, yet they certainly will take place.

It cannot be a secret to this House, that the present Sovereign's claim to the
throne of this country was founded only upon the delinquency of the Stuart
family; a circumstance that ought never to be out of his Majesty's
recollection. It was true, indeed, that the unfortunate race of that name were
universally detested in this country, and therefore his Majesty had little to
fear from their pretensions: but he should ever remember, that it was the
conduct of wicked and ignorant ministers that excited that detestation for
them. If there should be at this day one of that unfortunate Hou^e remaining,
what a scope for upbraidings and rem^^strance could he not find in the present
reign! Could he not say, "You have banished my ancestor from the throne, and
ba^red the scepter from all his progeny for the misconduct of his ministers;
and yet the min^sters of the present reign are ten times more wicked and more
ignorant than those were; and whilst you all agree in giving to your present
sovereign the title of best of princes, his ministers have rendered his reign,
beyond any degree of comparison, the most infamous that ever disgraced the
nation." -- The minister, though with such a load of national censure and
national calamity on his head, has the hardiness to boast of his innocence; but
it is not a conscious rectitude of mind that can excuse a minister from
criminality. What he calls innocence may be another name for ignorance; and
ignorance in a minister is a crime of the first magnitude. But the wide ruin
that the counsels of administration have spread through this great empire, and
the miserable state to which they have reduced it in the short space in which
the present Parliament have been sitting, is so far beyond the natural effects
of mere ignorance, that I cannot help adopting the opinion of an honorable
friend, that there is treachery at the bottom of the national councils. His
Lordship (Lord North) may flatter himself as much as he pleases in the
protection of a majority, or in the security of the law; but, when a nation is
reduced to such a state of wretchedness and distraction that the laws can
afford the people no relief, they will give a minister who has caused the evil
but little protection. What the law of the land could not do, the law of nature
would accomplish; the people would inevitably take up arms, and the first
characters in the kingdom would be seen in their ranks!

SECTION III. ELOQUENCE OF THE BAR.
I. PLEADINGS of LYSIAS the ORATOR in Favor of certain ORPHANS defrauded by an
UNCLE, Executor to the Will of their FATHER.
VENERABLE JUDGES!
IF the cause, which now comes under your cognizance, were not of extraordinary
importance, I should never have given my consent that it should be litigated
before you. For it seems to me shameful, that near relations should commence
prosecutions against one another; and I know, that, in such trials, not only
the aggressors, but even those who resent injuries too impatiently, must appear
to you in a disadvantageous light. But the plaintiffs, who have been defrauded
of a very large sum of money, and cruelly injured by one who ought to have been
the last to hurt them; have applied to me, as a relation, to plead their cause,
and procure them redress. And I thought I could not decently excuse myself from
undertaking the patronage of persons in such distres^ful circumstances, with
whom I had such close connections: for the sister of the plaintiffs, the niece
of Diogiton the defendant, is my wife.

When the plaintiffs entreated me, as they did often, to undertake the
management of the suit, I advised them to refer the difference, between them
and their uncle the defendant, to private arbitration; thinking it the interest
of both parties to conceal, as much as possible, from the knowledge of the
public, that there was any dispute between them. But, as Diogiton knew that it
was easy to prove him guilty of detaining the property of the plaintiffs his
nephews, he foresaw, that it would by no means answer his purpose to submit his
cause to the decision of arbitrators. He has, therefore, determined to proceed
to the utmost extremity of injustice, at the hazard of the consequences of a
prosecution.

I most humbly implore you, venerable judges, to grant the plaintiffs redress,
if I show you, as I hope I shall in the most satisfactory manner, that the
defendant, though so nearly related to the unhappy orphans the plaintiffs, has
treated them in such a manner, as would be shameful among absolute strangers.

I beg leave to lay before you, venerable judges, the subject of the present
prosecution, as follows:

Diodotus and Diogition were brothers, the children of the same father and the
some mother. Upon their father's decease, they divided between them his
movables; but his real estate they enjoyed conjunctly. Diodotus growing rich,
Diogition offered him his only daughter in marriage. By her Diodotus had two
sons and a daughter. Diodotus happening afterward to be enrolled, in his turn,
to go to the war under Thrasyllus, he called together his wife, his brother's
daughter, his wife's brother, and his own brother, who was likewise his
father-in-law, and both uncle and grandfather to his children. He thought he
could not trust the care of his children in properer hands than those of his
brother. He leaves in his custody, his will, with five talents of silver. He
gives him an account of seven talents, and forty minae besides, which were out
at interest, and a thousand minae, which were due to him by a person in the
Chersonesus. He had ordered in his will, that, in case of his death, one
talent, and the household-furniture, should be his wife's. He bequeathed
farther, to his daughter, one talent, and twenty minae, and thirty Cyzicenian
staterers, and the rest of his estate equally between his sons. Settling his
affairs thus, and leaving a copy of his will, he sets out along with the army.
He dies at Ephesus. Diogition conceals from his daughter the death of her
husband. He gets into his hands the will of his deceased brother, by pretending
that it was necessary for him to show it as a voucher, in order to his
transacting some affairs for his brother during his absence. At length, when he
thought the decease of his brother could not much longer be concealed, he
formally declares it. The family go into mourning. They stay one year at
Piraeum, where their movables were. In this time the produce of all that could
be sold of the effects being spent, he sends the children to town, and gives
his daughter, the widow of his brother Diodotus, to a second husband, and with
her five thousand drachmae, of which the husband returns him one thousand as a
present. When the eldest son came to man's estate, about eight years after the
departure of Diodotus, Diogiton calls the children together; tells them, that
their father had left them twenty minae of silver, and thirty staterers. "I
have laid out (says he) of my own money, for your maintenance and education, a
considerable sum. Nor did I grudge it, while I was in flourishing
circumstances, and could afford it. But, by unforeseen and irremediable
misfortunes, I am reduced to an incapacity of continuing my kindness to you.
Therefore as you (speaking to the eldest son) are now of an age to shift for
yourself, I would advise you to resolve upon some employment, by which you may
gain a subsistence."

The poor fatherless children were thunderstruck upon hearing this barbarous
speech. They fled in tears to their mother, and, with her, came to request my
protection. Finding themselves stripped of the estate left them by their
father, and reduced by their hard-hearted uncle and grandfather to absolute
beggary, they entreated that I would not desert them too: but, for the sake of
their sister, my wife, would undertake their defense. The mother begged that I
would bring about a meeting of the relations, to reason the matter with her
father; and said, that though she had never before spoke in any large company,
especially of men, she would endeavor to lay before them the distresses and
injuries of her family.

Diogiton being, with difficulty, brought to the meeting, the mother of the
plaintiffs asked him, how he could have the heart to use her sons in such a
manner? "Are you not, Sir (says she,) the uncle and the grandfather of the two
fatherless youths? Are they not the children of your own brother and of your
own daughter? How could they be more nearly related to you, unless they were
your own sons? And, though you despised all human authority, you ought to
reverence the gods, who are witnesses of the trust reposed in you by the
deceased father of the unhappy youths."

She then enumerated the several sums, the property of the deceased, which had
been received by Diogiton, and charged him with them, producing authentic
evidence of every particular. "You have driven (says she) out of their own
house, the children of your own daughter, in rags, unfurnished with the common
decencies of life. You have deprived them of the effects, and of the money left
them by their father. But you want to enrich the children you have had by my
stepmother; which, without doubt, you might lawfully and properly do, if it
were not at the expense and to the utter ruin of those whose fortunes were
deposited in your hands, and whom, from affluence, you want to reduce to
beggary; impiously despising the authority of the gods, injuring your own
daughter, and violating the sacred will of the dead."

The distressed mother having vented her grief in such bitter complaints as
these, we were all, by sympathy, so touched with her afflictions, and the
cruelty of her injurious father, that, when we considered in our own minds the
hard usage which the young innocents had met with, when we remembered the
deceased Diodotus, and thought how unworthy a guardian he had chosen for his
children, there was not one of us who could refrain from tears. And I persuade
myself, venerable judges, that you will not be unaffected with so calamitous a
case, when you come to consider attentively the various aggravations of the
defendant's proceedings. Such unfaithfulness, in so solemn a trust, were it to
pass unpunished, and consequently to become common, would destroy all
confidence among mankind; so that nobody would know how, or to whom, he could
commit the management of his affairs in his absence or after his death.

The defendant, at first, would have denied his having had any effects of his
brother's left in his hands; and when he found he could not get off that way,
he then produced an account of sums laid out, as he pretended, by him for the
children, to such a value as is beyond all belief; no less than seven talents
of silver and seven thousand drachmae. All this, he said, had been expended in
eight years, in the clothing and maintenance of two boys and a girl.

Had the defendant been a man of any principle, he would have bethought himself
of laying out to advantage the fortune left in his hands by the deceased, for
the benefit of the fatherless children. Had he bought with it lands or houses,
the children might have been maintained out of the yearly rents, and the
principal have been kept entire. But he does not seem to have once thought of
improving their fortune; but, on the contrary, to have contrived only how to
strip them.

But the most atrocious (for a single action) of all his proceedings, is what
follows. When he was made commander of the galleys, along with Alexis the son
of Aristodicus, and, according to his own account, had been, on occasion of
fit^i^g out the fleet and himself, at the expense of forty-eight m^nae (...) of
his own private purse, -- he charges (...) ^^^ant-war^s with half this sum.
Whereas the state not o^^y exempts minors from public offices, but even grants
them immunity for one year at least after they come of age. And when he had
fitted out, for a voyage to the Adriatic, a ship of burden to the value of two
talents, he told his daughter, the mother o^ ^is wards, that the adventure was
at the risk and for the benefit of his wards. But, when the returns were made,
and he had doubled the sum by the profits of the voyage, -- the gains were, he
said, all his own! -- The fortune of his wards was to answer for the damages,
but was not to be at all the better for the advantages! If, in this manner, one
is to trade at the peril and loss of others, and engross to himself the whole
profits, it is not difficult to conceive how his partners may come to be undone
while he enriches himself.

To lay before you all the particulars which have come to our knowledge of this
complicated scene of wickedness, would but disgust and shock you. We have
witnesses h^re to prove what we have alleged against this cruel invader of the
property of helpless innocents, his own near relations, entrusted to his charge
by his deceased brother.

[The witnesses are here examined.]

You have heard, Venerable Judges, the evidence given against the defendant. He
himself owns the actual receipt of seven talents and forty minae of the estate
of the plaintiffs. To say nothing of what he may have, or rather certainly has
gained by the use of this money; I will allow, what every reasonable person
will judge more than sufficient for the maintenance of three children, with a
governor and maid -- a thousand drachmae a year; which is something less than
three drachmae a day. In eight years, this amounts to eight thousand drachmae.
So that, upon balancing the account, there remain due to the plaintiffs, of the
seven talents and forty minae, six talents and twenty minae: for the defendant
cannot pretend, that the estate of the plaintiffs has suffered by fire, by
water, or by any other injury than what himself has done it.

II. CICERO AGAINST VERRES.
THE time is come, Fathers, when that which has long been wished for, toward
allaying the envy your order has been subject to, and removing (...)
imputations against trials, is effectually put in our ^er. An opinion has long
prevailed, not only here (...) home but likewise in foreign countries, both
dangerous to you and pernicious to the state, -- that, in prosecutions, men of
wealth are always safe, however clearly convicted. There is now to be brought
upon his trial before you, to the confusion, I hope, of the propagators of this
slanderous imputation, one whose life and actions condemn him in the opinion of
all impartial persons; but who, according to his own reckoning and declared
dependence upon his riches, is already acquitted; I mean Caius Verres. I demand
justice of you, Fathers, upon the robber of the public treasury, the oppressor
of Asia Minor and Pamphylia, the invader of the rights and privileges of
Romans, the scourge and curse of Sicily. If that sentence is passed upon him
which his crimes deserve, your authority, Fathers, will be venerable and sacred
in the eyes of the public; but if his great riches should bias you in his
favor, I shall still gain one point, -- to make it apparent to all the world,
that what was wanting in this case, was not a criminal nor a prosecutor, but
justice and adequate punishment.

To pass over the shameful irregularities of his youth, what does his
quaestorship, the first public employment he held, what does it exhibit, but
one continued scene of villainies? Cneius Carbo plundered of the public money by
his own treasurer, a consul stripped and betrayed, an army deserted and reduced
to want, a province robbed, the civil and religious rights of a people
violated. The employment he held in Asia Minor and Pamphylia, what did it
produce but the ruin of those countries? in which houses, cities, and temples,
were robbed by him. What was his conduct in his praetorship here at home? Let
the plundered temples, and public works neglected that he might embezzle the
money intended for carrying them on, bear witness. How did he discharge the
office of a judge? Let those who suffered by his injustice answer. But his
praetorship in Sicily crowns all his works of wickedness, and finishes a
lasting monument to his infamy. The mischief^ done by him in that unhappy
country, during the three years of his iniquitious administration, are such,
that many years under the wisest and best of praetors will not be sufficient to
restore things to the condition in which he found them: for it is notorious,
that, during the time of his tyranny, the Sicilians neither enjoyed the
protection of their own original laws, of the regulations made for their
benefit by the Roman senate upon their coming under the protection of the
commonwealth, nor of the natural and unalienable rights of men. His nod has
decided all causes in Sicily for these three years. And his decisions have
broke all law, all precedent, all right. The sums he has, by arbitrary taxes
and unheard of impositions, extorted from the industrious poor, are not to be
computed. The most faithful allies of the commonwealth have been treated as
enemies. Roman citizens have, like slaves, been put to death with tortures. The
most atrocious criminals, for money, have been exempted from the deserved
punishments; and men of the most unexceptionable characters condemned and
banished unheard. The harbors, though sufficiently fortified, and the gates of
strong towns, opened to pirates and ravagers. The soldiery and sailors,
belonging to a province under the protection of the commonwealth, starved to
death. Whole fleets, to the great detriment of the province. suffered to
perish. The ancient monuments of either Sicilian or Roman greatness, the
statues of heroes and princes, carried off; and the temples stripped of the
images. Having, by his iniquitous sentences, filled the prisons with the most
industrious and deserving of the people, he then proceeded to order numbers of
Roman citizens to be strangled in the goals; so that the exclamation, "I am a
citizen of Rome!" which has often, in the most distant regions, and among the
most barbarous people, been a protection, was of no service to them; but, on
the contrary, brought a speedier and more severe punishment upon them.

I ask now, Verres, what you have to advance against this charge? Will you
pretend to deny it? Will you pretend, that any thing false, that even any thing
aggravated, is alleged against you? Had any prince, or any state, committed the
same outrage against the privilege of Roman citizens, should we not think we
had sufficient ground for declaring immediate war against them? What punishment
ought, then, to be inflicted upon a tyrannical and wicked praetor, who dared,
at no greater distance than Sicily, within sight of the Italian coast, to put
to the infamous death of crucifixion that unfortunate and innocent citizen
Publius Gavius Cosanus, only for his having asserted his privilege of
citizenship, and declared his intention of appealing to the justice of his
country against a cruel oppressor, who had unjustly confined him in prison at
Syracuse, whence he had just made his escape? The unhappy man, arrested as he
was going to embark for his native country, is brought before the wicked
praetor. With eyes darting fury, and a countenance distorted with cruelty, he
orders the helpless victim of his rage to be stripped, and rods to be brought;
accusing him, but without the least shadow of evidence, or even of suspicions
of having come to Sicily as a spy. It was in vain that the unhappy man cried
out, "I am a Roman citizen: I have served under Lucius Pretius, who is now at
Panormus, and will attest my innocence." The blood-thirsty p^etor, deaf to all
he could urge in his own defense, ordered the infamous punishment to be
inflicted. Thus, Fathers, was an innocent Roman citizen publicly mangled with
scourging; whilst the only words he uttered amidst his cruel sufferings were,
"I am a Roman citizen!" With these he hoped to defend himself from violence and
infamy. But of so little service was this privilege to him, that while he was
thus asserting his citizenship, the order was given for his execution -- for
his execution upon the cross! --

O liberty! -- O sound once delightful to every Roman ear! -- O sacred
privilege of Roman citizenship! -- once sacred! -- now trampled upon! -- But
what then! Is it come to this? Shall an inferior magistrate, a governor, who
holds his whole power of the Roman people, in a Roman province, within sight of
Italy, bind, scourge, torture with fire and red-hot plates of iron, and at last
put to the infamous death of the cross, a Roman citizen? Shall neither the
cries of innocence expiring in agony, nor the tears of pitying spectators, nor
the majesty of the Roman commonwealth, nor the fear of the justice of his
country, restrain the licentious and wanton cruelty of a monster, who, in
confidence of his riches, strikes at the root of liberty, and sets mankind at
defiance?

I conclude with expressing my hopes, that your wisdom and justice, Fathers,
will not, by suffering the atrocious and unexampled insolence of Caius Verres
to escape the due punishment, leave room to apprehend the danger of a total
subversion of authority, and introduction of general anarchy and confusion.

III. CICERO FOR MILO.
MY LORDS,
THAT you may be able the more easily to determine upon this point before you,
I shall beg the favor of an attentive hearing, while in a few words I lay open
the whole affair. -- Clodius being determined, when created praetor, to harass
his country with every species of oppression, and finding the comitia had been
delayed so long the year before, that he could not hold this office many
months, all on a sudden threw up his own year, and reserved himself to the
next; not from any religious scruple, but that he might have, as he said
himself, a full entire year for exercising his praetorship; that is, for
overturning the commonwealth. Being sensible he must be controled and cramped
in the exercise of his praetorian authority under Milo, who, he plainly saw,
would be chosen consul by the unanimous consent of the Roman people; he joined
the candidates that opposed Milo, but in such a manner that he overruled them
in every thing, had the sole management of the election, and, as he used often
to boast, bore all the comitia upon his own shoulders. He assembled the tribes;
he thrust himself into their counsels, and formed a new tribe of the most
abandoned of the citizens. The more confusion and disturbance he made, the more
Milo prevailed. When this wretch, who was bent upon all manner of wickedness,
saw that so brave a man, and his most inveterate enemy, would certainly be
consul; when he perceived this, not only by the discourses, but by the votes of
the Roman people, he began to throw of all disguise, and to declare openly that
Milo must be killed. He often intimated this in the senate, and declared it
expressly before the people; insomuch that when Favonius, that brave man, asked
him what prospect he could have of carrying on his furious designs, while Milo
was alive? he replied, that in three or four days at most he should be taken
out of the way: which reply Favonius immediately communicated to Cato.

In the mean time, as soon as Clodius knew, (nor indeed was there any
difficulty to come at the intelligence) that Milo was obliged by the 18th of
January to be at Lanuvium, where he was dictator, in order to nominate a
priest, a duty which the laws rendered necessary to be performed every year; he
went suddenly from Rome the day before, in order, as appears by the event, to
way-lay Milo in his own grounds; and this at a time when he was obliged to
leave a tumultuous assembly, which he had summoned that very day, where his
presence was necessary to carry on his mad designs; a thing he never would have
done, if he had not been desirous to take the advantage of that particular time
and place for perpetrating his villainy. But Milo, after having staid in the
senate that day till the house was broke up, went home, changed his clothes,
waited a while, as usual, till his wife had got ready to attend him, and then
set forward about the time that Clodius, if he had proposed to come back to
Rome that day, might have returned. He meets Clodius near his own estate, a
little before sunset, and is immediately attacked by a body of men, who throw
their darts at him from an eminence, and kill his coachman. Upon which he threw
off his cloak, leaped from his chariot, and defended himself with great
bravery. In the mean time Clodius's attendants drawing their swords, some of
them ran back to the chariot in order to attack Milo in the rear; whilst
others, thinking that he was already killed, fell upon his servants who were
behind: these being resolute and faithful to their master, were, some of them,
slain; whilst the rest, seeing a warm engagement near the chariot, being
prevented from going to their master's assistance, hearing besides from Clodius
himself that Milo was killed, and believing it to be fact, acted upon this
occasion (I mention it, not with a view to elude the accusation, but because it
was the true state of the case) without the orders, without the knowledge,
without the presence of their master, as every man would wish his own servants
should act in the like circumstances.

This, my Lords, is a faithful account of the matter of fact: the person who
lay in wait was himself overcome, and force subdued by force, or rather
audaciousness chastised by true valor. I say nothing of the advantage which
accrues to the state in general, to yourselves in particular, and to all good
men; I am content to wave the argument I might draw from hence in favor of my
client, whose destiny was so peculiar, that he could not secure his own safety,
without securing yours and that of the republic at the same time. If he could
not do it lawfully, there is no room for attempting his defense. But, if reason
teaches the learned, necessity the barbarian, common custom all nations in
general, and even nature itself instructs the brutes to defend their bodies,
limbs, and lives when attacked, by all possible methods, you cannot pronounce
this action criminal, without determining at the same time, that whoever falls
into the hands of a highwayman, must of necessity perish either by the sword or
your decisions. Had Milo been of this opinion, he would certainly have chosen
to have fallen by the hand of Clodius, who had more than once before this made
an attempt upon his life, rather than be executed by your order, because he had
not tamely yielded himself a victim to his rage. But if none of you are of this
opinion, the proper question is, not whether Clodius was killed; for that we
grant: but whether justly or unjustly? If it appear that Milo was the
aggressor, we ask no favor; but if Clodius, you will then acquit him of the
crime that has been laid to his charge.

What method then can we take to prove that Clodius lay in wait for Milo? It is
sufficient, considering what an audacious abandoned wretch he was, to show that
he lay under a strong temptation to it, that he formed great hopes, and
proposed to himself great advantages from Milo's death. By Milo's death,
Clodius would not only have gained his point of being praetor, without that
restraint which his adversary's power as consul would have laid upon his wicked
designs, but likewise that of being praetor under those consuls, by whose
connivance at least, if not assistance, he hoped he should be able to betray
the state into the mad schemes he had been forming; persuading himself, that as
they thought themselves under so great an obligation to him, they would have no
inclination to oppose any of his attempts, even if they should have it in their
power; and that, if they were inclined to do it, they would perhaps be scarce
able to control the most profligate of all men, who had been confirmed and
hardened in his audaciousness by a long series of villainies.

Milo is so far from receiving any benefit from Clodius's death, that he is
really a sufferer by it. But it may be said that hatred prevailed, that anger
and resentment urged him on, that he avenged his own wrongs, and redressed his
own grievances. Now if all these particulars may be applied not merely with
greater propriety to Clodius than to Milo, but with the utmost propriety to the
one, and not the least to the other; what more can you desire? For why should
Milo bear any other hatred to Clodius, who furnished him with such a rich
harvest of glory, but that which every patriot must bear to all bad men? As to
Clodius, he had motives enough for bearing ill will to Milo; first, as my
protector and guardian; then as the opposer of his mad schemes, and the
controller of his armed force; and lastly, as his accuser.

Every circumstance, my Lords, concurs to prove that it was for Milo's interest
Clodius should live; that, on the contrary, Milo's death was a most desirable
event for answering the purposes of Clodius; that on the one side there was a
most implacable hatred, on the other not the least; that the one had been
continually employing himself in acts of violence, the other only in opposing
them; that the life of Milo was threatened, and his death publicly foretold by
Clodius, whereas nothing of that kind was ever heard from Milo; that the day
fixed for Milo's journey was well known to his adversary, while Milo knew not
when Clodius was to return; that Milo's journey was necessary, but that of
Clodius rather the contrary; that the one openly declared his intention of
leaving Rome that day, while the other cocealed his intention of returning;
that Milo made no alteration in his measures, but that Clodius feigned an
excuse for altering his; that if Milo had designed to way-lay Clodius, he would
have waited for him near the city till it was dark, but that Clodius, even if
he had been under no apprehensions from Milo, ought to have been afraid of
coming to town so late at night.

Let us now consider whether the place where they encountered was most
favorable to Milo or to Clodius. But can there, my Lords, be any room for
doubt, or deliberation upon that? It was near the estate of Clodius, where at
least a thousand able-bodied men were employed in his mad schemes of building.
Did Milo think he should have an advantage by attacking him from an eminence,
and did he for this reason pitch upon that spot for the engagement; or was he
not rather expected in that place by his adversary, who hoped the situation
would favor his assault? The thing, my Lords, speaks for itself, which must be
allowed to be of the greatest importance in determining a question. Were the
affair to be represented only by painting, instead of being expressed by words,
it would even then clearly appear which was the traitor, and which was free
from all mischievous designs; when the one was sitting in his chariot muffled
up in his cloak, and his wife along with him. Which of these circumstances was
not a very great encumbrance? the dress, the chariot, or the companion? How
could he be worse equipped for an engagement, when he was wrapped up in a cloak,
embarrassed with a chariot, and almost fettered by his wife? Observe the other
now, in the first place, sallying out on a sudden from his seat; for what
reason? in the evening; what urged him? late; to what purpose, especially at
that season? He calls at Pompey's seat; with what view? To see Pompey? He knew
he was at Alsium. To see his house? He had been in it a thousand times. What
then could be the reason of this loitering and shifting about? He wanted to be
upon the spot when Milo came up.

But if, my Lords, you are not yet convinced, though the thing shines out with
such strong and full evidence, that Milo returned to Rome with an innocent
mind, unstained with guilt, undisturbed by fear, and free from the accusations
of conscience; call to mind, I beseech you by the immortal gods, the expedition
with which he came back, his entrance into the forum while the senate house was
in flames, the greatness of soul he discovered, the look he assumed, the speech
he made on the occasion. He delivered himself up, not only to the people, but
even to the senate; nor to the senate alone, but even to guards appointed for
the public security; nor merely to them, but even to the authority of him whom
the senate had entrusted with the care of the whole republic: to whom he would
never have delivered himself, if he had not been confident of the goodness of
his cause.

What now remains, but to beseech and adjure you, my Lords, to extend that
compassion to a brave man, which he disdains to implore, but which I, even
against his consent, implore and earnestly entreat. Though you have not seen
him shed a single tear while all are weeping around him, though he has
preserved the same steady countenance, the same firmness of voice and language,
do not on this account withhold it from him.

On you, on you I call, ye heroes, who have lost so much blood in the service
of your country! to you, ye centurions, ye soldiers, I appeal in this hour of
danger to the best of men, and bravest of citizens! while you are looking on,
while you stand here with arms in your hands, and guard this tribunal, shall
virtue like this be expelled, exterminated, cast out with dishonor? By the
immortal gods I wish (pardon me, O my country! for I fear what I shall say out
of a pious regard for Milo may be deemed impiety against thee,) that Clodius
not only lived, but were praetor, consul, dictator, rather than be witness to
such a scene as this. Shall this man, then, who was born to save his country,
die any where but in his country? Shall he not at least die in the service of
his country? Will you retain the memorials of his gallant soul, and deny his
body a grave in Italy? Will any person give his voice for banishing a man from
this city, whom every city on earth would be proud to receive within its walls?
Happy the country that shall receive him! ungrateful this, if it shall banish
him! wretched, if it should lose him! But I must conclude; my tears will not
allow me to proceed, and Milo forbids tears to be employed in his defense. You,
my Lords, I beseech and adjure, that, in your decision you would dare to act as
you think. Trust me, your fortitude, your justice, your fidelity, will more
especially be approved of by him (Pompey,) who in his choice of judges has
raised to the bench the bravest, the wisest, and the best of men.

SECTION IV. SPEECHES DELIVERED ON VARIOUS OCCASIONS.
I. CAIUS MARIUS to the ROMANS; showing the Absurdity of their hesitating to
confer on him the RANK of GENERAL merely on ACCOUNT of his EXTRACTION.
IT is but too common, my Countrymen, to observe a material difference between
the behavior of those who stand candidates for places of power and trust,
before and after their obtaining them. They solicit them in one manner, and
execute them in another. They set out with a great appearance of activity,
humility, and moderation; and they quickly fall into sloth, pride, and avarice.
-- It is, undoubtedly, no easy matter to discharge, to the general
satisfaction, the duty of a supreme commander in troublesome times. To carry
on, with effect, an expensive war, and yet be frugal of the public money; to
oblige those to serve, whom it may be delicate to offend; to conduct, at the
same time, a complicated variety of operations; to concert measures at home,
answerable to the state of things abroad; and to gain every valuable end, in
spite of opposition from the envious, the factious, and the disaffected -- to
do all this, my countrymen, is more difficult than is generally thought.

But, besides the disadvantages which are common to me with all others in
eminent stations, my case is, in this respect, peculiarly hard -- that, whereas
a commandder of Patrician rank, if he is guilty of a neglect or breach of duty,
has his great connections, the antiquity of his family, the important services
of his ancestors, and the multitudes he has, by power, engaged in his interest,
to screen him from condign punishment, my whole safety depends upon myself;
which renders it the more indispensably necessary for me to take care that my
conduct be clear and unexceptionable. Besides, I am well aware, my Countrymen,
that the eye of the public is upon me; and that, though the impartial, who
prefer the real advantage of the commonwealth to all other considerations,
favor my pretensions, the Partricians want nothing so much as an occasion
against me. It is, therefore, my fixed resolution, to use my best endeavors,
that you be not disappointed in me, and that their indirect designs against me
may be defeated.

I have, from my youth, been familiar with toils and with dangers. I was
faithful to your interest, my countrymen, when I served you for no reward but
that of honor. It is not my design to betray you, now that you have conferred
upon me a place of profit. You have committed to my conduct the war against
Jugurtha. The Patricians are offended at this. But, where would be the wisdom
of giving such a command to one of their honorable body? a person of
illustrious birth, of ancient family, of innumerable statues, but -- of no
experience! What service would his long line of dead ancestors, or his
multitude of motionless statues, do his country in the day of battle? What
could such a general do, but, in his trepidation and inexperience, have
recourse to some inferior commander for direction in difficulties to which he
was not himself equal? Thus, your Patrician general would in fact have a
general over him; so that the acting commander would still be a Plebeian. So
true is this, my Countrymen, that I have, myself, known those who have been
chosen consuls, begin then to read the history of their own country, of which,
till that time, they were totally ignorant; that is, they first obtained the
employment, and then bethought themselves of the qualifications necessary for
the proper discharge of it.

I submit to your judgment, Romans, on which side the advantage lies, when a
comparison is made between Patrician haughtiness and Plebeian experience. The
very actions, which they have only read, I have partly seen, and partly myself
achieved. What they know by reading, I know by action. They are pleased to
slight my mean birth: I despise their mean characters. Want of birth and
fortune is the objection against me; want of personal worth, against them. But
are not all men of the same species? What can make a difference between one man
and another, but the endowments of the mind? For my part, I shall always look
upon the bravest man as the noblest man. Suppose it were enquired of the
fathers of such Patricians as Albinus and Bestia, whether, if they had their
choice, they would desire sons of their character, or of mine: what would they
answer, but that they should wish the worthiest to be their sons? If the
Patricians have reason to despise me, let them likewise despise their
ancestors, whose nobility was the fruit of their virtue. Do they envy the
honors bestowed upon me? let them envy, likewise, my labors, my abstinence, and
the dangers I have undergone for my country, by which I have acquired them. But
those worthless men lead such a life of inactivity, as if they despised any
honors you can bestow; whilst they aspire to honors, as if they had deserved
them by the most industrious virtue. They lay claim to the rewards of activity,
for their having enjoyed the pleasures of luxury. Yet none can be more lavish
than they are in praise of their ancestors. And they imagine they honor
themselves by celebrating their forefathers; whereas they do the very contrary:
for, as much as their ancestors were distinguished for their virtues, so much
are they disgraced by their vices. The glory of ancestors casts a light,
indeed, upon their posterity; but it only serves to show what the descendants
are. It alike exhibits to public view their degeneracy and their worth. I own I
cannot boast of the deeds of my forefathers; but I hope I may answer the cavils
of the Patricians by standing up in defense of what I have myself done.

Observe now, my Countrymen, the injustice of the Patricians. They arrogate to
themselves honors on account of the exploits done by their forefathers, whilst
they will not allow me the due praise for performing the very same sort of
actions in my own person. He has no statues, they cry of his family. He can
trace no venerable line of ancestors. -- What then? Is it matter of more praise
to d^^grace one's illustrious ancestors, than to become illustrious by one's
own good behavior? What if I can show no statues of my family? I can show the
standards, the armor, and the trappings, which I have myself taken from the
vanquished: I can show the scars of those wounds, which I have received by
facing the enemies of my country. These are my statues. These are the honors I
boast of. Not left me by inheritance, as theirs; but earned by toil, by
abstinence, by valor; amidst clouds of dust and seas of blood: scenes of
action, where those effeminate Patricians, who endeavor by indirect means to
depreciate me in your esteem, have never dared to show their faces.

II. SPEECH of PUBLIUS SCIPIO to the ROMAN ARMY before the Battle of the TICIN.
WERE you, Soldiers, the same army which I had with me in Gaul, I might well
forbear saying any thing to you at this time: for what occasion could there be
to use exhortation to a cavalry that had so signally vanquished the squadrons
of the enemy upon the Rhone; or to legions, by whom that same enemy, flying
before them to avoid a battle, did in effect confess themselves conquered? but
as these troops, having been enrolled for Spain, are there with my brother
^neius, making war under my auspices (as was the will of the senate and people
of Rome,) I, that you might have a consul for your captain against Hannibal and
the Carthaginians, have freely offered myself for this war. You, then, have a
new general, and I a new army. On this account, a few words from me to you will
be neither improper nor unseasonable.

That you may not be unapprised of what sort of enemies you are going to
encounter, or of what is to be feared from them, they are the very same, whom,
in a former war, you vanquished both by land and sea; the same from whom you
took Sicily and Sardinia, and who have been these twenty years your
tributaries. You will not, I presume, march against these men with only that
courage with which you are wont to face other enemies: but with a certain anger
and indignation, such as you would feel if you saw your slaves on a sudden rise
up in arms against you. Conquered and enslaved, it is not boldness, but
necessity, that urges them to battle; unless you can believe that those who
avoided fighting when their army was entire, have acquired better hope by the
loss of two-thirds of their horse and foot in the passage of the Alps.

But you have heard, perhaps, that, though they are few in number, they are men
of stout hearts and robust bodies; heroes of such strength and vigor as nothing
is able to resist. -- Mere effigies! nay, shadows of men! wretches, emaciated
with hunger, and benumbed with cold! bruised and battered to pieces among the
rocks and craggy cliffs! their weapons broken, and their horses weak and
foundered! Such are the cavalry, and such the infantry, with which you are
going to contend; not enemies, but the fragments of enemies. There is nothing
which I more apprehend, than that it will be thought Hannibal was vanquished by
the Alps before we had any conflict with him. But, perhaps, it was fitting it
should be so; and that, with a people and a leader who had violated leagues and
covenants, the gods themselves, without man's help, should begin the war, and
bring it to a near conclusion; and that we, who, next to the gods, have been
injured and offended, should happily finish what they have begun.

I need not be in any fear that you should suspect me of saying these things
merely to encourage you, while inwardly I have different sentiments. What
hindered me from going into Spain? That was my province, where I should have
had the less dreaded Asdrubal, not Hannibal, to deal with. But, hearing, as I
passed along the coast of Gaul, of this enemy's march, I landed my troops, sent
the horse forward, and pitched my camp upon the Rhone. A part of my cavalry
encountered, and defeated that of the enemy. My infantry not being able to
overtake theirs, which fled before us, I returned to my fleet; and, with all
the expedition I could use in so long a voyage by sea and land, am come to meet
them at the foot of the Alps. Was it, then, my inclination to avoid a contest
with this tremendous Hannibal? and have I met with him only by accident and
unawares? or am I come on purpose to challenge him to the combat? I would
gladly try, whether the earth, within these twenty years, has brought forth a
new kind of Carthaginians; or whether they be the same sort of men who fought
at the Aegates, and whom, at Eryx, you suffered to redeem themselves at
eighteen denarii per head: whether this Hannibal, for labors and journeys, be,
as he would be thought, the rival of Hercules; or whether he be, what his
father left him, a tributary, a vassal, a slave of the Roman people. Did not
the consciousness of his wicked deed at Saguntum torment him and make him
desperate, he would have some regard, if not to his conquered country, yet
surely to his own family, to his father's memory, to the treaty written with
Amilcar's own hand. We might have starved him in Eryx; we might have passed
into Africa with our victorious fleet, and, in a few days, have destroyed
Carthage. At their humble supplication, we pardoned them; we released them,
when they were closely shut up without a possibility of escaping; we made peace
with them when they were conquered. When they were distressed by the African
war, we considered them, we treated them, as a people under our protection. And
what is the return they make us for all these favors? Under the conduct of a
hair-brained young man, they come hither to overturn our state, and lay waste
our country. -- I could wish, indeed, that it were not so; and that the war we
are now engaged in concerned only our own glory, and not our preservation. But
the contest at present is not for the possession of Sicily and Sardinia, but of
Italy itself: nor is there behind us another army, which, if we should not
prove the conquerors, may make head against our victorious enemies. There are
no more Alps for them to pass, which might give us leisure to raise new forces.
No, Soldiers; here you must make your stand, as if you were just now before the
walls of Rome. Let every one refle^t, that he is now to defend, not his own
person only, but his wife, his children, his helpless infants. Yet, let not
private considerations alone possess our minds: let us remember that the eyes
of the senate and people of Rome are upon us; and that as our force and courage
shall now prove, such will be the fortune of that city and of the Roman empire.

III. SPEECH of HANNIBAL to the CARTHAGINIAN ARMY, on the same OCCASION.
I KNOW not, Soldiers, whether you or your prisoners be encompassed by fortune
with the stricter bonds and necessities. Two seas enclose you on the right and
left; not a ship to fly to for escaping. Before you is the Po, a river broader
and more rapid than the Rhone: behind you are the Alps; over which, even when
your numbers were undiminished, you were hardly able to force a passage. Here,
then, Soldiers, you must either conquer or die the very first hour you meet the
enemy.

But the same fortune which has thus laid you under the necessity of fighting,
has set before your eyes the most glorious rewards of victory. Should we, by
our valor, recover only Sicily and Sardinia, which were ravished from our
fathers, those would be no inconsiderable prizes. Yet, what are those? The
wealth of Rome; whatever riches she has heaped together in the spoils of
nations; all these with the masters of them, will be yours. The time is now
come to reap the full recompense of your toilsome marches, over so many
mountains and rivers, and through so many nations, all of them in arms. This is
the place which Fortune has appointed to be the limits of your labor; it is
here that you will finish your glorious warfare, and receive an ample
recompense of your completed service. For I would not have you imagine, that
victory will be as difficult as the name of a Roman war is great and sounding.
It has often happened that a despised enemy has given a bloody battle; and the
most renowned kings and nations have by a small force been overthrown. And, if
you but take away the glitter of the Roman name, what is there wherein they may
stand in competition with you? For (to say nothing of your service in war, for
twenty years together, with so much valor and success) from the very pillars of
Hercules, from the ocean, from the utmost bounds of the earth, through so many
warlike nations of Spain and Gaul, are you not come hither victorious? And with
whom have you now to fight? With raw soldiers, an undisciplined army, beaten,
vanquished besieged by the Gauls the very last summer; an army unknown to their
leader, and unacquainted with him.

Or shall I, who was born, I might almost say, but certainly brought up, in the
tent of my father, that most excellent general; shall I, the conqueror of Spain
and Gaul, and not only of the Alpine nations, but, which is greater still, of
the Alps themselves; shall I compare myself with this half-year captain? a
captain, before whom should one place the two armies without their ensigns, I
am persuaded he would not know to which of them he is consul. I esteem it no
small advantage, Soldiers, that there is not one among you, who has not often
been an eyewitness of my exploits in war: not one, of whose valor I myself
have not been a spectator, so as to be able to name the times and places of his
noble achievements; that with soldiers, whom I have a thousand times praised
and rewarded, and whose pupil I was before I became their general, I shall
march against an army of men strangers to one another.

On what side soever I turn my eyes, I behold all full of courage and strength.
A veteran infantry; a most gallant cavalry; you, my Allies, most faithful and
valliant; you, Carthaginians, whom not only your country's cause, but the
justest anger, impels to battle. The hope, the courage of assailants, is always
greater than of those who act upon the defensive. With hostile banners
displayed, you are come down upon Italy: you bring the war. Grief, injuries,
indignities, fire your minds, and spur you forward to revenge. -- First, they
demanded me, that I, your general, should be delivered up to them; next, all of
you who had fought at the siege of Saguntum: and we were to be put to death by
the extremest tortures. Proud and cruel nation! Every thing must be yours, and
at your disposal? You are to prescribe to us with whom we shall make war, with
whom shall we make peace? You are to set us bounds; to shut us up within hills
and rivers; but you are not to observe the limits which yourselves have fixed!
"Pass not the Iberus." What next? "Touch not the Saguntines; Saguntum is upon
the Iberus, move not a step toward that city." Is it a small matter, then,
that you have deprived us of our ancient possessions, Sicily and Sardinia? you
would have Spain too. Well; we shall yield Spain, and then -- you will pass
into Africa. -- Will pass, did I say? -- this very year they ordered one of
their consuls into Africa, the other into Spain. No, Soldiers; there is nothing
left for us but what we can vindicate with our swords. Come on, then. Be men.
The Romans may, with more safety, be cowards: they have their own country
behind them, have places of refuge to fly to, and are secure from danger in the
roads thither; but, for you, there is no middle fortune between death and
victory. Let this be but well fixed in your minds; and, once again, I say you
are conquerors.

IV. Speech of ADHERBAL to the Roman Senate, imploring their Assistance against
JUGURTHA.
FATHERS!
IT is known to you, that king Micipsa, my father, on his deathbed, left in
charge to Jugurtha, his adopted son, conjunctly with my unfortunate brother
Hiempsal, and myself, the children of his own body, the administration of the
kingdom of Numidia, directing us to consider the senate and people of Rome as
proprietors of it. He charged us to use our best endeavors to be serviceable to
the Roman commonwealth, in peace and war; assuring us, that your protection
would prove to us a defense against all enemies, and would be instead of
armies, fortifications, and treasures.

While my brother and I were thinking of nothing but how to regulate ourselves
according to the directions of our deceased father -- Jugurtha -- the most
infamous of mankind! -- breaking through all ties of gratitude and of common
humanity, and trampling on the authority of the Roman commonwealth, procured
the murder of my unfortunate brother, and has driven me from my throne and
native country, though he knows I inherit, from my grandfather Massinissa, and
my father Micipsa, the friendship and alliance of the Romans.

For a prince to be reduced, by villainy, to my distressful circumstances, is
calamity enough; but my misfortunes are heightened by the consideration that I
find myself obliged to solicit your assistance, Fathers, for the services done
you by my ancestors, not for any I have been able to render you in my own
person. Jugurtha has put it out of my power to deserve any thing at your hands;
and has forced me to be burdensome, before I could be useful to you. And yet,
if I had no plea, but my undeserved misery -- a once powerful prince, the
descendant of a race of illustrious monarchs, now, without any fault of my own,
destitute of every support and reduced to the necessity of begging foreign
assistance, against an enemy who has seized my throne and my kingdom -- if my
unequalled distresses were all I had to plead -- it would become the greatness
of the Roman commonwealth, the arbitress of the world, to protect the injured,
and to check the triumph of daring wickedness over helpless innocence. -- But,
to provoke your vengeance to the utmost, Jugurtha has driven me from the very
dominions, which the senate and people of Rome gave to my ancestors: and, from
which, my grandfather, and my father, under your umbrage, expelled Syphax and
the Carthaginians. Thus, Fathers, your kindness to our family is defeated; and
Jugurtha, in injuring me, throws contempt on you.

Oh wretched prince! Oh cruel reverse of fortune! Oh father Micipsa! is this
the consequence of your generosity; that he, whom your goodness raised to an
equality with your own chidren, should be the murderer of your children? Must,
then, the royal house of Numidia always be a scene of havoc and blood? While
Carthage remained, we suffered, as was to be expected, all sorts of hardships
from their hostile attacks: our enemy near: our only powerful ally, the Roman
commonwealth, at a distance. While we were so circumstanced, we were always in
arms, and in action. When that scourge of Africa was no more, we congratulated
ourselves on the prospect of established peace. But, instead of peace, behold
the kingdom of Numidia drenched with royal blood! and the only surviving son of
its late king, flying from an adopted murderer, and seeking that safety in
foreign parts which he cannot command in his own kingdom.

Whither -- Oh! whither shall I fly? If I return to the royal palace of my
ancestors, my father's throne is seized by the murderer of my brother. What can
I there expect, but that Jugurtha should hasten to imbrue, in my blood, those
hands which are now reeking with my brother's? If I were to fly for refuge, or
for assistance, to any other court; from what prince can I hope for protection,
if the Roman commonwealth gives me up? From my own family or friends I have no
expectations. My royal father is no more. He is beyond the reach of violence,
and out of hearing of the complaints of his unhappy son. Were my brother alive,
our mutual sympathy would be some alleviation. But he is hurried out of life,
in his early youth, by the very hand which should have been the last to injure
any of the royal family of Numidia. The bloody Jugurtha has butchered all whom
he suspected to be in my interest. Some have been destroyed by the lingering
torment of the cross. Others have been given a prey to wild beasts, and their
anguish made the sport of men more cruel than wild beasts. If there be any yet
alive, they are shut up in dungeons, there to drag out a life more intolerable
than death itself.

Look down, illustrious senators of Rome! from that height of power to which
you are raised, on the unexampled distresses of a prince, who is, by the
cruelty of a wicked intruder, become an outcast from all mankind. Let not the
crafty insinuations of him who returns murder for adoption, prejudice your
judgment. Do not listen to the wretch who has butchered the son and relations
of a king, who gave him power to sit on the same throne with his own sons. -- I
have been informed, that he labors by his emissaries to prevent your
determining any thing against him in his absence; pretending that I magnify my
distress, and might for him have staid in peace in my own kingdom. But if ever
the time comes when the due vengeance from above shall overtake him, he will
then dissemble as I do. Then he, who now, hardened in wickedness, triumphs over
those whom his violence has laid low, will, in his turn, feel distress, and
suffer for his impious ingratitude to my father, and his blood-thirsty cruelty
to my brother.

Oh murdered butchered brother! Oh dearest to my heart -- now gone for ever
from my sight! -- But, why should I lament his death? He is, indeed, deprived
of the blessed light of heaven, of life, and kingdom, at once, by the very
person who ought to have been the first to hazard his own life in defense of
any one of Micipsa's family: but, as things are, my brother is not so much
deprived of these comforts, as delivered from terror, from flight, from exile,
and the endless train of miseries which render life to me a burden. He lies
full low, gored with wounds, and festering in his own blood. But he lies in
peace. He feels none of the miseries which rend my soul with agony and
distraction, while I am set up a spectacle to all mankind of the uncertainty of
human affairs. So far from having it in my power to revenge his death, I am not
master of the means of securing my own life. So far from being in a condition
to defend my kingdom from the violence of the usurper, I am obliged to apply
for foreign protection for my own person.

Fathers! Senators of Rome! the arbiters of the world! -- to you I fly for
refuge from the murderous fury of Jugurtha. -- By your affection for your
children, by your love for your country, by your own virtues, by the majesty of
the Roman commonwealth, by all that is sacred, and all that is dear to you --
deliver a wretched prince from undeserved, unprovoked injury; and save the
kingdom of Numidia, which is your own property, from being the prey of
violence, usurpation, and cruelty.

V. Speech of CANULEIUS to the Consuls; in which he demands that the PLEBEIANS
may be admitted into the Consulship, and that the law prohibiting PATRICIANS
and PLEBEIANS from intermarrying may be repealed.
WHAT an insult upon us is this! If we are not so rich as the Patricians, are
we not citizens of Rome as well as they? inhabitants of the same country?
members of the same community? The nations bordering upon Rome, and even
strangers more remote, are admitted, not only to marriages with us, but to what
is of much greater importance, the freedom of the city. Are the decemvirs
enacted it? and a most shameful one it is in a free state. Such marriages, it
seems, will taint the pure blood of the nobility! Why, if they think so, let
them take care to match their sisters and daughters with men of their own sort.
No Plebeian will do violence to the daughter of a Patrician. Those are exploits
for our prime nobles. There is no need to fear that we shall force any body
into a contract of marriage. But, to make an express law to prohibit marriages
of Patricians with Plebeians, what is this but to show the utmost contempt of
us, and to declare one part of community to be impure and unclean?

They talk to us of the confusion there will be in families if this statute
should be repealed. I wonder they don't make a law against a commoner's living
near a nobleman, or going the same road that he is going, or being present at
the same feast, or appearing in the same marketplace. They might as well
pretend that these things make confusion in families, as that intermarriages
will do it. Does not every one know, that the children will be ranked according
to the quality of their father, let him be a Patrician or a Plebeian? In short,
it is manifest enough that we have nothing in view but to be treated as men and
citizens; nor can they who oppose our demand have any motive to do it but the
love of domineering. I would fain know of you, Consuls and Patricians, is the
sovereign power in the people of Rome, or in you? I hope you will allow, that
the people can, at their pleasure, either make a law or repeal one. And will
you, then, as soon as any law is proposed to them, pretend to list them
immediately for the war, and hinder them from giving their suffrages by leading
them into the field?

Hear me, consuls. Whether the news of the war you talk of be true, or whether
it be only a false rumor spread abroad for nothing but a color to send the
people out of the city, I declare, as tribune, that this people who have
already so often spilt their blood in our country's cause, are again ready to
arm for its defense and its glory, if they may be restored to their natural
rights, and you will no longer treat us like strangers in our own country: but,
if you account us unworthy of we, because we are commoners, to be treated worse
than strangers? And, when we demand that the people may be free to bestow their
offices and dignities on whom they please, do we ask any thing unreasonable or
new? Do we claim more than their original inherent right? What occasion, then,
for all this uproar, as if the universe were falling to ruin? They were just
going to lay violent hands upon me in the senate house.

What! must this empire, then, be unavoidably overturned: must Rome of
necessity sink at once, if a Plebeian, worthy of the office, should be raised
to the consulship? The Patricians, I am persuaded, if they could, would deprive
you of the common light. It certainly offends them that you breathe, that you
speak, that you have the shapes of men. Nay, but to make a commoner a consul,
would be, say they, a most enormous thing. Numa Pompilius, however, without
being so much as a Roman citizen, was made king of Rome. The elder Tarquin, by
birth not even an Italian, was nevertheless placed upon the throne. Servius
Tullius, the son of a captive woman (nobody knows who his father was), obtained
the kingdom as the reward of his wisdom and virtue. In those days, no man in
whom virtue shone conspicuous was rejected or despised on account of his race
and descent. And did the state prosper the less for that? Were not these
strangers of the very best of all our kings? and supposing, now, that a
Plebeian should have their talents and merit, must not he be suffered to govern
us.

But, "we find, that, upon the abolition of the regal power, no commoner was
chosen to the consulate." And what of that? Before Numa's time, there were no
pontiffs in Rome. Before Servius Tullius's days, there were no census, no
division of people into classes and centuries. Who ever heard of consuls,
before the expulsion of Tarquin the Proud? Dictators, we all know, are of
modern invention; and so are the offices of tribunes, aediles, quaestors.
Within these ten years we have made decemvirs, and we have unmade them. Is
nothing to be done but what has been done before? That very law forbidding
marriages of Patricians with Plebeians, is not that a new thing? Was there any
such law before your alliance by intermarriages, if you will not suffer the
entrance to the chief offices in the state to be open to all persons of merit
indifferently, but will confine you choice of magistrates to the senate alone
-- talk of wars as much as ever you please; paint, in your ordinary discourses,
the league and power of our enemies, ten times more dreadful than you do now --
I declare, that this people whom you so much despise, and to whom you are
nevertheless indebted for all your victories -- shall never more insist
themselves; not a man of them shall take arms; not a man of them shall expose
his life for imperious lords, with whom he can neither share the dignities of
the state, nor in private life have any alliance by marriage.

VI. SPEECH of JUNIUS BRUTUS over the dead BODY of LUCRETIA.
YES, noble lady, I swear by this blood, which was once so pure, and which
nothing but royal villainy could have polluted, that I will pursue Lucius
Tarquinius the Proud, his wicked wife, and their children, with fire and sword;
nor will I ever suffer any of that family, or of any other whatsoever, to be
king in Rome: Ye gods, I call you to witness this my oath! -- There, Romans,
turn your eyes to that sad spectacle -- the daughter of Lucretius, Collatinus's
wife -- she died by her own hand. See there a noble lady, whom the lust of a
Tarquin reduced to the necessity of being her own executioner, to attest her
innocence. Hospitably entertained by her as a kinsman of her husband's, Sextus,
the perfidious guest, became her brutal ravisher. The chaste, the generous
Lucretia, could not survive the insult. Glorious woman! But once only treated
as a slave, she thought life no longer to be endured. Lucretia, a woman,
disdained a life that depended on a tyrant's will; and shall we -- shall men,
with such an example before our eyes, and after five-and-twenty years of
ignominious servitude, shall we, through a fear of dying, defer one single
instant to assert our liberty? No, Romans, now is the time; the favorable
moment we have so long waited for is come. Tarquin is not at Rome. The
Patricians are at the head of the enterprise. The city is abundantly provided
with men, arms, and all things necessary. There is nothing wanting to secure
the success, if our own courage does not fail us. And shall those warriors, who
have ever been so brave when foreign enemies were to be subdued, or when
conquests were to be made to gratify the ambition and avarice of Tarquin, be
then only cowards, when they are to deliver themselves from slavery? -- Some of
you are perhaps intimidated by the army which Tarquin now commands. The
soldiers, you imagine, will take the part of their general. Banish so
groundless a fear. The love of liberty is natural to all men. Your
fellow-citizens in the camp feel the weight of oppression with as quick a sense
as you that are in Rome: they will as eagerly seize the occasion of throwing
off the yoke. But, let us grant there may be some among them, who, through
baseness of spirit or a bad education, will be disposed to favor the tyrant.
The number of these can be but small, and we have means sufficient in our hands
to reduce them to reason. They have left us hostages more dear to them than
life. Their wives, their children, their fathers, their mothers, are here in
the city. Courage, Romans, the gods are for us; those gods, whose temples and
altars the impious Tarquin has profaned by sacrifices and libations made with
polluted hands, polluted with blood, and with numberless unexpiated crimes
committed against his subjects. -- Ye gods, who protected our forefathers, ye
genii, who watch for the preservation and glory of Rome, do you inspire us with
courage and unanimity in this glorious cause, and we will, to our last breath,
defend your worship from all profanation.

DEMOSTHENES to the ATHENIANS, exciting them to prosecute the WAR against
PHILIP.
WHEN I compare, Athenians, the speeches of some amongst us with their actions,
I am at a loss to reconcile what I see with what I hear. Their protestations
are full of zeal against the public enemy; but their measures are so
inconsistent, that all their professions become suspected. By confounding you
with a variety of projects, they perplex your resolutions; and lead you from
executing what is in your power, by engaging you in schemes not reducible to
practice.

It Is true, there was a time, when we were powerful enough, not only to defend
our own borders, and protect our allies, but even to invade Philip in his own
dominions. Yes, Athenians, there was such a juncture; I remember it well. But,
by neglect of proper opportunities, we are no longer in a situation to be
invaders: it will be well for us, if we can provide for our own defense, and
our allies. Never did any conjuncture require so much prudence as this.
However, I should not despair of seasonable remedies, had I the art to prevail
with you to be unanimous in right measures. The opportunities which have so
often escaped us, have not been lost through ignorance or want of judgment, but
through negligence or treachery. -- If I assume, at this time, more than
ordinary liberty of speech, I conjure you to suffer patiently those truths
which have no other end but your own good. You have too many reasons to be
sensible how much you have suffered by hearkening to sycophants. I shall,
therefore, be plain in laying before you the grounds of past miscarriages, in
order to correct you in your future conduct.

You may remember, it is not above three or four years since we had the news of
Philip's laying siege to the fortress of Juno in Thrace. It was, as I think, in
October, we received this intelligence. We voted an immediate supply of
threescore talents; forty men of war were ordered to sea; and so zealous we
were, that, preferring the necessities of state to our very laws, our citizens
above the age of five-and-forty years were commanded to serve. What followed?
-- A whole year was spent idly without any thing done; and it was but in the
third month of the following year, a little after the celebration of the feast
of Ceres, that Charedemus set sail, furnished with no more than five talents,
and ten galleys not half-manned.

A rumor was spread, that Philip was sick. That rumor was followed by another,
that Philip was dead. And, then, as if all danger died with him, you dropped
your preparations: whereas, then, then was your time to push, and be active;
then was your time to sec^^e yourselves, and confound him at once. Had your
resolutions, taken with so much heat, been as warmly seconded by action, you
had then been as terrible to Philip, as Philip, recovered, is now to you. "To
what purpose, at this time, these reflections? What is done, cannot be undone."
But, by your leave, Athenians, though past moments are not to be recalled, past
errors may be repeated. Have we not, now, a fresh provocation to war? Let the
memory of oversights, by which you have suffered so much, instruct you to be
more vigilant in the present danger. If the Olynthians are not instantly
succored, and with your utmost efforts, you become assistants to Philip, and
serve him more effectually than he can help himself.

It is not, surely, necessary to warn you, that votes alone can be of no
consequence. Had your resolutions, of themselves, the virtue to compass what
you intend, we should not see them multiply every day, as they do, and upon
every occasion, with so little effect; nor would Philip be in a condition to
brave and affront us in this manner. -- Proceed, then, Athenians, to support
your deliberations with vigor. You have heads capable of advising what is best;
you have judgment and experience to discern what is right; and you have power
and opportunity to execute what you determine. What time so proper for action?
What occasion so happy? And when can you hope for such another, if this be
neglected? Has not Philip, contrary to all treaties, insulted you in Thrace?
Does he not, at this instant, straiten and invade your confederates, whom you
have solemnly sworn to protect? Is he not an implacable enemy? a faithless
ally? the usurper of provinces, to which he has no title nor pretense? a
stranger, a barbarian, a tyrant? and, indeed, what is he not?

Observe, I beseech you, men of Athens, how different your conduct appears,
from the practices of your ancestors. They were friends to truth and plain
dealing, and detested flattery and servile compliance. By unanimous consent,
they continued arbiters of all Greece, for the space of forty-five years,
without interruption: a public fund, of no less than ten thousand talents, was
ready so any emergency: they exercised over the kings of Macedon that authority
which is due to barbarians; obtained, both by sea and land, in their own
persons, frequent and signal victories; and, by their noble exploits,
transmitted to posterity an immortal memory of their virtue, superior to the
reach of malice and detraction. It is to them we owe that great number of
public edifices, by which the city of Athens exceeds all the rest of the world
in beauty and magnificence. It is to them we owe so many stately temples, so
richly embellished, but, above all, adorned with the spoils of vanquished
enemies. -- But, visit their own private habitations; visit the houses of
Aristides, Miltiades, or any other of those patriots of antiquity; -- you will
find nothing, not the least mark or ornament, to distinguish them from their
neighbors. They took part in the government, not to enrich themselves, but the
public; they had no scheme or ambition, but for the public; nor knew any
interest, but the public. It was by a close and steady application to the
general good of their country, by an exemplary piety toward the immortal gods,
by a strict faith and religious honesty betwixt man and man, and a moderation
always uniform and of a piece, they established that reputation, which remains
to this day, and will last to utmost posterity.

Such, O men of Athens! were your ancestors: so glorious in the eye of the
world; so bountiful and munificent to their country; so sparing, so modest, so
self-denying to themselves. What resemblance can we find, in the present
generation, of these great men? At a time, when your ancient competitors have
left you a clear stage; when the Lacedaemonians are disabled; the Thebans
employed in troubles of their own; when no other state whatever is in a
condition to rival or molest you; in short, when you are at full liberty; when
you have the opportunity and the power to become once more the sole arbiters of
Greece; -- you permit, patiently, whole provinces to be wrested from you; you
lavish the public money in scandalous and obscure uses; you suffer your allies
to perish in times of peace, whom you preserved in time of war; and, to sum up
all, you yourselves, by your mercenary court, and servile resignation to the
will and pleasure of designing, insidious leaders, abet, encourage, and
strengthen the most dangerous and formidable of your enemies. Yes, Athenians, I
repeat it, you yourselves are the contrivers of your own ruin. Lives there a
man who has confidence enough to deny it? let him arise, and assign, if he can,
any other cause of the success and prosperity of Philip. "But," you reply,
"what Athens may have lost in reputation abroad, she has gained in splendour at
home. Was there ever a greater appearance of prosperity; a greater face of
plenty? Is not the city enlarged? Are not the streets better paved, houses
repaired and beautified?" -- Away with such trifles! Shall I be paid with
counters? An old square new vamped up! a fountain! an aqueduct! Are these
acquisitions to brag of? Cast your eye upon the magistrate, under whose
ministry you boast these precious improvements. Behold the despicable creature,
raised, all at once, from dirt to opulence; from the lowest obscurity to the
highest honors. Have not some of these upstarts built private houses and seats
vying with the most sumptuous of our public palaces? And how have their
fortunes and their power increased, but as the commonwealth has been ruined and
impoverished!

To what are we to impute these disorders; and to what cause assign the decay
of a state so powerful and flourishing in past times? -- The reason is plain.
The servant is now become the master. The magistrate was then subservient to
the people; punishments and rewards were properties of the people; all honors,
dignities, and preferments, were disposed by the voice and favor of the people:
but the magistrate, now, has usurped the right of the people, and exercises an
arbitrary authority over his ancient and natural lord. You miserable people!
the meanwhile, without money, without friends; from being the ruler, are become
the servant; from being the master, the dependant: happy that these governors,
into whose hands you have thus resigned your own power, are so good and so
gracious as to continue your poor allowance to see plays.

Believe me, Athenians, if, recovering from this lethargy, you would assume the
ancient freedom and spirit of your fathers; if you would be your own soldiers
and your own commanders, confiding no longer your affairs in foreign or
mercenary hands; if you would charge yourselves in your own defenee, employing
abroad, for the public, what you waste in unprofitable pleasures at home; the
world might, once more, behold you making a figure worthy of Athenians. "You
would have us then (you say) do service in our armies, in our own persons; and,
for so doing, you would have the pensions we receive in time of peace accepted
as pay in time of war. Is it thus we are to understand you?" -- Yes, Athenians,
it is my plain meaning. I would make it a standing rule, that no person, great
or little, should be the better for the public money, who should grudge to
employ it for the public service. Are we in peace! the public is charged with
your subsistence. Are we in war, or under a necessity, as at this time, to
enter into a war? let your gratitude oblige you to accept, as pay, in defense
of your benefactors, what you receive, in peace, as mere bounty -- Thus,
without any innovation; without altering or abolishing any thing, but
pernicious novelties, introduced for the encouragement of sloth and idleness;
by converting only, for the future, the same funds, for the use of the
serviceable, which are spent, at present, upon the unprofitable; you may be
well served in your armies; your troops regularly paid; justice duly
administered; the public revenues reformed, and increased; and every member of
the commonwealth, rendered useful to his country, according to his age and
ability, without any further burden to the state.

This, O men of Athens! is what my duty prompted me to represent to you upon
this occasion. -- May the gods inspire you, to determine upon such measures, as
may be most expedient, for the particular and general good of our country!

SECTION V. DRAMATIC PIECES.
I. DIALOGUES.
I. BELCOUR and STOCKWELL.
Stock. MR. Belcour, I am rejoiced to see you; you are welcome to England.


Bell. I thank you heartily, good Mr. Stockwell. You and I have long conversed
at a distance: now we are met: and the pleasure this meeting gives me, amply
compensates for the perils I have run through in accomplishing it.


Stock. What perils, Mr Belcour? I could not have thought you would have had a
bad passage at this time o'year.


Bell. Nor had we. Courier like, we came posting to your shores upon the pinions
of the swiftest gales that ever blew. It is upon English ground all my
difficulties have arisen: it is the passage from the riverside I complain of.


Stock. Indeed! What obstructions can you have met between this and the
riverside?


Bell. Innumerable! Your town's as full of defiles as the island of Corsica;
and, I believe, they are as obstinately defended. So much hurry, bustle, and
confusion, on your quays; so many sugar-casks, porter-butts, and common council
men, in your streets; that, unless a man marched with artillery in his front,
it is more than the labor of a Hercules can effect to make any tolerable way
through your town.


Stock. I am sorry you have been so incommoded.


Bell. Why, faith, it was all my own fault. Accustomed to a land of slaves, and
out of patience with the whole tribe of custom-house extortioners, boatmen,
tide-waiters, and water-bailiffs, that beset me on all sides worse than a swarm
of musquetoes, I preceeded a little too roughly to brush them away with my
ratan. The sturdy rogues took this in dudgeon; and, beginning to rebel, the
mob-chose different sides, and a furious scuffle ensued; in the course of
which, my person and apparel suffered so much, that I was obliged to step into
the first tavern to refit, before I could make my approaches in any decent trim.


Stock. Well, Mr Belcour, it is a rough sample you have had of my countrymen's
spirit; but, I trust, you will not think the worse of them for it.


Bell. Not at all, not at all: I like them the better. Were I only a visitor, I
might perhaps wish them a little more tractable; but, as a fellow-subject and a
sharer in their freedom, I applaud their spirit -- though I feel the effects of
it in every bone in my skin. -- Well, Mr Stockwell, for the first time in my
life, here am I in England; at the fountainhead of pleasure; in the land of
beauty, of arts, and elegancies. My happy stars have given me a good estate,
and the conspiring winds have blown me hither to spend it.


Stock. To use it, not to waste it, I should hope; to treat it, Mr Belcour, not
as a vassal over whom you have a wanton despotic power, but as a subject whom
you are bound to govern with a temperate and restrained authority.


Bell. True, Sir, most truly said; mine is a commission, not a right: I am the
offspring of distress, and every child of sorrow is my brother. While I have
hands to hold, therefore, I will hold them open to mankind. But, Sir, my
passions are my masters; they take me where they will; and, oftentimes, they
leave to reason and virtue nothing but my wishes and my sighs.


Stoch. Come, come, the man who can accuse, corrects himself.


Bell. Ah! that is an office I am weary of. I wish a friend would take it up: I
would to heaven you had leisure for the employ. But, did you drive a trade to
the four corners of the world, you would not find the task so toilsome as to
keep me free from faults.


Stock. Well, I am not discouraged. This candor tells me I should not have the
fault of self-conceit to combat; that, at least, is not amongst the number.


Bell. No; if I knew that man on earth who thought more humbly of me than I do,
I would take up his opinion and forego my own.


Stock. And, were I to choose a pupil, it should be one of your complexion: so,
if you will come along with me, we shall agree upon your admission, and enter
upon a course of lectures directly.


Bell. With all my heart.


II. HENRY AND CHIEF JUSTICE.
Chapter Just. I AM assured, if I be measured rightly,
Your Majesty has no just cause to hate me.

Henry. No! might a prince of my great hopes forget
So great indignities you laid upon me?
What! rate, rebuke, and roughly send to prison,
The immediate heir of England? Was this easy?
May this be washed in Lethe and forgotten?

Chapter Just. I then did use the person of your father;
The image of his power lay then in me:
And, in the administration of his law,
While I was busy for the commonwealth,
Your highness pleased to forget my place,
The majesty and power of law and justice,
The image of the king whom I presented,
And struck me in the very seat of judgment;
Whereon, as an offender to your father,
I gave bold way to my authotity,
And did commit you. If the deed were ill,
Question your royal thoughts; make the case yours;
Be now the father, and propose a son:
Hear your own dignity so much profaned;
See your most dreadful laws so loosely slighted;
Behold yourself so by a son disdained;
And, then, imagine me taking your part,
And, in your power, so silencing your son.
After this cold consid'rance, sentence me;
And, as you are a king, speak in your state,
What have I done that misbecame my place,
My person, or my liege's sovereignty.

Henry. You are right, Justice, and you weigh this well;
Therefore still bear the balance of the sword:
And I do wish your honors may increase,
Till you do live to see a son of mine
Offend you, and obey you, as I did.
You committed me;
For which I do commit into your hand,
The unstained sword that you have used to bear,
With this remembrance, that you use the same
With the like bold, just, and impartial spirit,
As you have done against me. There is my hand:
You shall be as a father to my youth;
My voice shall sound as you do prompt mine ear.
Now call we our high courts of parliament;
And let us choose such limbs of noble counsel,
That the great body of our state may go
In equal rank with the best governed nation;
That war or peace, or both at once, may be
As things acquainted and familiar to us;
In which you, Father, shall have foremost hand.
Our coronation done, we will accite
(As I before remembered) all our state;
And (Heaven consigning to my great intents)
No prince, no peer, shall have just cause to say,
"Heaven, shorten Harry's happy life one day."

III. LADY TOWNLY and LADY GRACE.
Lady T. OH, my dear Lady Grace! how could you leave me so unmercifully alone
all this while?


Lady G. I thought my lord had been with you.


Lady T. Why, yes -- and therefore I wanted your relief; for he has been in
such a fluster here --


Lady G. Bless me! for what?


Lady T. Only our usual breakfast; we have each of us had our dish of
matrimonial comfort this morning -- we have been charming company.


Lady G. I am mighty glad of it: sure it must be a vast happiness when man and
wife can give themselves the same turn of conversation!


Lady T. Oh, the prettiest thing in the world!


Lady G. Now I should be afraid, that where two people are every day together
so, they must often be in want of something to talk upon.


Lady T. Oh, my dear, you are the most mistaken in the world! married people
have things to talk of, child, that never enter into the imagination of others.
-- Why, here is my lord and I, now, we have not been married above two short
years, you know, and we have already eight or ten things constantly in bank,
that, whenever we want company, we can take up any one of them for two hours
together, and the subject never the flatter; nay, if we have occasion for it,
it will be as fresh next day too, as it was the first hour it entertained us.


Lady G. Certainly that must be vastly pretty.


Lady T. Oh, there is no life like it! Why, the other day, for example, when you
dined abroad, my lord and I, after a pretty cheerful tete-a-tete meal, sat us
down by the fireside, in an easy, indolent, pick-tooth way, for about a
quarter of an hour, as if we had not thought of any other's being in the room.
-- At last, stretching himself and yawning -- My dear, says he, -- aw -- you
come home very late last night. -- 'Twas but just turned of two, says I. -- I
was in bed -- aw -- by eleven, says he. -- So you are every night, says I. --
Well, says he, I am amazed you can sit up so late. -- How can you be amazed,
says I, at a thing that happens so often! -- Upon which we entered into a
conversation! and though this is a point has entertained us above fifty times
already, we always find so many pretty new things to say upon it, that I
believe in my soul it will last as long as we live.


Lady G. But pray, in such sort of family-dialogues (though extremely well for
passing the time) does not there now and then enter some little witty sort of
bitterness?


Lady T. Oh, yes! which does not do amiss at all. A smart repartee, with a zest
of recrimination at the head of it, makes the prettiest sherbet. Ay, ay, if we
did not mix a little of the acid with it, a matrimonial society would be so
luscious, that nothing but an old liquorish prude would be able to bear it.


Lady G. Well, certainly you have the most elegant taste --


Lady T. Though, to tell you the truth, my dear, I rather think we squeezed a
little too much lemon into it this bout: for it grew so sour at last, that, I
think -- I almost told him he was a fool -- and he again -- talked something
oddly of -- turning me out of doors.


Lady G. Oh! have a care of that.


Lady T. Nay, if he should, I may thank my own wise father for it.


Lady G. How so?


Lady T. Why, when my good lord first opened his honorable trenches before me,
my unaccountable papa, in whose hands I then was, gave me up at discretion.


Lady G. How do you mean?


Lady T. He said, the wives of this age were come to that pass, that he would
not desire even his own daughter should be trusted with pin-money; so that my
whole train of separate inclinations are left entirely at the mercy of a
husband's odd humors.


Lady G. Why, that, indeed, is enough to make a woman spirit look about her.


Lady T. Nay, but be serious, my dear, what would you really have a woman do in
my case?


Lady G. Why, if I had a sober husband, as you have, I would make myself the
happiest wife in the world, by being as sober as he.


Lady T. Oh, you wicked thing! how can you teaze one at this rate, when you
know he is so very sober, that (except giving me money) there is not one thing
in the world he can do to please me. And I, at the same time, partly by nature,
and partly, perhaps, by keeping the best company, do with my soul love almost
every thing he hates. I do^t upon assemblies; my heart bounds at a ball; and at
an opera -- I expire. Then, I love play to distraction; cards enchant me -- and
dice -- put me out of my little wits. -- Dear, dear hazard! -- Oh, what a flow
of spirits it gives one! -- Do you never play at hazard, child?


Lady G. Oh, never! I don't think it sits well upon women; there is something so
masculine, so much the air of a rake in it. You see how it makes the men swear
and curse; and, when woman is thrown into the same passion -- why --


Lady T. That Is very true; one is a little put to it, sometimes, not to make
use of the same words to express it.


Lady G. Well, and, upon ill luck, pray what words are you really forced to
make use of?


Lady T. Why, upon a very hard case, indeed, when a sad wrong word is rising
just to one's tongue's end, I give a great gulp -- and swallow it.


Lady G. Well -- and is it not enough to make you forswear play as long as you
live?


Lady T. Oh, yes; I have forsworn it.


Lady G. Seriously?


Lady T. Solemnly, a thousand times; but then one is constantly for sworn.


Lady G. And how can you answer that?


Lady T. My dear, what we say, when we are losers, we look upon to be no more
binding than a lover's oath or a great man's promise. But I beg pardon, child;
I should not lead you so far into the world: you are a prude, and design to
live soberly.


Lady G. Why, I confess, my nature and my education do in a good degree incline
me that way.


Lady T. Well, how a woman of spirit (for you don't want that, child) can dream
of living soberly, is to m^ inconceivable; for you will marry, I suppose?


Lady G. I cannot tell but I may.


Lady T. And will not you live in town?


Lady G. Half the year, I should like it very well.


Lady T. My stars! and you would really live in London half the year to be
sober in it?


Lady G. Why not?


Lady T. Why, cannot you as well go and be sober in the country?


Lady G. So I would -- the other half year.


Lady T. And pray, what comfortable scheme of life would you form now for your
summer and winter sober entertainments?


Lady G. A scheme that I think might very well content us.


Lady T. Oh, of all things, let us here it.


Lady G. Why, in summer, I could pass my leisure hours in riding, in reading,
walking by a canal, or sitting at the end of it under a great tree; in
dressing, dining, chatting with an agreeable friend; perhaps, hearing a little
music, taking a dish of tea, or a game at cards -- soberly; managing my family,
looking into its accounts, playing with my children, if I had any: or in a
thousand other innocent amusements -- soberly: and, possibly, by these means, I
might induce my husband to be as sober as myself.


Lady T. Well, my dear, thou art an astonishing creature! for sure such
primitive antediluvian notions of life have not been in any head these thousand
years. -- Under a great tree! -- ha! ha! ha! -- But I beg we may have the sober
town-scheme too -- for I am charmed with the country one.


Lady G. You shall, and I Will try to stick to my sobriety there too.


Lady T. Well, though I am sure it will give me the vapors, I must hear it.


Lady G. Why, then, for fear of your fainting, Madam, I will first so far come
into the fashion, that I would never be dressed out of it -- but still it
should be soberly; for I cannot think it any disgrace to a woman of my private
fortune not to wear her lace as fine as the wedding-suit of a first duchess:
though there is one extravagance I would venture to come up to.


Lady T. Ay, now for it --


Lady G. I would every day be as clean as a bride.


Lady T. Why, the men say that is a great step to be made one. -- Well, now you
are dressed, pray, let us see to what purpose?


Lady G. I would visit -- that is, my real friends; but as little for form as
possible. -- I would go to court; sometimes to an assembly; nay, play at
quadrille -- soberly. I would see all the good plays; and, because it is the
fashion, now and then go to an opera; but I would not expire there -- for fear
I should never go again. And, lastly, I cannot say, but for curiosity, if I
liked my company, I might be drawn in once to a masquerade; and this, I think,
is as far as any woman can go -- soberly.


Lady T. Well, if it had not been for that last piece of sobriety. I was just
going to call for some surfeit-water.


Lady G. Why, don't you think, with the farther aid of breakfasting, dining,
taking the air, supping, sleeping, (not to say a word of devotion), the
four-and-twenty hours might roll over in a tolerable manner?


Lady T. Tolerable! deplorable. -- Why, child, all you propose is but to endure
life: now, I want -- to enjoy it.


IV. PRIULI AND JAFFIER.
Pri. No more! I Will hear no more! Be gone, and leave me.


Jaff. Not hear me! By my sufferings, but you shall!
My lord, my lord! I Am not that abject wretch
You think me. Patience! where is the distance throws
Me back so far, but I may boldly speak
In right, though proud oppression will not hear me!

Pri. Have you not wronged me?


Jaff. Could my nature ever
Have brook'd injustice or the doing wrong,
I need not now thus low have bent myself
To gain a hearing from a cruel father.
Wronged you!

Pri. Yes, wronged me. In the nicest point,
The honor of my house, you have done me wrong.
When you first came home from travel,
With such hopes as made you looked on
By all men's eyes a youth of expectation,
Pleased with your seeming virtue, I received you;
Courted, and sought to raise you to your merits;
My house, my table, nay, my fortune too,
My very self was yours: you might have used me
To your best service; like an open friend
I treated, trusted you, and thought you mine:
When, in requi^al of my best endeavors,
You treacherously practiced to undo me;
Seduced the weakness of my age's darling,
My only child, and stole her from my bosom.

Jaff. It Is to me you owe her:
Childless you had been else, and in the grave
Your name extinct; no more Priuli heard of.
You may remember, scarce five years are past,
Since in your brigantine you sailed to see
The Adriatic wedded by our Duke;
And I was with you. Your unskilful pilot
Dashed us upon a rock; when to your boat
You made for safety; entered first yourself:
The affrighted Belvidera, following next,
As she stood trembling on the vessel's side,
Was by a wave washed off into the deep;
When instantly I plunged into the sea,
And buffeting the billows to her rescue,
Redeemed her life with half the loss of mine.
Like a rich conquest, in one hand I bore her,
And, with the other dashed the saucy waves,
That thronged and pressed to rob me of my prize.
I brought her; gave her to your despairing arms:
Indeed you thanked me: but a nobler gratitude
Rose in her soul; for from that hour she loved me,
Till, for her life, she paid me with herself.

Pri. You stole her from me; like a thief, you stole her
At dead of night: that cursed hour you chose
To rifle me of all my heart held dear.
May all your joys in her prove false as mine;
A steril fortune and a barren bed
Attend you both; continual discord make
Your days and nights bitter and grievous still:
May the hard hand of vexatious need
Oppress and grind you; till, at last, you find
The curse of disobedience all your portion.

Jaff. Half of your curse you have bestowed in vain:
Heaven has already crowned our faithful loves
With a young boy, sweet as his mother's beauty.
May he live to prove more gentle than his grandsire,
And happier than his father.

Pri. No more.


Jaff. Yes, all; and, then -- adieu for ever.
There Is not a wretch, that lives on common charity,
But's happier than I: for I have known
The luscious sweets of plenty; every night
Have slept with soft content about my head,
And never waked but to a joyful morning;
Yet now must fall like a full ear of corn,
Whose blossom 'scap'd, yet's withered in the ripening.

Pri. Home, and be humble, study to retrench;
Discharge the lazy vermin of thy hall,
Those pageants of thy folly;
Reduce the glittering trappings of thy wife
To humble weeds, fit for thy little state:
Then, to some suburb cottage both retire:
Drudge to feed loathsome life; get brats and starve.
Home, home, I say. -- Exit.

Jaff. Yes, if my heart would let me --
This proud, this swelling heart: home I would go,
But that my doors are hateful to my eyes,
Filled and damm'd up with gaping creditors.
I Have now not fifty ducats in the world;
Yet still I am in love and pleased with ruin.
Oh, Belvidera! Oh! she is my wife --
And we will bear our wayward fate together --
But never know comfort more.

V. BONIFACE and AIMWELL.
Bon. THIS way, this way, Sir.


Aim. You're my landlord, I suppose?


Bon. Yes, Sir, I Am old Will. Boniface; pretty well known upon this road, as
the saying is.


Aim. O, Mr. Boniface, you're servant.


Bon. O, Sir -- What will your honor please to drink, as the saying is?


Aim. I have heard your town of Litchfield much famed for ale: I think I Will
taste that.


Bon. Sir, I have now in my cellar ten ton of the best ale in Staffordshire:
it is smooth as oil, sweet as milk, clear as amber, and strong as brandy; and
will be just fourteen years old the fifth day of next March, old style.


Aim. You're very exact, I find, in the age of your ale.


Bon. As punctual, Sir, as I am in the age of my children: I Will show you such
ale! -- Here, Tapster, broach number 1706, as the saying is. -- Sir, you shall
taste my anno domini. -- I have lived in Litchfield, man and boy, above
eight-and-fifty years, and, I believe, have not consumed eight-and-fifty ounces
of meat.


Aim. At a meal, you mean, if one may guess by your bulk.


Bon. Not in my life, Sir: I have fed purely upon ale: I have eat my ale, drank
my ale, and I always sleep upon ale. Enter Tapster, with a tankard. Now, Sir,
you shall see -- Your worship's health: [drinks] -- Ha! delicious, delicious!
-- Fancy it Burgundy, only fancy it, -- and it is worth ten shillings a quart.


Aim. [drinks] It Is confounded strong.


Bon. Strong! it must be so, or how should we be strong that drink it?


Aim. And have you lived so long upon this ale, landlord?


Bon. Eight-and-fifty years, upon my credit, Sir: but it killed my wife, poor
woman, as the saying is.


Aim. How came that to pass?


Bon. I don't know how, Sir, -- she would not let the ale take its natural
course, Sir: she was for qualifying it every now and then with a dram, as the
saying is; and an honest gentleman that came this way from Ireland, made her a
present of a dozen bottle, of usquebaugh -- but the poor woman was never well
after -- but, however, I was obliged to the gentleman, you know.


Aim. Why, was it the usquebaugh that killed her?


Bon. My lady Bountiful said so -- She, good lady, did what could be done: she
cured her of three tympanies: but the fourth carried her off. But she is happy,
and I Am contented, as the saying is.


Aim. Who Is that lady Bountiful you mentioned?


Bon. Odd's my life, Sir, we'll drink her health: (drinks.) -- My lady
Bountiful is one of the best of women. Her last husband, Sir Charles Bountiful
left her worth a thousand pounds a year; and I believe she lays out one half
on it in charitable uses for the good of her neighbors.


Aim. Has the lady been any other way useful in her generation?


Bon. Yes, Sir, she has a daughter by Sir Charles; the finest woman in all our
country, and the greatest fortune. She has a son too, by her first husband;
'squire Sullen, who married a fine lady from London the other day: if you please,
Sir, we'll drink his health. Drinks.


Aim. What sort of a man is he?


Bon. Why, Sir, the man's well enough; says little, thinks less, and does --
nothing at all, faith: but he is a man of great estate, and values nobody.


Aim. A sportsman, I suppose?


Bon. Yes, he is a man of pleasure; he plays at whist, and smokes his pipe
eight-and-forty hours together sometimes.


Aim. A fine sportsman, truly! -- and married you say?


Bon. Ay; and to a curious woman, Sir. -- But he is my landlord; and so a man,
you know, would not -- Sir, my humble service to you. [drinks] -- Though I
value not a farthing what he can do to me: I pay him his rent at quarter-day; I
have a good running trade; I have but one daughter, and I can give her -- but
no matter for that.


Aim. You're very happy, Mr. Boniface: pray, what other company have you in
town?


Bon. A power of fine ladies; and then we have the French officers.


Aim. O that is right, you have a good many of those gentlemen: pray, how do you
like their company?


Bon. So well, as the saying is, that I could wish we had as many more of them.
They Are full of money, and pay double for every thing they have. They know,
Sir, that we paid good round taxes for the taking of 'em; and so they are
willing to reimburse us a little; one of 'em lodges in my house. [Bell rings.]
-- I beg your worship's pardon -- I Will wait on you again in half a minute.


VI. HAMLET and HORATIO.
Hor. HAIL to your lordship!


Ham. I Am glad to see you well.
Horatio! -- or I do forget myself.

Hor. The same, my lord.


Ham. I Am very glad to see you:
But what makes you from Wittenberg:

Hor. A truant disposition, my lord.


Ham. I would not hear your enemy say so;
Nor shall you do my ear that violence,
To be a witness of your own report
Against yourself: I know you are no truant.
But what is your affair in Elsineur?
We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.

Hor. My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.


Ham. I pry'thee do not mock me, fellow-student:
I think it was to see my mother's wedding.

Hor. Indeed, my Lord, it followed hard upon.


Ham. Thrift, thrift, Horatio; the funeral baked meats
Did coldly furnish forth the marriage-tables.
Would I had met my direst foe in heaven,
Ere I had seen that day, Horatio.
My father! -- me thinks I see my father.

Hor. Where, my lord?


Ham. In my mind's eye, Horatio.


Hor. I saw him once: he was a goodly king.


Ham. He was a man, take him for all in all,
I shall not look upon his like again.

Hor. My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.


Ham. Saw! who?


Hor. The king, your father.


Ham. The king, my father?


Hor. Defer your admiration for a while
With an attentive ear, till I deliver
This wonder to you.

Ham. Pray, let me hear.


Hor. Two nights together
Had Marcellus and Bernardo, on their watch,
In the dead waste and middle of the night,
Been thus encountered: a figure like your father,
Armed at all points exactly, cap-a-pee,
Appears before them, and with solemn march
Goes slow and stately by them: thrice he walked
Within their rapier's length; whilst they (distilled
Almost to jelly with their fear)
Stand dumb, and speak not to him. This to me
In dreadful secrecy impart they did;
And I with them the third night kept the watch;
Where, as they had delivered, both in time,
Form of the thing, each word made true and good,
The apparition comes.

Ham. But where was this?


Hor. My lord, upon the platform where we watched.


Ham. Did you not speak to it?


Hor. My lord, I did;
But answer made it none: yet once methought
It lifted up its head, and did address
Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
But even then the morning cock crew loud,
And, at the sound, it shrunk in haste away,
And vanished from our sight.

Ham. It Is very strange!


Hor. As I do live, my honored lord, it is true;
And we did think it then our duty
To let you know it.

Ham. Indeed, indeed, Sir, but this troubles me.
Hold you the watch to night?

Hor. We do, my Lord.


Ham. Armed, say you?


Hor. Armed, my Lord.


Ham. From top to toe?


Hor. From head to foot.


Ham. Then saw you not his face?


Hor. O yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.


Ham. What, looked he frowningly?


Hor. A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.


Ham. Pale, or red?


Hor. Nay, very pale.


Ham. And fixed his eyes upon you?


Hor. Most constantly.


Ham. I would I had been there!


Hor. It would have much amazed you.


Ham. Very like: staid it long?


Hor. While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.


Ham. His beard was grisly?


Hor. It was, as I have seen it in his life*
A fable silvered.

Ham. I Will watch tonight; perchance 'twill walk again.


Hor. I warrant you it will.


Ham. If it assume my noble father's person,
I Will speak to it, though hell itself should gape,
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you,
If you have hitherto concealed this sight,
Let it be treble in your silence still;
And whatsoever else may hap tonight,
Give it an understanding, but no tongue:
I will requite your love. So fare you well.
Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
I Will visit you.

VII. LOVEGOLD and LAPPET.
Love. All Is well hitherto; my dear money is safe. -- Is it you, Lappet?


Lap. I should rather ask if it be you, Sir: why, you look so young and
vigorous --


Love. Do I, do I?


Lap. Why, you grow younger and younger every day, Sir: you never looked half
so young in your life, Sir, as you do now. Why, Sir, I know fifty young fellows
of five-and-twenty that are older than you are.


Love. That may be, that may be, Lappet, considering the lives they lead; and
yet I am a good ten years above fifty.


Lap. Well, and what is ten years above fifty? it is the very flower of a man's
age. Why, Sir, you are now in the very prime of your life.


Love. Very true, that is very true, as to understanding; but I am afraid, could
I take off twenty years, it would do me no harm with the ladies, Lappet. -- How
goes on our affair with Mariana? Have you mentioned any thing about what her
mother can give her? For, nowadays, nobody marries a woman unless she bring
something with her besides a petticoat.


Lap. Sir, why, Sir, this young lady will be worth to you as good a thousand
pound a year as ever was told.


Love. How, a thousand pound a year?


Lap. Yes, Sir. There Is, in the first place, the article of a table: she has a
very little stomach: she does not eat above an ounce in a fortnight: and then,
as to the quality of what she eats, you will have no need of a French cook upon
her account. As for sweetmeats, she mortally hates them so there is the
article of desserts wiped off all at once. You Will have no need of a
confectioner, who would be eternally bringing in bills for preserves,
conserves, biscuits, comfits, and jellies, of which half a dozen ladies would
swallow you ten pounds worth at a meal. This, I think, we may very moderately
reckon at two hundred pounds a year at least. -- For clothes, she has been bred
up at such a plainness in them, that should we allow but for three
birthnight-suits a year saved, which are the least a town-lady would expect,
there go a good two hundred pounds a year more. -- For jewels (of which she
hates the very sight) the yearly interest of what you must lay out in them
would amount to one hundred pounds. -- Lastly, she has an utter detestation to
play, at which I have known several moderate ladies lose a good two thousand
pounds a year. Now, let us take only the fourth part of that, which amounts to
five hundred, to which if we add two hundred pounds on the table-account, two
hundred pounds in clothes, and one hundred pounds in jewel^ -- there is, Sir,
your thousand pound a year in hard money.


Love. Ay, ay, these are pretty things, it must be confessed, very pretty
things; but there is nothing real in them.


Lap. How, Sir! is it not something real to bring you a vast store of sobriety,
the inheritance of a love for simplicity of dress, and a vast acquired fund of
hatred for play?


Love. This is downright raillery, Lappet, to make me up a fortune out of the
expenses she will not put me to. -- But there is another thing that disturbs me.
You know this girl is young, and young people generally love one another's
company; it would ill agree with a person of my temper to keep an assembly for
all the young rakes and flaunting girls in town.


Lap. Ah, Sir, how little do you know of her! this is another particularity
that I had to tell you of; she has a most terrible aversion to all young
people, and loves none but persons of your years. I would advise you, above all
things, to take care not to appear too young. She insists on sixty at least.
She says that fifty-six years are not able to content her.


Love. This humor is a little strange methinks.


Lap. She carries it farther, Sir, than can be imagined. She has in her chamber
several pictures; but, what do you think they are? none of your smock-fac'd
young fellows, your Adonis's, your Paris's, and your Apollo's: no, Sir, you see
nothing there, but your handsome figures of Saturn, king Priam, Old Nestor, and
good father Anchises upon his son's shoulders.


Love. Admirable! this is more than I could have hoped; to say the truth, had I
been a woman, I should never have loved young fellows.


Lap. I believe you: pretty sort of stuff, indeed, to be in love with, your
young fellows! pretty masters, indeed, with their fine complexions, and their
fine feathers!


Love. And do you really think me pretty tolerable?


Lap. Tolerable! you are ravishing: if your picture was drawn by a good hand,
Sir, it would be invaluable! Turn about a little, if you please -- there, what
can be more charming? Let me see you walk -- there is a person for you; tall,
straight, free, and degagee: why, Sir, you have no fault about you.


Love. Not many -- hem, hem, -- not many, I thank heaven: only a few rheumatic
pains now and then, and a small catarrh that seizes me sometimes.


Lap. Ah! Sir, that is nothing; your catarrh sits very well upon you, and you
cough with a very good grace.


Love. But tell me, what does Mariana say of my person?


Lap. She has a particular pleasure in talking of it; and I assure you, Sir, I
have not been backward, on all such occasions, to blazon forth your merit, and
to make her sensible how advantageous a match you will be to her.


Love. You did very well, and I am obliged to you.


Lap. But, Sir, I have a small favor to ask of you; -- I have a lawsuit
depending, which I am on the very brink of losing for want of a little money,
[He looks gravely] and you could easily procure me success, if you had the
least friendship for me -- You cannot imagine, Sir, the pleasure she takes in
talking of you: [He looks pleased] Ah! how you will delight her, how your
venerable mein will charm her! She will never be able to withstand you -- But
indeed, Sir, this lawsuit will be of terrible consequence to me: [He looks
grave again.] I am ruined, if I lose it; which a very small matter might
prevent -- Ah! Sir, had you but seen the raptures with which she has heard me
talk of you. [He resumes his gai^ty.] How pleasure sparkled in her eyes at the
recital of your good qualities! In short, to discover a secret to you, which I
promised to conceal, I have worked up her imagination, till she is downright
impatient of having the match concluded.


Love. Lappet, you have acted a very friendly part; and I own that I have all
the obligations in the world to you.


Lap. I beg you would give me this little assistance, Sir: [He looks serious.]
It will set me on my feet, and I shall be eternally obliged to you.


Love. Farewell* I Will go and finish my dispatches.


Lap. I assure you, Sir, you could never assist me in a greater necessity.


Love. I must go give some orders about a particular affair.


Lap. I would not importune you, Sir, if I was not forced by the last extremity.


Love. I expect the tailor about turning my coat: don't you think this coat
will look well enough turned, and with new buttons, for a wedding-suit?


Lap. For pity's sake, Sir, don't refuse me this small favor; I shall be undone
indeed, Sir. If it were but so small a matter as ten pounds, Sir --


Love. I think I hear the taylor's voice.


Lap. If it were but five pounds, Sir; but three pounds, Sir; nay, Sir, a
single guin^a would be of service for a day or two. [As he offers to go out on
either side, she intercepts him.]


Love. I must go, I cannot stay -- hark, there! somebody calls me. -- I am very
much obliged to you, indeed; I am very much obliged to you. Exit.


Lap. Go to the devil like a covetous good-for-nothing villain as you are.
Ramilie is in the right: however, I shall not quit the affair; for, though I
get nothing out of him, I am sure of my reward from the other side.


VIII. BRUTUS and CASSIUS.
Cas. WILL you go see the order of the course?


Bru. Not I.


Cas. I pray you, do.


Bru. I am not gamesome: I do lack some part
Of that quick spirit that is in Antony.
Let me not hinder, Cassius, your desires:
I Will leave you.

Cas. Brutus, I do observe you now of late;
I have not from your eyes that gentleness
And show of love, as I was wont to have:
You bear too stubborn and two strange a hand
Over your friend that loves you.

Bru. Cassius,
Be not deceived; if I have vell'd my look,
I turn the trouble of my countenance
Merely upon myself. Vexed I am,
Of late, with passions of some difference,
Conceptions only proper to myself;
Which gives some soil, perhaps to my behavior:
But let not therefore my good friends be grieved,
Among which number, Cassius, be you one;
Nor construe any further my neglect,
Than that poor Brutus, with himself at war,
Forgets the shows of love to other men.

Cas. Then, Brutus, I have much mistook your passion:
By means whereof this breast of mine has buried
Thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations.
Tell me, good Brutus, can you see your face?

Bru. No, Cassius; for the eye sees not itself,
But by reflection from some other thing.

Cas. It Is just.
And it is very much lamented, Brutus,
That you have no such mirror as will turn
Your hidden worthiness into your eye,
That you might see your shadow. I have heard,
Where many of the best respect in Rome,
(Except immortal Caesar) speaking of Brutus,
And groaning underneath this age's yoke,
Have wished that noble Brutus had his eyes.

Bru. Into what dangers would you lead me, Cassius,
That you would have me seek into myself,
For that which is not in me?

Cas. Therefore, good Brutus, be prepared to hear:
And since you know you cannot see yourself
So well as by reflection, I, your glass,
Will modestly discover to yourself,
That of yourself which yet you know not of.
And be not jealous of me, gentle Brutus:
Were I a common laugher, or did use
To stale with ordinary oaths my love
To every new protestor; if you know
That I do fawn on men, and hug them hard,
And after scandal them; or if you know
That I profess myself in banqueting
To all the rout; then hold m^ dangerous.

Three shouts. Bru. What means this shouting? I do fear the people
Choose Caesar for their king.

Cas. Ay, do you fear it?
Then must I think you would not have it so.

Bru. I would not Cassius: yet I love him well.
But wherefore do you hold me here so long?
What is it that you would impart to me?
If it be aught toward the general good,
Set honor in one eye, and death in the other,
And I will look upon both indifferently:
For, let the gods so speed me, as I love
The name of honor more than I fear death.

Cas. I know that virtue to be in you, Brutus,
As well as I do know your outward favor.
Well, honor is the subject of my story:
I cannot tell what you and other men
Think of this life; but for my single self,
I had as lief not be, as live to be
In awe of such a thing as I myself.
I was born free as Caesar; so were you:
We both have fed as well; and we can both
Endure the winter's cold as well as he.
For once, upon a raw and gusty day
The troubled Tiber chating with his shores,
Caesar says to me, "Dare thou Cassius, now
Leap in with me into this angry flood,
And swim to yonder point?" -- Upon the word,
Ac^^utred as I was, I plunged in,
And bad him follow; so indeed he did.
The torrent roared, and we did buffet it
With lusty sinews; throwing it aside,
And stemming it with hearts of controversy.
But ere we could arrive the point proposed,
Caesar cried, "Help me, Cassius, or I sink."
I, as Aeneas, our great ancestor,
Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder
The old Anchises bear, so, from the waves of Tiber,
Did I the tired Caesar: and this man
Is now become a god; and Cassius is
A wretched creature, and must bend his body
If Caesar carelessly but nod on him.
He had a fever when he was in Spain,
And when the fit was on him, I did mark
How he did shake: it is true; this god did shake:
His coward lips did from their color fly;
And that same eye, whose bend does awe the world,
Did lose its luster; I did hear him groan:
Ay, and that tongue of his, that bade the Romans
Mark him, and write his speeches in their books,
"Alas!" it cried -- "Give me some drink, Titinius" --
As a sick girl. Ye gods, it does amaze me,
A man of such a feeble temper should
So get the start of the majestic world,
And bear the palm alone. Shout.

Bru. Another general shout!
I do believe that these applauses are
For some new honors that are heaped on Caesar.

Cas. Why, man, he does bestride the narrow world
Like a Colossus; and we petty men
Walk under his huge legs, and peep about
To find ourselves dishonorable graves.
Men at some times are masters of their fates;
The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,
But in ourselves, that we are underlings.
Brutus and Caesar! what should be in that Caesar?
Why should that name be sounded more than yours?
Write them together; yours is as fair a name:
Sound them; it does become the mouth as well:
Weigh them; it is as heavy: conjure with 'em;
Brutus will start a spirit as soon as Caesar.
Now, in the name of all the gods at once,
Upon what meats does this our Caesar feed,
That he has grown so great? Age, thou art shamed;
Rome, thou have lost the breed of noble bloods.
When went there by an age, since the great flood,
But it was famed with more than with one man?
When could they say, 'till now, that talked of Rome,
That her wide walls encompassed but one man?
Oh! you and I have heard our fathers say,
There was a Brutus once, that would have brook'd
The eternal devil to keep his state in Rome,
As easily as a king.

Bru. That you do love me, I am nothing jealous;
What you would work me to, I have some aim:
How I have thought of this, and of these times,
I shall recount hereafter; for this present,
I would not (so with love I might entreat you)
Be any further moved. What you have said,
I will consider: what you have to say,
I will with patience hear; and find a time
Both meet to hear, and answer such high things.

Cas. I am glad that my weak words
Have struck but this much show of fire from Brutus.

IX. CHARON, MERCURY, and GHOSTS.
Char. LOOK you, gentlemen and ladies, this will never do. My boat is but
small; and old, and leaky into the bargain; so that, if it be either in the
least over-loaded, or not exactly trimmed, you will be among the Stygian frogs
presently, every single ghost of you. You come pushing and crowding in such
shoals, and I know not how much luggage along with you, that you are like to
repent of your being in such a hurry; at least those of you who cannot swim.


1st Ghost. But you don't consider, Mr. Ferryman, how much we are tired of
dodging about here, where we have neither house nor home, where there is
nothing but mud, in which we sink over shoes, over boots, nor so much as a tree
to hang a dog upon. Pray, good Charon, push us over as fast as you can.


Char. What a plague ails the brainless ghost? Would you have me do
impossibilities? Do, Mercury, be^r a hand a little. Push them back, Don't let
above one come into the boat at a time; that you may examine them ghost by
ghost, and make them strip and leave their luggage before they set a foot in
the boat.


Mer. Ay, ay, I Will take care of that, Charon. -- Hold. Who are you? You seem to
brush forward as who should say, "I am no small fool."


2d Ghost. Why, Sir, I am no less person than Lampichus the tyrant.


Mer. Pray, good Mr. Lampichus, the tyrant, where do you intend to stow all
that luggage?


2d Ghost. Consider, Mercury, it is not proper that a king should travel
without his conveniences about him.


Mer. Whatever may be proper for you in quality of a king, you must allow me to
determine of the necessaries of life requisite for you in quality of a ghost. I
shall therefore desire, that your tyrantship will be pleased to leave your bags
of gold, your pride, and your cruelty, behind. For, if you were to go into our
poor crazy wherry with them, you would sink it, if there were no passenger but
yourself.


2d Ghost. Pray, good Mercury, let me carry my diadem. It is not much heavier
than an old-fashioned wedding ring. How will the ghosts know that I am a king,
without something of a royal ensign about me?


Mer. There is no difference, where you are going, between a king and a cobbler,
unless the cobbler has been a better a man, which happens commonly enough. --
But who are you, pray?


3d Ghost. A conqueror. I am the famous --


Mer. You shall not conquer me, I can tell you, Mr. Famous: and, therefore, if you
don't throw your sword and your spear, and all these trophies, into the Styx,
you shall not set a foot in the boat.


3d Ghost. What, must not my immortal honors accompany me? If I had not thought
of enjoying them in the other world, I had not taken the pains I did about them.


Mer. You will see presently what honors judge Minos will confer on you for
ravaging mankind, and deluging the world with blood. -- Stop, Who are you?


4th Ghost. Sir, I am an universal genius.


Mer. That is to say, in plain English, a Jack of all trades, and good at none.


4th Ghost. Why, Sir, I have writ upon all manner of subjects. I have published
ten volumes in folio, sixteen quartos, thirty-five octavos, nineteen volumes in
twelves, and twenty-two pamphlets. I am a standard-author in astronomy, in
natural history, in physic, in criticism, in history, in epic, tragic, and
comic poetry, in metaphysics, in grammar, in --


Mer. Plague on thy everlasting tongue; is it never to lie still any more? What
mountain of a folio is that thou have got under thy arm?


4th Ghost. Sir, it is only my common place-book.


Mer. Well, if you will go and dispose of it, and of your learned pride, and
your scurril^ty to all your contemporary authors, and of your arrogance in
pretending to be master of so many different subjects, and of your ostentation
in giving yourself so many silly airs of learning needlessly; and come back in
the dress and disposition of a modest well-behaved skeleton, we shall think of
giving you your passage. -- Now, who are you?


5th Ghost. Sir, I am worth a plumb, as I can show you by my Ledger. Look you
here.

"Balance Dr. -- Per Contra Cr."


Mer. What, in the name of Plutus, has the silly ghost got in his pericranium?
Do think, friend, that there is cheating, and usury, and stock-jobbing, in
the lower regions? Stand out of the way -- Who are you?


6th Ghost. Sir, I am a gentleman, rat me.


Mer. Ay, there is little doubt of your rotting, now you are dead. You were
half-rotten before you died.


6th Ghost. Sir, I have been the happiest of all mortals in the favor of the
ladies, split me. The tender creatures could refuse me nothing. I conquered
wherever I tried, stap my vi^als.


Mer. I cannot but admire your impudenee to tell me a lie. Don't you know,
sirrah, that Mercury is a god? No lady, whose favors were worth having, ever
cared a farthing for you, or any pig-tailed puppy of your sort. Therefore let
me have none of your nonsense; but go and throw your snuff box, your monkey
airs, your ratme's, and your spilt-me's, your pretensions to favors you never
received, your foolish brains, and your chattering tongue: throw them all into
the Styx; and then we shall perhaps talk to you.


7th Ghost. I am a female conqueror, and have had princes at my feet. My beauty
has been always thought irresistible, nor has --


8th Ghost. I am a venerable priest of the temple of Apollo, and you kn^w,
Mercury, whether the report of the Delphic oracle's being only a contrivance
among us, be not a malicious fiction; and whether the priests, in all ages, and
in all places, have not been, and will not always be, eminent for their artless
undesigning simplicity, their contempt of riches, their honest opposition to
the vices of the great, and their zeal in promoting truth and liberty of
conscience, and --


9th Ghost. I have the honor to tell you, Sir, I am the darling of the greatest
prince on earth. I have kept in favor five-and-twenty years in spite of the
hatred of a whole nation, and the arts of hundreds of rivals. There is not, I
will take upon me to say, Sir, a fetch in politics, nor a contrivance for
worming in, and screwing out, that I am not master of. I had, I assure you,
Sir, (a word in your ear) I had my king as much at my command as a shepherd has
his dog. Sir, I should be proud to serve you, Sir, if you --


10th Ghost. I presume, illustrious Sir, you will not hinder me of my passage,
when I inform you, I only want to carry with me a few nostrums, a little
physical Latin, and a small collection of learned phrase^ for expressing common
things more magnificently, which if they were put into a vernacular tongue,
wou^d be too easily understood. Besides, I have, I believe --


11th Ghost. Great god of eloquence, you will not, I am persuaded, stop a
famous lawyer and orator. I am master of every trope and figure that ever was
heard of. I can make any cause good. By the time I have talked half an hour,
there is not a judge on the bench, that knows which side the right is on, or
whether there be any right on either side. And then, for brow-beating, and
finding useful and seasonable demurs, quirks, and the like, I dare challenge --


12th Ghost. Mercury, I do entreat you to let me come into the boat. I am sure,
judge Minos will pass a very favorable sentence on me. For it is well known,
that no body ever was a more exact observer of the religious ceremonies
appointed by authority, and established by custom, than myself. And what was
alleged against me, of my being given to censoriousness, pride, and private
sins, is all false -- almost -- and --


13th Ghost. I am sure, Mercury, I shall be very well received by judge Minos,
judge Rhadamanthus, and judge Aeacus. For I never did harm to any body; but was
always ready to do any kindness in my power. And there is nothing can be
alleged against me worth naming. For it is not true, that I believed neither
God nor future state. I was no Atheist, as has been alleged, but only a
Free-thinker.


14th Ghost. Pray, Mercury, let a brave soldier come into the boat. See what a
stab in my back I died of.


15th Ghost. Pray, Mercury, don't keep out an industrious citizen, who died of
living too frugally.


16th Ghost. Pray, Mercury, let an honest farmer pass, who was knocked on the
head for not selling corn to the poor for a song.


Mer. Hoity, toity! What have we got! Why don't you all bawl together? Now, in
the name of the three F^ries, what must we do, Charon?


Char. Push them away. Push them into the Styx. There is not one of them fit to
be carried over. One comes loaded with arrogance and cruelty, another with
falsehood and flattery, another with love of same and desire of boundless
dominion, another with false learning, another with learned pride, another with
spiritual pride and hypocrisy, another with avarice and churlishness, another
with foppery and false pretensions to ladies favors, another with political
craft, bribery, and corruption, another with law quirks, another with quackish
nostrums, and another with priestcraft; and they expect, that my poor little
old half-rotten wherry should carry them and all their nasty luggage over at
one lift. Why, Mercury, it would require such a vessel as those they will build
at the island of Albion two thousand years hence, which will be called first
rate men of war, to carry such a cargo. Therefore we must even put off, with
this half dozen of passengers; and, perhaps, by the time we come back, some of
them will be stripped to the buff, I mean to the bones, and disencumbered of
their respective appurtenances, so as to be fit for the voyage.


Mer. We have nothing else for it, Charon. Therefore, gentlemen and ladies, if
you don't clear the way, I must be rude to you. Fall back, fall back. I have
not room to push the boat off -- O -- Methinks I see a couple of modest-looking
ghosts whom I should know, standing at a distance. -- Ay, ay, it is the same.
-- Hark ye, you good people, come this way. You seem to have shaken off all
your useless lumber. I remember you. You lived in a little cottage on the side
of a hill in the Chersonesus Cimbrica. You were always good, honest, contented
creatures.


Char. Take them in, Mercury. They are worth an hundred of your cumbrous
emperors, conquerors, beauties, and literati. Come, let us push off.


X. CARDINAL WOLSEY AND CROMWELL.
Wol. FAREWELL, a long farewell to all my greatness!
This is the state of man: today he puts forth
The tender leaves of hope: tomorrow blossoms,
And bears his blushing honors thick upon him;
The third day comes a frost, a killing frost,
And when he thinks, good easy man, f^ll surely
His greatness is a ripening, n^ps his shoot --
And then he falls, as I do. I have ventured,
Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders,
These many summers in a sea of glory;
But far beyond my depth: my high-blown pride*
At length broke under me; and now has left me,
Weary and old with service, to the mercy
Of a rude stream, that must for ever hide me.
Vain pomp and glory of the world, I hate ye!
I feel my heart new opened. Oh, how wretched
Is that poor man that hangs on prince's favors!
There is, betwixt that smile he would aspire to,
That sweet regard of princes, and his ruin,
More pangs and fears than war or woman have;
And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer,
Never to hope again. Enter Cromwell.
Why, how now, Cromwell?

Crom. I have no power to speak, Sir.


Wol. What, amazed
At my misfortunes? can thy spirit wonder
A great man should decline? Nay, if you weep,
I Am fallen indeed.

Crom. How does your grace?


Wol. Why, well;
Never so truly happy, my good Cromwell.
I know myself now, and I feel within me
A peace above all earthly dignities;
A still and quiet conscience. The king has cured me,
I humbly thank his grace; and, from these shoulders,
These ruined pillars, out of pity taken
A load would sink a navy, too much honor.
Oh, it is a burden, Cromwell, it is a burden,
Too heavy for a man that hopes for heaven!

Crom. I Am glad your Grace has made that right use of it.


Wol. I hope I have: I Am able now, methinks,
Out of a fortitude of soul I feel,
TO endure more miseries, and greater far,
Than my weak-hearted enemies dare offer.
What news abroad?

Crom. The heaviest and the worst
Is your displeasure with the King.

Wol. God bless him!


Crom. The next is, that Sir Thomas More is chosen* Lord Chancellor in your
place.


Wol. That Is somewhat sudden --
But he is a learned man. May he continue
Long in his Highness's favor, and do justice
For truth's sake and his conscience; that his bones,
When he has run his course, and sleeps in blessings,
May have a tomb of orphans' tears wept on him!
What more?

Crom. That Cranmer is returned with welcome;
Installed Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Wol. That Is news indeed!


Crom. Last, -- that the Lady Anne,
Whom the king has in secrecy long married,
This day was viewed in open as his Queen,
Going to chapel; and the voice is now
Only about her coronation.

Wol. There was the weight that pulled me down;
O Cromwell!
The King has gone beyond me: all my glories
In that one woman I have lost for ever.
No sun shall ever usher forth my honors,
Or gild again the noble troops that waited
Upon my smiles. Go, get thee from me, Cromwell;
I am a poor fallen man, unworthy now
To be thy lord and master. Seek the King --
(That sun I pray may never set!) -- I Have told him
What and how true thou art: he will advance thee:
Some little memory of me will stir him
(I know his noble nature) not to let
Thy hopeful service perish too. Good Cromwell,
Neglect him not; make use now, and provide
For thine own future safety.

Crom. Oh my Lord!
Must I then leave you? Must I needs forego
So good, so noble, and so true a master?
Bear witness all that have not hearts of iron,
With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his Lord!
The King shall have my service; but my prayers
For ever, and for ever, ^h^ll be yours.

Wol. Cromwell -- I did not think to shed a tear
In all my miseries -- but thou has forced me,
Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman --
Let Us dry our ey^^* and thus far hear me, Cromwell*
And when I am forgotten, as I shall be,
And sleep in dull ^old marble, where no mention
Of me must more be heard -- say then, I taught thee,
Say, Wolsey, that once rode the waves of glory,
And sounded all the depths and shoals of honor,
Found thee a way, out of his wreck, to rise in;
A sure and safe one, though thy master missed it.
Mark but my fall, and that which ruined me.
Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition:
By that sin fell the angels: how can man, then,
(Though the image of his Maker) hope to win by it*
Love thyself last: cherish those hearts that wait thee:
Corruption wins not more than honesty.
Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace,
To silence envious tongues. Be just and fear not.
Let all the ends thou aim'st at, be thy Country's,
Thy God's, and Truth's: then, if thou fall'st, O Cromwell,
Thou fall'st a blessed martyr. Serve the King --
And pr'y thee lead me in --
There take an inventory of all I have:
To the last penny, it is the King's. My robe,
And my integrity to Heaven, is all
I dare now call mine own. Oh Cromwell, Cromwell!
Had I but served my God with half the zeal
I served my king, he would not in mine age
Have left me naked to mine enemies.

Crom. Good Sir, have patience.


Wol. So I have. Farewell
The hopes of court! -- My hopes in heaven do dwell.

XI. SIR CHARLES AND LADY RACKET.
Lady R. O LA! -- I Am quite fatigued -- I can hardly move -- why don't you help
me, you barbarous man?


Sir C. There: take my arm --


Lady R. But I will not be laugh^d at -- I don't love you.


Sir C. Don't you?


Lady R. No. Dear me! -- this glove! -- why don't you help me off with my
glove! -- P^^aw! you awkward thing (...): you an't ^it to ^e about me. -- Reach
me ^air -- you have no compassion for me. -- I am so (...) to sit down -- Why
do you ^r^g me to routs? -- You know I hate 'em.


Sir C. Oh! there is no existing, no breathing, unless one does as other people
of fashion do.


Lady R. But I Am out of humor -- I lost all my money.


Sir C. How much?


Lady R. Three hundred.


Sir C. Never fret for that -- I don't value three hundred pounds to contribute
to your happiness.


Lady R. Don't you? -- Not value three hundred pounds to please me!


Sir C. You know I don't.


Lady R. Ah! you fond fool! -- But I hate gaming -- It almost metamorphoses a
woman into a fury -- Do you know that I was frighted at myself several times
tonight -- I had a huge oath at the very tip of my tongue.


Sir C. Had ye?


Lady R. I caught myself at it -- and so I bit my lips -- And then I was
crammed up in a corner of the room with such a strange party at a whist-table,
looking at black and red spots -- did you mind 'em!


Sir C. You know I was busy elsewhere.


Lady R. There was that strange, unaccountable woman Mrs Nightshade -- She
behaved so strangely to her husband -- a poor, inoffensive, good-natured, good
sort of a good for-nothing kind of man. -- But she so teiz'd him -- "How could
you play that card? Ah, you have a head! and so has a pin -- You're a numskull,
you know you are -- Ma'am, he has the poorest head in the world: he does not
know what he is about: you know you don't -- Ah fie! I Am ashamed of you!"


Sir C. She has served to divert you, I see.


Lady R. And then, to crown all -- there was my Lady Clackit, who runs on with
an eternal volubility of nothing, out of all season, time, and place -- In the
very midst of the game she begin^ -- "Lard, Ma'am, I was apprehensive I should
not be able to wait on your La'ship -- my poor little dog, Pompey, -- the
sweetest thing in the world! -- a spade led? -- there is the knave -- I was
fetching a walk, Me'm, the other morning in the Park -- a fine frosty morning
it was -- I love frosty weather of all thing -- let me look at the last trick
-- and so, Me'm, little Pompey -- and if your La'ship was to see the dear
creature pinched with the frost, and mincing his steps along the Mall -- with
his pretty little innocent face -- I vow I don't know what to play -- An so,
Me'em, while I was talking to Captain Flimsey -- your La'ship knows Captain
Flimsey -- Nothing but rubbish in my hand! -- I cannot help it -- And so Me'em,
five odious frights of dogs beset my poor little Pompey -- the dear creature
has the heart of a lion; but who can resist five at once? -- And so Pompey
barked for assistance -- the hurt he received was upon his chest -- the doctor
would not advise him to venture out till the wound is healed, for fear of an
inflammation -- Pray, what is trumps?"


Sir C. My dear, you would make a most excellent actress.


Lady R. Well, now, let us go to rest -- but Sir Charles, how shockingly you
played that last rubber, when I stood looking over you!


Sir C. My love, I played the truth of the game.


Lady R. No, indeed, my dear, you played it wrong

Sir C. Po! nonsense! you don't understand it.


Lady R. I beg your pardon, I Am allowed to play better than you.


Sir C. All conceit, my dear; I was perfectly right.


Lady R. No such thing, Sir Charles; the diamond was the play.


Sir C. Po! po! ridiculous! the club was the card against the world.


Lady C. Oh! no, no, no; I say it was the diamond.


Sir C. Z^^nd^! Madam, I say it was the club.


Lady R. What do you fly into such a passion for?


Sir C. 'Sdeath and fury, do you think I don't know what I Am about? I tell you
once more, the club was the judgment of it.


Lady R. May be so -- have it your own way.


Sir C. Vexation ^ y^^'re the ^gest woman that ever liv^d; there is no conv^g
(...) you -- Look'ye here, my Lady Racket -- (...) the clearest case in the
world, I Will m^^e it plain in a moment.


Lady R. W^ll, Sir! -- ha, ha, ha!


Sir C. I ^ad four ^^^ds left -- a trump had led -- they were (...) -- no, no,
no, they were seven, and we nine -- the^, you know -- the beauty of the play
was to --


Lady R. Well, now, it is amazing to me, that you cannot see it -- Give me leave,
Sir Charles -- your left hand adversary had led his last trump -- and he had
before finished the club, and roughed the diamond -- now if you had put on your
diamond --


Sir C. Zoons! Madam, but we played for the odd trick.


Lady R. And sure the play for the odd trick --


Sir C. Death and fury! cannot you hear me?


Lady R. Go on, Sir.


Sir. C. Zoons! hear me, I say. -- Will you hear me?


Lady R. I never heard the like in my life.


Sir C. When then you are enough to provoke the patience of a Stoic. -- Very
well, Madam? -- You know no more of the game than your father's leaden Hercules
on the top of the house -- You know no more of whist than he does of gardening.


Lady R. Ha, ha, ha!


Sir C. You're a vile woman, and I Will not sleep another night under one roof
with you.


Lady R. As you please, Sir.


Sir C. Madam, it shall be as I please -- I Will order my chariot this moment --
[Going] I know how the cards should be played as well as any man in England,
that let me tell you -- [Going] -- And when your family were standing behind
counters, measuring ou^ ^ape, and bartering for Whitechapel needl^s, my
ancestors, my ancestors, Madam, were squandering away whole estates at cards;
whole estates, my Lady R^cket -- [She hums a tune.] -- Why then, by all that is
dear to me, I Will never exchange another w^rd with you, good, bad, or
indifferent -- Look ye, my Lady Racket -- thus it stood -- the trump being led,
it was then my business --


Lady R. To play the diamond, to be sure.


Sir C. I have done with you for ever; and so you may tell your father. Exit


Lady R. What a passion the gentleman is in! ha, ha! I promise him I Will not
give up my judgment.


Re-enter Sir Charles. Sir C. My Lady Racket -- look ye, Ma'am -- once more!
out of pure good nature --


Lady R. Sir, I am convinced of your goodnature.


Sir C. That, and that only, prevails with me to tell you, the club was the
play.


Lady R. Well be it so -- I have no objection.


Sir C. It Is the clearest point in the world -- we were nine, and --


Lady R. And, for that very reason, you know the club was the best in the house.


Sir C. There Is no such thing as talking to you -- You're a base woman -- I Will
part from you for ever -- you may live here with your father, and admire his
fantastical evergreens till you grow as fantastical yourself -- I Will set out
for London this instant -- [Stops at the door.] The club was not the best in
the house.


Lady R. How calm you are! Well! -- I Will go to bed: will you come! -- You had
better -- Poor Sir Charles!


Looks and laughs, then exit. Sir C. That ease is provoking. [Crosses to the
opposite door where she went out.] -- I tell you the diamond was not the play;
and I here take my final leave of you -- [Walks back as fast as he can.] I am
resolved upon it; and I know the club was not the best in the house.


XII. BRUTUS and CASSIUS.
Cas. THAT you have wronged me, does appear in this:
You have condemned and noted Lucius Pella
For taking bribes here of the Sardians;
Wherein my letter (praying on his side
Because I knew the man) was slighted of.

Bru. You wronged yourself to write in such a case.


Cas. In such a time as this, it is not meet
That every nice offense should bear its comment.

Bru. Yet let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself
Are much condemned to have an itching palm
To sell and mart your offices for gold
To undeservers.

Cas. I an itching palm!
You know that you are Brutus that speak this,
Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.

Bru. The name of Cassius honors this corruption,
And chastisement does therefore hide its head.

Cas. Chastisement!


Bru. Remember March, the Ides of March remember.
Did not great Julius bleed for justice sake?
What! shall one of us,
That struck the foremost man of all this world,
But for supporting robbers; shall we now
Contaminate our fingers with base bribes?
And sell the mighty space of our large honors
For so much trash as may be grasped thus! --
I had rather be a dog and bay the moon,
Than such a Roman.

Cas. Brutus, bay not me:
I Will not endure it. You forget yourself,
To hedge me in: I am a soldier
Older in practice, abler than yourself
To make conditions.

Bru. Go to; you are not Cassius.


Cas. I am.


Bru. I say, you are not.


Cas. Urge me no more; I shall forget myself:
Have mind upon your health: tempt me no farther.

Bru. Away, slight man!


Cas. Is It possible?


Bru. Hear me, for I will speak.
Must I give way and room to rash choler?
Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?

Cas. O gods! ye gods! must I endure all this?


Bru. All this! ay, more. Fret till your proud heart break:
Go, show your slaves how choleric you are,
And make your bondmen tremble. Must I budge?
Must I observe you? must I stand and crouch
Under your testy humor? By the gods,
You shall digest the venom of your spleen,
Though it do split you: for, from this day forth,
I Will use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter,
When you are waspish.

Cas. Is it come to this?


Bru. You say, you are a better soldier:
Let it appear so; make your vaunting true,
And it shall please me well. For mine own part,
I shall be glad to learn of noble men.

Cas. You wrong me every way -- you wrong me, Brutus:
I said an elder soldier, not a better.
Did I say better?

Bru. If you did, I care not.


Cas. When Caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.


Bru. Peace, peace, you durst not so have tempted him.


Cas. I durst not! --

Bru. No.


Cas. What! durst not tempt him?


Bru. For your life you durst not.


Cas. Do not presume too much upon my love;
I may do that I shall be sorry for.

Bru. You have done what you should be sorry for.
There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats;
For I am armed so strong in honesty,
That they pass by me as the idle wind
Which I respect not. I did send to you
For certain sums of gold, which you denied me;
For I can raise no money by vil^ means:
By Heaven, I had rather coin my heart,
And drop my blood for drachma^, than to wring
From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash,
By any indirection. I did send
To you for gold to pay my legions;
Which you de^ed (...). Was that done like Cassius?
Should I have answered Caius Cassius so?
When Marcus B^ut^s grows so covetous,
To lock such ^afe^ counters from his friends,
Be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts
Dash him in pieces.

Cas. I denied you not.


Bru. You did.


Cas. I did not: he was but a fool
That brought my answer back. -- Brutus has riv'd my heart.
A friend should bear a friend's infirmities;
But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.

Bru. I do not. Still you practice them on me.


Cas. You love me not.


Bru. I do not like your faults.


Cas. A friendly eye could never see such faults.


Bru. A flatterer's would not, though they did appear
As huge as high Olympus.

Cas. Come, Antony! and young Octavius, come!
Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius:
For Cassius is a-weary of the world --
Hated by one he loves; braved by his brother;
Checked like a bondsman; all his faults observed,
Set in a note-book, learned and conn'd by rote,
To cast into my teeth. Oh I could weep
My spirit from mine eyes! -- There is my dagger,
And here my naked breast -- within, a heart
Dearer than Plutus' mine, richer than gold:
If that thou needst a Roman's, take it forth:
I that denied thee gold, will give my heart.
Strike as thou did at Caesar; for I know,
When thou did hate him worst, thou lov'dst him better
Than ever thou lov'dst Cassius.

Bru. Sheath your dagger,
Be angry when you will, it shall have scope:
Do what you will, dishonor shall be humor.
O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb
That carries anger as the flint bears fire;
Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark,
And straight is cold again.

Cas. Has Cassius lived
To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus,
When grief and blood ill-temper'd vexes him!

Bru. When I spoke that, I was ill-temper'd too.


Cas. Do you confess so much? give me your hand.


Bru. And my heart too. Embracing.


Cas. O Brutus!


Bru. What Is the matter?


Cas. Have you not love enough to bear with me,
When that rash humor which my mother gave me,
Makes me forgetful?

Bru. Yes, Cassius: and, from henceforth,
When you are over-earnest with your Brutus,
He Will think your mother chides, and leave you so.

II. SPEECHES AND SOLILOQUIES.
I. HAMLET's ADVICE to the PLAYERS.
SPEAK the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you; trippingly on the
tongue. But if you mouth it as many of our players do, I had as lieve the
town-crier had spoke my lines. And, do not saw the air too much with your hand;
but use all gently: for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,
whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may
give it smoothness. Oh! it offends me to the soul, to hear a robusteous
periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears
of the groundlings; who (for the most part) are capable of nothing but
inexplicable dumb shows and noise. Pray, you avoid it.

Be not too tame neither: but let your own discretion be your tutor. Suit the
action to the word, the word to the action; with this special observance, that
you o'erstep not the modesty of nature: for any thing so overdone, is from the
purpose of playing; whose end is -- to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to
nature; to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age
and body of the time, his form and pressure. Now, this overdone or come tardy
of, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve;
the censure of one of which, must, in your allowance, o'erweigh a whole theater
of others. Oh! there be players that I have seen play, and heard others praise,
and that highly, that, neither having the accent of christian, nor the gait of
christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed, that I have thought
some of Nature's journey-men had made men, and not made them well; they
imitated humanity so abominably.

II. DOUGLAS's ACCOUNT of HIMSELF.
MY name is Norval. On the Grampian hills
My father feeds his flocks; a frugal swain,
Whose constant cares were to increase his store,
And keep his only son, myself, at home.
For I had heard of battles, and I longed
To follow to the field some warlike lord;
And heaven soon granted what my sire denied.
This moon, which rose last night round as my shield,
Had not yet filled her horns, when by her light,
A band of fierce barbarians, from the hills,
Rushed, like a torrent, down upon the vale,
Sweeping our flocks and herds. The shepherds fled
For safety and for succor. I alone,
With bended bow and quiver full of arrows,
Hovered about the enemy, and marked
The road he took: then hasted to my friends;
Whom, with a troop of fifty chosen men,
I met advancing. The pursuit I led,
Till we o'ertook the spoil-encumber'd foe.
We fought -- and conquered. Ere a sword was drawn,
An arrow from my bow had pierced their chief,
Who wore that day the arms which now I wear.
Returning home in triumph, I disdained
The shepherd's slothful life; and, having heard
That our good king had summoned his bold peers
To lead their warriors to the Carron side,
I left my father's house, and took with me
A chosen servant to conduct my steps --
You trembling coward, who forsook his master.
Journeying with this intent, I passed these towers*
And, heaven-directed, came this day to do
The happy deed that gilds my humble name.
III. DOUGLAS's ACCOUNT of the HERMIT.
BENEATH a mountain's brow, the most remote
And inaccessible by sherpherds trod,
In a deep cave, dug by no mortal hand,
A hermit lived; a melancholy man,
Who was the wonder of our wandering swains
Austere and lonely, cruel to himself,
Did they report him; the cold earth his bed,
Water his drink, his food the shepherd's alms.
I went to see him; and my heart was touched
With reverence and pity. Mild he spoke;
And, entering on discourse, such stories told.
As made me often revisit his sad cell.
For he had been a soldier in his youth;
And fought in famous battles, when the peers
Of Europe, by the bold Godfredo led,
Against the usurping infidel displayed
The blessed cross, and won the Holy Land.
Pleased with my admiration, and the fire
His speech struck from me, the old man would shake
His years away, and act his young encounters:
Then, having showed his wounds, he would sit him down,
And, all the live-long day, discourse of war.
To help my fancy in the smooth green turf
He cut the figures of the marshalled hosts;
Described the motions, and explained the use,
Of the deep column, and the lengthened line,
The square, the crescent, and the phalanx firm:
For, all that Saracen or Christian knew
Of war's vast art, was to this hermit known.
IV. SEMPRONIUS's SPEECH for WAR.
MY voice is still for war.
Gods! can a Roman senate long debate
Which of the two to choose, slavery or death?
No -- let us rise at once, gird on our swords,
And, at the head of our remaining troops,
Attack the foe, break through the thick array
Of his thronged legions, and charge home upon him.
Perhaps some arm more lucky than the rest
May reach his heart, and free the world from bondage.
Rise, Fathers, rise: it is Rome demands your help:
Rise, and revenge her slaughtered citizens,
Or share their fate. The corpse of half her senate
Manure the fields of Thessaly, while we
Sit here, deliberating in cold debates
If we should sacrifice our lives to honor,
Or wear them out in servitude and chains.
Rouse up, for shame! Our brothers of Pharsalia
Point at their wounds, and cry aloud to battle:
Great Pompey's shade complains that we are slow;
And Scipio's ghost walks unrevenged amongst us.
V. LUCIUS's SPEECH FOR PEACE.
MY thoughts, I must confess, are turned on peace.
Already have our quarrels filled the world
With widows and with orphans: Scythia mourns
Our guilty wars; and earth's remotest regions
Lie half unpeopled by the feuds of Rome:
It Is time to sheath the sword, and spare mankind.
It is not Caesar, but the Gods, my Fathers!
The gods declare against us, and repel
Our vain attempts. To urge the foe to battle
(Prompted by blind revenge and wild despair)
Were to refuse the awards of Providence,
And not to rest in Heaven's determination.
Already have we shown our love to Rome;
Now let us show submission to the Gods.
We took up arms, not to revenge ourselves,
But free the commonwealth. When this end fails,
Arms have no further use. Our country's cause,
That drew our swords, now wrests them from our hands,
And bids us not delight in Roman blood
Unprofitably shed. What men could do
Is done already. Heaven and earth will witness
If Rome must fall, that we are innocent.
VI. HOTSPUR's account of a For.
MY liege, I did deny no prisoners.
But I remember, when the fight was done,
When I was dry with rage and extreme toil,
Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword,
Came there a certain lord; neat; trimly dressed;
Fresh as a bridegroom; and his chin, new-reap'd,
Showed like a stubble-land at harvest-home.
He was perfumed like a milliner;
And, 'twixt his finger and his thumb, he held
A pouncet-box, which ever and anon
He gave his nose --
And still he smiled, and talked:
And, as the soldiers bare dead bodies by,
He called them "untaught knaves, unmannerly,
To bring a slovenly unhandsome corpse
Betwixt the wind and his nobility." --
With many holiday and lady terms,
He questioned me: amongst the rest, demanded
My prisoners in your Majesty's behalf.
I then, all-smarting with my wounds, being galled
To be so pestered with a popinjay,
Out of my grief and my impatience,
Answered neglectingly -- I know not what --
He should or should not: for he made me mad,
To see him shine so brisk, and smell so sweet,
And talk so like a waiting-gentlewoman,
Of guns, and drums, and wounds, (Heaven save the mark!)
And telling me, the sovereign'st thing on earth
Was permacity for an inward bruise;
And that it was great pity, so it was,
This villainous saltpetre should be dug
Out of the bowels of the harmless earth,
Which many a good tall fellow had destroyed
So cowardly: and, but for these vile guns --
He would himself have been a soldier. --
This bald, unjointed chat of his, my Lord,
I answered indirectly, as I said;
And I beseech you, let not his report
Come current for an accusation
Betwixt my love and your high Majesty.
VII. HOTSPUR's SOLILOQUY on the CONTENTS of a LETTER.
"BUT, for mine own part, my lord, I could be well contented to be there, in
respect of the love I bear your house." -- He could be contented to be there!
Why is he not then? -- In respect of the love he bears our house! He shows in
this, he loves his own barn better than he loves our house. Let me see some
more. "The purpose you undertake, is dangerous." -- Why, that is certain: it is
dangerous to take a cold, to sleep, to drink: but I tell you, my lo^d Fool, out
of this ^^ttle danger, we pluck this flower safety. "The purpose you undertake,
is dangerous; the friends you have named, uncertain; the time, itself,
unsorted; and your whole plot too ^^ght, for the counterpoise of so great an
opposition." Say you so, say you so? I say unto you again, you are a ^low
cowardly hind, and you lie. What a lackbrain is thi^! Our plot is a good plot
as ever was laid; our friends true and constant; a good plot, good friends and
full of expectation; an excellent plot, very good friends. What a frosty
spirited rogue is this! Why my Lord of York commends the plot, and the general
course of the action. By this hand, if I were now by this rascal, I could brain
him with his lady's fan. Is there not my father, my uncle, and myself; Lord
Ed^und Mortimer, my Lord of York, and Owen Glendower? Is there not, besides the
Douglas? Have I not all their letters, to meet me in arms by the ninth of the
next month? and are there not some of them set forward already? What a Pagan
rascal is this! an infidel! -- Ha! you shall see now, in very sincerity of fear
and cold heart, will he to the king, and lay open all our proceedings. O! I
could divide myself and go to buffets, for moving such a dish of skimmed milk
with so honorable an action. -- Hang him! let him tell the king. We are
prepared. I will set forward tonight.

VIII. OTHELLO's Apology for his Marriage.
MOST Potent, grave, and reverend signiors;
My very noble and approved good masters --
That I have taken away this old man's daughter,
It is most true; true, I have married her:
The very head and front of my offending
Has this extent; no more. Rude am I in speech,
And little blessed with the set phrase of peace:
For since these arms of mine had seven year's pith,
Till now some nine-moons wasted, they have used
Their dearest action in the tented field*
And little of this great world can I speak,
More than pertains to seats of broils and battle;
And, therefore, little shall I grace my cause
In speaking for myself. Yet by your patience,
I will a round unvarnish'd tale deliver
Of my whole course of love; what drugs, what charms,
What conjuration, and what mighty magic,
(For such proceeding I am charged withal)
I won his daughter with. --
^ Her father loved me; often invited me;
Still questioned me the story of my life
From year to year; the battles, sieges, fortunes,
That I had past.
I ran it through, even from my boyish days
To the very moment that he bade me tell it.
Wherein I spoke of most disastrous chances:
Of moving accidents by flood and field;
Of hair-breadth escapes in the imminent deadly breach;
Of being taken by the insolent foe,
And sold to slavery: of my redemption thence,
And with it all my travel's history.
-- All these to hear
Would De^demona seriously incline:
But still the house-affairs would draw her thence:
Which ever as she could with haste dispatch,
She Would come again, and with a greedy ear
Devor up my discourse. Which I observing,
Took once a pliant hour, and found good means
To draw from her a prayer of earnest heart,
That I would all my pilgrimage dilate;
Whereof by parcels she had something heard,
But not distinctively. I did consent;
And often did beguile her of her tears,
When I did speak of some distressful stroke
That my youth suffered. My story being done,
She gave me for my pains a world of sighs.
She swore, In faith, 'twas strange, 'twas passing strange;
'Twas pitiful, 'twas wondrous pitiful:
She wished she had not heard it; yet she wished
That Heaven had made her such a man. She thanked me;
And bade me, if I had a friend that loved her,
I should but teach him how to tell my story,
And that would woo her. On this hint I spoke:
She loved me for the dangers I had past;
And I loved her, that she did pity them. --
This only is the witchcraft which I have used.
IX. HENRY IVth's SOLILOQUY ON SLEEP.
How many thousands of my poorest subjects
Are at this hour asleep! -- O gentle Sleep!
Nature's soft nurse! how have I frighted thee,
That thou no more wilt weigh my eyelids down,
And steep my senses in forgetfulness?
Why rather, Sleep, lie thou in smoky cribs,
Upon uneasy pallets stretching thee,
And hushed with buzzing night-flies to thy slumber,
Than in the perfumed chambers of the great,
Under the canopies of costly state,
And lulled with sounds of sweetest melody?
O thou dull god! why lie thou with the vile
In loathsome beds, and leave the kingly couch
A watch-case to a common larum-bell?
Will thou, upon the high and giddy mast,
Seal up the ship-boy's eyes, and rock his brains
In cradle of the rude imperious surge,
And, in the visitation of the winds,
Who take the ruffian billows by the top,
Curling their monstrous heads, and hanging them
With deaf'ning clamors in the slippery shrouds,
That, with the hurly, Death itself awakes;
Can thou, O partial Sleep! give thy repose
To the wet sea-boy in an hour so rude,
And, in the calmest and the stillest night,
With all appliances and means to boot,
Deny it to a king? -- Then, happy lowly clown! --
Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.
X. CAPT. BOBADILS's method of Defeating an ARMY.
I WILL tell you, Sir, by the way of private and under seal, I am a gentleman;
and live here obscure, and to myself: but, were I known to his Majesty and the
Lords, observe me, I would undertake, upon this poor head and life, for the
public benefit of the state, not only to spare the entire lives of his subjects
in general, but to save the one half, nay three fourths of his yearly charge in
holding war, and against what enemy soever. And how would I do it, think you?
-- Why thus, Sir. -- I would select nineteen more to myself, throughout the
land: gentlemen they should be; of good spirit, strong and able constitution. I
would choose them by an instinct that I have. And I would teach these nineteen
the special rules; as your Punto, your Reverso, your Stoccata, your Imbroccata,
your Passada, your Montonto; till they could all play very near, or altogether,
as well as myself. This done, say the enemy were forty thousand strong. We
twenty would come into the field, the tenth of March, or thereabouts; and we
would challenge twenty of the enemy: they could not, in their honor, refuse us.
Well -- we would kill them; challenge twenty more -- kill them: twenty more --
kill them: twenty more -- kill them too. And, thus, would we kill, every man,
his ten a day -- that is ten score: ten score -- that is two hundred: two hundred
a day -- five days, a thousand: forty thousand -- forty times five -- five
times forty -- two hundred days kill them all up by computation. And this I
will venture my poor gentlemanlike carcass to perform (provided there be no
treason practiced upon us) by fair and discreet manhood; that is, civilly -- by
the sword.

XI. SOLILOQUY of HAMLET's UNCLE on the MURDER of his BROTHER.
OH! my offense is rank: it smells to heaven:
It has the primal, eldest curse upon it! --
A brother's murder! -- Pray I cannot,
Though inclination be a sharp as 'twill:
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent;
And, like a man to double business bound,
I stand in pause where I shall first begin --
And both neglect. -- What if the cursed hand
Were thicker than itself with brother's blood?
Is there not rain enough in the sweet sweet heavens
To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy,
But to confront the visage of offense?
And what is in prayer, but this twofold force?
To be forestalled, ere we come to fall;
Or pardoned, being down? -- Then, I Will look up.
My fault is past. -- But, oh! what form of prayer
Can serve my turn? Forgive me my foul murder
That cannot be, since I am still possessed
Of those effects for which I did the murder;
My crown, my own ambition, and my queen.
May one be pardoned, and retain the offense?
In the corrupted currents of this world,
Offence's gilded hand may shove by justice;
And often it is seen, the wicked prize itself
Buys out the laws. But it is not so above.
There is no shuffling: there, the action lies
In its true nature, and we ourselves compelled,
Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
To give in evidence. What then? What rests?
Try what repentance can. -- What can it not?
Y^^, what can it, when one cannot repent? --
Oh wretched state! -- Oh bosom black as death!
Oh limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
Art more engaged! -- Help, angels! -- Make assay!
Bow, stubborn knees; and, heart, with strings of steel,
Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe!
All may be well --
XII. SOLILOQUY of HAMLET on DEATH.
To be -- or not to be -- that is the question.
Whether it is nobler in the mind to suffer
The stings and arrows of outrageous fortune;
Or take up arms against a sea of troubles,
And, by opposing, end them? -- To die -- to sleep --
No more -- and, by a sleep, to say we end
The heart-ache, and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to -- it is a consummation
Devoutly to be wished. To die -- to sleep --
To sleep -- perchance to dream -- ay, there is the rub --
For, in that sleep of death, what dreams may come,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause. -- There Is the respect
That makes calamity of so long life:
For, who would bear the whips and scorns of time --
The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
The pang of despised love, the law's delay.
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of the unworthy takes --
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin! Who would fardles bear,
To groan and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death
(That undiscovered country, from whose bourne
No traveller returns) puzzles the will,
And makes us rather bear those ills we have,
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all;
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sickly'd over with the pale cast of thought;
And enterprises of great pith and moment,
With this regard, their current turn awry,
And lose the name of action.
XIII. FALSTAFF's ENCOMIUMS on SACK.
A GOOD sherris-sack has twofold operation in it. -- It ascends me into the
brain: dries me there, all the foolish, dull, and crudy vapors which environ
it; makes it apprehensive, quick, inventive; full of nimble, fiery, and
delectable shapes, which, delivered over to the voice, the tongue, which is the
birth, becomes excellent wit. -- The second property of your excellent sher^,
is the warming of the blood; which, before, cold and settled, left the liver
whit^ and pa^^, which is the badge of pusillanimity and cowardice. But the
sherris warms it, and makes it course from the inwards to the parts extreme. It
illuminateth the face; which, as a beacon, gives warning to all the rest of
this little kingdom, man, to arm: and, then the vital commoners, and inland
petty spirits, muster me all to their captain, the heart; who, great, and
puffed up with this retinue, does any deed of courage -- and this valor comes
of sherris. So that skill in the weapon is nothing without sack, for that sets
it awork; and learning a mere hoard of gold kept by a devil, till sack
commences it, and sets it in act and use. Hereof comes in that Prince Harry is
valiant; for the cold blood he did naturally inherit of his father, he has,
like lean, steril, and bare land, manured, husbanded, and tilled, with drinking
good, and good store of fertile sherris. -- If I had a thousand sons, the first
human principle I would teach them, should be -- To forswear thin potations,
and to addict themselves to sack.

XIV. PROLOGUE to the TRAGEDY of CATO.
To wake the soul by tender strokes art, of
To raise the genius, and to mend the heart,
To make mankind in conscious virtue bold,
Live over each scene, and be what they behold:
For this the tragic muse first trod the stage:
Commanding tears to stream through every age;
Tyrants no more their savage nature kept,
And foes to virtue wondered how they wept.
Our author shuns by vulgar springs to move;
The hero's glory, or the virgin's love:
In pitying love we but our weakness show,
And wild ambition well deserves the woe.
Here tears shall flow from a more generous cause;
Such tears as patriots shed for dying laws:
He bids your breast with ancient ardors rise,
And calls forth Roman drops from British eyes.
Virtue confessed in human shape he draws,
What Plato thought, and god-like Cato was:
No common object to your sight displays,
But what with pleasure Heaven itself surveys;
A brave man struggling in the storms of fate,
And greatly falling with a falling state!
While Cato gives his little senate laws,
What bosom beats not in his country's cause?
Who sees him act, but envies every deed?
Who hears him groan; and does not wish to bleed?
Even when proud Caesar, 'midst triumphal cars,
The spoils of nations, and the pomp of wars,
Ignobly vain, and impotently great,
Showed Rome her Cato's figure drawn in state:
As her dead father's reverend image past,
The pomp was darkened, and the day overcast.
The triumph ceased -- tears gushed from every eye;
The world's great victor passed unheeded by:
Her last good man dejected Rome adored,
And honored Caesar's, less than Cato's sword.
Briton's attend. Be worth like this approved;
And show you have the virtue to be moved.
With honest scorn the first famed Cato viewed
Rome learning arts from Greece whom she subdued:
Our scene precariously subsists too long
On French translation and Italian song.
Dare to have sense yourselves: assert the stage:
Be justly warmed with your own native rage.
Such plays alone should please a British ear,
As Cato's self had not disdained to hear.
XV. CATO's Soliloquy on the Immortality of the Soul.
IT must be so -- Plato, thou reason'st well! --
Else, whence this pleasing hope, this fond desire,
This longing after immortality?
Or, whence this secret dread, and inward horror,
Of falling into naught? Why shrinks the soul
Back on herself, and startles at destruction?
It Is the divinity that stirs within us:
It Is Heaven itself, that points out an Hereafter,
And intimates eternity to man.
Eternity! -- thou pleasing -- dreadful thought!
Through what variety of untried being,
Through what new scenes and changes must we pass!
The wide, the unbounded prospect lies before me:
But shadows, clouds, and darkness rest upon it. --
Here will I hold. If there is a Power above us,
(And that there is, all nature cries aloud
Through all her works) He must delight in virtue;
And that which he delights in must be happy.
But when, or where? This world was made for Caesar.
I Am weary of conjectures -- this must end them. --
Laying his hand on his sword. Thus I am doubly armed. My death and life,
My bane and antidote, are both before me.
This, in a moment, brings me to an end;
But this informs me I shall never die.
The soul, secured in her existence -- smiles
At the drawn dagger and defies its point. --
The stars shall fade away, the Sun himself
Grow dim with age, and nature sink in years:
But thou shall flourish in immortal youth;
Unhurt amidst the war of elements,
The wrecks of matter, and the crush of worlds.
XVI. RICHARD IIId's Soliloquy on his Deformity.
Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths,
Our bruised arms hung up for monuments,
Our stern alarms are changed to merry meetings,
Our dreadful marches to delightful measures:
Grim-visag'd war has smoothed his wrinkled front;
And now, instead of mounting ba^bed steeds,
To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,
He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber,
To the lascivious pleasing of a lute;
But I, that am not made for sportive tricks,
Nor made to court an amorous looking-glass;
I, that am curtailed of man's fair proportion,
Cheated of feature by dissembling Nature,
Deformed, unfinished, sent before my time
Into this breathing world, scare half made up,
And that so lamely and unfashionably,
That dogs bark at me as I halt by 'em;
Why I, in this weak piping time of peace,
Have no delight to pass away my hours,
Unless to see my shadow in the sun,
And descant on my own deformity:
Then, since this earth affords no joy to me,
But to command, to check, and o'erbear such
As are of happier person than myself:
Why, then to me this restless world's but hell;
Till this misshapen trunk's aspiring head
Be circled in a glorious diadem. --
But, then, it is fixed on such a height -- oh! I
Must stretch the utmost reaching of my soul.
I Will climb betimes, without remorse or dread*
And my first step shall be on Henry's head.
XVII. RICHARD IIId's Soliloquy the Night before the Battle of BOSWORTH.
IT IS now the dead of night, and half the world
Is with a lonely solemn darkness hung;
Yet I (so coy a dame is Sleep to me)
With all the weary courtship of
My care-tir'd thoughts, cannot win her to my bed,
Though even the stars do wink, as 'twere, with over-watching.
I Will forth and walk a while. The air's refreshing.
And the ripe harvest of the new-mown hay
Gives it a sweet and wholesome odor. --
How awful is this gloom! -- and hark! from camp to camp
The hum of either army stilly sounds,
That the fixed sentinels almost receive
The secret whispers of each other's watch:
Steed threatens steed in high and boastful neighings,
Piercing the Night's dull ear. -- Hark! from the tents,
The armorers, accomplishing the knights,
With clinks of hammers closing rivets up,
Give dreadful note of preparation; while some,
Like sacrifices, by their fires of watch
With patience sit, and inly ruminate
The morning's danger. By yon Heaven my stern
Impatience chides this tardy-gated Night,
Who, like a foul and ugly witch, does limp
So tediously away. I Will to my couch,
And once more try to sleep her into morning.
Lies down: a groan is heard. Ha! what means this dismal voice? Sure it is
The echo of some yawning grave,
That teems with an untimely ghost -- it is gone:
'Twas but my fancy; or, perhaps, the wind
Forcing his entrance through some hollow cavern.
No matter what: I feel my eyes grow heavy.
Sleeps. -- The ghosts of those whom he had murdered appear; after which he
awakes and starts from his sleep. Give me a horse! bind up my wounds! --
Have mercy, Heaven! -- ha! soft! 'twas but a dream:
But then so terrible, it shakes my soul:
Cold drops of sweat hang on my trembling flesh;
My blood grows chilly, and I freeze with horror.
Oh tyrant Conscience, how do thou afflict me
When I looked back, it is terrible retreating;
I cannot bear the thought, nor dare repent: --
Who Is there?
Enter CATESBY. Cat. It Is I, my lord. The early village-cock
Has thrice done salutation to the morn:
Your friends are up, and buckle on their armor.

Rich. Oh Catesby! I have had such horrid dreams --

Cat. Shadows my lord! below the soldier's heeding.

Rich. Now, by this day's hopes, shadows tonight
Have struck more terror to the soul of Richard,
Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers
Armed all in proof, and led by shallow Richmond.

Cat. Be more yourself, my lord: consider, Sir,
Were it but known a dream had frighted you,
How wo^ld your animated foe presume on it?

Rich. Perish that thought: no, never be it said
That fate itself could awe the soul of Richard.
Hence babbling dreams; you threaten here in vain:
Conscience avaunt! -- Richard's himself again --
Hark! the shrill trumpet sounds to horse. Away:
My soul's in arms and eager for the fray.

XVIII. SOLILOQUY of DICK the APPRENTICE.
THUS far we run before the wind. -- An apothe^ary! -- make an apothecary of
me! -- What, cramp my genius over a pestle and mortar; or mew me up in a shop
with an alligator stuffed, and a beggarly account of empty boxes! -- to be
culling simples and constantly adding to the bills of mortality! -- No! no! It
will be much better to be pasted up in capitals, The part of Romeo by a young
gentleman, who never appeared on any stage before! -- My ambition fires at the
thought -- But hold, -- may not I run some chance of failing in my attempt? --
hissed -- pelted -- laughed at -- not admitted into the Green-room; -- that
will never do -- down, busy devil, down, down: -- Try it again -- Loved by the
women, envied by the men, applauded by the pit, clapped by the gallery, admired
by the boxes. "Dear colonel, is'nt he a charming creature? My Lord, don't you
like him of all things? -- Makes love like an angel? -- What an eye he has! --
fine legs! -- I shall certainly go to his benefit." -- Celestial sounds! -- And
then I Will get in with all the painters, and have myself put up in every
print-shop -- in the character of Macbeth! "This is a sorry sight." (Stands and
attitude.) In the character of Richard, "Give me another horse, bind up my
wounds." -- This will do rarely -- And then I have a chance of getting well
married -- O glorious thought! I will enjoy it, though but in fancy -- But
what is a clock? -- it must be almost nine. I Will away at once; this is club
night -- the spouters are all met -- little think they I Am in town -- they will
be surprised to see me -- off I go; and then for my assignation with my master
Gargle's daughter -- Limbs do your office, and support me well;
Bear me to her, then fail me if you can.


XIX. BRUTUS's Harangue on the death of CAESAR.
ROMANS, Countrymen, and Lovers! -- hear me for my cause, and be silent, that
you may hear. Believe me for mine honor; and have respect to mine honor, that
you may believe. Censure me in your wisdom; and awake your senses, that you may
the better judge. -- If there be any in this assembly, any dear friend of
Caesar's, to him I say, that Brutus's love to Caesar was no less than his. If,
then, that friend demand why Brutus rose against Caesar this is my answer; Not
that I loved Caesar less, but that I loved Rome more. Had you rather Caesar
were living, and die all slaves; than that Caesar were dead, to live all free
men? -- As Caesar loved me, I weep for him; as he was fortunate, I rejoice at
it: as he was valiant, I honor him; but, as he was ambitious, I slew him. There
are tears for his love, joy for his fortune, honor for his valor, and death
for his ambition. -- Who Is here so base, that would be a bondsman? if any,
speak; for him have I offended. Who Is here so rude, that would not be a Roman?
if any, speak; for him have I offended. Who Is here so vile, that will not love
his country? if any, speak; for him have I offended. -- I pause for a reply --

None! Then none have I offended. -- I have done no more to Caesar than you
shall do to Brutus. The question of his death is enrolled in the capitol; his
glory not extenuated, wherein he was worthy; nor his offenses enforced, for
which he suffered death.

Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony, who, though he had no hand in his
death, shall receive the benefit of his dying, a place in the commonwealth; as
which of you shall not? With thi^ I depart, that as I slew my best lover for
the good of Rome, I have the same dagger for myself, when it shall please my
country to need my death.

XX. ANTONY's Oration over CAESAR's Body.
FRIENDS, Romans, Countrymen, -- lend me your ears,
I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.
The evil that men do lives after them;
The good is often interred with their bones:
So let it be with Caesar! -- Noble Brutus
Has told you Caesar was ambitious.
If it were so, it was a grievous fault;
And grievously has Caesar answered it. --
Here, under leave of Brutus, and the rest,
(For Brutus is an honorable man,
So are they all, all honorable men):
Come I to speak in Caesar's funeral. --
He was my friend, faithful and just to me*
But Brutus says he was ambitious;
And Brutus is an honorable man.
He has brought many captives home to Rome.
Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill:
Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?
When that the poor have cried Caesar has wept*
Ambition should be made of s^erner stuff.
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;
And Brutus is an honorable man.
You all did see, that, on the Lupercal,
I thrice presented him a kingly crown;
Which he did thrice refuse: was this ambition?
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;
And, sure, he is an honorable man.
I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke;
But here I am to speak what I do know.
You all did love him once; not without cause:
What cause withholds you then to mourn for him?
O judgment! thou art fled to brutish beasts,
And men have lost their reason -- Bear with me:
My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar;
And I must pause 'till it come back to me. --
But yesterday the word of Caesar might
Have stood against the world; now lies he there*
And none so poor to do him reverence.
O Masters! if I were disposed to stir
Your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage,
I should do Brutus wrong, and Cassius wrong;
Who, you all know, are honorable men.
I will not do them wrong: I rather choose
To wrong the dead, to wrong myself and you,
Than I will wrong such honorable men.
But here is a parchment, with the seal of Caesar:
I found it in his closet: it is his will.
Let but the commons hear this testament,
(Which pardon me I do not mean to read),
And they would go and kiss dead Caesar's wounds,
And dip their napkins in his sacred blood;
Yea, beg a hair of him for memory,
And, dying, mention it within their wills,
Bequeathing it as a rich legacy
Unto their issue. --
If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
You all do know this mantle: I remember
The first time ever Caesar put it on;
'Twas on a summer's evening in his tent,
That day he overcame the Nervii --
Look! in this place ran Cassius' dagger through --
See what a rent the envious Casca made --
Through this the well-beloved Brutus stabbed;
And as he plucked his cursed steel away,
Mark how the blood of Caesar followed it! --
This, this was the unkindest cut of all:
For when the noble Caesar saw him stab,
Ingratitude more strong than traitors arms,
Quite vanquished him; then burst his mighty heart;
And, in his mantle muffling up his face,
Even at the base of Pompey's statue
(Which all the while ran blood) -- great Caesar fell.
O what a fall was there, my countrymen!
Then I, and you, and all of us, sell down;
Whilst bloody treason flourished over us.
O now you weep; and I perceive you feel
The dint of pity: these are gracious drops.
Kind souls! what, weep you when you but behold
Our Caesar's vesture wounded? -- look you here* --
Here is himself -- marred as you see by traitors. --
Good friends! sweet friends! let me not stir you up
To such a sudden flood of mutiny:
They that have done this deed are honorable;
What private griefs they have, alas, I know not,
That made them do it; they are wise and honorable,
And will, no doubt, with reason answer you.
I come not, friends, to steal away your hearts:
I am no orator, as Brutus is;
But, as you know me all, a plain blunt man,
That love my friends; and that they know full well,
That gave me public leave to speak of him:
For I have neither wit, nor words, ^or worth,
Action, nor utt'rance, nor power of speech,
To stir men's blood; I only speak right on
I tell you that which you yourselves do know;
Show you sweet Caesar's wounds, poor, poor dumb mouths,
And bid them speak for me. But were I Brutus,
And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony
Would ruffle up your spirits, and put a tongue
In every wound of Caesar, that should move
The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny.
XXI. FALSTAFF's SOLILOQUY on HONOR.
OWE Heaven a death! -- It Is not due yet; and I would be loath to pay him
before his day. What need I be so forward with him that calls not on me? --
Well, it is no matter -- honor pricks me on. But how if honor prick me off when
I come on? how then? Can honor set to a leg? no: or an arm? no: or take away
the grief of a wound? no. Honor has (...) skill in surgery then? no. What is
honor? a word. What is that word honor? air; a trim reckoning. Who has it? he
that died a Wednesday. Does he feel it? no. Does he ^ear it? no. Is it
insensible then? yea, to the dead. But will it not live with the living? no.
Why? detraction will not suffer it. Therefore, I Will none of it. Honor is a mere
'scutcheon -- and so ends my catechism.

XXII. THE WORLD compared to a STAGE.
ALL the world's a stage;
And all the men and women, merely players.
They have their exits and entrances;
And one man, in his time, plays many parts,
His acts being seven ages. -- At first, the Infant;
Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms --
And, then, the whining Schoolboy; with his satchel
And shining morning-face, creeping, like snail,
Unwillingly to school. -- And, then, the Lover;
Sighing like furnace; with a woeful ballad
Made to his mistress' eye-brow. -- Then, a Soldier;
Full of strange oaths, and bearded like the pard;
Jealous in honor; sudden and quick in quarrel;
Seeking the bubble reputation
Even in the cannon's mouth. -- And, then, the Justice;
In fair round belly, with good capon lined;
With eyes severe, and beard of formal cut;
Full of wise saws and modern instances:
And so he plays his part. -- The sixth age shifts
Into the lean and slipper'd Pantaloon;
With spectacles on nose, and pouch on side;
His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide
For his shrunk shank; and his big manly voice,
Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
And whistles in his sound. -- Last scene of all,
That ends this strange eventful history,
Is second Childishness, and mere Oblivion:
Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans every thing.
APPENDIX. CONTAINING A Concise and Systematic Course of LESSONS on a New Plan.
I. EXAMPLES of ANTITHESIS; or the OPPOSITION of WORDS or SENTIMENTS.
1. THE manner of speaking is as important as the matter. Chesterfield.

2. Cowards die many times; the valiant never taste of death but once.
Shakespeare.

3. Temperance, by fortifying the mind and body, leads to happiness;
intemperance, by enervating the mind and body, ends generally in misery.

Art of Thinking. 4. Almost every object that attracts our notice, has its
bright and its dark side. He who habituates himself to look at the displeasing
side, will sour his disposition, and, consequently, impair his happiness; while
he who constantly beholds it on the bright side, insensibly meliorates his
temper, and, in consequence of it, improves his own happiness, and the
happiness of all around him.

World. 5. A wise man endeavors to shine in himself; a fool to outshine others.
The former is humbled by the sense of his own infirmities; the latter is lifted
up by the discovery of those which he observes in others. The wise man
considers what he wants; and the fool what he abounds in. The wise man is
happy, when he gains his own approbation; and the fool, when he recommends
himself to the applause of those about him. Spectator.

6. Where opportunities of exercise are wanting, temperance may in a great
measure supply its place. If exercise throws off all superfluities, temperance
prevents them; if exercise clears the vessels, temperance neither satiates nor
overstrains them; if exercise raises proper ferments in the humors, and
promotes the circulation of the blood, temperance gives nature her full play,
and enables her to exert herself in all her force and vigor; if exercise
dissipates a growing distemper, temperance starves it. Spectator.

7. I have always preferred cheerfulness to mirth. The latter I consider as an
act, the former as a habit of the mind. Mirth is short and transient,
cheerfulness fixed and permanent. Those are often raised into the greatest
transports of mirth, who are subject to the greatest depressions of melancholy:
on the contrary, cheerfulness, though it does not give the mind such an
exquisite gladness, prevents us from falling into any depths of sorrows. Mirth
is like a flash of lightning, that breaks through a gloom of clouds, and
glitters for a moment; cheerfulness keeps up a kind of daylight in the mind,
and fills it with a steady and perpetual serenity. Spectator.

8. At the same time that I think discretion the most useful talent a man can
be master of, I look upon cunning to be the accomplishment of little, mean,
ungenerous minds. Discretion points out the noblest ends to us, and pursues the
most proper and laudable methods of attaining them; cunning has only private
selfish aims, and sticks at nothing which may make them succeed; discretion has
large and extended views, and, like a well-formed eye, commands a whole
horizon; cunning is a kind of short-sightedness, that discovers the minutest
objects which are near at hand, but is not able to discern things at a
distance. Spectator.

9. Nothing is more amiable than true modesty, and nothing more contemptible
than the false. The one guards virtue; the other betrays it. True modesty is
ashamed to do any thing that is repugnant to the rules of right reason; false
modesty is ashamed to do any thing that is opposite to the humor of the
company. True modesty avoids every thing that is criminal; false modesty every
thing that is unfashionable. The latter is only a general undetermined
instinct; the former is that instinct, limited and circumscribed by the rules
of prudence and religion. Spectator.

10. How different is the view of past life, in the man who is grown old in
knowledge and wisdom, from that of him who is grown old in ignorance and folly!
The latter, is like the owner of a barren country, that fills his eye with the
prospect of naked hills and plains, which produce nothing either profitable or
ornamental: the former, beholds a beautiful and spacious landscape, divided
into delightful gardens, green meadows, fruitful fields; and can scarce cast
his eye on a single spot of his possessions, that is not covered with some
beautiful plant or flower. Spectator.

11. As there is a worldly happiness, which God perceives to be no other than
disguised misery; as there are worldly honors, which, in his estimation, are
reproach: so there is a worldly wisdom, which in his sight, is foolishness. Of
this worldly wisdom the characters are given in the scriptures, and placed in
contrast with those of the wisdom which is from above. The one, is the wisdom
of the crafty; the other, that of the upright: the one, terminates in
selfishness; the other, in charity: the one is full of strife and bitter
envying; the other, of mercy and good fruits. Blair.

12. Where is the man that possesses, or indeed can be required to possess,
greater abilities in war than Pompey? One who has fought more pitched battles
than others have maintained personal disputes! carried on more wars than others
have acquired knowledge of by reading! reduced more provinces than others have
aspired to even in thought! whose youth was trained to the profession of arms,
not by precepts derived from others, but by the highest offices of command; not
by personal mistakes in war, but by a train of important victories; not by a
series of campaigns, but by a succession of triumphs! Cicero.

13.
In point of sermons, it is confessed
Our English clergy make the best:
But this appears, we must confess,
Not from the pulpit, but the press.
They manage, with disjointed skill,
The matter well, the manner ill;
And, what seems paradox at first,
They make the best, and preach the worst. Byram.
14.
All nature, is but art unknown to thee;
All chance, direction which thou can not see;
All discord, harmony not understood;
All partial evil, universal good. Pope.
15.
Know, Nature's children all divide her care:
The fur, that warms a monarch, warmed a bear.
While man exclaims, "See all things for my use!"
"See man for mine!" replies a pampered goose:
And just as short of reason he must fall,
Who thinks all made for one, not one for all. Pope.
16.
O thou goddess,
Thou divine Nature! how thyself thou blazon'st
In these two princely boys! They are as gentle
As zephyrs blowing below the violet
Not wagging his sweet head; and yet as rough
(Their royal blood enchas'd) as the rudest wind
That by the top does take the mountain-pine
And make him stoop to the vale. Shakespeare.
17.
True ease, in writing, comes from art, not chance;
As those move easiest who have learned to dance.
It Is not enough no harshness gives offense;
The sound must seem an echo to the sense.
Soft is the strain, when Zephyr gently blows,
And the smooth stream in smoother numbers flows:
But when loud surges lash the sounding shore,
The hoarse rough verse should like the torrent roar.
When Ajax strives some rock's vast weight to throw,
The line, too, labors, and the words move slow:
Not so when swift Camilla scours the plain,
Flies over the unbending corn, and skims along the main.
Hear how Timotheus' varied lays ^urprise,
And bid alternate passions fall and rise!
While, at each change, the son of Libyan Jove,
Now, burns with glory; and, then, melts with love:
Now, his fierce eyes with sparkling fury glow;
Now, sighs steal out, and tears begin to flow.
Persians and Greeks like turns of nature found;
And the world's victor -- stood subdued by sound! Pope.
18.
-- Different minds
Incline to different objects. One pursues
The vast alone, the wonderful, the wild:
Another sighs for harmony, and grace,
And gentlest beauty. -- Hence, when lightning fires
The arch of heaven, and thunders rock the ground;
When fu^ous whirlwinds rend the howling air;
And Ocean, groaning from the lowest bed,
Heaves his tempestuous billows to the sky;
Amid the mighty uproar, while below
The nations tremble, Shakespeare looks abroad
From some high cliff, superior, and enjoys
The elemental war. But Waller longs,
All on the margin of some flowery stream,
To spread his careless limbs amid the cool
Of plantane shades; and to the listening deer,
The tale of slighted vows, and love's disdain,
Resound, soft-warbling, all the live-long day.
Consenting zephyr sighs; the weeping rill
Joins in his plaint melodious; mute the groves;
And hill and dale, with all their echoes, mourn. --
Such, and so various, are the tastes of men. Akenside.
II. EXAMPLES of ENUMERATION; or the mentioning of PARTICULARS.
1. I CONSIDER a human soul without education like marble in the quarry; which
shows none of its inherent beauties, till the skill of the polisher fetches out
the colors, makes the surface shine, and discovers every ornamental cloud,
spot, and vein, that runs through the body of it. Spectator.

2. The subject of a discourse being opened, explained, and confirmed; that is
to say, the speaker having gained the attention and judgment of his audience;
he must proceed to complete his conquest over the passions; such as,
imagination, admiration, surprise, hope, joy, love, fear, grief, anger. Now, he
must begin to exert himself: here it is, that a fine genius may display itself,
in the use of amplification, enumeration, interrogation, metaphor, and every
ornament that can render a discourse entertaining, winning, striking, and
enforcing.

Baillie. 3. I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life; nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers; nor things present, nor things to come; nor height,
nor depth; nor any other creature; shall be able to separate us from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. St Paul.

4. Sincerity is to speak as we think, to do as we pretend and profess, to
perform and make good what we promise, and really to be what we would seem and
appear to be. Tillotson.

5. The brightness of the sky, the lengthening of the days, the increasing
verdure of the spring, the arrival of any little piece of good news, or
whatever carries with it the most distant glimpse of joy, is frequently the
parent of a social and happy conversation. World.

6. If we suppose that there are superior beings who look into the ways of men,
(as it is highly probable there are, both from reason and revelation,) how
different must be their notions of us from those which we are apt to form of
one another! -- A contemplation of God's works, a voluntary act of justice to
our own detriment, a generous concern for the good of mankind, tears shed in
silence for the misery of others, a private desire of resentment broken and
subdued, an unfeigned exercise of humility or any other virtue, are such
actions as are glorious in their sight, and denominate men great and reputable.
The most famous among us are often looked upon with pity and contempt, or with
indignation; while those who are most obscure are regarded with love, with
approbation, and esteem. Spectator.

7. In fair weather, when my heart is cheered, and I feel that exaltation of
spirits which results from light and warmth joined with a beautiful prospect of
nature, I regard myself as one placed by the hand of God in the midst of an
ample theater, in which the sun, moon, and stars, the fruits also and
vegetables of the earth, perpetually changing their positions or their aspects,
exhibit an elegant entertainment to the understanding, as well as to the eye.
-- Thunder and lightning, rain and hail, the painted bow, and the glaring
comets, are decorations of this mighty theater; and the sable hemisphere,
studded with spangles, the blue vault at noon, the glorious gildings and rich
colors in the horizon, I look on as so many successive scenes. Spectator.

7. Complaisance renders a superior amiable, an equal agreeable, and an
inferior acceptable. It smooths distinction, sweetens conversation, and makes
every one in the company pleased with himself. It produces goodnature and
mutual benevolence, encourages the timorous, sooths the turbulent, humanises
the fierce, and distinguishes a society of civilized persons from a confusion
of savages. In a word, complaisance is a virtue that blends all orders of men
together in a friendly intercourse of words and actions, and is suited to that
equality in human nature which every one ought to consider so far as is
consistent with the order and economy of the world. Guardian.

8. Though we seem grieved at the shortness of life in general, we are wishing
every period of it at an end. The minor longs to be of age; then to be a man of
business: then to make up an estate; then to arrive at honors then to retire.
The usurer would be very well satisfied, to have all the time annihilated that
lies between the present moment and the next quarter-day; the politician would
be contented to lose three years in his life, could he place things in the
posture which he fancies they will stand in after such a revolution of time;
and the lover would be glad to strike out of his existence, all the moments
that are to pass away before the happy meeting.

9. Should the greater part of people sit down and draw up a particular account
of their time, what a shameful bill would it be! So much in eating, drinking,
and sleeping, beyond what nature requires; so much in revelling and wantonness;
so much for the recovery of last night's intemperance; so much in gaming,
plays, and masquerades; so much in paying and receiving formal and impertinent
visits; so much in idle and foolish prating, in censuring and reviling of our
neighbors; so much in dressing out our bodies and in talking of fashions; and
so much wasted and lost in doing nothing at all. Sherlock.

10. If we would have the kindness of others we must endure their follies. He
who cannot persuade himself to withdraw from society, must be content to pay a
tribute of his time to a multitude of tyrants: -- to the loiterer, who makes
appointments he never keeps -- to the consulter, who asks advice which he never
takes -- to the boaster, who blusters only to be praised -- to the complainer,
who whines only to be pitied -- to the projector, whose happiness is to
entertain his friends with expectations which all but himself know to be vain
-- to the oeconomist, who tells of bargains and settlements -- to the
politician, who predicts the consequence of deaths, battles, and alliances --
to the usurer, who compares the state of the different funds -- and the talker
who talks only because he loves to be talking. Johnson.

11. Charity suffers long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth
not itself; is not puffed up* does not behave itself unseemly; seeks not her
own; is not easily provoked; thinks no evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity, but
rejoiceth in the truth; bears all things, believes all things, hops all
things, endures all things.

St. Paul. 12.
Delightful task! to rear the tender thought,
To teach the young idea how to shoot,
To pour the fresh instruction over the mind,
To breathe the enlivening spirit, and to fix
The generous purpose in the glowing breast. Thomson.
13.
Dread over the scene, the ghost of Hamlet stalks;
Othel^o rages; poor Monimia mourns;
And Belvid^ra pours her soul in love.
Terror alarms the breast: the comely tear
Steals over the cheek. Or else, the comic muse
Holds to the world a picture of itself,
And raises, fly, the fair impa^tial laugh.
Sometimes, she li^s her strain, and paints the scenes
Of beateous life; whatever can deck mankind,
Or charm the heart, in generous Bevil showed. Thomson.
14.
Then Commerce brought into the public walk
The busy merchant; the big warehouse built;
Raised the strong crane; choked up the loaded street
With foreign plenty; and thy stream, O Thames,
Large, gentle, deep, majestic, king of floods!
Chose for his grand resort. On either hand,
Like a long wintry forest, groves of masts
Shot up their spires; the bellying sheet between
Possessed the breezy void; the sooty hulk
Steered sluggish on; the splendid barge
Rowed, regular, to harmony; around,
The boat, light-skimming, stretched its oary wings;
While, deep, the various voice of fervent toil
From bank to bank increased; whence, ribb'd with oak*
To bear the British thunder, black and bold,
The roaring vessel rushed into the main. Thomson.
15.
Ten thousand thousand bright ideas, such
As never mingled with the vulgar dream,
Crowd fast into the philosophic mind.
As fast the correspondent passions rise,
As varied, and as high: devotion, raised
The rapture and divine astonishment;
The love of nature unconfined, and, chief,
Of human race; the large ambitious wish
To make them blessed; the sigh for suffering worth
Lost in obscurity: the noble scorn
Of tyrant pride; the fearless great resolve;
The wonder which the dying patriot draws,
Inspiring glory through remotest time;
The awakened throb for virtue and for fame;
The sympathies of love and friendship dear;
With all the social offspring of the heart. Thomson.
16.
Let Newton, pure Intelligence, whom God
To mortals lent to trace his boundless works
From laws sublimely simple, speak thy fame
In all philosophy* For lofty sense,
Creative fancy, and inspection keen
Through the deep windings of the human heart,
Is not wild Shakespeare thine and Nature's boast?
Is not each great, each amiable muse
Of classic ages in thy Milton met?
A genius universal as his theme,
Astonishing as Chaos, as the bloom
Of blowing Eden fair, as Heaven sublime. Thomson.
17.
See what a grace was seated on this brow;
Hyperion's curls; the ^r^nt of Jove himself;
An eye like Mars, to threaten and command;
A station like the her^ld Mercury
New-lighted on a heav'n-kissing hill;
A combination, and a form indeed,
Where every god did seem to s^t his seal,
To give the world assurance of a man. Shak^speare.
18.
The cloud-capt towers, the gorgeou^ pal^ces,
The solemn temples, the great globe itself,
Yea, all which it inherit (...) d^ss^lve;
And like the baseless fabric of a vision,
Leave not a wreck behind. Shakespeare.
III. Examples of SUSPENSION; or a delaying of the Sense.
As beauty of person with an agreeable carriage, pleases the eye, and that
pleasure consists in observing that all the parts have a certain elegance, and
are proportioned to each other; so does decency of behavior obtain the
approbation of all with whom we converse, from the order, consistency, and
moderation of our words and actions. Spectator.

2. If Pericles, as historians report, could shake the firmest resolutions of
his hearers, and set the passions of all Greece in a ferment, when the public
welfare of his country, or the fear of hostile invasions, was the subject; what
may we not expect from that orator, who, with a becoming energy, warns his
audience against those evils which have no remedy, when once undergone, either
from prudence or time? Spectator.

3. Though there is a great deal of pleasure in contemplating the material
world, by which I mean that system of bodies into which nature has so curiously
wrought the mass of dead matter, with the several relations which those bodies
bear to one another; there is still something more wonderful and surprising in
contemplating the world of life, or those various animals with which every part
of the universe is furnished. Spectator.

4. Since it is certain that our hearts deceive us in the love of the world,
and that we cannot command ourselves enough to resign it, though we every day
wish ourselves disengaged from its allurements; let us not stand upon a formal
taking of leave, but wean ourselves from them, while we are in the midst of
them. Spectator.

5. When a man has got such a great and exalted soul, as that he can look upon
life and death, riches and poverty, with indifference, and closely adheres to
Honesty, in whatever shape she presents herself; then it is that Virtue appears
with such a brightness, as that all the world must admire her beauties. Cicero.

6. To hear a judicious and elegant discourse from the pulpit, which would in
print make a noble figure, murdered by him who had learning and taste to
compose it, but, having been neglected as to one important part of his
education, knows not how to deliver it otherwise than with a tone between
singing and saying, or with a nod of his head, to enforce, as with a hammer,
every emphatical word, or with the same unanimated monotony in which he was
used to repeat Quae genus at Westminster-school; what can be imagined more
lamentable; yet more common! Burgh.

7. Having already shown how the fancy is affected by the works of nature, and
afterward considered in general both the works of nature and of art, how they
mutually assist and complete each other in forming such scenes and prospects as
are most apt to delight the mind of the beholder; I shall in this paper throw
together some reflections on that particular art, which has a more immediate
tendency than any other, to produce those primary pleasures of the imagination
which have hitherto been the subject of this discourse. Spectator.

8. The causes of good and evil are so various and uncertain, so often
entangled with each other, so diversified by various relations, and so much
subject to accidents which cannot before seen; that he who would fix his
condition upon incontestible reasons of preference, must live and die inquiring
and deliberating. Johnson.

9.
He who through vast immensity can pierce,
See worlds on worlds compose one universe,
Observe how system into system runs,
What other planets circle other suns,
What varied being peoples every star,
May tell why Heaven has made us as we are. Pope.
10.
In that soft season, when descending showers
Call forth the greens and wake the rising flowers;
When opening buds salute the welcome day,
And earth, relenting, feels the genial ray;
As balmy sleep has charmed my cares to rest,
And love itself was banished from my breast;
A train of phantoms, in wild order rose,
And, joined, this intellectual scene compose. Pope.
11.
Of man's first disobedience, and the fruit
Of that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste
Brought death into the world, and all our woe,
With loss of Eden, till one greater man
Restore us, and regain the blissful seat,
Sing heavenly Muse! Milton.
12.
As one who long in populous city pent,
Where houses thick and sewers annoy the air,
Forth issuing on a summer's morn to breathe
Among the pleasant villages and farms
Adjoin'd, from each thing met conceives delight;
The smell of grain, or tedded grass, or kine,
Or dairy, rural sight, each rural sound;
If chance, with nymph-like step, fair virgin pass,
What pleasing seemed, for her now pleases more,
She most, and in her look sums all delight:
Such pleasure took the serpent to behold
This flowery plat, the sweet recess of Eve
Thus early, thus alone. Milton.
IV. Examples of PARENTHESIS; or Words interposed in Sentences.
THOUGH good sense is not in the number, nor always, it must be owned, in the
company of the sciences; yet is it (as the most sensible of poets has justly
observed) fairly worth the seven. Melmoth.

2. An elevated genius, employed in little things, appears (to use the simile
of Longinus) like the sun in his evening declination; he remits his splendour,
but retains his magnitude; and pleases more, though he dazzles less.

Johnson. 3. The horror with which we entertain the thoughts of death (or
indeed of any future evil), and the uncertainty of its approach, fill a
melancholy mind with innumerable apprehen^ions and suspicions. Spectator.

4. To be regardless of those phenomena that are placed within our view, and
display the wisdom and power of their Creator, is an affront to Providence, of
the same kind (I hope it is not impious to make such a simile) as it would be
to a good poet to fit out his play without minding the plot or beauties of it.
Spectator.

5. Notwithstanding all the care of Cicero, history informs us that Marcus
proved a mere blockhead; and that Nature (who it seems, was even with the son
for her prodigality to the father) rendered him incapable of improving, by all
the rules of eloquence, the precepts of philosophy, his own endeavors, and the
most refined conversation in Athens. Spectator.

6. The opera (in which action is joined with music in order to entertain the
eye at the same time with the ear) I must beg leave (with all due submission to
the taste of the great) to consider as a forced conjunction of two things which
nature does not allow to go together. Burgh.

7. As to my own abilities in speaking (for I shall admit this charge, although
experience has convinced me, that what is called the power of eloquence
depends for the most part upon the hearers, and that the characters of public
speakers are determined by that degree of favor which y^u vouc^safe to each),
if long practice, I say, has given me any proficiency in speaking, you have
ever found it devoted to my country. Demosthenes.

8. When Socrates' ^etters were knocked off (as was usually to be done on the
day that the condemned person was to be executed), being seated in the midst of
his disciples, and laying one of his legs over the other in a very uncon^d
posture, he began to rub it where it had been galle^ by the iron; and (whether
it was to show the indifferenc^ with which ^e entertained the thoughts of his
appro^ching death, or (after his usual manner) to take every occasion of
philosop^ing upon some useful subject) he observed the pleasure of that
sensation which now arose in those very parts of his l^g that just before had
been so much pained by the setter. Upon this he reflected on the nature of
pleas^re and pain in general, and how constantly they succeeded one another.
Spectator.

9.
One day (the tale's by Martial penned)
A father thus addressed hi^ friend.
To train my boy, and call forth sense,
You know I Have stuck at no expense:
I Have tried him in the several arts,
(The lad, no doubt, has latent parts);
Yet, trying all, he nothing knows,
But, crab-like, rather backward goes.
Teach me what yet remains undone;
It Is your advice shall fix my son. --
Sir, says the friend, I Have weighed the matter;
Excuse me, for I scorn to flatter:
Make him (nor think his genius checked)
An herald or an architect.
Perhaps (as commonly it is known)
He heard the advice, and took his own. Gay.
10.
Say Father Thames (for thou have seen
Full many a sprightly race,
Disporting on thy margent green,
The paths of pleasure trace),
Who foremost now delight to cleave
With pliant arm the glassy wave? Gray.
11.
Let us (since life can little more supply
Than just to look about us and to die)
Exp^tiate free over all this scene of man;
A mighty maze! but not without a plan. Pope.
12.
Before the gates, there sat,
On ^ther side, a formidable sh^pe.
The one seemed woman to the waist, and fair:
But ended foul, in many a scaly fold
Voluminou^ and vast; a serpent, armed
With mortal sting. The other shape
(If shape it might be called, that shape had none
Distinguishable in member, joint, or limb;
Or substance might be called, that shadow seemed;
For each seemed either) -- black it stood as night,
Fierce as ten furies, terrible as hell,
And shook a dreadful dart: what seemed his head
The likeness of a kingly crown had on. -- Milton.
V. Examples of INTERROGATION; or Questioning.
ONE day, when the Moon was under an eclipse, she complained thus to the Sun of
the discontinuance of favors. My dearest friend, said she, why do you not shine
upon me as you used to do? Do I no^ shine upon thee? said the Sun: I am very
sure that I intend it. O no! replies the Moon: but I now perceive the reason. I
see that dirty planet the Earth is got between us Dod^ley's Fables.

2. Searching every kingdom for the man who has the least comfort in life,
Where is he to be found? -- In the royal palace. -- What! His majesty? Yes;
especially if he be despo^le. Art of Thinking.

3. You have obliged a man: Very well! what would you have more? Is not the
consciousness of doing good a sufficient reward. Art of Thinking.

4. Is it credible, is it possible, that the mighty soul of a Newton should
share exactly the same fate with the vilest insect that crawls upon the ground:
that, after having laid open the mysteries of nature, and pushed its
discoveries almost to the very boundaries of the universe, it should on a
sudden, have all its lights at once extinguished, and sink into everlasting
darkness and insensibility? Spect.

5. Suppose a youth to have no prospect either of sitting in parliament, of
pleading at the bar, of appearing upon the stage or in the pulpit; does it
follow, that he need bestow no pains in learning to speak properly his native
language? Will he never have occasion to read, in a company of his friends, a
copy of verses, a passage of a book or newspaper? Must he never read a
discourse of Tillotson, or a chapter of the Whole Duty of Man, for the
instruction of his children and servants? -- Cicero justly observes, that
address in speaking is highly ornamental, as well as useful, even in private
life. The limbs are parts of the body much less noble than the tongue; yet no
gentleman grudges a considerable expense of time and money to have his son
taught to use them properly: which is very commendable. And is there no
attention to be paid to the use of the tongue, the glory of man? Burgh.

6. Life is short and uncertain: we have not a moment to lose. Is it prudent to
throw away any of our time in tormenting ourselves or others, when we have so
little for honest pleasures? Forgetting our weakness, we stir up mighty
enmities, and fly to wound as if we were invulnerable. Wherefore all this
bustle and noise? The best use of a short life is, to make it agreeable to
ourselves and to others. Have you cause of quarrel with your servant, your
master, your king, your neighbor? forbear a moment; death is at hand, which
makes all equal. What has man to do with wars, tumults, ambushes? You would
destroy your enemy? You lose your trouble; death will do your business while
you are at rest. And, after all, when you have got your revenge, how short will
be your joy or his pain? While we are among men, let us cultivate humanity; let
us not be the cause of fear nor of pain to one another. Let us despise injury,
malice, and detraction; and bear with an equal mind such transitory evils.
While we speak, while we think, death comes up, and closes the scene. Art of
Thinking.

7. Does greatness secure persons of rank from infirmities either of body or
mind? Will the headache, the gout, or fever, spare a prince any more than a
subject? When old age comes to lie heavy upon him, will his engineers relieve
him of the load? Can his guards and sentinels, by doubling and trebling their
numbers, and their watchfulness, prevent the approach of death? Nay, if
jealousy, or even ill-humor, disturb his happiness, will the cringes of his
sawning attendant restores his tranquillity? What comfort has he, in
reflecting, (if he can make the reflection) while the cholic, like Prometheus's
vulture, ^ears his bowels, that he is under a canopy of crimson velvet fringed
with gold? When the pangs of the gout, or stone, extort from him screams of
agony, do the titles of Highness or Majesty come sweetly into his ear? If he is
agitated with rage, does the sound of Serene, or Most Christian, prevent his
staring, reddening, and gnashing with his teeth, like a madman? Would not a
twinge of the toothache, or an affront from an inferior, make ^he mighty Caesar
forget that he was emperor of the world?

Montaigne. 8. When will you, my Countrymen, when will you rouse from your
indolence and bethink yourselves of what is to be done? When you are forced to
it by some fatal disaster? When irresistible necessity drives you? -- What
think you of the disgraces which are already come upon you? is not the past
sufficient to stimulate your activity? or, do you wait for somewhat more
forcible and urgent? -- How long will you amuse yourselves with enquiring of
one another after news as you ramble idly about the streets? What news so
strange ever came to Athens, as that a Macedonian should subdue this state and
lord it over Greece? Demosthenes.

9.
What is the blooming tincture of the skin,
To peace of mind and harmony within?
What the bright sparkling of the finest eye,
To the soft soothing of a calm reply?
Can comeliness of form, or shape, or air,
With comeliness of words or deeds compare?
No: -- those at first the unwary heart may gain;
But these, these only, can the heart retain. Gay.
10.
Has God, thou fool! worked solely for thy good,
Thy joy, thy pastime, thy attire, thy food?
Who for thy table seeds the wanton fawn,
For him, as kindly, spread the flowery lawn.
Is it for thee the lark ascends and sings?
Joy tunes his voice, joy elevates his wings.
Is it for thee the linnet pours his throat?
Loves of own, and raptures, swell the note.
The bounding steed you pompously bestride,
Shares with his lord the pleasure and the pride.
Is thine alone the seed that strews the plain?
The birds of heaven shall vindicate their grain.
Thine the full harvest of the golden year?
Part pays, and justly, the deserving steer.
The hog that ploughs not, nor obeys thy call,
Lives on the labors of this lord of all. Pope.
11.
Say, why are beauties praised and honored most,
The wise man's passion, and the vain man's toast?
Why decked with all that land and sea afford?
Why angels called, and angel-like adored?
Why round our coaches crowd the white-glov'd beaux?
Why bows the side-box from its inmost rows?
How vain are all these glories, all our pains,
Unless good-sense preserve what beauty gains:
That men may say, when we the front-box grace,
Behold the first in virtue as in face! Pope.
12.
Wronged in my love, all proffers I disdain;
Deceived for once, I trust not kings again.
Ye have my answer -- What remains to do?
Your king, Ulysses, may consult with you.
What needs he the defense this arm can make?
Has he not walls no human ^orce can shake?
Has he not fenced his guarded navy round
With piles, with rampa^ts, and a tre^ch profound?
And will not these, the wonders he has done,
Repel the rage of P^iam's single son? Homer.
VI. Examples of CLIMAX; or a gradual increase of SENSE or PASSION.
1. CONSULT your whole nature. Consider yourselves, not only as sensitive, but
as rational beings; not only as rational, but social; not only as social, but
immortal. Blair.

2. Whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate; and whom he did
predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called, them he also justified;
and whom he justified, them he also glorified. St Paul.

3. After we have practiced good actions a while, they become easy; and when
they are easy, we begin to take pleasure in them; and when they please us, we
do them frequently; and by frequency of acts, a thing grows into a habit; and a
confirmed habit is a second kind of nature; and so far as any thing is natural,
so far it is necessary, and we can hardly do otherwise; nay, we do it many
times when we do not think of it. Tillotson.

4. It is pleasant to be virtuous and good, because that is to excel many
others: it is pleasant to grow better, because that is to excel ourselves: it
is pleasant to mortify and subdue our lusts, because that is victory: it is
pleasant to command our appetites and passions, and to keep them in due order,
within the bounds of reason and religion, because that is empire. Tillotson.

5. Tully has a very beautiful gradation of thoughts to show how amiable virtue
is. We love a virtuous man, says he, who lives in the remotest parts of the
earth, though we are altogether out of the reach of his virtue, and can receive
from it no manner of benefit; nay, one who died several ages ago, rai^es a
secret fondness and benevolence for him in our minds, when we read his story;
nay, what is (...) more, one who has been the enemy of our country, provided
his wars were regulated by justice and humanity. Spectator.

6. The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil; my
lust shall be sati^fied upon them, I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy
them. Thou did blow with thy wind -- the sea covered them, they sank as lead
in the mighty waters. Song of Moses.

7. What a piece of work is man! how noble in reason! how infinite in ^culties!
in form and moving how express and admirable! in action how like an angel! in
apprehension how like a god! Hamlet.

8. As trees and plants necessarily arise from seeds, so are you, Anthony, the
seed of this most calamitous war. -- You mourn, O Romans, that three of your
armies have been slaughtered -- they were slaughtered by Anthony: you lament
the loss of your most illustrious citizens -- they were torn from you by
Anthony: the authority of this order is deeply wounded -- it is wounded by
Anthony: in short, all the calamities we have ever since beheld (and what
calamities have we not beheld?) have been entirely owing to Anthony. As Helen
was of Troy, so the bane, the misery, the destruction of this state is --
Anthony.

Cicero. 9.
-- Give me the cup,
And let the kettle to the trumpets speak,
The trumpets to the cannoneers within,
The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth,
Now the king drinks to Hamlet. -- Tr. of Hamlet.
10.
At first, heard solemn over the verge of heaven,
The tempest grows; but, as it nearer comes,
And rolls the awful burden on the wind,
The lightnings flash a larger curve, and more
The noise astounds; till over-head a sheet
Of livid flame discloses wide; then shuts
And opens wider; shuts and opens still
Expansive, wrapping either in a blaze:
Follows the loosened aggravated roar,
Enlarging, deepning, mingling; peal on peal
Crushed horrible, convulsing heaven and earth.
Thomson. 11.
I conjure you, by that which you profess,
(However you come to know it) answer me.
Though you untie the winds, and let them fight
Against the churches; though the yesty waves
Confound and swallow navigation up;
Though bladed corn be lodged, and trees blown down;
Though castles topple on their warders' heads;
Though palaces and pyramids do slope
Their heads to the foundations; though the treasure
Of nature's germins tumble all together,
Even 'till destruction sicken -- answer me
To what I ask you. Trag. of Macbeth.
12.
That Is truly great. What think you 'twas set up
The Greek and Roman name in such a luster,
But doing right in stern despite of Nature,
Shutting their ears to all her little cries,
When great, august, and god-like justice called?
At Aulis, one poured out a daughter's life,
And gained more glory than by all his wars;
Another slew a sister in just rage;
A third, the theme of all succeeding times,
Gave to the cruel axe a darling son.
Nay more, for justice some devote themselves,
As he at Carthage, an immortal name!
Yet there is one step left above them all,
Above their history, above their fable,
A wife, bride, mistress, unenjoy'd -- do that,
And tread upon the Greek and Roman glory.
Trag. of the Revenge. VII. Examples of JOY, GRIEF, COURAGE, FEAR, LOVE, and
ANGER.
1.
LET this auspicious day be ever sacred;
No mourning, no misfortunes happen on it;
Let it be remarked for triumphs and rejoicings;
Let happy lovers ever make it holy,
Choose it to bless their hopes, and crown their wishes;
This happy day, that gives me my Calista.
Fair Penitent. 2.
Then is Orestes blessed! -- My griefs are fled!
Fled like a dream! -- Methinks I tread in air!
Surprising happiness! unlooked for joy!
Never let love despair! The prize is mine! --
Be smooth, ye seas; and, ye propitious winds,
Blow from Epirus to the Spartan coast? Did. Mother.
3.
All dark, and comfortless!
Where are those various objects that, but now,
Employed my busy eyes? Where those eyes?
Dead are their piercing rays, that lately shot
Over flowery vales to distant sunny hills,
And drew with joy the vast horizon in.
These groping hands are now my only guides,
And feeling all my sight.
O misery! What words can sound my grief?
Shut from the living whilst among the living;
Dark as the grave amidst the b^stling world.
At once from business, and from pleasure barred:
No more to view the beauty of the spring,
Or see the face of kindred, or of friend. Trag. of Lear.
4.
Thou can not speak of what thou do not feel:
Were thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
An hour but married, Tyb^lt murdered,
Doting like me, and like me banished;
Then migth'st thou speak, then might thou tear thy hair,
And fall upon the ground as I do now,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Romeo and Juliet. 5.
Thou speak a woman's, hear a warrior's wish.
Right from their native land, the stormy North,
May the wind blow, till every keel is fixed
Immovable in Caledonia's strand!
Then shall our foes repent their bold invasion,
And roving armies shun the fatal shore. Trag. of Douglas.
6.
A generous few, the vet'ran hardy gleanings
Of many hapless fight, with a fierce
Heroic fire inspirited ^ch other;
Resolved on death, disdaining to survive
Their dea^est country -- "If we fall," I cried,
"Let us not tamely fall like pas^ive cowards!
No -- let us live, or let us die like men! --
Come on, my friends. To A^red we will cut
Our glorious way; or, as we ^obly perish,
Will offer to the genius of our country
Whole ^catombs of Danes." -- As if one soul
Had moved them all, around their heads they flashed
Their flaming ^alchions -- "Lead us to those Danes!
Our country! vengeance!" was the general cry.
Masque of Alfred. 7.
How ill this taper burns! -- Ha! who comes here?
I think, it is the weakness of mine eyes,
That shapes this monstrous apparition! --
It comes upon me -- Art thou any thing?
Art thou some god, some angel, or some devil,
That make my blood cold, and my hair to stare?
Speak to me, what thou art.
8. Ah! mercy on my soul! What is that? My old friend^ ghost! T^y say, none but
wicked folks walk. I wish ^ were at the bottom o^ a coal pit! La! how pale, and
how ^ong his fac^ is grown since his death. He never was h^ds^me. And death has
improved him very much the w^ong way. -- Pray, do not come near me. I wished
y^u very well when you were alive. But I could never abide a dead m^ ch^^k ^y
jowl with me -- Ah, ah, m^rcy on us' ^o ne^rer, pray! (...) it be only to take
your leave of me, that you are (...), I could have excused you the c^remony
(...) heart. -- Or if you -- mercy ^n us -- (...) ne^rer ^y, -- or if you have
wronged any bo^y, as you alway^ ^ov^d money a little, I give you the w^rd of a
frighted Christian, I will pray, as long as you please, for the de^iverance and
repose of your departed soul. My g^od, worthy, noble friend, do, pray,
disappear, as ever you would wish your old friend to come to his senses again.
Moliere's Blunderer.

9.
Who can behold such beauty, and be silent?
Oh! I could talk to thee for ever;
For ever fix and gaze on those dear eyes;
For every glance they send, darts through my soul. Orphan.
10.
-- Whatever you do
Still betters what is ^one. When you speak, sweet,
I Would have you do so ever: when you sing,
I Would have you buy and sell, give alms, and pray
In such sweet notes; and, ordering your affairs,
To (...) them to^: or, when you dance,
Li^ (...) mouth wave by gentlest winds heaved up,
So (...) you to the music's dulcet breath,
That I could wish the motion were perpetual.
Winter's tale. 11.
Hear me, rash man: on thy allegiance hear me.
Since thou have ^riven to make us break our vow,
(Which nor ou^ nature nor our place can bear)
We banish thee for ever from our sight
And kingdom. If, when three days are expired
Thy hated trunk be found in our dominions,
That moment is thy death. -- Away!
By Jupiter this shall not be revoked. Trag. of Lear.
12.
Alive! in triumph! and Mercutio slain!
Away to heaven respective lenity,
And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now!
Now, Tybalt, take the villain back again
That late thou gav'st me; for Mercutio's soul
Is but a little way above our heads
Staying for thine to keep him company;
And thou, or I, or both shall follow him.
Romeo and Juliet. VIII. Examples of ADMIRATION, CONTEMPT, PITY, HATRED, PRIDE,
HUMILITY, CHEERFULNESS, MELANCHOLY, COMMANDING, ENTREATY, HOPE, and DESPAIR.
1.
I SAW young Harry with his beaver up,
His cuisses on his thighs, gallantly armed,
Rise from the ground like feathered Mercury;
And vaulted with such ease into his seat,
As if an angel dropped down from the clouds,
To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus,
And witch the world with noble horsemanship.
1 Henry IV. 2.
Away! -- no woman could descend so low.
A skipping, dancing, worthless tribe you are.
Fit only for yourselves, you he^d together;
And when the circling glass warms your vain hearts,
You talk of beauties that you never saw,
And fancy raptures that you never knew. Fair Penitent.
3.
As, in a theater, the eyes of men,
After a well-grac'd actor leaves the stage,
Are idly bent on him that enters next,
Thinking his prattle to be tedious;
Even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes
Did scowl on Richard. No man cried, God save him!
No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home;
But dust was thrown upon his sacred head;
Which, with such gentle sorrow, he shook off,
(His face still combating with tears and smiles,
The badges of his grief and patience,)
That had not God, for some strong purpose, steeled
The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted,
And barbarism itself have pitied him. Richard II.
4.
How like a fawning publican he looks?
I hate him, for he is a Christian;
But more, for that in low simplicity
He lends out money gratis, and brings down
The rate of usance here with us in Venice:
If I can catch him once upon the hip,
I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him.
He hates our sacred nation; and he rails,
Even there where merchants most do congregate,
On me, my bargains, and my well-won thrift,
Which he calls usury. Cursed be my tribe
If I forgive him! Merch. of Venice.
5.
Ask for what end the heavenly bodies shine,
Earth for whose use -- Pride answers, "'It Is for mine:
For me kind Nature wakes her genial power,
Suckles each herb, and spreads out every flower;
Annual, for me, the grape, the rose, renew
The juice nectarious and the balmy dew;
For me, the mine a thousand treasures brings;
For me, health gushes from a thousand springs;
Seas roll to waft me, suns to light me rise;
My footstool earth, my canopy the skies." Essay on Man.
6.
I know not how to thank you. Rude I am
In speech and manners; never till this hour
Stood I in such a presence: yet, my Lord,
There Is something in my breast which makes me bold
To say, that Norval never will shame thy favor.
Trag. of Douglas. 7.
Wished morning's come! and now, upon the plains
And distant mountains where they feed their flocks,
The happy shepherds leave their homely huts,
And, with their pipes, proclaim the newborn day.
The cheerful birds, too, on the tops of trees
Assemble all in choirs, and with their notes
Salute and welcome up the rising sun. Orphan.
8.
There is a stupid weight upon my senses,
A dismal sullen stillness, that succeeds
The storm of rage and grief, like silent death
After the tumult and the noise of life:
Love was the informing active fire within:
Now that is quenched, the m^ss forgets to move,
And longs to mingle with its kindred earth.
Fair Penitent. 9
-- Silence, ye winds
That make outrageous war upon the ocean?
And thou, old Ocean, lull thy boist'^ous waves:
Ye warring elements be hushed as death,
While I impose my dread commands on hell.
And thou, profoundest hell, whose dreadful sway
Is given to me by fate and demogorgon --
Hear, hear my powerful voice through all thy regions;
And, from thy gloomy caverns, -- thunder the reply.
Rinaldo and Armida. 10.
Reward him for the noble deed, just Heaven!
For this one action, guard him, and distinguish him
With signal mercies, and with great deliverance:
Save him from wrong, adversity, and shame:
Let never-fading honors flourish round him;
And consecra^e his name, even to time's end:
Let him know nothing else but good on earth,
And everlasting He^edness hereafter. Jane Shore.
11.
O Hope, sweet flatterer, whose delusive touch
Sheds on afflicted minds the balm of comfort,
Relieves the load of poverty, sustains
The captive bending with the weight of bonds,
And smooths the pillow of disease and pain;
Send back the ex^ori^g messenger with joy,
And let me hail thee from that friendly grove. Boadicea.
12.
Why do they lay me on a couch of thorns?
How should I rest? -- They bid me close my eyes --
But, through the lids, I see a thousand forms,
Numberless terrors! -- I shut both ears -- and yet
I hear infernal howlings! -- Death and despair,
Have laid hold upon me! -- Oh miserable that I am!
Would I had died as innocent as Gloucester! --
Let me think no more! -- Is there no physician
Can cure the mind? Nothing to kill reflection? --
That I could drink oblivion down! -- Oh! when
Shall I have rest? -- Trag. of the Duke of Gloucester.
IX. Examples of THREATENING, BOASTING, PERPLEXITY, GRATITUDE, AWE, HORROR,
REPROACHING, REVENGE, RIDICULE, REMORSE, JEALOUSY, and HUMOR.
1.
WHAT god shall enter you forbidden field?
Who yields assistance, or but wills to yield,
Back to the skies he shall be driven,
Gash'd with dishonest wounds, the scorn of heaven:
Or, from our sacred hill with fury thrown,
Deep in the dark Tartarean gulf shall groan,
With burning chains fixed to the brazen floors,
And locked by hell's inexorable doors;
As deep beneath the infernal center hurled,
As from that center to the ethereal world. Homer's Iliad.
2.
My arm a noble victory never gained;
And I am ^rouder to have passed that stream,
Than that I drove a million o'^r the plain.
Can none remember? -- Yes, I know all must:
When glory, like the dazzling eagle, stood
Perched on my beaver in the G^anick flood;
When Fortune's self my standard* trembling, bore,
And the pale Fates stood frightened on the shore;
When all the immortals on the billows rode,
And I myself appeared the leading god.
Lee's Alexander. 3.
-- What a tide of woes
Come rushing on this woeful land at once!
I know not what to do. I would to heaven
(So my untruth had not provoked him to it)
The king had cut off my head with my brother's
What, are there posts dispatched for Ireland?
How shall we do for money for these wars?
Come, sister, (cousin I would say,) pray, pardon me.
Go fellow, get thee home, provide some carts,
And bring away the armor that is there.
Gentlemen, will you go and muster men?
If I know how to order these affairs,
Disorderly thus thrust into my hands,
Never believe me. -- All is uneven,
And every thing is left at six and seven. Richard II.
4.
My father! -- Oh, let me unlade my breast;
Pour out the fullness of my soul before you;
Show every tender, every grateful thought,
This wondrous goodness stirs. But it is impossible,
And utterance all is vile; since I can only
Swear you reign here, but never tell how much.
Fair Penitent. 5.
Night, sable goddess! from her ebon throne
In rayless majesty, now stretches forth
Her leaden scepter over a slumbering world. --
Silence, how dead! and darkness, how profound!
Nor eye nor listening ear an object finds:
Creation sleeps. It Is as the general pulse
Of life stood still, and nature made a pause,
An awful pause, prophetic of her end. Night Thoughts.
6.
Hark! -- The death-denouncing trumpet sounds
The fatal charge, and shouts proclaim the onset.
Destruction rushes dreadful to the field,
And bathes itself in blood. Havoc, let loose,
Now, undistinguished, rages all around;
While Ruin, seated on her dreary throne,
Sees the plain strewn with subjects truly hers,
Breathless and cold. Scanderbeg.
7.
Wherefore rejoice? -- what conquests brings he home?
What tributaries follow him to Rome,
To grace in captive-bonds his chariot-wheels?
You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless things!
O you hard hearts! you cruel men of Rome!
Knew you not Pompey? many a time and often,
Have you climbed up to walls and battlements,
To towers and windows, yea, to chimney-tops,
Your infants in your arms; and there have sat
The live-long day, with patient expectation,
To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome:
And do you now put on your best attire,
And do you now cull out an holiday,
And do you now strew flowers in his way,
That comes in triumph over Pompey's blood?
Begone --
Run to your houses, fall upon your knees,
Pray to the gods to intermit the plague,
That needs must light on this ingratitude.
Shak. J. Caesar. 8. If it will feed nothing else, it will feed my revenge. He
has disgraced me, and hindered me of half a million, laughed at my losses,
mocked at my gains, scorned my nation, thwarted my bargains, cooled my friends,
heated mine enemies. And what is his reason? I am a Jew. Has not a Jew eyes?
has not a Jew hands, organs, dimensions, senses, affections, passions? Is he
not fed with the same food, hurt with the same weapons, subject to the same
diseases, healed by the same means, warmed and cooled by the same winter and
summer, as a Christian is? If you prick us, do we not bleed? if you tickle us,
do we not laugh? if you poison us, do we not die? and if you wrong us, shall we
not revenge? If we are like you in the rest, we will resemble you in that. If a
Jew wrong a Christian, what is his humility? revenge. If a Christian wrong a
Jew, what should his sufferance be by Christian example? why, revenge. The
villainy you teach me, I will execute; and it shall go hard but I will better
the instruction. Merch. of Venice.

9. -- Here Is a stay,
That shakes the rotten carcass of old Death
Out of his rags! Here Is a large mouth indeed,
That spits forth death and mountains, rocks and seas;
Talks as familiarly of roaring lions,
As maids of thirteen do of puppy-dogs! --
What cannoneer begot this lusty blood?
H^ speaks plain cannon-fire, and smoke and bounce.
He gives the bastinado with his tongue.
Our ears are cudgelled. Not a word of his,
But buffets better than a fist of France. --
Zounds! I was never so bethumped with words,
Since I first called my brother's father dad.
King John. 10. I remember a mass of things, but nothing distincly: a quarrel,
but nothing wherefore. Oh that men should put an enemy in their mouths, to
steal away their brains! that we should, with joy, pleasance, revel, and
applause, transform ourselves into beast^ -- I will ask him for my place again
-- he shall tell me I Am a drunkard! Had I as many mouths as Hydra, such an
answer would stop them all. To be now a sensible man, by and by a fool, and
presently a beast! Every inordinate cup is unblest, and the ingredient is a
devil. Trag. of Othello.

11. Ye amaranths! ye r^ses, like the more!
Sweet myrtles, and ye golden orange groves!
Joy-giving, love-inspiring, holy bower!
Know, in thy fragrant bosom thou receiv'st --
A murderer! Oh, I shall stain thy lilies,
And horror will usurp the seat of bliss.
-- Ha! she sleeps --
The day's uncommon heat has overcome her.
Then take, my longing eyes, your last full gaze --
Oh, what a sight is here! how dreadful fair! --
Who would not think that being innocent!
Where shall I strike? -- Who strikes her, strikes himself,
My own lifeblood will issue at her wound. --
But see, she smiles! -- I never shall smile more --
It strongly tempts me to a parting kiss --
Ha! smile again! -- She dreams of him she loves. --
Curse on her charms! -- I Will stab her through them all.
Revenge. 12. Embowell'd! if thou embowel me today, I Will give you leave to
powder me, and eat me too, tomorrow. 'Twas time to counterfeit, or that hot
termagant Scot had paid me scot and lot too. Counterfeit? I lie, I am no^
counterfeit: to die, is to be a counterfeit* for he is but the counterfeit of a
man, who has not (...) life of a man: but to counterfeit dying, when a man
thereby lives, is to be no counterfeit, but the true and perfect image of life
indeed. The better part of valor is -- discretion; in the which better part I
have saved my life. I am afraid of this gunpowder Pe^cy, though he be dead:
how, i^ he should counterfeit too, and rise? I am afraid, he would prove the
better counterfeit. Therefore I Will make him sure: yea, and I Will swear I killed
him. Why may he not rise, as well as I? Nothing confutes me but eyes, and no
body sees me. -- Therefore, sirrah, with a new wound in your thigh, come you
along with me.

1 Henry IV. FINIS.

