MADAM WILLIS's LETTERS, and her CHARACTER. WITH SOME STRICTURES OF Madam ANN
STOCKBRIDGE'S: AND THE CHARACTER OF Madam Sarah Page.

THREE ladies in two distant counties born, Two of them were born in the county
of Plymouth; the other in the county of Essex -- (the maiden name of this lady
was Carlton). This is noticed that they may have the honor of giving birth to
these ladies, who were an honor to their sex; and that the ladies of the
present age there, may labor to shine with equal luster. May the ladies in
other counties, by these examples be fired with a laudable ambition to excel.
The males of any taste wish to see it: then would they lead them to their
bowers with as much pleasure as Adam did their mother Eve -- and would think
that Astrae with all her train, were returned to this earth. Then would the
mountains and the little hills rejoice, while the flowers overspread the lawns;
and the little rivulets, as they ran from the Manadnocks, and every high hill,
into the valleys, would murmur their praise: for their minds would be adorned
with all the flowers which grow upon the banks of the Parnassian streams. How
would they shine! -- Will not the ladies of the present ages that are rich in
this worlds be rich in good works? Yes, they will: they will improve their own
minds -- and will scatter books among the poor of their sex, that they may do
the same, if they have minds capable of giving entertainment to a noble
ambition; an ambition to desire that their names may survive the wastes of
time, and that they may set an example to the generations that shall come after
thems to go and do likewise, that the story of the nymphs may be no longer
fabulous.

Whose lives, their age and country did adorn:
Such striking pictures sure must please their sex,
And merit from the males their warm respects.
The famed WILLIS, STOCKBRIDGE alike, and PAGE --
Ye bards, hand down their names through every age:
Then will the nymphs of future times, rehearse
Your praise, in sounding rhyme and flowing verse.
BOSTON: PRINTED and Sold by NATHANIEL COVERLY, at the Corner of Back-Street,
leading to Charles River-Bridge. MDCCLXXXVIII.

THE ladies whose characters are exhibited to view in miniature in the
following pages, were born To raise the virtues, animate the bliss,
And sweeten all the toils of human life.
Grace was in all their steps -- heaven in their eyes --
In every gesture, dignity and love.


Shall not the ladies of the present age have such lovely pictures to gaze
upon, that the ladies of the next may be improved by theirs: and even in
country towns, that they may shine as the nymphs in days of yore in the
valleys. -- I wish all the ladies in America that have shone might be noticed.
I might have noticed many others in the last age, who shone to advantage; but
my time would have failed me. May some other writer, whose fortune and capacity
is larger than mine, be disposed to bring their names back from the land of
forgetfulness: and when they are noticed, may the ladies of fortune spread
their names among their sex, that their names may be spread in the next ages
and not be confined to their coffins, or lost in a grave or a tomb, or even be
despised beforehand.
They would form, I trust, a beautiful gallaxy, which might be viewed by every
sensible mind with as much pleasure as we view the milky-way, when it shines
the brightest. It would dispose the softer sex to labor after every female
accomplishment; and incline the males to repair to the springs and the lawns,
to seek them in their retreat in the noonday breezes, that they might be
charmed with the melodious sound of their enchanting voices, and with that
sterling sense that would flow from their lips when their ideas were formed
into words. They would smooth every roughness in the males, and remind them of
that sweet harmony which subsists in the angelick spheres, and tune their
voices in praise of their Maker, that he had formed such creatures to dwell
upon the globe, to sweeten the drops which distilled from their brows, when
they were making the necessary preparations for life; yes, they would remind
them of their mother Eve in her state of innocence, and when she shone in the
walks of Paradise, before the serpent made his appearance. -- But I have done*
and the reader may pass on, and see how beautiful is a female's composition --
when she can mourn with them that mourn, and weep with them that weep.

Rachel's Sepulcher; OR, A MEMORIAL OF Mrs. Lydia Willis, Taken, chiefly, from
her Letters to Friends, on various occasions.
A DESIRE to preserve the memory of worthy and beloved Friends, especially of
such as have, through the course of their lives approved themselves the friends
of God, is not only founded in nature, but seems evidently warranted in the
holy Scriptures. God has told us that the righteous shall be in everlasting
remembrance Psalms 112 6.
; and that the memory of the just is blessed Prove. 10 7.
-- Which implies the care of Providence, not by miracle, but by the use of
proper means, in preserving the memory of such just and righteous persons:
While those of an opposite character, through neglect, are forgotten. Their very
name is blotted out; as it follows, but the name of the wicked shall rot.

From this principle, no doubt, and with this view even to perpetuate the
memory of his beloved Rachel the Patriarch Jacob raised a monument over her
grave Genesis 35, 19, 20, Rachel died, and was buried in the way to Ephrath; and
Jacob set a pillar upon her grave: that is the pillar of Rachel's grave unto
this day: which was known, in after ages, to be Rachel's sepulcher, and
referred to, 1 Samuel 10, 2.

But there are other monuments equally durable and more instructive, due to the
merits of some departed friends, which may be justly expected, as they are
earnestly desired by the living; for this worthy end, that God may be glorified
and praised, for his gifts and graces, bestowed on the children of men, whereby
he alone makes one to differ from another.

The monuments here intended, are the Lives and Characters of persons whose
excellent spirit, christian conversation, profitable writings and good works,
do furnish materials both to entertain and edify succeeding generations, who,
without such memorials, would entirely miss the benefit.

It Is with this view, and not without some hopes of attaining this end that I
have, at the earnest desire of one (whom I could not deny) been persuaded to
gather up some pious remains of Mrs. Lydia Willis, whose memory is precious, so
far as I have known, to all her acquaintance -- peculiarly so to her beloved
surviving husband, near relations and intimate friends, for whose use, more
especially these pages are designed.

Characters, I know, are oftentimes offensive; and many unkind reflections, are
occasioned thereby, both on the living and the dead. -- But why should any be
offended at a character truly drawn? Why take offense, at a simple narrative of
facts, or a true and faithful account of those virtues and good things, which
evidently took place and appeared, in the person's life! And this I take to be
the main point, in giving a character, even to pay a sacred regard to truth in
relating facts, or things that were really found, in the person described. And
when all is said in truth, we mean not, thereby, to exalt and praise the man
himself, but to glorify God in him.

Wherefore, to excite the living to praise the giver of every good and perfect
gift, as well as to comfort and edify her surviving friends, I shall in
simplicity of heart, give a sketch of Mrs. Willis's Life and Character; more
especially as it appears in her familiar letters, wherein the genuine
breathings of her soul are the most sensibly discovered, perhaps, of any way in
which her ideas were communicated.

Of these I have therefore selected a number, and giving the most of them at
large, exactly as they were written with her own hand; except a grammatical
defect has, now and then, been supplied. That her letters might appear in
their native simplicity, I have not so much as corrected some inaccuracies,
which a learned pen might have avoided. -- The principal liberty that I have
taken, is sometimes to exchange a word for some other, which is more expressive
of what was evidently her meaning! and the word that is substituted, may be
known by inverted comma's before and after it, thus " -- "

But some of her letters are wholly suppressed; and in those that appear, some
stricking passages are omitted, on account of the singular amity and
friendship, that subsisted between her and the living relative, to whom they
were written; in whose hands she knew herself to be safe, though she wrote with
the most unreserved freedom.

MRS. Lydia Willis, late virtuous Consort of the Rev. Mr. Eliakim Willis,
Pastor of the second Church of Malden, after ten days sickness, died there,
much lamented, on the 25th of January, 1767, in the 59th year of her age.

She was born at Duxborough, April 1709, the only Daughter of Mr. Thomas Fish
of that Town, deceased.

A Description of her person, (with some principal branches of her character)
is aptly and truly drawn, by another hand, as entered at the close of this
account.

And yet, to complete the view of her person, there is room to add, that she
was of an eligible stature and proportion. Her visage comely especially in
youth, nor wholly defaced in age. It might have been said, she was so in age to
an uncommon degree.
-- On her countenance dwelt a peculiar seriousness and pleasancy, so agreeably
composed, as to demand respect, while it sensibly invited to nearness and
freedom of converse.

As a grateful acknowledgement to the father of lights, it may be said, that
under the influence of a careful and religious education, her youth was
preserved from blemish. So that she entered the social life, in good repute
among her companions.

An early taste for reading led her to acquaint herself, as opportunity
favored, with authors, polite as well as religious; the latter more
especially, suited her attention. -- This rendered her conversation edifying,
while it agreeably entertained her discerning acquaintance. So that she was
favored with the best society that her rural situation and the times afforded.

A good talent at writing gave her the advantage of a profitable
correspondence; which many special providence occasioned her frequently to
improve. -- Her constitution (being of the most delicate and tender make)
subjected her to habitual weakness, and frequent distressing sicknesses; which,
together with numerous other adverse providence, made her indeed a woman of
sorrow and acquainted with grief. -- She was a person of uncommon trials and
afflictions, from her early days. Which, however, did not sink her spirits, but
rather tended, for the most part, to wake up and invigorate every faculty, and
manifest to others, rather than herself.

She abounded in love and tender affections, not only to her near relations,
but to all mankind -- A mind, susceptable of the deepest impressions, disposs'd
her to joy and sorrow, in their turns, proportionable to every interesting
event.

On such occasions, her letters are most expressive of what she felt. -- But as
crosses and afflictions were familiar to her, even from her youth. These were,
most frequently, the moving subjects, on which she wrote. -- In a very low
state of health, and under some peculiar trials, she writes, to her brother at
Stonington, upon his marriage, and settlement there.

DUXBOROUGH, Dec. 20, 1732. Dear Brother,
"I Can no more, but just congratulate your happy change -- wishing a long
continuance of the pleasant scene, with greater additions of bliss, than, as
yet your soul finds room for the reception of -- and then turn my thoughts to
the gloomy cares, in which my life is involved. I had a great desire to come to
your Ordination; and was ready to flatter myself, that heaven would be
propitious to my wishes, and grant me health enough to admit of the journey --
But alas! I find every scence of pleasure, that appears in view, is but
imaginary, nothing real. -- I dare not say, I am contented, and willing to bear
my misfortunes: but" (can say) "my constant desires are, that my will may join
with his, who has assigned them for me. -- I will not blast your joys with a
particular recital of my circumstances. Oh no: I had rather you should erase
your unhappy sister, forever from your memory, than suffer her afflictions, to
deprive you of any part of that happiness, which heaven has designed for you --
But this, I must tell you, I despair of ever being well! Each day brings a
boundless eternity nearer by view: and how my unbodied spirit will appear, is
the great concern! For which I beg, while alive, to be remembered by you in your
prayers to God; -- that he would enrich me with his grace, patiently and
cheerfully to endure every affliction that may advance his glory and my eternal
peace. -- Remember me to your -- spouse. Tell her I love her next to you, etc.
From your affectionate Sister,

Lydia Fish."


The next spring after this, she so far recovered her health, that she visited
Stonington, where she spent the summer, very pleasantly, at her brothers, with
growing endearments. -- But this perhaps, served rather to increase than abate
her trials, when absent, upon returning, bodily infirmities, and other sorrows.
-- Her affections, that were even too tender before, are now, with greater
difficulty, kept under command.

On her journey home, she writes back in a moving strain. -- Little-Compton,
Nov. 6, 1733. Dear Brother and Sister,
"I Cannot bear to leave you without a second farewell. Though the hurry that
attends my writing, "prevents" my expressing the thousandth part of the tender
concern, which wrecks my -- soul, at the though it of being parted from such dear
-- creatures. -- When I revolve in my mind the "trying" distance that
"providence" has placed me at from you, the thought is too hard to bear,
without dissolving into tears. Forgive my childish fondness, which has hardly
afforded a dry eye since I left you. And in the midst of my wild despairing
grief, my distracted senses would tear you from my soul, that I might have ease.

But my better reason chides my rashness, and bids me forever indulge the
generous tenderness, though I loose the repose of my life thereby."

After a particular account of her journey, she concludes, "I am this moment
setting out for home -- Farewell dear souls -- I bless while I write."




Under the influence of such excessively tender emotions, accompanied with
extreme pains, she returned to her fathers's house; where, besides her own and
families common troubles, she met with a new scene of sorrow, which in the
issue, almost dissolved her tender frame. -- This was the dangerous sickness of
her brother Samuel Fish, from which there was but little hopes of his recovery.
-- The following is an extract of some passages of a letter, wrote upon the
occasion above.

DUXBOROUGH, Nov. 16. 1733. "Dear Brother,"
"WIth what pleasing raptures could I embrace this opportunity of writing, or
breathing out my soul to you, if I could, in an measure do it in an agreeable
entertaining manner. -- But oh! I cannot. -- There is a gloomy cloud of ills,
that hangs heavy on my little weakly soul, and almost stiffles every glimmering
thought of earthly joys. It is with the greatest reluctance that I am forced to
tell you the troubles of our family, etc." (After a very affecting account of
the frowns of Providence, in respect to their temporal affairs, and her own
bodily infirmities, she adds.) -- "But I must alarm your ears with a more
melancholy story, than any of my own ailments. Brother Samuel's sickness comes
nearer my heart, and gives me deeper wounds than any my own could do -- He
continues very weak, and has lost much flesh -- is sometimes very melancholy
and discouraged about himself. But we are not yet out of hopes that he may be
restored to health, in God's time."

"Your affectionate Sister, L. Fish."


With a blessing on means he recovered his health and strength, so far that, in
a few weeks, he returned to his vessel and business, which was in the sea
faring way. -- This mercy gave joy to the family; but to none more than the
Sister; whose sensible feelings were not to be outdone, even by parents
themselves.

Thus raised from the sides of the grave, and being in the bloom of life, About
^3 years of age.
'twas hoped he would live for a lasting comfort and blessing to the family. --
But how soon and how suddenly was their rejoicing turned into mourning! In a
little more than a month from the date above, he was drowned in Plymouth bay.
-- What less than divine support could uphold the distressed parents, -- ever
fond and tender of their children, -- aged and broken with repeated and long
continued troubles? And surely nothing short of that eternal arm, which saved a
sinking Peter, could have preserved our Lydia (whose very composition was love
and tenderness) from plunging deeper in the floods of sorrow, than her blooming
brother in the ocean. Upon this sorrowful occasion she writes to her brother at
Stonington. -- DUXBOROUGH, December 28, 1733. Dear Brother,
"IT is not unlikely that, by some means or other, you may have heard of the
change in our family, before this can meet you. -- But if not, forgive the
unwilling hand, that writes unwelcome news. And may divine goodness enable me
to write and you to hear, the soul-searching affliction, which God, in his
infinite wisdom, is pleased to try our faith and patience withal. -- Fain would
my trembling soul spin out the time, and frame a thousand things, before it
tells the wound. -- But no -- my mournful errand must be done. -- Oh Heaven
assist me in pronouncing those bitter words, our dearest brother is gone! his
time is swallowed up in a vast eternity. -- But not "by" a natural death, as
some phrase it. Oh no! He soon recovered from his bed of pain and weakness --
his flesh and strength were renewed, even to the wonder and admiration of all
who saw him, -- the rose and the lilly seemed to mix in every agreeable
feature; and new graces adorn each look and action -- His sweet temper,
together with a manly, generous soul had gained the affections of all who knew
him: So that the whole town seem to mingle their tears with ours, and mourn
their loss. -- And if the death of one makes such impressions on the hearts of
strangers, what then do our souls suffer, who were more intimately acquainted,
and knew more of his worth? -- Oh how high were our expectations raised! how
fond were all our fancies? -- but none more lavishly set than your poor,
wounded, distressed sister. -- For finding -- in him, I had vainly placed my
happiness there, and pleased myself with an imaginary notion, of taking much
pleasure in the world in that dear engaging object. -- But alas! he is gone!
my expectations are perished, -- his young life is cut off, by a sudden stroke
of Providence. --

"He had been to Boston, and was returning home, the 19th day of this month, --
They had just turned the gurnet, when he thought proper to ease the main-sheet,
which he was about; and (the wind being very high) he was struck "(or carried)"
overboard with it. -- There happened to be a little place were the rails of the
^^oop were broke, and there he must glide through, and plunge into his watery
grave! -- I have not life to repeat the many aggravating circumstances, which
attended this melancholy scene; nor would I wound your ears with them if I
could -- But this I would let you know, brother Nathaniel A younger brother
still living.
was on board, and saw him in the water, while struggling with all the bitter
agonies of soul and body. -- Oh what a -- killing sight was that! May Heaven
support him under his extreme sorrow; and give him, and all of us, grace to
make a happy improvement of this fiery trial, which God has justly sent, to
refine our souls from sin; and that mercy, and not judgment may be the happy
consequence, is the earnest desire of your affectionate, sorrowful sister,

Lydia Fish.
"P. S. My father would have writ but was not in a capacity Being overcome with
grief. -- Though he lived some years after this shock, yet his sorrow evidently
preyed upon him.
-- He and mother both send their tender love to you and sister, desiring a
continual remembrance in your prayers, for the comfortable supports of grace
and patience, under God's afflicting rod. -- My two surviving brothers, and
poor distressed sister, Mr. Samuel Fish lest a sorrowful widow, but no child.
with myself all pay our tender regards to you both, and ask the same favor
with them "(i. e. parents)." I must leave you to think of their sorrow, for it
exceeds the power of expression. It awakes their former griefs; insomuch that
they seem to be groaning under the burden of two bereavements at once Here she
refers to the like sudden death of their eldest son, Mr. Thomas Fish, jun. who
was going passenger from Duxborough to Boston, in a coaster, September, 1722.
when the vessel was overset, by a sudden, violent gale of wind, not far from
the light house, and drove ashore on Nantasket beech, nigh to which he was
drowned. Madam Robinson, virtuous and amiable consort of Rev. Mr. John
Robinson, (then Minister at Duxborough) and her daughter, were drowned at the
same time. [She was the mother of the late governor Trumbull's lady of
Connecticut, and one of the wives of the Rev. Jacob Eliot, of Lebanon,
deceased; and of the wife of the late Rev. Abel Styles of Woodstock.] The said
Mr. Thomas Fish was educated at Cambridge-College, -- took his degree, A. B.
July 1719; and just before his death was published to Mrs. Anne Turner, of
Situate, now the wife of Deacon Joseph Stockbridge, of Pembroke.

[This lady was a daughter of Col. Amos Turner, of Situate. The God of Nature
blessed her with a capacious mind, which she greatly improved by reading the
best writers the age she lived in afforded; and by conversing with persons of
the best taste in the circle in which she lived; especially the clergy who were
most noted for their accomplishments. She rendered her husband one of the
happiest of men, by her most sweet and engaging behavior. The want of children
was supplied by her most soft and endearing deportment. And though she had no
children, she trained up those of others in such a manner, that they were ready
to rise up and call her blessed.

She lived to an advanced age; and died in her 84th year, in December, 1782.
She left the world as became a disciple of Jesus, though she left it with the
most excruciating pains, as she died with a cancer in her breast: yet she did
not reckon the sufferings of the present time worthy to be compared with the
glories which were revealed in her. How did she converse with a most intimate
friend, who saw her but a few days before her death? Those who were not
acquainted with her, knew not the happiness they lost; and those that were,
were ready to cry out in the language of a divine writer, Blessed are the dead
who die in the Lord: henceforth they rest from their labors, and their works
follow them. -- And though she is dead, the life which she lived speaks to all.
And may these lines recommend religion to her sex; and then she did not live in
vain with respect to them, as she did not I trust with respect to herself.

But I shall add no more with respect to this once amiable lady -- but that the
leading strokes in the character of Madam Page, toward the close of this
pamphlet, were applicable to her; and that she may be viewed in as amiable a
light by the reader. The three ladies, whose characters have been attempted in
some measure in these pages, ought ever to shine in this hemisphere, like three
brilliant stars.]

He was universally beloved for his strict virtue, amiable endowments and
engaging behavior -- most dear to his parents, who mourned not alone.

Two sons, so desirable, being taken away after the like affecting manner, in
their bloom, at the same time of life, about 23 years old, and neither of their
bodies ever found, must needs fall uncommonly heavy upon their aged parents,
whose other trials had brought them very low. -- Deep called unto deep. -- They
mourned for their sons many days: and their gray hairs were brought down with
sorrow to the grave.


-- Do write the first opportunity."






Under this severe trial she was greatly supported, in her mind and spirits,
though her body languished. She was enabled to make a religious and profitable
improvement of the Providence, that deprived her of one of the dearest comforts
of life. -- Soon after this, she writes to her brother at Stonington, as
follows.

DUXBOROUGH, Jan. 12, 1733 4. Dear Brother and Sister,
"I am unwilling that any opportunity for writing should be neglected, since it
is all I can do, in token of that love and tenderness I feel for you. -- I have
lately sent you a letter, which gave an account of our sorrowful circumstances;
so that I shall not be particular in this. But only let you know, that we, who are
alive, are in our usual state of health; though every body cries out upon me,
that I look like a picture of death. -- And indeed, I have been more indisposed
since my brother's death, than I have been for twelve months before. Not with
any new kind of indisposition, but the occasion new.
-- I believe that grief was part of the occasion. My body partook in the
sufferings of my soul. -- But I hope the sufferings of both here, will prove
the happy cause "(or means)" of my rejoicing hereafter; which is all the
comfort I have, and all I can wish, this side the grave, which seems to be
gaping for me: But I don't think I shall take up my cold lodging there, before
I have seen more and greater afflictions, which I believe my life is spared
for. -- The dear corpse of my brother is not yet found, nor have we any ground
to think it ever will."

"'It Is not without reluctance that I am obliged to leave you: but -- I did not
know of writing 'till late; and a heart and head too full of sorrow and care,
to think or write any thing agreeable," etc. -- "So must bid you farewell,
mixing a thousand blessings therewith.

Your tender sister, Lydia Fish.


Extract of a letter to her brother, in answer to his upon her own and families
afflictions. -- DUXBOROUGH, May 4, 1734. Dear --
"WE received yours, which demonstrated the greatest "tenderness for us." -- I
cannot -- it is impossible for me to express the variety of passions awakened, by
reading your dear engaging lines. -- Oh that I could gain a thought from my
disordered soul, that might excite in you a clear idea of the tender concern
that I continually feel for you both. -- I return you my hearty thanks for the
good counsel you gave, and wish the taking impressions may prove lasting, on
each of our souls. -- I have a great deal to say; but cannot speak. -- My
thoughts are more confused than ever. -- I long to see you; but must not think
of being so happy, 'till Providence brings you here again. -- I am struggling
to bring my mind to my circumstances, and be willing to meet my allotments in
all their charming or most frightful shapes. May Heaven's preserving goodness
spare you both, and grant me the bliss I wish, to see your faces once more.

Your tender sister, Lydia Fish.




Under the double pressure of settled prevailing weakness of body and clouds of
darkness, that overspread her mind, she had such a low opinion of herself, and
such diffidence of personal merit, as tended to sink her thoughts beneath her
own importance. -- to increase the gloom, and encourage despondence, even when
her circumstances (however ill) were not so desperate, as imagined. -- And yet
under cloudy providence, she would, at times, encourage herself in the Lord
that all might issue well. -- A specimen of her affecting apprehensions, in
such a state of mind, we have in the following extracts of a letter, wrote in a
time of some peculiar trials.

DUXBOROUGH, September 13, 1734. "Dear Brother,
"WE received your welcome letters." -- "If my soul was freed from all
perplexed ideas, yet I know the dimensions of it will never afford an answer."
-- "Indeed, my thoughts all appear so much unworthy the name, that were it not
for you, I would forever conceal the poor conceptions of my mind, and never
display such confused notions, as, by your indulgence, my weakness still
prompts me to do. -- I should have writ by -- But not having any thing new to
acquaint you with, I willingly neglected it, in hopes of more favorable
changes, respecting the circumstances of the family: And that I might not
always grate your ears with a recital of what would be distasteful." -- But I
have waited in vain, in that respect: For the frowns of Providence still
surround us, with darker ills than what, till now, has been conceived of.

"Oh, what gloomy cares distract my mind, blend all my thoughts, and wound my
better reason! -- Dear brother, I cannot tell you how shocking it is, to think
of leaving home, to go I know not where! -- not that my present circumstances
oblige me to it; but since I have nothing but my feeble hands, to support my
tender frame, I must seek out such employments as they can bear. -- I know you
wish me well, and would rejoice at my agreeable settlement. But that is a
favor the unfortunate may not expect. -- If by disclosing my mind I should in
any measure, disappoint your expectations, in that regard, I hope you will be
so kind to me, and so just to yourself, as to attribute your disappointment to
your own mistaken "judgment, which has raised me in your opinion, so much above
my deserts." -- "By revolving me in your mind, with all my demerits, you will
need no other assurance of my person and circumstances being alike
distasteful." -- "Wherefore, I am resolved, with submission to Providence, to
preserve my liberty, resigning myself to the care of Heaven, whose blessings, I
hope, will meet my endeavors, both for time and eternity.

Your tender sister, Lydia Fish.


About this time her infirmities and trials so prevailed, or at least, had such
an influence, as to prevent her usual frequent writing. However, her ardent
affection for her friends, and abiding concern about herself, now and then,
overcame all impediments, and furnished matter for letters, at distant periods.
BOSTON, August 25, 1735. Dear Brother and Sister,
"I Have set apart this evening, and retired, as much as I could, from the
noisy world, in order to say something to you. But I have lived so long in the
neglect of writing, that every little faculty which I formerly had, has utterly
deserted me, and nothing but confusion reigns instead of thought: So must
entreat you not to look for any thing from me, but only the most sincere love
and tender affection, that was ever nourished by such a relation.

"Oh, I know not how to suppress the variety of passions, often felt by me,
resulting from the thoughts of that "trying" separation, which "Providence" has
destined me from such dear, enlivening, soul-edifying relatives. I am afraid my
submission to Providence is tainted with murmurings; for I don't know how to
conclude it best for me, to live debarred from the conversation of such, as
might have a happy tendency to promote my best good. -- Dear -- don't fail
writing, and admonishing of me. I stand in constant need of your counsel. Don't
spare reproofs, nor let your charity extend too far. I am afraid you are
deceived in me; and conceive better thoughts "of me" than I deserve. For though
I earnestly desire those excellencies you mentioned in your last, yet, upon an
impartial examination, I cannot find myself possessed of so rich a treasure. --
I have been in town a fortnight; left the family in their usual state,
excepting my mother's choking fits; they seem to grow much upon her, to the
grief and surprise of us all. I beg your prayers in her behalf. -- I have
enjoyed my health very well this summer; adored be divine goodness therefore.

Your affectionate sister, Lydia Fish.


To her brother, on her mother's dangerous sickness. -- DUXBOROUGH, March 20,
1736. Dear Brother and Sister,
"WE have had the pleasing satisfaction of hearing from you several times this
winter; but no opportunity to convey a letter, etc. till now, which, mixed with
grief and joy I embrace. -- But can no more than just let you know how it is
with us; and give you back the assurance of love and friendship. -- Our present
circumstances are melancholy, by reason of my mother's indisposition, which
has wholly confined her these ten or twelve days. -- She has many ailments; but
that which chiefly concerns "(or exercises)" the Doctor's skill, and affects
her and us, is a distressing pain, which centers in her back -- feared to be
the gravel or stone. -- She is unwilling I should mention any thing about her
illness, for fear it would trouble you; but I thought it would be crueller to
be wholly silent, in what so nearly concerns us all. -- I need not ask your
addresses to Heaven for us; for I know the tender sympathy you feel, will not
admit of silence in that regard. -- Father has had four or five fits In one of
which, it is supposed, he expired, alone, the April following; being found dead
on the road from Plymouth to Duxborough.
this winter; but they seem to be abated of late. -- We have met with many
difficulties," etc.

"I am very desirous of coming to you; insomuch that I find it hard to exercise
patience, under disappointments. My present circumstances forbid me to
entertain any such thoughts. For if divine mercy spares my mother's life, we
cannot expect a speedy recovery. And we have no help but A. W. and she almost as
weakly as I. So that we do after a poor fashion -- with much pain and
difficulty. Excuse my hasty performance, and accept all of our tender regards.

Your affectionate sister, Lydia Fish.




At another time, under confinement, by usual infirmities and heavy trials, she
expresses her love and grief in the following lines.

Extract of a letter without date.
Dear Brother,
"IT IS not without reluctance, that I appear before you in such a gloomy style,
as my late circumstances move me to write" in. But the tender ties of nature
excite me to manifest my regard some way or other: And since it is not in my
power, to assume a language, foreign to my heart, or to dissemble" (and hide)
"my griefs so handsomely, as I could wish, if thereby I might be entertaining.
-- I must desire you to accept of my love, in these dark inconnected lines." --
"Yes -- my soul flies to you" laden with grief, and seeks your friendly breast
-- to entertain its woes. -- It Is true, the friends I am with are dear as my
life: But "yet your absence"! -- "It Is not all the beauteous scenes of a
delightful spring, can cheer my cloudy soul, though now adorned in nature's
richest plumes, profuse of balmy sweets" -- "as if the delicious allurement
rationally strove to ravish my senses and charm me into -- gaity," "Dont' chide
my weakness, if I tell you what distressing fears I have indulged since I saw
you last. -- Though my better reason forbids my distrust about future events,
yet, in spire of me, that fearful thought, which daily haunts my breast, of
seeing you no more, melts all my reason, and drowns it with my tears. -- But I
have hushed my passions a little better, of late, by resigning you, and all
that is dear, to the care of a holy providence, which I know will do nothing,
but what is wisest, holiest and best, for such as are "the children of God," --
"I have a thousand things yet to say, but must conceal the rest; for my
indispositions force me from the sweet entertainment, to my painful bed, where
I have been confined this eight or nine days" etc. "Your tender sister, who
sends a thousand loves and blessings with her name,

Lydia Fish.
P. S. "I heartily congratulate you on the happy meeting with our Brothers,
whom I hope, heaven has bro't safe to your view; and wish the same goodness
may, once more grant me the like favor."




In a low and afflicted state, both in body and mind, and now at a distance
from all her near relations, she writes, on the transient and unsatisfying
pleasure of seeing friends. --

Little Compton, October 16, 1736. Dear Brother and Sister,
"WE have so lately seen each other, that it seems impertinent to write, having
nothing new to acquaint you with. -- But yet my soul is laden with sentiments
that want to be disclosed. For it is so seldom that I can see your faces, that
when I have that happiness, I can no more -- but gaze. -- And while I think to
speak my griefs, hasty time runs on, and, like a subtle thief, steals you from
me, -- robs me of the bliss, and leaves me less contented than before. -- But
you have taught me not to complain; and my reason bids me be silent, lest I
should, unwillingly, make you the partakers of my sorrows, which the blind
world cannot see, through the vail of a cheerful aspect. -- I should write
oftener than you would care to read, if I knew how to make my pen dissemble and
speak things foreign to my mind. -- But since I cannot be gay in writing,
forgive me if a gloomy thought escapes" from "my soul: don't think it an act of
the will, but attribute it to the weak government of my possions. -- If I
murmur, it is at I don't know what. It Is not that I am discontented with my
outward circumstances of life; not would I think that you should not live at
such a -- distance, where Providence has assigned you, from me: no, -- it is
something else concerns me; and yet I am unconcerned -- There is the wound,
that wants your friendly aid, to help my soul to her desired peace."

P. S. "I am still at Little Compton, in a much poorer state of health than you
left me in: which makes me much concerned about getting home." The sudden death
of Mr. Williston last Monday, has been a great surprise to me. -- "I Am unable
to set up -- Farewell --

Your affectionate sister," L. F.




She so far recovered her health, as to return home, this fall: and sometime
the spring after, writes -- no date.

Dear Brother,
"FAIN would I say something, if I knew how, in answer to your engaging lines,
which fill my soul with gratitude. -- You say, my expressions are too moving,
and almost wish me to forbear." I may justly give you back your own complaints
-- and say, you are -- I cannot bear it: for I am too susceptible of
impressions, as well as you. -- But if my undesigning pen has committed such a
fault, forgive me; for I know your -- soul too well, to be wilfully guilty of
such errors, were I capable of committing them. But when I wrote last, my soul
was overwhelmed -- pain and distress, weakness of body and mind, enfeebles all
my faculties; which is the reason why I write so seldom to you. -- While at
Little Compton, I was so ill, that I was obliged to send for Mr. Billings. The
worthy minister of that town, and principal physician in the place, who
delighted in offices of kindness to all, especially to the afflicted.
He did a great deal for me, -- I received much benefit: (but had,
notwithstanding, a very tedious winter,) he refused satisfaction -- I could not
thank him enough, -- pray do me the favor, ("thank him for me,") when you have
opportunity. I am as well at present, as is common for me to be: but dare not
depend upon coming to Stonington; though I earnestly desire to come, once more,
if it might be. -- I can hardly forbear shedding tears, to think they are all
coming to see you, but unhappy me. Though I am not so unreasonable, as to
desire to come now, if I could: for we should not only be troublesome to you,
but cruel to Mother, if all of us should leave her at once. But I hope and
intend to come the latter end of summer, God willing -- But I cannot desire you
to come for me, for I know my company can never be worth that trouble: though I
wish some other motive might bring you here, that I might have the opportunity
of going with you. -- A thousand loves to you and my dear sister, and little
Molly shares her part.

"Farewell dear soul."


Having buried her father, in April, 1736, which gave her deep sorrow of heart,
she had the trial of parting with her mother, in --, 1737. This occasioned
inexpressible grief and anguish of soul. For her death was sudden: occasioned
by a fit of the apoplectick kind. -- As it began to be light in the morning she
opened the door of her daughter's bed room, (supposed, as usual, to see how she
did) and as she entered the room, dropped down, with a low sigh or groan, and
never spoke more.

Lydia viewed this sore affliction as sent more especially on her account,
designed for her chastisement, rather than for any others. In the midst of
grief and distress she would often say, with great severity on herself, "that
her sins had slain her mother." -- In a weakly, and oftentimes even helpless
state, being unable to minister to herself, her chief dependence was upon her
mother; who was unwearied in doing for her, every thing that might relieve and
comfort her. But now the creature fails -- her earthly props are gone, --
father and mother forsake her; and there is none among creatures, like minded,
to take her up! Now, if no higher refuge opens to view, than what the earth and
creatures afford she must be even inconsolable. -- How she should be provided
for, supported; and enabled to perform the remaining stages of life? were
questions naturally arising, but not easily answered; until the Lord appeared
to relieve her troubled mind, by showing that the fountain remained, though the
streams were dried up. This consolation was not entirely withheld from her,
though she had not, speedily, the sensible benefit of it.

Under all the dark dispensations of Providence, implied and referred to, in
the foregoing letters and account, she remained very much in the dark, as to
her spiritual state. -- Though the spirit and sentiments of her writings,
accompanied with a life agreeable to the Gospel, might afford sufficient ground
of charity to others, that the grace of God was with her, yet she had very
little charity for herself; at least had not the comfort of knowing that God
was hers, and that all these things were tokens of his love and faithfulness.
--

But in the midst of darkness and trying afflictions; not late in life, while
yet in a single state, she was, hopefully, led, more fully and clearly, to view
and adore the hand that rules the world, and humbly to acquiesce in all his
dealings with her. -- She rose in some good measure, above the frowns and
flatteries of human life, -- made the Lord her refuge, -- his holy religion her
business, and conversing with him her chiefest joy.

At a season when favored with some glimmerings of light and comfort, breaking
through the clouds, she breathes the following sentiments of her soul, in a
letter to her brother at Stonington, after long silence.

DUXBOROUGH, February 20, 1738. Dear Brother,
"YOUR expressions of love and pity, shown to me in all your letters, fill my
soul with inexpressible gratitude, however careless I may appear -- I am
ashamed of my neglects, -- I will not pretend to excuse myself; but will
improve this opportunity, though in much weakness, relying on the ingenuity of
-- to pity and pardon the defects of my indigested thoughts* -- I would very
gladly entertain you with some cheerful turn of thought; but that I find it
impossible for me, to pass by the black, melancholy scene of affliction -- to
admit of any external delights, to cheer my drooping soul. -- But I must stop
here, and not proceed, with a recital of gloomy reflections, to wound your
tender, sympathizing heart, which not only pities my distress, but feels it
too; which is all, or more than I can desire. -- But I hope divine grace is
about to thwart the prevailing biass of nature, and turn the current of my
affections from the vanities of time, (which too long I have been in pursuit
of) to live more upon invisibles, and feast on intellectual joys, wherein true
satisfaction only can be found. But oh! a true religious life, is a nice and
difficult undertaking. Lord help me to keep the even paths of virtue, through an
uneven, troublesome, sorrowful world, is the language of my soul. -- Crosses
and afflictions appear less formidable, while I can keep a steady view on the
blood of my Redeemer. -- Send your desires to Heaven for me, dear brother, that
God would shine more and more on my polluted soul; and cause me to improve
wisely, under every dispensation of his holy providence, and sweeten every
sorrow, with the happy fruits of sanctification, through boundless grace in
him, to whom I desire to commend you and all that is dear. -- Farewell.

From your affectionate sister, Lydia Fish.
"P. S. I cannot conclude without letting you know the goodness of Heaven to me,
respecting my health; which is restored and continued beyond my expectation.




Extract of a letter to a friend at Lebanon, without date, supposed to be writ
about this time, in much haste. --

"Dear Mrs. B --,
"WE just now received a letter from you, in which you expressed your love to
me, with desire that I would send you a line." -- "I am ready to embrace the
opportunity, to let you hear from me, as a poor acknowledgement of that love
and esteem, which is due from your worthless friend. -- I am just going from
home, so that I cannot say half I would to you -- But I hope Heaven is your
benefactor, and has made your circumstances better than heretofore; if not,
it is best relying there still; for crosses and afflictions, loose their
efficacy by impatience and distrustings. Though it is difficult for human
frailty, to discover the blessings and mercies that flow to us, under the
gloomy vail of sorrow and trouble." -- "For my part, I have drunk deep of the
sorrows of life; and have experienced more of the mercies of God, in my
affliction, than ever I was sensible of, in all my prosperity". -- "I long to
see you and all my friends that way. -- My love to you and your children --
your respectful friend,

Lydia Fish.


Not long after this, she was married to Mr. Elia^im Willis, son of the late
Hon. Samuel Willis, Esquire; of Dartmouth, and after some time removed to dwell
there. -- But before she left her native place, she had further afflictions to
endure by distressing sickness, which brought her very low. -- Just upon her
recovery she writes.

DUXBOROUGH October 6, 1739. Dear Brother,
"THESE with my tender regards come just to acquaint you with my present
circumstances, which through the goodness of God, are much better than when you
left me. I remained very ill, until the next week after you went away, when I
began to mend; and have been better ever since, am now able to sit up and walk
about house a little.

"I am lost in admiration at the various dispensations of providence to me, a
poor worthless worm; who am still spared, when so many others are taken away!
That I am so often brought to the gates of the grave, and so often receive the
sentence of death in myself, and yet so often experience the new returns of
life! Oh that I may be faithful in the remaining duties of it, and with
christian patience wait for my change; and then join the happy number of those,
that receive the promised reward, is the earnest wish of her, who begs to be
continua^^^ remembered by the best of brothers. When you bow before the throne,
fail not to carry me, with those distressed ones that cry for mercy. -- Who can
tell how prevalent your prayers may prove for your poor afflicted sister,

Lydia Willis.


These tender emotions of soul, manifest in all her foregoing letters, were not
excited, merely, by what befell herself and family, or confined to such
occasions. Although affecting providence, so near home, may well be supposed, if
not allowed, to engage her first attention, yet she was ever sensibly touched
with the afflictions of others, no ways related. It was familiar to her to weep
with them that wept, as well as to rejoice with them that rejoiced: choosing
rather to visit and converse with the former of which sympathizing temper the
following letter is an evidence.

To Miss Jane Gardener, a virtuous young lady of her acquaintance, daughter of
the Rev. Mr. James Gardener, Minister of the Gospel at Marshfield, she writes
on the occasion of her father and sister's death. -- Found among her papers,
supposed to be the first draft, -- unfinished and without date. --

My dear Friend,
"'IT IS my present indisposition that prevents my coming, personally, to condole
with you, now, under your sorrowful bereavement. -- Though I know my best
advice will sink beneath your own superior knowledge, yet the lively sense I
have of your affection, prompts me to offer it, as a poor token of that love
and friendship, which is due from your unworthy friend, who has drunk deep of
the bitter draught. -- I have been inured to sorrow from my tender years, and
none knows how to pity, but such as have pledged in the same cup. Two years
have revolved, upon my sorrowful life, since my last hopes were cut off, in"
the death of "my dear and only parent; when I thought it impossible for me to
live, and even chose strangling and death, rather than life. -- But blessed be
God, I am still the living, monument of his sparing mercy; and I hope I can
say, that it is good for me thus to be afflicted -- in such a way and manner,
as infinite wisdom sees meet to dispense unto me. -- My stubborn heart needs
the severity of the rod: the wormwood and the gall my soul has still in
remembrance; and; oh blessed God, grant it may be truly humbled within me.

"And now, dear Jenny, your turn is come!" -- "When death stays, "long from a
house (says one) yet come it must; and when it comes, it often strikes double."
-- A sweet endearing sister, A lovely pleasant child, about 8 or 10 years old,
died a few weeks before her father.
followed by a tender, virtuous father, to" enlarge "the wound and make your
grief more keen. -- But the greater the sorrow" is, the greater the
consolations, which will, hopefully "be ushered into the soul, by humble
penitential cries, to the omniscient God, whose ear is always open to the sighs
and groans of his poor afflicted ones. Let us pray for the happy fruits of
sanctification." -- " When father and mother forsake us, then the Lord will
take us up. -- Wherefore then should we fear? if God be for us, who or what can
be against us?

"I heartily pity" you; "yes, my soul grieves with and for you, I know the
strugglings of nature and grace, in the gloomy hour of affliction. -- Besides
the agonizing pangs we feel, at parting with beloved relatives, there are wild
ideas roving in our minds, relating to our abode here, which result from the
vain though of living long -- And then, how we shall be provided for, when such
-- a friend is gone, who was our only or chief earthly benefactor! -- And, by
unbelief, limit omnipotent power, or grasp his providence within our finite
capacities; not considering how easy" it is with him, and "how willing he is to
open new" streams, when the old are dried up. -- These, and such like
reflections have been very prevalent with me; but I hope you have not the like
imperfections."


After this we find her at Dartmouth, well provided for and most kindly treated
-- but still the subject of many sorrows, and some unexperienced before. --
Here she finds the bowels of a mother, exulting at the birth of a lovely
daughter; and anon they are troubled, yea turned within her, at the early
departure of the pleasant babe; after about three weeks enjoyment of the
blessing. -- But he who knows how to comfort them that are cast down, was
present with his cordials, to support her fainting spirits, that she might not
be overcome with much sorrow. -- She survived the double stroke of sickness and
grief -- was raised up from the sides of the grave -- restored to her usual
state, and strengthened to endure another trial, more severe and dreadful. --
The birth of two sons, that forsook their mother even before they were born --
infant twins which never saw light, was an event as wonderful as it was
distressing. -- That one so feeble in her make -- so extremely weak and low, at
the time of trial, should live through such a perilous hour, leaves no room to
question the power and goodness of God, remarkably displayed for her
deliverance.

These afflictions, together with all that went before, were doubtless designed
and happily improved for her soul's good. -- Though after those terrible
shocks, she seemed to be more silent, and, in a manner, laid aside her pen, for
a season, yet when she wrote or conversed, she generally appeared to be more
stablished, strengthened and settled.

The little that she wrote to her friends, after so many scenes of sorrow, and
trying, but teaching providence, was, chiefly, by way of advice and excitement
to the younger, and of condolence, sympathy and consolation to others, in the
days of their affliction and distress. -- An instance or two, of the like kind,
has been already given, I shall add the following, as a specimen of the rest.

To her niece, M. F. -- while at school in Newport.

"DARTMOUTH, June 27, 1751." "My dear Child,"
"SUFFER me to call you mine, since none of that loved name can rival you, in
my affections; a faint emblem whereof I present you in these few inconnected
lines; that you may know my hearty love, which raises my desires to Heaven,
both for your temporal and eternal prosperity. -- I know you don't need my
advice; since superior minds are not wanting to cultivate your growing genius.
Yet I would also become a beggar, that your blooming morning may begin with
God. -- My dear life! let your prayers and endeavors join with their prayers
and instructions, that you may pass, unspotted, through the hasty months of
youth -- in this tempting, bewitching, ensnaring world; where there is nothing
but sin and vanity, naturally possessing all minds and things. Don't suffer
your affections to be sullied, with the gay, airy pomp, with which you are, or
may be surrounded. Think on the transcendant beauties of the bleeding Prince of
life; who died to redeem you from all perishable toys. -- There may all your
passions center, in that boundless ocean, is the earnest desire of your
affectionate aunt,

Lydia Willis."


The following, without date, found among her papers, in her own hand, perhaps
not sent or miscarried, supposed to be wrote some years after the above, and
after her remove to Malden; yet being to the same person, in answer to one
received from her, may take its place here, though several letters to other
friends, intervened. -- It exhibits a picture of her low and humble opinion of
herself, and a specimen of the difficulties and discouragements she met with,
in her religious affairs; yet full of love and tenderness, nor empty of
judicious counsel and advice.

"Oh my dearest pleasant flower,"
"I Received yours of October 14, but not till near a month after wrote. -- And
not having opportunity to return my thankful acknowledgments, I was obliged to
welter in silence, under the painful pleasure of gratitude. And now I have an
opportunity presented, and have taken upon me to write, I know not what to say.
-- I am altogether unequal to the very shadow of an answer. -- I am a pitiful,
broken vessel, which contains no ideas; nor can I persuade myself that my
former lines had half the merit which your approbation seems to indicate; but
this I know, it was a specimen of my heart, as my frame then was. -- But now,
alas! where am I? under the chastnings of the Almighty! But far, -- ah,
infinitely far from learning those divine lessons, which dutiful children are
wont to receive, from the correcting hand of their beneficent," heavenly
Father. -- "Would you know how I do, and what preparations I am making for
eternity; or what progress I have made, with my advancing years, to that world
of spirits, which I am swiftly hastening to? -- Well then, my dear, to deal
plainly, I must tell you, I am poor and low, -- a fit object of your prayers
and pity, much rather than a copy to pattern after. -- My life is made up with
blots and blurrs. -- I am one of the most stupid creatures that divine patience
suffers to live. -- A gospel sinner! what can be worse? Yet, through amazing
goodness, under hope of saving grace, and God proclaiming peace to my poor
captive soul, through the merits of his Son's blood; which I am, (in my poor
manner) striving to obtain. -- But oh, my discouragements are not few nor
small! The gate is strait, -- the way is narrow, -- my heart is hard, -- my
sins are great, -- my strength is weak, -- my faith is so benighted with
doubts, that I am ready to cast all offered good away. --

Such languid, faint desires I feel,
Within this wicked, stupid heart,
I should, I would, but that, I will,
I hardly dare (with truth) assert.
"Thus I have, in a very broken manner, given you a faint sketch of my poverty;
praying that a blessing may attend this dark image of myself, to quicken your
flight to Jesus. -- Hasten, my dearly beloved -- spread the wings of faith, and
fly away, now the door of boundless mercy stands wide open," and "you have
(blessed be God) through grace, begun to enter. -- Oh stay not in the plain, --
cast not a look back, for all the glittering toys, the world can possibly give,
-- keep them at a distance, -- they are poison when near. -- Listen to no
discouragements, though they come with never so great, seeming propriety. You may
be sure to meet with crowds of such visitants, and the more familiarly they are
entertained, the more intruding will they be, 'till they plunge the poor
trembling soul into darkness. -- And then; oh then comes on a train of evils,
too many to be expressed, -- known only by experience.

"Oh may the bold tormentors never disturb your peaceful breast: but may the
blessed Spirit guide and direct you, through this ensnaring world, to that city
of refuge, which is opened in the bleeding wounds of our compassionate
Redeemer; in whose blissful arms I leave you, begging an interest in your
prayers."


The following was written to her brother, N. F. At Norwich.
in a day of his sore affliction, occasioned by the death of four lovely
children, within a few days of each other; two of which were buried the same
day, in one grave.

"Oh my dearly beloved friends,
"I Am distressed for you. I feel your wounds. Your sorrows are half mine. My
heart bleeds, and condoles with you, under this painful rod, which infinite
wisdom and love are exercising you withal. -- But alas, what can your poor
afflicted broken sister say? How shall I address myself? In what consolatory
manner can I appear before you? Your fainting spirits call for rich, balmy
cordials, to soften the keen anguish of your bleeding wounds. And should I
summon the poor remains of my feeble powers, I could do no more, but send you
to the balm of the covenant, from whence, I trust, you have, through grace,
already begun to sip divine consolation.

"Your letter is expressive of the christian. You seem to enter the school of
affliction with such meekness, patience and resignation, as if you had already
attained the stature of a man in Christ Jesus. -- I pray we may not be deceived
in matters of such infinite importance. -- The hand of love meets out our
bitter cups; and by such" kind of "trials, the friends of God are proved. But
afflictions cry love, in the ears of conscience, afterward;" -- (call for
returns of love, or tokens of filial obedience) "oh may we be attentive
listners thereto, and diligent in our researches; not suffering the least" hint
or motion, "to escape observance, as ever we expect the sanctifying fruits of
the cross; for by such fiery trials, sincerity is brought to the test. -- We
don't know what manner of creatures we are, 'till cast into the furnace; the
light whereof shows us, what to let go, and whether we love God, more than
these.

"When we list under the banners of Jesus, we" become, and "stand engaged, to
give our richest treasures up, without reserve. We take Jesus with his cross,
-- Jesus with his offices, as well as for all his benefits. -- And is it not a
much greater mercy, to be enabled to give up such dear young limbs, -- such
pleasant opening flowers, into the arms of their Redeemer, than the enjoyment
of them, in this ensnaring world, could possibly be?

"Half your dear ones are gone before you! -- Oh turn your eyes from the dead
to the living, and adore that goodness, which has stayed his rough wind, in the
day of the east wind. -- You have pleasant children yet left -- Lord grant that
they may live before thee; and may they prove double blessings in their day and
generation. And" may "you, their now sorrowful parents, be abundantly
comforted, in their well ordered life and conversation. -- So prays your
childless, sympathizing sister,

Lydia Willis."
Dartmouth, February 10, 1752. "P. S. I am pining to see you, my dear brother
and sister, -- I am every day at your house, in my pleased imaginations; but I
have but little reason to hope for the more substantial satisfaction. How that
may be, God only knows. -- Oh pray for me, that I may find grace to be
faithful, under all my trials, till death. Remember me to my beloved brother
Fish, and family. My love to your dear children."




By the tenor of the following letter, it must be intended for one of Mr.
Willis's brother; as neither of her own has ever yet been called to the trial
of burying an only child. It Is without date, and, for aught that appears, may
properly take place here.

Dear brother and sister,
"THE tender sympathizing sense I have of the afflictive providence of God upon
you, in the death of your dear and only babe, excites my poor attempts to
condole with you and to comfort you, under this heavy cross." You Will believe me
if I tell you, "I know how to pity you, having drunk of the like bitter cup. --
My bowels are troubled for you. -- To such as are in affliction, pity should be
shown. But oh! what can pitying friends do? How vain are their attempts to heal
the keen anguish of the smarting rod? None but the hand that strikes, can cure
the wound. -- In Jesus there is strong consolation. Thither, dear souls, I
would entreat your flight, for the sanctifying influences of his holy Spirit,
without which you will certainly loose the benefit of the cross; which, I
trust, is laid upon you for your eternal felicity -- that your affections may
be reduced from creature comforts, -- from empty bubbles," and set on "the
living fountain of all substantial joys, where there is safety in love; no fear
of excess, nor danger of cruel death."


The last instance that we find, of such tender, savoury breathings of soul,
toward her friends in affliction and distress, is an unfinished letter to her
brother at Stonington, as appears from an expression in it, applicable to none
else, in that relation. -- It is but a sketch of her sentiments, at a time when
her affections were most tenderly moved, at the news of his youngest daughter's
distressing sickness, of which there was but little hope of her surviving. It
was found among her papers; but, probably, never completed nor sent, or failed
of coming to hand. -- In a kind of tumult of tender passions, she writes.

"Alas, my dear Brother and Sister,"
"WHAT can I say -- what can I do, but love and wish and pray, that God, of his
boundless rich grace, may be all, and do all, in and for you and yours, as the
circumstances do or may call for. -- The sorrowful news have reached my ears
and pierced my heart, respecting dear Miss Becca's sickness; -- and I am now
waiting for further tidings; but (for want of that holy fixed fortitude of
soul, the Psalmist speaks of) I am afraid of evil ones. -- The Lord prepare us
all for his holy will, when and how it may be manifested.

"It may be you feel the powerful band of parental ties, stronger than ever you
knew before, if called to part with that lovely one, for whom you would even
die. -- Oh, methinks I hear, and see and feel the anguish of your groaning,
bleeding, wounded souls, in such a gloomy hour. -- But if this be the case, I
am sure there is" full "consolation, in that sweet balmy covenant which," in
"Jesus" is opened "for such as believe," and at such times as these. --
Therefore, dear souls, rejoice in him, and give him back his own, -- and bless
a taking as well as a giving God." -- "Pray for your poor, unworthy sister, who
are groaning under the burdens and sorrows of life, which infinite wisdom meets
out to me, in various forms (too great to be expressed, though infinitely less
than my deserts) that I may be strengthened with strength in my soul."

The dear relative above mentioned, recovered of that sickness, to which (it is
supposed) the foregoing letter refers; and, not long after, was married [to Mr.
Benjamin Douglass] with whom she lived in great amity, at New Haven, about
three years, and then died of the smallpox, December 8, 1766, in the 28th year
of her age, to the inexpressible grief of her parents, husband and sister, and
much lamented by all friends. -- She was [allowed by all her intimate
acquaintance, to be a truly amiable young woman, not only on account of the
external beauties of her person, but more especially for the sweet and obliging
temper of her mind. Her very composition was love, tenderness and generosity.]
-- Remarkably patient in all her distressing sicknesses; and in her last was
favored with such discoveries of God, and found such trust in him, as
abundantly satisfied her attendants and sorrowing friends that her hope of
eternal life was founded in Gospel evidences of a saving acquaintance with
Christ.

In less than two months after her decease, Mrs. Willis departed this life, as
above related; concerning whom it remains to be said, That her relish for
divine things, and deep concern for the prevalence of true godliness in her own
heart and life, may further appear from some select passages, found among her
private papers, after her death; which ('it is supposed) she met with in her
reading, and penned for her own use; as what were peculiarly agreeable to her
sentiments, and which deeply impressed her mind.

They are as follows, viz.

Providence are sometimes dark texts, that want an expositor. -- God's
providence fulfils his promise. -- Without God's providence nothing falls out
in the world. -- Without his permission nothing stirs. -- Without his blessing
nothing prospers.

Afflictions are not so much threatened as promised to the children of God.

To be a christian, and a suffering christian, is a double honor.

By affliction God separates the sin which he hates, from the soul which he
loves.

An hard heart is not so easily broken, as a broken heart is bound up.

We must bear the warnings of the conscience, or we shall feel the woundings of
conscience.

A word from God; a look from Christ; a touch from the Spirit, will break the
heart.

To those that believe, (1) Christ is precious. (2) The word is sweet. (3) Sin
is bitter. (4) Saints are dear. (5) Religion is their business. (6) The world
is a broken idol. (7) Death is welcome.

Reserving other parts of her life and character, to the hand that published
them soon after her funeral (though some of them have been, unavoidably, touched
in the foregoing account) I shall here only observe,

That her early profession of religion was followed with the exercises of
devotion; and, abating humane imperfections, adorned with a conversation
becoming the gospel. Her attendance, when able, was constant on public worship
and ordinances of God's house, where her solemn deportment spoke the deep
concern of her soul, to worship God in spirit and in truth. -- The zeal which
carried her up to the house of God, accompanied her back to her ow^, and spread
itself through her ordinary conversation. -- The godly were highest in her
esteem, with whom she delighted to converse upon the affairs of religion and
the other world. Yet ever sociable and pleasant, delighting to make all about
her happy. -- Even on a bed of sickness and pain, which affected the hearts of
her friends, she would conceal a measure of her own grief, and strive to cheer
their spirits, rather than increase their sorrows by uttering all her
complaints. Her common treatment of those that visited her house, or fell in
her way, (not excepting the injurious) discovered a heart full of friendship
and loving kindness to all men. But her tenderness and dear affection to her
relatives was almost singular; nor did it fail of suitable returns -- As a
daughter, sister, wife and mother, none more affectionate. The duties of each
relation were considered as a privilege, not a task -- done with so much
pleasure and cheerfulness, and (which could hardly fail) attended with such
mutual endearments, as made it not easy to say, whether she loved more than she
was beloved. -- As a mistress, provident and kind to her servants, ruling with
moderation and gentleness, to make their yoke of servitude easy, and their
burden light. -- She guided the affairs of her house with discretion,
generosity, carefulness and frugality appeared in all her domestic economy. --
Though pressed with infirmities of body, she greatly assisted her worthy
partner in the instruction and education of tender youths, committed to their
care (for which she had a singular faculty, and) in which exercise she closed
her life.

When the time came that she must die, being apprehensive that it was her last
sickness, she seemed not terrified at the approach of death. -- She that had
long been deprived of health, and even cut off (in youth) from the hopes of
that blessing. -- She "that often received the sentence of death in herself,
and viewed the grave as gasping for her," met the summons, when she found it
real, with much composure of mind. -- Though under some clouds, and, in a
measure, destitute of former manifestations, yet retained a firm reliance on
the all perfect righteousness and merits of Christ for acceptance with God, --
thirsting for him and the displays of his grace in that decisive hour. -- At a
lucid interval, from the force of her disease, which had now deeply affected
the powers of her mind, she finished her work with this important and striking
expression (in answer to a word that was spoken, concerning her going to join
the angels and saints in their delightful work of praise) It Is not enough said
she, "for me to glorify God in heaven; I long to glorify him on (...) and in
death."


The following character of Mrs. Willis, heretofore referred to, was drawn by a
gentleman of her intimate acquaintance, and published in the Boston prints,
soon after her death. Which, as it harmonizes with and confirms the foregoing
account; the substance whereof (touchin^ (...) character) was taken down, by
the author, (...) he saw or heard of what was printed, I hope will (therefore)
escape the censure of Tautology, and be admitted as an acceptable close.

MALDEN, January 30, 1767.
"On Sunday last, one o'clock in the morning, died here, much lamented, Mrs.
Willis, Aetat. 59, the pious and truly amiable consent of the Rev. Mr. Eliakim
Willis, Pastor of the second church in this town. -- The external graces of her
person were uncommon. -- The vivacity and sprightliness of her countenance was
unusual. Her aspect discovered a quick discernment, a deep sensibility, and
benevolent heart. In manners she was gentle, easy and unaffected -- A most
agreeable companion -- of a very sociable (...) pleasant, without the least
tincture of levity -- serious, without a gloom -- religious and devout, without
enthusiasm -- extremely entertaining in conversation.

Her natural genius was above the common size -- her taste for reading was
almost singular; and she excelled most of her sex, in a relish for works of
genius; books written in taste. She had a quick sense of the charms of
imagination and beauties of expression.

"But subjects of divinity chiefly engaged her attention, and especially such
as were the most important and interesting. -- Her favorite authors were those
that placed the perfections of God, the grace of the gospel, and our absolute
dependence upon God, through Christ, in the clearest light; and that gave the
justest representation of our obligations, our duty and interest -- and that
afforded the best rules for self-examination, and the most powerful motives to
christian practice. -- Piety, which commenced in early life, was no small part
of her character. She appeared jealous of herself, with a godly jealousy; and
at times was concerned lest she should be mistaken in an affair of the greatest
consequence; though at other times, a sight of the glory of God, in the face of
Christ, removed the inquietudes of her mind; and the love of God shed abroad in
(...) heart, cast out disquieting fear.

"She had a remarkable turn for friendship; and the unusual kindness, courtesy
and cheerfulness, with which she treated her friends, appeared to be a just and
sincere expression of that respect and benevolence which warmed her heart. She
highly valued such as exceeded in goodness and ingenuity.

"She excelled in charity and hospitality -- was a true friend to the poor --
of a tender, compassionate, sympathizing heart -- easily touched with a sense
of the afflictions and sorrows of others -- could mourn with them that mourned,
and weep with them that wept.

"She was much esteemed and beloved by her acquaintance; and the worthy object
of Mr. Willis's warmest and strongest affections. Nor need it be said, that she
was very happy in the conjugal connection.

"Her constitution was extremely delicate; and, for a number of years she had
been subject to much feebleness and indisposition, which did not however
destroy the amiable sweetness of her mind.

"The rules of true virtue and religion were her guide and companions in life:
A dependence upon God's all sufficiency through Christ alone, in death, was her
support. -- And yesterday her funeral was attended with great decency and
solemnity." --


-- The house appointed for all living. There the wicked cease from troubling,
and there the weary be at rest. Amen.

State of NEW HAMPSHIRE, DUNBARTON, MAY 1, 1786.
SUBLATAM EX OCULIS QUAERIMUS INVIDI.

Hor. Englished:

Her snatched from our sight, we fondly would recall.


AT three o'clock this morning, departed this life, after a short illness of
the bilious kind, Madam Sarah Page, in the 62d year of her age -- the amiable
relict of the late worthy Capt. Caleb Page, of this place.

This lady had weighed about three hundred weight. -- Her stature was eligible
-- her visage comely. There was a beautiful symmetry in the features of her
face; and her shape was neatly proportioned. Such was the majesty and natural
elegance of her appearance, that the eye that saw her gave witness to her. Her
eyes beamed such a luster, as bespake the greatness of her mind: her outward
form was lovely, her inward not less exact. The God of nature had blessed her
with a capacious mind, which she greatly improved by reading (or having read to
her by her friends, while she laid her hand to the spindle, and her hand held
the distaff) some of the best writers in polemical and practical divinity; for
which she had a taste, as well as for the belles-letters, and would make the
most judicious remarks upon the beauties of the author. She was religious
without the least tincture of enthusiasm or superstition, and never thought
religion consisted in grimmace. Her invention was sprightly, her wit ready, and
of the keenest and most brilliant kind -- her temper firm and agreeable -- her
judgment sound beyond what was common to her sex. She had a mind formed for
friendship, and was capable of giving counsel and advice. She despised all low
cunning, in which some little creatures pride themselves. She never said one
thing, when she meant another, which rendered her a most endearing friend; and
would never forsake her friend in the day of adversity; and nothing but the
basest ingratitude could wean her affections, where she had once placed them,
though some beasts in human shape may be so base sometimes as to give occasion
for it, especially if they are of the crocodile kind. Such creatures are aptly
described in the following lines: Such brutes shall with disgrace be clothed,
In spite of all their pride:
Their own confusion like a cloak,
The guilty wretches hide.


Her liberality if not boundless, was most extensive. The poor and needy were
her care, and the distressed of every kind. Of this, she has left a witness in
the breasts of hundreds if not thousands. She was peculiarly fitted for the
social life. Her husband was known in the gates, when he sat among the elders
of the land; and his heart ever trusted safely in her. And though her children
could not rise up and call her blessed (as she never had any); yet, numbers
whom she trained up, if they have any minds, will do it (and if any one was
without a mind, she was not to blame for that); for she opened her mouth with
wisdom, and in her (...) was the law of kindness. She looked well to the ways
of her household, and eat not the bread of idleness. -- How entertaining! how
instructive! was her conversation! How pleasing! how striking was her smile!
She was formed for the sweets of life: Her mind was finished for delight! Many
daughters have done virtuously; but her price was far above rubies.

But though she has left her friends in tears, and some to sigh the inward pain
in silence, I trust she is gone to a more exalted hemisphere, and (...) even
the world that knew her to lament their lost, as every one that has true
discernment will, and will labor to follow her to that glorious world, of
which at present we are not capable of (...) adequate ideas; for eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, neither can (...) enter into the heart of mortals to
conceive of those glories which are laid up for such angelic forms. If they
shone here, what will they do hereafter. Ah! where is that lovely form, whose
brightest eyes
Looked like the morn, and shone like as the skies;
Fair as the moon, reflecting silver light,
Strong as the golden sun, and beamy bright.
Wrapped in the image of a pleasing sleep,
No more (...) hear her sigh, nor see her weep.
She shone like ^straea, while here below;
And now, in realms above, she is like her too.
The (...) sweets which feed the thyme be,
Madam, thou lovely Page, were found in thee.
The beauties of thy sex were found in one:
Thou wast a magazine of charms alone.
That lovely form is mouldering in the grave,
Where lies alike, the Princess and the slave.
Dead, no -- she is gone her virtues to display,
In the bright regions of eternal day.
There "springs of endless joy are breaking forth!
There buds the promise of celestial worth,
Worth which must ripen in an happier clime,
And brighter sun beyond the bounds of time."
When I see some little flirts, how great the contrast! Yet I adore (it is not
meant with divine worship) a female mind that is great, though it be contained
within a little casket.

How uncommon soever the above character may appear in any age, especially in
the present one, it is not exaggerated, verbum sacerdotis. i. e. upon the word
of a priest. In drawing this imperfect character, care was taken to prevent
adulation, which ever lessens the credence of real worth. For the truth of the
character, an appeal is made to the sensible part of her acquaintance. -- When
this character was once read to a clergyman's lady, she replied with an air,
which discovered she thought it exceeded due bounds. The reverend divine, her
husband, told her he knew the woman while she lived, and it was a just
character: And if so, it must have been drawn from the life. I scorn to paint
female furies' passions,
Which rise to heaven, and put out all the stars.
Let me the softer, more angelick forms
Describe, in the smooth Watts's softest strains.
I wish the females not void of passion,
Nor void of sense -- may reason ever rule.



When I consider a person of such distinguished merit taken off the stage
before she had arrived at the age allotted for human life, and see others
spared, from whose minds an idea did never shoot, and perhaps never will; I am
ready to exclaim, in the language of Portius, The ways of Heaven are dark and
intricate.
Puzzled in mazes, and perplexed with errors,
Our understanding traces them in vain,
Lost and bewildered in the fruitless search;
Nor sees with how much art the windings run,
Nor where the regular confusion ends.


N. B. Shall not the character of so amiable a person be spread as far as pen
and types can do it, through the American States? Ye brethren of the type, waft
her name down to posterity; and by doing of it, you will immortalize your own,
as some of the Greek and Latin poets have done by celebrating their goddesses.
The name of an Abigail, a Judith, and a Dorcas, or a Tabitha, with many others,
must go to make up her character. -- But I shall add no more, lest it should be
suspected, though I fall short, that I grow wanton in her praise.

The female reader is desired, before she gives the pamphlet a second reading,
to impress her mind with the following lines, that she may make the characters
her own; and then it will be seen she did not read in vain: Let all be hushed,
each softest motion cease;
Be every loud tumultuous thought at peace;
And every ruder gasp of breath
Be calm, as in the arms of death:
And thou most fickle, most uneasy part,
Thou restless wanderer, my heart,
Be still; gently, ah! gently leave,
Thou busy, idle thing, to leave.
Stir not a pulse; and let my blood,
That turbulent, unruly flood,
Be softly staid;
Let me be all, but my attention dead.


The Editor wishes his pains may not be lost; but that the young ladies' minds
of the present age, may be so warmed by such bright examples, that they may
shine through life like the morning and the evening star in her courses. How
glorious then will they appear, when the beauties of their minds may be viewed
without a telescope. Then, should they set in our hemisphere in early life,
they will rise in a brighter, and shine like the famed Narcissa who expired in
Newhampshire the last spring, and left her Philemon and the world to lament
their loss.

FINIS.

