THE SEASONS. IN FOUR BOOKS. WITH BRITANNIA. BY JAMES THOMSON.

To which are added the following Pieces, I. Ode on St. Cecilia's Day, by Mr.
POPE. II Alexander's Feast, or the Power of Music, by Mr. DRYDEN. III. Ode on
Solitude, by Mr POPE. IV. The dying Christian to his Soul, an Ode, by the same.
V. The Universal Prayer, by the same. VI. Elegy, to the Memory of an
unfortunate Lady, by the same. VII. Veni Creator Spirittus, translated in
Paraphrase, by Mr. DRYDEN.


To which is prefixed, The LIFE and LITERARY CHARACTER of Mr. THOMSON.

Illustrated with a new Set of DESIGNS

PHILADELPHIA: Pinted for RICE and Co. MARKET-STREET. MDCCLXXXVIII.

To the READER.
THE Methods now pursued in teaching the English Tongue, are such as give all
the Advantages, that formerly could only be acquired by an Acquaintance with
the dead Languages; This has raised its Value, and brought into Esteem many of
the Productions, and elegant Compositions, that have appeared in the English
Language, whose Beauties and Value were hitherto, only perceptible to those who
had labored in the learned Languages, or had walked in the Fields of Science.

The present Method of teaching the English Language, adopted in our first
Schools, where Gentlemen of the most classical as well as liberal Education
preside, not only leads the Scholar into a proper Knowledge of Grammar, but
introduces him to the more polite Parts of Literature, whereby he is instructed
in Syntax, Prosody, and all the Beauties of Trope and Figure, etc. These, while
they refine the Taste, enlarge the Conception, and so improve the Mind, as to
fit it for the most rational of all Amusements, that of studying a good Author,
entering thoroughly into his Meaning, and as it were imbibing his Spirit. In
these Pursuits some of the most admired of the English Writers, both in Prose
and Verse, have been introduced into our Schools; whose Beauties and
Excellencies being first laid before the Pupil by his Tutor, he in a little
Time becomes capable of himself to point them out. And as that Part of
THOMSON'S WORKS, which include the SEASONS, is particularly adapted to the
Purpose, a very correct Edition is here offered, Printed from his last
Corrections; to which is added his Poem, entitled, BRITANNIA, which breathing
the Spirit of true Patriotism, Liberty, and Love of Mankind, is peculiarly well
calculated for Youth and tender minds; and, as our Author himself expresses it,
-- "to rear the tender Thought,
To teach the young Idea how to shoot,
To pour the fresh Instruction over the Mind,
To breathe the enlivening Spirit, and to fix
The generous Purpose in the glowing Breast."
SPRING, 1148. But that this Piece may be still more useful, and more fully to
answer the Design, and lead the Youth into a Variety of the pleasing Paths of
Poetry, a Collection of other Pieces are here inserted, to instruct him in the
Beauties of an Ode, an Elegy, etc. without raising the Purchase above the Rate
of common School Books.

THE LIFE AND LITERARY CHARACTER OF JAMES THOMSON; Pointing out some particular
Beauties of the Author for the Use of young Minds.
JAMES THOMSON, an eminent British poet, was the son of a Divine in Scotland,
and born at Ednam, in the shire of Roxburgh, the eleventh of September, 1700.
He gave early marks of genius, which was discoverable through the rudeness of
his puerile essays; and, after the usual course of school education at
J^dburgh, was sent to the university of Edinburgh. In the second year of his
admission, his studies were for some time interrupted by the death of his
father; but his mother soon after repaired with her family, which was very
numerous, to Edinburgh, where she lived in a decent frugal manner, till her
favorite son had not only finished his academical course, but was even
d^stinguished and patronized as a genius. About this time the study of poetry
became pretty general in Scotland, the best English authors being universally
read, and imitations of them attempted; but taste as yet had made but little
progress, cr^ticism being there limited to rules and forms, which served only
to discover the inaccuracies of a poet, while his fire and fancy escaped their
notice. Thomson, who believed he was entitled to judges of a more exalted
genius, began to turn his views toward London which an accident soon after
entirely determined him in.

The divinity chair at Edinburgh was then filled by Mr Hamilton, whose lectures
our author attended ab^ut a year, when in an exercise in the psalm, in which
the power and majesty of God were celebrated, he gave so highly poetical and
sublime a paraphrase and illustration, that it surprised the whole audience.
Mr. Hamilton complimented him on this performance in a particular manner; but
at the same time told him, in his smiles of approbation, that if he expected to
be useful in the ministry, he must keep a stricter rein upon his imagination,
and express himself in language more suitable to an audience, where the learned
and unlearned are equally respectable. Thomson concluded from this, that his
expectations from the study of theology might be precarious, even though the
church had been his choice; so that, having some encouragement from a lady of
quality, a friend of his mother, then in London, he quickly prepared for his
journey, which ended in no more than giving him an opportunity of entering on
the stage of the unknown world, without a patron, and but sparingly provided
with cash.

However, his merit did not lie long concealed. Mr. Forbes, af^erw^rds lord
presi^ent of the session, received him very kindly, and introduced him to some
of his friends, part^cularly to Mr. Aickman, whose premature death he has with
great affection commemorated, ^n a copy of verses written on that occasion. The
favorable manner in which he was every where received, emboldened him to risk
the publicat^on of his Winter, in March ^726, which wa^ no sooner read than
univ^rsally admired; and from that time his acquaintance was courted by all men
of taste Dr. Rundle, afterward bishop of Lerry, received him into his intimate
confidence and friendship; promoted his character every where: introduced him
to his great friend the lord chancellor Talbot; and some years after, when the
eldest son of that nobleman was to make his tour, recommended Mr Thomson as a
proper companion for him. His affection and gratitude to Dr. Rundle are finely
expressed, in his poem to the memory of lord Talbot. Our author held the
estimation of the public so highly, that he finished the plan which their
wishes laid out for him; and the expectations which his Winter had raised, were
fully answered in the successive publication of the other seasons; Summer, in
the year ^727; Spring, in the beginn^ng of 1728; and Autumn, in a quarto
edition of his works, in 1730.

Besides these, and his tragedy of Sophonisb^, which was well received in the
year 1729, Mr. Thomson had, in 1727, published his poem to the memory of Sir
Isaac Newton, th^n lately deceased. The same year, the resentment of our
merchants, for the interruption of their trade by the Spaniards in America*
running very high, Mr Thomson zea^ously took part in it, and wrote his poem
Britannia, to rouse the nation to revenge. His poetical pursuits were now
interrupted by his attendance on the honorable Mr. Charles Talbot in his
travels, with whom he visited most of the courts and capital cities of Europe.
How particular and judicious his observations were, appears from his poem on
Liberty, in five parts, thus in^itled. Ancient and Modern Italy compared;
Gre^ce; Rome; Britain; the Prospect. While he was writing the first part of
Liberty, he received a severe shock, by the death of his noble friend and
fellow-traveller, and this was soon followed by another still more so, and of
more general concern, the death of lord Talbot himself; which Mr. Thomson so
pathetically laments, in the poem dedicated to his memory. At the same time he
found himself from an easy competency, reduced to a state of precarious
dependence, in which he passed the remainder of his life, excepting only the
two last years of it, during which he enjoyed the place of surveyor general of
the Leeward islands, procured for him by the generous friendship of lord
Lyttleton.

Immediately upon his return to England with Mr. Talbot, the chancellor had
made him his secretary of briefs, a place of little attendance, suiting his
retired indolent way of life, and equal to all his wants. This place ^ell with
his patron; yet his genius could not be depressed, or his temper hurt, by this
reverse of fortune. He resumed, in time, his usual cheerfulness, and never
abated one article in his way of living; which, though simple, was elegant, and
with a peculiar neatness. The profits arising from his works were not
inconsiderable; his ^rag^dy of Agamemnon, acted in 1738, gave many nigh^s to
the author.

But his chief dependence, during this long interval, was on the protection and
bounty of his royal highness Frederick Prince of Wales, who, upon the
recommendation of lord Lyttleton, then his chief favorite, settled on him an
handsome allowance, and always received him very graciously. It happened,
however, that the favor of his royal highness was, in one instance, of some
prejudice to Mr. Thomson, in the refusal of a license for his tragedy of Edward
and Eleanora, which he had prepared for the stage in the year 1739. This
proceeded from the misunderstand^ng which then subsisted between the court of
the prince of Wales, and that of the king his father. His next dramatic
performance was the masque of Alfred, written jointly with Mr. Mallet, who was
his good friend on many occasions, and by command of the prince of Wales, for
the entertainment of his royal highness's court at his Summer residence* In the
year 1745, his Tancred and Sigismunda, taken from the novel in Gil Blas, was
well received. He in the mean time, was finishing his Castle of Indolence, an
allegorical poem, in two canto^. The stanza in which he wrote this piece is
that of Spencer, borrowed from the Italian poets. This was the last piece
published by Mr. Thomson, his tragedy of C^ri^lanus being only. prepared for
the theater, when a fever seized him, and deprived the world of a very good
man, as well as a very great poet. His death happened on the 27th of August,
1748. His executors were the lord Lyttleton and Mr. Mitchel; and, by their
interest, the orphan play of Coriolanus was brought on the stage to the b^st
advantage: from the pr^fits of which, and from the sale of his manuscripts and
other effects, all demands were duly satisfied, and a handsome sum remitted to
his sisters. His remains were deposited in the church of Richmond, under a
plain stone, without any inscription.

Mr. Thomson himself hints, somewhere in his works, that his figure was not the
most promising, his make being rather robust than graceful; and his worst
appearance was, when he was seen walking alone, in a thoughtful mood: but when
saluted by a friend* and they entered into conversation he would instantly
brighten into a most amiable aspect, his features no longer the same, and his
eyes darting a peculiar and animated fire. He had improved his taste by the
best originals, both ancient and modern, b^t could not bear to write what was
not strictly hi^ own. What he borrowed from the ancients, he gives us in an
avowed faithful paraphrase, or translation, as we see in a few passages taken
from Virgil, and in that beautiful picture from the elder Pliny, where the
course and gradual increase of the Nile are figured by the stages of man's life
The Autumn was his favorite season for poetical composition, and the deep
silence of the night the t^me he commonly chose for such studies: so that he
would often be heard walking in his study till near morning, humming over, in
his way, what he was to correct and write out the next day. The amusements of
his leisure hours were civil and natural history, voyages, and the best
relations of travelers; and, had his situation favored it, he would certainly
have excelled in gardening, agriculture, and every rural improvement and
exercise. Although he performed on no instrument, he was passionately fond of
music, and would sometimes listen a full hour at his window to the nightingales
in Richmond-gardens. Nor was his taste less exquisite in the arts of painting,
sculpture, and architecture. In his travels, he had seen all the most
celebrated monuments of antiquity, and the best productions of modern art, and
had studied them so minutely, and with such true judgment, that, in some of his
descriptions of his poem on Liberty, we have them so delineated as to place
them in a stronger light, perhaps, than if we saw them with our eyes. As for
the more distinguishing qualities of his mind and heart, they are best
discoverable in his writings, than they can be presented by the pen of any
biographer. There his love of mankind, of his country and friends; his devotion
to his God, founded on the most elevated and just conception of his operative
power and providence, shines in every page. So unbounded was his tenderness of
heart, that it took in even the brute creation: he was extremely tender toward
his own species. He is not indeed known, through his whole life, to have given
any person one moment's pain by his writings, or otherwise. He took no part in
the poetical squabbles of his time, and so was respected and left undisturbed
by both parties. These amiable virtues, this divine temper of mind, did not
fail of their due reward: the best and greatest men of his time honored him
with their friendship and protection: the applause of the public attended all
his productions; his friends loved him with an enthusiastic ardour, and
sincerely lamented his untimely death.

SPRING


SPRING.
The ARGUMENT.
The subject proposed. Inscribed to the Countess of HARTFORD. The Season is
described as it affects the various parts of Nature, ascending from the lower
to the higher; with digressions arising from the subject. Its influence on
inanimate Matter, on Vegetables, on brute Animals, and last on Man; concluding
with a dissuasive from the wild and irregular passion of Love, opposed to that
of a pure and happy kind.

SPRING.
COME, gentle SPRING, ethereal Mildness, come,
And from the bosom of yon dropping cloud.
While music wakes around, veiled in a shower
Of shadowing roses, on our plains descend.
O HARTFORD, fitted, or to shine in courts
With unaffected grace, or walk the plain
With innocence and meditation joined
In soft assemblage, listen to my song,
Which thy own Season paints; when Nature all
Is blooming, and benevolent, like thee.
AND see where surly WINTER passes off,
Far to the north, and calls his ruffian blasts:
His blasts obey, and quit the howling hill,
The shattered forest, and the ravaged vale;
While softer gales succeed, at whose kind touch,
Dissolving snows in livid torrents lost,
The mountains lift their green heads to the sky.
AS yet the trembling year is unconfirm'd,
And WINTER often at eve resumes the breeze,
Chills the pale morn, and bids his driving sleets
Deform the day delightless: so that scarce
The bittern knows his time, with bill ingulpht,
To shake the sounding marsh; or from the shore
The plovers when to scatter over the heath,
And sing their wild notes to the listening waste.
AT last from Aries rolls the bounteous sun,
And the bright Bull receives him. Then no more
The expansive atmosphere is cramped with cold;
But, full of life and vivifying soul,
Lifts the light clouds sublime, and spreads them thin,
Fleecy, and white, over all-surrounding heaven.
FORTH fly the tepid airs; and unconfined,
Unbinding earth, the moving softness strays,
Joyous, the impatient husbandman perceives
Relenting Nature, and his lusty steers
Drives from their stalls, to where the well-us'd plough
Lies in the furrow, loosened from the frost.
There, unrefusing, to the harnessed yoke,
They lend their shoulder, and begin their toil,
Cheered by the simple so^g and soaring lark.
Meanwhile, incumbent over the shining share,
The master leans, removes the obstructing clay,
Winds the whole work, and sidelong lays the glebe.
WHITE, through the neighboring fields the sower stalks,
With measured step; and, liberal, throws the grain
Into the faithful bosom of the ground:
The harrow follows harsh, and shuts the scene.
BE gracious, HEAVEN! for now laborious Man
Has done his part. Ye fostering breezes, blow!
Ye sof^ening dews, ye tender showers, descend!
And temper all, thou world-reviving sun,
Into the perfect year! Not ye who live
In luxury and ease, in pomp and pride,
Think these lost themes unworthy of your ear:
Such themes as these the rural MARO sung
To wide-imperial ROME, in the full height
Of elegance and taste, by GREECE refined.
In ancient times, the sacred plough employed
The kings, and awful fathers of mankind:
And some, with whom compared, your insect tribes
Are but the beings of a summer's day,
Have held the scale of empire, ruled the storm
Of mighty war; then, with unwearied
victorious hand,
Disdaining little delicacies, seized
The plough, and greatly independent lived.
scorned
This line not in the last Ed.
All the vile stores corruption can bestow.
YE generous BRITONS, venerate the plough!
And over your hills, and long withdrawing vales,
Let Autumn spread his treasures to the sun,
Luxuriant, and unbounded: as the sea,
Far through his azure turbulent domain,
Your empire owns, and from a thousand shores
Wafts all the pomp of life into your ports;
So with superior boon may your rich soil,
Exuberant, Nature's better blessings pour
Over every land, the naked nations cloathe,
And be the exhaustless granary of a world!
NOR only through the lenient air this change,
Delicious, breathes; the penetrative sun,
His force deep-darting to the dark retreat
Of vegetation, sets the steaming Power
At large, to wander over the vernant Earth,
In various hues; but chiefly thee, gay Green!
Thou smiling Nature's universal robe!
United light and shade! where the sight dwells
With growing strength, and ever-new delight.
FROM the moist meadow to the withered hill,
Led by the breeze, the vivid verdure runs,
And swells, and deepens, to the cherished eye.
The hawthorn whitens; and the juicy groves
Put forth their buds, unfolding by degrees,
Till the whole leafy forest stands displayed,
In full luxuriance, to the sighing gales;
Where the deer rustle through the twining brake,
And the birds sing concealed. At once, arrayed
In all the colors of the flushing year,
By Nature's swift and secret-working hand,
The garden glows, and fills the liberal air
With lavish fragrance; while the promised fruit
Lies yet, a little embryo, unperceived,
Within its crimson solds. Now from the town
Buried in smoke, and sleep, and noisome damps,
Often let me wander over the dewy fields,
Where freshness breathes, and dash the trembling drops
From the bent bush, as through the verdant maze
Of sweet-bria^ hedges I pursue my walk;
Or taste the smell of dairy; or ascend
Some eminence, AUGUSTA, in thy plains,
And see the country, far-diffus'd around,
One boundless blush, one white-empurpled shower
Of mingled blossoms; where the raptured eye
Hurries from joy to joy, and, hid beneath
The fair profusion, yellow Autumn spies.
I^, brushed from Russian wilds, a cutting gale
Rise not, and scatter from his humid wings
The clammy mildew; or, dry-blowing, breathe
Untimely frost; before whose baleful blast,
The full-blown Spring through all her foliage shrinks,
Joyless, and dead, a wide-dejected waste.
For often, engendered by the hazy north,
Myriads on myriads, insect-armies waft
Keen in the poisoned breeze; and wasteful eat,
Through buds and bark, into the blackened core,
Their eager way. A feeble race! yet often
The sacred sons of vengeance! on whose course
Corrosive famine waits, and kills the year.
To check this plague the skilful farmer, chaff,
And blazing straw, before his orchard burns;
Till, all involved in smoke, the latent foe
From every cranny suffocated falls:
Or scatters over the blooms the pungent dust
Of pepper, fatal to the frosty tribe:
Or, when the envenomed leaf begins to curl,
With sprinkled water drowns them in their nest:
Nor, while they pick them up with ^usy bill,
The little trooping birds unwisely scares.
BE patient, swains; these cruel-seeming winds
Blow not in vain. Far hence they keep, rep^ess'd,
Those deepening clouds on clou^s, surcharged with rain,
That over the vast Atlantic hither ^orne,
In endless train, would quench the summer-blaze,
And, chearless, drown the crude unripen'd year.
THE north-east spends his rage, h^
and now, shut up
Within his iron cave
caves, the effusive ^outh
Warms the wide air, and over the void of heaven
Breathes the big clouds with vernal showers distent.
At first a dusky wreath they seem to rise,
Scarce staining either; but by swift
fast degrees,
In heaps on heaps, the doubling vapor sails
Along the loaded sky, and mingling deep
Sits on the horison round a settled gloom.
Not such as wintry storms on mortals shed,
Oppressing life; but lovely, gentle, kind,
And full of every hope and every joy,
The wish of Nature. Gradual, sinks the breeze,
Into a perfect calm; that not a breath
Is heard to quiver through the closing woods,
Or rustling turn the many-twinkling leaves
Of aspin tall. The uncurling floods, diffused
In glassy breadth, seemed through delusive lapse
Forgetful of their course. It Is silence all,
And pleasing expectation. Herds and flocks
Drop the dry sprig, and mute-imploring eye
The falling verdure. Hushed in short suspense,
The plumy people streak their wings with oil,
To throw the lucid moisture trickling off;
And wait the approaching sign to strike, at once,
Into the general choir. Even mountains, vales,
And forests seem, impatient, to demand
The promised sweetness. Man superior walks
Amid the glad creation, musing praise,
And looking lively gratitude. At last,
The clouds consign their treasures to the fields,
And, softly shaking on the dimpled pool
Prelusive drops, let all their moisture flow,
In large effusion over the freshen'd world.
The stealing shower is scarce to patter heard,
By such as wander through the forest-walks,
Beneath the umbrageous multitude of leaves.
^ut who can hold the shade, while Heaven descends
In universal bounty, shedding herbs,
And fruits, and flowers, on Nature's ample lap?
Swift fancy fired anticipates their growth;
And, while the milky nutriment distills,
Beholds the kindling country color round.
THUS all day long the full-distended clouds
Indulge their genial stores, and well-showered earth
Is deep enriched with vegetable life;
'Till, in the western sky, the downward sun
Looks out, effulgent, from amid the flush
Of broken clouds, gay-shifting to his beam.
The rapid radiance instantaneous strikes
The illumined mountain, through the forest streams,
Shakes on the floods, and in a yellow mist,
Far-smoaking over the interminable plain,
In twinkling myriads lights the dewy gems.
Moist, bright, and green, the landscape laughs around.
Full swell the woods; their every music wakes,
Mixed in wild concert with the warbling brooks
Increased, the distant bleatings of the hills,
And
The hollow lows responsive from the vales,
Whence blending all the sweetened zephyr springs.
Mean time refracted from yon eastern cloud,
Bestriding earth, the grand ethereal bow
Shoots up immense; and every hue unfolds,
In fair proportion running from the red,
To where the violet fades into the sky.
Here, awful NEWTON, the dissolving clouds
Form, fronting on the sun, thy showery prism;
And to the sage-instructed
well-instructed eye unfold
The various twine of light, by thee disclosed
From the white mingling maze. Not so the boy
swain;
He wondering views the bright enchantment bend,
Delightful, over the radiant fields, and runs
To catch the falling glory; but amazed
Beholds the amusive arch before him fly,
Then vanish quite away. Still night succeeds,
A softened shade, and saturated earth
Awaits the morning-beam, to give to light*
Raised through ten thousand different plastic tubes,
The balmy treasures of the former day.
THEN spring the living herbs, profusely wild,
Over all the deep-green earth, beyond the power
Of botanist to number up their tribes:
Whether he steals along the lonely dale,
In silent search; or through the forest, rank
With what the dull incurious weeds account,
Bursts his blind way; or climbs the mountain-rock,
Fired by the nodding verdure of its brow.
With such a liberal hand has Nature flung
Their seeds abroad, blown them about in winds,
Innumerous mixed them with the nursing mold,
The moistening current, and prolific rain.
BUT who their virtues can declare? who pierce,
With vision pure, into these secret stores
Of health, and life* and joy? the food of Man,
While yet he lived in innocence, and told
A length of golden years, unflesh'd in blood,
A stranger to the savage arts of life,
Death, rapine, carnage, surfeit, and disease,
The lord, and not the tyrant of the world.
THE first fresh dawn then waked the gladden'd race
Of ^ncorrupted Man, nor blushed to see
The sluggard sleep beneath its sacred beam.
For their light slumbers gently fumed away;
And up they rose as vigorous as the sun,
Or to the culture of the willing glebe,
Or to the cheerful tendance of the flock.
Meantime the song went round; and dance and sport,
Wisdom and friendly talk, successive, stole
Their hours away. While in the rosy vale
Love breathed his infant sighs, from anguish free,
And full replete with bliss; save the sweet pain,
That, inly thrilling, but exalts it more.
Nor yet injurious act, nor surly deed,
Was known among these happy sons of HEAVEN;
For reason and benevolence were law.
Harmonious Nature too looked smiling on,
Clear shone the skies, cooled with eternal gales,
And balmy spirit all. The youthful sun
Shot his best rays, and still the gracious clouds
Dropped satness down; as, over the swelling mead,
The herds and flocks, commixing, played secure.
This when, emergent from the gloomy wood,
The glaring lion saw, his horrid heart
Was meeken'd, and he joined his sullen joy.
For music held the whole in perfect peace:
Soft sighed the flute; the tender voice was heard,
Warbling the varied heart; the woodlands round
Applied their quire; and winds and waters flowed
In consonance. Such were those prime of days.
BUT now those white unblemished manners
minutes, whence
The fabling poets took their golden age,
Are found no more amid these iron times,
These dregs of life! Now the distempered mind
Has lost that concord of harmonious powers,
Which forms the soul of happiness; and all
Is off the poise within: the passions all
Have burst their bounds; and reason half extinct,
Or impotent, or else approving, sees
The foul disorder. Senseless, and deformed,
Convulsive anger storms at large; or pale,
And silent, settles into fell revenge.
Base envy withers at another's joy,
And hates that excellence it cannot reach.
Desponding fear, of feeble fancies sull,
Weak, and unmanly, loosens every power.
Even love itself is bitterness of soul,
A pensive anguish pining at the heart:
Or, sunk to sordid interest, feels no more
That noble wish, that never-cloy'd desire,
Which, selfish joy disdaining, seeks, alone,
To bless the dearer object of its flame.
Hope sickens with extravagance; and grief,
Of life impatient, into madness swells;
Or in dead silence wastes the weeping hours.
These, and a thousand mixed emotions more,
From ever-changing views of good and ill,
Formed infinitely various, vex the mind
With endless storm. Whence, d^eply
inly rankling, grows
The partial thought, a listless unconcern,
Cold, and averting from our neighbor's good;
Then dark disgust, and hatred, winding wiles,
Coward deceit, and ruffian violence.
At last, extinct each social feeling, fell
And joyless inhumanity pervades,
And petrifies the heart. Nature disturbed
Is deemed, vindictive, to have changed her course.
HENCE, in old dusky time, a deluge came:
When the deep-cleft disparting orb, that arched
The central waters round, impetuous rushed,
With universal burst, into the gulf,
And over the high-pil'd hills of fractur'd earth
Wide-dash'd the waves, in undulation vast;
Till, from the center to the streaming clouds,
A shoreless ocean tumbled round the globe.
THE Seasons since have, with severer sway,
Oppressed a broken world: the Winter keen
Shook forth his waste of snows; and Summer shot
His pestilential heats. Great Spring, before,
Green'd all the year; and fruits and blossoms blushed,
In social sweetness, on the self-same bough.
Pure was the temperate air; an even calm
Perpetual reigned, save what the zephyrs bland
Breathed over the blue expanse: for then nor storms
Were taught to blow, nor hurricanes to rage;
Sound slept the waters; no sulphurous glooms
Swelled in the sky, and sent the lightning forth;
While sickly damps, and cold autumnal fogs,
Hung not, relaxing, on the springs of life.
But now, of turbid elements the sport,
From clear to cloudy tossed, from hot to cold,
And dry to moist, with inward-eating change,
Our drooping days are dwindled down to naught,
Their period finished ere it is well begun.
AND yet the wholesome herb neglected dies;
Though with a pure exhilarating soul
Of nutriment and health, and vital powers,
Beyond the search of art, it is copious blessed.
For, with hot ravine fired, ensanguin'd Man
Is now become the lion of the plain,
And worse. The wolf, who from the nightly fold
Fierce drags the bleating prey, never drunk her milk,
Nor wore her warming fleece: nor has the steer,
At whose strong chest the deadly tiger hangs,
Ever plough'd for him. They too are tempered high,
With hunger stung, and wild necessity,
Nor lodges pity in their shaggy breast.
But Man, whom Nature formed of milder clay,
With every kind emotion in his heart,
And taught alone to we; while from her lap
She pours ten thousand delicacies, herbs,
And fruits, as numerous as the drops of rain,
Or beams that gave them birth: shall he, fair form!
Who wears sweet smiles, and looks erect on heaven,
Ever stoop to mingle with the prowling herd,
And dip his tongue in gore? the beast of prey,
Blood-stained, deserves to bleed: but you, ye flocks,
What have you done; ye peaceful people, what,
To merit death? you, who have given us milk
In luscious streams, and lent us your own coat
Against the Winter's cold? and the plain ox,
That harmless, honest, guileless animal,
In what has he offended? he, whose toil,
Patient and ever-ready, clothes the land
With all the pomp of harvest; shall he bleed,
And struggling groan beneath the cruel hands
Even of the clown he feeds? and that, perhaps,
To swell the riot of the autumnal feast,
Won by his labor? thus the feeling heart
Would tenderly suggest: but it is enough,
In this late age, adventurous, to have touched
Light on the numbers of the Samian sage.
High HEAVEN forbids
HEAVEN too forbids the bold presumptuous strain,
Whose wisest will has fixed us in a state
That must not yet to pure perfection rise.
Now when the first foul torrent of the brooks,
Swelled with
by the vernal rains, is ebbed away;
And, whitening, down their mossy-tinctur'd stream
Descends the billowy foam: now is the time,
While yet the dark-brown water aids the guile,
To tempt the trout. The well-dissembled fly,
The rod fine-tapering with elastic spring,
Snatched from the hoary steed the floating line,
And all thy slender watery stores prepare,
But let not on thy hook the tortured worm,
Convulsive, twist in agonizing folds;
Which by rapacious hunger swallowed deep,
Gives, as you tear it from the bleeding breast
Of the weak helpless uncomplaining wretch,
Harsh pain and horror to the tender hand.
WHEN, with his lively ray, the potent sun
Has pierced the streams, and roused the finny race,
Then, issuing cheerful, to thy sport repair;
Chief should the western breezes curling play,
And light over either bear the shadowy clouds.
High to their fount, this day, amid the hills,
And woodlands warbling round, trace up the brooks;
The next, pursue their rocky-channel'd maze,
Down to the river, in whose ample wave
Their little Naiads love to sport at large.
Just in the dubious point, where with the pool
Is mixed the trembling stream, or where it boils
Around the stone, or from the hollowed bank,
Reverted, plays in undulating flow,
There throw, nice-judging, the delusive fly;
And, as you lead it round in artful curve,
With eye attentive mark the springing game.
Strait as above the surface of the flood
They wanton rise, or urged by hunger leap,
Then fix, with gentle twitch, the barbed hook;
Some lightly tossing to the grassy bank,
And to the shelving shore slow-dragging some,
With various hand proportioned to their force.
If yet too young, and easily deceived,
A worthless prey scarce bends your pliant rod,
Him, piteous of his youth, and the short space
He has enjoyed the vital light of Heaven,
Soft disengage, and back into the stream
The speckled captive
infant throw. But should you lure
From his dark haunt, beneath the tangled roots
Of pendant trees, the monarch of the brook,
Behooves you then to ply your finest art.
Long time he, following cautious, scans the fly;
And often attempts to seize it, but as often
The dimpled water speaks his jealous fear.
At last, while happily over the shaded sun
Passes a cloud, he desperate takes the death,
With sullen plunge. At once he darts along,
Deep-struck, and runs out all the lengthened line;
Then seeks the farthest ooze, the sheltering weed,
The cavern'd bank, his old secure abode;
And flies aloft, and flounces round the pool,
Indignant of the guile. With yielding hand,
That feels him still, yet to his furious course
Gives way, you, now retiring, following now
Across the stream, exhaust his idle rage;
Till floating broad upon his breathless side,
And to his fate abandoned, to the shore
You gayly drag your unresisting prize.
THUS pass the temperate hours: but when the sun
Shakes from his noonday throne the scattering clouds,
Even shooting listless languor through the deeps;
Then seek the bank where flowering elders crowd,
Where scattered wild the lily of the vale
Its balmy essence breathes, where cowslips hang
The dewy head, where purple violets lurk,
With all the lowly children of the shade:
Or lie reclined beneath yon spreading ash,
Hung over the steep; whence, borne on liquid wing,
The sounding culver shoots; or where the hawk,
High, in the beetling cliff, his airy builds.
There let the classic page thy fancy lead
Through rural scenes; such as the Mantuan swain
Paints in the matchless
unequal harmony of song.
Or catch thyself the landscape, gliding swift
Athwart imagination's vivid eye:
Or by the vocal woods and waters lulled,
And lost in lonely musing, in a dream,
Confused, of careless solitude, where mix
Ten thousand wandering images of things,
Soothe every gust of passion into peace,
All but the swellings of the softened heart,
That waken, not disturb the tranquil mind.
BEHOLD yon breathing prospect bids the Muse
Throw all her beauty forth. But who can paint
Like Nature? can imagination boast,
Amid its gay creation, hues like here is?
Or can it mix them with that matchless skill,
And lose them in each other, as appears
In every bud that blows? if fancy then
Unequal fails beneath the pleasing task;
Ah what shall language do? Ah where find words
Tinged with so many colors; and whose power,
To life approaching, may perfume my lays
With that fine oil, those aromatic gales,
That inexhaustive flow continual round?
YET, though successless, will the toil delight.
Come then, ye virgins, and ye youths, whose hearts
Have felt the raptures of refining love;
And thou, AMANDA, come, pride of my song!
Formed by the graces, loveliness itself!
Come with those downcast eyes, sedate and sweet,
Those looks demure, that deeply pierce the soul;
Where, with the light of thoughtful reason, mixed,
Shines lively fancy and the feeling heart:
Oh come! and while the rosy-footed May
Steals blushing on, together let us tread
The morning dews, and gather in their prime
Fresh-blooming flowers, to grace thy braided hair,
And thy loved bosom that improves their sweets.
SEE, where the winding vale its lavish stores,
I^riguous, spreads. See, how the lily drinks
The latent rill, scarce oozing through the grass,
Of growth luxuriant; or the humid bank,
In fair profusion, decks. Long let us walk,
Where the breeze blows from you extended field
Of blossomed beans. Arabia cannot boast
A fuller gale of joy than, liberal, thence
Breathes through the sense, and takes the ravished soul.
Nor is the mend unworthy of thy foot,
Full of fresh verdure, and unnumber'd flowers,
The negligence of Nature, wide, and wild;
Where, undisguis'd by mimic Art, she spreads
Unbounded beauty to the roving eye.
Here their delicious task the fervent bees,
In swarming millions, tend. Around, athwart,
Through the soft air, the busy nations fly,
Cling to the bud, and, with inserted tube,
Suck its pure essence, its ethereal soul:
And often, with bolder wing, they soaring dare
The purple heath, or where the wild-thyme grows
And yellow load them with the luscious spoil.
AT length the finished garden to the view
Its vistas opens, and its alleys green.
Snatched through the verdant maze, the hurried eye
Distracted wanders; now the bowery walk
Of covert close, where scarce a speck of day
Falls on the lengthened gloom, protracted sweeps;
Now meets the bending sky, the rive^ now
Dimpling along, the breezy-ruffled lake,
The forest darkening round, the glittering spire,
The ethereal mountain, and the distant main.
But why so far excursive? when at hand,
Along these blushing borders, bright with dew,
And in yon mingled wilderness of flowers,
Fair-handed Spring unbosoms every grace:
Throws out the snow-drop, and the crocus first;
The daisy, primrose, violet darkly blue,
And polyanthus of unnumber'd dies;
The yellow wall-flower, stained with iron brown;
And lavish stock that scents the garden round.
From the soft wing of vernal breezes shed,
Anemonies; auriculas, enriched
With shining meal over all their velvet leaves;
And full ranun^ulas of glowing red.
Then comes the tulip-race, where beauty plays
Her idle freaks* from family diffused
To family, as flies the father-dust,
The varied colors run; and while they break
On the charmed eye, the exulting florist ma^ks,
With secret pride, the wonders of his hand.
No gradual bloom is wanting; from the bud,
Firstborn of Spring, to Summer's musky tribes:
Nor hyacinths, of purest virgin white,
Low-be^t, and blushing inward; nor jonquils,

Nor hyacinths, deep-purpled; nor jonquils,
Of potent fragrance; nor narcissus fair,
As over the fabled fountain hanging still;
Nor broad carnations; nor gay-spotted pinks;
Nor, shower'd from every bush, the damask-rose.
Infinite numbers, delicacies, smells,
With hues on hues expression cannot paint,
The breath of Nature, and her endless bloom.
Hail, SOURCE of BEING! UNIVERSAL SOUL
Of Heaven and earth! ESSENTIAL PRESENCE, hail!
To THEE I bend the knee; to THEE my thoughts,
Continual, climb; who, with a master-hand,
Have the great whole into perfection touched.
By THEE the various vegetative tribes,
Wrapped in a filmy net, and clad with leaves,
Draw the live either, and imbibe the dew.
By THEE disposed into congenial soils,
Stands each attractive plant, and sucks, and swells
The juicy tide; a twining mass of tubes.
At THY command the vernal sun awakes
The torpid sap, detruded to the root
By wintry winds, that now in fluent dance,
And lively fermentation, mounting, spreads
All this innumerous-colour'd scene of things.
As rising from the vegetable world
My theme ascends, with equal wing ascend,
My panting Muse; and hark, how loud the woods
Invite you forth in all your gayest trim.
Lend me your song, ye nightingales! oh pour
The mazy-running soul of melody
Into my varied verse! while I deduce,
From the first note the hollow cuckoo sings,
The symphony of Spring, and touch a theme
Unknown to fame, the Passion of the groves.
WHEN first the soul of love is sent abroad,
Warm through the vital air, and on th^^heart
Harmonious seizes, the gay troops begin,
In gallant thought, to plume the painted wing;
And try again the long-forgotten strain,
At first faint-warbled. But no sooner grows,
The soft infusion prevalent, and wide,
Than, all alive, at once their joy overflows
In music unconfined. Up-springs the lark,
Shrill-voiced, and loud, the messenger of morn;
Ere yet the shadows fly, he mounted sings
Amid the dawning clouds, and from their haunts
Calls up the tuneful nations. Every copse
Deep-tangled
Thick wove, and tree irregular, and bush,
Bending with dewy moisture, over the heads
Of the coy quiristers that lodge within,
Are prodigal of harmony. The thrush
And wood-lark, over the kind contending throng
Superior heard, run through the sweetest length
Of notes; when listening Philomela deigns
To let them joy, and purposes, in thought
Elate, to make her night excel their day.
The blackbird whistles from the thorny brake;
The mellow bullfinch answers from the grove:
Nor are the ^innets, over the flowering furze
Poured out profusely, silent. Joined to these
Innumerous songsters, in the freshening shade
Of new-sprung leaves, their modulations mix
Mellifluous. The jay, the rook, the daw,
And each harsh pipe discordant heard alone,
Aid the full concert: while the stock-dove breathes
A melancholy murmur through the whole.
IT IS love creates their melody, and all
This waste of music is the voice of love;
That even to birds, and beasts, the tender arts
Of pleasing teaches. Hence the glossy kind
Try every winning way inventive love
Can dictate, and in courtship to their mates
Pour forth their little souls. First, wide around,
With distant awe, in airy rings they rove,
Endeavoring by a thousand tricks to catch
The cunning, conscious, half-averted glance
Of their regardless charmer. Should she seem
Softening the least approvance to bestow,
Their colors burnish* and by hope inspired,
They brisk advance; then, on a sudden struck,
Retire disordered; then again approach;
In fond rotation spread the spotted wing,
And shiver every feather with desire.
CONNUBIAL leagues agreed, to the deep woods
They haste away, all as their fancy leads,
Pleasure, or food, or secret safety prompts;
That Nature's great command may be obeyed,
Nor all the sweet sensations they perceive
Indulged in vain. Some to the holly-hedge
Nestling repair, and to the thicket some;
Some to the rude protection of the thorn
Commit their feeble offspring. The cleft tree
Offers its kind concealment to a few,
Their food its insects, and its moss their nests.
Others apart far in the grassy dale,
Or roughening waste, their humble texture weave.
But most in woodland solitudes delight,
In unfrequented glooms, or shaggy banks,
Steep, and divided by a habbling brook,
Whose murmurs soothe them all the live long day,
When by kind duty
for a season fixed. Among the roots
Of hazel, pendant over the plaintive stream,
They frame the first foundation of their domes;
Dry sprigs of trees, in artful fabric laid,
And bound with clay together. Now it is naught
But restless hurry through the busy air,
Beat by unnumber'd wings. The swallow sweeps
The slimy pool, to build his hanging house
Intent. And often, from the careless back
Of herds and flocks, a thousand tugging bills
Pluck hair and wool; and often, when unobserved,
Steal from the barn a straw: till soft and warm,
Clean, and complete, their habitation grows.
AS thus the patient dam assiduous sits,
Not to be tempted from her tender task,
Or by sharp hunger, or by smooth delight,
Though the whole loosened Spring around her blows,
Her sympathizing lover takes his stand
High on the opponent bank, and ceaseless sings
The tedious time away; or else supplies
Her place a moment, while she sudden flits
To pick the scanty meal. The appointed time
With pious toil fulfilled, the callow young
Warmed and expanded into perfect life,
Their brittle bondage break, and come to light,
A helpless family, demanding food
With constant clamor. O what passions then,
What melting sentiments of kindly care,
On the new parents seize! Away they fly
Affectionate, and undesiring bear
The most delicious morsel to their young;
Which equally distributed, again
The search begins. Even so a gentle pair,
By fortune sunk, but formed of generous mold,
And charmed
pierced with cares beyond the vulgar breast,
In some lone cott amid the distant woods,
Sustained alone by providential HEAVEN,
Often, as they weeping eye their infant train,
Check their own appetites and give them all.
NOR toil
pain alone they scorn: exalting love
By the great FATHER OF THE SPRING inspired,
Gives instant courage to the fearful race,
And to the simple art. With stealthy wing,
Should some rude foot their woody haunts molest,
Amid a neighboring bush they silent drop,
And whirring thence, as if alarmed, deceive
The unfeeling schoolboy. Hence, around the head
Of wandering swain, the white-wing'd plover wheels
Her sounding flight, and then directly on
In long excursion skims the level lawn,
To tempt him from her nest. The wild-duck, hence,
Over the rough moss, and over the trackless waste
The heath-hen flutters, (pious fraud!) to lead
The hot pursuing spaniel far astray.
BE not the Muse ashamed, here to bemoan
Her brothers of the grove, by tyrant Man
Inhuman caught, and in the narrow cage
From liberty confined, and boundless air.
Dull are the pretty slaves, their plumage dull,
Ragged, and all its brightening luster lost;
Nor is that sprightly wildness in their notes,
Which, clear and vigorous, warbles from the beech.
Oh then, ye friends of love and love-taught song,
Spare the soft tribes, this barbarous art forbear!
If on your bosom innocence can win,
Music engage, or piety persuade.
BUT let not chief the nightingale lament
Her ruined care, too delicately framed
To brook the harsh confinement of the cage.
Often when, returning with her loaded bill,
The astonished mother finds a vacant nest,
By the hard hand of unrelenting clowns
Robbed, to the ground the vain provision falls;
Her pinions ruffle, and low-drooping scarce
Can bear the mourner to the poplar shade;
Where, all abandoned to despair, she sings
Her sorrows through the night; and, on the bough
Sole-sitting, still at every dying fall
Takes up again her lamentable strain
Of winding woe, till, wide around, the woods
Sigh to her song, and with her wail resound.
BUT now the feathered youth their former bounds,
Ardent, disdain; and, weighing often their wings,
Demand the free possession of the sky.
This one glad office more, and then dissolves
Parental love at once, now needless grown.
Unlavish Wisdom never works in vain.
It Is on some evening, sunny, grateful, mild,
When naught but balm is breathing through the woods,
With yellow luster bright, that the new tribes
Visit the spacious heavens, and look abroad
On Nature's common, far as they can see,
Or wing, their range, and pasture. Over the boughs
Dancing about, still at the giddy verge
Their resolution fails; their pinions still,
In loose libration stretched, to trust the void
Trembling refuse: till down before them fly
The parent-guides, and chide, exhort, command,
Or push them off. The surging air receives
The plumy burden; and their self-taught wings
Winnow the waving element. On ground
Alighted, bolder up again they lead,
Farther and farther on, the lengthning sligh^;
Till vanished every fear, and every power
Roused into life, and action, light in air
The acquitted parents see their soaring race,
And once rejoicing never know them more.
HIGH from the summit of a craggy cliff,
Hung over the deep, such as amazing frowns
On utmost The farthest of the western islands of Scotland.
Kilda's shore, whose lonely race
Resign the setting sun to Indian worlds,
The royal eagle draws his vigorous young,
Strong-pounc'd, and ardent with paternal fire.
Now fit to raise a kingdom of their own,
He drives them from his fort, the towering seat,
For ages, of his empire; which, in peace,
Unstained he holds, while many a league to sea
He wings his course, and preys in distant isles.
SHOULD I my steps turn to the rural seat,
Whose lofty elms, and venerable oaks,
Invite the rook, who high amid the boughs
In early Spring, his airy city builds,
And ceaseless caws amusive; there, well-pleased,
I might the various polity survey
Of the mixed houshold-kind. The careful hen
Calls all her chirping family around,
Fed, and defended by the fearless cock,
Whose breast with ardour flames, as on he walks,
Graceful, and crows defiance. In the pond,
The finely-checker'd duck, before her train,
Rows garrulous. The stately-sailing swan
Gives out his snowy plumage to the gale;
And, arching proud his neck, with oary feet
Bears forward fierce, and guards his osier isle,
Protective of his young. The turkey nigh,
Loud-threatning, reddens; while the peacock spreads
His every-colour'd glory to the sun,
And swims in radiant
floating majesty along.
Over the whole homely scene the cooing dove
Flies thick in amorous chase, and wanton rolls
The glancing eye, and turns the changeful neck.
WHILE thus the gentle tenants of the shade
Indulge their purer loves, the rougher world
Of brutes, below, rush furious into flame,
And fierce desire. Through all his lusty veins
The bull, deep-scorch'd, the raging passion feels.
Of pasture sick, and negligent of food,
Scarce seen, he wades among the yellow broom,
While over his ample sides the rambling sprays
Luxuriant shoot; or through the mazy wood
Dejected wanders, nor the enticing bud
Crops, though it presses on his careless sense.
And often, in jealous madning fancy wrapped,
He seeks the fight; and, idly-butting, feigns
His rival gored in every knotty trunk.
Him should he meet, the bellowing war begins;
Their eyes flash fury; to the hollowed earth,
Whence the sand flies, they mutter bloody deeds,
And groaning deep the impetuous battle mix:
While the fair heifer, balmy-breathing, near,
Stands kindling up their rage. The trembling steed,
With this hot impulse seized in every nerve,
Nor hears the rein, nor heeds the sounding thong;
Blows are not felt; but tossing high his head,
And by the well-known joy to distant plains
Attracted strong, all wild he bursts away;
Over rocks and woods, and craggy mountains flies;
And, neighing, on the aerial summit takes
The exciting gale, then, steep descending, cleaves
The headlong torrents foaming down the hills,
Even where the madness of the straightened stream
Turns in black eddies round; such is the force
With which his frantic heart and sinews swell.
NOR undelighted, by the boundless Spring,
Are the broad monsters of the foaming
boiling deep:
From the deep ooze, and gelid cavern roused,
They flounce and tumble in unwieldy joy.
Dire were the strain, and dissonant, to sing
The cruel raptures of the savage kind:
How by this flame their native wrath sublimed,
They roam, amid the fury of their heart,
The far-resounding waste in fiercer bands,
And growl their horrid loves. But this the theme
I sing, enraptured, to the BRITISH FAIR,
Forbids, and leads me to the mountain-brow,
Where sits the shepherd on the grassy turf,
Inhaling, healthful, the des^ending sun.
Around him feeds his many-bleating flock,
Of various cadence; and his sportive lambs,
This way and that convolv'd, in friskful glee,
Their frolicks play. And now the sprightly race
Invites them forth; when swift, the signal given,
They start away, and sweep the massy mound
That runs around the hill; the rampart once
Of iron war, in ancient barbarous times,
When disu^ited BRITAIN ever bled,
Lest in eternal broil: ere yet she grew
To this deep-laid indissoluble state,
Where Wealth and Commerce lift their golden heads;
And, over our labors, Liberty and Law,
Impartial, watch, the wonder of a world!
WHAT is this mighty Breath, ye sages
curious, say,
That in a powerful language, felt not heard,
That, in a language rather felt than heard,
Instructs the fowls of heaven; and through their breast
These arts of love diffuses? What, but GOD?
Inspiring GOD! who boundless Spirit all,
And unremitting Energy, pervades,
Adjusts, sustains, and agitates the whole.
He ceaseless works alone, and yet alone
Seems not to work; with such perfection framed
Is this complex stupendous scheme of things.
But, though concealed, to every purer eye
The informing Author in his works appears:
Chief, lovely Spring, in thee, and thy soft scenes,
The SMILING GOD is seen* while water, earth,
And air attest his bounty; which exalts
The brute-creation to this finer thought,
And annual melts their undesigning hearts
Profusely thus in tenderness and joy.
STILL let my song a nobler note assume,
And sing the infusive force of Spring on Man;
When heaven and earth, as if contending, vye
To raise his being, and serene his soul.
Can he forbear to join the general smile
Of Nature? Can fierce passions vex his breast,
While every gale is peace, and every grove
Is melody? Hence, from the bounteous walks
Of flowing Spring, ye sordid sons of earth,
Hard, and unfeeling of another's woe,
Or only lavish to yourselves; away.
But come, ye generous minds, in whose wide thought,
Of all his works, CREATIVE BOUNTY burns
With warmest beam; and on your open front,
And liberal eye, sits, from his dark retreat,
Inviting modest want. Nor, till invoked,
Can restless goodness wait; your active search
Leaves no cold wintry corner unexplor'd;
Like silent-working HEAVEN, surprising often
The lonely heart with unexpected good.
For you the roving spirit of the wind
Blows Spring abroad; for you the teaming cloud
Descend in gladsome plenty over the world;
And the sun sheds his kindest rays for you,
Ye flower of human race! -- In these green days,
Reviving sickness lifts her languid head;
Life flows afresh; and young-ey'd health exalts
The whole creation round. Contentment walks
The sunny glade, and feels an inward bliss
Spring over his mind, beyond the power of kings
To purchase. Pure serenity apace
Induces thought, and contemplation still.
By swift degrees the love of Nature works,
And warms the bosom; till at last sublimed
To rapture, and enthusiastic heat,
We feel the present DEITY, and taste
The joy of GOD to see a happy world.
THESE are the sacred feelings of thy heart,
Thy heart informed by reason's purer
purest ray,
O LYTTELTON, the friend! thy passions thus
And meditations vary, as at large,
Courting the Muse, through Hagley-Park thou strayest;
you stray,
Thy British Tempe! There along the dale,
With woods o'erhung, and shag'd with mossy rocks,
Whence on each hand the gushing waters play,
And down the rough cascade white-dashing fall,
Or gleam in lengthened vista through the trees,
You silent steal; or sit beneath the shade
Of solemn oaks, that tuft the swelling mounts
Thrown graceful round by Nature's careless hand,
And pensive listen to the various voice
Of rural peace: the herds, the flocks, the birds,
The hollow-whispering breeze, the plaint of rills,
That, purling down amid the twisted roots
Which creep around, their dewy murmurs shake
On the soothed ear. From these abstracted often,
You wander through the philosophic world;
Where in bright train continual wonders rise,
Or to the curious or the pious eye.
And often, conducted by historic truth,
You tread the long extent of backward time:
Planning, with warm benevolence of mind,
And honest zeal unwarp'd by party-rage,
BRITANNIA's weal; how from the venal gulf
To raise her virtue, and her arts revive.
Or, turning thence thy view, these graver thoughts
The Muses charm: while, with sure taste refined,
You draw the inspiring breath of ancient song;
Till nobly rises, emulous, thy own.
Perhaps thy loved LUCINDA shares thy walk,
With soul to thine attun'd. Then Nature all
Wears to the lover's eye a look of love;
And all the tumult of a guilty world,
Tossed by ungenerous passions, sinks away*
The tender heart is animated peace;
And as it pours its copious treasures forth,
In varied converse, softening every theme,
You, frequent-pausing, turn, and from her eyes,
Where meeken'd sense, and amiable grace,
And lively sweetness dwell, enraptured, drink
That nameless spirit of ethereal joy,
Unutterable
Inimitable happiness! which love,
Alone, bestows, and on a favored few.
Meantime you gain the height, from whose fair brow
The bursting prospect spreads immense around;
And snatched over hill and dale, and wood and lawn,
And verdant field, and darkening heath between,
And villages embosom'd soft in trees,
And spiry towns by surging
dusky columns marked
Of household
rising smoke, your eye excursive roams:
Wide-stretching from the Hall, in whose kind haunt
The Hospitable Genius lingers
harbors still,
To where the broken landscape, by degrees,
Ascending, roughens into rigid
ridgy hills;
Over which the Cambrian mountains, like far clouds
That skirt the blue horison, dusky
doubtful, rise.
FLUSHED by the spirit of the genial year,
Now from the virgin's cheek a fresher bloom
Shoots, less and less, the live carnation round;
Her lips blush deeper sweets; she breathes of youth;
The shining moisture swells into her eyes,
In brighter flow; her wishing bosom heaves,
With palpitations wild; kind tumults seize
Her veins, and all her yielding soul is love.
From the keen gaze her lover turns away,
Full of the dear ecstatic power, and sick
With sighing languishment. Ah then, ye fair!
Be greatly cautious of your sliding hearts:
Dare not the infectious sigh; the pleading look,
Down-cast, and low, in meek submission dressed,
But full of guile. Let not the fervent tongue,
Prompt to deceive, with adulation smooth,
Gain on your purposed will. Nor in the bower,
Where woodbines flaunt, and roses shed a couch,
While evening draws her crimson curtains round,
Trust your soft minutes with betraying Man.
AND let the aspiring youth beware of love,
Of the smooth glance beware* for it is too late,
When on his heart the torrent-softness pours.
Then wisdom prostrate lies, and fading fame
Dissolves in air away; while the fond soul,
Wrapped in gay visions of unreal bliss,
Still paints the i^lus^^e form; the kindling grace;
The enticing smile* the modest-seeming eye,
Beneath whose beauteous beams, belying heaven,
Lurk searchless cunning, cruelty, and death:
And still, ^a^-warb^ing in his cheated ear,
Her siren voice, enchanting, draws him on,
To guileful shores, and meads of fatal joy.
EVEN present, in the very lap of love
Inglorious laid; while music flows around,
Perfumes, and oils, and wine, and wanton hours;
Amid the roses fierce repentance rears
Her snaky crest: a quick-returning pang
Shoots through the conscious heart; where honor still,
And great design, against the oppressive load
Of luxury, by fits, impatient heave.
BUT absent, what fantastic woes, arous'd,
Rage in each thought, by restless musing fed,
Chill the warm cheek, and blast the bloom of life?
Neglected fortune flies; and sliding swift,
Prone into ruin, fall his scorned affairs.
It Is naught but gloom around. The darkened sun
Loses his light. The rosy-bosom'd spring
To weeping fancy pines; and you bright arch,
Contracted, bends into a dusky vault.
All Nature fades extinct; and she alone
Heard, felt, and seen, possesses every thought,
Fills every sense, and pants in every vein.
Books are but formal dullness, tedious friends,
And sad amid the social band he sits;
Lonely, and unattentive. From his tongue
The unfinished period falls: while, borne away,
On swelling thought, his wafted spirit flies
To the vain bosom of his distant fair;
And leaves the semblance of a lover, fixed
In melancholy site, with head declined,
And love-dejected eyes. Sudden he starts,
Shook from his tender trance, and restless runs
To glimmering shades, and sympathetic glooms;
Where the dun umbrage over the falling stream,
Romantic, hangs; there through the pensive dusk
Strays, in heart-thrilling meditation lost,
Indulging all to love; or on the bank
Thrown, amid drooping lilies, swells the breeze
With sighs unceasing, and the brook with tears.
Thus in soft anguish he consumes the day,
Nor quits his deep retirement, till the moon
Peeps through the chambers of the fleecy east,
Enlightened by degrees, and in her train
Leads on the gentle hours: then forth he walks,
Beneath the trembling languish of her beam,
With softened soul, and wooes the bird of eve
To mingle woes with his: or, while the world
And all the sons of care lie hushed in sleep,
Associates with the midnight shadows drear;
And, sighing to the lonely taper, pours
His idly-tortur'd heart into the page,
Meant for the moving messenger of love;
Where rapture burns on rapture, every line
With rising frenzy fired. But if on bed
Delirious flung, sleep from his pillow flies.
All night he tosses, nor the balmy power
In any posture finds; till the gray morn
Lifts her pale luster on the paler wretch,
Exani^ate by love: and then perhaps
Exhausted Nature sinks a while to rest,
Still interrupted by distracted dreams
That over the sick imagination rise,
And in black colors paint the mimic scene.
Often with the enchantress of his soul he talks;
Sometimes in crowds distressed; or if retired
To secret-winding flower-enwoven bowers
Far from the dull impertinence of Man,
Just as he, credulous, his endless cares
Begins to lose in blind oblivious love,
Snatched from her yielded hand, he knows not how,
Through forests huge, and long untravel'd heaths
With desolation brown, he wanders waste,
In night and tempest wrapped; or shrinks aghast,
Back, from the bending precipice; or wades
The turbid stream below, and strives to reach
The farther shore; where succourless, and sad,
She with extended arms his aid implores,
But strives in vain; borne by the outrageous flood
To distance down, he rides the ridgy wave,
Or whelmed beneath the boiling eddy sinks.
These are the charming agonies of love,
Whose misery delights. But through the heart
Should jealousy its venom once diffuse,
It Is then delightful misery no more,
But agony unmixed, incessant gall,
Corroding every thought, and blasting all
Love's paradise. Ye fairy prospects, then,
Ye beds of roses, and ye bowers of joy,
Farewell! Ye gleamings of departed
departing peace,
Shine out your last! the yellow-tinging plague
Internal vision taints, and in a night
Of livid gloom imagination wraps.
Ah then! instead of love-enliven'd cheeks,
Of sunny features, and of ardent eyes
With flowing rapture bright, dark looks succeed,
Suffus'd, and glaring with untender fire,
A clouded
cloudy aspect, and a burning cheek,
Where the whole poisoned soul, malignant sits,
And frightens love away. Ten thousand fears
Invented wild, ten thousand frantic views
Of horrid rivals, hanging on the charms
For which he melts in fondness, eat him up
With fervent anguish, and consuming rage.
In vain reproaches lend their idle aid,
Deceitful pride, and resolution frail,
Giving false peace a moment. Fancy pours,
Afresh, her beauties on his busy thought,
Her first endearments, twining round the soul,
With all the witchcraft of ensnaring love.
Strait the fierce storm involves his mind anew,
Flames through the nerves, and boils along the veins:
While anxious doubt distracts the tortured heart;
For even the sad assurance of his fears
Were ease
peace to what he feels. Thus the warm youth
Whom love deludes into his thorny wilds,
Through flowery-tempting paths, or leads a life
Of fever'd rapture, or of cruel care;
His brightest aims extinguished all, and all
His lively moments running down to waste.
BUT happy they! the happiest of their kind!
Whom gentle stars unite, and in one fate
Their hearts, their fortunes, and their beings blend.
It Is not the coarser tie of human laws,
Unnatural often, and foreign to the mind,
That binds their peace, but harmony itself,
Attuning all their passions into love;
Where friendship full-exerts her softest power,
Perfect esteem enlivened by desire
Ineffable, and sympathy of soul;
Thought meeting thought, and will preventing will,
With boundless confidence: for naught but love
Can answer love, and render bliss secure.
Let him, ungenerous, who, alone intent
To bless himself, from sordid parents buys
The loathing virgin, in eternal care,
Well-merited, consume his nights and days:
Let barbarous nations, whose inhuman love
Is wild desire, fierce as the suns they feel;
Let eastern tyrants from the light of heaven
Seclude their bosom-slaves, meanly possessed
Of a mere, lifeless, violated form:
While those whom love cements in holy faith,
And equal transport, free as Nature live,
Disdaining fear. What is the world to them,
Its pomp, its pleasure, and its nonsense all!
Who in each other clasp whatever fair
High fancy forms, and lavish hearts can wish;
Something than beauty dearer, should they look
Or on the mind, or mind-illumin'd face;
Truth, goodness, honor, harmony, and love,
The richest bounty of indulgent HEAVEN.
Mean-time a smiling offspring rises round,
And mingles both their graces. By degrees,
The human blossom blows; and every day,
Soft as it rolls along, shows some new charm
The father's luster, and the mother's bloom.
Then infant reason grows apace, and calls
For the kind hand of an assiduous care.
Delightful task! to rear the tender thought,
To teach the young idea how to shoot,
To pour the fresh ^nstruction over the mind,
To breath (...) ^ivening spirit, and to fix
The gene^ p^rpose in the glowing breast.
Oh speak the joy,! ye, whom the sudden tear
Surprises often, while you look around,
And nothing strikes your eye but sights of bliss,
All various Nature pressing on the heart:
An elegant sufficiency, content,
Retirement, rural quiet, friendship, books,
Ease and alternate labor, useful life,
Progressive virtue, and approving HEAVEN.
These are the matchless joys of virtuous love;
And thus their moments fly. The seasons thus,
As ceaseless round a jarring world they roll,
Still find them happy; and consenting SPRING
Sheds her own rosy garland on their heads:
Till evening comes at last, serene and mild;
When after the long vernal day of life,
Enamored more, as more remembrance swells
With many a proof of recollected love,
Together down they sink in social sleep;
Together freed, their gentle spirits fly
To scenes where love and bliss immortal reign.
SUMMER


SUMMER.
The ARGUMENT.
The subject proposed. Invocation. Address to Mr. DODINGTON. An introductory
reflection on the motion of the heavenly bodies; whence the succession of the
seasons. As the face of Nature in this season is almost uniform, the progress
of the poem is a description of a summer's day. The dawn. Sunrising. Hymn to
the sun. Forenoon. Summer insects described. Hay-making. Sheep-shearing.
Noonday. A woodland retreat. Groupe of herds and flocks. A solemn grove: how
it affects a contemplative mind. A cataract, and rude scene. View of summer in
the torrid zone. Storm of thunder and lightning. A tale. The storm over, a
serene afternoon. Bathing. Hour of walking. Transition to the prospect of a
rich well-cultivated country; which introduces a panegyric on GREAT BRITAIN.
Sunset. Evening. Night. Summer meteors. A comet. The whole concluding with the
praise of philosophy.

SUMMER.
FROM brightening fields of either fair disclosed,
Child of the sun, refulgent SUMMER comes,
In pride of youth, and felt through Nature's depth:
He comes attended by the sultry hours,
And ever-fanning breezes, on his way;
While, from his ardent look, the turning SPRING
Averts her blushful face; and earth, and skies,
All-smiling, to his hot dominion leaves.
HENCE, let me haste into the mid-wood shade,
Where scarce a sunbeam wanders through the gloom;
And on the dark-green grass, beside the brink
Of haunted stream, that by the roots of oak
Rolls over the rocky channel, lie at large,
And sing the glories of the circling year.
COME, Inspiration! from thy hermit-seat,
By mortal seldom found: may fancy dare,
From thy fixed serious eye, and raptured glance
Shot on surrounding Heaven, to steal one look
Creative of the poet, every power
Exalting to an ecstasy of soul.
AND thou, my youthful Muse's early friend,
In whom the human graces all unite:
Pure light of mind, and tenderness of heart;
Genius, and wisdom; the gay social sense,
By decency chastis'd; goodness and wit,
In seldom-meeting harmony combined;
Unblemished honor, and an active zeal,
For BRITAIN's glory, Liberty, and Man:
O DODINGTON! attend my rural song,
Stoop to my theme, in spirit every line,
And teach me to deserve thy just applause.
WITH what an awful world-revolving power
Were first the unwieldy planets launched along
The illimitable void! Thus to remain
Amid the flux of many thousand years,
That often has swept the toiling race of Men
And all their labored monuments away,
Firm, unremitting, matchless, in their course;
To the kind-temper'd change of night and day,
And of the seasons ever stealing round,
Minutely faithful: Such THE ALL PERFECT HAND!
the perfect hand,
That poised, impels, and rules the steady WHOLE.
WHEN now no more the alternate Twins are fired,
And Cancer reddens with the solar blaze,
Short is the doubtful empire of the night;
And soon, observant of approaching day,
The meek-ey'd Morn appears, mother of dews,
At first faint-gleaming in the dappled east:
Till far over either spreads the widening glow;
And, from before the luster of her face,
White break the clouds away. With quickened step,
Brown Night retires. Young Day pours in apace,
And opens all the lawny prospect wide.
The dripping rock, the mountain's misty top
Swell on the sight, and brighten with the dawn.
Blue, through the dusk, the smoking currents shine;
And from the bladed field the fearful hare
Limps, awkward: while along the forest-glade
The wild deer trip, and often turning gaze
At early passenger. Music awakes,
The native voice of undissembled joy;
And thick around the woodland hymns arise.
Roused by the cock, the soon-clad shepherd leaves
His mossy cottage, where with Peace he dwells;
And from the crowded fold, in order, drives
His flock, to taste the verdure of the morn.
FALSELY luxurious, will not Man awake;
And, springing from the bed of sloth, enjoy
The cool, the fragrant, and the silent hour,
To meditation due, and sacred song?
For is there aught in sleep can charm the wise?
To lie in dead oblivion, losing half
The fleeting moments of too short a life?
Total extinction of the enlightened soul;
Or else to feverish vanity alive,
Wilder'd, and tossing through distempered dreams?
Who would in such a gloomy state remain
Longer than Nature craves; when every Muse
And every blooming pleasure wait without,
To bless the wildly-devious morning-walk?
BUT yonder comes the powerful King of Day,
Rejoicing in the east. The lessening cloud,
The kindling azure, and the mountain's brow
Illum'd with fluid gold, his near approach
Betoken glad. Lo! now, apparent all,
Aslant the dew-bright earth, and colored air,
He looks in boundless majesty abroad;
And sheds the shining day, that burnished plays
On rocks, and hills, and towers, and wandering streams,
High-gleaming from afar. Prime chearer, light!
Of all material beings first, and best!
Efflux divine! Nature's resplendent robe!
Without whose vesting beauty all were wrapped
In unessential gloom; and thou, O Sun!
Soul of surrounding worlds! in whom best seen
Shines out thy Maker! may I sing of thee?
IT IS by thy secret, strong, attractive force,
As with a chain indissoluble bound,
Thy System rolls entire: from the far bourne
Of utmost Saturn, wheeling wide his round
Of thirty years; to Mercury, whose disk
Can scarce be caught by philosophic eye,
Lost in the near effulgence of thy blaze.
INFORMER of the planetary train!
Without whose quickening glance their cumbrous orbs
Were brute unlovely mass, inert and dead,
And not as now the green abodes of life;
How many forms of being wait on thee
Inhaling spirit; from the unfettered mind,
By thee sublimed, down to the daily race,
The mixing myriads of thy setting beam.
THE vegetable world is also thine,
Parent of Seasons! who the pomp precede
That waits thy throne, as through thy vast domain,
Annual, along the bright ecliptic road,
In world-rejoicing state, it moves sublime.
Mean-time the expecting nations, circled gay
With all the various tribes of foodful earth,
Implore thy bounty, or send grateful up
A common hymn: while, round thy beaming car,
High-seen, the Seasons lead, in sprightly dance
Harmonious knit, the rosy-finger'd Hours,
The Zephyrs floating loose, the timely Rains,
Of bloom ethereal the light-footed Dews,
And softened into joy the surly Storms.
These, in successive turn, with lavish hand,
Shower every beauty, every fragrance shower,
Herbs, flowers, and fruits; till, kindling at thy touch,
From land to land is flushed the vernal year.
NOR to the surface of enlivened earth,
Graceful with hills and dales, and leafy woods,
Her liberal tresses, is thy force confined:
But, to the bowel'd cavern darting deep,
The mineral kinds confess thy mighty power.
Effulgent, hence the veiny marble shines;
Hence Labor draws his tools; hence burnished War
Gleams on the day; the nobler works of Peace
Hence bless mankind, and generous Commerce binds
The round of nations in a golden chain.
THE unfruitful rock itself, impregn'd by thee,
In dark retirement, forms the lucid stone.
The lively Diamond drinks thy purest rays,
Collected light, compact; that, polished bright,
And all its native luster let abroad,
Dares, as it sparkles on the fair one's breast,
With vain ambition emulate her eyes.
At thee the Ruby lights its deepning glow,
And with a waving radiance inward flames.
From thee the sapphire, solid either, takes
Its hue cerulean; and, of evening tinct,
The purple-streaming Amethyst is thine.
With thy own smile the yellow topaz burns.
Nor deeper verdure dies the robe of Spring,
When first she gives it to the southern gale,
Than the green Emerald shows. But, all combined,
Thick through the whitening Opal play thy beams;
Or, flying several from its surface, form
A trembling variance of revolving hues,
As the site varies in the gazer's hand.
THE very dead creation, from thy touch,
Assumes a mimic life. By thee refined,
In brighter mazes, the relucent stream
Plays over the mead. The precipice abrupt,
Projecting horror on the blackened flood,
Softens at thy return. The desert joys
Wildly, through all his melancholy bounds.
Rude ruins glitter; and the briny deep,
Seen from some pointed promontory's top,
Far to the blue horizon's utmost verge,
Restless, reflects a floating gleam. But this,
And all the much-transported Muse can sing,
Are to thy beauty, dignity, and use,
Unequal far, great delegated source,
Of light, and life, and grace, and joy below!
HOW shall I then attempt to sing of HIM,
Who, LIGHT HIMSELF, in uncreated light
Invested deep, dwells awfully retired
From mortal eye, or angel's purer ken;
Whose single smile has, from the first of time,
Filled, overflowing, all those lamps of heaven,
That beam for ever, through the boundless sky:
But, should he hide his face, the astonished sun,
And all the extinguished stars, would loosening reel
start
Wide from their spheres, and Chaos come again.
AND yet was every faultering tongue of Man,
ALMIGHTY FATHER
MAKER! silent in thy praise;
Thy Works themselves would raise a general voice,
Even in the depth of solitary woods,
By human foot untrod, proclaim thy power,
And to the quire celestial THEE resound,
The eternal cause, support, and end of all!
TO me be Nature's volume broad-display'd:
And to peruse its all instructing page,
Or, happily catching inspiration thence,
Some easy passage, raptured, to translate,
My sole delight; as through the falling glooms
Pensive I stray, or with the rising dawn
On Fancy's eagle-wing excursive soar.
NOW, flaming up the heavens, the potent sun
Melts into limpid air the high-rais'd clouds,
And morning fogs
mists, that hovered round the hills
In party-colored bands; till wide unveiled
The face of Nature shines, from where earth seems,
Far-stretch'd around, o meet the bending sphere.
HALF in a blush of clustering roses lost,
Dew-dropping Coolness to the shade retires;
There, on the verdant turf, or flowery bed,
By gelid founts and careless rills to muse;
While tyrant Heat, dispreading through the sky,
With rapid sway, his burning influence darts
On Man, and beast, and herb, and tepid stream.
WHO can unpitying see the flowery race,
Shed by the morn, their new flushed bloom resign,
Before the parching beam? So fade the fair,
When fevers revel through their azure veins.
But one, the lofty follower of the sun,
Sad when he sets, shuts up her yellow leaves,
Drooping all night; and, when he warm returns,
Points her enamored bosom to his ray.
HOME, from his morning task, the swain retreats;
His flock before him stepping to the fold:
While the full-udder'd mother lows around
The cheerful cottage, then expecting food,
The food of innocence, and health! The daw,
The rook and magpie, to the grey-grown oaks
(That the calm village in their verdant arms,
Sheltering, embrace) direct their lazy flight;
Where on the mingling boughs they fit embower'd,
All the hot noon, till cooler hours arise.
Faint, underneath, the household fowls convene;
And, in a corner of the buzzing shade,
The house-dog, with the vacant greyhound, lies,
Out-stretch'd, and sleepy. In his slumbers one
Attacks the nightly thief, and one exults
Over hill and dale; till, wakened by the wasp,
They starting snap. Nor shall the Muse disdain
To let the little noisy summer-race
Live in her lay, and flutter through her song:
Not mean though simple; to the sun allied,
From him they draw their animating fire.
WAKED by his warmer ray, the reptile young
Come winged abroad; by the light air upborn,
Lighter, and full of soul. From every chink,
And secret corner, where they slept away
The wintry storms; or rising from their tombs,
To higher life; by myriads, forth at once,
Swarming they pour; of all the varied hues,
Their beauty-beaming parent can disclose.
Ten thousand forms! ten thousand different tribes!
People the blaze. To sunny waters some
By fatal instinct fly; where on the pool
They, sportive, wheel; or, sailing down the stream,
Are snatched immediate by the quick-ey'd trout,
Or darting salmon. Through the green-wood glade
Some love to stray; there lodged, amused and fed,
In the fresh leaf. Luxurious, others make
The meads their choice, and visit every flower,
And every latent herb: for the sweet task,
To propagate their kinds, and where to wrap,
In what soft beds, their young yet undisclos'd,
Employs their tender care. Some to the house,
The fold, and dairy, hungry, bend their flight;
Sip round the pail, or taste the curdling cheese:
Often, inadvertent, from the milky stream
They meet their fate; or, weltering in the bowl,
With powerless wings around them wrapped, expire.
BUT chief to heedless flies the window proves
A constant death; where, gloomily retired,
The villain spider lives, cunning, and fierce,
Mixture abhorred! Amid a mangled heap
Of carcasses, in eager watch he sits,
O'erlooking all his waving snares around.
Near the dire cell the dreadless wanderer often
Passes, as often the ruffian shows his front.
The prey at last ensnared, he dreadful darts,
With rapid glide, along the leaning line;
And, fixing in the wretch his cruel fangs,
Strikes backward grimly pleased: the fluttering wing,
And shriller sound declare extreme distress,
And ask the helping hospitable hand.
RESOUNDS the living surface of the ground:
Nor undelightful is the ceaseless hum,
To him who muses through the woods at noon;
Or drowsy shepherd, as he lies reclined,
With half-shut eyes, beneath the floating shade
Of willows gray, close-crowding over the brook.
GRADUAL, from these what numerous kinds descend,
Evading even the microscopic eye!
Full Nature swarms with life; one wondrous mass
Of animals, or atoms organized,
Waiting the vital Breath, when PARENT-HEAVEN
Shall bid his spirit blow. The hoary fen,
In putrid steams, emits the living
livid cloud
Of pestilence. Through subterranean cells,
Where searching sunbeams scarce can find a way,
Earth animated heaves. The flowery leaf
Wants not its soft inhabitants. Secure,
Within its winding citadel, the stone
Holds multitudes. But chief the forest-boughs,
That dance unnumber'd to the playful breeze,
The downy orchard, and the melting pulp
Of mellow fruit, the nameless nations feed
Of evanescent insects. Where the pool
Stands mantled over with green, invisible,
Amid the floating verdure millions stray.
Each liquid too, whether it pierces, sooths,
Inflames, refreshes, or exalts the taste,
With various forms abounds. Nor is the stream
Of purest crystal, nor the lucid air,
Though one transparent vacancy it seems,
Void of their unseen people. These, concealed
By the kind art of forming HEAVEN, escape
The grosser eye of Man: for, if the worlds
In worlds enclosed should on his senses burst,
From cates ambrosial, and the nectar'd bowl,
He would abhorrent turn; and in dead night,
Whence silence sleeps over all, be stunned with noise.
LET no presuming impious railer tax
CREATIVE WISDOM, as if aught was formed
In vain, or not for admirable ends.
Shall little haughty ignorance pronounce
His works unwise, of which the smallest part
Exceeds the narrow vision of her mind?
As if upon a full proportioned dome,
On swelling columns heaved, the pride of art!
A critic-fly, whose feeble ray scarce spreads
An inch around, with blind presumption bold,
Should dare to tax the structure of the whole.
And lives the Man, whose universal eye
Has swept at once the unbounded scheme of things;
Marked their dependence so, and firm accord,
As with unfaultering accent to conclude
That This avails naught? Has any seen
The mighty chain of beings, lessening down
From INFINITE PERFECTION to the brink
Of dreary Nothing, desolate abyss!
From which astonished thought, recoiling, turns?
Till then alone let zealous praise ascend,
And hymns of holy wonder, to that POWER,
Whose wisdom shines as lovely on our minds,
As on our smiling eyes his servant-sun.
THICK in you stream of light, a thousand ways,
Upward, and downward, thwarting, and convolv'd,
The quivering nations sport: till, tempest-wing'd,
Fierce Winter sweeps them from the face of day.
Even so luxurious Men, unheeding, pass
An idle summer-life in fortune's shine,
A season's glitter! Thus they flutter on
From toy to toy, from vanity to vice;
Till, blown away by death, oblivion comes
Behind, and strikes them from the book of life.
NOW swarms the village over the jovial mead:
The rustic youth, brown with meridian toil,
Healthful, and strong; full as the summer-rose
Blown by prevailing suns* the ruddy maid,
Half naked, swelling on the sight, and all
Her kindled graces burning over her cheek.
Even stooping age is here; and infant-hands
Trail the long rake, or, with the fragrant load
O'ercharg'd, amid the kind oppression roll.
Wide flies the tedded grain; all in a row
Advancing broad, or wheeling round the field,
They spread the breathing harvest to the sun,
That throws refreshful round a rural smell:
Or, as they rake the green appearing ground,
And drive the dusky wave along the mead,
The russet hay-cock rises thick behind,
In order gay. While heard from dale to dale,
Waking the breeze, resounds the blended voice
Of happy labor, love, and social glee.
OR rushing thence, in one diffusive band,
They drive the troubled flocks, by many a dog
Compelled, to where the mazy-running brook
Forms a deep pool: this bank abrupt and high,
And that fair-spreading in a pebbled shore.
Urged to the giddy brink, much is the toil,
The clamor much, of men, and boys, and dogs,
Ere the soft fearful people to the flood
Commit their woolly sides. And often the swain,
On some impatient seizing, hurls them in:
Emboldened then, nor hesitating more,
Fast, fast, they plunge amid the flashing wave,
And panting labor to the farther shore.
Repeated this, till deep the well-wash'd fleece
Has drunk the flood, and from his lively haunt
The trout is banished by the sordid stream;
Heavy, and dripping, to the breezy brow
Slow move the harmless race: where, as they spread
Their swelling treasures to the sunny ray,
Inly disturbed, and wondering what this wild
Outrageous tumult means, their loud complaints
The country fill; and, tossed from rock to rock,
Incessant bleatings run around the hills.
At last, of snowy white, the gathered flocks
Are in the wattled pen innumerous pressed,
Head above head; and, ranged in lusty rows,
The shepherds sit, and whet the sounding shears.
The housewife waits to roll her fleecy stores,
With all her gay-drest maids attending round.
One, chief, in gracious dignity enthroned,
Shines over the rest, the pastoral queen, and rays
Her smiles, sweet-beaming, on her shepherd-king;
While the glad circle round them yield their souls
To festive mirth, and wit that knows no gall.
Meantime, their joyous task goes on apace:
Some mingling stir the melted tar, and some,
Deep on the new-shorn vagrant's heaving side,
To stamp his master's cipher ready stand;
Others the unwilling wether drag along,
And, glorying in his might, the sturdy boy
Holds by the twisted horns the indignant ram.
Behold where bound, and of its robe bereft,
By needy Man, that all-depending lord,
How meek, how patient, the mild creature lies!
What softness in its melancholy face,
What dumb complaining innocence appears!
Fear not, ye gentle tribes, it is not the knife
Of horrid slaughter that is over you waved;
No, it is the tender swain's well-guided shears,
Who having now, to pay his annual care,
Borrowed your fleece, to you a cumbrous load,
Will send you bounding to your hills again.
A SIMPLE scene! yet hence BRITANNIA sees
Her solid grandeur rise: hence she commands
The exalted stores of every brighter clime,
The treasures of the sun without his rage:
Hence, fervent all, with culture, toil, and arts,
Wide glows her land: her dreadful thunder hence
Rides over the waves sublime, and now, even now,
Impending hangs over Gallia's humbled coast,
Hence rules the circling deep, and awes the world.
IT IS raging Noon; and, vertical, the Sun
Darts on the head direct his forceful rays,
Over heaven and earth, far as the ranging eye
Can sweep, a dazzling deluge reigns; and all
From pole to pole is undistinguished blaze.
In vain the sight, dejected to the ground,
Stoops for relief; thence hot ascending steams
And keen reflection pain. Deep to the root
Of vegetation parched, the cleaving fields
And slippery lawn and arid hue disclose,
Blast Fancy's blooms, and wither even the soul.
Echo no more returns the cheerful sound
Of sharpening scythe: the mower sinking heaps
Over him the humid hay, with flowers perfumed;
And scarce a chirping grass-hopper is heard
Through the dumb mead. Distressful Nature pants.
The very streams look languid from afar;
Or, through the unshelter'd glade, impatient, seem
To hurl into the covert of the grove.
ALL-CONQUERING Heat, oh intermit thy wrath!
And on my throbbing temples potent thus
Beam not so fierce! Incessant still you flow,
And still another fervent flood succeeds,
Poured on the head profuse. In vain I sigh,
And restless turn, and look around for Night;
Night is far off; and hotter hours approach.
Thrice happy he! who
that on the sunless side
Of a romantic mountain, forest-crown'd,
Beneath the whole collected shade reclines:
Or in the gelid caverns, woodbine-wrought,
And fresh-bedew'd with ever-spouting streams,
Sits coolly calm; while all the world without,
Unsatisfied, and sick, tosses in noon.
Emblem instructive of the virtuous Man,
Who keeps his tempered mind serene, and pure,
And every passion aptly harmoniz'd,
Amid a jarring world with vice inflamed.
WELCOME, ye shades! ye bowery thickets, hail!
Ye lofty pines! ye venerable oaks!
Ye ashes wild, resounding over the steep!
Delicious is your shelter to the soul,
As to the hunted heart the sallying spring,
Or stream full flowing, that his swelling sides
Laves, as he floats along the herbag'd brink.
Cool, through the nerves, your pleasing comfort glide^;
The heart beats glad; the fresh expanded eye
And ear resume their watch; the sinews knit;
And life shoots swift through all the lightened limbs.
AROUND the adjoining brook, that purls along
The vocal grove, now fretting over a rock,
Now scarcely moving through a reedy pool,
Now starting to a sudden stream, and now
Gently diffused into a limpid plain;
A various groupe the herds and flocks compose,
Rural confusion! On the grassy bank
Some ruminating lie; while others stand
Half in the flood, and often bending sip
The circling surface. In the middle droops
The strong laborious ox, of honest front,
Which incompos'd he shakes; and from his sides
The troublous insects lashes with his tail,
Returning still. Amid his subjects safe,
Slumbers the monarch-swain; his careless arm
Thrown round his head, on downy moss sustained;
Here laid his scrip, with wholesome viands filled;
There, listening every noise, his watchful dog.
LIGHT fly his slumbers, if perchance a flight
Of angry gad-flies fasten on the herd;
That startling scatters from the shallow brook,
In search of lavish stream. Tossing the foam,
They scorn the keeper's voice, and scour the plain,
Through all the bright severity of noon:
While, from their laboring breasts, a hollow moan
Proceeding, runs low-bellowing round the hills.
OFTEN in this season too the horse, provoked,
While his big sinews full of spirits swell,
Trembling with vigor, in the heat of blood,
Springs the high fence; and, over the field effus'd,
Darts on the gloomy flood, with steadfast eye,
And heart estranged to fear: his nervous chest,
Luxuriant, and erect, the seat of strength!
Bears down the opposing stream: quenchless his thirst;
He takes the river at redoubled draughts;
And with wide nostrils, snorting, skims the wave.
STILL let me pierce into the midnight depth
Of yonder grove, of wildest largest growth;
That, forming high in air a woodland quire,
Nods over the mount beneath. At every step,
Solemn, and slow, the shadows blacker fall,
And all is awful listening gloom around.
THESE are the haunts of meditation, these
The scenes where ancient bards the inspiring breath,
Extatic, felt; and, from this world retired,
Conversed with angels, and immortal forms,
On gracious errands bent: to save the fall
Of virtue struggling on the brink of vice;
In waking whispers, and repeated dreams,
To hint pure thought, and warm the favored soul
For future trials fated to prepare;
To prompt the poet, who devoted gives
His muse to better themes; to sooth the pangs
Of dying worth, and from the patriot's breast,
(Backward to mingle in detested war,
But foremost when engaged) to turn the death;
And numberless such offices of love,
Daily, and nightly, zealous to perform.
SHOOK sudden from the bosom of the sky
A thousand shapes or glide athwart the dusk,
Or stalk majestic on. Deep-rous'd, I feel
A sacred terror, a severe delight,
Creep through my mortal frame; and thus, methinks,
A voice, than human more, the abstracted ear
Of fancy strikes. "Be not of us afraid,
"Poor kindred Man; thy fellow creatures, we,
"From the same PARENT-POWER our beings drew,
"The same our lord, and laws, and great pursuit.
"Once some of us, like thee, through stormy life,
"Toiled, tempest-beaten, ere we could attain
"This holy calm, this harmony of mind,
"Where purity and peace immingle charms.
"Then fear not us; but with responsive song,
"Amid these dim recesses, undisturbed
"By noisy folly and discordant vice,
"Of Nature sing with us, and Nature's GOD.
"Here frequent, at the visionary hour,
"When musing midnight reigns or silent noon,
"Angelic harps are in full concert heard,
"And voices chaunting from the wood-crown'd hill,
"The deepening dale, or inmost silvan glade:
"A privilege bestowed by us, alone,
"On Contemplation, or the hallowed ear
"Of Poet, swelling to seraphic strain."
AND art thou, A young lady, well known to the author, who died at the age of
eighteen, in the year 1738.
STANLEY, of that sacred band?
Alas, for us too soon! Though raised above
The reach of human pain, above the flight
Of human joy; yet, with a mingled ray
Of sadly-pleas'd remembrance, must thou feel
A mother's love, a mother's tender woe:
Who seeks thee still, in many a former scene;
Seeks thy fair form, thy lovely-beaming eyes,
Thy pleasing converse, by gay lively sense
Inspired; where moral wisdom mildly shone,
Without the toil of art, and virtue glowed,
In all her smiles, without forbidding pride.
But, O thou best of parents! wipe thy tears;
Or rather to PARENTAL NATURE pay
The tears of grateful joy, who for a while
Lent thee this younger self, this opening bloom
Of thy enlightened mind and gentle worth.
Believe the Muse: the wintry blast of death
Kills not the buds of virtue; no, they spread,
Beneath the heavenly beam of brighter suns,
Through endless ages, into higher powers.
THUS up the mount, in airy vision wrapped,
I stray, regardless whither; till the sound
Of a near fall of water every sense
Wakes from the charm of thought: swift-shrinking back,
I check my steps, and view the broken scene.
SMOOTH to the shelving brink, a copious flood
Rolls fair, and placid; where collected all,
In one impetuous torrent, down the steep
It thundering shoots, and shakes the country round.
At first, an azure sheet, it rushes broad;
Then whitening by degrees, as prone it falls,
And from the loud-resounding rocks below
Dashed in a cloud of foam, it sends aloft
A hoary mist, and forms a ceaseless shower.
Nor can the tortured wave here find repose:
But, raging still amid the shaggy rocks,
Now flashes over the scattered fragments, now
Aslant the hollowed channel rapid darts;
And falling fast from gradual slope to slope,
steep to steep,
With wild infracted course, and lessened roar,
It gains a safer bed, and steals, at last,
Along the mazes of the quiet vale.
INVITED from the cliff, to whose dark brow
He clings, the steep-ascending eagle soars,
With upward pinions through the flood of day;
And, giving full his bosom to the blaze,
Gains on the sun; while all the tuneful race,
Smit by afflictive noon, disordered droop,
Deep in the thicket; or, from bower to bower
Responsive, force an interrupted strain.
The stock-dove only through the forest cooes,
Mournfully hoarse; often ceasing from his plaint,
Short interval of weary woe! again
The sad idea of his murdered mate,
Struck from his side by savage fowler's guile,
Across his fancy comes; and then resounds
A louder song of sorrow through the grove.
BESIDE the dewy border let me sit,
All in the freshness of the humid air;
There in that hollowed rock, grotesque and wild,
An ample chair moss-lin'd, and over head
By flowering umbrage shaded; where the be
Strays diligent, and with the extracted balm
Of fragrant woodbine loads his little thigh.
NOW, while I taste the sweetness of the shade,
While Nature lies around deep-lull'd in Noon,
Now come, bold Fancy, spread a daring flight,
And view the wonders of the torrid Zone:
Climes unrelenting! with whose rage compared,
Yon blaze is feeble, and yon skies are cool.
SEE, how at once the bright-effulgent sun,
Rising direct, swift chases from the sky
The short-lived twilight; and with ardent blaze
Looks gayly fierce over all the dazzling air;
He mounts his throne; but kind before him sends,
Issuing from out the portals of the morn,
The Which blows constantly between the tropics from the east, or the
collateral points, the north-east and south-east: caused by the pressure of the
rarefied air on that before it, according to the diurnal motion of the sun from
east to west.
general Breeze, to mitigate his fire,
And breathe refreshment on a fainting world.
Great are the scenes, with dreadful beauty crowned
And barbarous wealth, that see, each circling year,
Returning suns and In all climates
places between the tropics, the sun as he passes and repastes in his annual
motion, is twice a year vertical
perpendicular, which produces this effect.
double seasons pass:
Rocks rich in gems, and mountains big with mines,
That on the high equator ridgy rise,
Whence many a bursting stream auriferous plays:
Majestic woods, of every vigorous green,
Stage above stage, high-waving over the hills;
Or to the far horison wide diffused,
A boundless deep immensity of shade.
Here lofty trees, to ancient song unknown,
The noble sons of potent heat and floods
Prone-rushing from the clouds, rear high to Heaven
Their thorny stems, and broad around them throw
Meridian gloom. Here, in eternal prime,
Unnumber'd fruits, of keen delicious taste
And vital spirit, drink amid the cliffs,
And burning sands that bank the shrubby vales,
Redoubled day, yet in their rugged coats
A friendly juice to cool its rage contain.
BEAR me, Pomona! to thy citron groves;
To where the lemon and the piercing lime,
With the deep orange, glowing through the green,
Their lighter glories blend. Lay me reclined
Beneath the spreading tamarind that shakes,
Fanned by the breeze, its fever-cooling fruit;
Deep in the night the massy locust sheds,
Quench my hot limbs; or lead me through the maze,
Embowering endless, of the Indian fig;
Or thrown at gayer ease, on some fair brow,
Let me behold, by breezy murmurs cooled,
Broad over my head the verdant cedar wave,
And high palmetos lift their graceful shade.
O stretched amid these orchards of the sun
Give me to drain the cocoa's milky bowl,
And from the palm to draw its freshning wine!
More bounteous, etc.

Or, stretched amid these orchards of the sun,
O let me drain the cocoa's milky bowl,
More bounteous far than all the frantic juice
Which Bacchus pours. Nor, on its slender twigs
Low-bending, be the full pomegranate scorned;
Nor, creeping through the woods, the gelid race
Of berries. Often in humble station dwells
Unboasted worth, above fastidious pomp.
Witness thou best Anana, thou the pride
Of vegetable life, beyond whatever
The poets imag'd in the golden age:
Quick let me strip thee of thy tufty
spiny coat,
Spread thy ambrosial stores, and feast with Jove!
FROM these the prospect varies. Plains immense
Lie stretched below, interminable meads
And vast savannahs, where the wandering eye,
Unfix'd, is in a verdant ocean lost.
Another Flora there, of bolder hues,
And richer sweets, beyond our garden's pride,
Plays over the fields, and showers with sudden hand
Exuberant spring: for often these valleys shift
Their green-embroider'd robe to fiery brown,
And swift to green again, as scorching suns,
Or streaming dews and torrent rains prevail.
ALONG these lonely regions, where retired,
From little scenes of art, great Nature dwells
In awful solitude, and naught is seen
But the wild herds that own no master's stall.
Prodigious rivers roll their fatning seas:
On whose luxuriant herbage, half-conceal'd,
Like a fallen cedar, far diffused his train,
Cased in green scales, the crocodile extends.
The flood disparts: behold! in plaited mail,
The Hippopotamus, or river-horse.
Behemoth rears his head. Glanced from his side,
The darted steel in idle shivers flies:
He fearless walks the plain, or seeks the hills;
Where, as he crops the varied fare, the herds
In widening circle round, forget their food,
And at the harmless stranger wondering gaze.
PEACEFUL, beneath primeval trees, that cast
Their ample shade over Niger's yellow stream,
And where the Ganges rolls his sacred wave;
Or mid the central depth of blackning woods,
High raised in solemn theater around,
Leans the huge elephant: wisest of brutes!
O truly wise! with gentle might endowed,
Though powerful, not destructive! here he sees
Revolving ages sweep the changeful earth,
And empires rise and fall; regardless he
Of what the never-resting race of men
Project: thrice happy! could he 'scape their guile,
Who mine, from cruel avarice, his steps;
Or with his towery grandeur swell their state,
The pride of kings; or else his strength pervert,
And bid him rage amid the mortal fray,
Astonished at the madness of mankind.
WIDE over the winding umbrage of the floods,
Like vivid blossoms glowing from afar,
Thick-swarm the brighter birds. For Nature's hand,
That with a sportive vanity has decked
The plumy nations, there her gayest hues
Profusely pours. In all the regions of the torrid zone, the birds, though more
beautiful in their plumage, are observed to be less melodious than ours.
But, if she bids them shine,
Arrayed in all the beauteous beams of day,
Yet frugal still, she humbles them in song.
Nor envy we the gaudy robes they lent
Proud Montezuma's realm, whose legions cast
A boundless radiance waving on the sun,
While Philomel is ours; while in our shades,
Through the soft silence of the listening night,
The sober-suited songstress thrills her lay.
BUT come, my Muse, the desart-barrier burst,
A wild expanse of lifeless sand and sky?
And, swifter than the toiling caravan,
Shoot over the vale of Sennar; ardent climb
The Nubian mountains, and the secret bounds
Of jealous Abyssinia boldly pierce.
Thou art no ruffian, who beneath the mask
Of social commerce come to rob their wealth;
No holy fury thou, blaspheming HEAVEN,
With consecrated steel to stab their peace,
And through the land, yet red from
with civil wounds,
To spread the purple tyranny of Rome,
Thou, like the harmless be, may freely range,
From mead to mead, bright with exalted flowers,
From jasmine grove to grove, may wander gay,
Through palmy shades and aromatic woods,
That grace the plains, invest the peopled hills,
And up the more than alpine mountains wa^e.
There on the breezy summit, spreading fair,
For many a league; or on stupendous rocks,
That from the sun redoubling valley lift,
Cool, to the middle air, their lawny tops;
Where palaces, and fanes, and villas rise;
And gardens smile around, and cultured fields;
And fountains gush; and careless herds and flocks
Securely stray; a world within itself,
Disdaining all assault: there let me draw
Ethereal soul, there drink reviving gales,
Profusely breathing from the spicy groves,
And vales of fragrance; there at distance hear
The roaring floods, and cataracts that sweep
From disembowel'd earth the virgin gold;
And over the varied landscape, restless, rove
Fervent with life of every fairer kind;
A land of wonders! which the sun still eyes
With ray direct, as of the lovely realm
Enamored, and delighting there to dwell.
HOW changed the scene! In blazing height of noon,
The sun, oppressed, is plunged in thickest gloom.
Still horror reigns, a dreary twilight round,
Of struggling night and day malignant mixed.
For to the hot equator crowding fast,
Where, highly rarefy'd, the yielding air
Admits their stream, incessant vapors roll,
Amazing clouds on clouds continual heaped;
Or whirled tempestuous by the gusty wind,
Or silent borne along, heavy, and slow,
With the big stores of steaming oceans charged.
Meantime, amid these upper seas, condensed
Around the cold aerial mountain's brow,
And by conflicting winds together dashed,
The thunder holds his black tremendous throne,
From cloud to cloud the rending lightnings rage;
Till, in the furious elemental war
Dissolved, the whole precipitated mass
Unbroken floods and solid torrents pours.
THE treasures these, hid from the bounded search
Of ancient knowledge; whence, with annual pomp,
Rich king of floods! overflows the swelling Nile.
From his two springs in Gojam's sunny realm,
Pure-welling out, he through the lucid lake
Of fair Dambea rolls his infant-stream.
There, by the Naiads nursed, he sports away
His playful youth, amid the fragrant isles,
That with unfading verdure smile around.
Ambitious, thence the manly river breaks;
And gathering many a flood, and copious fed
With all the mellow'd treasures of the sky,
Winds in progressive majesty along:
Through splendid kingdoms now devolves his maze,
Now wanders wild over solitary tracts
Of life-deserted sand; till, glad to quit
The joyless desert, down the Nubian rocks
From thundering steep to steep, he pours his urn,
And Egypt joys beneath the spreading wave.
HIS brother Niger too, and all the floods
In which the full-form'd maids of Afric lave
Their jetty limbs; and all that from the tract
Of woody mountains stretched through gorgeous Ind
Fall on Cormandel's coast, or Malabar;
From The river that runs through S^am; on whose banks a vast multitude of those
insects called Fire flies make a beautiful appearance in the night.
Menam's orient stream, that nightly shines
With insect-lamps, to where Aurora sheds
On Indus' smiling banks the rosy shower:
All, at this bounteous season, open their urns,
And pour untoiling harvest over the land.
NOR less thy world, COLUMBUS, drinks, refreshed,
The lavish moisture of the melting year.
Wide over his isles, the branching Oronoque
Rolls a brown deluge; and the native drives
To dwell aloft on life-sufficing trees,
At once his dome, his robe, his food, and arms.
Swelled by a thousand streams, impetuous hurled
From all the roaring Andes, huge descends
The mighty The river of the Amazons.
Orellana. Scarce the Muse
Dares stretch her wing over this enormous mass
Of rushing water; scarce she dares attempt
The sea-like Plata; to whose dread expanse,
Continuous depth, and wondrous length of course,
Our floods are rills. With unabated force,
In silent dignity they sweep along,
And traverse realms unknown, and blooming wilds,
And fruitful deserts, worlds of solitude,
Where the sun smiles, and seasons teem in vain,
Unseen, and unenjoy'd. Forsaking these,
Over peopled plains they fair-diffusive flow,
And many a nation feed, and circle safe,
In their soft bosom, many a happy isle;
The seat of blameless Pan yet undisturbed
By christian crimes, and Europe's cruel sons.
Thus pouring on they proudly seek the deep,
Whose vanquished tide, recoiling from the shock,
Yields to this liquid weight of half the globe;
And ocean trembles for his green domain.
BUT what avails this wondrous waste of wealth?
This gay profusion of luxurious bliss?
This pomp of Nature? what their balmy meads,
Their powerful herbs, and Ceres void of pain?
By vagrant birds dispersed, and wafting winds,
What their unplanted fruits? What the cool draughts,
The ambrosial food, rich gums, and spicy health,
Their forests yield? Their toiling insects what,
Their silky pride, and vegetable robes?
Ah! what avail their fatal treasures, hid
Deep in the bowels of the pitying earth,
Golconda's gems, and sad Potosi's mines;
Where dwelt the gentlest children of the sun?
What all that Afric's golden rivers roll,
Her odorous woods, and shining ivory stores?
Ill-fated race! the softening arts of Peace,
Whatever the humanizing Muses teach;
The godlike wisdom of the tempered breast;
Progressive truth, the patient force of thought;
Investigation calm, whose silent powers
Command the world; the LIGHT that leads to HEAVEN;
Kind equal rule, the government of laws,
And all-protecting FREEDOM, which alone
Sustains the name and dignity of Man:
These are not theirs. The parent-sun himself
Seems over this world of slaves to tyrannize;
And, with oppressive ray, the roseat bloom
Of beauty blasting, gives the gloomy hue,
And feature gross: or worse, to ruthless deeds,
Mad jealousy, blind rage, and fell revenge,
Their fervid spirit fires. Love dwells not there,
The soft regards, the tenderness of life,
The heart-shed tear, the ineffable delight
Of sweet humanity: these court the beam
Of milder climes; in selfish fierce desire,
And the wild fury of voluptuous sense,
There lost. The very brute-creation there
This rage partakes, and burns with horrid fire.
Lo! the green serpent, from his dark abode,
Which even imagination fears to tread,
At noon forth-issuing, gathers up his train
In orbs immense, then, darting out anew,
Seeks the refreshing fount; by which diffused,
He throws his folds: and while, with threatening tongue,
And deathful jaws erect, the monster curls
His flaming crest, all other thirst, appalled,
Or shivering flies, or checked at distance stands,
Nor dares approach. But still more direful he,
The small close-lurking minister of fate,
Whose high-concocted venom through the veins
A rapid lightning darts, arresting swift
The vital current. Formed to humble Man,
This child of vengeful nature! There, sublimed
To fearless lust of blood, the savage race
Roam, licensed by the shading hour of guilt,
And foul misdeed, when the pure day has shut
His sacred eye. The tiger darting fierce,
Impetuous on the prey his glance has doomed.
The lively-shining leopard, speckled over
With many a spot, the beauty of the waste;
And, scorning all the taming arts of Man,
The keen Hyena, fellest of the fell.
These, rushing from the inhospitable woods
Of Mauritania, or the tufted isles,
That verdant rise amid the Lybian wild,
Innumerous glare around their shaggy king,
Majestic, stalking over the printed sand;
And, with in perious and repeated roars,
Demand their fated food. The fearful flocks
Crowd near the guardian swain; the nobler herds,
Where round their lordly bull, in rural ease,
They ruminating lie, with horror hear
The coming rage. The awakened village starts;
And to her fluttering breast the mother strains
Her thoughtless infant. From the Pyrate's den,
Or stern Morocco's tyrant sang escaped,
The wretch half-wishes for his bonds again:
While, uproar all, the wilderness resounds,
From Atlas eastward to the frighted Nile.
UNHAPPY he! who from the first of joys,
Society, cut off, is left alone
Amid this world of death. Day after day,
Sad on the jutting eminence he sits,
And views the main that ever toils below;
Still fondly forming in the farthest verge,
Where the round either mixes with the wave,
Ships, dim-discovered, dropping from the clouds.
At evening, to the setting sun he turns
A mournful eye, and down his dying heart
Sinks helpless; while the wonted roar is up,
And his^ continual through the tedious night.
Yet here, even here, into these black abodes
Of monsters, unappall'd, from stooping Rome,
And guilty Caesar, LIBERTY retired,
Her CATO following through Numidian wilds:
Disdainful of Campania's gentle plains,
And all the green delights Ausonia pours;
When for them she must bend the servile knee,
And fawning take the sple^did robber's ^o^^.
NOR stop the terrors of these regions here.
Commissioned demo^ often, angels of wrath,
Let loose the raging elements. Breathed hot,
From all the boundless furnace of the sky,
And the wide glittering waste of burning sand,
A suffocating wind the pilgrim smites
With instant death. Patient of thirst and toil,
Son of the desert! even the camel feels,
Shot through his withered heart, the fiery blast.
Or from the black-red either, bursting broad,
Sallies the sudden whirlwind. Strait the sands,
Commov'd around, in gathering eddies play:
Nearer and nearer still they darkening come;
Till, with the general all-involving storm
Swept up, the whole continuous wilds arise;
And by their noonday fount dejected thrown,
Or sunk at night in sad disastrous sleep,
Beneath descending hills, the caravan
Is buried deep. In Cairo's crowded streets,
The impatient merchant, wondering, waits in vain,
And Mecca saddens at the long delay.
BUT chief at sea, whose every flexile wave
Obeys the blast, the ae^ial tumult swells.
In the dread ocean, undulating wide,
Beneath the radiant line that girts the globe,
The circling Typhon and Eenephia, names
terms for particular storms or hurricane^, known only between the tropic^.
Typhon, whirled from point to point,
Exhausting all the rage of all the sky,
And dire Typhon and Eenephia, names
terms for particular storms or hurricane^, known only between the tropic^.
Ecnephia reign. Amid the heavens,
Falsely serene, deep in a cloudy Called by sailors the Ox-Eye, being in
appearance at first no bigger.
speck
Compressed, the mighty tempest brooding dwells:
Of no regard, save to the skilful eye,
Fiery and soul, the small prognostic hangs
Alo^t, or on the promontory's brow
Musters its force. A faint deceitful calm,
A fluttering gale, the demon sends before,
To tempt the spreading sail. Then down at once,
Precipitant, descends a mingled mass
Of roaring winds, and flame, and rushing floods.
In wild amazement fixed the sailor stands.
Art is too slow. By rapid fate oppressed,
His broad-wing'd vessel drinks the whelming tide,
Hi^ ^n the bosom of the black abyss.
With such mad Seas the daring VASCO DE GAMA, the first who sailed round
Africa, by the Cape of Good Hope, to the East Indies.
GAMA fought,
For many a day, and many a dreadful night,
Incessant, laboring round the stormy Cape;
By bold ambition led, and bolder thirst
Of gold. For then from ancient gloom emerg'd
The rising world of trade: the Genius, then,
Of navigation, that, in hopeless sloth,
Had slumber'd on the vast Atlantic deep,
For idle ages, starting, heard at last
The DON HENRY, third son to John the first, king of Portugal. His strong
Genius to the discovery of new countries wa^ the source of all the modern
improvement^ in navigation.
LUSITANIAN PRINCE; who, HEAV'N-inspir'd,
To love of useful glory roused mankind*
And in unbounded Commerce mixed the world.
INCREASING still the terrors of these storms,
His jaws hor^ific armed with threefold fate,
Here dwells the direful shark. Lured by the scent
Of streaming crowds, of rank disease, and death,
Behold! he rushing cuts the briny flood,
Swift as the gale can bear the ship along;
And, from the partners of that cruel trade,
Which spoils unhappy Guinea of her sons,
Demands his share of prey; demands themselves.
The stormy fates descend: one death involves
Tyrants and slaves; when strait, their mangled Limbs
Crashing at once, he dies the purple seas
With gore, and riots in the vengeful meal.
WHEN over this world, by equinoctial rains
Flooded immense, looks out the joyless sun,
And draws the copious steam: from swampy fens,
Where putrefaction into life ferments,
And breathes destructive myriads; or from woods,
Impenetrable shades, recesses foul,
In vapors rank and blue corruption wrapped,
Whose gloomy horrors yet no desperate foot
Has ever dared to pierce; then, wasteful, forth
Walks the dire Power of pestilent disease.
A thousand hideous f^ends her course attend,
Sick Nature blasting, and to heartless woe,
And feeble desolation, casting down
The towering hopes and all the pride of Man.
Such as, of late, at Curthagena quenched
The BRITISH fire. You, gallant VERNON, saw
The miserable scene; you, pitying saw
To infant-weakness sunk the warrior's arm;
Saw the deep-racking ^ang, the ghastly form,
The lip pale-quivering, and the beamless eye
No more with ardour bright: you heard the groans
Of agonizing ships, from shore to shore;
Heard, nightly plunged amid the sullen waves,
The frequent corse; while on each other fixed,
In sad presage, the blank assistants seemed,
Silent, to ask, whom fate would next demand.
WHAT need I mention those inclement skies,
Where, frequent over the sickening city, plague,
The fiercest child of NEMESIS divine,
Descends? These are the causes supposed to be the first origin of the Plague,
in Dr. MEAD's elegant book on that subject.
From Ethiopia's poisoned woods,
From stifled Cairo's filth, and fetid fields
With locust-armies putrefying heaped,
This great destroyer sprung. Her awful rage
The brutes escape. Man is her destined prey*
Intemperate Man! and, over his guilty domes,
She draws a close incumbent cloud of death*
Uninterrupted by the living winds,
Forbid to blow a wholesome breeze; and stained
With many a mixture by the sun, suffus'd,
Of angry aspect. Princely wisdom, then,
Dejects his watchful eye; and from the hand
Of feeble justice, ineffectual, drop
The sword and balance: mute the voice of joy,
And hushed the clamor of the busy world.
Empty the streets, with uncouth verdure clad;
Into the worst of deserts sudden turned
The cheerful haunt of Men: unless escaped
From the doomed house, where matchless horror reigns,
Shut up by barbarous fear, the smitten wretch,
With frenzy wild, breaks loose; and, loud to heaven
Screaming, the dreadful policy arraigns,
Inhuman, and unwise. The sullen door,
Yet uninfected, on its cautious hinge
Fearing to turn, abhors society.
Dependants, friends, relations, Love himself,
Savag'd by woe, forget the tender tie,
The sweet engagement of the feeling heart.
But vain their selfish care: the circling sky,
The wide enlivening air is full of fate*
And, struck by turns, in solitary pangs
They fall, unblest, untended, and unmourn'd.
Thus over the prostrate city black Despair
Extends her raven wing; while, to complete
The scene of desolation, stretched around,
The grim guards stand, denying all retreat,
And give the flying wretch a better death.
MUCH yet remains unsung: the rage intense
Of brazen-vaulted skies, of iron fields,
Where drought and famine starve the blasted year:
Fi^'d by the torch of noon to tenfold rage,
The infuriate hill that shoots the pillar'd flame;
And, roused within the subterranean world,
The expanding earthquake, that resistless shakes
Aspiring cities from their solid base,
And buries mountains in the flaming gulf.
But it is enough; return, my vagrant Muse*
A nearer scene of horror calls thee home.
BEHOLD, slow-settling over the lurid grove
Unusual darkness broods; and growing gains
The full possession of the sky, surcharged
With wrathful vapor, from the secret beds,
Where sleep the mineral generations, drawn.
Thence Nit^e, Sulphur, and the fiery spume
Of fat B^t^m^n, steaming on the day,
With various tinctured trains of l^^ent flame
Pollute the sky, and in yon baleful cloud,
A reddening gloom, a magazine of sat,
Ferment; till, by the touch ethereal roused,
The dash of clouds, or irritating war
Of fighting winds, while all is calm below,
They furious spring. A boding silence reigns,
Dread through the dun expanse; save the dull sound,
That from the mountain, previous to the storm,
Rolls over the muttering earth, disturbs the flood,
And shakes the forest-leaf without a breath.
Prone, to the lowest vale, the ae^ial tribes
Descend: the tempest-loving raven scarce
Dares wing the dubious dusk. In^rueful g^ze
The cattle stand, and on the scowling heavens
Cast a deploring eye; by Man forsook,
Who to the crowded cottage hies him fast,
Or seeks the shelter of the downward cave.
It Is listening fear, and dumb amazement all:
When to the startled eye the sudden glance,
Appears far south, eruptive through the cloud;
And following flower, in explosion vast,
The Thunder raises his tremendous voice.
At first, heard solemn over the verge of heaven,
The tempest growls; but as it nearer comes,
And rolls its awful burden on the wind,
The lightnings flash a larger curve, and more
The noise astounds: till over head a sheet
Of livid flame discloses wide; then shuts
And opens wider; shuts and opens still
Expansive, wrapping either in a blaze.
Follows the loosened, aggravated roar,
Enlarging, deepening, mingling; peal on peal
Crushed horrible, convulsing heaven and earth.
DOWN comes a deluge of sonorous hail,
Or prone-descending rain. Wide-rent, the clouds.
Pour a whole flood; and yet, its flame unquench'd,
The unconquerable lightning struggles through,
Ragged and fierce, or in red whirling balls,
And fires the mountains with redoubled rage.
Black from the stroke, above, the smouldring pine
Stands a sad shattered trunk; and, stretched below,
A lifeless group the blasted cattle lie:
Here the soft flocks, with that same harmless look
They wore alive, and ruminating still
In fancy's eye; and there the frowning bull,
And ox half-rais'd. Struck on the castled cliff,
The venerable tower and spiry fane
Resign their aged pride. The gloomy woods
Start at the flash, and from their deep recess,
Wide-flaming out, their trembling inmates shake.
Amid Carnarvon's mountains rages loud
The repercussive roar: with mighty crush,
Into the flashing deep, from the rude rocks
Of Penmanmaur heaped hideous to the sky,
Tumble the smitten cliffs; and Snowden's peak,
Dissolving, instant yields his wintry load.
Far-seen, the heights of heathy Cheviot blaze,
And Thule bellows through her utmost isles.
GUILT hears appalled, with deeply troubled thought;
And yet not always on the guilty head
Descends the sated flash. Young CELADON
And his AMELIA were a matchless pair,
With equal virtue formed, and equal grace,
The same distinguished by their se^ a^one:
Hers the mild luster of the blooming morn,
And his the radiance of the risen day.
THEY loved. But such their guileless
guiltless passion was,
As in the dawn of time informed the heart
Of innocence, and undissembling truth.
'Twas friendship heightened by the mutual wish,
The enchanting hope, and sympathetic glow,
Beamed from the mutual eye. Devoting all
To love, each was to each a dearer self;
Supremely happy in the awakened power
Of giving joy. Alone, amid the shades,
Still in harmonious intercourse they lived
The rural day, and talked the flowing heart,
Or sighed, and looked unutterable things.
SO passed their life, a clear united stream,
By care unruffled; till, in evil hour,
The tempest caught them on the tender walk,
Heedless how far, and where its mazes strayed,
While, with each other blessed, creative love
Still bade eternal Eden smile around.
Presaging instant fate
Heavy with instant fate her bosom heaved
Unwonted sighs, and stealing often a look
Of the big gloom on C^LADON her eye
Fell ^earful, wetting her disordered cheek.
In vain assuring love, and confidence
In HEAVEN, repressed her fear; it grew, and shook
Her frame near dissolution. He perceived
The unequal conflict, and as angels look
On dying saints, his eyes compassion shed,
With love illumined high. "Fear not," he said,
"Sweet innocence! thou stranger to offense,
"And inward storm! He who you skies involves
"In frowns of darkness, ever smiles on thee,
"With kind regard. Over thee the secret shaft
"That wastes at midnight, or the undreaded hour
"Of noon, flies harmless: and that very voice,
"Which thunders terror through the guilty heart,
"With tongues of Seraphs whispers peace to thine.
"'It Is safety to be near thee sure, and thus
"To clasp perfection!" From his void embrace,
(Mysterious Heaven!) that moment, to the ground,
A blackened corse, was struck the beauteous maid.
But who can paint the lover, as he stood,
Pierced by severe amazement, hating life,
Speechless, and fixed in all the death of woe!
So, faint resemblance, on the marble tomb,
The well-dissembled mourner stooping stands,
For ever silent, and for ever sad.
AS from the face of heaven the shattered clouds
Tumultuous rove, the interminable sky
Sublimer swells, and over the world expands
A purer azure.... Through the lightened air
A higher luster....

Nature, from the storm,
Shines out afresh; and through the lightened air
A higher luster and a clearer calm,
Diffusive, tremble; while, as if in sign
Of danger past, a glittering robe of joy,
Set off abundant by the yellow ray,
Invests the fields, and nature smiles revived.
yet dropping from distress.
IT IS Beauty all, and grateful song around,
Joined to the low of kine, and numerous bleat
Of flocks thick-nibbling through the clover'd vale.
And shall the hymn be marred by thankless Man,
Most-favour'd; who with voice articulate
Should lead the chorus of this lower world?
Shall he, so soon forgetful of the hand
That hushed the thunder, and serenes the sky,
Extinguished feel that spark the tempest waked,
That sense of powers exceeding far his own,
Ere yet his feeble heart has lost its fears?
CHEERED by the milder beam, the sprightly youth
Speeds to the well-known pool, whose crystal depth
A sandy bottom shows. A while he stands
Gazing the inverted landscape, half afraid
To meditate the blue profound below;
Then plunges headlong down the circling flood.
His ebon tresses, and his rosy cheek
Instant emerge; and through the obedient wave,
At each short breathing by his lip repelled,
With arms and legs according well, he makes,
As humor leads, an easy-winding path;
While, from his polished sides, a dewy light
Effuses on the pleased spectators round.
THIS is the purest exercise of health,
The kind refresher of the summer-heats;
Nor, when cold Winter keens the brightening flood,
Would I weak-shivering linger on the brink.
Thus life redoubles, and is often preserved,
By the bold swimmer, in the swift illapse
Of accident disastrous. Hence the limbs
Knit into force; and the same Roman arm,
That rose victorious over the conquered earth,
First learned, while tender, to subdue the wave.
Even, from the body's purity, the mind
Receives a secret sympathetic aid.
CLOSE in the covert of an hazel copse,
Where winded into pleasing solitudes
Runs out the rambling dale, young DAMON sat,
Pensive, and pierced with love's delightful pangs.
There to the stream that down the distant rocks
Hoarse-murmuring fell, and plaintive breeze that played
Among the bending willows, falsely he
Of MUSIDORA's cruelty complained.
She felt his flame; but deep within her breast,
In bashful coyness, or in maiden pride,
The soft return concealed; save when it stole
In side-long glances from her downcast eye,
Or from her swelling soul in stifled sighs.
Touched by the scene, no stranger to his vows,
He framed a melting lay, to try her heart;
And, if an infant passion struggled there,
To call that passion forth. Thrice happy swain!
A lucky chance, that often decides the fate
Of mighty monarchs, then decided thine.
For lo! conducted by the laughing Loves,
This cool retreat his MUSIDORA sought:
Warm in her cheek the sultry season glowed;
And, robe'd in loose array, she came to bathe
Her fervent limbs in the ref^eshing stream.
What shall he do? In sweet confusion lost,
And dubious flutterings, he a while remained:
A pure ingenuous elegance of soul,
A delicate refinement, known to few,
Perplexed his breast, and urged him to retire.
But love forbade. Ye prudes in virtue, say,
Say, ye severest, what would you have done?
Meantime, this fairer nymph than ever blessed
Arcadian stream, with timid eye around
The banks surveying, stripped her beauteous limbs,
To taste the lucid coolness of the flood.
Ah then! not Paris on the pi^y
shady top
Of Ida panted stronger, when aside
The rival-goddesses the veil divine
Cast unconfined, and gave him all their charms,
Than, DAMON, thou; as from the snowy leg,
And slender foot, the inverted silk she drew;
As the soft touch dissolved the virgin zone;
And, through the parting robe, the alternate breast,
With youth wild-throbbing, on thy lawless gaze
In full luxuriance rose. But, desperate youth,
How durst thou risque the soul-distracting view;
As from her naked limbs, of glowing white,
Harmonious swelled by Nature's finest hand.
In folds loose-floating fell the fainter lawn;
And fair-expos'd she stood, shrunk from herself
With fancy blushing, at the doubtful breeze
Alarmed, and starting like the fearfu^ fawn?
Then to the flood she rushed; the parted flood
Its lovely guest with closing waves received;
And every beauty softening, every grace
Flushing anew, a mellow luster shed:
As shines the lily through the crystal mild;
Or as the rose amid the morning dew,
Fresh from Aurora's hand, more sweetly glows.
While thus she wantoned, now beneath the wave
But ill-conceal'd; and now with streaming locks,
That half-embrac'd her in a humid veil,
Rising again, the latent DAMON drew
Such madning draughts of beauty to the soul.
As for a while overwhelmed his raptured thought
With luxury too daring. Checked, at last,
By love's respectful modesty, he deemed.
The theft profane, if aught profane to love
Can ever be deemed; and, struggling from the shade,
With headlong hurry fled; but first these lines,
Traced by his ready pencil, on the bank
With trembling hand he threw. "Bathe on, my fair,
"Yet unbeheld save by the sacred eye
"Of faithful love. I go to guard thy haunt,
"To keep from thy recess each vagrant foot,
"And each licentious eye." With wild surprise,
As if to marble struck, devoid of sense,
A stupid moment motionless she stood:
So ^^ands the The Venus of Medici.
statue that enchants the world,
So bending tries to veil the matchless boast,
The mingled beauties of exulting Greece.
Recovering, swift she flew to find those robes
Which blissful Eden knew not; and, arrayed
In careless haste, the alarming paper snatched.
But when her DAMON's well-known hand she saw,
Her terrors vanished, and a softer train
Of mixed emotions, hard to be described,
Her sudden bosom seized: shame void of guilt,
The charming blush of innocence, esteem
And admiration of her lover's flame,
By modesty exalted: even a sense
Of self-approving beauty stole across
Her busy thought. At length, a tender calm
Hushed by degrees the tumult of her soul;
And on the spreading beach, that over the stream
Incumbent hung, she with the silvan pen
Of rural lovers this confession carved,
Which soon her DAMON kissed with weeping joy:
"Dear youth! sole judge of what these verses mean,
"By fortune too much favored, but by love,
"Alas! not favored less, be still as now
"Discreet: the time may come you need not fly."
THE sun has lost his rage: his downward orb
Shoots nothing now but animating warmth,
And vital luster; that, with various ray,
Lights up the clouds, those beauteous robes of heaven,
Incessant rolled into romantic shapes,
The dream of waking fancy! Broad below,
Covered with ripening fruits, and swelling fast
Into the perfect year, the pregnant earth
And all her tribes rejoice. Now the soft hour
Of walking comes: for him who lonely loves
To seek the distant hills, and there converse
With Nature; there to harmonize his heart,
And in pathetic song to breathe around
The harmony to others. Social friends,
Attun'd to happy unison of soul;
To whose exalting eye a fairer world,
Of which the vulgar never had a glimpse,
Displays its charms; whose minds are richly fraught
With philosophic stores, superior light;
And in whose breast, enthusiastic, burns
Virtue, the sons of interest deem romance;
Now called abroad enjoy the falling day*
Now to the verdant Portico of woods,
To Nature's vast Lyce^m, forth they walk;
By that kind School where no proud master reigns,
The full free converse of the friendly heart
Improving and improved. Now from the world,
Sacred to sweet retirement, lovers steal,
And pour their souls in transport, which the SIRE
Of love approving hears, and calls it good.
Which way, AMANDA, shall we bend our course?
The choice perplexes. Wherefore should we choose?
All is the same with thee. Say, shall we wind
Along the streams? or walk the smiling mead?
Or court the forest-glades? or wander wild
Among the waving harvests? or ascend,
While radiant Summer opens all its pride,
Thy hill, delightful The old name of Richmond, signifying in Saxon Shining, of
Splendour.
Shene? Here let us sweep
The boundless landscape: now the raptured eye,
Exulting swift, to huge AUGUSTA send,
Now, to the High-gate and Hamstead*
Sister-hills that skirt her plain,
To lofty Harrow now, and now to where
Majestic Windsor lifts his princely brow.
In lovely contrast to this glorious view,
Calmly magnificent, then will we turn
To where the silver THAMES first rural grows.
There let the feasted eye unwearied stray:
Luxurious, there, rove through the pendan^ woods
That nodding hang over HARRINGTON's retreat;
And, stooping thence to Ham's embowering walks,
Beneath whose shades, in spotless peace retired,
With HER the pleasing partner of his heart,
The worthy QUEENSB'RY yet laments his GAY,
And polished CORNBURY wooes the willing muse,
Slow let us trace the matchless VALE OF THAMES;
Fair-winding up to where the Muses haunt
In Twi^nam's bowers, and for their POPE implore
The healing God In his last sickness.
, to royal Hampton's pile,
To Clermont's terrass'd height, and F^sher's groves,
Where in the sweetest solitude, embraced
By the soft windings of the silent Mole,
From courts and senates PELHAM finds Repose.
Enchanting vale! beyond whatever the Muse
Has of Achaia or Hesperia sung!
O vale of bliss! O softly-swelling hills!
On which the Power of Cultivation lies,
And joys to see the wonders of his toil.
HEAVENS! what a goodly prospect spreads around*
Of hills, and dales, and woods, and lawn^, and spires,
And glittering towns, and gilded streams, till all
The stretching landscape into smoke decays!
Happy BRITANNIA! where the QUEEN OF ARTS,
Inspiring vigor, LIBERTY abroad
Walks, unconfined, even to thy farthest cotts,
And scatters plenty with unsparing hand.
RICH is thy soil, and merciful thy clime;
Thy streams unfailing in the summer's drought;
Unmatched thy guardian-oaks; thy valleys float
With golden waves: and on thy mountains flocks
Bleat numberless; while, roving round their sides,
Bellow the blackening herds in lusty droves.
Beneath, thy meadows glow, and rise unquell'd
Against the mower's scythe. On every hand,
Thy villas shine. Thy country teems with wealth;
And property assures it to the swain,
Pleased, and unwearied, in his guarded toil.
FULL are thy cities with the sons of art;
And trade and joy, in every busy street,
Mingling are heard: even Drudgery himself,
As at the car he sweats, or dusty hews
The palace-stone, looks gay. Thy crowded ports,
Where rising masts an endless prospect yield,
With labor burn, and echo to the shouts
Of hurried sailor, as he hearty waves
His last adieu, and loosening every sheet,
Resigns the spreading vessel to the wind.
BOLD, firm, and graceful, are thy generous youth,
By hardship sinew'd, and by danger fired,
Scattering the nations where they go; and first
Or on the listed plain, or stormy
wintry seas.
Mild are thy glories too, as over the plans
Of thriving peace thy thoughtful fires preside;
In genius, and substantial learning, high;
For every virtue, every worth renowned;
Sincere, plain-hearted, hospitable, kind;
Yet like the mustering thunder when provoked,
The dread of tyrants, and the sole resource
Of those that under grim oppression groan.
THY SONS OF GLORY many! ALFRED thine,
In whom the splendour of heroic war,
And more heroic peace, when governed well,
Combine; whose hallowed name the virtues saint*
And his own Muses love, the best of Kings.
With him thy EDWARDS and thy HENRY's shine*
Names dear to fame; the first who deep impressed
On haughty Gaul the terror of thy arms,
That awes her genius still. In Statesmen thou,
And Patriots, fertile. Thine a steady MORE,
Who, with a generous though mistaken zeal,
Withstood a brutal tyrant's useful rage,
Like CATO firm, like ARISTIDES just,
Like rigid CINCINNATUS nobly poor,
A dauntless soul erect, who smiled on death.
Frugal, and wise, a WALSINGHAM is thine;
A DRAKE, who made thee mistress of the deep,
And bore thy name in thunder round the world*
Then flamed thy spirit high: but who can speak
The numerous worthies of the MAIDEN REIGN?
In RALEIGH mark their every glory mixed,
RALEIGH, the scourge of Spain! whose breast with all
The sage, the patriot, and the hero burned.
Nor sunk his vigor, when a coward-reign
The warrior ^etter'd, and at last resigned,
To glut the vengeance of a vanquished foe.
Then, active still and unrestrained, his mind
Explored the vast extent of ages past,
And with his prison hours enriched the world;
Yet found no times, in all the long research,
So glorious, or so base, as those he proved,
In which he conquered, and in which he bled.
Nor can the Muse the gallant SIDNEY pass,
The plume of war! with early laurels crowned,
The Lover's myrtle, and the Poet's bay.
A HAMPDEN too is thine, illustrious land,
Wise, strenuous, firm, of unsubmitting soul,
Who stem'd the torrent of a downward age
To slavery prone, and bade thee rise again,
In all thy native pomp of freedom bold.
Bright, at his call, thy age of Men effulg'd,
Of Men on whom late time a kindling eye
Shall turn, and tyrants tremble while they read.
Bring every sweetest flower, and let me strew
The grave where RUSSEL lies; whose tempered blood
With calmest cheerfulness for thee resigned,
Stained the sad annals of a giddy reign;
Aiming at lawless power, though meanly sunk
In loose inglorious luxury. With him
His friend, the ALCERMON SIDNEY.
BRITISH CASSIUS, fearless bled;
Of high determined spirit, roughly brave,
By ancient learning to the enlightened love
Of ancient freedom warmed. Fair thy renown
In awful Sages and in noble Bards;
Soon as the light of dawning science spread
Her orient ray, and waked the Muses' song.
Thine is a BACON; hapless in his choice,
Unfit to stand the civil storm of state,
And through the smooth barbarity of courts.
With firm but pliant virtue, forward still
To urge his course. Him for the studious shade
Kind Nature formed, deep, comprehensive, clear,
Exact, and elegant; in one rich soul,
PLATO, the STAGYRITE, and TULLY joined.
The great deliverer he! who from the gloom
Of cloistered monks, and jargon-teaching schools,
Led forth the true Philosophy, there long
Held in the magic chain of words and forms,
And definitions void: he led her forth,
Daughter of HEAVEN! that, slow-ascending still,
Investigating sure the chain of things,
With radiant finger points to HEAVEN again.
The generous ANTHONY ASHLEY COOPER, Earl of Shaftesbury.
ASHLEY thine, the friend of Man;
Who scanned his Nature with a brother's eye,
His weakness prompt to shade, to raise his aim,
To touch the finer movements of the mind,
And with the moral beauty charm the heart.
Why need I name thy BOIL, whose pious search
A mid the dark recesses of his works,
The great CREATOR sought? And why thy LOCK,
Who made the whole internal world his own?
Let NEWTON, pure Intelligence, whom GOD
To mortals lent, to trace his boundless works
From laws sublimely simple, speak thy fame
In all philosophy. For lofty sense,
Creative fancy, and inspection keen
Through the deep windings of the human heart,
Is not wild SHAKESPEARE thine and Nature's boast?
Is not each great, each amiable Muse
Of classic ages in thy MILTON met?
A genius universal as his Theme,
Astonishing as Chaos, as the bloom
Of blowing Eden fair, as Heaven sublime.
Nor shall my verse that elder bard forget,
The gentle SPENSER, Fancy's pleasing son;
Who, like a copious river, poured his song
Over all the mazes of enchanted ground:
Nor thee, his ancient master, laughing sage,
CHAUCER, whose native manners-painting verse,
Well-moraliz'd, shines through the Gothic cloud
Of time and language over thy genius thrown.
MAY my song soften, as thy DAUGHTERS I,
BRITANNIA, hail! for beauty is their own,
The feeling heart, simplicity of life,
And elegance, and taste: the faultless form,
Shaped by the hand of harmony; the cheek,
Where the live crimson, through the native white
Soft-shooting over the face diffuses bloom,
And every nameless grace; the parted lip,
Like the red rose bud moist with morning-dew,
Breathing delight; and, under flowing jet,
Or sunny ringlets, or of circling brown,
The neck slight-shaded, and the swelling breast;
The look resistless, piercing to the soul,
And by the soul informed, when dressed in love
She sits high-smiling in the conscious eye.
ISLAND of bliss! amid the subject seas,
That thunder round thy rocky coasts, set up,
At once the wonder, terror, and delight,
Of distant nations; whose remotest shores
Can soon be shaken by thy naval arm,
Not to be shook thy self, but all assaults
Baffling, as
like thy hoar cliffs the loud sea-wave.
O THOU! by whose almighty Nod the scale
Of empire rises, or alternate falls,
Send forth the saving VIRTUES round the land,
In bright patrol: white Peace, and social Love;
The tender-looking Charity, intent
On gentle deeds, and shedding tears through smiles;
Undaunted Truth, and Dignity of mind;
Courage composed, and keen; sound Temperance
Healthful in heart and look; clear Chastity,
With blushes reddening as she moves along,
Disordered at the deep regard she draws;
Rough Industry; Activity untir'd,
With copious life informed, and all awake:
While, in the radiant front, superior shines
That first paternal virtue, Public Zeal,
Who throws over all an equal wide survey,
And, ever musing on the common weal,
Still labors glorious with some great design.
LOW walks the sun, and broadens by degrees,
Just over the verge of day. The shifting clouds
Assembled gay, a richly-gorgeous train,
In all their pomp attend his setting throne.
Air, earth, and ocean smile immense. And now,
As if his weary chariot sought the bowers
Of Amphitrite, and her tending nymphs,
(So Grecian fable sung) he dips his orb;
Now half-immers'd; and now a golden curve
Gives one bright glance, then total disappears.
FOR ever running an enchanted round,
Passes the day, deceitful, vain, and void;
As fleets the vision over the formful brain,
This moment hurrying wild the impassioned soul,
The next in nothing lost. It Is so to him,
The dreamer of this earth, an idle blank:
A sight of horror to the cruel wretch,
Who all day long in sordid pleasure rolled,
Himself an useless load, has squandered vile,
Upon his scoundrel train, what might have cheered
A drooping family of modest worth.
But to the generous still-improving mind,
That gives the hopeless heart to sing for joy,
Diffusing kind beneficence around,
Boastless, as now descends the silent dew;
To him the long review of ordered life
Is inward rapture, only to be felt.
Confessed from yonder slow-extinguish'd clouds,
All either softening, sober Evening takes
Her wonted station in the middle air;
A thousand Shadows at her beck. First this
She sends on earth; then that of deeper dye
Steals soft behind; and then a deeper still,
In circle following circle, gathers round,
To close the face of things. A fresher gale
Begins to wave the wood, and stir the stream,
Sweeping with shadowy gust the fields of corn;
While the quail clamours for his running mate.
Wide over the thistly lawn, as swells the breeze,
A whitening shower of vegetable down
Amusive floats. The kind impartial care
Of Nature naught disdains: thoughtful to seed
Her lowest sons, and clothe the coming year,
From field to field the feathered seeds she wings.
HIS folded flock secure, the shepherd home
Hies, merry-hearted; and by turns relieves
The ruddy milk-maid of her brimming pail;
The beauty whom perhaps his witless heart,
Unknowing what the joy-mix'd anguish means,
Sincerely loves, by that best language shown
Of cordial glances, and obliging deeds.
Onward they pass, over many a panting height,
And valley sunk, and unfrequented; where
At fall of eve the fairy people throng,
In various game, and revelry to pass
The summer-night, as village-stories tell.
But far about they wander from the grave
Of him, whom his ungentle fortune urged
Against his own sad breast to lift the hand
Of impious violence. The lonely tower
I^ also shunned; whose mournful chambers hold,
So night-struck fancy dreams, the yelling ghost.
AMONG the crooked lanes on every hedge,
The glowworm lights his gem; and, through the dark,
A moving radiance twinkles. Evening yields
The world to Night; not in her winter-robe
Of massy stygian woof, but loose arrayed
In mantle dun. A faint erroneous ray,
Glanced from th'imperfect surfaces of things,
Flings half an image on the straining eye;
While wavering woods, and villages, and streams,
And rocks, and mountain-tops, that long retained
The ascending gleam, are all one swimming scene,
Uncertain if beheld. Sudden to heaven
Thence weary vision turns; where, leading soft
The silent hours of love, with purest ray
Sweet Venus shines; and from her genial rise,
When daylight sickens till it springs afresh,
Unrivaled reigns, the fairest lamp of night,
As thus the effulgence tremulous I drink,
With cherished gaze, the lambent lightnings shoot
Across the sky; or horizontal dart,
In wondrous shapes: by fearful murmuring crowds
Portentous deemed. Amid the radiant orbs,
That more than deck, that animate the sky,
The life-infusing suns of other worlds;
Lo! from the dread immensity of space
Returning, with accelerated course,
The rushing comet to the sun descends;
And as he sinks below the shading earth,
With awful train projected over the heavens,
The guilty nations tremble. But, above
Those superstitious horrors that enslave
The fond sequacious herd, to mystic faith
And blind amazement prone, the enlightened few,
Whose godlike minds philosophy exalts,
The glorious stranger hail. They feel a joy
Divinely great; they in their powers exult,
That wondrous force of thought, which mounting spurns
This dusky spot, and measures all the sky;
While, from his far excursion through the wilds
Of barren ether, faithful to his time,
They see the blazing wonder rise anew,
In seeming terror clad, but kindly bent
To work the will of all-sustaining LOVE:
From his huge vapoury train perhaps to shake
Reviving moisture on the numerous orbs,
Through which his long ellipsis winds; perhaps
To lend new fuel to declining suns,
To light up worlds, and feed the eternal fire.
WITH thee, serene PHILOSOPHY! with thee,
And thy bright garland, let me crown my song!
Effusive source of evidence, and truth!
A luster shedding over the ennobled mind.
Stronger than summer-noon; and pure as that,
Whose mild vibrations soothe the parted soul,
New to the dawning of celestial day.
Hence through her nourished powers, enlarged by thee;
She springs aloft, with elevated pride,
Above the tangling mass of low desires,
That bind the fluttering crowd; and, angel-wing'd,
The heights of science and of virtue gains,
Where all is calm and clear; with Nature round
Or in the starry regions, or the abyss,
To reason's and to fancy's eye displayed:
The First up-tracing, from the dreary void,
The chain of causes and effects to HIM,
The world-producing ESSENCE, who alone
Possesses being; while the Last receives
The whole magnificence of heaven and earth,
And every beauty, delicate or bold,
Obvious or more remote, with livelier sense,
Diffusive painted on the rapid mind.
TUTORED by thee, hence POETRY exalts
Her voice to ages; and informs the page
With music, image, sentiment, and thought,
Never to die! the treasure of mankind!
Their highest honor, and their truest joy!
WITHOUT thee what were unenlighten'd Man?
A savage roaming through the woods and wilds,
In quest of prey; and with the unfashion'd furr
Rough-clad; devoid of every finer art,
And elegance of life. Nor happiness
Domestic, mixed of tenderness and care,
Nor moral excellence, nor social bliss,
Nor guardian law were his; nor various skill
To turn the furrow, or to guide the tool
Mechanic; nor the heaven-conducted prow
Of navigation bold, that fearless braves
The burning line, or dares the wint'ry pole;
Mother severe of infinite delights!
Nothing, save rapine, indolence, and guile,
And woes on woes, a still-revolving train!
Whose horrid circle had made human life
Than nonexistence worse: but, taught by thee,
Ours are the plans of policy, and peace;
To live like brothers, and conjunctive all
Embellish life. While thus laborious crowds
Ply the tough oar, PHILOSOPHY directs
The ruling helm; or like the liberal breath
Of potent Heaven, invisible, the sail
Swells out, and bears the inferior world along.
NOR to this evanescent speck of earth
Poorly confined, the radiant tracts on high
Are her exalted range; intent to gaze
Creation through; and, from that full complex
Of never-ending wonders, to conceive
Of the SOLE BEING right, who spoke the Word,
And Nature moved complete. With inward view,
Thence on the ideal kingdom swift she turns
Her eye; and instant, at her powerful glance,
The obedient phantoms vanish or appear;
Compound, divide, and into order shift,
Each to his rank, from plain perception up
To the fair forms of Fancy's fleeting train:
This line not in the second Edition.
To Reason then, deducing truth from truth;
And notion quite abstract; where first begins
The world of spirits, action all, and life
Unfettered, and unmixed. But here the cloud,
So wills ETERNAL PROVIDENCE, sits deep.
Enough for us to know that this dark state,
In wayward passions lost, and vain pursuits,
This infancy of being, cannot prove
The final issue of the works of GOD,
By boundless LOVE and perfect WISDOM formed,
And ever rising with the rising mind.
AUTUMN


AUTUMN.
The ARGUMENT.
The subject proposed. Addressed to Mr ONSLOW. A prospect of the fields ready
for harvest. Reflections in praise of industry raised by that view. Reaping. A
tale relative to it. A harvest-storm. Shooting and hunting, their barbarity. A
ludicrous account of fox-hunting. A view of an orchard. Wall-fruit. A vineyard.
A description of fogs, frequent in the latter part of Autumn: whence a
digression, enquiring into the rise of fountains and rivers. Birds of season
considered, that now shift their habitation. The prodigious number of them that
cover the northern and western isles of SCOTLAND. Hence a view of the country.
A prospect of the discolored, fading woods. After a gentle dusky day,
moonlight. Autumnal meteors. Morning: to which succeeds a calm, pure,
sun-shiny day, such as usually shuts up the season. The harvest being gathered
in, the country dissolved in joy. The whole concludes with a panegyric on a
philosophical country life.

AUTUMN.
CROWNED with the sickle and the wheaten sheaf,
While AUTUMN, nodding over the yellow plain,
Comes jovial on; the Doric reed once more,
Well pleased, I tune. Whatever the Wint'ry frost
Nitrous prepared; the various-blossom'd Spring
Put in white promise forth; and Summer-suns
Concocted strong, rush boundless now to view,
Full, perfect all, and swell my glorious theme.
ONSLOW! the Muse, ambitious of thy name,
To grace, inspire, and dignify her song,
Would from the Public Voice thy gentle ear
Awhile engage. Thy noble cares she knows,
The patriot virtues that distend thy thought,
Spread on thy front, and in thy bosom glow;
While listening senates hang upon thy tongue,
Devolving through the maze of eloquence
A roll of periods, sweeter than her song.
But she too pants for public virtue; she,
Though weak i^
of power, yet strong in ardent will,
Whenever her country rushes on her heart,
Assumes a bolder note, and fondly tries
To mix the patriot's with the poet's flame.
WHEN the bright Virgin gives the beauteous days,
And Libra weighs in equal scales the year;
From heaven's high cope the fierce effulgence shook
Of parting summer, a serener blue,
With golden light enlivened, wide invests
The happy world. Attemper'd suns arise,
Sweet-beam'd, and shedding often through lucid clouds
A pleasing calm; while broad, and brown, below,
Extensive harvests hang the heavy head.
Rich, silent, deep, they stand; for not a gale
Rolls its light billows over the bending plain;
A calm of plenty! till the ruffled air
Falls from its poise, and gives the breeze to blow.
Rent is the fleecy mantle of the sky;
The clouds fly different; and the sudden sun
By fits effulgent gilds the illumined field,
And black by fits the shadows sweep along*
A gayly-checker'd heart-expanding view,
Far as the circling eye can shoot around,
Unbounded tossing in a flood of corn.
THESE are thy blessings, INDUSTRY! rough power!
Whom labor still attends, and sweat, and pain;
Yet the kind source of every gentle art,
And all the soft civility of life;
Raiser of human kind! by Nature cast,
Naked, and helpless, out amid the woods,
And wilds, to rude inclement elements;
With various seeds of art deep in the mind
Implanted, and profusely poured around
Materials infinite; but idle all.
Still unexerted, in the unconscious breast,
Slept the lethargic powers; corruption still,
Voracious, swallowed what the liberal hand
Of bounty scattered over the savage year:
And still the sad barbarian, roving, mixed
With beasts of prey; or for his acorn-meal
Fought the fierce tusky boar; a shivering wretch!
Aghast, and comfortless, when the bleak north,
With Winter charged, let the mixed tempest fly,
Hail, rain, and snow, and bitter-breathing frost:
Then to the shelter of the hut he fled:
And the wild season, sordid, pined away.
For home he had not; home is the resort
Of love, of joy, of peace and plenty, where,
Supporting and supported, polished friends,
And dear relations mingle into bliss.
But this the rugged savage never felt,
Even desolate in crowds; and thus his days,
Rolled heavy, dark, and unenjoy'd along;
A waste of time! till INDUSTRY approached,
And roused him from his miserable sloth:
His faculties unfolded; pointed out,
Where lavish Nature the directing hand
Of art demanded; showed him how to raise
His feeble force by the mechanic powers,
To dig the mineral from the vaulted earth,
On what to turn the piercing rage of fire,
On what the torrent, and the gathered blast;
Gave the tall ancient forest to his axe;
Taught him to chip the wood, and hew the stone,
Till by degrees the finished fabric rose;
Tore from his limbs the blood-polluted furr,
And wrapped them in the woolly vestment warm,
Or bright in glossy silk, and flowing lawn;
With wholesome viands filled his table, poured
The generous glass around, inspired to wake
The life-refining soul of decent wit:
Nor stooped at barren bare necessity,
But still advancing bolder, led him on,
To pomp, to pleasure, elegance, and grace;
And, breathing high ambition through his soul,
Set science, wisdom, glory, in his view,
And bade him be the Lord of all below.
THEN gathering men their natural powers combined
And formed a Public; to the general good
Submitting, aiming, and conducting all.
For this the Patriot-Council met, the full,
The free, and fairly represented Whole;
For this they planned the holy guardian laws,
Distinguished orders, animated arts,
And with joint force Oppression chaining, set
Imperial Justice at the helm; yet still
To them accountable: nor slavish dreamed
That toiling millions must resign their weal,
And all the honey of their search, to such
As for themselves alone themselves have raised.
HENCE every form of cultivated life
In order set, protected, and inspired,
Into perfection wrought. Uniting all,
Society grew numerous, high, polite,
And happy. Nurse of art! the city reared
In beauteous pride her tower-encircled head;
And, stretching street on street, by thousands drew,
From twining woody haunts, or the tough yew
To bows strong-straining, her aspiring sons.
THEN COMMERCE brought into the public walk
The busy merchant; the big warehouse built;
Raised the strong crane; choked up the loaded Street
With foreign plenty; and thy stream, O THAMES, 121
Large, gentle, deep, majestic, king of floods!
This line not in the last Edition.
Than whom no river heaves a fuller tide,
Chose for his grand resort. On either hand,
Like a long wint'ry forest, groves of masts
Shot up their spires; the bellying sheet between
Possessed the breezy void; the sooty hulk
Steered sluggish on; the splendid barge along
Rowed, regular, to harmony; around,
The boat, light-skimming, stretched its oary wings;
While deep the various voice of fervent toil
From bank to bank increased; whence ribb'd with oak,
To bear the BRITISH THUNDER, black, and bold,
The roaring vessel rushed into the main.
THEN, too, the pillar'd dome, magnific, heaved
Its ample roof; and luxury within
Poured out her glittering stores: the canvas smooth,
With glowing life protuberant, to the view
Embodied rose; the statue seemed to breathe,
And soften into flesh, beneath the touch
Of forming art, imagination-flush'd,
ALL is the gift of INDUSTRY; whatever
Exalts, embellishes, and renders life
Delightful. Pensive Winter cheered by him
Sits at the social fire, and happy hears
The excluded tempest idly rave along;
His hardened fingers deck the gaudy Spring;
Without him Summer were an arid waste;
Nor to the autumnal months could thus transmit
Those full, mature, immeasurable stores,
That, waving round, recall my wandering song.
SOON as the morning trembles over the sky,
And, unperceived, unfolds the spreading day;
Before the ripened field the reapers stand,
In fair array; each by the lass he loves,
To bear the rougher part, and mitigate
By nameless gentle offices her toil.
At once they stoop and swell the lusty sheaves;
While through their cheerful band the rural talk.
The rural scandal and the rural jest
Fly harmless, to deceive the tedious time,
And steal unfelt the sultry hours away.
Behind the master walks, builds up the shocks;
And conscious, glancing often on every side
His sated eye, feels his heart heave with joy.
The gleaners spread around, and here and there,
Spike after spike, their scanty
sparing harvest pick.
Be not too narrow, husbandmen! but fling
From the full sheaf, with charitable stealth,
The liberal handful. Think, oh grateful think!
How good the GOD of HARVEST is to you;
Who pours abundance over your flowing fields;
While these unhappy partners of your kind
Wide-hover round you, like the fowls of heaven,
And ask their humble dole. The various turns
Of fortune ponder; that your sons may want
What now, with hard reluctance, faint, ye give.
THE lovely young LAVINIA once had friends;
And Fortune smiled, deceitful, on her birth.
For, in her helpless years deprived of all,
Of every stay, save Innocence and HEAVEN,
She with her widowed mother, feeble, old,
And poor, lived in a cottage, far retired
Among the windings of a woody vale;
By solitude and deep surrounding shades,
But more by bashful modesty, concealed.
Together thus they shunned the cruel scorn
Which virtue, sunk to poverty, would meet
From giddy passion
fashion and low-minded pride:
Almost on Nature's common bounty fed,
Like the gay birds that sung them to repose,
Content, and careless of tomorrow's fare.
Her form was fresher than the morning rose,
When the dew wets its leaves; unstained, and pure,
As is the lily, or the mountain snow,
The modest virtues mingled in her eyes,
Still on the ground dejected, darting all
Their humid beams into the blooming flowers:
Or when the mournful tale her mother told,
Of what her faithless fortune promised once,
Thrilled in her thought, they, like the dewy star
Of evening, shone in tears. A native grace
Sat fair-proportion'd on her polished limbs,
Veiled in a simple robe, their best attire,
Beyond the pomp of dress; for loveliness
Needs not the foreign aid of ornament,
But is when unadorned adorned the most.
Thoughtless of beauty, she was beauty's self,
Recluse amid the close-embowering woods.
As in the hollow breast of Appenine,
Beneath the shelter of incircling hills,
A myrtle rises, far from human eye,
And breathes its balmy fragrance over the wild;
So flourished blooming, and unseen by all,
The sweet LAVINIA: till, at length, compelled
By strong necessity's supreme command,
With smiling patience in her looks, she went
To glean PALEMON's fields. The pride of swains
PALEMON was, the generous, and the rich;
Who led the rural life in all its joy,
And elegance, such as Arcadian song
Transmits from ancient uncorrupted times;
When tyrant custom had not shackled Man,
But free to follow Nature was the mode.
He then, his fancy with autumnal scenes
Amusing, chanced beside his reaper-train
To walk, when poor LAVINIA drew his eye;
Unconscious of her power, and turning quick
With unaffected blushes from his gaze:
He saw her charming, but he saw not half
The charms her down-cast modesty concealed.
That very moment love and chaste desire
Sprung in his bosom, to himself unknown;
For still the world prevailed, and its dread laugh,
Which scarce the firm philosopher can scorn,
Should his heart own a gleaner in the field:
And thus in secret to his soul he sighed.
"WHAT pity! that so delicate a form,
"By beauty kindled, where enlivening sense,
"And more than vulgar goodness seem to dwell,
"Shou^^ be devoted to the rude embrace
"Of some indecent clown? She looks, methinks,
"Of old ACASTO's line; and to my mind
"Recalls that patron of my happy life,
"From whom my liberal fortune took its rise;
"Now to the dust gone down; his houses, lands,
"And once fair-spreading family, dissolved.
"'It Is said that in some lone obscure retreat,
"Urged by remembrance sad, and decent pride,
"Far from those scenes which knew their better days,
"His aged widow and his daughter live,
"Whom yet my fruitless search could never find,
"Romantic wish! would this the daughter were!"
WHEN, strict enquiring, from herself he found
She was the same, the daughter of his friend,
Of bountiful ACASTO; who can speak
The mingled passions that surpised his heart,
And through his nerves in shivering transport ran?
Then blazed his smothered flame, avowed, and bold;
And as he viewed her, ardent, over and over,
Love, gratitude, and pity wept at once.
Confused, and frightened at his sudden tears,
Her rising beauties flushed a higher bloom,
As thus PALEMON, passionate, and just,
Poured out the pious rapture of his soul.
"And art thou then ACASTO's dear remains?
"She, whom my restless gratitude has sought,
"So long in vain? Oh heavens
yes! the very same,
"The softened image of my noble friend,
" "Alive his every look, his every feature,
Alive, his every feature, every look,
"More elegantly touched. Sweeter than Spring!
"Thou sole surviving blossom from the root
"That nourished up my fortune! Say, ah where,
"In what sequestered desert, have thou drawn
"The kindest aspect of delighted HEAVEN?
"Into such beauty spread, and blown so fair;
"Though poverty's cold wind, and crushing rain,
"Beat keen, and heavy, on thy tender years?
"O let me now, into a richer soil,
"Transplant thee safe! where vernal suns, and showers,
"Diffuse their warmest, larg^^^ influence;
"And of my garden be the pride, and joy!
"It ill befits thee, oh it ill befits
"ACASTO's daughter, his, whose open stores,
"Though vast, were little to his ampler heart,
"The father of a country, thus to pick
"The very refuse of those harvest-fields,
"Which from his bounteous friendship I enjoy:
"Then throw that shameful pittance from thy hand,
"But ill-apply'd to such a rugged task;
"The fields, the master, all, my fair, are thine;
"If to the various blessings which thy house
" Has on me lavished, thou will add that bliss,
Has lavished on me, thou will add that bliss,
"That dearest bliss, the power of blessing thee!"
HERE ceased the youth: yet still his speaking eye
Expressed the sacred triumph of his soul,
With conscious virtue, gratitude, and love,
Above the vulgar joy divinely raised.
Nor waited he reply. Won by the charm*
Of goodness irresistible, and all
In sweet disorder lost, she blushed consent.
The news immediate to her mother brought,
While, pierced with anxious thought, she pined away
The lonely moments for LAVINIA's fate;
Amazed, and scarce believing what she heard,
Joy seized her withered veins, and one bright gleam
Of setting life shone on her evening hours:
Not less enraptured than the happy pair;
Who flourished long in tender bliss, and reared
A numerous offspring, lovely like themselves,
And good, the grace of all the country round.
DEFEATING often the labors of the year,
The sultry south collects a potent blast.
At first, the groves are scarcely seen to stir
Their trembling tops; and a still murmur runs
Along the soft-inclining fields of corn:
But as the aerial tempest fuller swells,
And in one mighty stream, invisible,
Immense, the whole excited atmosphere,
Impetuous rushes over the sounding world;
Strained to the root, the stooping forest pours*
A rustling shower of yet untimely leaves.
High beat, the circling mountains eddy in,
From the bare wild, the dissipated storm,
And send it in a torrent down the vale.
Exposed, and naked, to its utmost rage,
Through all the sea of harvest rolling round,
The billowy plain floats wide; nor can evade,
Though pliant to the blast, its seizing force;
Or whirled in air, or into vacant chaff
Shook waste. And sometimes too a burst of rain,
Swept from the black horison, broad, descends
In one continuous flood. Still over head
The mingling tempest weaves its gloom, and still
The deluge deepens; till the fields around
Lie sunk, and flatted, in the sordid wave.
Sudden, the ditches swell; the meadows swim.
Red, from the hills, innumerable streams
Tumultuous roar; and high above its banks
The river lift; before whose rushing tide,
Herds, flocks, and harvests, cottages and swains,
Roll mingled down; all that the winds had spared,
In one wild moment ruined; the big hopes,
And well-earn'd treasures of the painful year.
Fled to some eminence, the husbandman,
Helpless beholds the miserable wreck
Driving along; his drowning ox at once
Descending, with his labors scattered round,
He sees; and instant over his shivering thought
Comes Winter unprovided, and a train
Of clamant children dear. Ye masters, then,
Be mindful of the rough laborious hand,
That sinks you soft in elegance and ease;
Be mindful of those limbs, in russet clad,
Whose toil to yours is warmth, and graceful pride;
And o^ be mindful of that sparing board,
Which cover^ yours with luxury profuse,
Makes your glass sparkle, and your sense rejoice!
Nor cruelly demand what the deep rains,
And all-involving winds have swept away.
HERE the rude clamor of the sportsman's joy,
The gun fast-thundering, and the winded horn,
Would tempt the Muse to sing the rural Game:
How, in his mid-career, the spaniel struck,
Stiff, by the tainted gale, with open nose,
Out-stretch'd, and finely sensible, draws full,
Fearful, and cautious, on the latent prey;
As in the sun the circling covey bask
Their varied plumes, and watchful every way,
Through the rough stubble turn the secret eye.
Caught in the meshy snare, in vain they beat
Their idle wings, entangled more and more:
Nor on the surges of the boundless air,
Though borne triumphant, are they safe; the gun,
Glanced just, and sudden, from the fowler's eye,
O'ertakes their sounding pinions; and again,
Immediate, brings them from the towering wing,
Dead to the ground; or drives them wide-dispers'd,
Wounded, and wheeling various, down the wind.
THESE are not subjects for the peaceful Muse,
Nor will she stain with such her spotless song;
Then most delighted, when she social sees
The whole mixed animal-creation round
Alive, and happy. It Is no joy to her,
This falsely-chearful barbarous game of death;
This rage of pleasure, which the restless youth
Awakes, impatient, with the gleaming morn;
When beasts of prey retire, that all night long,
Urged by necessity, had ranged the dark,
As if their conscious ravage shunned the light,
Ashamed. Not so the steady tyrant Man,
Who with the thoughtless insolence of power
Inflamed, beyond the most infuriate wrath
Of the worst monster that ever roam'd the waste,
For sport alone pursues the cruel chase,
Amid the beamings of the gentle days.
Upbraid, ye ravening tribes, our wanton rage*
Ye ravening Tribes, upbraid our wanton rage,
For hunger kindles you, and lawless want;
But lavish fed, in Nature's bounty rolled,
To joy at anguish, and delight in blood,
Is what your horrid bosoms never knew.
POOR is the triumph over the timid hare!
Scared from the corn, and now to some lone seat
Retired: the rushy fen; the ragged furze,
Stretched over the stony heath: the stubble chapt;
The thistly lawn; the thick entangled broom;
Of the same friendly hue, the withered fern:
The fallow ground laid open to the sun,
Concoctive; and the nodding sandy bank,
Hung over the mazes of the mountain brook.
Vain is her best precaution; though she sits
Concealed, with folded ears; unsleeping eyes,
By Nature raised to take the horizon in;
And head couched close betwixt her hairy feet,
In act to spring away. The scented dew
Betrays her early labyrinth; and deep,
In scattered sullen openings, far behind,
With every breeze she hears the coming storm.
But nearer, and more frequent, as it loads
The sighing gale, she springs amazed, and all
The savage soul of game is up at once:
The pack full-opening, various; the shrill horn,
Resounded from the hills; the neighing steed,
Wild for the chase; and the loud hunter's shout;
Over a weak, harmless, flying creature, all
Mixed in mad tumult, and discordant joy.
THE Stag too, singled from the herd, where long
He ranged the branching monarch of the shades,
Before the tempest drives. At first, in speed
He sprightly, puts his faith; and, roused by fear,
fear-arous'd,
Gives all his swift aerial soul to flight.
Against the breeze he darts, that way the more
To leave the lessening murderous cry behind:
Deception short! though fleete^ than the winds
Blown over the keen-air'd mountain by the north,
He bursts the thickets, glances through the glades,
And plunges deep into the wildest wood;
If slow, yet sure, adhesive to the track
Hot-steaming, up behind him come
comes again
The inhuman rout, and from the shady depth
Expel him, circling through his every shift.
He sweeps the forest often; and sobbing sees
The glades mild opening to the golden day;
Where, in kind contest, with his butting friends
He wont to struggle, or his loves enjoy.
Often in the full-descending flood he tries
To lose the scent, and lave his burning sides;
Often seeks the herd; the watchful herd alarmed,
With selfish care avoid a brother's woe.
What shall he do? His once so vivid nerves,
So full of buoyant spirit, now no more
Inspire the course; but fainting breathless toil,
Sick, seizes on his heart: he stands at bay;
And puts his last weak refuge in despair.
The big round tears run down his dappled face;
He groans in anguish; while the growling pack,
Blood-happy, hang at his fair jutting chest,
And mark his beauteous checkered sides with gore.
OF this enough. But if the sylvan youth
Whose fervent blood boils into violence,
Must have the chase; behold, despising flight,
The rous'd-up lion, resolute and slow,
Advancing full on the protended spear,
And coward-band, that circling wheel aloof.
Slunk from the cavern, and the troubled wood,
See the grim wolf; on him his shaggy foe
Vindictive fix, and let the ruffian die:
Or, growling horrid, as the brindled boar
Grins fell destruction, to the monster's heart
Let the dart lighten from the nervous arm.
THESE BRITAIN knows not; give, ye BRITONS, then,
Your sportive fury, pityless, to pour
Loose on the nightly robber of the fold:
Him, from his craggy-winding haunts unearth'd,
Let all the thunder of the chase pursue.
Throw the broad ditch behind you; over the hedge
High-bound, resistless; nor the deep morass
Refuse, but through the shaking wilderness
Pick your nice way; into the perilous flood
Bear fearless, of the raging instinct full;
And as you ride the torrent, to the banks
Your triumph sound sonorous, running round,
From rock to rock, in circling echoes tossed;
Then scale the mountains to their woody tops;
Rush down the dangerous steep; and over the lawn,
In fancy swallowing up the space between,
Pour all your speed into the rapid game,
For happy he! who tops the wheeling chase;
Has every maze evolv'd, and every guile
Disclosed; who knows the merits of the pack;
Who saw the villain seized, and dying hard,
Without complaint, though by an hundred mouths
Relentless torn: O glorious he, beyond
His daring peers! when the retreating horn
Calls them to ghostly halls of gray renown,
With woodland honors graced; the fox's fur,
Depending decent from the roof; and spread
Round the drear walls, with antic figures fierce,
The stag's large front: he then is loudest heard,
When the night staggers with severer toils,
With feats Thessalian Centaurs never knew,
And their repeated wonders shake the dome.
BUT first the fuel'd chimney blazes wide;
The tankards foam; and the strong table groans
Beneath the smoking sirloin, stretched immense
From side to side; in which, with desperate knife,
They deep incision make, and talk the while
Of ENGLAND's glory, never to be defaced,
While hence they borrow vigor: or amain
Into the pasty plunged, at intervals,
If stomach keen can intervals allow,
Relating all the glories of the chase.
Then sated Hunger bids his brother Thirst
Produce the mighty bowl; the mighty bowl,
Swelled high with fiery juice, steams liberal round.
A potent gale, delicious as the breath
Of Maia, to the lovesick shepherdess,
On violets diffused, while soft she hears
Her panting shepherd stealing to her arms.
Nor wanting is the brown October, drawn
Mature and perfect, from his dark retreat
Of thirty years; and now his honest front
Flames in the light refulgent, not afraid
Even with the vineyard's best produce to vie.
To cheat the thirsty moments, whist a while
Walks his dull round, beneath a cloud of smoke,
Wreathed fragrant from the pipe; or the quick dice,
In thunder leaping from the box, awake
The sounding gammon: while romp-loving Miss
Is haul'd about in gallantry robust.
AT last these puling idlenesses laid
Aside, frequent and full, the dry divan
Close in firm circle; and set, ardent, in
For serious drinking. Nor evasion sly,
Nor sober shift is to the puking wretch
Indulged apart; but earnest, briming Bowls
Lave every soul, the table floating round,
And pavement faithless to the fuddled foot.
Thus as they swim in mutual swill, the talk,
Vociferous at once from twenty tongues,
Reels fast from theme to theme; from horses, hounds,
To church or mistress, politics or ghost,
In endless mazes, intricate, perplexed.
Mean-time, with sudden interruption, loud,
The impatient catch bursts from the joyous heart:
That moment touched is every kindred soul;
And, opening in a full-mouthed cry of joy,
The laugh, the slap, the jocund curse goes round;
While from their slumbers shook, the kennel'd hounds
Mix in the music of the day again.
As when the tempest, that has vexed the deep
The dark night long with fainter murmurs falls:
So gradual sinks their mirth. Their feeble tongues,
Unable to take up the cumbrous word,
Lie quite dissolved. Before their maudlin eyes,
Seen dim, and blue, the double tapers dance,
Like the sun wading through the misty sky.
Then, sliding soft, they drop. Confused above,
Glasses and bottles, pipes and gazetteers,
As if the table even itself was drunk,
Lie a wet, broken scene; and wide, below,
Is heaped the social slaughter: where astride
The lubber Power in filthy triumph sits,
Slumbrous, inclining still from side to side,
And steeps them drenched in potent sleep till morn.
Perhaps some doctor of tremendous paunch,
Awful and deep, a black abyss of drink,
Out-lives them all; and from his buried flock
Retiring full of rumination sad.
Laments the weakness of these latter times.
But if the rougher sex by this fierce sport
Is hurried wild, let not such horrid joy
Ever stain the bosom of the BRITISH FAIR.
Far be the spirit of the chase from them!
Uncomely courage, unbeseeming skill;
To spring the fence, to rein the prancing steed;
The cap, the whip, the masculine attire,
In which they roughen to the sense, and all
The winning softness of their sex is lost.
In them it is graceful to dissolve at woe;
With every motion, every word to wave
Quick over the kindling cheek, the ready blush;
And from the smallest violence to shrink,
Unequal, then the loveliest in their fears;
And by this silent adulation, soft,
To their protection more engaging Man.
O may their eyes no miserable sight,
Save weeping lovers see! a nobler game,
Through Loves enchanting wiles pursued, yet fled,
In chase ambiguous. May their tender limbs
Float in the loose simplicity of dress,
And fashioned all to harmony, alone
Know they to seize the captivated soul,
In rapture warbled from love-breathing lips;
To teach the lute to languish; with smooth s^ep,
Disclosing motion in its every charm,
To swim along, and swell the mazy dance;
To train the foliage over the snowy lawn;
To guide the pencil, turn the tuneful page;
To lend new flavor to the fruitful year,
And heightened Nature's dainties; in their race
To re^ their graces into second life,
To give Society its highest taste;
Well-ordered home Man's best delight to make;
And by submissive wisdom, modest skill,
With every gentle care-eluding art,
To raise the virtues, animate the bliss,
And sweeten all the toils of human life:
This be the female dignity and praise*
Ye swains, now hasten to the hazel bank;
W^ere down you dale the wildly-winding brook
^alls hoarse from steep to steep. In close array,
Fit for the thickets and the tangling shrub,
Ye virgins, come. For you their latest song
The woodlands raise; the clustering nut for you
The lover finds amid the secret shade;
And where they burnish on the topmost bough,
With active vigor crushes down the tree;
Or shakes them ripe from the resigning husk,
A glossy shower, and of an ardent brown,
As are the ringlets of MELINDA's hair:
MELINDA! formed with every grace complete,
Yet these neglecting, above beauty wise,
And far transcending such a vulgar praise.
Hence from the busy joy-resounding fields,
In che^rful error, let us tread the maze
Of Autumn, unconfined; and taste, rev^v'd,
The breath of orchard big with bending fruit.
Obedient to the breeze and beating ray,
From the deep-loaded bough a mellow shower
Incessant m^lts away. The juicy pear
Lies, in a soft profusion, scattered round.
A va^ious sweetness swells the gentle race:
^y nature's all-refining hand prepared:
Of ^emper'd sun and water, earth, and air,
In ever-changing composition mixed.
Such, falling frequent through the chiller night,
The fragrant stores, the wide-projected heap^
Of apples, which the lusty-handed year,
Innumerous, over the blushing orchard shakes.
A various spirit, fresh, delicious, keen,
Dwells in their gelid pores; and, active, points*
The piercing cider for the thirsty tongue:
Thy native theme, and boon inspirer too,
PHILLIPS, Pomona's bard, the second thou
Who nobly durst, in rhyme-unfetter'd verse,
With BRITISH freedom sing the BRITISH song:
How, from Silu^ian vats, high-sparkling wines
Foam in transparent stoods; some strong to cheer
The wintry revels of the laboring hind:
And tasteful some to cool the summer hours.
In this glad season, while his sweetest heams
The sun shades equal to the meeken'd day;
Oh lose me in the green delightful walks
Of DODINGTON, thy seat, serene, and plain;
Where simple Nature reigns; and every view,
Diffiusive, spreads the pure D^rsetian downs,
In boundless prospect; yonder shagg'd with wood,
Here rich with harvest, and there wh^te with flocks!
Meantime the grandeur of thy lofty dome,
Far splendid, seizes on the ravished eye*
New beauties rise with each revolving day;
New columns swell; and still the fresh Spring ^^nds
New plants to quicken, and new groves to green*
Full of thy genius all! the Muses' seat:
Where in the secret bower, and winding walk,
For virtuous YOUNG and thee they twine the bay.
Here wandering often, fired with the restless thirst
Of thy applause, I solitary court
The inspiring breeze: and meditate the book
Of Nature ever open; aiming thence
Warm from the heart, to learn the moral song.
Here, as I steal along the sunny wall,
Where Autumn basks, with fruit impurpled deep,
My pleasing theme continual prompts my thought:
Presents the downy peach; the shi^ing plumb;
The ruddy, fragrant nectarine; and dark,
Beneath his ample leaf, the luscious fig.
The vine, too, here her curling tendrils shoots;
Hangs out her clusters, glowing to the south;
And scarcely wishes for a warmer sky.
Turn we a moment Fancy's rapid flight
To vigorous soils, and climes of fair extent;
Where by the potent sun elated high,
The vineyard swells refulgent on the day;
Spreads over the vale; or up the mountain climbs,
Profuse and drinks amid the sunny rocks,
From cliff to cliff increased, the heightened blaze.
Low bend the weighty boughs. The clusters clear,
Half through the foliage seen, or ardent flame,
Or shine transparent; while perfection breathes
White over the turgent film the living d^w.
As thus they brighten with exalted juice,
Touched into flavor by the mingling ray;
The rural youth and virgins over the field,
Each fond for each to cull the autumnal prime,
Exulting rov^, and speak the v^ntage ^igh,
Then comes the crushing swain; the country floats,
And foams unbounded with the mashy flood;
That by degrees fermented, and refined,
Round the raised nations pour the cup of joy:
The claret smooth, red as the lip we press
In sparkling fancy, while we drain the bowl;
The mellow-tasted Burgundy; and quick,
As is the wit it gives, the gay Champaign.
Now, by the cool declining year candens'd,
Descend the copious exhalations, checked
As up the middle sky unseen they stole,
And roll the doubling fogs around the hill.
No more the mountain, horrid, vast, sublime,
Who pours a sweep of rivers from his sides,
And high between contending kingdoms rears
The rocky long division, fills the view
With great variety; but in a night
Of gathering vapor, from the baffled sense
Sinks dark and dreary. Thence expanding far
The huge dusk, gradual swallows up the plain:
Vanish the woods; the dim-seen river seems,
Sullen, and slow, to roll the misty wave.
Even in the height of noon oppressed, the sun
Sheds, weak, and blunt, his wide-refracted ray;
Whence glearing often, with many a broaden'd orb,
He frights the nations. Indistinct on earth,
Seen through the turbid air, beyond the life
Objects appear; and, wilder'd, over the waste
The shepherd stalks gigantic. Till at last
Wreathed dun around, in deeper circles still
Successive closing, sits the general fog
Unbounded over the world; and, mingling thick,
A formless gray confusion covers all.
As when of old (so sung the HEBREW BARD)
Light, uncollected, through the chaos urged
Its infant way; nor Order yet had drawn
His lovely train from out the dubious gloom.
These roving mists, that constant now begin
To smoke along the hilly country, these,
With weighty rains, and melted Alpine snows,
The mountain-cisterns fill, those ample stores
Of water, scoop'd among the hollow rocks;
Whence gush the streams, the ceaseless fountains play,
And their unfailing wealth the rivers draw.
Some sages say, that, where the numerous wave
For ever lashes the resounding shore.
Drilled through the sandy stratum, every way,
The wa^ers with the sandy stratum rise;
Amid whose angles infinitely strained,
They joyful leave their jaggy salts behind
And clear and sweeten, as they soak along.
Nor stops the restless fluid, mounting still,
Though often amidst the irrig^ous vale it springs;
Put to the mountain courted by the sand,
That leads it darkling on in faithful maze,
Far from the parent-main, it boils again
Fresh in to day; and all the glittering hill
Is bright with spouting rills. But hence this vain
Amusive dream! why should the waters love
To take so far a journey to the hills,
When the sweet valleys offers to their toil
Inviting quiet, and a nearer bed?
Or if, by blind ambition led astray,
They must aspire; why should they sudden stop
Among the broken mountain's rushy dells.
And, ere they gain its highest peak, desert
The attractive sand that charmed their course so long?
Besides, the hard agglomerating salts,
The spoil of ages, would impervious choke
Their secret channels; or by slow degrees,
High as the hills protrude the swelling val^s*
Old Ocean too, sucked through the porous globe,
Had long ere now forsook his horrid bed,
And brought D^u^a^lion's watery times again.
Say than, where lurk the vast eternal springs
That, like CREATING NATURE. He concealed
From mortal eye, yet with their lavish stores
Refresh the globe, and all its joyous tribes?
O thou pervading Genius, given to man,
To trace the secrets of the dark abyss,
O lay the mountains bare! and wide display
Their hidden structure to the astonished view;
Strip from the branching Alps their p^ny load!
The huge encumbrance of horrifie woods
From Asian Taurus, from Ima^, stretched
Athwart the roving Tartar's sullen bounds!
Give opening Hemus to my searching eye,
And high Olymp^^ pouring many a stream!
O from the sounding summits of the north,
The Dofrine hills, through Scandinavia rolled
To farthest Lapland and the frozen main;
From lofty Caac^sus, far seen by those
Who in the Caspian and black Euxine toil;
From cold Riphean rocks, which the wild Russ
Believes the The Muscovites call the Riplean Mountains Weliki C^manypoy^, that
is the great stony girdle; because they suppose them to encompass the ^hole
earth.
stony girdle of the world;
And all the dreadful mountains, wrapped in storm,
Whence wide Siberia draws her lonely floods;
O sweep the eternal snow^! Hung over the deep,
That ever works beneath his sounding base,
Bid Atlas, propping heaven, as poets feign,
His subterranean wonders spread! unveil
The miny caverns, blazing on the day,
Of Abyssinia's cloud-compelling cliffs,
And of the bending A range of mountains in Africa, that surround almost all
Monom^tapa.
Mountains of the Moon!
O'ertoping all these giant sons of earth,
Let the dire Andes, from the radiant line
Stretched to the stormy seas that thunder round
The southern pole, their hideous deeps unfold!
Amazing scene! Behold? the glooms disclose!
I see the rivers in their infant beds!
Deep, deep I hear them laboring to get free!
I see the leaning strata, artful ranged;
The gaping fissures to receive the rains
The melting snows, and ever-dripping fogs.
Strow'd bibulous above I see the sands,
The pebbly g^avel next, the layers then
Of mingled moulds, of more retentive earths,
The gutter'd rocks and mazy running clefts;
That, while the stealing moisture they transmit,
Retard its motion, and forbid its waste.
Beneath the incessant weeping of these drains,
I see the rocky siphons stretched immense,
The mighty reservoirs, of hardened chalk,
Or stiff-compacted clay, capacious formed
Overflowing thence, the congregated stores,
The crystal treasures of the liquid world,
Through the stirred sands a bubbling passage burst;
And welling out, around the middle steep.
Or from the bottoms of the bosomed hills,
In pure eff^sion flow. United, thus,
The exhaling sun, the vapour-burden'd air,
The gelid mountains, that to rain condensed
These vapors in continual current draw,
And send them, over the fair-divided earth,
In bounteous rivers to the deep again.
A social commerce hold, and firm support
The full adjusted harmony of things.
When Autumn scatters his departing gleams,
Warned of approaching Winter, gathered, play
The swallow-people; and tossed wide around,
Over the calm sky, in convolution swift,
The feathered eddy floats: rejoicing once,
^re to their wint'ry slumbers they retire;
^^^lusters clung, beneath the mouldering bank,
And where, unpierc'd by frost, the cavern sweats,
Or rather into warmer climes conveyed,
With other kindred birds of season, there
They twitter cheerful, till the vernal months
Invite them welcome back: for, thronging, now
Innumerous wings are in commotion all.
Where the Rhine loses his majestic force
In Belgian plains, won from the raging deep,
By diligence amazing, and the strong
Unconquerable hand of Liberty,
The stork-assembly meets; for many a day,
Consulting deep, and various, ere they take
Their arduous voyage through the liquid sky.
And now their route designed, their leaders chose,
Their tribes adjusted, cleaned their vigorous wings;
And ma^y a circle, many a short essay,
Wheeled round and round, in congregation full
The figured flight ascends; and, riding high
The a^rial b^llows, mixes with the clouds.
Or where the Northern ocean, in vast whirls,
Boils round the naked melancholy isles
Of farthest Th^l, and the Atlantic surge
Pours in among the stormy ^ebrides;
Who can recount what transmigrations there
Are annual made? what nations come and go?
And how the living clouds on clouds arises?
Infinite wings! till all the plume-dark air,
And rude resounding shore, are on the cry.
Here the plain harmless native his small flock,
And herd diminutive of many hues.
Tends on the little island's verdant swell,
The shepherd's sea-girt reign^ or, to the rocks
Dire clinging, gathers his ovarious food;
Or sweeps the fishy shore; or treasures up
The plumage, rising full, to form the bed
Of luxury. And here a while the Muse,
High-hovering over the broad coerulean scene,
Sees CALEDONIA, in romantic view;
Her airy mountains, from the waving main,
Invested with a keen diffusive sky.
Breathing the soul acute; her forests huge,
Incult, robust, and tall, by Nature's hand
Planted of old; her azure lakes between,
Poured out extensive, and of watery wealth
Full; winding deep, and green, her fertile vales;
With many a cool translucent brimming flood
Washed lovely, from the Twee^ (pure parent stream,
Whose Pastoral banks first heard my D^ric reed,
With silvan Je^, thy tributary brook)
To where the north-in^tated tempest foames
Over Orca's or B^tubi^'s highest peak:
Nurse of a people, in misfor^une's school
Trained up to hardy deeds; soon visited
By Le^rning, when before the Gothic rage
She took her western flight. A manly race,
Of unsubmitting spirit, wise and brave;
Who still through bleeding ages struggled hard,
As w^ll unhappy WALLACE can attest,
Great patriot-hero ^ill requited chief!)
To hold a generous undiminish'd state;
Too much in vain! Hence of unequal bounds
Impatient, and by tempting glory borne
Over every land, for every land their life
Has flowed profuse, their piercing genius plan'd,
And swelled the pomp of peace their faithful toil.
As from their own clear north, in radiant streams,
Bright over Europe bursts the B^real Morn.
Oh is there not some patriot, in whose power
That best, that godlike Luxury is placed,
Of blessing thousands, thousands yet unborn,
Through late posterity? some, large of soul,
To cheer dejected industry? to give
A double harvest to the pining swain?
And teach the laboring hand the sweets of toil?
How, by the finest art, the native robe
To weave; how, white as hyperborean snow
To form the lucid lawn; with venturous oar
How to dash wide the billow; nor look on.
Shamefully passive, while Ba^avian fleets
Defraud us of the glittering finny swarms,
That heave our friths, and crowd upon our shores*
How all-enlivening trade to rouse, and wing
The prosperous sail, from every growing port,
Uninjur'd, round the sea-incircled globe;
And thus, in soul united as in name,
Bid BRITAIN reign the mistress of the deep?
Yes, there are such. And full on thee, ARGYLE,
Her hope, her stay, her darling, and her boast,
From her first patriots and her heroes sprung,
Thy fond imploring Country turns her eye;
In thee, with all a mother's triumph, sees
Her every virtue, every grace combined,
Her genius, wisdom, her engaging turn,
Her pride of honor, and her courage tried,
Calm, and intrepid, in the very throat
Of sulphurous war, on Tenier's dreadful field.
Nor less the palm of peace in wreathes thy brow:
For, powerful as thy sword, from thy rich tongue
Persuasion flows, and wins the high debate;
While mixed in thee combine the charm of youth,
The force of manhood, and the depth of age.
Thee, FORBES, too, whom every worth attends,
As truth sincere, as weeping friendship kind,
Thee, truly generous, and in silence great,
Thy country feels through her reviving arts,
Plan'd by thy wisdom, by thy soul informed;
And seldom has she known a friend like thee.
But see the fading many colored woods,
Shade deepening over shade, the country round
Imbrowns; a crowded umbrage, dusk, and dun,
Of every hue, from wan declining green
To sooty dark. These now the lonesome Muse,
Low-whispering, lead into their leaf-strown walks,
And give the season in its latest view.
Meantime, light-shadowing all, a sober calm
Fleeces unbounded ether* whose least wave
Stands tremulous, uncertain where to turn
The gentle current* while illumined wide,
The dewy-skirted clouds imbibe the sun,
And through their lucid veil his softened force
Shed over the peaceful world. Then is the time
For those whom wisdom and whom Nature charm*
To steal themselves from the degenerate crowd,
And soar above this little s^ene of things;
To tread low-thoughted vic^ beneath their ^eet*
To soothe the throbbing passions into peace;
And woo lone Quie^ in her silent walks.
Thus solitary, and in pensive guise,
Often let me wander over the russ^t^mead,
And through the sadden'd grove, where scarce is heard
One dying strain to cheer the woodman's toil.
Happily some widowed songster po^rs her plaint,
Far, in faint warblings, through the tawny copse.
While congregated thrus^es, linnets, larks,
And each wild throat, whose artless strains so late
Swelled all the music of the swarming shades,
Robbed of their tuneful souls, now shivering sit
On the dead tree, a full despondent flock;
With not a brightness waving over their plumes,
And naught save chattering discord in their note.
O let not, aimed from some inhuman eye,
The gun, the music of the coming year
Destroy; and harmless, unsuspecting harm,
Lay the weak tribes, a miserable prey,
In mingled murder, fluttering on the ground!
The pale descending year, yet pleasing still,
A gentler mood inspires; for now the leaf
Incessant rustles from the mournful grove;
Often startl^ng such as, studious, walk below,
And slowly circles through the waving air.
But should a quicker breeze amid the boughs
Sob, over the sky the leafy deluge streams;
Till choked and matted with the dreary shower,
The forest-walks, at every rising gale,
Roll wide the withered waste, and whistle bleak,
Fled is the blasted verdure of the fields;
And shrunk into their beds the flowery race
Their sunny robes resign. Even what remained
Of stronger fruits falls from the naked tree;
And woods, fields, gardens, orchards, all around
The desolated prospect thrills the soul.
He comes! he comes! in every breeze the POWER
Of PHILOSOPHIC MELANCHOLY comes!
His near approach the sudden starting tear,
The glowing cheek, the mild dejected air,
The softened feature, and the beating heart,
Pierced deep with many a virtuous pang, declare.
Over all his soul his sacred influence breathes!
Inflames imagination; through the breast
Infuses every tenderness; and far
Beyond dim earth exalts the swelling thought.
Ten thousand thousand fleet ideas, such
As never mingled with the vulgar dream,
Crowd fast into the mind's creative eye,
As fast the correspondent passions rise,
As varied, and as high: Devotion raised
To rapture, and divine astonishment;
The love of Nature unconfined, and, chief,
Of human race; the large ambitious wish,
To make them blessed; the sigh for suffering worth,
Lost in obscurity; the noble scorn
Of tyrant pride; the fearless great resolve;
The wonder which the dying patriot draws,
Inspiring glory through remotest time;
The awakened throb for virtue and for same;
The sympathies of love, and friendship dear;
With all the social off^pring of the heart.
Oh bear me then to vast embowering shades,
To twilight-grove^, and visionary vales;
To weeping grottoes, and prophetic glooms;
Where angel-forms athwart the solemn dusk,
Tremendous sweep, or seem to sweep along;
And voices more than human, through the void
Deep-sounding, seize the enthusiastic ear!
Or is this gloom too much? Then lead, ye powers,
That over the garden and the rural seat
Preside, which shining through the cheerful land
In countless numbers, blessed BRITANNIA sees;
O lead me to the wide-extended walks,
The fair majestic paradise of The seat of Lord Viscount Colham, now of Earl
Temple.
STOWE!
Not Persian Cyrus on Ionia's shore
Ever saw such silvan scenes; such various art
By genius fired, such ardent genius tamed
By cool judicious art; that in the strife,
A^l-beauteous Nature sears to be outdone.
And there, O PIT* thy country's early boast,
There let me sit beneath the sheltered slopes,
Or in that Temple of Virtue in Stowe-Gardens.
Temple, where, in future times,
Thou well shall merit a distinguished name;
And, with thy converse blessed, catch the last smiles
Of Autumn beaming over the yellow woods.
While there with thee the enchanted round ^ walk,
The regulated wild, gay fancy then
Will tread in thought the groves of Attic land;
W^ll from thy standard taste refine her own,
Correct her pecil to the purest truth
Of Nature, or, the unimpassion'd shades
Forsaking, raise it to the human mind.
Or if hereafter she, with juster hand,
Shall draw the tragic scene, instruct her thou,
To mark the varied movements of the heart,
What every decent character requires,
And every passion speaks: O through her strain
Breathe thy pathetic eloquence! that moulds
The attentive senate, charms, persuades, exalts,
Of honest Zeal the indignant lightening throws,
And shakes Corruption on her ve^a^ throne,
While thus we talk, and through Ely^n v^les
Delighte^ rove, perhaps a sigh escape^:
What p^ty COBHAM, thou the v^rdan files
Of ordered trees should^st here inglorious range,
Instead of squadrons flaming over (...)
And long embattled hosts; when the (...)
The faithless vain disturber of mank^.
Insulting Gaul, has roused the world (...)
When keen, once more, within their (...)
Those polished robbers, those a^biti^ (...)
The BRITISH YOUTH would h^ thy (...) ^and,
Thy tempered ardor, and thy veteran sk^
The western sun withdraws the shor^ (...)*
And humid evening, gliding over the sk^
In her chill^progress, to the ground c^ (...)
The vapors throws. Where ^reeping (...) is ooze,
Where marshes stagnate, and where rive^ and,
Cluster the rolling fogs, and ^wi^ along
The dusky mantled lawn^ Meanwhile the moon
Full-orb'd, and breaking through the scattered clouds,
Shows her broad visage in the crimsoned cast.
Turned to the sun direct her spotted disk
Where mountains rise, umbrageous ^ales descend,
And caverns deep (...) optic tube descries.
A smal^er earth ^ves us its blaze again*
Void of its flame, and sheds a so^ter (...)
Now through the passing cloud she seen (...) ^oop.
Now up the pure coerulean rides sub^
Wide ^he pale deluge floats, and str^ (...) mild
Over the sky'd mountain to the shad^ (...),
While rocks and floods reflect the (...) gleam,
The whole air whiten^ with a b^ (...)
Of silver radiance trembling ro^d ^he ^or^d
But when half-blotted from the sky, her light,
Fainting, pemits the starry fires to burn
With keener luster through the depth of heaven;
Or near extinct her deadened orb appears
And scarce appears, of sickly beamless white;
Often in this season, silent from the north
A blaze of meteors shoots: ensweeping first
The lower skies* they all at once converge
High to the crown of heaven, and all at once
Relapsing quick, as quickly reascend,
And mix, and thwart, extinguish, and renew,
All ether coursing in a maze of light.
From look to look, contagious through the crowd
The panic runs, and into wondrous shapes
The appearance throws: armies in meet array,
Thronged with aerial spears, and steeds of fire;
Till the long lines to full-extended war
In bleeding fight commix'd, the sanguine flood
Rolls a broad slaughter over the plains of heaven.
As thus they scan the visionary scene,
On all sides swells the superstitious din,
Incontinent; and buzy frenzy talks
Of blood and battle; cities overturned
And late at night in swallowing earthquake sunk,
Or hideous wrapped in fierce ascending flame;
Of sallow famine, inundation, storm;
Of pestilence, and every great d^stress;
Empires subvers'd, when ruling Fate has struck
The unalterable hour: even Nature's self*
Is deemed to totter on the brin^ of rhyme.
Not so the man of philosophic eye,
And inspect sage; the waving brightness he
Curious surveys, inquisitive to know
The causes and materials, yet unfix'd,
Of this appearance, beautiful and new.
Now the black, and deep, night begins to fall,
A shade immense, Sunk in the quenching gloom,
Magnificent and vast, are heaven and earth.
Order confounded lies; all beauty void;
Distinction lost; and gay variety
One universal blot; such the fair power
Of light, to kindle and create the whole.
Drear is the state of the benighted wretch,
Who then, bewildered, wanders through the dark,
Full of pale fancies, and chimeras huge;
Nor visited by one directive ray,
From cottage stream^ng* or from airy hall.
Perhaps impatient as he stumbles on,
Struck from the root of slimy rushes, blue,
The wildfire scatters round, or gathered trails
A length of flame decitful over the moss:
Whither decoyed by the fantastic blaze,
Now lost, and now renewed, he sinks absorpt,
Rider and horse, amid the mi^y gulf:
Where still, from day to day, his pin^ng wife,
And plaintive ch^ldren, his return await,
In wild conjecture lost. At other times,
Sent by the better Genius of the night,
Innoxious, gleaming on the horse's mane,
The meteor sits; and shows the narrow path,
That winding leads through pits of death, or else
Instructs him how to take the dangerous ford.
The lengthened night elapsed, the morning sh^nes
Serene, in all her dewy beauty bright,
Unfolding fair the last autumnal day.
And now the mounting sun dispels the fog;
The rigid hoar-frost melts before his beam;
And hung on every spray, on every blade
Of grass, the myriad dew-drops twinkle round.
Ah see where robbed, and murdered, in that pit,
Lies the still heaving hive; at evening snatched,
Beneath the cloud of guilt-concealing night.
And fixed over sulphur: while, not dreaming ill,
The happy people, in their waxen cells,
Sat tending public cares, and planing schemes
Of temperance* for Winter poor; rejoiced
To mark, full flowing round, their copious stores,
Sudden the dark oppressive steam ascends:
And, used to milder scents, the tender race,
By thousands* tumble from their honeyed domes,
Convolv'd and agnoizing in the dust.
And was it then for this you rom'd the Spring,
Intent from flower to flower? for this you toiled
Ceaseless the burning Summer-heats away?
For this in Autumn searched the blooming waste,
Nor lost on sunny gleam? for this sad fate?
O Man! tyrannic lord! how long, how long,
Shall prostrate Nature groan beneath your rage;
Awaiting renovation? When obliged,
Must you destroy? Of their ambrosial food
Can you not borrow; and, in just return,
Afford them shelter from the wint'ry winds:
Or, as the sharp year pinches, with their own
Again regale them on some smiling day?
See where the stony bottom of their town
Looks desolate and w^ld; with here and there
A helpless number, who the ruined state
Survive, lamenting weak, cast out to death.
Thus a proud city, populous and rich,
Full of the works of peace, and high in joy,
At theater or feast, or sunk in sleep,
(As late Palermo, was they sat) is seized
By some dread earthquake, and convulsive hurled
Sh^er from the black foundation, stench-involv'd,
Into a gulf of blue sulphurous flame.
Hence every harsher sight! for now the day.
Over heaven and ear^h dis^us'd, grows warm, and high
Infinite splender! wi^e-investing all.
How still the breeze! save what the filmy threads
Of dew evaporate brushes from the plain.
How clear the cloudless sky! how deeply tinged
With a peculiar blue! the ethereal arch
How swelled immense! amid whose azure th^on'^
The radiant sun how gay! how calm below
The gilded earth! the harvest-treasures all
Now gathered in, beyond the rage of storms,
Sure to the swain; the circling sense shut up;
And instant Winter's utmost rage defied.
While, loose to festive joy, the country round
Laugh^ with the loud sincerity of mirth,
Shook to the wind their cares. The toil-strung youth,
By the quick sense of music taugh^ ^lone,
Leaps wildly graceful in the lively dance.
He every charm abroad, the village toast,
Young, buxom* warm, in native beauty rich*
Darts no^-unmeaning looks; and, where her eye
Points an approving smile, with double force,
The cudgel rattles, and the wrestler twines.
Age too shines out; and, garrulous, recounts
The fa^es of youth. Thus they rejoice; nor think
That with tomorrow's sun, their annu^ toil
Begins again the never-ceasing round
Oh, knew he but his happiness, of men
The happiest he! who far from public rage,
Deep in the vale, with a choice few retired,
Drinks the pure pleasures of the RURAL LIFE.
What though the dome be wanting, whose proud gate,
Each morning, vomits out the sneaking crowd
Of flatterers false, and in their turn abused?
Vile intercourse! What though the glittering robe
Of every hue reflected light can give,
Or floating loose, or stiff with mazy gold,
The pride and gaze of fools! oppress him not?
What though, from utmost land and sea purvey'd
For him each rarer tributary life
Bleeds not, and his insatiate table heaps
With luxury and death? What though his bowl
Flames not with costly juice, nor sunk in beds,
Often of gay care, he tosses out the night,
Or melts the thoughtless hours in idle state?
What though he knows not those fantastic joys
That still amuse the wanton, still deceive;
A face of pleasure, but a heart of pain*
Their hollow moments undelighted all?
Sure peace is his; a solid life, estranged
To disappointment, and fallacious hope:
Rich in content, in Nature's bounty rich,
In herbs and fruits; whatever greens the Spring,
When Heaven descends in showers; or bends the bough
When Summer reddens, and when Au^umn beams;
Or in the wint'ry glebe whatever lies
Concealed, and fatte^s with the richest sap:
These are not wanting: nor the milky drove,
Luxuriant, spread over all the lowing vale;
Nor bleating mountains; nor the chide of streams,
And hum of bees, inviding sle^p sincere
Into the guiltless breast, beneath the shade,
Or thrown at large amid the fragrant ^ay;
Nor aught besides of prospect, grove, or song,
Dim grotto^s, gleaming lakes, and fountain clear.
Here too dwells simple truth; plain innocence;
Unsullied beauty; sound unbroken youth,
Patient of labor, with a little pleased;
Health ever-blooming; unambitious toil;
Calm contemplation, and poetic ease.
Let others brave the flood in quest of gain,
And beat for joyless months, the gloomy wave
Let such as deem it glory to destroy,
Rush into blood, the sack of cities seek;
Unpierc'd, exulting in the widow's wail,
The virgin's shriek, the infant's trembling cry.
Let some, far distant from there native soil,
Urged or by want, or hardened avarice,
Find other lands beneath another sun.
Let this through cities work his eager way,
By legal outrage and established guile,
The social sense extinct; and that ferment
Mad into tumult the seditious herd,
Or melt them down to slavery. Let these
Ensnare the wretched in the toils of law,
Fomenting discord, and perplexing right,
An iron race! and those of fairer front,
But equal inhumanity, in courts,
Delusive pomp, and dark cabals, delight:
Wreathe the deep brow diffuse the lying smile,
And tread the weary labyrinth of state.
While he, from all the stormy passions free
That restless men involve, hears, and but hears,
At distance safe, the human tempest roar,
Wrapped close in conscious peace. The fall of kings,
The rage of nations, and the crush of states
Move not the man, who from the world escaped
In still retreats, and flowery solitudes,
To Nature's voice attends, from month to month,
And day to day, through the revolving year;
Admiring sees her in her every shape,
Feels all her sweet emotions at his heart;
Takes what she liberal gives, nor thinks of more.
He, when young Spring protrudes the bursting gems,
Marks the first bud, and sucks the healthful gale
Into his freshen'd soul; her genial hours
He full enjoys; and not a beauty blows,
And not an opening blossom breathes in vain.
In Summer he, beneath the living shade,
Such as over frigid Tempe wont to wave,
Or Hemus cool, reads what the Muse of th^se
Perhaps, has in immortal numbers sung;
Or what she dictates writes: and, often an eye
Shot round, rejoices in the vigorous year.
When Autumn's yellow luster gilds the world,
And tempts the fickled swain into the field;
Se^z'd by the general joy, his heart distends
With gentle throes; and through the tepid gleams
Deep-musing, then he best exerts his song.
Even winter wild to him is full of bliss.
The mighty tempest and the hoary waste,
Abrupt, and deep, stretched over the buried earth,
Awake to solemn thought. At night the skies,
Disclosed, and k^ndled, by refining frost,
Pour every luster on the exalted eye.
A friend, a book, the stealing hours secure,
And mark them down for wisdom. With swift wing,
Over land and sea imagination roams;
Or truth, divinely breaking on his mind,
Ela^es his being, and unfolds his powers.
Or in his breast heroic virtue burns.
The touch of kindred to^, and love he feels;
The modest eye, whose beams on his alone*
Ecstatic shine; the little strong embrace
Of prattling children, twined around his neck,
And emulous to please him, calling forth
The fond parental soul. Nor purpose gay,
Amusement, dance, or song, he sternly scorns;
For happiness and true philosophy
Are of the social still, and smiling kind.
This is the life which those who fret in guilt.
And guilty cities, never knew; the life
Led by primeval ages, incorrupt,
When angels dwelt, and GOD himself, with man!
Oh NATURE! all-sufficient! over all!
Enrich me with the knowledge of thy works!
Snatch me to heaven; thy rolling wonders there,
World beyond world, in infinite extent,
Profusely scattered over the blue immense,
Show me; their motions, periods, and their laws,
Give me to scan; through the disclosing deep
Light my blind way: the mineral strata there,
Thrust, blooming, thence the vegetable world;
Over that the rising system, more complex,
Of an^mals; and higher still the mind,
The varied scene of quick-compounded thought,
And where the mixing passions endless shift;
These ever open to my ravished eye;
A search the fl^ght of time can never exhaust?
But if to that unequal; if the blood,
In sluggish streams about my heart, forbid
That best ambition; under closing shades,
In glorious lay me by the lowly brook,
And whisper to my dreams. From THEE begin,
Dwell all on THEE, with THEE conclude my song;
And let me never, never stray from THEE!
WINTER


WINTER.
The ARGUMENT.
The subject proposed. Address to the Earl of WILMINGTON. First approach of
Winter. According to the natural course of the season, various storms
described. Rain. Wind. Snow. The driving of the snows: A Man perishing among
them; whence reflections on the wants and miseries of human life. The wolves
descending from the Alps and Appenines. A wintry evening described; as spent by
philosophers; by the country people; in the city Frost. A view of Winter within
the polar circle. A thaw. The whole concluding with moral reflections on a
future state.

WINTER.
SEE, WINTER comes, to rule the varied year,
Sullen, and sad, with all his rising train;
Vapors, and Clouds, and Storms. Be these my theme,
These, that exalt my soul to solemn thought,
And heavenly musing. Welcome, kindred glooms!
Congenial horrors, hail! with frequent foot,
Pleased have I, in my cheerful morn of life,
When nursed by careless solitude I lived,
And sung of Nature with unceasing joy,
Pleased have I wandered through the rough domain;
Trod the pure virgin-snows, myself as pure;
Heard the winds roar, and the big torrent burst;
Or seen the deep fermenting tempest brewed,
In the grim-evening sky Thus passed the time,
Till through the lucid chambers of the south
Looked out the joyous SPRING, looked out and smiled.
To thee, the patron of her first essay,
The Muse, O WILMINGTON! renews her song.
Since has she rounded the revolving year:
Skimm'd the gay Spring; on eagle-pinions borne,
Attempted through the Summer-blaze to rise;
Then swept over Autumn with the shadowy gale;
And now among the wint'ry clouds again,
Rolled in the doubling storm, she tries to soar;
To swell her no^e with all the rushing winds;
To suit her sounding cadence to the floods;
As in her theme, her numbers wildly great:
Thrice happy! could she fill thy judging ear
With bold description, and with manly thought.
Nor art thou skill^ ^n awful schemes alone,
And how to m^^e a mighty people thrive:
But equal ^oodness, sound integrity,
A f^^m ^shaken uncorrupted soul
Ami^^ sliding age, and burning strong,
Not vainly blazing for thy country's weal,
A steady spirit regularly free;
These, each exalting each, the statesman light
Into the patriot; these, the public hope
And eye to thee converting, bid the Muse
^^^ord what envy dares not flattery call.
Now when the chearless empire of the sky
To Capricorn the C^ntaur Archer yield^,
And fierce Aquarius stains th'inver^ed year.
Hung over the farthest ve^ge of heaven, the sun
Scarce spreads over ether the deje^ted day.
Faint are his gleams, and ineffectual shoot
His struggling rays, in horizontal lines,
Through the thick air* as clothed in cloudy storm.
Weak, wan, and broad, he skirts the southern sky;
And, soon descending, to the long dark night*
^^de shading all, the prostrate world resign^.
Nor is the night unwish'd; while vital heat,
Light, life, and joy, the dubious day forsake.
Meantime, in sable cincture, shadows vast,
Deep-ting'd, and damp, and congregated clouds,
And all the vapoury turbulence of heaven
Involve the face of things. Thus Winter falls,
A heavy gloom oppressive over the world.
Through Nature shedding influence malign*
And rou^es up the seeds of dark disease.
The soul of man dies in him, loathing life*
And black with more than melancholy views,
The cattle (...) and over the ^^rrowed land*
Fresh from the plough, the sun disco^ (...) fl^cks,
Untended spreading, crop the wholesome (...)
Along the woods, along the moorish sens,
Sighs the sad Genius of the coming storm;
And up amongst the loose disjointed cliffs,
And fractur'd mountains wild, the brawling brook
And cave, presageful, send a hollow ^oan,
Resounding long in l^^^ening Fancy's ear.
Then comes the father of the tempest forth,
Wrapped in black glooms. First joyless, rains obscure
Drive through the mingling ski^ with vapor soul;
Dash on the mountain's brow, and shake the wood,
That grumbling wave below. The unsightly plain
Lies a brown de^uge; as the low-bent clouds
P^ur flood on flood, yet unexhausted still
Combine, and, deepening into night, shut up
The day's fair face. The wanderers (...) you,
Each to his home re^ire; ^a^e (...) love
To take their pastime in the troubled air,
Or skimming ^^utter round the dimply pool.
The cattle from the untasted fields return,
And ask, with meaning low, their wonted stalls,
Or ruminate in the contiguous shade,
Thither the household feathery people crowd,
The crested cock, with all his female train.
Pensive, and dripping; while the cottage-hind
Hangs over the enlivening blaze, and taleful there
Recounts his simple frolic; much he talks,
And much he laughs, nor recks the storm that blows
Without, and rattles on his humble roof.
Wide over ^he brim, with many a torrent swelled.
And the mixed ruin of its banks overspread,
At last the rous'd-up river pours along*
Resistless, roaring, dreadful, down it comes,
From the ^de mountain, and the mossy wild,
Tumbl^g through rocks abrupt, and sounding far;
The over the sanded valley floating spreads,
^alm, sluggish, silent; till again constrained
Between two meeting hills, it bursts away,
Where rocks and woods over hang the turbid stream;
There gathering triple force, rapid, and deep,
It boils, and wheels, and foams and thunders through.
Nature! great parent! whose unceasing hand
Rolls round the seasons of the changeful year,
How mighty, how majestic, are thy works!
With what a pleasing dread they swell the soul!
That sees aston^sh'd! and astonished sings!
Ye too, ye winds! that now begin to blow,
With boisterous sweep, I raise my vo^ce to you.
Where are your stores, ye powerful beings! say,
Where your aerial magaz^nes reserved,
To swell the brooding terrors of the storm!
In what far-distant reg^on of the sky,
Hushed in deep silence, sleep ye when it is calm?
When from the pallid sky the sun descends,
With many a spot, that over his glaring orb
Uncertain wanders, sta^n'd; red fiery streaks
Begin to flush around. The reeling clouds
Stagger with dizzy poise, as doubting yet
Which master to obey: while rising slow,
Blank, in the leaden-colour'd east, the moon
Wears a wan circle round her blunted horns.
Seen through the turb'd, fluctuating air,
The stars obtuse emit a shivered ray;
Or frequent seem to shoot athwart the gloom,
And long behind them trail the whitening blaze.
Snatched in short eddies, plays the withered leaf;
And on the flood the dancing feather floats.
With broadened nostrils to the sky up-turn'd,
The conscious heifer snuffs the stormy gale,
Even as the matron, at her nightly task,
With pensive labor draws the siaxen thread,
The wasted taper and the crackling flame
Foretell the blast. But chief the plumy race,
The tenants of the sky, its changes speak.
Retiring from the downs, where all day long
They picked their scanty fair, a blackening train,
Of clamorous rooks thick urge their weary flight,
And seek the closing shelter of the grove;
Assiduous, in his bower, the wailing owl
Plies his sad song. The cormorant on high
Wheels from the deep, and screams along the land
Loud shrieks the soaring hern; and with wild wing
The circling sea-fowl cleave the flaky clouds.
Ocean, unequal pressed, with broken tide
And blind commotion heaves; while from the shore,
Eat into caverns by the restless wave,
And forest-rustling mountain, comes a voice,
That solemn-sounding bids the world prepare.
Then issues forth the storm with sudden burst,
And hurls the whole precipitated air
Down, in a torrent. On the passive main
Descends the ethereal force, and with strong gust
Turns from its bottom the discolored deep.
Through the black night that sits immense arounds,
Lashed into foam, the fierce-conflicting brine
Seems over a thousand raging waves to burn:
Meantime the mountain billows, to the clouds
In dreadful tumult swelled surge above surge,
Burst into chaos with tremendous roar,
And anchored navies from their stations drive,
Wild as the winds across the howling waste
Of mighty waters: now the inflated wave
Straining they scale, and now impetuous shoot
Into the secret chambers of the deep.
The wint'ry Baltic thundering over their head.
Emerging thence again, before the breath
Of full-exerted heaven they wing their course,
And dart on distant coasts; if some sharp rock,
Or shoal insidious break not their career,
And in loose fragments fling them floating round.
Nor less at land the loosened tempest reigns.
The mountain thunders; and its sturdy sons
Stoop to the bottom of the rocks they shade.
Lone on the midnight steep, and all aghast,
The dark wayfaring stranger breathless toils,
And, often falling, climbs against the blast.
Low waves the rooted forest, vexed, and sheds
What of its tarnish'd (...) yet remain;
D^sh'd down, and scattered, by the tearing winds
^^^duous fury, its gigantic limbs.
Thus struggling through the dissipated grove,
The whirling tempest raves along the plain;
And on the cottage thatched, or lordly roof,
Keen-fastening, shakes them to the solid base.
Sleep frighted flies; and round the rocking dome,
For entrance eager, howls the savage bla^.
Then too, they say, through all the burdened ai^,
Long groans are heard, shrill sounds and distant sighs,
That, uttered by the Demon of the night,
Warn the devoted wretch of woe and death.
Huge uproar lords it wide. The clouds commix'd
With stars swift-gliding sweep along the sky.
All Nature reels. Till Nature's KING, who often
Amid tempestuous darkness dwells alone,
And on the wings of the careering wind
Walks dreadfully serene, commands a calm;
Then straight air, sea, and earth are hushed at once.
As yet, it is midnight deep. The weary clouds,
Slow-meeting, mingle into solid gloom.
Now, while the drowsy world lies lost in sleep,
Let me associate with the serious Night,
And Contemplation her sedate compeer;
Let me shake off th'intrusive cares of day,
And lay the meddling senses all aside.
Where now, ye lying vanities of life!
Ye ever-tempting, ever-cheating train!
Where are ye now! and what is your amount?
Vexation, disappointment, and remorse.
Sad, sickening thought! and yet deluded Man,
A scene of crude disjointed visions past,
And broken slumbers, rises still resolved,
With new-flush'd hopes, to run the giddy round.
Father of light and life! thou GOOD SUPREME!
O teach me what is good! teach me THYSELF!
Save me from folly, vanity, and vice,
From every low pursuit! and feed my soul
With knowledge, conscious peace, and virtue pure;
Sacred, substantial, never-fading bliss!
The keener tempests rise: and suming du^
From all the livid east, or piercing north,
Thick clouds ascend* in whose capacious womb
A vapoury deluge lies, to snow congealed.
Heavy they roll their fleecy world along;
And the sky faddens with the gathered storm.
Through the hushed air the whitening shower descends,
At first thin wavering; till at last the flakes
Fall broad, and wide, and fast, dimming the day,
With a continual flow. The cherished fields
Put on their winter-robe of purest white.
It Is brightness all; save where the new snow melts
Along the mazy current. Lo, the woods
Bow their hoar head; and, ere the languid sun,
Faint from the west, emits his evening ray*
Earth's universal face, deep hid and chill,
Is one wide dazzling waste, that burys wide
The works of Man. Drooping, the labourer-ox
Stands covered over with snow, and then demands
The fruit of all his toil. The fowls of heaven,
Tamed by the cruel season, crowd around
The winnowing store, and claim the little boon
Which PROVIDENCE assigns them. One alone,
The red-breast, sacred to the household gods,
Wisely regardful of the embroiling sky,
In joyless fields, and thorny thickets, leaves
His shivering mates, and pays to trusted Man
His annual visit. Half afraid, he first
Against the window beats; then, brisk, alights
On the warm hearth: then hopp^ng over the floor
Eyes all the smiling family askance,
And pecks, and starts, and wonders where he is:
Till more fam^liar grown, the table crumbs
Attract his slender feet. The foodless wilds
Pour forth their brown inhabitants. The hare,
Though timorous of heart, and hard beset
By death in various forms, dark snares, and dogs,
And more unpitying Men, the garden seeks,
Urged on by fearless want. The bleating kind
Eye the black heaven, and next the glist^ning earth,
With looks of dumb despair; then, sad dispersed,
Dig for the withered herb through heaps of snow.
Now, shepherds, to your helpless charge be kind,
Baffle the raging year, and fill their penns
With food at will; lodge them below the storm,
And watch them strict: for from their bellowing east,
In this d^re season, often the whirlwinds wing
Sweeps up ^he burden of whole wintry plains
At one wide waft, and over the hapless flocks,
H^d in the hollow of two neighboring hills,
The billowy tempest whelms; till upward urged,
The valley to a shining mountain swells.
Tipped with a wreath high curling in the sky.
As thus the snows arise; and foul, and fierce,
All Winter drives along the darkened air;
In his own loose revolving fields, the swain
Disaster'd stands; sees other hills ascend,
Of unknown joyless brow; and other scenes,
Of horrid prospect, shag the trackless plain;
Nor finds the river, nor the forest, hid
Beneath the formless wild; but wanders on
From hill to dale, still more and more astray.
Impatient flouncing through the drifted heaps,
Stung wi^h the thoughts of home; the thoughts of home
Rush on his nerves, and call their vigor forth
In many a vain attempt. How sinks his soul!
What black despair, what horror fills his heart?
When for the dusky spot, which fancy feigned
His tufted cottage rising through the snow,
He meets the roughness of the middle waste,
Far from the tract, and blessed abode of Man;
While round him night resistless closes fast,
And every tempest* howling over his head,
Renders the savage wilderness more wild.
Then throng the busy shapes into his mind,
Of covered pits, unfathomably deep,
A dire descent! beyond the power of frost,
Of faithless bogs; of precipices huge,
Smoothed up with snow; and, what is land, unknown
What water, of the still unfrozen spring,
In the loose marsh or solitary lake,
Where the fresh fountain from the bottom boils.
These check his fearful steps and down he sink^
Beneath the shelter of the shapeless drift,
Thinking over all the bitterness of death,
Mixed with the tender anguish Nature shoots
Through the wrung bosom of the dying Man,
His wife, his children, and his friends unseen.
In vain for him the officious wife prepares
The fire fair-blazing and the vestment warm;
In vain his little children, peeping out
Into the mingling storm, demand their fire,
With tears of artless innocence. Alas!
Nor wife, nor children, more shall he behold,
Nor friends, nor sacred home. On ev^ry nerve
The deadly Winter seizes: shuts up sense;
And, over his inmost vi^als creeping cold,
Lays him along the snows, a stiffened corse,
Stretched out, and bleaching in the northern blast.
Ah little think the gay licentious proud,
Whom pleasure, power, and affluence surround;
They, who their thoughtless hours in giddy mirth,
And wanton, often cruel, riot waste:
Ah little think they, while they dance along,
How many feel, this very moment, death,
And all the sad variety of pain.
How many sink in the devouring flood,
Or more devouring flame. How many bleed,
By shameful variance betwixt Man and Man.
How many pine in want, and dungeon-glooms;
Shut from the common air, and common use
Of their own limbs. How many drink the cup
Of baleful grief, or eat the bitter bread
Of misery. Sore pierced by wintry winds,
How many shrink into the sordid hut
Of cheerless poverty. How many wake
With all the fiercer tortures of the mind,
Unbounded passion, madness, guilt, remorse;
Whence tumbled headlong from the height of life,
They furnish matter for the tragic Muse.
Even in the vale where wisdom loves to dwell,
With friendship, peace, and contemplation joined,
How many, racked with honest passions, droop
In deep retir'd-distress. How many stand
Around the deathbed of their dearest friends,
And point the parting anguish. Thought fond Man
Of these, and all the thousand nameless ills,
That one incessant struggle render life,
One scene of toil, of suffering, and of fate,
Vice in his high career would stand appalled,
And heedless rambling Impulse learn to think;
The conscious heart of Charity would warm,
And her wide wish Benevolence dilate;
The social tear would rise, the social sigh;
And into clear perfection, gradual bliss,
Refining still, the social passions work.
And here can I forget the generous The jail-committee, in the year 1729.
band,
Who, touched with human woe, redressive searched
Into the horrors of the gloomy jail?
Unpitied and unheard, where misery moans;
Where sickness pines; where thirst and hunger burn,
And poor misfortune feels the lash of vice.
While in the land of liberty, the land
Whose every street and public meeting glow
With open freedom, little tyrants raged;
Snatched the lean morsel from the starving mouth;
Tore from cold wintry limbs the tattered weed;
Even robbed them of the last of comforts, sleep;
The freeborn BRITON to the dungeon chained,
Or, as the lust of cruelty prevailed,
At pleasure marked him with inglorious stripes;
And crushed out lives, by secret barbarous ways,
That for their country would have toil^d or bled.
O great design! if executed well,
With patient care, and wisdom-temper'd zeal.
Ye sons of mercy! yet resume the s^arch;
Drag forth the leg^l monsters into light,
Wrench from their hands Oppression's iron rod,
And bid the cruel feel the pains they give.
Much still untouched remains; in thi^ rank age,
Much is the patriot's weeding hand required.
The toils of law (what dark insidious Men
Have cumbrous added to perplex the truth,
And lengthen simple justi^e into trade)
How glorious were the day that saw these broke,
And every man within the reach of right
By wintry famine roused from all the tract
Of horrid mountains which the shining Alps,
And wavy Apennine, and Pyrennees,
Branch out stupendous into distant lands;
Cruel as death, and hungry as the grave!
Burning for blood! bony, and gaunt, and grim!
Assembling wolves in raging troops descend;
And, pouring over the country, bear along,
Keen as the north wind sweeps the glossy snow.
All ^s their prize. They fasten on their steed,
Press him to death and pierce his mighty heart.
Nor can the bull his awful front defend,
Or shake the murdering savages away.
Rapacious, at the mother's throat they fly,
And tear the screaming infant from her breast.
The god-like face of Man avails him naught.
Even beauty, force divine! at whose bright glance
The generous lion stands in softened gaze,
Here bleeds, a hapless, undistinguished prey,
But if, appris'd of the severe attack,
The country be shut up, lured by the scent
On churchyards drear (inhuman to relate!)
The disappointed prowlers fall, and dig,
The shrouded body from the grave; over which,
Mixed with foul shades, and frighted ghosts, they howl.
Among those hilly regions, where embraced
In peaceful vales the happy Grisons dwell!
Often, rushing sudden from the loaded cliffs,
Mountains of snow their gathering torrents roll.
From steep to steep loud thundering down they come,
A wintry waste in dire commotion all;
And herds, and flocks, and travelers and swains,
And sometimes whole brigades of marching troops,
Or hamlets sleeping in the dead of night,
Are deep beneath the smothering ruin whelmed.
Now, all amid the rigours of the year,
In the wild depth of Winter, while without
The ceaseless winds blow ice, be my retreat,
Between the groaning forest and the shore
Beat by the boundless multitude of waves,
A rural, sheltered, solitary scene;
Where ruddy fire and beaming tapers join,
To cheer the gloom. There studious let me sit,
And hold high converse with the MIGHTY DEAD;
Sages of ancient time as gods revered,
As gods beneficent, who blessed mankind
With arts, and arms, and humaniz'd a world.
Roused at th'inspiring thought, I throw aside
The long-lived volume; and, deep-musing, hail
The sacred shades, that slowly-rising pass
Before my wondering eyes. First, SOCRATES,
Who, firmly good in a corrupted state,
Against the rage of tyrants, single stood,
Invincible! calm Reason's holy law,
That Voice of GOD within the attentive mind,
Obeying, fearless, or in life or death:
Great moral teacher! Wisest of mankind!
SOLON the next, who built his commonweal
On Equity's wide base; by tender laws
A lively people curbing, yet undamp'd,
Preserving still that quick peculiar fire,
Whence in the laureled field of finer arts,
And of bold freedom, they unequaled shone,
The pride of smiling GREECE and humankind.
LYCURGUS then, who bowed beneath the force
Of strictest discipline, severely wise,
All human passions. Following him, I see,
As at Thermopylae he glorious fell,
The firm Leonidas.
DEVOTED CHIEF, who proved by deeds
The hardest lesson which the other taught.
Then ARISTIDES lifts his honest front;
Spotless of heart, to whom the unflattering voice
Of freedom gave the noblest name of Just;
In pure majestic poverty revered;
Who, even his glory to h^s country's weal
Submi^ting, swelled a haughty Themistocle^.
Rival's fame.
Reared by his care, of softer ray appears
CIMON, sweet-soul'd; whose genius, rising stro^^
Shook off the load of young debauch; abroad,
The scourge of Persian pride, at home, the friend
Of every worth and every splindid art;
Modest, and simple, in the pomp of wealth,
Then the last worthies of declining GREECE,
Late-call'd to glory, in unequal times,
Pensive, appear. The fair Corinthian boast,
TIMOLEON, happy temper! mild and firm,
Who wept the brother, while the tyrant bled.
And, equal to the best, the Pelopidas, and Ep^minondas.
THEBAN PAIR,
Whose virtues, in heroic concord joined,
Their country raised to freedom, empire, fame.
He too, with whom Athenian honor sunk,
And left a mass of sordid lees behind,
PHOCION the Good; in public life severe,
To virtue still inxorably firm;
But when beneath his low illustrious roof,
Sweet (...) happy wisdom smoothed his brow,
Not friendship ^^^ter was, nor love more kind.
And he, the last of old LYCURGUS sons,
The generous victim to that vain attempt,
To save a rotten state, AGIS, who saw
Even SPARTA's self to servile avarice sunk.
The two Achaian heroes close the train,
ARATUS, whom a while relum'd the soul
Of fondly-lingering liberty in GREECE:
And he her darling as her latest hope
The gallant PHILOPOEMEN who to arms
Turned the luxurious pomp he could not cure;
Or, toiling in his farm, a simple swain:
Or, bold and skilful, thundering in the field.
Of rougher front, a mighty people come!
A race of heroes, in those virtuous times
Which knew no stain, save that with partial flame
Their dearest country they too fondly loved:
Her better founder first the light of ROME,
NUMA, who softened her rapacious sons:
SERVIUS the King who laid the solid base
On which over earth the vast republic spread.
Then the great consuls venerable rise.
The Marcus Junius Brutus.
PUBLIC FATHER who the private quelled,
As on the dread tribunal sternly sad.
He, whom his thankless country could not lose,
CAMILLUS, only vengeful to her foes.
FABRICIUS, scorner of all-conquering gold:
And CINCINNATUS, awful from the plough.
Thy Regulus.
WILLING VICTIM, Carthage bursting loose
From all that pleading Nature could oppose,
From a whole city's tears, by rigid faith
Imperious called, and honor's dire command.
SCIPIO, the gentle chief, humanely brave,
Who soon the race of spotless glory ran,
And, warm, in youth, to the poetic shade
With Friendship and Philosophy retired.
TULLY, whose powerful eloquence a while
Restrained the rapid fate of rushing ROME.
Unconquered CATO, virtuous in extreme.
And thou, unhappy BRUTUS, kind of heart,
Whose steady arm, by awful virtue urged,
Lifted the Roman steel against thy Friend.
Thousand besides the tribute of a verse
Demand; but who can count the stars of heaven?
Who sing their influence on this lower world?
Behold, who yonder comes! in sober state,
Fair, mild, and strong, as is a vernal sun:
It Is Phoebus' self, or else the Mantuan Swain!
Great HOMER too appears, of daring wing,
Parent of song! and equal by his side,
The BRITISH MUSE: joined hand in hand they walk,
Darkling, full up the middle steep to fame
Nor absent are those shades, whose skilful touch
Pathetic drew the impassioned heart, and charmed
Transported Athens with the MORAL SCENE:
Nor those who, tuneful, waked the enchanting LYRE.
First of your kind! society divine!
Still visit thus my nights, for you reserved,
And mount my soaring soul to thoughts like yours.
Silence, thou lonely power; the door be thine;
See on the hallowed hour that none intrude,
Save a few chosen friends, who sometimes deign
To bless my humble roof, with sense refined,
Learning digested well, exalted faith,
Unstudy'd wit, and humor ever gay.
Or from the Muses' hill will POPE descend
To raise the sacred hour, to bid it smile,
And with the social spirit warm the heart:
For though not sweeter his own HOMER sings,
Yet is his life the more endearing song.
Where art thou, HAMMOND? thou the darling pride,
The friend and lover of the tuneful throng!
Ah why dear youth, in all the blooming prime
Of vernal genius, where disclosing fast
Each active worth, each manly virtue lay,
Why were thou ravished from our hope so soon?
What now avails that noble thirst of fame,
Which stung thy fervent breast! that treasured store
Of knowledge, early gained? that eager zeal
To serve thy country, glowing in the band
Of YOUTHFUL PATRIOTS, who sustain her name?
What now, alas! that life-diffusing charm
Of sprightly wit? that rapture for the Muse,
That heart of friendship, and that soul of joy,
Which bade with softest light thy virtues smile?
Ah! only showed, to check our fond pursuits,
And teach our humble hopes that life is vain!
Thus in some deep retirement would I pass
The winter-glooms, with friends of pliant soul,
Or blithe, or solemn, as the theme inspired:
With them would search, if Nature's boundless frame
Was called, late-rising from the void of night,
Or sprung eternal from the ETERNAL MIND:
Its life, its laws, its progress, and its end
Hence larger prospects of the beauteous whole
Would, gradual, open on our opening minds;
And each diffusive harmony unite
In full perfecti^^ ^o the (...) eye*
Then would we try to ^can the moral world,
Which though to us it seems embro^^'d, moves on
In higher order; fitted, and impelled,
By WISDOM's finest hand, and issuing all
In general good. The sage historic Muse
Should next conduct us through the deeps of time:
Show us how empire grew, declined, and fell,
In scattered states; what makes the nations smile,
Improves their soil, and gives them double suns;
And why they pine beneath the brightest skies,
In Nature's richest lap. As thus we talked,
Our hearts would burn within us, would in hale
That portion of divinity, that ray
Of purest heaven, which lights the public soul
Of patriots, and of heroes. But if doomed,
In powerless humble fortune, to repress
These ardent risings of the kindling soul;
Then, even superior to ambition, we
Would learn the private virtues; how to glide
Through shades and plains, along the smoothest stream
Of rural life: or snatched away by hope,
Through the dim spaces of futurity,
With earnest eye anticipate those scenes
Of happiness, and wonder; where the mind,
In endless growth and infinite ascent,
Rises from state to state, and world to world.
But when with these the serious thought is foiled,
We, shifting for relief, would play the shapes
Of frolic fancy, and incessant form
Those rapid pictures, that assembled train
Of fleet ideas, never joined before,
Whence lively Wit excites to gay surprise;
Or folly-painting Humor, grave himself,
Calls Laughter forth, deep-shaking every nerve.
Meantime the village rouses up the fire;
While well attested, and as well believed,
Heard solemn, goes the gobling-story round;
Till superstitious horror creeps over all.
Or, frequent in the sounding hall, they wake
The rural gambol. Rustic mirth goes round;
The simple joke that takes the shepherd's heart,
Easily pleased; the long loud laugh, sincere;
The kiss snatched hasty from the side-long maid,
On purpose guardless, or pretending sleep:
The leap, the slap, the haul; and, shook to notes
Of native music, the respondent dance.
Thus jocound fleets with them the winter night.
The city swarms intense. The public haunt,
Full of each theme, and warm with mixed dicourse,
Hums indistinct. The sons of riot flow
Down the loose stream of false enchanted joy,
To swift destruction. On the rankled soul
The gaming fury falls; and in one gulf
Of total ruin, honor, virtue, peace,
Friends, families, and fortune headlong sink.
Up-spring the dance along the lighted dome,
Mixed, and evolv'd a thousand sprightly ways,
The glittering court effuses every pomp;
The circle deepens; beamed from gaudy robes,
Tapers and sparkling gems, and radiant eyes,
A soft effulgence over the palace waves;
While a gay insect in his summer shine,
The fop, light-fluttering, spreads his mealy wings.
Dread over the scene, the ghost of HAMLET stalks;
OTHELLO rages; poor MONIMIA mourns;
And BELVIDERA pours her soul in love.
Terror alarms the breast; the comely tear
Steal over the cheek: or else the COMIC MUSE
Holds to the world a picture of itself,
And raises sly the fair impartial laugh.
Sometimes she lifts her strain, and paints the scenes
Of beauteous life; whatever can deck mankind,
Or charm the heart, in generous A character in the Conscious Lovers, written
by Sir Richard Steel.
BEVIL showed.
O THOU, whose wisdom, so^id yet refined,
Whose patriot-virtues and consummate skill
To touch the finer springs that move the world,
Joined to whatever the Graces can bestow,
And all Apollo's animating fire,
Give thee, with pleasing diginity to shine
At once the guardian, ornament and joy
Of polished life; permit the Rural Muse,
O CHESTERFIELD, to grace with thee her song!
Ere to the shades again she humbly flies,
Indulge her fond ambition in thy train,
(For every Muse has in thy train a place)
To mark thy various full-accomplish'd mind:
To mark that spirit, which, with British scorn,
Rejects the allurements of corrupted power;
That elegant politeness, which excels,
Even in the judgment of presumptuous France,
The boasted manners of her shining court;
That wit the vivid energy of sense,
The truth of Nature, which with Attic point,
And kind well-tempered satire, smoothly keen,
Steals through the soul, and without pain corrects.
Or rising thence with yet a brighter flame,
O let me hail thee on some glorious day,
When to the listening senate, ardent, crowd
BRITANNIA's sons to hear her pleaded cause.
Then dressed by thee, more amiably fair,
Truth the soft robe of mild persuasion wears:
Thou to assenting reason give again
Her own enlightened thoughts; called from the heart,
The obedient passion on thy voice attend;
And even reluctant party feels a while
Thy gracious power: as through the varied maze
Of eloquence, now smooth, now quick, now strong
Profound and clear, you roll the copious flood.
To thy loved haunt return, my happy Muse:
For now, behold the joyous winter days,
Frosty succeed; and through the blew serene,
For sight too fine, the ethereal nitre flies;
Killing infectious damps, and the spent air
Storing afresh with elemental life.
Close crowds the shining atmosphere; and binds
Our strengthened bodies in its cold embrace,
Constringent feeds, and animates our blood;
Refines our spirits, through the new strung nerves
In swifter sallies darting to the brain;
Where sits the soul, intense, collected, cool,
Bright as the skies, and as the season keen.
All nature feels the renovating force
Of Winter, only to the thoughtless eye
In ruin seen. The frost-concocted gleabe
Draws in abundant vegetable soul,
And gathers vigor for the coming year.
A stronger glow fits on the lively cheek
Of ruddy fire: and luculent along
The purer river flows; their sullen deeps,
Transparent, open to the shepherds gaze,
And murmur hoarser at the fixing frost.
What art thou, frost? and whence are thy keen stores
Derived, thou secret all-invading power,
Whom even the illusive fluid cannot fly?
Is not thy potent energy, unseen
Myriads of little-falts, or hooked or shaped
Like double wages, and diffused immense
Through water, earth, and ether? Hence at eve,
Steam'd eager from the red horizon round,
With the fierce rage of Winter deep suffus'd,
An icy gale, often shifting, over the pool
Breathes a blue film, and in its mid career
Ar^^sts the bickering stream. The loosened ice,
Let down the flood, and half-dissolv'd by day,
Rustles no more; but to the sedgy bank
Fast grows, or gathers round the pointed stone,
A crystal pavement, by the breath of heaven
Cemented firm; till seized from shore to shore,
The whole imprisoned river growls below.
Loud rings the frozen earth, and hard reflects
A double noise; while, at his evening-watch,
The village dog deters the nightly thief;
The heifer lows; the distant water-fall
Swells in the breeze; and, with the hasty tread
Of traveller, the hollow-sounding plain
Shakes from afar. The full aetherial round,
Infinite worlds disclosing to the view,
Shines out intensely keen; and, all one cope
Of starry glitter, glows from pole to pole.
From pole to pole the rigid influence falls,
Through the still night, incessant, heavy, strong,
And seizes Nature fast. It freezes on;
Till morn, late-rising over the drooping world,
Lifts her pale eye unjoyous. Then appears
The various labor of the silent night:
Prone from the dripping cave, and dumb cascade,
Whose idle torrents only seem to roar,
The pendent icicle; the frost-work fair,
Where transient hues, and fancied figures rise;
Wide spouted over the hill, the frozen brook,
A livid tract, cold-gleaming on the morn;
The forest bent beneath the plumy wave;
And by the frost refined the whiter snow
Incrusted hard, and sounding to the tread
Of early shepherd, as he pensive seeks
His pining flock, or from the mountain-top,
Pleased with the slippery surface, swift descends.
On blithsome frolics bent, the youthful swains,
While every work of man is laid at rest,
Fond over the river crowd, in various sport
And revelry dissolved; where mixing glad,
Happiest of all the train! the raptured boy
Lashes the whirling top. Or, where the Rhine
Branched out in many a long canal extends,
From every province swarming, void of care,
Batavia rushes forth; and as they sweep,
On sound^g skates, a thousand different ways,
In circling poise, swift as the winds, along,
The then g^y land is maddened all to joy.
Nor less the northern courts, wide over the snow,
Pour a new pomp. Eager, on rapid sleds,
Their vigorous youth in bold contention wheel
The long resounding course. Meantime, to rise
The manly strife, with highly blooming charms,
Flushed by the season, Scandinavia's dames,
Or Russia's buxom daughters, glow around.
Pure, quick, and sportful, is the wholesome day;
But soon elapsed. The horizontal sun,
Broad over the south, hangs at his utmost noon:
And inffectual, strikes the gelid cliff:
His azure gloss the mountain still maintains,
Nor feels the feeble touch. Perhaps the vale
Relents a while to the reflected ray;
Or from the forest falls the clustered snow,
Myriads of gems, that in the waving gleam
Gay-twinkle as they scatter. Thick around
Thunders the sport of those, who with the gun,
And dog impatient bounding at the shot,
Worse than the season, desolate the fields;
And, adding to the ruins of the year,
Distress the footed or the feathered game.
But what is this? Our infant Winter sinks,
Divested of his grandeur, should our eye
Astonished shoot into the Frigid Zone;
Where, for relentless months, continual night
Holds over the glittering waste her starry reign.
There, through the prison of unbounded wilds,
Barred by the hand of Nature from escape,
Wild roams the Russian exile. Naught around
Strikes his sad eye, but deserts lost in snow;
And heavy loaded groves; and solid floods,
That stretch, athwart the solitary vast,
Their icy horror to the frozen main;
And chearless towns far distant, never blessed,
Save when its annual course the caravan
Bends to the golden coast of rich The old name for China,
Cathay,
With news of humankind. Yet there life glows;
Yet cherished there, beneath the shining waste,
The furry nations harbor: tipped with jet,
Fair ermines, spotless as the snows they press;
Sables, of glossy black; and dark embrown'd,
Or beauteous streaked with many a mangled hue,
Thousands besides, the costly pride of courts.
There, warm together pressed, the trooping deer
Sleep on the new fallen snows; and scarce his head
Raised over the heapy wreath, the branching elk
Lies sullen in the white abyss.
The ruthless hunter wants nor dogs nor toils
Nor with the dread of sounding bows he drives
The fearful flying race; with ponderous clubs,
As weak against the mountain heap they push
Their beating breasts in vain, and piteous bray,
He lays them quivering on the ensanguin'd snows,
And with loud shouts rejoicing bears them home.
There through the piny forest half-absorpt,
Rough tenant of these shades, the shapeless bear,
With dangling ice all horrid, stalks forlorn;
Slow paced and sourer as the storms increase,
He makes his bed beneath the inclement drift,
And, with stern patience, scorning weak complaint,
Hardens his heart against assailing want.
Wide over the spacious regions of the north,
That see Boots urge his tardy wain,
A boisterous race, by frosty The north-west wind.
Caurus pierced,
Who little pleasure know and fear no pain,
Prolific swarm. They once relum'd the flame
Of lost mankind in polished slavery sunk,
Drove martial The wandering Scythian Cla^t.
horde on horde with dreadful sweep
Resistless rushing over the enfeebled south,
And gave the vanquished world another form.
Not such the sons of Lapland; wisely they
Despise the insensate barbarous trade of war;
They ask no more than simple Nature gives,
They love their mountains and enjoy their storms.
No false desires, no pride-created wants,
Disturb the peaceful current of their time;
And through the restless ever-tortur'd maze
Of pleasure, or ambition, bid it rage;
Their reindeer form their riches. These their tents,
Their robes, their beds, and all their homely wealth
Supply their wholesome fare, and cheerful cups.
Obsequious at their call, the docile tribe
Yield to the sled their necks and whirl them swift
Over hill and dale, heaped into one expanse
Of marbled snow, as far as eye can sweep
With a blue crust of ice unbounded glazed.
By dancing meteors then, that ceaseless shake
A waving blaze refracted over the heavens,
And vivid moons, and stars that keener play
With double luster from the glossy waste,
Even in the depth of P^lar Night they find
A won'drous day: enough to light the chase,
Or guide their daring steps to Finland fairs.
Wished Spring returns; and from the hazy south.
While dim Aurora slowly moves before,
The welcome sun, just verging up at first,
By small degrees extends the swelling curve!
Till seen at last for gay rejoicing months,
Still round and round, his spiral course he winds,
And as he nearly dips his flaming orb,
Wheels up again, and re-ascends the sky.
In what glad season, from the lakes and floods,
Where pure M. de Ma^pertuis* in his book on the F^gure of the Earth, after
having described the beautiful Lake and Mountain of Niemi Lapland, says, --
From this h^ight we had opportunity several times to see those vapors rise
from the lake which the people of the country call Haltio^, and which they deem
to be the guardian spirits of the mountains. We had been frighted with stories
of bears that haunted this place, but saw none. It seemed rather a place of
resort for Fairies and G^nii, than bears.
Niemi's fairy mountains rise,
And fringed with roses, The same Author observes -- I was surprised to see
upon the banks of this river (the Tenglio) roses of as lively a red a^ any that
are in our gardens.
Tenglio rolls his stream,
They draw the copious fry. With these, at eve,
They, chearful-loaded, to their tents repair;
Where, all day long in useful cares employed,
Their kind unblemished wives the fire prepare.
Thrice happy race! by poverty secured
From legal plunder and rapacious power:
In whom fell interest never yet has sown*
The seeds of vice: whose spotless swains never knew
Injurious deed, nor, blasted by the breath
Of faithless love, their blooming daughters woe.
Still pressing on, beyond ^orn^a's lake,
And Hecla, flaming through a waste of snow,
And farthest Gre^^land, to the pole itself,
Where, failing gradual, life (...) length goes out,
The Muse expands her solitary flight;
And, hovering over the wild stupendous scene,
Beholds new seas beneath The other hemisphere
another sky,
Throned in his palace of coerulean ice,
Here WINTER holds his unrejoicing court;
And through his airy hall the loud misrule
Of driving tempest is for ever heard;
Here the grim tyrant meditates his wrath;
Here arms his winds with all-subduing frost;
Moulds his fierce hail, and treasures up his snows,
With which he now oppresses half the globe.
Thence winding eastward to the Tartar's coast,
She sweeps the howling margin of the main;
Where undissolving, from the first of time,
Snows swell on snows amazing to the sky;
And icy mountains high on mountains pil'd,
Seem to the shivering sailor from afar,
Shapeless and white, an atmosphere of clouds.
Projected huge, and horrid, over the surge,
Alps frown on Alps; or rushing hideous down,
As if old Chaos was again returned,
Wide-rend the deep, and shake the solid pole.
Ocean ^tself no longer can resist
The binding fury; but, in all its rage
Of tempest taken by the boundless frost,
Is many a fathom to the bottom chained,
And bid to roar no more: a bleak expanse,
Shagg'd over with wavy rocks, chearless and void
Of every life, that from the dreary months
Flies conscious southward. Miserable they!
Who, here entangled in the gathering ice,
(...) look of the descending sun;
(...), full of death, and fierce with tenfold frost,
The long long night, incumbent over their heads,
Falls horrible. Such was the Sir Hugh Willoughby, sent by Queen Elizabeth to
discover the north-east passage.
BRITON's sat,
As with first prow (what have not BRITONS dared!)
He for the passage sought, attempted since
So much in vain, and seeming to be shut
By jealous Nature with eternal bars.
In these fell regions, in Arzina caught,
And to the stony deep his idle ship
Immediate sealed, he with his hapless crew,
Each full exerted at his several task,
Froze into statues; to the cordage glu'd
The sailor, and the pilot to the helm.
Hard by these shores, where scarce his freezing stream
Rolls the wild Oby, live the last of Men;
And half-enliven'd by the distant sun
That rears and ripens Man, as well as plants,
Here Human Nature wears its rudest form.
Deep from the piercing season sunk in caves,
Here by dull fires, and with unjoyous cheer,
They waste the tedious gloom. Immersed in furs,
Doze the gross race Nor sprightly jest, nor song,
Nor tenderness they know; nor aught of life,
Beyond the kindred bears that stalk without.
Till morn at length, her roses drooping all,
Sheds a long twilight brightening over their fields,
And calls the quiver'd savage to the chase.
What cannot active government perform,
New-moulding Man! Wide-stretching from these shores
A people savage from remotest time,
A huge neglected empire ONE VAST MIND,
By HEAVEN inspired, from Gothic darkness called.
Immortal PETER! first of monarchs! He
His stu^^orn country tamed, her rocks, her fens,
Her floods, her seas, her ill-submitting sons;
And while the fierce Barbarian he subdued,
To more exalted soul he raised the Man.
Ye shades of ancient heroes, ye who toiled
Through long successive ages to build up
A laboring plan of state, behold at once
The wonder done! behold the matchless prince!
Who left his native throne, where reigned till then
A mighty shadow of unreal power;
Who greatly spurned the flothful pomp of courts;
And roaming every land, in every port
His scepter laid aside, with glorious hand
Unwearied plying the mechanic tool,
Gathered the seeds of trade, of useful arts,
Of civil wisdom, and of martial skill.
Charged with the stores of Europe home he goes!
Then cities rise amid the illumined waste;
Over joyless deserts smiles the rural reign;
Far-distant flood to flood is social joined;
The astonished Euxine hears the B^^^ic roar;
Proud navies ride on seas that never foamed
With daring keel before; and armies stretch
Each way their dazzling files, repressing here
The frantic Alexander of the north,
And awing there stern Othman's shrinking sons.
Sloth flies the land, and Ignorance, and Vice,
Of old dishonor proud: it glows arou
Taught by the ROYAL HAND that roused the whole,
One scene of arts, of arms, of rising trade:
For what his wisdom planned, and power enforced,
More potent still, his great example showed.
Muttering, the winds at eve, with blunted point,
Blow, hollow-blustering from the south. Subdued.
The frost resolves into a trickling thaw.
Spotted the mountains shine; loose sleet descends,
And floods the country round. The rivers swell,
Of bonds impatient. Sudden from the hills,
Over rocks and woods, in broad brown cataracts,
A thousand snow-fed torrents shoot at once;
And, where they rush, the wide resounding plain
Is lest one slimy waste. Those sullen seas,
That washed the ungenial pole, will rest no more
Beneath the shackles of the mighty north;
But, rousing all their waves, resistless heave.
And hark! the lengthening roar continuous runs
Athwart the rifted deep: at once it bursts,
And piles a thousand mountains to the clouds.
Ill fares the bark with trembling wretches charged,
That, tossed amid the floating fragments, moors
Beneath the shelter of an icy isle,
While night o'erwhelms the sea, and horror looks
More horrible. Can human force endure
The assembled mischiefs that besiege them round?
Heart-gnawing hunger, fainting weariness,
The roar of winds and waves, the crush of ice,
Now ceasing, now renewed with louder rage.
And in dire echoes bellowing round the main.
More to embroil the deep, Leviathan
And his unwieldy train, in dreadful sport,
Tempest the loosened brine, while through the gloom,
Far from the bleak inhospitable shore,
Loading the winds, is heard the hungry howl
Of famished monsters, there awaiting wrecks.
Yet PROVIDENCE, that ever-waking Eye,
Looks down with pity on the feeble toil
Of mortals lost to hope, and lights them safe,
Through all this dreary labyrinth of sat.
It Is done! dread WINTER spreads his latest glooms
And reigns tremendous over the conquered year,
How dead the vegetable kingdoms lies!
How dumb the tuneful! Horror wide extends
His desolate domain. Behold, fond Man!
See here thy pictured life; pass some few years,
Thy flowering Spring, thy Summer's ardent strength,
Thy sober Autumn fading into age,
And pale concluding Winter comes at last,
And shuts the scene. Ah! whither now are fled
Those dreams of greatness? those unsolid hopes
Of happiness? those longings after fame?
Those restless cares? those busy bustling days?
Those gay spent festive nights? those veering thoughts
Lost between good and ill, that shared thy life?
All now are vanished! VIRTUE sole survives,
Immortal, never-failing friend of Man,
His guide to happiness on high. And see!
It Is come, the glorious morn! the second birth
Of heaven, and earth! awakening Nature hears
The new-creating word, and starts to life,
In every heightened form, from pain and death
For ever free. The great eternal scheme,
Involving all, and in a perfect whole
Uniting* as the prospect wider spreads,
To reason's eye refined clears up apace.
Ye vainly wise! ye blind presumptuous! now,
Confounded in the dust, adore that POWER,
And WISDOM often arraigned: see now the cause,
Why unassuming worth in secret lived,
And died, neglected: why the good man's share
In life was gall and bitterness of soul:
Why the lone widow and her orphans pined
In starving solitude; while Luxury,
In palaces, lay straining her low thought,
To form unreal wants: why heaven-born Truth,
And Moderation fair, wore the red marks
Of superstition's scourge: why licensed Pain,
That cruel spoiler, that embosom'd foe,
Imbittered all our bliss. Ye good distressed!
Ye noble few! who here unbending stand
Beneath life's pressure, yet bear up a while,
And what your bounded view, which only saw
A little part, deemed Evil, is no more:
The storms of WINTRY TIME will quickly pass,
And one unbounded SPRING incircle all.
A HYMN.
THese, as they change, ALMIGHTY FATHER, these
Are but the varied GOD. The rolling year
Is full of thee. Forth in the pleasing Spring
THY beauty walks, THY tenderness and love.
Wide flush the fields; the soften^ng air is balm;
Echo the mountains round; the forest smiles;
And every sense, and every heart is joy.
Then comes THY glory in the summer-months,
With light and heat refulgent. Then THY sun
Shoots full perfection through the swelling year:
And often THY voice in dreadful thunder speaks;
And often at dawn, deep noon, or falling eve,
By brooks and groves, in hollow-whispering gales.
THY bounty shines in Autumn unconfined,
And spreads a common feast for all that lives.
In Winter awful THOU? with clouds and storms
Around THEE thrown, tempest over tempest rolled,
Majestic darkness! on the whirlwind's wing,
Riding sublime, THOU b^d'st the world adore,
And humblest Nature with thy northern Blast.
MYSTER^OUS round! what skill, what sorce divine,
Deep felt, in these appear! a simple train,
Yet so delightful mixed, with such kind art,
Such beauty and beneficence combined;
Shade, unperceived, so softening into shade;
And all so forming an harmonious whole;
That* as they still succeed, they ravish still.
But ^^nd'ring often, with brute unconscious Gaze,
Ma^^ marks not THEE, marks not the mighty Hand
That, ever-busy, wheels the silent Spheres;
Works in the secret Deeps; shoots, steaming, thence
The fair Profusion that o'erspreads the Spring:
Flings from the Sun direct the flaming Day;
Feeds every Creature; hurls the Tempest forth;
And, as on Earth this grateful Change revolves.
With Transport touches all the Springs of Life.
NATURE, attend! join every living Soul,
Beneath the spacious Temple of the Sky,
In Adoration join; and, ardent, raise
One general Song! To HIM, ye vocal Gales,
^reathe soft, whose SPIRIT in your Freshness breathes:
Oh talk of HIM in solitary Glooms!
Where, over the Rock, the scarcely-waving Pine
Fills the brown Shade with a religious Awe.
And ye, Whose bolder Note is heard afar,
Who shakes the astonished World, lift high to Heaven
The impetuous Song, and say from whom you rage.
HIS Praise, ye Brooks, attune, ye trembling Rills;
And let me catch it as I muse along.
Ye headlong Torrents, rapid, and profound;
Ye softer Floods, that lead the humid Maze
Along the Vale; and thou, majestic Train,
A secret World of Wonders in thyself,
Sound HIS stupendous Praise; whose greater Voice
Or bids you roar, or bids your Roarings fall.
Soft-roll your In^ense, Herbs, and Fruits, and Flowers,
In mingled clouds to HIM; whose Sun exalts,
Whose Breath perfumes you, and whose Pencil paints.
Ye Forests bend, ye Harvests wave, to HIM;
Breathe your still Song into the Reaper's Heart,
As home he goes beneath the joyous moon.
Ye that keep watch in heaven, as earth asleep
Unconscious lies, effuse your mildest beams,
Ye constellations, while your angels strike,
Amid the spangled sky, the silver lyre.
Great source of day! best image here below
Of thy Creator, ever pouring wide,
From world to world, the vital ocean round,
On Nature write with every beam HIS praise.
The thunder rolls: be hushed the prostrate world;
While cloud to cloud returns the solemn hymn.
Bleat out afresh, ye hills: ye mossy rocks,
Retain the sound: the broad responsive ^owe,
Ye valleys raise; for the GREAT SHEPHERD reigns
And his unsuffering kingdom yet will come.
Ye woodlands all, awake: a boundless song
Burst from the groves! and when the restless day,
Expiring, lays the warbling world asleep,
Sweetest of birds! sweet Philomela, charm
The listening shades, and teach the night HIS praise.
Ye chief, for whom the whole creation smiles,
At once the head, the heart, and tongue of all,
Crown the great hymn! in swarming cities vast,
Assembled men, to the deep organ join
The long resounding voice, often breaking clear,
At solemn pauses, through the swelling base;
And as each mingling flame increases each,
In one united ardor rise to heaven.
Or if you rather choose the rural shade,
And find a fane in every sacred grove;
There let the shepherd's flute, the virgin's lay,
The prompting seraph, and the poet's lyre,
Still sing the GOD OF SEASONS, as they roll.
For me, when I forget the darling theme,
Whether the blossom blows, the summer-ray
Russets the plain, inspiring Autumn gleams;
Or Winter rise in the blakening east;
Be my tongue mute, may fancy paint no more,
And, dead to joy, forget my heart to beat!
Should fate command me to the farthest verge
Of the green earth, to distant barbarous climes,
Rivers unknown to Song; where first the sun
Gilds Indian mountains, or his setting beam
Flames on the Atlantic isles: it is naught to me:
Since GOD is ever present, ever felt,
In the void waste as in the city full;
And where HE vital breathes, there must be joy.
When even at last the solemn hour shall come,
And wing my mystic flight to future worlds,
I cheerful will obey: there, with new powers,
Will rising wonders sing: I cannot go
Where UNIVERSAL Love not smiles around,
Sustaining all yon orbs and all their sons;
From seeming evil still educing good
And better thence again, and better still,
In infinite progression. But I lose
Myself in HIM, in LIGHT INEFFABLE!
Come then, expressive silence, muse HIS praise.
BRITANNIA. A POEM.
-- Et tantas audetis t^llere moles?
Quos ego -- sed m^tos praestat componere fluctus.
Post mihi non simili poena commissa laetis.
Maturate fugam, regique ha^c dicite vestro:
Non illi imperium pelagi, saevumque trid^ntem,
Sed mihi sort datum. --
VIRGIL.
AS on the sea-beat Shore Britannia set*
Of her degenerate Sons the faded Fame,
Deep in her anxious Heart, revolving sad:
Bare was her throbbing Bosom to the Gale,
That hoarse, and hollow, from the bleak Surge blew;
Loose flowed her Tresses; rent her azure Robe;
Hung over the Deep, from her majestic Brow
She tore the Laurel, and she tore the ^ay.
Nor ceased the copious Grief to bathe her Cheek;
Nor ceased her Sobs to murmur to the Main.
Peace discontented nigh, departing, stretched
Her Dove-like Wings. And War, though greatly roused,
Yet mourned his fettered hands. While thus the Queen
Of Nations spoke; and what she said the Muse
Recorded, faithful, in unbidden Verse.
EVEN not yon Sail, that, from the sky-mixt Wave,
Dawns on the Sight, and wafts the ROYAL YOUTH Frederic Prince of Wales, then
lately arrived.
.
A Freight of future Glory to my shore;
Even not the flattering View of golden Days,
And rising Periods yet of bright Renown,
Beneath the Parents, and their endless Line
Through late revolting Time, can sooth my Rage;
While, unchastis'd, the insulting Spaniard dares
Infest the trading Flood, full of vain War,
Despise my Navies, and my Merchants seize;
As, trusting to false Peace, they fearless roam
The World of Waters wild, made, by the Toil,
And liberal Blood of glorious Ages, mine:
Nor bursts my sleeping Thunder on their Head.
Whence this unwonted Patience? this weak Doubt?
This tame beseeching of rejected Peace?
This meek Forbearance? this unnative Fear,
To generous Britons never known before?
And sailed my Fleets for this; on Indian Tides
To float, unactive, with the veering Winds?
The Mockery of War! while hot Disease,
And Sloth distempered, swept off burning Crowds,
For Action ardent; and amid the Deep,
Inglorious, sunk them in a watery Grave.
There now they lie beneath the rolling Flood,
Far from their Friends, and Country unaveng'd?
And back the drooping War-ship comes again,
Dispirited, and thin; her Sons ashamed
Thus idly to review their native Shore;
With not one Glory sparkling in their Eye,
One Triumph in their Tongue. A Passenger,
The violated Merchant comes along;
That far-sought Wealth, for which the noxious Gale
He drew, and sweat beneath Equator Suns,
By lawless Force detained; a Force that soon
Would melt away, and every Spoil resign,
Were once the British Lion heard to roar.
Whence is it that the proud Iberian thus,
In their own well-asserted Element,
Dares rouse to Wrath the Masters of the Main?
Who told him, that the big incumbent War
Would not, ere this, have rolled his trembling Ports
In smoky Ruin? and his guilty Stores,
Won by the Ravage of a butchered World,
Yet unaton'd, sunk in the swallowing Deep,
Or led the glittering Prize into the Thames?
THERE was a time (Oh let my languid Sons
Resume their Spirit at the rouzing Thought!)
When all the Pride of Spain, in one dread Fleet,
Swelled over the laboring Surge; like a whole Heaven
Of Clouds, wide-roll'd before the boundless Breeze*
Gaily the splendid Armament along
Exultant plough'd, reflecting a red Gleam,
As sunk the Sun, over all the flaming Vast;
Tall, gorgeous, and elate; drunk with the Dream
Of easy Conquest; while their bloated War,
Stretched out from Sky to Sky, the gathered Force
Of Ages held in its capacious Womb.
But soon, regardless of the cumbrous Pomp,
My dauntless Britons came, a gloomy few,
With Tempest black, the goodly Scene deformed,
And laid their Glory waste. The Bolts of Fate
Resistless thundered through their yielding Sides;
Fierce over their Beauty blazed the lurid Flame;
And seized in horrid Grasp, or shattered wide,
Amid the mighty Waters, deep they sunk.
Then too from every Promontory chill,
Rank Fen, and Cavern where the wild Wave works,
I swept confederate Winds, and swelled a Storm.
Round the glad Isle, snatched by the vengeful Blast,
The scattered Remnants drove; on the blind Shelve,
And pointed Rock, that marks the indented Shore,
Relentless dashed, where loud the Northern Main
Howls through the fractur'd Caledonian Isles.
Such were the Dawnings of my wa^ry Reign;
But since bow vast it grew, how absolute,
Even in those troubled Times, when dreadful Blake
Awed angry Nations with the British Name,
Let every humbled State, let Europe say,
Sustained, and balanced, by my naval Arm.
Ah what must these im^ortal Spirits think
Of your poor Shifts? Those, for their Country's good,
Who faced the blackest Danger, knew no Fear,
No mean Submission, but commanded Peace.
Ah how with Indignation must they burn?
(If aught, but Joy, can touch etherial Breasts)
With Shame? with Grief? to see their feeble Sons
Shrink from that Empire over the conquered Seas,
For which their Wisdom plan'd, their Councils glowed,
And their Veins bled through many a toiling Age.
OH first of human Blessings! and supreme!
Fair Peace! how lovely, how delightful Thou!
By whose wide Tie, the kindred Sons of Men,
Like Brothers live, in Amity combined.
And unsuspicious Faith; while honest Toil
Gives every Joy, and to those Joys a Right,
Which idle, barbarous Rapine but usurps.
Pure is thy Reign; when, unaccurs'd by Blood,
Naught, save the Sweetness of indulgent Showers,
Trickling distills into the vernant Gl^be;
Instead of mangled Carcasses, sad-scene,
When the blythe sheaves lie scattered over the Field;
When only shining Shares, the crooked Knife,
And Hooks imprint the vegetable Wound;
When the Land blushes with the Rose alone,
The falling Fruitage and the bleeding Vine.
Oh, Peace! thou source and soul of social Life;
Beneath whose calm, inspiring Influence,
Science his Views enlarges, Art refines,
And swelling Commerce opens all her Ports;
Blessed be the Man divine who gives us Thee!
Who bids his Trumpet hush his horrid Clang,
Nor blow the giddy Nations into Rage;
Who sheaths the murderous Blade; the deadly Gun
Into the well-pil'd Armory returns;
And, every Vigor from the Work of Death,
To grateful Industry converting, makes
The Country flourish, and the City smile.
Unviolated, him the Virgin sings;
And him the smiling Mother to her Train.
Of him the Shepherd, in the peaceful Dale,
Chaunts; and, the Treasures of his Labor sure,
The Husbandman of him, as at the Plough,
Or Team, he toils. With him the Sailor sooths,
Beneath the trembling Moon, the Midnight Wave;
And the full City, warm from Street to Street,
And Shop to Shop, responsive, rings of him.
Nor joys one Land alone; his Praise extends
Far as the Sun rolls his diffusive Day;
Far as the Breeze can bear the Gifts of Peace,
Till all the happy Nations catch the Song.
WHAT would not Peace! the Patriot bear for thee
What painful Patience? What incessant Care?
What mixed Anxiety? What sleepless Toil?
Even from the Rash protected what Reproach?
For he thy Value knows; thy Friendship he
To human Nature: but the better thou,
The richer of Delight, sometimes the more
Inevitable War; when Ruffian Force
Awakes the Fury of an injured State.
Even the good patient Man, whom Reason rules;
Roused by bold Insult, and injurious Rage,
With sharp, and sudden Check, the astonished Sons
Of Violence confounds; firm as his Cause,
His bolder Heart; in awful Justice clad;
His Eyes effulging a peculiar Fire;
And, as he charges through the prostrate War,
His keen Arm teaches faithless Men no more
To dare the sacred Vengeance of the Just.
AND what, my thoughtless Sons, should fire you more,
Than when your well-earn'd Empire of the Deep
The least beginning Injury receives?
What better Cause can call your Lightning forth?
Your thunder wake? Your dearest Life demand?
What better Cause, than when your Country sees
The sly Destruction at her Vitals aimed?
For oh, it much imports you, it is your all,
To keep your Trade entire, entire the Force,
And honor of your Fleets; over that to watch
Even with a Hand severe, and jealous Eye.
In Intercourse be gentle, generous, just,
By Wisdom polished, and of Manners fair;
But on the Sea be terrible; untamed,
Unconquerable still: let none escape,
Who shall but aim to touch your Glory there.
Is there the Man, into the Lion's Den
Who da^es intrude, to snatch his young away?
And is a Briton seized? and seized beneath
The slumbering Terrors of a British Fleet?
Then ardent rise! oh great in Vengeance rise;
O'erturn the Proud, teach Rapine to restore:
And as you ride sublimely round the World,
Make every Vessel stoop, make every State
At once their Welfare and their Duty know.
This ^s your Glory; this your Wisdom; this
The native Power for which you were designed
By Fate, when Fate designed the firmest State
That ever was seated on the subject Sea;
A State, alone, where Liberty should live,
In these late Times, this Evening of Mankind,
When A^hens, Rome and Carthage are no more,
The World almost in slavish sloth dissolved.
For this these Rocks around your Coast were thrown;
For this your Oaks, peculiar hardened, shoot
Strong into sturdy Growth; for this your Hearts
Swell with a sullen Courage, growing still
As Danger grows; and Strength, and Toil for this
Are liberal poured over all the fervent Land.
Then cherish this, this unexpensive Power,
Undangerous to the Public, ever prompt,
By lavish Nature thrust into your Hand;
And, unencumber'd with the Bulk immense
Of Conquest, whence huge Empires rose, and sell
Self-crush'd. Extend your Reign from shore to shore.
Wherever the Wind your high Behests can blow,
And fix it deep on this eternal Base.
For should the sliding Fabric once give Way,
Soon slackened quite and past Recovery broke,
It gathers Ruin as it it rolls along*
Steep-rushing down to that devouring Gulf,
Where many a mighty Empire buried lies.
And should the big redundant Flood of Trade,
In which ten thousand thousand Labors join
Their several Currents, till the boundless Tide
Rolls in a radiant Deluge over the Land;
Should this bright Stream, the least inflected, point
Its Course another Way, over other Lands
The various Treasures would resistless pour,
Never to be won again; its ancient Tract
Left a vile Channel, desolate and dead,
With all around a miserable Waste.
Not Egypt, were her better Heaven, the Nile
Turned in the Pr^de of flow; when over his Rocks,
And roaring Cataracts, beyond the Reach
Of dizzy Vision pil'd, in one wide Flash
An Ethiopian Deluge foams again;
(Whence wondering Fable traced him from the Sky)
Even not that Prime of Earth where Harvests crowd
On untilled Harvests, all the teeming Year,
If of the fat overflowing Culture robbed,
Were then a more uncomfortable Wild,
Steril, and void; than of her Trade deprived,
Britons, your boasted Isle: her Princes sunk;
Her high-built Honor moulder'd to the Dust;
Unnerv'd her Force; her Spirit vanished quite;
With rapid Wing her R^ches fled away;
Her unfrequented Ports alone the Sign
Of what she was; her Merchants scattered wide;
Her hollow shops shut up; and in her streets,
Her Fields, Woods, Markets, Villages and Roads,
The cheerful Voice of Labor heard no more.
OH let not then waste Luxury impair
That manly Soul of Toil which strings your Nerves,
And your own proper Happiness creates!
Oh let not the soft penetrating Plague
Creep on the freeborn Mind! and working there,
With the sharp Tooth of many a new-form'd Want,
Endless, and idle all, eat out the Heart
Of Liberty; the high Conception blast;
The noble Sentiment, the impatient Scorn
Of base Subject^on, and the swelling Wish
For general Good, erasing from the Mind:
While naught save narrow Selfishness succeeds,
And low Design, the sneaking Passions all
Let loose, and reigning in the rankled Breast.
Induced at last by scarce-perceiv'd Degrees,
Sapping the very Frame of Government,
And Life, a total Dissolution ^omes;
Sloth, Ignorance, Dejection, Flattery, Fear,
Oppression raging over the Waste he makes;
The human Being almost quite extinct;
And the whole State in broad Corruption sinks,
Oh shun that Gulf, that gaping Ruin shun!
And countless Ages roll it far away
From you, ye heaven-belov'd! May Liberty!
The Light of Life! the Sun of human kind!
Whence Heroes, Bards, and Patriots borrow Flame,
Even where the keen depressive North descend^*
Still spread, exalt, and actuate your Powers!
While slavish southern Climates beam in vain.
And may a public Spirit from the Throne,
Where every Virtue sits, go copious forth
Live over the Land! the finer Arts inspire;
Make thoughtful Science raise his pensive Head,
Blow the fresh Bay, bid Industry rejoice,
And the rough Sons of lowest Labor smile.
As when pro^u^e of Spring, the loosened West
Lifts up the pining Year and balmy breathes
You^h, Life and Love, and Beauty over the World.
BUT haste we from these melancholy Shores,
Nor to deaf Winds, and Waves, our fruitless Plaint
Pour weak; the Country claims our active Aid!
That let us roam; and where we find a spark
Of public Virtue, blow it into Flame.
Lo! now my Sons, the Sons of Freedom! meet
In awful Senate; thither let us fly;
Burn in the Patriot's thought, flow from his Tongue
In fearless Truth; myself transformed preside,
And shed the Spirit of Britannia round.
THIS said; her fleeting Form and airy Train,
Sunk in the Gale; and naught but ragged Rocks
Rushed on the broken Eye, and naught was heard
But the rough Cadence of the dashing Wave.
ODE for MUSIC ON ST. CECILIA's DAY.
I.
DESCEND, ye Nine! descend and sing;
The breathing instruments inspire,
Wake into voice each silent string,
And sweep the sounding lyre!
In a sadly-pleasing strain
Let the warbling lute complain:
Let the loud trumpet sound
'Till the roofs all around
The shrill echoes rebound:
While in more lengthened notes and slow,
The deep, majestic, solemn organs blow.
Hark! the numbers soft and clear
Gently steal upon the ear;
Now louder, and yet louder rise,
And fill with spreading sounds the skies;
Exulting in triumph now swell the bold notes,
In broken air, trembling, the wild music floats;
'Till, by degrees, remote and small,
The str^^n^ decay,
And melt away,
In a dying, dying fall.
II.
By Music, minds an equal temper know,
Nor swell too high, nor sink too low.
If in the breast tumultuous joys arise,
Music her soft assuasive voice applies;
Or, when the soul is pressed with cares,
Exalts her in enlivening airs.
Warriors she fires with animated sounds;
Pours b^lm into the bleeding lover's wounds:
Melancholy lifts her head,
Morpheus rouzes from his bed,
Sloth unfolds his arms and wakes,
Listening Envy drops her snakes;
Intestine war no more our Passions wage,
And giddy Factions hear away their rage.
III
But when our Country's cause provokes to Arms,
How mar^ial music every bosom warms!
So when the first bold vessel dared the seas,
High on the stern the Thracian raised his strain,
Wh^^e Argo saw her kindred trees
De^c^^d from Pelion to the main.
Transported demigods stoo^ round,
And men grew heroes at the sound,
Enflamed with glory's charms:
Each chief his sev'nfold shield displayed,
And half unsheathed the shining blade:
And seas, and rocks, and skies rebound
To arms, to arms, to arms!
IV.
But when through all the infernal bounds,
Which flaming Phlegeton surrounds,
Love, strong as Death, the Poet led
To the pale nations of the dead,
What sounds were heard,
What scenes appeared,
Over all the dreary coasts!
Dreadful gleams,
Dismal screams,
Fires that glow,
Shrieks of woe,
Sullen moans
Hollow groans,
And cries of tortured ghosts!
But hark! he strikes the golden lyre;
And see! the tortured ghosts respire,
See, shady forms advance!
Thy stone, O Sisyphus, stands still,
Ixion rests upon his wheel,
And the pale specter dance!
The Furies sink upon their iron beds,
And snakes uncurl'd hang listening round their heads.
V.
By the streams that ever flow,
By the fragran' winds that blow
Over the Elys^an flowers;
By those happy souls who dwell
In yellow me^d of Asphodel,
Or Amaranthine bowers;
By the hero's armed shades,
Glittering through the gloomy glades;
By the youths that died for love,
Wandering in the myrtle grove,
Restore, restore Euridice to life:
Oh take the husband, or return the wife!
He sung, and hell consented
To hear the Poet's prayer;
Stern Proserpine relented,
And gave him back the fair.
Thus song could prevail
Over death, and over Hell,
A conquest how hard and how glorious?
Though fate had fast bound her,
With Styx nine times round her,
Yet music and love were victorious.
VI.
But soon, too soon, the lover turns his eyes:
Again she falls, again she dies, she dies!
How will thou now the fatal sisters move!
No crime was thine, if it is no crime to love.
Now under hanging mountains,
Beside the falls of fountains
Or where the Hebrus wanders,
Rolling in meanders,
All alone,
Unheard, unknown,
He makes his moan:
And calls her ghost,
For ever, ever lost!
Now with Furies surrounded,
Despairing, confounded,
He trembles, he glows,
Amidst Rhodopoe's snows:
See, wild as the winds over the desert he flies;
Hark! Haemus resounds with the Bacchanal's cries --
Ah see! he dies!
Yet even in death Euridice he sung,
Euridice still trembled on his tongue,
Euridice the woods,
Euridice the floods.
Euridice the rocks, and hollow mountains rung.
VII.
Music the fiercest grief can charm,
And sate's severest rage disarm:
Music can soften pain to ease,
And make despair and madness please:
Our joys below it can improve,
And antedate the bliss above.
This the divine Cecilia sound
And to her Maker's praise confined the sound,
When the full organ joins the tuneful quire,
The Immortal powers incline their ear;
Borne on the swelling notes our sou^s aspire,
While solemn a^s improve the sacred fire,
And angels lean from heaven to hear.
Of Orpheus n^w no more let Poets tell,
To bright Cecilia greater power is giv^n;
His numbers raised a shade from hell,
Here Is lift the soul to heaven.
ALEXANDER's FEAST. OR, THE POWER of MUSIC, An ODE. In Honor of St. Cecilia's
Day.
By Mr. DRYDEN.
I.
'TWAS at the Royal Feast, for Persia won,
By Philip's Warlike Son:
Aloft in awful State,
The God-like Hero sat
On his imperial Throne:
His valiant Peers were placed around;
Their Brows with Roses and with Myrtles bound.
(So should Desert in Arms be crowned:)
The lovely Thais by his Side,
Sat like a blooming Eastern Bride
In Flower of Youth and Beauty's Pride.
Happy, happy, happy Pair!
None but the Brave,
None but the Brave,
None but the Brave deserves the Fair.
CHORUS.
Happy, happy, happy Pair!
None but the Brave,
None but the Brave,
None but the Brave deserves the Fair.
II.
Timotheus placed on high,
Amid the tuneful Quire,
With flying Fingers touched the Lyre:
The trembling Notes ascend the Sky,
And Heavenly Joys inspire.
The Song began from Jove;
Who left his blissful Seats above,
(Such is the Power of mighty Love.)
A Dragon's fiery Form belied the God:
Sublime on radiant Spires He rode,
When He to fair Olympia pressed:
And while He sought her snowy Breast,
Then, round her slender Waist he curled,
And st^mp'd an Image of himself, a Sovereign of the World.
The listening Crowd admi^e the lofty Sound.
A present Deity, they shout around:
A present Deity the vaulted Roofs rebound:
With ravished Ears
The Monarch hears,
Assumes the God,
Affects to nod,
And seems to shake the Spheres.
CHORUS.
With ravished Ears
The Monarch hears,
Assumes the God,
Affects to nod,
And seems to shake the Spheres.
III.
The Pr^is^ of Ba^^^us then ^he sweet Mus^cian sung;
O^ (...):
The jolly God in Triumph comes;
Sound the Trumpets; beat the Drums;
Flushed with a purple Grace
He shows his honest Face,
Now gives the Hautboys breath; He comes, He comes,
Bacchus, ever Fair and Young,
Drinking Joys did first ordain:
Bacchus' Blessings are a Treasure,
Drinking is the Soldier's Pleasure:
Rich the Treasure,
Sweet the Pleasure;
Sweet is Pleasure after Pain.
CHORUS.
Bacchus' Blessings are a Treasure;
Drinking is the Soldier's Pleasure;
Rich the Treasure,
Sweet the Pleasure;
Sweet is Pleasure after Pain.
IV.
Soothed with the Sound the King grew vain;
Fought all his Battles over again;
And thrice he routed all his Foes; and thrice he slew the slain.
The master saw the Madness rise,
His glowing Cheeks, his ardent Eyes;
And while he Heaven and E^r^h defied,
Changed his Hand, and cheek'd his Pride.
He chose a mournful Muse.
Soft Pity to infuse:
He sung Darius Great and Good,
By too severe a Fate,
Fallen, fallen, fallen, fallen,
Fallen from his high Estate,
And weltring in his Blood:
Deserted at his utmost Need,
By those his former Bounty fed:
On the bare Earth exposed he lies,
With not a friend to close his Eyes.
With down-cast Looks the joyless Victor sat,
Revolving in his altered Soul
The various Turns of Chance below;
And, now, and then, a sigh he stole;
And Tears began to flow.
CHORUS.
Revolving in his altered Soul
The various Turns of Chance below;
And, now and then, a sigh he stole;
And Tears began to flow.
V.
The mighty Master smiled, to see
That Love was in the next Degree:
'Twas but a Kindred-Sound to move;
For Pity melts the Mind to Love.
Softly sweet, in Lydian Measures,
Soon he soothed his Soul to Pleasures.
War, he sung, is Toil and Trouble;
Honor but an empty Bubble.
Never ending, still beginning,
Fighting still, and still destroying,
If the World be worth thy Winning,
Think, O think, it worth Enjoying.
Lovely Thais sits beside thee,
Take the Good the Gods provide thee.
The Many rend the Skies, with loud Applause;
So Love was crowned, but Music won the Cause.
The Prince, unable to conceal his Pain,
Gazed on the Fair
Who caused his Care,
And sighed and looked, and sighed again:
At length, with Love and Wine at once oppressed,
The vanquished Victor sunk upon her Breast.
CHORUS.
The Prince, unable to conceal his Pain,
Gazed on the F^ir
Who caused his Care,
And sighed and looked and sighed again:
At length, with Love and Wine at once oppressed,
The vanquished Victor sunk upon her Breast.
VI.
Now strike the Golden Lyre again:
A louder yet, and yet a louder Strain.
Break his Bands of Sleep asunder,
And rouse him, like a ra^tling Peal of Thunder.
Hark, hark, the horrid Sound
Has ^ais'd up his Head,
As awaked from the Dead,
And amaz^d, he star^s around.
Revenge, Revenge, Timotheus cries,
See the Furies arise:
See the Snakes that they rear,
How they hiss in their Hair,
And the Sparkle^ that flesh from their Eyes!
Behold a ghastly Band,
Each a Torch in his Hand!
Those are Grecian Ghosts, that in Battle were slain,
And unbury'd remain
Inglorious on the Plain.
Give the Vengeance due
To the Valiant Crew.
Behold how they toss their Torches on high,
How they point to the Persian Abodes,
And glittering Temples of their Hostile Gods,
The Princes applaud, with a furious Joy;
And the King seized a Flambeau, with Zeal to destroy;
Thais led the Way,
To light him to his Prey,
And like another Helen, fired another Troy.
CHORUS.
And the King seized a Flambeau, with Zeal to destroy;
Thais led the way,
To light him to his Prey,
And like another Helen, fired another Troy.
VII
Thus, long ago,
Ere heaving Bellows learned to blow,
While Organs yet were mute;
Timotheus, to his breathing Flute,
And sounding Lyre
Could swell the Soul to Rage, or kindle soft Desire
At last divine Ceci^ia came,
Inventress ^f the Vocal Frame;
The sweet Enthusiast, from her sacred Store,
Enlarged the f^me^ narrow Bounds,
and added Length to solemn Sounds,
Wi^h Nature's Mother-^it, and Arts unknown before.
Let old Timotheus yield the Prize,
Or both divide the Crown;
He raised a Mortal to the skies;
She drew an Angel down.
Grand CHORUS.
At last, Divine Cecilia came,
Inventress of the Vocal Frame;
The sweet Enthusiast, from her sacred Store,
Enlarged the former narrow Bounds,
And added Length to solemn Sounds,
With Nature's Mother-Wit, and Arts unknown before.
Let old Timotheus yield the Prize,
Or both divide the Crown;
He raised a Mortal to the Skies;
She drew an Angel down.
ODE on SOLITUDE.
By Mr. POPE.
HAPPY the man, whose wish and care
A few paternal acres bound,
Content to breathe his native air,
In his own ground.
Whose herds with milk, whose fields with bread,
Whose flocks supply him with attire,
Whose trees in summer yield him shade,
In winter fire.
Blessed, who can unconcern'dly find
Hours, days, and years slide soft away,
In health of body, peace of mind,
Quiet by day,
Sound sleep by night; study and ease,
Together mixed; sweet recreation:
And innocence, which most does please
With meditation.
Thus let me live, unseen, unknown,
Thus unlamented let me die,
Steal from the world, and not a stone,
Tell where I lie.
The dying Christian to his Soul. ODE.
By Mr. POPE.
I.
VITAL spark of heavenly flame:
Quit, oh quit this mortal frame:
Trembling, hoping, lingering, flying,
Oh the pain, the bliss of dying!
Cease, fond Nature, cease thy strife,
And let me languish into life.
II.
Hark! they whisper; Angels say,
Sister Spirit, come away.
What is this absorbs me quite?
Steals my senses, shuts my sight,
Drowns my spirits, draws my breath?
Tell me, my soul, can this be Death?
III.
The world recedes; it disappears!
Heaven opens on my eyes! my ears
With sounds seraphic ring:
Lend, lend your wings! I mount, I fly!
O Grave? where is thy V^ctory?
O Death! where is thy Sting?
THE UNIVERSAL PRAYER. DEO OPT. MAX.
By Mr. POPE.
FATHER of All! in every Age,
In every Clime adored,
By Saint, by Savage, and by Sage,
Jehovah, Jove, or Lord!
Thou Great First Cause, least understood,
Who all my Sense confined
To know but this, that Thou art Good,
And that myself am blind;
Yet gave me, in this dark Estate,
To see the Good from Ill;
And binding Nature fast in Fate,
Left free the Human Will.
What Conscience dictates to be done,
Or warns me not to do,
This, teach me more than Hell to shun,
That, more than Hea^'n pursue.
What Blessings thy free Bounty gives,
Let me not cast away;
For God is paid when Man receives,
TO enjoy is to obey.
Yet not to Earth's contracted Span
Thy Goodness let me bound,
Or think Thee Lord alone of Man,
When thousand Worlds are round:
Let not this weak, unknowing Hand
Presume thy Bolts to throw.
And deal Damnation round the Land,
On each I judge thy Foe.
If I am right, thy Grace impart,
Still in the right to stay:
If I am wrong, oh teach my Heart
To find that better Way.
Save me alike from foolish Pride,
Or impious Discontent,
At ought thy Wisdom has denied,
Or aught thy Goodness lent.
Teach me to feel another's Woe,
To hide the Fault I see;
That Mercy I to others show,
That Mercy show to me.
Mean though I am, not wholly so,
Since quickened by thy Breath;
O lead me whereso^'er I go,
Through this Day's Life or Death.
This Day, be Bread and Peace my Lot:
All else beneath the Sun,
Thou know if best bestowed or not,
And let thy Will be done.
To thee, whose Temple is all Space,
Whose Altar, Earth, Sea, Skies!
One Chorus let all Being raise!
All Nature's Incense rise!
ELEGY To the MEMORY of an UNFORTUNATE LADY See the Duke of Buckingham's verses
to a Lady designing to retire into a Monastery compared with Mr. P^pe's Le^ters
to several Ladies, p. 206. quarto edition She seems to be the same person whose
unfortunate death is the subject of this poem.
.
By Mr. POPE.
WHAT beck'ning ghost, along the moonlight shade
Invites my steps, and points to yonder glade!
It Is she! -- but why that bleed^ng bosom gored,
Why dimly gleams the visionary sword?
Oh ever beauteous, ever friendly! ^ell,
Is it, in Heaven a crime to love too well?
T^ bear too tender, or too firm a heart,
To act a Lover's or a Roman's part?
Is there no bright reversion in the sky,
For those who greatly think, or bravely die?
Why bade ye else, ye powers! her soul aspire
Above the vulgar flight of low desire?
Ambition first sprung from your blessed abodes;
The glorious Fault of Angels and of Gods*
Thence to their images on earth it flows,
And in the breasts of Kings and Heroes glows.
Most souls, it is true, but peep out onc^ ^n age,
Dull sullen prisoners in the body's cage:
Dim lights of life, that burn a length of years,
Useless, unseen, as lamps in sepulchers;
Like Eastern Kings, a lazy state they keep,
And close conf^n'd to their own palace sleep.
From these perhaps (ere nature bade her die)
Fate snatched her early to the pitying sky,
As into air the purer spirits flow,
And separate from their kindred dregs below;
So flew the soul to its congenial place,
Nor left one virtue to redeem her race.
But thou false guardian of a charge too good,
Thou mean deserter of a Brother's blood!
See on these ruby lips the trembling breath,
These cheeks now fading at the blast of death;
Cold is the breast that warmed the world (...)
And those love darting eyes must roll no more*
Thus, if eternal justice rules the ball,
Thus shall your wives, and thus your children fal^
On all the line a sudden vengeance waits,
And frequent h^rse sh^l^ besi^g^ your gates.
There passengers shall stand and pointing say,
(While the long funeral blackens all the way,)
Lo! these were they, whose souls the Furies steeled,
And cursed with hearts unknowing how to yield.
Thus unlamented pass the crowd away,
The gaze of fools, and pageant of a day!
So perish all, whose breasts never learned to glow
For others good, or melt at others woe.
What can atone (oh ever injured shade!)
Thy fate unpitied, and thy rites unpaid?
No friend's complaint, no kind domestic tear
Pleased thy pale ghost, or graced thy mournful bier:
By foreign hands thy dying eyes were closed,
By foreign hands thy decent limbs composed,
By foreign hands thy humble grave adorned,
By strangers honored, and by strangers mourned!
What though no friends in sable weeds appear,
Grieve for an hour, perhaps, then mourn a year,
And bear about the mockery of woe
To midnight dances, and the public show?
What tho no weeping loves thy ashes grace,
Nor polished marble emulate thy face?
What though no sacred earth allow thee room,
Nor hallowed dirge be muttered round thy tomb?
Yet shall thy grave with rising flow^rs be dressed,
And the green ^urf l^e lightly on thy breast:
There shall the more her earliest tears bestow,
There the first roses of the year shall blow;
While A^ge^s with their silver w^ngs o'ershade
The ground now sacred by thy relics made.
So peaceful rests without a stone, a name,
What once had beauty, titles, wealth and fame.
How loved, how honored once, avails thee not,
To whom related, or by whom be got;
A heap of dust alone remains of thee,
It Is all thou art and all the proud shall be!
Poets themselves must fall like th^se they sung,
Deaf the praised ear, and mu^e the tuneful tongue.
Even he, whose soul now me^^s in mournful lays,
Shall shortly want the generous tear he pays;
Then from his closing eyes thy form shall part,
And the last pang shall ^ear thee from his heart.
Life's idle business at one gasp be over,
The Muse forgot, and thou beloved no more!
VENI CREATOR SPIRITUS. Translated in Paraphrase.
By Mr. DRYDEN.
CReated Spirit, by whose Aid
The World's Foundations first were laid,
Come visit ev^ry pious Mind;
Come pour thy Joys on Human Kind;
From Sin and Sorrow set us free;
And make thy Temples worthy Thee.
O, Source of uncreated Light,
The Father's promised Paraclete! Comforter.

Thrice Holy Fount, thrice Holy Fire,
Our Hearts with Heavenly love inspire;
Come, and thy Sacred Unction bring
To sanctify us, while we sing!
Plenteous of Grace, descend from high,
Rich in thy sev'nfold Energy!
Thou Strength of his Almighty Hand,
Whose Power does Heaven and Earth command.
Proceeding Spirit, our Defense,
Who do the Gift of Tongues dispense,
And crown'st thy Gift with Eloquence!
Refine and purge our Earthly Parts;
But, Oh, inflame and fire our Hearts!
Our Frailties help, our Vice control;
Submit the Senses to the Soul;
And when rebellious they are grown,
Then, lay thy Hand, and hold 'em down.
Chase from our Minds the infernal For;
And Peace, the Fruit of Love, bestow:
And, lest our Feet should step astray;
Protect, and guide us in the way.
Make us Eternal Truths receive,
And practice all that we believe:
Give us thyself, that we may see
The Father, and the Son, by thee.
Immortal Honor, endless Fame,
Attend the Almighty Father's Name;
The Savior Son be glorified,
Who for lost Man's Redemption died,
And equal Adoration be,
Eternal Paraclete, to thee.
FINIS.

