Open Communion examined; OR, A BRIEF DEFENSE OF THE PRACTICE OF THE Close
Communionists.

WHEREIN is considered the unfriendly Charges against the Baptists -- Faith and
Order of the Gospel Churches -- Strictures on Baptism -- The Impropriety of the
Baptists communing with others, and their Difference in Sentiments pointed out
-- Observations on the Arguments for free Communion.

BY THOMAS BALDWIN, V. D. M. Pastor of the Church in CANAAN.

I will show thee that which is noted in the scripture of truth.

DANIEL X. 21. Can two walk together except they be agreed.

AMOS. WINDSOR: PRINTED BY ALDEN SPOONER. M,DCC,LXXXIX.

PREFACE.
IT has become a custom to begin a preface with an apology, which may be
understood as an expression of modesty.

Men of science and exalted genius, as well as the illiterate and weak, tread
the same path, which gives reason to suppose, that some who thus excuse their
abilities, and seemingly debase their performances, are at the same time,
endeavoring to build their nest among the stars.

If what I have written in the following pages should any way serve the
interest of the Redeemer's kingdom, or be a mean of removing any difficulties
out of the minds of God's people, and of making the path of their duty more
plain, (while it offen^s the del^acy of none) it needs no apology. -- If it
should have a contrary effect, no apology can rescue it from censure.

It was not a ^^ndness for polemick subjects that induced me to write, but the
honor of ^^ist as ^^^giver in his own kingdom, and to assert the scripture
importance of a p^^^tive institution, and at the request of the (...) at their
meeting at Wo^^, A D. 1787; and at their meeting at Ma^^ow, A. D. 1788, the
substance of the following work was read and approved.

As the things which I have touched upon are matters which labor in the minds
of many, and although almost every subject has been exhausted yet, as I
remember, I never saw a single page wrote in america upon this; therefore I
esteem it my privilege (though the youngest) to show my opinion.

If any ^igh^ is offered, the candid will receive it -- If any mistakes ^r'
made, they can overlook them -- If any conviction is offered to the cons^^ne^s
of any, they are desired carefully to weigh the evidences of truth, and to
follow the light as it shall appear to them.

I can truly say, I desire not to offend the least child that belongs to
Christ's family; and yet in giving my thoughts on the present subject, I have
taken liberty to use plainness of speech.

If I have any where supplied the want of arguments with invectives against
those I differ from. I have thereby weakened the cause I wish to see supported.

If any should suppose that what I have written has a tendency to destroy what
fellowship there is between the Baptist churches and those of other
a^nominations. I have only to observe, so f^r as they are agreed in the truth,
I would not wish to ^isunite them

What I have transcribed from the cracles of truth. I hope has not suffered in
my ^^nds: my thoughts which I have ^^ded thereto, I leave the reader to judge
of their coherence.

I have endeavored to shun ^^biguity of expression; and in a plain and single
manner, mark out the footsteps of the FLOCK.

I have not the varity to think that what I have wrote will answer every mind
that is honestly enquiring after the right way; much less all the objections of
those who choose to cavil.

I am happy to believe the bright day is hastening on which shall burn up all
the hay, wood and stubble, of all those who build on the gospel's foundation:
when all shall serve the Lord with one consent: and whilst I am contending
earnestly for one article of the christian faith I hope to be governed by a
spirit of love, candor and moderation.

And let us all, like the noble Bereans, search and see, whether these things
are so. And may HE that is the LIGHT OF THE WORLD, enlighten us all into the
knowledge of his WILL.

T. BALDWIN.
Canaan, January 15th, 1789.
SECTION I. Remarks on the unfriendly aspersions cast upon the Baptists, for
refusing communion with other denominations -- The gospel doctrine of a church,
and qualification of the members -- With strictures on Baptism.
THE Baptist churches in general, have long been blamed for holding and
practicing what is commonly called close communion, as if wholly inconsistent
with christian charity, or that mutual forbearance which the gospel requires:
and by some it is considered as incompatible with the existence of grace; and
for which we have been loaded with many reproachful names.

WE are charged of making the want of a little water only, a bar to communion;
and that we are so superstitiously fond of the watery element, that we place
the whole of our religion in what they call a mere circumstance of the
ordinance of baptism: and some even assert, that we hold that none can be saved
without being immersed. And that thereby we put baptism in the place of
redeeming blood.

BUT why such unfriendly charges? Surely they greatly impeach our doctrinal
principles, and are perfectly inconsistent with our avowed sentiments and
constant practice.

FOR it is too notorious to admit a plea of ignorance, in any of our opponents,
that we consider no one as a proper subject of baptism, who does not profess
repentance toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ; who does not, in
other words, appear to be in a state of salvation.

NAY, so far from making baptism a saving ordinance, we do not, we cannot,
consider any one as a proper subject of it, who looks upon it in that light.

BUT however, we desire to pay a proper deference to that, as well as any other
of Christ's institutions; and not to treat it as though it was left to our
choice, either to practice or omit it: although we do not consider it as
essential to salvation, yet it is essential to the visibility of a gospel
church; and to consequently to communion at the Lord's ^able; for that is a
church ordinance, and ought never to be administered but to members that are in
special covenant.

I AM persuaded that the Baptists are not the only people who believe baptism
to be a pre-requisite to the Lord's supper.

WAS a Turk to be brought from Mecca to America, and here should be convinced
o^ Mahomet's imposture, and become a true convert to christianity, immediately
after should attend at a Paedo-Baptist church, it being one of their stated
seasons to celebrate the sacred supper; the solemnity attracts his mind, he
sees the beauty of the ordinance, and desires to partake in it. Will they
permit him? I am persuaded they will not. But what are their reasons? Is it
because they do not look upon him as a Christian? No, for they really do. But
do they not believe God has received him? Yes, they do. But do they not believe
Christ communes with him spiritually? They do. How can they then shut him off?
Doubtless, because they view him to be no baptized, and not a member of any
church. Their conduct in refusing him, would be consistent with the tenderest
feelings of christianity. Therefore we do not commune merely as Christians, but
as such in a regular, visible, standing.

BUT to illustrate the point further, suppose a minister of Christ was
providentially in one of our new towns where were a number of inhabitants,
respectable on other accounts, but had never been baptized in their infancy,
nor had any church been gathered in the place -- he is invited to preach -- his
labors are so far succeeded, that in a few days considerable numbers are
hopefully brought to the knowledge of the truth -- the next Lord's day they
desire him to break bread to them. What will he do? Why, it free communion is
to be established, here is a good opportunity for it to operate in its full
latitude; for if it be lawful and right to break bread to one that is
unbaptized, it may be to a whole society. But however, if he be a Paedobaptist
minister, I presume he will not be guilty of such an irregularity: nor would a
consistent Baptist. And I feel safe to conclude, that our Paedobaptist brethren
would not blame us for refusing communion with such a society, who did not
submit to baptism in some mode or other, however amiable their christian
characters might appear in other respects.

IF they would acquit us from blame in the foregoing instance, why should they
fault us for refusing communion with those that we verily belive have never
been baptized according to Christ's institution: for, agreeable to an ancient
writer, "They who are not rightly baptized, are, doubtless, not baptized at all
Baptismum quumt (...) dubio non habent. Turtil. de baptismo, cap. xi. page ^30.
." Wherefore we conclude, that communion does not belong to christians merely
as such, but to them as baptized members of some gospel church.

NEITHER yet should we be quite safe to open our doors for communion, to all
who are in a church state, and profess to be baptized.

Therefore, it will be necessary in the next place, to attend to the scripture
account of the Faith and Order of a Gospel Church.

A GOSPEL church must be built upon a gospel plan. Therefore, if we look into
the scriptures, we shall easily perceive, that the church is a society of
saints, and faithful men and women in Christ Jesus, that are joined together in
holy fellowship, that are incorporated into a visible church state, and by
agreement meet together to carry on the worship of God, to glorify him, and
edify one another.

THE church does not appear to be national, provincial, or parochial; but truly
congregational. It is not built of dead materials, but of lively stones 1 Pet.
ii. 5.
; each of them fitted before they are laid in the building, "so that there is
neither hammer nor axe heard in all the house while it is in building 1 Kings,
vi. 7.
." how wonderful! how superb! and yet how exact the model, so that there needed
no alteration to bring them altogether with that exactness, that bone comes to
its bone.

THE church is called by St. Paul, "The pillar and ground of the truth 1 Timothy
3.15.


THE gospel rule gives none a right in the church of Christ, but true
believers: and all that enter not in by Christ the door, are thieves and robbers

THE church is Christ's m^st^cal body, which he has loved and gave himself
for, "that he might sanctify and cleanse it, with the washing of water by the
word Ephesians. 5.25.
.

IF we wish to understand the apostolic form of a gospel church, we must expect
to find it in the acts of the apostles, or some of their writings. The first
gospel church that was gathered after the ascension of the Messiah, was that at
Jerusalem, which is described in the following order, "Then they that gladly
received his WORD were baptized; and the same day there were added unto them
about three thousand souls: and they continued stedsastly in the apostles
doctrine and fellowship Act^. 3.41, 42.
."

WHEN Ananias with Sapphira ^^s wife, came and lied to the Holy Ghost, and
pretended they were friends to Christ, when they were not, and were both fallen
dead; great fear tell upon the attending multitude. Act^ 11 -- 14^
"And of the rest durst no man join himself unto them." (That is, such as they
were, ca^na^, hypocritical professors.) -- "But believers were the more added
unto the Lord multitudes both of men and women." So early did false pretenders
try to get a place in the church of Christ.

THIS church at Jerusalem being gathered under the inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, may be considered as a model for all succeeding ones; every circumstance
related concerning it, discovers it to be a body of true believers in Christ.

THE next church gathered by the Apostles was that at Samaria, which exactly
agrees with that at Jerusalem -- "When they believed Philip preaching the
things concerning the kingdom of GOD, and the name of JESUS CHRIST, they were
baptized, both men and women." Acts 8.12.


THE church of Corinth also appears to be in the same method; "Many of the
Corinthians bearing, believed, and were baptized." Acts 18.8.
The church at Ephesus was addressed by the Apostle, as "Saints and faithful in
Christ Jesus;" and as those who had been raised from the dead, and quickened by
sovereign grace, turned from the course of this world, delivered from the
spirit that works in the children of disobedience. The Corinthians "first
gave their own selves unto the Lord, and unto one another by the Will of God."
2 Cor. 8.5.
And none can, in a gospel sense, give themselves up in church covenant, till
they previously give themselves up to the Lord.

I think that no one that is indebted to the New Testament for his knowledge
respecting a gospel church, will try to gainsay the foregoing description.

Therefore I would observe, that if the foregoing description be a scriptural
representation of a gospel church; then consequently, that church that does not
agree thereto, is not strictly upon a gospel plan, unless it can be proved,
that there are two modes of gospel churches.

THAT there may be churches formed, that in many particulars may resemble a
gospel church, I wish not to deny; -- and that in those churches there may be
many real Christians, is a matter I have no desire to scruple: so I have reason
to suppose that there are many Christians, not un^^ed to any church.

AGAIN, The Christian church is built on Christ's authority, and is supported
and defended by the same: He is the chief corner stone, on which their
spiritual building is erected -- "disallowed, indeed, of men -- but chosen of
GOD, and precious. -- Therefore, that church that is built on worldly
establishments, and depends on civil aid for its support, and defense, is not
strictly conformed to the gospel plan.

EZRA, that ingenious scribe, refused to ask aid of the civil arm, to assist
him against the enemies in the way, saying, "I was ashamed to require of the
King a band of soldiers and horsemen, to help us against the enemies in the
way: because we had spoken to the King, saying, The hand of our God is upon all
them for good that seek him: but his power and his wrath is against all them
that forsake him." (...) viii. (...).


CHRIST'S "kingdom is not of this world:" John xviii. 36.
and in a religious sense is not connected with, nor any ways dependent thereon
for its being or support.

IT will doubtless be granted, that there are many churches in the land* that
are not formed according to the foregoing method, as may be made evident, and
will appear in the following particulars, i. e. That a heart belief, or saving
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, ^s not considered by many of them as a
pre-requisite to baptism, or to their being admitted into ^ull communion: which
does not agree with the truly apostolic rule. Philip's words to the Eunuch who
desired to submit himself to the ordinance of baptism, were, "If thou believe
with all thine heart, thou may." Acts viii. ^7.
Philip was directed to this chariot by the Spirit of God, and must be
considered as acting under the influence of that through the whole transaction:
and if he required any thing more of the Ethiopean convert, than what was
necessary, really necessary to that ordinance, it would discover a degree of
partiality which few would be willing to admit, considering the influence he
acted under. That this was not the case is evident from St. Paul's words, "With
the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is
made unto salvation." Romans x. 10.
This heart belief is the only belief that is unto righteousness, and this must
precede a confession with the mouth, if not the confession will be but a
falsehood.

AGAIN, Many of the Paedobaptists hold the covenant made with Abraham, called
by Stephen "the covenant of circumcision," to be the covenant of grace. Acts
vil. 8.
From hence they infer the right of infant membership; and consider the natural
feed of believers as the children of Abraham; and hence claim the special
privileges of the gospel for them ^s such.

THIS rather differs from Paul's ideas, who tells us, "the promise -- was not
to Abraham nor to his seed through the law, but through the righteousness of
faith. Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace, to the end the
promise might be sure to all the seed" Romans iv. 13 -- 16.
"And if ve be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the
promise." Gal. iii. 29.
Hence we may inter, that it we be not Christ's, then we are not Abraham's
seed, and are not heirs according to the promise.

AGAIN, The apostle Peter calls the members of the Christian church, "an holy
priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ;" 1 Pet. ii. 5 -- 9.
which no carnal professor can do; neither can men in their natural state, for
" spiritual things are foolishness to then;". but the children of God are "an
holy nation, a peculiar people. to show forth the praises of him who has
called them out of darkness into his mavelous light." Can we by this
description find the features or an infant in his natural state? or do they not
rather resemble true believers in Christ. But it is further added, "which in
time past were not a people, but are now the people of God, which had not
obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy."

BUT how will this agree with the notion of infants being born with an
hereditary right to the special ordinances of the gospel? If it be true that
they have a right, then there is no time when they are not a people after they
are born into the world: and that they obtained mercy in the same way that Levi
paid tithes, i. e. in the loins of his father. Upon this scale, that parents
convey a right of church privileges to their infant seed, I cannot see why they
do not hold their church privileges by the same tenure as they hold their lands.

BUT perhaps it may be thought I am trying to expose a sentiment that the
Paedobaptists do not hold, i. e. that grace is essential to church membership.
I think one of two things is evident by their practice, either 1st. That grace
is conveyed as above described; or 2d. That grace is not essential to church
membership. To suppose the former, would supersede the necessity of
regeneration -- to suppose the latter, would be to lay the foundation for a
graceless church; and would leave no other difference betwix^ that and the
world, than what consists merely in name and external form.

IF what has been observed already from the last will and testament of our Lord
be true, it must sufficiently appear, that evidences of grace are absolutely
necessary to the admission of a member to church fellowship, or special
ordinances.

AT a certain time our Lord enquired of his disciples, whom men said that he
was. After a relation of the different opinions of others, Peter believingly
affirms, "THOU ART THE CHRIST THE SON OF THE LIVING GOD. And Jesus answered and
said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simonbarjona, for flesh and blood has not
revealed it unto thee, but my father which is in heaven. And I say unto thee,
thou art Peter; and upon this ROOK I will build my church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it." Matthew xvi. 13 -- 18.


CHURCHES in general, of all denominations, improve this declaration as a
promise in their favor. But to determine the propriety of the claim, it is
necessary to consider two things, 1st. What we are to understand by the Rock.
2d. The manner of the building upon it.

Now, should we build upon another rock in stead of that referred to by our
Lord, it would naturally seclude us from the promise.

AGAIN, Should we build and lay the true rock as our foundation, but at the
same time should not attend to the manner of building as described by Christ,
we might still be left without any just right to the promise. Therefore I would
here observe, that Christians in general (Papists excepted) acknowledge this
rock to refer to Christ. But should the reader think I take something for
granted that is not proved, let him consult the following scriptures, Isa.
xxviii. 16. Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a
precious corner stone, a sure foundation. 2 Samuel xxi. 2. The Lord is my rock.
Again in the 32 verse, Who is a rock save our GOD. Also see 1 Samuel ii. 2.
Neither is there any rock like our GOD. Again, 1 Cor. iii. 11. For other
foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is JESUS CHRIST. The apostle
speaking of the household of God, says, They are built upon the foundation of
the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone:
Ephesians. 11.20.

BY all which I trust it is made evident, that this rock on which the church of
Christ is built, is Christ himself, who is the "root and offspring of David,
the bright and the morning star."

THIS is the rock implied in Peter's confession. But let us observe in the next
place the manner of the building to be erected on this rock. A profession of
faith, in adults, in order to their admission to special communion, is a point
generally acknowledged: but if this be the only idea that is to be taken, that
they stand in the alley and give their tacit consent to the articles and
covenant read; consenting to subject themselves to the rules of any particular
church: if this be all that is plead for as necessary to the building of the
church of Christ, I shall take leave to demur. For most persons that have been
educated in the theory of the Christian religion, could subscribe to this
implicit faith: but those members that are fit materials for this spiritual
building, make a confession in substance as Peter did; and this springs from a
Christ revealed in them; "flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee."
Without such a revelation as this, no person can be a fit member for a gospel
church; neither can they get upon this rock without it: for until this is made
to their souls, they do not know God nor Christ; for it is expressly declared
by Christ, Mat. xi. 27. No man knows the Son but the Father; neither knows
any man the Father but the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him.
And if they do not know Christ, they are not his sheep: for he says. John x.
xiv. I am the good, shepherd and know my sheep, and am known of mine. Now if
they are not Ch^^st sheep, what right have they in his fold. Christ fixes a
saving issue upon coming to him, hearing his sayings, and doing them: Mat vi.
47. And it is said, John vi. 44. No man can come to me except the Father which
sent me draw him: This is the man that digs deep and lays his foundation (by
faith and repentance) upon this blessed ROCK

FOR the present let us view the matter in a different light: if the divine
rule will admit of one unregenerate persons' being received as a proper member
of a gospel church, it will of two; and it of two, it will of ten; and so
consequently there may be a whole church and not a true believer in it: but
would any one dare to call such a society of people, a church of Christ? Would
it not rather resemble a synagogue of satan? But perhaps it will be objected,
that it is not likely such an instance ever will take place; surely there is
nothing but divine interposition to hinder it, if this method is allowed to be
ruleable.

BUT it may be further objected, that a perfect church is not to be expected in
this imperfect state. To which I answer, the divine rule requires that they be
perfect: Mat. v. 48. 2 Cor. xiii. 11. Heb. xiii. 21. The question is not,
whether, after all, we shall not have some hypocrites, or unregenerate persons
in the church; but whether we may knowingly receive such, or otherways receive
them that give no evidence to the contrary.

NOW it will be readily granted that the divine rule requires every Christian
to be perfect. But what if some should say. We don't expect Christians to be
perfect, and so should take liberty to indulge themselves in sin, could the
divine rule be plead in their favor? Would it not rather stare them in the
face? Equally so does the gospel rule every carnal and hypocritical professor.

BUT it may be further objected, that it is the duty of every person to attend
to all the external duties of religion, as means God has appointed for their
conversion. To which I answer, it is the duty of every rational creature,
immediately to love God, and that perfectly as Gabriel does; for without a
principle of real love to God, the sinner cannot perform any christian duty;
for short of this, his duties are like a dead corpse without a spirit: For the
end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart: 1 Timothy i. 5.

IF the gospel directs the sinner to a progressive use of means or ordinances,
in order to his conversion, then it does not require him immediately to
believe, or to exercise evangelical repentance: means always precede the end
for which they were designed. But to speak plain, every duty that the law or
gospel requires of any creature, it requires it to be done from a principle of
supreme love to GOD; and without that, all his pretensions to duty are but
hypocrisy. Prayer, reading of God's word, attending to the word preached, and
special ordinances (in an orderly way) are duties held up before every person:
but they are required to attend them with penitent hearts. If the sinner
attempts to pray with a heart of impenitency and unbelief, he does but deceive
himself and mock God: for his motives cannot spring from a higher source than
that which rules his heart, which is selflove. If he attends divine service,
and imagines he has been worshipping God, he does but deceive himself: for they
that worship God, worship him in spirit and in truth; whilst this inscription
might be justly written upon his most refined acts of devotion, To the UNKNOWN
GOD. Should he be sprinkled from the baptismal layer, or immersed in Jurdon's
swelling flood, it would avail him nothing without a new heart. Sold he come
to the sacred table of our Lord, and receive the outward elements, yet still he
does not commune with Christ: for Christ is light, and he is darkness, and they
have no communion together.

THAT the proclamation of the gospel is to be made in the ears of sinners, will
be readily granted: and where ever it comes, it makes a demand for the sinner
immediately to surrender his heart. His refusal is criminal, and lays him under
condemnation: John iii. 18. But that the gospel invites impenitents, while
such, to partake of its special ordinances, I choose rather to deny; for unto
the wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou
should take my covenant in thy mouth: Psalm. l. 16. But it may be possible
that some may object, that I hereby excuse the sinner from attempting any duty,
because he has not love to God: I am far from making excuses for impenitents,
but would rather show them their inexcusableness. Should the question be asked
me, Whether it is the duty of a sinner to pray, I should readily answer, yes;
and add, that he must pray in faith; for whatsoever is not of faith is sin:
Romans xiv. 23. And without faith it is impossible to please God: Heb. xi. 6. How
then shall they call on him in whom they have not believed: Romans x 14. I can
see no valuable end answered to the Redeemer's cause, or to the souls of men,
either by urging or receiving unregenerate sinners into the church. If they can
be persuaded that they are doing something that is acceptable to God as the
matter of their duty, this may afford their consciences a temporary relief, and
may be the means of their delay of embracing that which alone can prove the
salvation of their souls.

SHOULD one of the servants of Christ be called to visit a dying person, on
entering the room should discover that death had stretched out his^icy arms to
receive him -- that he is past hope of recovery -- the crisis is important -- a
few minutes will decide his safe for eternity! The dying man fixes his ghastly
eyes upon him, as a master in Israel, and expects some directions from him,
while with a faultering tongue he thus relates his sad case; I am a poor undone
sinner, just going into eternity, and have no evidence of an interest in
Christ! What shall I DO! Will the faithful minister now tell him, he must
attend the use of means, as God's appointment for his conversion? Will he
direct him to receive baptism, or to join to the church, or receive the sacred
supper? all which he may do and yet be damned: or will he not rather adopt St.
Paul's direction to the Jailor, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall
be saved: Acts xvi. 31. -- And tell him, if he believes not he shall die in his
sins: John viii. 24. It will undoubtedly be granted, that the last mentioned is
safest for the dying man; if so, it is also safest for living men; for living
men are all dying men! and we know not which will die first, either the sick or
the well! Therefore, we ought ever to give such directions to sinners at all
times, as would be late to give them when on a dying bed.

THEREFORE, having taken a survey of the gospel doctrine relative to the
character of God's professing people, and the churches of our Lord Jesus
Christ, we find this to be the account: That those who had been so taught as to
understand the doctrine of the cross, and so learned of the Father as to come
to the SON, immediately manifested their faith by their works of obedience, in
submiting themselves to the ordinance of baptism. -- After thus publicly giving
themselves up to the Lord, "they gave themselves to one another by the will of
God," or according to his will. Then they broke bread and continued in
fellowship.

BUT we have no account of any one's believing before taught, "for how shall
they hear without a preacher." Nor of any one's being baptized before they
believed. (or professed so to do.) Nor of any one that came to the sacred
supper before they were baptized. We then believe it to be the apostolic order,
to baptize none till they profess their faith in Christ; and that till then,
they cannot be considered as qualified members for a gospel church, nor be
received into their fellowship at the Lord's table.

THEREFORE, before we are blamed too much, let a different line of conduct be
proved from the writings of the evangelists or apostles, and it will be our
happiness if we are wrong to be convinced, that we may have opportunity to
reform.

BUT that our reasons for refusing communion with other denominations, may more
fully appear, let us go on to consider the following things:

SECTION II. The impropriety of the Baptist Churches communing with those of
other Denominations considered. and their difference in Sentiment wore
particularty pointed out.
THE Baptist churches believe, that no person can be a disciple of Christ, that
is not capable of self-denial; for the Author of our religion has said,
"Whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my
disciple: Luke xiv. 33." "Let him deny himself and take up his daily cross and
follow me: Luke ix. 23." And if he be not a disciple, he cannot be considered a
proper subject of special ordinances.

WE believe in one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.

1st. That this one Lord is the Woman's SEED, the IMMANUEL, born of the Virgin,
the one MEDIATOR between GOD and MAN, the HEAD of the Church, and ZION's KING,
-- a LEADER and COMMANDER of his people -- the great Pattern and Example for all
true Believers.

2d. One Faith; that faith that works by love and purifies the beart; which is
the only faith of GOD'S Elect, and which alone can give a right to special
ordinances; for without it it is impossible to please GOD. And that this one
faith, is particularly in each qualified subject, and cannot give a right to
any but those that have it.

3d. One Babtism; that this one baptism is an immersion in water, in the name
of the triune GOD; which is to be continued until Christ's second coming.

SHOULD any suppose this one baptism to be the baptism of the Holy Ghost and
fire, spoken of by John Baptist and our Savior, I shall take leave to dissent
from their opinion; and give some reasons for my own.

THE baptism of the Holy Ghost was spoken of by Christ and his Harbinger, as
that which had not then taken place.

I think any one would take singular freedom to say, that there was then no
Christians that had experienced the blessings of grace in an ordinary
conversion; if it be not so, this consequence must follow -- That those whom
Christ had chosen, some of whom he had sent forth to teach and do miracles,
were ignorant of the spirituality of religion, and were still in their sins.

AGAIN, further, if the baptism of the Holy Ghost be the one intended, it would
exclude water baptism in every mode: -- For we can as easily conceive of two
Lords, as of two baptisms referred to one institution.

THE doctrine of baptisms mentioned by the Apostle, Heb. vi. 2, has no
reference to the gospel institution of baptism; but is the same Greek word that
is trat slated Washings in another chapter of the same epistle -- Heb. ix. 10.
There is a negation fixed to these baptisms, and they were to be left, because
they were law ceremonies, and not gospel institutions.

BUT here will a question arise, What are we to understand by the baptism of
the Holy Ghost and fire? spoken of by John, Matt. iii. 11, and by Christ, Acts
i. 5. John's words are -- "I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance; but
He that comes after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to
bear; he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and fire." Christ's words are --
"And being assembled he commanded that they should not depart from Jerusalem,
but wait for the promise of the Father; which, says he, ye have heard from me,
for John truly baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy
Ghost, not many days hence." Doubtless these, at this time, had as great a
measure of the Spirit, as Christians in general have, and yet were not baptized
with the Holy Ghost.

BUT the explanation of the foregoing, we meet with in the beg^ning of the next
chapter, soon after Christ's ascension, "They were all with one accord in one
place, and suddenly there came a sound from Heaven, as of a mighty rushing
wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting: and there appeared
unto then: cloven longues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them, and
they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other
tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance: Acts ii, 1, 2, 3.

HERE is the Holy Ghost and fire that was mentioned. -- For Jesus was now
glorified, and the Holy Ghost according to his promise given. I think it is far
evident, that the baptism of the Holy Ghost and fire, did not respect the
ordinary influences of God's spirit, either in the conversion of sinners, or in
its comforting influences on his people: But must respect the extraordinary and
miraculous gifts bestowed on the apostles and others, for the confirmation of
the gospel; such as the gifts of tongues, healing, prophesying, etc.

BUT as these observations may differ from the general opinion of others,
therefore I must be a little particular. Will any person dare to say, that
those believers at Samaria, whom Philip baptized, were not true converts? If
they were not, then Philip baptized a number of unqualified subjects, that were
strangers to the love of God. If they were true converts, I think my
observation must stand; for it is further observed of them, that "when the
apostles that were at Jerusalem, had heard that Samaria had received the word
of God, they sent Peter and John unto them, who grayed for them, that they
might receive the Holy Ghost. (for as yet he was fallen upon none of then; only
they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.) Then laid they their hands
on them, and they received the Holy Ghost:" Acts viii. 14, 15, 16. The same
idea is further illustrated by St. Paul, who, when "he came to Ephesus, found
certain disciples," and "he said unto them, Have ye received the Holy Ghost
since ye believed?" Their answer was, "We have not heard whether there be any
Holy Ghost:" Acts xix. 1, 2 -- 6. The apostle it seems presumed, that if they
were disciples, they were baptized; therefore did not enquire, whether they
were baptized, but unto what they were baptized. "And when Paul had laid his
hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke with tongues and
prophesied."

ALTHOUGH they had never heard of the Holy Ghost in these miraculous
operations, yet they were disciples and believers.

THEREFORE I think I have a right to this conclusion, that the baptism of the
Holy Ghost ceased when these miraculous gifts ceased; and that the one baptism
referred to, is Water Baptism: yea, even this baptism of the Holy Ghost never
superceded or destroyed the necessity of Water Baptism, as an institution of
Christ. See it exemplified, Acts x. 44 -- 48.

BUT let none conclude I mean to deny that Christians have any influences of
the Holy Ghost in this day; I do not: neither do I believe they were without
them when Christ was upon earth, or even before he came. And yet these
extraordinary influences were not given, for Jesus was not yet glorified.
Therefore the institution of baptism stands unshaken upon the firm basis of a
divine command, which will continue it until the end of time, not withstanding
many ancient and modern corrupters; Socinians, Quakers. Universalists, etc.

THE Baptists not only believe that this one baptism is an institution of
Christ, but that it is ever to be administered in one mode, and to one kind of
subjects. Our opponents suppose (at least many of them) that it may be
administered upon a profession of faith, or without it; either by immersion or
sprinkling. They acknowledge immersion to believers to be lawful baptism; could
we, with a good conscience, allow the same of infant sprinkling, much of our
dispute would be at an end. "But our fixed and avowed persuasion will not
permit us to allow, that infant sprinkling, though performed with the greatest
solemnity, is worthy of the name. Consequently, though they consistently with
their own principles, may receive us to communion among them, yet we cannot
admit them to fellowship with us at the Lord's table, without contradicting our
professed sentiments. For it appears to us, on the most deliberate enquiry,
that immersion is not a mere circumstance, or a mode of baptism, but essential
to the ordinance: so that in our judgment, he who is not immersed is not
baptized. This is one of our reasons for refusing communion to our Paedobaptist
brethren, whom in many respects, we highly esteem, and toward whom we think it
our duty to cultivate the most cordial affection." Booth's Apol. p. 14.


WE really believe one mode of baptism to be of divine appointment; all others
but human invention.

BUT is this ordinance of our Lord left in such obscurity, that an honest mind
must be always at a loss how to practice it? To plead this, is to impeach
Christ, that he has not been as faithful in his own house as a son, as Moses
was as a servant: Heb. iii. 5, 6.

BUT from whence does it appear that baptism is a duty? Not from any moral
precept, but from a positive institution. "All positive institutions depend
entirely upon the will and declaration of the person who institutes them, with
respect to the end and design of them; and also the due manner of performing
them." Letters to Bishop Hoadley.
But are not positive institutions as plain as moral precepts? If so, why do we
blame the sinner for not complying with one, and excuse the Christian for
neglecting the other?

BUT it is said, they do not neglect it, but only practice it in a different
way! But is this different way divine institution, or something substituted in
its room? If the former, we may presume that it is made plain in the word, as
it is not designed for men of science only, but for unlearned men and women,
and for babes in Christ.

THE instance recorded in scripture concerning Saul who was sent to destroy
Amaleck, with the prophets reply to him at his return, may serve as a specimen
to discover the nature and effects of disobedience. The command was positive,
and was in part obeyed; but "the best of the sheep and oxen were saved alive."
But Saul was very confident he had performed the will of the Lord, and thus
addressed Samuel: "Blessed be thou of the Lord; I have performed the
commandment of the Lord:" 1 Samuel xv. 12. And doubtless Saul would have carried
his point, had not an inspired prophet withstood him. It is likely Saul had
some specious pretenses for his conduct: he might flatter himself that these
sheep and oxen might be a large saving of the property of Israel; and that to
save them to do sacrifice to the Lord, was a laudable design; he did not
pretend he had the least regard to self in the whole affair, but was now
prudently taking care that Jehovah's altar might be loaded with the richest
sacrifices. But the prophet soon gave him to understand, that obedience to
divine appointments, such as depend entirely on an express command, is better
in the sight of God than hecatombs of bleeding beasts, or clouds of smoking
incense: For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as
iniquity and idolatry: 1 Samuel xv. 23.

WHEN the children of Israel were returned from their captivity, they gathered
themselves to Ezra the scribe, to be instructed in their duty out of the law --
"And they found written in the law which the Lord had commanded by Moses, that
the children of Israel should dwell in booths in the feast of the seventh
month: Neh. viii. 14." This was a positive institution, and justly claimed the
obedience of all Israel. But notwithstanding this, it was not kept in the
instituted way, from the days of Joshua, until the days of Nehemiah. Was the
institution to blame for their neglect, or must the blame fall on them? On them
surely. But might not some plausible objections be made against reformation?
What if some had asked the question -- "If this be so, why did none of the
learned fathers find it out? Were not Samuel, David, Solomon, Jehoshaphat, Asa.
Josiah and Hezekiah, all good men? and they did not keep this feast in booths."
What if others had said, "we do not understand the word booths in such a point
of light -- a booth means a sort of tent, the design of which is to screen us
from the scorching beams of the sun, and defend us from the injuries of the
weather; and as our hooses answer these purposes, we esteem it lawful for us to
eat this feast in them."

BUT what would all these objections, and many more that might be made, avail
in the mind of a man who was desirous for reformation, and had his eyes open to
read in the law of the Lord? "It was found written in the law of the Lord;"
therefore it was a sufficient reason for every one to engage in reformation,
whose heart was brought to love the law of his God.

WE profess to take the word of GOD, for a perfect rule of faith and practice;
if so, we are not to follow the opinions of the best of men, though ever so
learned and great, any further than they follow Christ, or walk according to
his institutions; "to the law and the testimony," this is our only guide in
matters of religion. And from hence we find, that baptism is a positive
institution of Christ, left in his church for the benefit of his people;
concerning which we can know nothing but from the revealed will of the Great
Lawgiver. Had the baptism of unbelievers been intended, it would have been
declared; if it was either expressed or implied, the apostles must have
understood it, and their practice would have discovered it; of which nothing
certain has ever yet been made to appear.

IF sprinkling had been the divinely appointed mode, it would be rational to
expect to find it exemplified in scripture; and that instead of their going to
the water, that they brought the water to them. "It behooves us therefore, well
to consider the rule which our Lord has given relating to this ordinance."
Booth's Apol. p. 24.
"Because we can have no other direction in these sort of duties, unless we
have recourse to mere invention, which makes them our own institutions, and not
the institutions of him who first appointed them." B. Hoadley's p. ac. p. 3.


THEREFORE we find, after the most deliberate enquiry that there is such a real
difference in our sentiments and practice, that what the Paedobaptists believe
and practice for baptism, is so essentially different from Christ's
appointment, that in our opinion it cannot be baptism.

THEN surely we must be the most inconsistent set of Christians in the world,
to hold up the necessity of baptism by our profession, and yet when we come to
the Lord's table, practically deny it, by receiving those to our communion whom
we do not hesitate to tell the world, we look upon as unbaptized persons; and
so for the sake of holding free communion, we must " build again the things
that we have destroyed, and thereby make ourselves transgressors," for once
renouncing them.

BUT let us go on to see, what such a practice in built upon.

SECTION III. The arguments for free comraunion considered -- others offered in
vindication of the Close Communionists.
SHOULD all that has been observed in the preceding pages be assented to, yet
this question may be put: Cannot the Baptist churches commune with the
Paedobaptists, where they obtain satisfaction that they are Christians, and are
sincere? The brother proposing to commune informs the church to whom he
applies, that he has reason to suppose he was baptized in his infancy, and has
never seen it to be his duty, to be baptized since. -- Did he but see it to be
duty, he would cordially comply with it; but as he does not, desires to partake
with them as he is.

WHAT can the church do? Must the man be debarred from doing his duty in one
instance, because he cannot see it in another? Or will they drag him into the
water, against the light of his own conscience? Surely not the latter. Some
reasons must be given or the man ought to be received. But what is the ground
of his application? Why, he is a Christian, and is sincere, and he is baptized
to himself, or he considers himself so.

THAT he is a Christian the church is fully satisfied; and that he may be
sincere, they do not pretend to deny; but sincerity is not the term of
communion: out being conformed to the apostle's doctrine and coutinuing
steadfastly therein: Acts ii. 42.

IF sincerity be the term of communion, why might not Paul have been admitted
when he was a member in good standing in the Jewish church? But it may be
objected that he persecuted the saints of JESUS: it is true; but who can
challenge his sincerity from his own declaration? I verily thought with myself
that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth: Acts
xxvi 9. And whatever we practice that is not according to the will of Christ,
is contrary there to, although we be ever so sincere in doing it.

BUT may we not suppose that some of all denominations are sincere although
ever so erroneous. But to illustrate the idea, suppose one who had been
educated a Roman Catholic, should become a true convert, so as to satisfy a
judgment of charity -- he asks for communion at the Lord's table, but at the
same time lets the church know, that he could not, with a good conscience,
receive the cup. Although he has renounced the church of Rome, the mother of
abominations, yet he would not reject any thing that appears to him to be
right, because that church held the same; he now acts honestly, according to
the best light he has. Would any Protestant church commune with him? Surely if
they mean to practice free communion they ought to. The man is allowed indeed
to be in an error, but then it is of that kind that is called "non-essential,
not foundamental, merely circumstantial" -- "the strong ought to bear the
infirmaties or the weak," -- he must be received.

AT their next communion season, there comes a disciple of George Fox, who
denies water baptism in every mode, but he has got convinced of one error in
his party, respecting the sacred supper, and is now desirous to testify his
obedience to this institution. Free communion is too liberal in its sentiments
to reject him, his plea is sincerity, which no one has a right to scruple,
without falling under that severe reproof, "Who art thou that judge another
man's servant; to his own master he stands or falls." Neither of the foregoing
instances can be more inconsistent, than for a Baptist church to commune with a
Paedobaptist, whilst they hold him to be unbaptized.

AND the arguments that will vindicate the conduct of one, will serve the same
purpose for the other.

BUT it may be profitable here to have recourse to the scripture doctrine in
this matter, and it that approves of such a line of conduct, we ought to drop
the dispute; it not, to contend earnestly for this article of the Christian
faith.

IT must be acknowledged, that there is a connection between the two positive
institutions of Christ, and that one of them must be prior to the other. For a
man cannot partake of the Lord's supper, and be baptized, at the same time.

IT is reasonable to suppose, that these appointments, with regard to their
order and connection, depend as much on the sovereign will and pleasure of the
Lawgiver, as the appointments themselves. "Here then the question is, Has our
sovereign Lord revealed his will, in regard to this matter? -- To the law and
to the testimony:" How read thou? "To determine the query, we may first
consider the order of time in which the two positive institutions of the
new testament were appointed: -- That baptism was an ordinance of God -- that
submission was required, and that it was administered to multitudes before the
sacred supper was heard of or had existance, are undeniable facts." Booth's
Apol. p. 31.
John Baptist, the Apostles, and even the Son of God incarnate, all practically
recommended baptism, at a time when it would have been impious to have eaten
bread and drank wine as an ordinance of divine worship. Baptism therefore had
the priority in point of institution.

LET us next consider the order of words in the great commission: when a risen
Savior tells his disciples, "ALL POWER is given to me in heaven and in earth,
go ye therefore and teach all nations, BAPTIZING them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to OBSERVE ALL
THINGS WHATSOEVER I HAVE COMMANDED YOU:" Mat. xxviii. 18, 19, 20. The first
article of the commission is, to teach, then -- what? To baptize, or to
administer the Lord's supper? let every conscience judge.

LET us next consider the apostolic practice. It is very evident the apostles
understood our Lord in the sense for which we plead, and practiced accordingly.
For when a number were "pricked to the heart, and erred, Men and brethren what
shall we DO? Then Peter said unto them, repent and" -- what, break bread? Nav
verily; but "be baptized every one of you." The willing converts followed his
direction; "Then they that gladly received his word were baptized."

THE next step was, to join themselves to the church, and afterward they broke
bread. This is apostolic order, and cannot be denied, without contradicting the
oracles of truth.

WHEN Christ has thus revealed his will, for us to dispute it, is rebellion; it
rather becomes us with humility, to rejoice that he has made the path of our
duty so plain.

IF what has already been observed stands consistent with scripture, a contrary
practice cannot be proved from the word, unless it is like a leaden rule, that
will apply to any thing. Then if this be the order in which the two gospel
institutions stand, we shall do well to consider, who has given us a
dispensing power, to set aside one which claims a prior right on the convert's
obedience, for the sake of indulging him in another.

MOSES had no right to alter a single pin in the tabernacle, but was admonished
to make all things according to the pattern shown in the mount. And whosoever
inverts the order of Christ's appointments, must be considered as dictating
INFINITE WISDOM.

THE next thing that I shall consider is, the arguments drawn from St. Paul's
words to the Romans, Receive ye one another as Christ also has received us:
Romans xv 7. Hence our opponents argue, that if GOD has received a person, and we
have reason to suppose that he communes with them, we cannot, in the exercise
of a Christian temper, refuse them. But is this receiving limited to communing
at the Lord's table? Is there no other way for us to manifest our love to our
brethren of other denominations, but for us practically to give up what we
conscienciously believe to be the order of GOD'S house? Before we make such a
movement, it will be safe to enquire into the apostle's meaning, and instead of
giving my own thoughts on the text, I choose rather to transcribe a passage
from a Paedobaptist writer, (...) Compound. Acc. of the form and order of the
church, p. 109, 110.
quoted by Mr. BOOTH, Apology, p. 85.
who, dissenting from what our opponents infer, observes -- "This difference is
glaringly forced and wide, discovering their ignorance of the true meaning and
design of the text, who make it. The apostle is not here speaking of admission
to church membership at all; nor does he consider those to whom be writes in
the precise light of the church universal, but as members of a particular
church or body, among whom there was some difference of opinion about means,
etc. which was like to break their communing together, as is plain from the
preceding chapter. The apostle sets himself to prevent this, and to accomplish
a reconciliation: And after a number of healing things, he concludes with these
words -- Receive ye one another; that is, ve who are saints at Rome, who have
agreed to walk together in the commandments and ordinances of the Lord Jesus;
ye who are professedly united in church communion, receive ye one another in
love, as becomes saints united in one body for mutual benefit. Bear ye one
another's burdens: watch over and admonish one another in love, notwithstanding
some difference in sentiment among you, as to the eating certain meats, and
regarding certain days; but let not that difference make any breach in your
communion together as a church of Christ. But let the strong dear with those
that are weak; and the weak not be offended with the liberty of the strong.
Judge not one another uncharitably; but let brotherly love continue. This is
precisely the apostle's meaning, as will appear to those who look impartially
into the connection of his argument, and by no means serves the purpose for
which the objectors bring i^." There is an essential difference between their
eating or not eating meats in the apostolic times, and our being baptized or
not baptized, prior to communion at the Lord's table. The latter being a solemn
institution of divine worship: out can this be asserted of the former? Surely
it must be straining things beyond bounds, to set these obsolete, antiquated
rites, in contrast with a gospel institution.

Another argument made use of in favor of free communion is, that if they are
GOD'S children, he communes with them; and if so, it would be superstition for
any to refuse to come to the sacred table with them. But it is not what GOD can
or does do, but his revealed will that is the rule of our duty. Many have left
the word of GOD out of a partial regard to the characters of great and good men
But it may be remembered, that when the LORD sent the prophet from Judah to cry
against the altar at Bethel, that he was forbid to eat bread or drink water in
that place. For a time he kept close to the word of the LORD, and prospered.
But after he was gone, an old prophet pursued after him, and finally prevailed
with him to return; had he appeared as an open enemy, it is not likely the
prophet would have heard to him; but this is the way in which he prevailed with
him, by telling him -- I also am a prophet -- and that an angel spoke unto me
to bring thee back. But though a prophet, or an angel from heaven had spoken
unto him, he had no warrant to leave the word of GOD; and for his disobedience
was soon slain of a lion. See this account, 1 Kings, xiii.


ANOTHER argument made use of by them who plead for open communion is, that we
can join in prayer, either in our families or in public, with Paedobaptists, or
can hear them preach occasionally, and yet after all, cannot come to the Lord's
table with them. It is true, and perhaps some cause can be showed for our
conduct. We esteem it not only lawful, but to be our indispensible duty, to
manifest our love to all that love the Lord, in every way that is not
inconsistent with a revelation of the divine will in some other respects.

I PRESUME it will be a given point, that circumcision was absolutely necessary
for every male, in order to partake at the paschal supper; this was not the
effect of any bigoted notion in the Israellies, but by a possitive command of
Jehovah: Exodus xii. 48. Had Enoch who walked with GOD as a saint, and who, as a
prophet, foretold the coming of Christ to judgment -- or Noah, who was an Heir
of the righteousness of faith, as well as a preacher or it -- or Melchisedek,
that illustrious type of the Great Messiah -- had these been cotemporary with
Moses, and sojourners in the same wilderness, they could not have been admitted
to communion in the Israelitish church, without submitting to circumcision. Yet
had Enoch been in the camp of Israel when Korah and his company mutinied, and
had been disposed to have given the rebels a lecture on the second coming of
Christ, I cannot suppose his offered service would have been rejected by Moses,
merely because he was not circumcised. Had Noah been present when the
tabernacle was erected, and had been disposed ^o have given the people a sermon
on the future incarnation of the Son of GOD, and the righteousness of faith, of
which that sacred structure had a typical regard, I cannot but think they would
have given him a hearing; and yet the positive law of Jehovah, would have
forbid their partaking at the paschal least.

OUR Lord, though he warned his hearers against the pride and hypocris^, the
unbelief and covetousness of the Pharisees and Scribes, yet exhorted the people
to regard the truths they delivered: Mat. xxiii. 1, 2, 3. Yet would any assert
that our LORD would have admitted these Ecclesiastics to communion in special
ordinances? -- When the beloved disciple said, "Master, we saw one casting out
devils in thy name, and we forbad him, because he followed not with us:" Jesus
answered, "Forbid him not; for he that is not against us, is for us:" Luke ix.
49, 50. From hence it appears, that we ought to encourage those who are
fighting against the common enemy, and are propagating the common truth,
although we cannot commune in special ordinances together.

ANOTHER argument made use of in favor of open communion, is the consequences
that will follow upon close communion, i. e. that if Christians cannot commune
together in this world, how can they expect to enjoy fellowship together in
Heaven.

THIS is something very frightful indeed! that there must be too heavens for
separate spirits!

BUT this may be answered by attending to a few things. Who would dare to
anathematize all those who deny the use of both ordinances? Or who will venture
to say, that among the different kindreds, tongues and tribes, who will appear
in that illustrious throng, at the decisive hour, there will be none who never
saw nor practiced the sacred ordinances in any form? Or who will affirm that
none who are excommunicated persons will ever be admitted into heaven?

AND yet upon gospel principles, it would be unlawful to commune with them
while such.

BUT these objections must appear of no weight to the candid. For where is
there a church of any denomination that there is not such difference of opinion
in some things among them, as at some times to produce trials, and at others,
sharp contencions? And yet may we not suppose that one heaven will hold them
all after death? Yes; death, the great leveller, will put an end to our party
disputes, and bring the dust of contending christians to rest in sweet
agreement in the grave! equally so will the fiery trial, which shall burn up
all the hay, wood and stubble, from the soul -- bring the spirits of all good
men to dwell in a state of uninterrupted felicity.

THE last thing that I shall consider which is brought as a plea for open
communion is, that the scripture account of baptism is left in such darkness
and ambiguity, both as to the subjects and mode, that nothing certain can be
determined. Therefore it calls for our charity toward them who differ from us.
It may be remembered, that when the talents were committed to the servants to
occupy, the two that improved made no complaints; the other had got a hard
master, an austere man; a great many difficulties stood in the way of duty.
That the baptism of infants is not made plain, we shall not deny: but, that
believers were baptized, is as plain as words can make it; and shines through
the new testament as if written with a sunbeam. If sprinkling be the mode
intended in the new testament, we must concede to the proposition, that it is
not made plain. It would seem like an ambiguous affair indeed, to relate, that
both the administrator and the person baptized, went down into the water, and
came up out of it again, when all that was to be done, was only to sprinkle a
little water in the face. Yea, to read in the volume of inspiration that
multitudes were baptized IN the river Jordan; and that they were baptized in
Enon, because there was MUCH water there, when a few basins of water would have
served the purpose equally well: this would seem indeed to be so dark, that
common sense must have been at a loss how to have reconciled this ancient
account with modern practice, had it not been that some gentlemen of great
invention, have lent their friendly aid, and cast peculiar light upon the
subject, by informing the world, that the large quantity of water was necessary
for the use of the camels and asses the people rode upon; whereas the only
thing that the scriptures bring into view, is the convenience of baptizing.
That the Paedobaptists consider it as not made plain in scripture; or, that it
is left to be practiced indifferently, as circumstances may require, is
abundantly evident from their conduct; for many of them administer both ways;
some times in the meeting house, and then in a river. What strange amphibious
Christians indeed!

IF the Greek verb Baptizo has not been rightly explained, we have no reason to
suppose it ever will be.

AND this evidence we find in our favor from the various expositors upon it,
that all the Baptists agree, that the word in its first or primary sense,
signifies to dip or plunge, and only in a secondary and consequential sense, to
wash Doctor Gill's answer to Mr. Dickenson, p. 90.
Many of the Paedobaptists allow the first sense of the word to be the same as
we do: See the learned Henry, on Romans vi. 4. -- Also quoted by Mr Foster, Dr.
Doodridge, Mr. Burkitt, Dr. Maclaine, Dr. Wall, and Mr. Pool.
and if others deny it, yet still the evidence stands in our favor; for none
would give it up against themselves, if they were not obliged in justice to do
it. A number of ancient, learned expositors upon the Greek, allow this sense.
Scapula, Schrevelius, Budaeus, Calvin, Beza Casaubon, Grotius, etc. quoted with
their words by Dr. Gill.
The matter is out of dispute in our minds; and we really think, that the
combination of words and circumstances recorded in the New Testament, have made
it as plain as any others could, so that "He that runs may read;" so plain that
"No wayfaring man, though a fool, needs err therein." Yet many who have been
educated in the theory of the christian religion, from their early days, excuse
themselves from this duty, because they cannot see it. But it is so plain that
an Ethiopian Eunuch, who, but a few minutes before, did not understand what he
read, is soon instructed in the weighty concerns of his soul, and believes in
the truth with all his HEART; which immediately led him to come down from his
charior, and go down into the water. Surely the Christian who boasts superior
advantages above an Ethiopian, must stand admonished by this example. I^
Annanias of Demascus. was to meet such an indifferent brother, would he not
address him in his admonishing language, "Why tarriest thou? Arise and be
baptized" -- Would not the ready obedience of the Jailor, who "Arose the same
hour of the night, and was baptized, he and all his straightway," such a
delaying brother?

COULD not Lydia leave the riverside, where the LORD first opened her heart,
before she gave proof of her faith, by submitting to this ordinance? Then let
the doubting lift their eyes and see what a cloud of witnesses we are
surrounded with, and lay aside every weight, and run the self-denying race --
and fee that they do not make void the commandments of GOD, through their
tradition.

HAVING thus gone through with what I proposed, I shall close the whole by a
brief address to the Baptist churches.

Dear Brethren,
IT WAS at the request of a number of you that I attempted to write; and it I
should fail of answering your expectations, yet still I have the testimony of
my conscience, to the rectitude of my intention; and my inability you will
tenderly impeach. -- You will find a great difference in those who object
against our order, with regard to close communion; some no doubt are to be
considered in the light of those we meet with, Ezra iv. 2, who requested of
those Jewish Fathers, to build with them; their plea was, "We seek your GOD as
ye do; and we do sacrifice to him since the day of Esar-haddon; King of Assure."
These were not admitted for they were enemies, and only faught to overthrow
those who were building.

BUT you will meet with others, who, joying and beholding your order, would
gladly take privileges with you; who stand high in your esteem as friends to
the cause of truth; these demand the tenderest expressions of your love -- yet
it is never to be expressed in a way contrary to GOD'S revealed will.
Therefore, if our profession be consistent with the word of truth, let our
practice be so too. Let those who open their doors for free communion consider,
whether they do not give more liberty than the scripture does, by sitting down
at the holy table with those whom they look upon as unbaptized. They will do
well to search for a precedent for their conduct in the word of GOD. I am
persuaded, if they were to ask the christian world in general, they would
readily join with the apostle and say, "We have no such custom, nor the
churches of GOD" that were before us, as to receive unbaptized persons to
commune with us.

LET those who practice according to their profession, never be ashamed of the
Cross of Christ; but remember that it is enough that the disciple be as his
Lord, and the servant be as his master. Remember the apostles words to the
Thessalonians -- "Now we command you, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walks disorderly, and not
after the traditions he received of us:" 2 Thessalonians. iii. 6. It may be your duty
to withdraw from them that you consider as not conformed to the tradition of
the apostles; so far as not to partake together at the Lord's table.

But I shall close with the words of the beloved Paul to the Corinthians: --
"Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same things, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgments:" 1 Cor,
i. 10.

FINIS.

