THE BETTER SORT: OR, The GIRL of SPIRIT.

AN OPERATICAL, COMICAL FARCE:

Perhaps there is some will say, I Would give a guinea,
To know who is Yorick, Flash, Sententious, Jenny.
Let Us see the mangled characters that bleed --
Farce, and no Scandal, is a FARCE indeed.
Know, slander-loving readers, great and small,
We scorn on private Characters to fall --
"They Are Knights of the Shire, and represent you all."
EPILOGUE. PRINTED AT BOSTON, BY ISAIAH THOMAS AND COMPANY.

Sold at their BOOKSTORE, No. 45, NEWBURY STREET, and at said THOMAS'S
BOOKSTORE in WORCESTER.

MDCCLXXXIX.

PREFACE.
THE thirst for Novelty is unextinguishable. The human mind is of such
exquisite susceptibility, as to be insatiable to variety; hence it is the good
people of this town have more than once discovered their avidity to gratify
this passion or affection by instantly snatching up newspapers, magazines, and
even farces. Some people may perhaps attribute this eagerness in pursuit of
literary entertainment to a love of scandal. With what greater degree of truth,
might this be imputed to a desire of something new! -- I have the charity to
suppose this may be one of the causes which prompt the public to buy new
publications, not to say any thing of encouraging the Art of Printing -- the
boast of Americans -- the palladium of liberty -- and the cream of the
Constitution. Sorry I am to add that this eager solicitude in a generous
public has oftentimes been ill requited; it has been requited with a farcical
representation of a few heterogeneous incidents, thrown together with
injudicious haste, and prompted solely by the lucre of gain -- a few private
anecdotes have been inserted in these pages, but without instruction, without
even amusement for their aim, they have obtained, for the reason above cited, a
temporary reception; but not deserving a repository in the library of
Curiosity, or even in the memory of Slander, they have silently rolled down the
stream of time into the dull lake of oblivion. The dramatick style is
universally allowed to be a useful channel for conveying instruction to all
classes of citizens -- and though a new play must necessarily loose a great
part of its effect, because the advantage of action is shut out, yet a candid
mind will doubtless and nevertheless receive the seed into good ground; the
good humor of the reader must therefore supply the comic humor of an actor.
Whence it appears that a Farcical Opera presented to the American states at
this juncture, must be a very useful work. The following work, therefore, is
now offered to the candor, and for the amusement and edification of the
credulous public. A public whom I call credulous because they have generally
purchased books of this kind before they took the trouble to examine them. If
then they have been cheated by the empty sound of a title, the question is, How
ought a Farce to be written. I can answer the question in no better way than by
encouraging the reader diligently to peruse, what he now sees before him. In a
more especial manner will his good nature be awakened, when he finds that the
conversation of the parties tends to some general point, that the unities of
the Drama are not altogether violated, and that a PLOT is pursued and brought
about, all which must provoke his patience to read these fifty pages clean
through.

PROLOGUE. In the CHARACTER of MR. SENTENTIOUS.
LOOK round the world, how very few we see,
From prejudice and prepossession free!
Old customs are revered, and new ones cursed,
The partial heart still faithful to the first.
Suppose, I say -- "It might not come amiss
TO erect a Stage in such a town as this."
How many voices issue from the crowd,
Some whispering praise, while others damn aloud;
Some deprecate the time -- and some rejoice --
A different interest prompts a different voice.
Ye sober CITS, just, friendly, kind and civil,
Who dread the drama, as ye dread the devil,
Hear what our author bade me to impart,
And he is a warm, good fed'ralist at heart.
He says it is vice awakes the muses rage,
Her powers satirick but reform the age.
Perhaps some FEMALE FLIRT breaks forth in praise,
"Glorious! to sport it all the night at plays!
"Then should we see, in silks and satins laced,
"What Boston Lady has the greatest taste."
"Stop child," methinks the MATRON grave, replies,
(From a long life's experience rendered wise)
"PLAYS (were there some committee to o'ersee 'em)
"Might be as useful as a long Te Deum;
"Thus to attend the labored works of bards,
"PLAYS might improve the time, that is spent at cards,
"At moral truth and social virtue aiming,
"PLAYS soon would supersede the vice of gaming."
The YOUTH from CAMBRIDGE thinks the matter fine --
"A school for wit, and eloquence divine!
" -- That play'rs were moral men -- appears quite fully,
" (...) you know, was hand-in-glove with Tully."
A good MECHANIC, somewhat loath to flatter,
Owns, on the whole, he hugely likes the matter.
Staunch, to preserve the morals of THE PEOPLE,
He sees the buck at taverns run to tipple,
Who every evening saunters on, and gapes,
From the Green Dragon to the Bunch of Grapes.
Spending his money! O the mighty curse!
In punch -- at dice, and often something worse.
But see the BUCK himself -- the painted creature,
Who always strives to adorn the work of nature,
Strives to adorn, with all his might and power,
His shirt with ruffles, and his cape with flour!
" Gads bod! a stage in Boston! -- that is the broth, A cant term for any thing
very good. --

"But our old DONS will all be mighty wroth --
"What sun we'd have, were it not for these old prigs,
"Who never change their principles nor wigs." Pope.

"A Stage reforms the manners of a nation --
"Then, how convenient for an -- assignation."
O impotence of fools! to whom it is given
To countermine the choicest gifts of Heaven.
At social joys, their indiscretion strikes;
Of folly's tide, they raise the spacious dykes;
Follies unseen, gain power as they rise,
And mundate us with a flood of vice.
To fix fair Virtue in her steadfast cause;
To improve your morals, more than win applause;
To show the foibles of domestic strife,
The tyrant husband, and the scolding wife;
TO expose the father, who, by right divine,
Would sacrifice his child at MAMMON's shrine,
For this the Comic MUSE "first trod the stage,"
And scourged the vice and folly of the age,
Manners, and sometimes principles, she mended,
And took her task up -- where the preacher ended.
But since a Theater is not allowed
TO amuse the great -- to instruct the vulgar crowd,
A worthy lady of the "better sort,"
Consents to night to make a little sport,
This worthy lady in a merry mood,
Will risk the consequences -- bad or good.
Here, with conclusive, dictatorial pride,
To sum the evidence on either side,
Exceeds the limits of our small commission --
We leave the premises to your decision;
With you we rest the merits of the cause,
And humbly hope the verdict -- of applause.
PERSONS of the DRAMA.
MEN.
HARRY TRUE LOVE -- Entertains a passion for Mira. MR. SENTENTIOUS -- A man of
good sense, but rather too sentimental. PETER LOVEMUCH -- An old man, in love
with Alonzo's money. ALONZO HAZARD -- In love with Mira's fortune. CAPTAIN
FLASH -- A British subject -- one who loves to belittle America, and to talk
about English politics. YORICK -- A good natured Yankee, but no taste for
dueling -- in other respects the fool of the play.
WOMEN.
JENNY -- Friend of Mira. MRS. SENTENTIOUS -- Thinks if one has a fortune, one
ought to enjoy it -- and as she has money, the best way is to set up for one of
the better sort. MIRA -- Daughter of Lovemuch, she has some esteem for Harry,
and is a " Girl of spirit."
SERVANT.
SCENE -- The HOUSE of MRS. SENTENTIOUS.

THE BETTER SORT, etc.
SCENE I.
MR. and MRS. SENTENTIOUS. MRS. IT IS always so, my dear, you will never let me
have my way, and yet I can plan as well as any body.


MR. Bless me! my love, what knock down this partition?


MRS. Yes! knock it down, and turn these two chambers into one -- we shall then
have an excellent hall to entertain company in.


MR. Two rooms full of company at once!


MRS. You have no soul for grandeur, Mr. Sententious. I mean to be remarked for
splendor and luxury; these are the steps by which I design to ascend to the
pinnacle of politeness and the tip top of the bettermost genii. My fortune was
told me that I should be a lady.


MR. I foresee infinite expense in this plan.


MRS. I foresee infinite pleasure in it. There is nothing like echoing back a
husband's remonstrance. Aside.


MR. If we have made a fortune by our own industry, it is no argument that it
should be squandered away in one winter.


MRS. If we have made a fortune, it is no argument that it should be hoarded
up, to look at, to all eternity.


MR. But, my dear, if we set sail upon the sea of luxury, the hand of the most
skilful pilot will be too feeble to manage --


MRS. That is just like you -- you always pother me with your similes.


MR. In a word, my dear, the desires of extravagance are no more to be filled
up than the ocean.


MRS. In a word, my dear, the desires of avarice are worse, they can no more be
filled up than the bottomless pit.


MR. Lord deliver us from these wives.

AIR.
If you have a smart wife,
She Is the plague of your life,
And thus is your happiness ended
If money she earns,
She readily learns,
How speedily gold may be spended.

MRS. Lord deliver us from these husbands.

AIR.
If husbands we have,
The money they crave,
To hoard in their chests, is unbounded,
They Are afraid of a souse,
To furnish their house --
With poverty ever surrounded.
I must be all prepared against this evening -- I have engaged a splendid
company -- here will be Alonzo, Mira, and Capt. Flash, and Harry True Love, and
a house full of the better sort.


MR. Your brain is ever fertile in schemes of extravagance. It is not every
body that would go to the expense that I do -- You might therefore relinquish a
little of --


MRS. Not every body! what fools them is!


MR. You ought not to say " them is" -- I never shall be able to teach you to
speak grammatically.


MRS. The bettermost genii don't place the ton in mere words -- it is in
actions, and actions of high life and grandeur too -- It is these that
distinguish the better sort from the canal.


MR. The canaille! you ought never to use words you do not understand -- say
the vulgar, or commonalty; but my own instructions, added to those of the
music master, the dancing master, and a hundred other masters, is breath
wasted upon the wind.


MRS. I dare say you think it all money thrown into the fire --


MR. Yes, Madam -- and out comes a molten calf that I am obliged to worship.
Aside.


MRS. All this is nothing to the purpose -- I shall order the workmen
immediately to proceed in their business, and make these two rooms into one
elegant hall.


MR. O that I could teach you to reflect one minute! How often have I
expatiated on the virtues and happy consequences of prudence, and still you are
deaf to the voice of economy.


MRS. Now for the sentimental!


MR. She who cherishes in her bosom a passion for extravagance, will find she
nurtures a viper to sting her to the heart.


MRS. It Is a pity but you had been Secretary to King Solomon -- you make full
as good proverbs.


MR. When she has once indulged --


MRS. Yes, my dear, when we once get a taste of it, it is hard to leave it off
-- I grant all that --


MR. When she has once indulged herself in trespassing on the bounds of luxury,
she proceeds with less caution, without reflecting that the admission of the
first error but opens the door to a train of unconquerable evils.


MRS. You mean to the train of the better sort.


MR. When people of common life get something forehanded in the world, it
certainly discovers a little mind to strive to emulate the extravagance of
their superiors.


MRS. Come, my love, no more words.


MR. Words! -- God bless the woman! Words! -- I would not have you mind my
words! I mean to inculcate sentiments, and I wish you, Madam, to distinguish
between them. Would to God I could write these sentiments with a pen of iron
upon the heart of every woman in town.


MRS. Come, my love, no more words -- these sentiments, as you call them,
always fright ladies of the better sort into hystericks.


MR. More shame for them --


MRS. O! I faint -- Betty! Betty! -- my drops, my drops, my sal val latinum --
I faint -- MATRIMONIAL DUET.
HUSBAND. Pardon! O pardon! lovely wife,
Inform me what you want;
Say, can my guineas end the strife?
To hear thy wit,
To see thy fit,
To hear,
To see,
Who would not grant.

WIFE. What gentle sounds now break upon mine ear,
Soft as the song of any saint?

HUSBAND. It is thy husband's gentle voice you hear.

WIFE. Alas! alas! why did I faint.




MR. Come wife, let us end the debate -- make the house into one room if you
wish it -- make a playhouse of it and welcome -- only give me more peace and
quietness, and less of your repartee and fainting.


Enter SERVANT. SERVANT. Madam, please to walk down -- the company is come.


MRS. Come, Sir. --


Exeunt. SCENE II.
A ROOM below STAIRS. MIRA and JENNY. JENNY. TELL me what is the matter -- are
you in the dumps? -- How is Harry? You have the character of being a girl of
spirit; let me desire you then, to disburthen yourself freely, and rely upon my
friendship.

AIR.
I.
Dear girl, when the mind's out of health,
It is known by our tears and our sighs;
Not flattery can charm us, or wealth,
It Is friendship the comfort supplies.
II.
Of MY friendship I beg you to ask
Whatever your heart may approve,
Good fortune may smile on the task,
And reward the exertions of love.
III.
Then cheer up thy heart, my dear lass,
Give sighing and tears to the wind;
My invention shall hasten to pass
The thing that is most to your mind.

MIRA. From you, my love, all assurances of friendship are vain. How
unfortunate is my situation! To be debarred the company of the youth of my
affections, and subject to the caprice of an unnatural father -- of a father
who places his happiness in the accumulation of riches, and deems every man
unworthy his esteem, whose disposition is not equally parsimonious. For this
reason I begin to suspect the intentions of old Alonzo. I see him daily
closeted with my father, and indeed he has been uncommonly polite to me, of
late. What a sorry plight must a poor girl be in, who has the misfortune to
have a rich father, when any man who fears to become a bankrupt may repair his
consumptive purse by falling in love with her -- money -- I love, and I
acknowledge I have long loved the engaging Harry, and yet am constrained,
through fear, to conceal my passion from my parent. My spirits alone can
preserve me.

AIR. Had I a heart for falsehood framed.
I.
How hard the fate of her who loves,
Yet must her flame conceal!
How hard, when any friend reproves
The heart they ought to heal!
II.
Thus on the tender budding rose
The worm corroding lies,
And ere it to perfection grows,
Is blasted -- fades -- and dies.
I believe these men are all Turks, and think women have no souls: But I will
let them all see that I have a soul -- I am determined to exercise my spirit --
resolution is the only specific in my desperate case.


JENNY. It gives me great pleasure, my dear, to hear you talk with so much
spirit, only stand to it, and I Will be bound to lay A PLOT that will insure your
felicity -- Your father and Alonzo, I think, will be here this evening.


MIRA. I am to have the honor of an interview with his misership, presently.


JENNY. In the mean time I Will draw his picture to your father -- I Will swear to
you I will not flatter him -- Possibly I may speak a good word for Harry at the
same time.


MIRA. A very excellent contrivance -- but stop -- I hear the rustling of silks
--


SCENE III.
Enter Mrs. SENTENTIOUS. Mrs. SENTENTIOUS. LADIES, I beg your pardon for
detaining you so long -- I had some small matters to see to, which was the
occasion of my not waiting upon you immediately on your arrival.


JENNY. Make no apology, Madam.


A knocking at the front door. Mrs. SENTENTIOUS. Ladies, the company comes,
will you walk up stairs?


Exeunt Mrs. SENTENTIOUS and JENNY. SCENE IV.
Enter PETER. MIRA. WHY, Sir, you appear early here this evening. --


PETER. Yes, yes, daughter, I want to have some small talk with you about
matrimony --


MIRA. I think, Sir, you had better take an opportunity for that purpose at our
own house --


PETER. No no child, no -- Here Is Mr. Hazard, I shall introduce him to you --
He is much in love with you -- a good man truly -- he is good.


DUET. The FATHER and the DAUGHTER.
FATHER. At the Comic Opera I have sometimes seen action alone excite the
highest applause, independent of either the poetry or the music. I saw a Duo
performed by an old man and a young woman, supposed to be his daughter, in such
an humourous manner, as drew an universal enchore from the spectators. The
merit of the musical part of the composition, I was told, was but very
moderate, and as for sentiment you shall judge.

The father informs his daughter, in a song, that he has found an excellent
match for her; who, besides being rich, and very prudent, and not too young,
was over and above a particular friend of his own, and, in person and
disposition, much such a man as himself; he concludes, by telling her, that the
ceremony will be performed next day. She thanks him, in the gayest air
possible, for his obliging intentions, adding, that she should have been glad
to have shown her implicit obedience to his commands, provided there had been
any chance of the man's being to her taste; but as, from the account he had
given, there could be none, she declares she will not marry him next day, and
adds, with a very long quaver, that if she were to live to eternity, she should
continue of the same opinion. The father, in a violent rage, tells her, that
instead of tomorrow, the marriage should take place that very day; to which she
replies, Non; he rejoins, Si; she, Non, non; he, Si, si; the daughter, Non,
non, non; the father, Si, si, si; and so the singing continues for five or six
minutes. You perceive there is nothing marvelously witty in this; and for a
daughter to be of a different opinion from her father, in the choice of a
husband, is not a very new dramatick incident. Well, I told you the Duo was
encored -- they immediately performed it a second time, and with more humor
than the first. The whole house vociferated for it again; and it was sung a
third time, in a manner equally pleasant, and yet perfectly different from any
of the former two.

I thought the house would have been brought down about our ears, so
extravagant were the testimonies of approbation.

The two actors were obliged to appear again, and sing this Duo a fourth time;
which they executed in a style so new, so natural, and so exquisitely droll,
that the audience now thought there had been something deficient in all their
former performances, and that they had hit on the true comic only this last
time.

Some people began to call for it again; but the old man, now quite exhausted,
begged for mercy; on which the point was given up. I never had any idea that
such strong comic powers could have been displayed in singing a song. --
MOORE'S ITALY, vol. i. page 222, etc.


Dear daughter, since wedlock's the balsam of life,
Change, change your condition to that of a wife;
I have sought round my friends, and Alonzo I find
To be wealthy and prudent -- he is aged, but kind:
His locks and his countenance much like my own,
And the ficklesome gambols of youth are all flown.

DAUGHTER. Alonzo! the miser I cannot abide,
To a whipping post, father, I Would sooner be tied:
A match out of nature may breed discontent,
And forced inclination too late may repent:
With my hand goes my heart, Sir, whenever I find,
A youth of an open and generous mind.

FATHER. Alonzo's but sixty, and you are fifteen,
No more contradiction then, let there be seen,
He Will be loving and tender, obliging and kind,
And I Am thinking tomorrow you both shall be joined,
No man in the city such riches can tell,
No man in the city who guards them so well.

DAUGHTER. From an object like him, how my thoughts seem to fly!
I know I cannot love the old fool if I die:
I fear your advice and your counsel you waste,
For avarice and dotage are not to my taste.
In short, ere I Will wed such a fellow as he,
A virgin Ill live to E -- ter -- ni -- ty.

FATHER. Since tomorrow's denied, my girl -- hear what I say,
By my faith -- you young sauce -- you shall marry today.
Alonzo shall marry you -- you shall be his --

DAUGHTER. No!


FATHER. Yes!


DAUGHTER. No! No!


FATHER. Yes! Yes!


DAUGHTER. No! No! No!


FATHER. Yes! Yes! Yes!


BOTH. No, No, No, No, No, No! etc.
Yes, Yes, Yes, Yes, Yes, Yes! etc.

DAUGHTER. In short ere I Will wed such a fellow as he,
A virgin I Will live to E -- ter -- ni -- ty.

Exit FATHER.
MIRA alone. So the important secret is out! Old Alonzo -- ha! ha! -- Surely
there is a power who will countermine this sacrifice, and at length reward true
love and constancy -- I must persevere, however, in my resolution -- A girl of
spirit will hearken to good advice, and not suffer her temper to rise to
rashness.

SONG. Maid of the Mill.
I.
Ye damsels draw near, who are coax'd to be wives,
By the glitter of gold or of fame,
Observe, as you wish for the peace of your lives,
Whoever at wedlock may aim.
II.
Ill-coupled, a train of calamities grow,
That prudence itself cannot hush;
If a fool, the poor dupe can no honor bestow,
And if impudent, kindle a blush.
III.
If a miser like mine should present you his hand,
Bid the fordid old wretch disappear,
Pride, Jealousy, Hate, would your actions command,
And Repentance would bring up the rear.
IV.
The rake, of all wretches, dear virgins, oppose,
He always one's honor suspects;
The worst of all women are all that he knows,
And he thinks there is no odds in the sex.
V.
But show me the lad of a generous heart,
Where candor and good nature glow,
And if I deny him -- then bid me depart,
And lead apes in the regions below.

SCENE V.
Enter CAPTAIN FLASH. FLASH. IT is with inexpressible pleasure, my dear angel,
that I embrace this favorable opportunity of telling you with what sincerity I
am your most obedient humble servant.


MIRA. I beg, Sir, to be excused from attending to your usual torrent of
impertinence --

Enter JENNY and YORICK. Seasonably come, my Jenny, to relieve me from the
fears of an inundation of politics --


FLASH. I beg pardon, good folks -- the tongue, you know, will some times say
things foreign to the heart --


MIRA. Thank you for your compliment, Sir --


YORICK. I suppose then, a gentleman's tongue is situate in his head, somewhat
like a waterman in a boat, who looks one way and rows another -- or, like a
politician who speaks for one party and votes for the opposite.


JENNY. Or like a school boy --


YORICK. Lord! Miss Jenny -- none of your tales about school boys -- you cannot
hold a candle to me for telling a story -- Only hear me tell about our
sleighing frolic -- As soon as we got over the Neck, going up Roxbury hill,
who should we meet but a hack full of your bloods, of the first water, red hot
from the Punch-bowl -- Well -- down they come, full tilt -- Our driver, in
turning out, cut up his nags, and away we went, Jehu like, into the snow drift,
and turned the sleigh bottom up, as clean as a whistle, five girls and three
fellows -- "O lud! O lud!" that was the song, such squeaking, and hollowing,
and bawling, and yelling, and sighing, and laughing -- and the poor ladies had
nothing to do but to travel to the sleigh again, " wading over head and ears in
snow, as high as their knees" -- AIR. What pleasure can, etc.
I.
What pleasure can compare
To a sleighing with the Fair,
In the evening, the evening, in cold and frosty weather?
When rapidly we go,
As we gingle over the snow,
And tantarra, huzza! and tantarra, huzza! and tantarra sings every brave
fellow.
II.
When to Watertown we get,
And the turkey's on the spit,
And we dance, boys, we dance, boys, and drive away all sorrow,
It Is then your milk and tea
Gives place to "strong sangree,"
And we banish, huzza! we banish, huzza! and we banish the cares of tomorrow.
III.
When the turkey's roasted brown,
To the supper we sit down,
And "keep it up," and "keep it up," sings every jovial fellow,
With the wine glass in his hand,
He never makes a stand,
But guzzles, huzza! but guzzles, huzza! and guzzles it away till he is mellow.
IV.
Now for Boston we prepare,
And the night is cold and clear,
And we are stowing close, we are stowing close, because it is chilly weather --
O then what fun we feel,
When the sleigh it takes a heel,
And we are huddl'd, huzza! and we are huddl'd, huzza! and we are huddl'd brave
boys, altogether.
V.
It Is then the ladies cry
O lud! -- O dear! -- O my!
And we scrabble, boys -- we scrabble, boys, all from the snowy weather:
Then in the sleigh again,
Do we scamper over the plain,
And tantarra, huzza! and tantarra, huzza! and tantarra sings every brave
fellow.



MIRA. Bravo! bravo, Yorick! If you mean this in favor of your frolicking,
you will never catch me there. I wonder girls don't catch their deaths.


YORICK. I suppose you need not turn over, without you're a mind to -- but
consider the necessity of some amusement for such a town as this --


Enter Mr. SENTENTIOUS. JENNY. Then we must consider the balls and concerts,
and the endeavors of the gentlemen of the Musical Society, to please and
entertain us --


YORICK. And what is music without words? -- It Is just like a soul without a
body.


FLASH. A very sit simile, it having too much of the celestial to suit your
earthly ideas --


SENTENTIOUS. You may depend upon it, Yorick, if you think to find amusement in
that which is not congenial to your taste, you will be deceived with a cloud,
instead of embracing a Juno.


YORICK. I don't know any thing about that -- but this I know, I like dancing
well enough, but as to your tweedle dum and tweedle dee, without any words, I
an't over fond of it --


JENNY. There are many good singers in town, and to deny It would be swimming
against the stream of popular applause.


YORICK. Granted -- But what I complain of is, that there is nothing new for
them to sing -- Must we be obliged to sing English songs forever -- I heard a
person some evenings since sing a song about Auld England's glory -- what have
Americans to do, in the name of Phoebus, with " Auld England's glory?" So you
see, my complaint is not without reason.


FLASH. And I applaud his judgment who sung -- Who is there to make songs or
music in this country? Or what is there to make songs about? Or if they were
made, what would they be good for? --


YORICK. And so Captain you think we ought to sing the songs of your country
because they are ready cut and dry! -- Charming reason!


SENTENTIOUS. Every nation is undoubtedly characterized by their songs -- They
were anciently calculated to inspire the minds of the people with great ideas
of liberty and sentiments of heroism. Even our American Indians have their war
songs. Remember the effect of the songs of Ossian. The Welsh bards were put to
death by Edward I. when he conquered Wales, for the reason I have given, and
through motives of policy. I have now by me " General Montgomery," -- "The
Battle of the Kegs," -- "Frencau's Poems," -- and many others which were
favorites with the Continental soldiers, and no doubt contributed as much to
encourage them to endure hardships and persevere in the struggle, as paper
money.


FLASH. One may observe the songs of our British sailors in the same point of
view -- One of your Connecticut wits says "They have sung themselves into
invincibility" -- and possibly " Hearts of Oak," and the " Roast Beef of Old
England," may inspire their minds, as you say, with great and heroic
sentiments.


YORICK. Don't all these observations center in my favor? and ought not a new
nation to have new songs? I wish some clever fellow would sit down and write us
half a hundred.


MIRA. So do I too. --


SONG.
I.
A SONG, a SONG, is the cry of mankind,
All know what to SINGING belongs;
It Is interest governs us all you will find,
And gives us the pitch of our SONGS.
II.
The miser with riches who is never content,
Can tell what is right or is wrong,
For he joins in the CHORUS of twenty per cent,
And owns it a very good SONG.
III.
Behold the mechanic, the federal lad
Who hopes that the Union is strong;
But says it is money that makes the heart glad,
And hammer's away with a SONG.
IV.
The merchant is punctual -- to see himself paid,
And wishes for credit, that is long,
Yet strike up the ditty of commerce and trade,
How quickly he joins in the SONG.
V.
The lawyer and parson do know very well,
The things that to singing belong,
One fingers the fee, ere a word he can tell --
One "turns off his flock with a song."
VI.
And WASHINGTON too, the hero and sage,
To Heaven he carols this SONG: --
"The blessings which thou to Columbia gave,
"O Heaven! I pray thee prolong."
Exeunt JENNY and MIRA. SCENE V.
CAPT. FLASH, YORICK, and PETER LOVEMUCH. PETER. WHY Capt. Flash, you seem to
object to things, merely because they are American.


FLASH. Step forward a little into the room, where we may be by ourselves, and
I will endeavor to convince you of the truth of my arguments.


PETER. Sir, I am a true whig of '75, and a staunch sederalist of '89 -- and if
you persevere to belittle my country, you will anger me sorely --


FLASH. I shall not be singular in my perseverence, if I continue in my
sentiments -- The intrepid Abbe Mably, and the judicious Abbe Reynal have
insisted on the truth of what they aver, and they say, every thing in nature,
when once transported to America, will degenerate --


YORICK. Very judgmatical fellows, this Master Reynard and the other one. I wish
they would take a peep at our gray horses, they have not grown an inch smaller
these seventeen years, to my knowledge.


FLASH. You cannot object to the testimony of two credible French witnesses --
the French are your friends.


YORICK. Frenchmen may be mistaken as well as English, though I don't say they
would take such delight to misrepresent things --


FLASH. Explain yourself, Sir -- that is an insinuation derogatory to the
character of my nation -- and I shall resent it, for I am --


YORICK. Who are you! --


FLASH. I declare myself to be a British subject -- Now, who are you, Sir? --


YORICK. Who am I -- Why, I Am a Yankee, all over --


PETER. You should say, you was a citizen of America, Yorick -- consider, you
are engaged in a national dispute -- a very important one, too.


YORICK. Why, Sir, I shall not be afraid, if so be he don't challenge me to fight
a duel -- I hate them bloody pistols, though I will not tell him so. Aside.


FLASH. I Am an Englishman -- I shall let no reflection pass in my hearing, with
impunity.


YORICK. Why? -- How will you prevent it! --


FLASH. I shall call him to the Field of Honor -- and his life, or --


YORICK. Whi -- e -- u -- Why you're a bloody minded fellow, to be sure! -- and
since you are going to put on them there airs, I Will tell you two things -- the
first is, I am not afraid to fight; the second is, that I was only in jest.


PETER. Ha! ha! ha! That Is a good come off, Yorick -- I applaud you, my boy --
you were carried too far in your country's cause by the high blood of youth --
you swum out of your depth, buoyed by a pure federal principle -- and were the
generality of mankind as ready to make concessions as you are, we should have
none of your duels.


YORICK. There I join you, Sir -- I look upon all dueling, gaming and guzzling,
and the like of that (excepting sleighing frolicks) to be perfectly antifederal
-- and as to you, Capt. Flash, when I happened to say that the French did not
take such delight to misrepresent matters as the English, I considered the
different interests of the two nations. It is for the glory of Great Britain,
to depreciate the merit of America, that she may appear unrivalled -- the like
as we may see in our manner of electioneering; for instance; a man wants to be
a Rep. or a Congress man, he in the first place puts a piece in the Sentinel,
telling how and about what a great man he is, with his name in a line of
capital letters; but the cream of the jest is, that he takes care to black all
the other candidates. A Frenchman, on the other hand, is a gentleman, and I
love a Frenchman. We are under infinite obligation to that generous nation, and
he who utters a syllable disrespectful of our great ally, deserves the severest
punishment that can be inflicted -- the punishment of ingratitude.


FLASH. If there be not solid truth in your reasoning, I grant that there is
something like a show of plausibility, and for which reason I accept it as a
concession. But after all I advise you not to place too much confidence in
French faith -- because they are deeply interested in whatever concerns Great
Britain.


YORICK. It Is mighty strange that some folks must needs judge others by
themselves! Aside to PETER.


FLASH. I look upon America to be nothing more than a cats paw, which the
ambition of France, prompted by diabolical antipathy to Old England, has made
use of to stir up the embers of sedition. America, it is true, is independent,
but in my mind she will soon rue the time she withdrew from the protection of
the parent country. How happy would it be then, for both countries, if America
were to return.


YORICK. Such a return would be, as the song says, to go

"To that far country, from whose bourn,
"They say, few travelers return."

FLASH. By which you would insinuate, I suppose, that if Old England got you in
her power again, it would be a hard matter to slip your necks cut of the collar.


YORICK. No, no, I mean that King George is dead.


FLASH. Dead! how unfortunate! -- I shall have to buy a new commission --

DIRGE. Are you sure the News is true, etc. -- Or, Chevy Chase.
I.
And are you sure the news it true,
And are you sure he is dead?
What steps shall England now pursue --
Now all her glory's fled!
II.
He was a man of honest heart,
But had advisers bad,
His kingdom they in two did part,
Which made him very sad.
III.
And now he is gone, ah, flow my tears!
As Destiny thinks fit --
Far -- far away from rebel jeers,
And Peter Pindar's wit.
IV.
Dear Yorick, think full well of this,
In time lay by your jokes,
Since you and I, alas! must die,
Like unto Royal folks.
V.
Then bear this moral in your mind,
Wherever you do go --
"Death is a man, do all we can,
"That levels high and low."
VI.
Then fill the bumber, serve the wine,
And bring the bottles forth,
It Is of no service to repine,
Here Is health to GEORGE the FOURTH.

YORICK. I once made a hunting song about a sleighing frolic, and thought mine
was the best in nature, but you beat me out and out.


Exeunt. SCENE VII. CAPTAIN FLASH and MRS. SENTENTIOUS.
FLASH. I PLAINLY see, Madam, as to our opinion of high life, or what may be
called living, we perfectly agree.


MRS. SENTENTIOUS. True, Sir, I should be sorry to differ in opinion from
Captain Flash -- Your taste is built by the English model, and whatever is
English charms me.


FLASH. Not merely from its being English, I should presume, Madam, but your
notions of life being regulated by a true taste, it is the merit of the English
which you admire, and which, give me leave to add, is worthy your admiration
and imitation.


MRS. SENTENTIOUS. Sir, I never descend to definitions -- the "better sort"
say, that whatever comes from England is best, and so I assent to what the
better sort say.


FLASH. English and Excellent are synonimous terms.


MRS. SENTENTIOUS. Yes, Sir --


FLASH. The manners of the English are so free and so engaging --


MRS. SENTENTIOUS. Yes, Sir --


FLASH. There is so much candor, and honesty, and elegance, and politeness, in
an Englishman --


MRS. SENTENTIOUS. Yes, Sir --


FLASH. She assents to every thing I say, I Will try the other way. Aside Allowing,
Madam, for a little dissimulation --


MRS. SENTENTIOUS. Yes, Sir --


FLASH. And mauvaise honte, and aukwardness --


MRS. SENTENTIOUS. Yes, Sir --


FLASH. You are a lady of such exquisite good breeding that you contradict
nothing I say --


MRS. SENTENTIOUS. True -- Sir -- I never contradict any body but my husband --
AIR.
I.
In the state of marriage
There is dissimulation,
A proud and saucy carriage
Will cause a disputation.
II.
Yet it is "honey, love, and dear,"
Whenever we do come --
But, lack-a-day! I fear
It Is " no such thing" at home.


After all, I don't know what you mean by your mauvaise honte -- it sounds to
me as a very odd, out of the way word.


FLASH. But I took you to be a woman of words.


MRS. SENTENTIOUS. That is very strange, that you should take Mrs. Sententious
for a woman of words --


FLASH. You are disposed to be witty, Madam --


MRS. SENTENTIOUS. I do not aspire to the honor of being a woman of words --
for my modesty would rest perfectly satisfied with the humble title of a woman
of letters.


Enter ALONZO HAZARD, MR. SENTENTIOUS, and HARRY. MRS. SENTENTIOUS. I have had
a long conversation, my dear, with Captain Flash, about the English -- he
admires my imitation of the manners of the better sort -- and advises me to
proceed in my resolution.


MR. SENTENTIOUS. He is very liberal of his advice -- I am much obliged to him!


ALONZO. Ay, Ay, people are most commonly very liberal of that which costs
nothing -- teach young people the main chance, and give them a clear idea of
principal and interest, and they will want no advice.


MR. SENTENTIOUS. Is that all the principle you would instill into young minds
-- Hearken to my advice -- AIR.
Betimes instruct the forward youth,
In ways of " sentiment and truth,"
So shall he find when age comes on
A refuge from the storms of care --
Then shall thy cherub virtues own
Thy pupil for her heir.



ALONZO. Very chimerical heirships these -- nothing to be got by them,
therefore I think you had better teach them that two and two make four.

AIR.
I.
I have heard that some lover of wisdom, of old,
This excellent axiom started,
(And which to repeat to you, now I make bold)
"That a fool and his money's soon parted."
II.
Behold the young master for College is fit,
And goes to the Tutor hard-hearted;
And lays out his shiners for learning and wit --
For a fool and his money's soon parted.
III.
Then of wisdom, it is here the criterion lies,
"From the money -- O! never be started,"
For the miser's the only good fellow that is wise,
While a fool and his money are parted.

FLASH. I am not a sentimentalist, nor yet so wise as to keep my money to look
at -- I am a true buck, and now I Will sing you my advice.

AIR.
I.
All ye who would know how to shuffle through life,
Despising the nonsense of dunners and strife,
With me, who am thoroughly learned, advise,
Skilled in cunning and experimentally wise.
Though I boast of no sense, I am versed in the rules
Of bubbling the witty, and cheating of fools.
II.
In making your fortune be never too late,
Life's thread may be cut by the scissors of fate:
Though the source of your riches folks cannot divine,
Let your impudence teach you the method to shine:
Get drunk, gamble high, and mark my tuition,
And away you climb up to a Captain's commission.
III.
Run as deeply in debt as your credit extends --
Cheat and slander your new, and forget your old friends:
Then how will they stare when they see you so gay,
Treating ladies and gentlemen every day!
They Will think when they see so much custard and pudding,
Ye must have grown damnable rich of a sudden.
IV.
Though this cannot last long -- yet never give out,
Still keep up the style -- knock the bottle about:
Duns, sheriffs, bonds, bills, executions and writs,
Urged home, must not frighten you out of your wits:
Though they make a sad face up, do you make a sadder,
Be very polite -- but as deaf as an adder.
V.
What scheme for the lad, when such mischief surrounds?
What left, but to marry some ten thousand pounds?
Turn off his fair mistress, and offer his hand
To one who has money, and plenty of land.
Flash away with her fortune, make small of the gains,
But love -- while an acre or shilling remains.
VI.
These, my bucks and my bloods, are the schemes I pursue,
I have practiced them long, and I know they will do.
Experience and cunning have taught me the rules
Of bubbling the witty, and cheating of fools.
Thus I cheat my friends, creditors, mistress and wife,
And this is the way that I shuffle through life.

HARRY. Gentlemen, I beg leave to differ from you all -- I flatter myself, I
possess as much of the wisdom of Mr. Hazard, as not to be cheated -- as much of
Mr. Sententious, as not to be negligent in the relative duties, and as much of
the Captain Flash, as will furnish me at any time with an answer for one of his
order.

RONDEAU.
The happy lad, who gaily views
The shuffling game the world pursues,
Sees some who win, but more that loose,
It Is only that, which can amuse
The happy lad,
And he who such a path pursues,
Shall taste his hive of sweetened dews;
To crown his wish, and close his views,
Soon shall some GIRL OF SPIRIT choose
The happy lad.

Exeunt. SCENE VIII.
MIRA, and ALONZO HAZARD. ALONZO. MISS Mira, I am your most obedient slave.


MIRA. Sir! I emancipate you from this instant --


ALONZO. I presume your good father has acquainted you with his intention of
bestowing upon me your fair hand.


MIRA. He has: It may be in his power to bestow my hand, but remember, my heart
is at my own disposal.


ALONZO. We never stand for trifles, nowadays, my dear -- after marriage, love
comes of course.


MIRA. Vile, villainous suggestion!


ALONZO. To own the truth, I didn't expect a young lady would fall in love with
me at first sight!


MIRA. Dare you talk of love, whose only idea is attached to the subject of
money?


ALONZO. Oh! fine notions truly! the sentimental! ha! money! -- I Will sing you a
song about that -- a song I composed myself on modern love and courtship, on
purpose to serenade you, my dear -- in courtship I Would have you know that money
is always the object -- and as to love, that is all fol de roll.

SONG. Here Is to the Maiden of bashful Fifteen.
I.
The man who would court with an impudent face,
Calls his mistress his dear and his honey,
He praises her beauty and ravishing grace --
But never a word of her money.
CHORUS. -- Of independence,
At some future tense,
He talks, but her fortune must pay the expense.
II.
Though he sigh, and he chatter and tenderly look,
He never lets her know what his wish is:
So the fisherman skilfully covers his hook,
And thus he trepans -- simple fishes.
CHORUS. -- He values not thence,
A handful of cents,
For he knows what he catches must pay the expense.
III.
Though dissimulation unskilfully played,
May happen to vex, or to fret her,
A shilling that is artfully tip'd to the maid,
Conveys to her bosom, your letter.
CHORUS. -- Then lovers learn hence
Not to value the cents,
I warrant the lady will pay the expense.
IV.
Affairs reconciled -- I plainly foresee,
No time should be spended in tarry'ng --
The wife got her ring, and the parson his fee,
Complete the fine business of marry'ng.
CHORUS. -- Grudge not to pay thence,
A purse full of cents,
I warrant the lady will bear the expense.

MIRA. Is it possible such consummate villainy can exist with mankind! How is
it that misers --


ALONZO. Stop, Madam, stop, stop -- villainy! -- misers! -- the lady is a
little out of temper. I had something more to say, but I will adjourn it to a
future opportunity -- Madam, your most obedient and very humble servant. Exit.


MIRA alone. Sir, Yours, (courtesying very low) -- I shall know how to get rid
of him another time.

SOLO. O the Days when I was young!
I.
O the day that I was born!
To behold a scoundrel court!
Meeting thus contempt and scorn,
From the hand that should support.
II.
What avails the constant mind?
What can sheld the heart from care?
Usage cruel and unkind,
Sinks the temper to despair.
III.
Fixed upon his golden prize,
Lo! the husband buys a wife! --
Hence new grievances arise!
Hence the ills of married life!
IV.
Hence the gentleman is cold,
Hence the lady pouts and scorns:
Vengeful she becomes and bold,
Hence the growing ill of horns.
But why do I repine? If I have relied upon my spirits in the beginning,
perseverance only can support me to the end. I must therefore sit down here,
and calmly wait the event.


SCENE IX.
Enter HARRY. HARRY. JOYFUL news! my dear Myra!


MIRA. What has happened.


HARRY. In conversation with your father, he informed me that he had promised
you in marriage to his friend Alonzo; but he had just heard that Alonzo had
lost the greatest part of his property by dealing too extensively in the usury
business. In consequence of which your father has utterly discarded him.


MIRA. I suppose the old gentleman perceived the situation of his straitened
finances and would have made himself good by attaching my fortune to his estate.


HARRY. That is all! my love; Alonzo is a man of an excellent heart -- for
though your fortune might have undergone some little diminution, he never would
have proceeded to any outrage against your person.


MIRA. Please to proceed in your story.


HARRY. Your father then took me cordially by the hand, and begged leave to
congratulate me on my good fortune.


MIRA. You surprise me! -- what fortune?


HARRY. I have been so lucky, my love, as to draw the highest prize in the
North Mills Lottery!


MIRA. Let us then endeavor to view the glittering store, not as happiness,
but only as a mean of enjoying it.


SCENE X.
Enter YORICK, JENNY, PETER, MRS. SENTENTIOUS, MR. SENTITIOUS, and CAPT. FLASH.
YORICK. BEHOLD, good gentlefolks, the Conscious Lovers.


JENNY. I told you I would LAY A PLOT (to Mira) -- Mr. Henry I congratulate you
on your good fortune.


PETER. Be happy, my children -- I was disappointed in the character of Old
Hazard -- Our friend Jenny has told me strange stories -- alas! alas! that
there should be so much dissimulation in mankind! -- However, I learn thus much
-- that though it may be the duty of a father to see his daughter well married
off, yet there can be no harm in a girl putting on a good share of spirit to
every body whomsoever.


MRS. SENTENTIOUS. I am extremely happy that such an eclaircissement should
happen in my house -- One who has contributed in the least to the happiness of
any person, may hold up her head with the better sort.


MR. SENTENTIOUS. If Jenny will now speak a good word for Yorick, it will
augment the happiness of the evening, and conclude the feast of sentiment.


JENNY. Let me finish one thing at a time. --


YORICK. Give me your hand.


CAPTAIN FLASH. As I have cut a great flash in the conversation of this
evening, I now say, if it were possible I could forget my King and country, I
would settle in Boston, and leave off my old pranks. In the mean time I most
heartily drink to your health -- DUET. A bumper of good liquor.
HARRY and MIRA. We'll nothing now but pleasure --
For constancy's a treasure,
Whose bounty 's without measure,
So fill a cheerful glass,
To every faithful lass.
Let every maid inherit,
A share of decent spirit;
And then, when ills surround her,
No trouble shall confound her.




Exeunt omnes. EPILOGUE. THE PRINTERS TO THE PUBLIC.
WE told our author that to be in vogue,
He ought to have given us an Epilogue --
He sent us here (O help us out good Lord!)
Thus to harangue you of our own accord: --
Perhaps you would have us tell you, if we are able,
Whether there is any Moral to our Fable. --
-- A father contradicted by a daughter --
This, in our mind, is no such mighty matter.
-- Morals we hate -- we love to deal in fiction --
And what so charming as sweet contradiction?
-- LADIES, to you we make our first appeal,
Whose sympathetick hearts well know and feel
The whole extent of contradiction's power --
When did you know it gain so much before?
To you this Comic Opera belongs --
We'd have you read the Play and sing the Songs.
Accept then ladies -- what is but your due --
And now dear GENTLEMEN, a word with you.
And now, ye well bred, party colored crews,
Who deign this spotless pamphlet to peruse --
Ye husbands -- ye who never yet were jealous!
Ye beaux, bucks, bloods and sops and pretty fellows.
Who complaisance and gallantry inherit,
We dare you all to toast -- " The Girl of Spirit."
Dear, reverend CRITICS, must we then conclude
Without a word to you? we are not so rude --
We sought the bard -- "a Farce, a Farce," we said --
"Ah, scandal," quoth the man, and shook his head --
"Who dares a page of sland'rous lies to tell,
"My soul detests him as the gates of hell."
Then he talked something of a certain sage
Who wrote much po'try in the Augustan age,
Who like Mahomet's pigeon, in his ears,
Did whisper, " Rhimer! Keep your farce nine years."
To which we said -- "since WE are here at home,
It Is very odd that you should go to Rome
To gain some typographical advice --
We'll put you in a method -- in a trice --
Will let you know how Farces may be made,
It Is very odd if we don't know our trade.
If you're afraid of Satire, why indite it,
And as you say the matter, so we'll write it:
Or, give us sheet by sheet, and we will print,
Just as YOU write -- if that will not do -- the devil's in it."
Perhaps there is some will say, "I Would give a guinea
To know who is Yorick, Flash, Sententious, Jenny.
Let Us see the mangled characters that bleed --
Farce, and no Scandal, is a FARCE indeed."
Know, slander-loving readers, great and small,
We scorn on private characters to fall --
"They Are Knights of the Shire, and represent you all.
AIRS, SONGS, DUETS, etc.
I. If you have a smart wife, 11 II. If husbands we have, 11 III. Pardon, O
pardon, gentle wife, 14 IV. Dear girl, when the mind's out of health, 16 V. How
hard the fate of her who loves, 17 VI. Dear daughter since wedlock's the balsam
of life, 20 VII. Ye damsels draw near who are coax'd to be wives, 23 VIII. What
pleasure can compare 25 IX. A song, a song is the cry of mankind, 29 X. And are
you sure the news is true, 35 XI. In the state of marriage, 38 XII. Betimes
instruct the forward youth, 39 XIII. I have heard that some lover of wisdom of
old, 40 XIV. All ye who would know how to shuffle through life, 40 XV. The happy
lad who gaily views, 42 XVI. The man who would court with an impudent face 43
XVII. O the day that I was born, 45 XVIII. We'll nothing now but pleasure, 48
ERRATUM -- Page 39, line 5, of the Air, read "the cherub Virtue."


