INFANT BAPTISM VINDICATED, BY EXPLAINING The Covenant of Grace; AND PROVING
THAT IT IS A DIVINE INSTITUTION, Under the Gospel Dispensation.

By the APOLOGIST.

He has made with me an EVERLASTING COVENANT, ordered in all things and sure:
for this is all my salvation, and all my desire.

2 Samuel 23.5. NEW LONDON: PRINTED BY T. GREEN. M,DCC,LXXXIX.

INFANT BAPTISM vindicated, etc.
SOME time since, a small pamphlet was published, bearing the title of,
Conferences on baptism. In answer to this, another has been published,
entitled, Remarks on a late WRITER on baptism, by SAND NILES. To evade the
arguments for infant baptism, contained in the first publication, Mr. N, as
others have been, was obliged to deny, That the covenant of grace was ever made
with mankind, and that circumcision was a seal of the covenant, between God and
his people; See Remarks, p. 3, 4, 5.
sensible that these, if admitted, would form an insuperable argument for
infant baptism. This reduces the controversy to this single point: If God has
not instituted the covenant of grace, and does not transact with mankind in it,
the baptism of infants is an human invention, and they who inculcate it, teach
for doctrine the commandments of men; but if God has instituted it, they who
deny it, reject an ordinance of God, and neglect a useful part of christian
practice. This shows the importance of the present subject.

As it may assist the reader in understanding the present design, I will hazard
a general conjecture concerning Mr. N's ideas on these subjects: if it be not
accurately just, the error will be pardonable, as he has not explicitly
conveyed them.

Mr. N. supposes, if I understand him, That in the covenant with Abraham, God
promised and secured the land of Canaan, with many temporal favors, for a
possession to his seed. In connection with this, he instituted many religious
rites, which were typical of Christ and spiritual blessings. When, therefore,
the posterity of Abraham inherited the promised land, and Christ, who was
eminently the seen promised, came and completed the work of redemption, the
covenant with Abraham was fulfilled -- the end of those religious institutions
attained, and that whole dispensation disannulled. -- Consequently, no visible
covenant subsists between God and his people, under the gospel dispensation;
nor are baptism and the Lord's supper, seals of any federal transaction between
them; but duties, in common with others, which believers are to perform, in
obedience to the commands of Christ.

Others consider the covenant with Abraham, as being the covenant of grace, and
a perpetual institution to the people of God; in which they transact with him,
in a visible and public manner; and divine ordinances, as confirming tokens or
seals of this transaction. This expresses the difference, and introduces the
proposed subject, which is, To explain or define the covenant of grace.

That distinct and clear ideas of this subject may be obtained, it should be
premised, That covenants suppose parties, imply conditions, and are adapted to
the end designed by them. It may be further observed, That the scriptures speak
of two covenants, without giving either of them any distinguishing name or
title. One of these, was eternally made between the father and the son: the
other subsists between God and his people. To prevent confusion of thought and
language, Either not attending to this distinction, or not admitting it,
appears to be the source of the confusion and absurdity, so apparent in Mr. N's
description of covenants, p. 5, 6, 7.
the former has been denominated, The covenant of redemption: having been
concerted between the Father and the Son, with respect to the redemption of the
human race. In this, according to our conception, the Father, viewing the human
race as fallen, proposed the incarnation and death of the Son, as the way and
means of their recovery. To induce him to a compliance, he et before him, in
connection with that dazzling glory which this would reflect on the divine
character and government, the honor and joy, of redeeming an inconceivable
number of miserable sinners, from wrath and hell, and exalting them to a state
of dignity and blessedness in his heavenly kingdom. These appeared to the Son
so important, glorious and desirable, that for the sake of obtaining them, he
cheerfully consented, humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the CROSS. The other has subsisted between God and men, and been
termed, The covenant of grace; to distinguish it from the covenant of works,
made with man in his innocent state: and express the infinite condescension and
grace of God, in forming it, and receiving man into it, and the important and
valuable blessings, he graciously bestows upon him in it. To explain and
understand this, it should be considered, That God made a covenant with man, at
least implicitly, in his primitive state: promising him the continuance of his
favor, and everlasting blessedness in his presence, as the consequence and
reward of perfect obedience to his commands; but threatened to punish
disobedience with eternal death. By violating this covenant, he secluded
himself and his race, from all divine favors, upon the basis of law and
desert, incurred the divine displeasure, and involved himself and his posterity
in an abyss of misery. In this state of horror and despair, God intimated to
him, his gracious purpose of redeeming and saving him through the interposition
of a mediator. He then proposed a new covenant, in which personal merit was
excluded, and the atonement of Christ was the basis of his favor and
acceptance. He promised pardon and eternal life, as acts of mere grace, to all
true believers in Christ Jesus. The prosecution of this glorious device of
saving sinners through a mediator, in the external application and use of
wisely adopted means and mercies, is the DISPENSATION, and the promise of
eternal life to believers in him, is THE COVENANT OF GRACE. For a series of
ages, God treated with mankind upon this covenant, externally acquainting them
with it, by the ministry of holy men, to whom he revealed it, and by whom he
invited them into it; but he transacted it, with those who complied with the
terms of it only spiritually and personally, without prescribing (...)
^^^^^^ition of it, or affixing any visible and public (...) it. But in process
of time, he ordained (...) public institution, and transacted with mankind in
it, by sensible signs and tokens, ratifying it by known and established rites.
-- Concerning this we may observe,

I. The parties, God and men.

If it be supposed, that the exceeding guiltiness of man, prohibits all federal
connection, between him and his God, Mr. N. is very confident in denying, That
the covenant of grace could have been made with Abraham. To demonstrate the
impossibility of it, he has expressed the ingredients of a covenant, and having
compared the ability of Abraham with them, inferred, that it was impossible,
that the covenant of grace could have been made with him.

He says, p. 5, 'The following things are necessarily included in a covenant.'
For the sake of brevity, I make no remarks on the three first, though justly
obnoxious to censure, and examine only the two last.

4. 'Merit on both sides' -- so where there is no merit, no worth or
excellency, as he appears to explain merit, there can be no covenant,
consequently there can be no covenant between beings totally depraved. But this
article implies, that a covenant may subsist between parties, if there be merit
on both sides. God is possessed of infinite worth: Abraham is a partaker of
God's image, the sum of all excellency, therefore God and Abraham may be
parties in the same covenant. Yet he says, 'Abraham nor any of his posterity,
can ever boast of this, because by the fall, he lost all the excellency there
ever was in man, in this happy state.' But I cannot comprehend, how Abraham and
his posterity, who were born totally depraved, fell and lost their excellency.
That they fell and lost all the excellence (...) ever was in man, in his happy
state, when Adam fell and lost it, two thousand years before they were born,
has really so much of the mysterious in it, I shall not attempt to explain it.

5. And lastly, neither party ought to be under prior obligations respecting
the conditions of the covenant; but Abraham was never free from being under the
strongest obligation, that is, to love and honor God, 'and therefore, could
not possibly be a party in the covenant.' According to this, persons cannot be
parties in a covenant, who are under previous obligations to each other. If,
therefore, pious persons are under obligations to love and delight in one
another, before they covenant together, they cannot be parties in a covenant,
or enter into church state. If angels are obliged to honor and love one
another, they cannot transact in a covenant together: and if the father and
son, as distinct personalities in the Godhead, were under eternal obligations
to love, honor and delight in each other, they were eternally disqualified
from covenanting together. The want of merit or worth, in the preceding
article, disqualified wicked men and devils, from covenanting with one another;
and according to this, the merit or worth of the holy, disqualify them from
being parties in a covenant: and thus, according to the two last things
'necessarily Included in a covenant,' it was impossible, that a covenant ever
could have taken place, or ever can, between the good in heaven, or on earth;
or between the wicked on earth, or in hell. -- Yet he says, The glorious
transaction of the covenant of grace, was only between the Father and the Son,
and that before all worlds. But in contradiction to this, and all he has said
to prove, that the covenant of grace could not have been made with Abraham, he
says, p. t, 'This,' (the covenant of grace) Abraham had a discovery of, was
interested in, and was renewed to him from time to time, till the covenant of
circumcision was annexed to it. So according to these two propositions, the
covenant of circumcision, which was made with Abraham, was annexed to the
covenant of grace, which was only made between the father and the son, before
all worlds!

How natural it is for mankind that would support error, to strain all their
faculties, and almost do violence to scripture and reason, in order to
propagate a scriptureless tenet. See Mr. N's remarks, p. 19.


it will be removed by considering the medium, through which all transactions
take place, between an holy God and sinful creatures: through JESUS CHRIST, a
blessed center of agreement and communion. The union of the divine and human
nature, in his person, or as the scriptures express it, The fullness of the
Godhead dwelling in him bodily, perfectly qualifies him for the important
office, of mediating between an offended God and guilty sinners. In him, God is
reconciling the world to himself, proposing the most merciful terms and offers,
and persuading to a compliance, by the most affecting considerations. An
apprehension and sense of these, existing in the mind, expel from it that
horror and dread, which a consciousness of sin and guilt produce, allure and
constrain it to a cordial acceptance. Thus, in Jesus Christ, God and men meet
and unite: they contract with each other, and walk together, as those who are
agreed, in all the endearing expressions of harmony and love.

These subjects were anciently expressed by the sacrifices, offered to God by
his people. Noah builded an altar and offered sacrifices, And the Lord smelled
a sweet savor: this grateful odor arose from the respect this sacrifice had
to Christ, who atoned for sin by the sacrifice of himself. And God blessed
Noah, and said, and I, behold I establish my covenant with you. Genesis 8.21. and
9.9 -- 18.
So the Lord said to Abraham, Take me an heifer of three years old, and a
she-goat of three years old, and a turtle dove and a young pigeon. And he took
unto him all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid each piece over
against the other, but the birds be divided not. And it came to pass, when it
was dark, behold! a smoking furnace and a burning lamp! striking
representations of the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow,
passed between those pieces -- In that same day the Lord made a covenant with
Abraham. Genesis 15.9 -- 19.
That this covenant was represented by these visible signs and figures, is
evident from the words of the prophet: And I will give the men -- which have
not performed my covenant, which they made before me, when they cut the calf in
twain, and passed between the parts thereof. Jer. 34.18, 19.
This covenant was renewed, Genesis 17, and solemnly ratified and completed, by a
visible seal or token. -- We have a similar transaction described, Exodus 24.
And Moses sent young men, who offered burnt offerings and sacrificed peace
offerings unto the Lord. And Moses took half the blood and put it in basins,
and half he sprinkled on the altar. And Moses took the blood and sprinkled it
on the people and said, Behold, the blood of the covenant, which the Lord has
made with you. -- The comment of the apostle, on this passage, Heb. 9.12 -- 15.
evidently shows, that it had respect to Christ, who through the eternal
Spirit, offered himself without spot to God. Thus the Israelites visibly
entered into covenant with God, through Jesus Christ, typically represented by
their offerings. But when the shadows fled away, on the incarnation and
sacrifice of Christ, the people of God transacted with him in his covenant,
without a veil, by professing their faith in him and obedience to his commands:
as the words of the apostle teach us, when he says, Ye are not come to the
mount which might be touched -- but unto mount Sion, -- and to Jesus, the
mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, which speaks
better things than the blood of Abel. Heb. 12.18.
Which imply, that under the new testament dispensation, by professing faith in
Christ and obedience to his commands, believers enter into covenant with God,
as the Israelites did at mount Sinai. Agreeably to these general observations,
we find entering into covenant with God, to be the distinguishing character of
God's people, as constituting those, who, only, will be accepted and rewarded
in the general judgment: Gather my saints together unto me, those that have
made a covenant with me by sacrifice. Psalm. 50.5.
This brings me to consider

II. The Terms.

In the covenant which God has instituted, he proposes himself, as the great
good, the blessed portion and reward, to be possessed by those who accede to
his terms, and enter into covenant with him. This comprises in it, all that
protection, grace and comfort, which shall best subserve the interests of God's
kingdom and their own good in this world, and the enjoyment of God forever, in
the world to come. The present comfortable, and the future eternal enjoyment of
God, as the all-sufficient, satisfying portion of the soul, is that blessed
motive which he proposes, to induce man to comply with the terms or conditions
on his own part.

The requisitions or terms on the part of man are, That forsaking all other as
the objects of his respect, desire and pursuit, he should make choice of God
for his supreme good and chief end, obey his commands and seek his glory,
confiding in his grace, through Jesus Christ, for pardon and acceptance. These
are implied in the words addressed to Abraham, I am thy shield and thy
exceeding great reward -- I am God almighty; walk before me and be thou
perfect. As for me, behold my covenant is with thee, and thou shall be a father
of many nations: Genesis 15.1.17.1.
which contain the sublime subjects of the gospel. The same good to be enjoyed,
God, over all blessed forever -- Possessed through the same medium, Jesus
Christ the righteous; and enjoyed in the same way, the way of holiness, or
universal obedience to the commands of God. In succeeding ages, when God gave
the Israelites the ten commandments, engraven on tables of stone, these were
called the tables of the covenant. Deuteronomy. 9.
When, in addition to these, he prescribed particular laws and ordinances,
which were inserted in a book, it was called, The book of the covenant. And
Moses took the book of the covenant and read in the audience of all the people.
And all the people answered and said, All that the Lord has commanded, will we
do and be obedient. Exodus 24.3.
We may consider the words of Moses, as an illustration of the terms and manner
of covenanting, and the light in which this subject was viewed, Thou have, this
day, avouched the Lord, to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his
statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and to hearken to his voice.
And the Lord has, this day, avouched thee, to be his peculiar people -- and
that thou should keep his commandments, and that thou should be an holy
people unto the Lord thy God. Deuteronomy. 26.17.
This public transaction formed the visibly holy, or the covenant people of
God. In consequence of it, they had a mutual interest in each other, -- God was
their God -- and they were his people. This connection was expressed by the
endearing relation, between the husband and the wife, I am married unto you
says the Lord: And the transgressions of it, by the impure violations of the
nuptial bond -- Surely, as a wife treacherously departs from her husband, so
have ye dealt treacherously with me, O HOUSE OF ISRAEL, says the Lord. Jer.
3.14 -- 20.


Similar to the terms on which God covenanted with Abraham and the Israelites,
were those prescribed by Christ, to his apostles, for the admission of members
to their communion. They were to preach repentance for the remission of sins in
his name; and to teach them, to observe all things, whatsoever he had commanded
them: and they who complied with these requisitions, who professed faith in
Christ, and subjection to his gospel, sustained the same relation to Christ,
that the posterity of Abraham did to God, were the covenant people, the Israel
of God, 2 Cor. 11.2.
under the new testament, as they were under the old. Gal. 6.16.
Let us now consider

III. The token or seal of it.

It may be observed, That the terms, token, sign and seal, are of the same
import, and are used in the same sense. This is evident from Genesis 17.11.
compared with Romans 4.11. God said to Abraham, It, circumcision, shall be a
token of the covenant between me and you. This the apostle calls, The sign of
circumcision, and says, it was a seal of the righteousness of faith. The
consistency of these various terms will appear, only by considering, That the
seal of any engagement or contract, is only the completing sign or token of it.
When God made a covenant with Abraham, he appointed circumcision to be the
token of it. This seal of the covenant, by his particular direction, was to be
affixed to all the males of his family, both those which were born in his
house, and those which were bought with money. As this injunction was connected
with the institution of the covenant, if it can be proved, That the covenant
exists and operates under the gospel dispensation, it will be equally evident,
that children are the subjects of the seal of it. -- This brings me to observe

IV. That this was a perpetual institution.

That such a covenant subsisted between God and the natural seed of Abraham, is
not disputed by any. But as Mr. N. denies and I affirm, that it had respect to
the dispensation of the gospel, and should be equally obligatory on the
spiritual, as it had previously been on the natural seed of Abraham: the proof
of it shall now be attempted. Not to insist, as Mr. N. observes, That the
covenants made with Noah and Abraham, are expressly declared to be everlasting
covenants: and we have occular demonstration, that the covenant with Noah yet
exists, as we observe the token of it, The bow in the cloud; and as the
covenant with Abraham is expressed in the same terms, we may rationally infer,
that it is of equal duration, An everlasting covenant, and according to the
original institution, operates equally with the covenant of Noah, in the
present, That a compliance with the invitations of the gospel, is the same as
entering into covenant with God, is evident from Isa. 55.3. -- Hear, and your
soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the
sure mercies of David: which may be explained by that everlasting covenant,
which he made with him, which was ordered in all things and sure -- 2 Samuel
23.5. If a compliance with the gospel imports the same as transacting in a
covenant with God, then a public profession of it, is the same as a public
covenant transaction with him.
I would observe

1. This is plainly implied in the predictions of the prophets.

Holy men of old made the gospel dispensation a glorious subject of their
prophecy. One of the events which they foretold, as pertaining to it, was that
of other nations uniting themselves with the Jews, as the covenant people of
God. From those passages which express this, I select only two, which teach it
very plainly, (Isa. 44.5.) One shall say, I am the Lord's, and another shall
call himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand to
the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel. (Zech. 8.23.) In those
days it shall come to pass, that ten men shall take hold out of all languages
of the nations, even shall take hold of the skirts of him that is a Jew,
saying, We will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you. That these
prophecies relate to gospel times, and the conversion of the gentiles, is very
evident from their contexts: and it is equally manifest, that they contain two
distinct propositions:

(1.) They do very plainly imply, That the posterity of Abraham should exist,
under the gospel dispensation, as the visible people of God. This is agreeable
to the elevated prophecy of Isaiah, (chap. 54.1.) in which he styles the
gentiles, the desolate, and terms the Jews, the married wife: which the apostle
quotes, (Gal. 4.27.) and applies to the gentiles termed, the desolate, and the
Jews, whom he represents as having an husband. This doctrine, which is thus
suggested in the prophecies of the old testament, is plainly implied, and
clearly expressed in the observations of the new. It is implied in the words of
Christ, Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: John 10.13.
which evidently refers to the Jews: for he was not sent but to the lost sheep
of the house of Israel. Mat. 15.27.
The description of the apostle, very forcibly implies, That the commonwealth
of Israel then existed, and that the Jews were the body, or people of God. Ephesians.
2. and 3 -- 6.
It is implied in these expressions, SOME of the branches were broken off --
Blindness in PART is happened to Israel. Romans 11.17 -- 27.
The apostle denies, in the most emphatical terms, the total rejection and
extirpation of the Jewish church. I say then, Has God cast away his people?
GOD FORBID -- God has not cast away his people which be foreknew. Wot ye not
what the scripture says of Elias? How he makes intercession to God against
Israel, saying, Lord, they have killed thy prophets, and dug down thine
altars: and I only am left alone, and they seek my life. But what says the
answer of God unto him? I have reserved to myself seven thousand men, who have
not bowed the knee to Baal. EVEN SO them at this PRESENT TIME ALSO, there is a
remnant according to the election of grace. Romans 11.1.


(2). That the proselyted, or converted gentiles, should enter into covenant
with God, and unite themselves to the Jews, as his people. This is, evidently,
the meaning of those expressions, One shall say I am the Lord's, and call
himself by the name of Jacob, shall subscribe with his hand to the Lord, as
signing a written covenant, surnaming himself by the name of Israel, and taking
hold of the skirt of him that is a JEW. This agreeable to those prophecies,
Also the sons of the stranger, which join themselves to the Lord -- and take
hold of my covenant. The Lord God which gathers the outcasts of Israel,
says, Yet will I gather others to HIM, besides those that are gathered to him.
Isa. 56.6 -- 8.
The words of Christ are of a similar signification, Other sheep I have which
are not of this fold, them also must I bring in, and there shall be one fold,
and one shepherd. John 10.13.
The descriptions of the apostle suggest an accomplishment of these
predictions. The apostle represents believing gentiles as CUT OUT of the
olive tree which was WILD by nature, and graffed in amongst the Fews, the
NATURAL BRANCH, and WITH THEM partaking of the root and fatness of the
olive tree: and affirms, That when the Jews, who were broken off, shall turn to
the Lord, they shall be reinstated in their former privileges and relation, or
be graffed into their OWN olive tree. Romans 11.
He describes the gentiles, who were aliens from the common wealth of Israel,
and strangers from the covenants of promise, as becoming FELLOW-CITIZENS with
the saints, and of the household of God: as being FELLOW-HEIRS, and of the SAME
body; and the gentiles, thus united and incorporated with the Jews, as being
FITLY FRAMED together, forming a spiritual house, and growing into an holy
temple of the Lord. Ephesians. 2 and 3 chap.
Thus demonstrably, do scriptures teach, the existence of the posterity of
Abraham, as the visible people of God, under the gospel dispensation; and that
the gentiles should, and did with them, call themselves by their name, and take
hold of God's covenant.

If any addition can be made to these scripture illustrations of this argument,
it may be from these words of the apostle, Before faith came we were kept under
the law, shut up to the faith, which should afterward be revealed. Wherefore
the law was our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that we might be justified
by faith. But after faith is come, we are no longer a schoolmaster. -- Now I
say, that the heir, as long as he is a child, differs nothing from a servant,
though he be lord of all; But is under tutors and governors until the time
appointed of the father. Even so we, when we were children, were in bondage
under the elements of the world: But when the fullness of time was come, God
sent forth his son o redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive
the adoption of sons -- Wherefore thou art no more a servant but a son. Gal.
3.21 -- 23. and 4. 1 -- 8.
It is very manifest from the context, that the apostle, in this passage, is
considering the state of the church, before the coming of Christ and after it.
This he compares to that of a child, educated and trained up for the privileges
of manhood and freedom, and possessing an estate: and if the similitude of the
apostle be just, it is as evident, that the church under the old testament
dispensation and the new, is the same church, as that the child, grown from a
state of infancy to that of manhood, is the same person.

2. The terms, or conditions of covenanting, are the same to believers under
the new, that they were to the Jews under the old testament dispensation. The
Israelites were to acknowledge no true God, but the God of Abraham, and to obey
all his statutes: and there was one law to the home-born and to the stranger.
Exodus 20.3. and 12.49.
Christ made these the terms, on which proselytes should be received into the
number of his disciples. Mat. 28.20.
All the difference which can be supposed, is rather of words, than ideas.
Between the Jews and the heathen, the dispute was about the deity. The
Israelites would acknowledge no true God, but their own. The heathen
acknowledged many other divinities. So the disciples acknowledged Christ to be
the only true Messiah. Their opposers denied their doctrine and rejected their
faith. This appears evidently to have been the same dispute; especially when it
is considered, that Christ was the God of Israel: That Christ was the God of
Israel, to refer to no other passages, is evident from the words addressed to
Moses, Exodus 33.23. -- And I will cover thee with my hand while I pass by. And
I will take away my hand and then shall see my BACK PARTS. -- From which it is
evident, that the God with whom Moses conversed, put on, visibly, an human
form; but this was peculiar to the second person in the Trinity. And probably,
he made this, and other similar appearances, as pledges of his future
incarnation, to familiarize that mysterious event, and excite as earnest
expectation of it in the mind. The sentiment is further confirmed by the words
of Stephen, who speaking of Moses, says, Acts 7.38. This is be that was in the
church in the wilderness that spoke with the Angel in the mount Sinai. But the
term ANGEL Or messenger, though frequently applied to the Son, can be with no
propriety, nor is it ever applied to the Father. If Jesus Christ were the God
of Israel, then the Jewish and Christian church had the same head -- And if the
same head, why is it not, must it not be the same body? And if the same body,
does it not consist of the same members?
which will make the dispute between the Israelites and the heathen, and the
disciples and their opposers, to have been, Whether Christ were the only true
God and Savior, or not? -- As the Israelites received none into their
communion, but those who abandoned all other deities, acknowledged their God,
to be the only true God, and conformed to their rules of his worship: so the
apostles, as is evident from the instance of Philip and the eunuch, admitted
none to their fellowship, but those who professed their faith in Christ, and
promised obedience to his commandments. This shows that the requisitions of the
apostles, for admission to their number, were the same with those the
Israelites exacted of strangers, for admission to their privileges: and that
they were of the same nature with their entering into covenant with God.

3. The same religious ordinances were common to Jews and Christians.

Circumcision among the Israelites, was the token or seal of complying with the
terms, and entering into covenant with God: and the passover, of their
deliverance from the servitude and oppression of Egypt. So baptism is the seal
of our discipleship to Christ: and the Lord's Supper of redemption by him. That
baptism and the Lord's Supper, are of the same significancy with circumcision
and the passover, is evident from this, that they are called by the same name.
This is manifest from the words of the apostle, In whom also ye are circumcised
with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of sins by
the circumcision of Christ. Colos. 2.11.
That by the circumcision of Christ, the apostle designed baptism, is evident
from the parallel passage, Romans 6.2. So the Lord's Supper, is the passover of
Christ. -- Even Christ our passover is sacrificed for us. Therefore let us keep
the feast. 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.
From which it is evident, that baptism and the Lord's Supper, under the
gospel, are the same ordinances with circumcision and the passover among the
Jews: or in other words, are the christian circumcision and the christian
passover: and therefore seals of the same covenant. This is according to the
common acceptance; yet strictly speaking, circumcision only, was the ancient
seal of the covenant between God and his people. The passover did not obtain,
until ages after the institution of the covenant; and was particularly designed
to commemorate the distinguishing mercy of God to the Israelites, in sparing,
or passing over their first born, when he slew those of the Egyptians; and
delivering them from the yoke of Egypt. So Christ instituted baptism as the
seal of disciplesship, and the obligations of christians, to take up their
cross and follow him, or to die unto sin and live unto righteousness. But he
instituted his supper, as a memorial of his dying love, or redemption by him,
and as an happy medium of exciting the faith, and promoting the holiness and
comfort of believers.

It may here be observed also, That as it was the God of Abraham, of Christ,
who instituted the covenant with him, established the seal of it, and
prescribed the subjects to which it should be affixed: so it was he only, who
could repeal or change those statutes: as therefore, when he revised those
laws, and introduced a new dispensation, he judged it expedient, only to alter
the seal, and substitute baptism in the place of circumcision, the statute
requiring the application of it to children, remained in its ancient state,
irrepealably established, as it were, by a new edict, and will continue in
force, until it shall be abrogated, by a new dispensation from heaven.




4. The Jewish and the Christian church are the same holy people, enjoy the
same religious privileges, and sustain the same characters and relations.

The scriptures represent Abraham as the common head of all those who believe.
The father of circumcised Jews and uncircumcised gentiles, Romans 4.
who unitedly compose one household of faith, form one religious commonwealth,
Ephesians. 2.19.
and are the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16.
the same holy nation. Compare Exodus 19.5. with 1 Pet. 2.9.
Hence, they enjoy the same immunities and privileges, and are blessed with
faithful Abraham, being nourished by the fatness of the olive tree. Romans 11.


They sustain the same characters and relations. God was an husband, and the
Israelites were his wife. So Christ is an husband, or bridegroom, and the
church is his wife, or spouse. Jer. 31.32. Ephesians. 5.23 -- 32. a Cor. 11.2.
The congregation of Israel, and the new testament church (compare Psa. 22.22.
with Heb. 2.11.) are equally the brethren of Christ. In like manner, The
promises made to the Israelites are applied to believers. Be content with such
things as ye have, for he has said, (Genesis 28.15. -- 1 Chronicles. 28.20.) I will
never leave thee nor forsake thee. So that we may boldly say, (as Psa. 27.1.
and 118.6.) The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what man can do unto me.
Heb. 13.5.
The Christian church is the temple of God, as the congregation of Israel was.
Te are the temple of God, as God has said, (...). 28.18. Levit. 26.12.) I will
dwell in them and walk (...), and I will be their God, and they shall be my
people.

They are equally the children of God: Wherefore come out from among them and
be ye separate, says the Lord, (Isa. 52.11.) and touch not the unclean thing,
and I will receive you, and I will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my
sons and daughters says the Lord almighty. Compare 2 Cor. 6.16 -- 18. with
Jer. 31.1, 9, 33.


5. The whole dispensation of the new testament is a fulfillment of the
covenants, made with Noah and Abraham. It has been observed, That the covenant
with Noah was made through Christ, externally represented by the sacrifices
which he offered to God, and therefore was the covenant of grace. As it may be
questioned, Whether this were the covenant of grace, since only temporal
deliverances and blessings are contained in it, it may be satisfactory to
remark, That it is worthy of particular observation, That the first intimations
of divine mercy to mankind, were only implied in promises of deliverance from
evil, and from those evils which had previously involved them in the greatest
distress. Thus the first parents of mankind, foiled by the subtilty of the
serpent, deprived of their purity and bliss, and under terrible apprehen sions
of greater sufferings, were comforted with the promise, That the seed of the
woman should brake the serpent's bead; but this implicitly promised, Salvation
by Christ. -- So Noah and his family, saved from the general destruction which
had overspread the world, and under fearful apprehensions, that the same
terrible calamity would be repeated, were relieved by a gracious promise and
covenant, confirmed by a visible token, That the earth should no more be
destroyed by the waters of a flood: and a divine security of the perpetual
enjoyment of the fruits of the earth. As the deluge was an affecting emblem of
the eternal destruction of the wicked, and the preservation of Noah in the ark,
of the salvation of believers through Christ: so the promise of deliverance
from another flood, obtained through the sacrifices offered to God, implied the
promise of deliverance from that eternal perdition, and that everlasting
salvation of which they were figures, through Christ the great sacrifice. --
This is as natural, as that heaven should be contained in the promise to
Abraham, that his seed should possess the land of Canaan; or that the
destruction of satan's kingdom should be denounced, and salvation contained in
the promise to Adam and Eve, That some one of their posterity should bruise the
head of the snake. As the covenant with Noah contained a grant of temporal
blessings: so the covenant with Abraham contained a grant of religious
privileges -- and thus these two covenants comprehended all the temporal
mercies, religious privileges and eternal blessings implied and secured in the
covenant of grace.




Future events relating to the government of the world and of the church, were
revealed to the apostle John, who lived in the beginning of this dispensation,
and are described by him in the revelation. These descriptions are generally
expressed in the terms and figures of the old testament; and it is necessary to
examine their origin, to ascertain their true meaning. In his vision he heard a
voice, saying, Come up hither, and I will show thee the things which shall be
hereafter. He looked and behold a throne was set in heaven, and there was a
RAINBOW round about the throne. Rev. 4^ 1 -- 3.
From whence was this figure taken? And God said to Noah, Behold I establish my
covenant between me and you -- This is the token of the covenant -- Behold I do
set my how in the cloud. It being observed, That this bow was formed by the
rain which descended from the cloud, it was from that termed, the rainbow. Now
when John saw a rainbow round about the throne, the seat of divine government,
it naturally suggests to us that covenant of which the bow was the token; and
teaches, that the series of events now disclosed to his prophetic eyes, was
agreeable to the nature of it -- and as the expression, The things which shall
be hereafter, comprizes in it, all the revolutions and events which should
occur from that period to the end of the world, we may infer, That all divine
administrations toward the church, and the whole government of the world, are
agreeable to that everlasting covenant which God made with Noah. So John saw a
mighty angel clothed with a cloud and a RAINBOW upon his head. Rev. chap. 10.
This angel, from the description of him, was Jesus Christ: He stood with his
right foot upon the sea and his left upon the land, to denote his absolute
dominion over them; all things being put under his feet. He lifted up his hand
to heaven and swear, that time should be no longer; but in the days of the
voice of the seventh angel, the mystery of God, those curious and intricate
dispensations of divine providence, so inexplicable by human minds, should be
finished and come to an end. Rev. chap. 10.
We are informed, (Rev. 11.15 -- 18.) That the seventh angel sounded, which
introduced the general judgment: thus teaching us, That conformably to the
nature, and under the signature of the covenant with Noah, Jesus Christ will
come to judge the quick and dead, and so finish that grand scene which he had
been displaying, from the deluge of the world, to the dissolution of the
heavens and earth.

It is equally evident, That the dispensations of providence are agreeable to
the nature and a fulfillment of the covenant made with Abraham. This is implied
in the words of the apostle, This I say, that the covenant which was before
CONFIRMED of God in Christ. Gal. 3.17.
-- The covenant which God made with Abraham, is in these words expressly
declared to have been confirmed in Christ Jesus; and this proves it to have
been a gracious covenant, and, as all the transactions between the father and
son are, permanent and durable; similar to the promises of God in Jesus Christ,
which are YEA and AMEN. -- With great propriety therefore might the apostle
affirm, That the law, or dispensation of Moses, which was established four
hundred and thirty years after it, could not disannul and make it void. And can
it be supposed, that Christ should vacate it when it was CONFIRMED in him? That
he should dissolve that covenant on earth, which was confirmed in him, in
heaven? This is illustrated by another assertion, This I say, that Jesus Christ
was the minister of circumcision, for the truth of God, to confirm the promises
made unto the fathers. By circumcision we must understand, either the Jewish
nation or church which was termed, The circumcision, Under stood in this sense,
The text represents Jesus Christ as the grand minister of the jewish nation or
church, under whose administration, the promises made to the fathers, of
blessing all nations in Abraham, were fulfilled and confirmed, through which,
the gentiles were united with the jews, and the Jewish church state enlarged,
dignified and essentially perfected.
to distinguish it from the gentiles who were called, The uncircumcision, or
that covenant of which circumcision was the seal or token: of this covenant
Jesus Christ was the minister, the officer or agent, and the end for which he
sustained this character or office, was to CONFIRM the promises made to the
fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, which promises pertained essentially to that
covenant which be made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac, and confirmed the
same unto Jacob for a law, and unto Israel for an everlasting covenant, saying,
Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan -- and in thy seed shall all the
families of the earth be blessed. Psa. 105.9 -- 12. Began. 12.2.
-- The first of which was accomplished, when Joshua subdued the land of
Canaan, divided it among the tribes by lot, and they possessed it -- and the
other, when Christ commanded the gospel of the kingdom to be preached to every
creature, became the light of the gentiles, and made them fellow-heirs with the
Jews, and partakers of his promise by the gospel. It is therefore as
inconsistent for a gentile believer to affirm, that the covenant with Abraham
is disannulled, when he enjoys the blessings of the gospel in consequence of
it, as it would have been for an Israelite to have asserted it, when he was
eating the grapes of Eschol, or the milk and honey, of Canaan. So that the
new testament is so far from disannulling and abrogating the covenant with
Abraham, that it teaches us, that Jesus Christ, the author of it, is the grand
officer of confirming and establishing the contents of it, and that under his
administration it is brought to its most proper issue and effect. -- We may
therefore infer, that the work of Christ and his universal government of the
church and world, are a fulfillment of the covenant which God made Abraham -- As
Jesus Christ is the agent of fulfilling the covenant with Abraham, and this is
the end of his government and administration, so we are taught, that in
officiating as the supreme Judge of the world, he will make this the rule by
which he will distribute rewards and inflict punishments. -- This is evidently
suggested in the description of the general judgment -- When the apostle in his
vision, saw the dead judged, the prophets and saints rewarded, and the wicked
destroyed, The temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen the Ark
of his testament or covenant, (described Exodus 25.10.) and there were
lightnings, and voices, and thundering, and an earthquake, and great hail. Rev.
11.15.
Thus representing Jesus Christ, as judging quick and dead, agreeably to the
covenant made with the Israelites in the wilderness, and attended with all the
dreadful appearances, the same terrible exhibitions of divine Majesty, which he
displayed on mount Sinai when he made it. Exodus 19.16 -- 18.


It is manifest from the general observations, That the terms and language of
the covenant which God made with his ancient friend, run through the old and
New Testament, and that according to the universal representation of scripture,
the various dispensations of divine providence, relative to the Jewish and
Christian church, are made subservient to the accomplishment of the promises,
and an actual bestowment of the blessings contained in it. -- Let it suffice to
add, That the description of the eternal blessedness of the righteous, in the
heavenly state, is in the express terms and language of the important promise
contained in it, -- And they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with
them and be THEIR GOD. Rev. 21.3.


Thus the covenant of grace has been defined and explained -- and so
demonstrably evident is it, that it was made with Abraham, and operates under
the gospel dispensation. The inference is clear and unavoidable, that the seal
of it is to be affixed to believers and their seed, as it was in its original
institution.

THE reader is particularly desired to observe, That the note at the bottom of
the 11th page should have been introduced page 10, at the end of the second
general division -- and to correct the following

ERRATA.
Page 5, line 27, for adopted read adopted. P. 11, l. last, after present, add
day. P. 13, l. 28, read BRANCHES. P. 14, l. 4, after did, add unite -- l. 12,
after longer, add under.


