AN ORATION, WHICH MIGHT HAVE BEEN DELIVERED TO THE STUDENTS IN ANATOMY, ON THE
LATE RUPTURE BETWEEN THE TWO SCHOOLS IN THIS CITY.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY T. DOBSON AND T. LANG, IN SECOND STREET. FEBRUARY,
1789.

The ARGUMENT.
ADDRESS -- the folly and danger of dissension -- the Orator enumerates the
enemies of the fraternity -- reminds them of a late unseasonable interruption
-- a night scene in the Potter's Field -- he laments the want of true zeal in
the brotherhood -- and boasts of his own -- the force of a ruling passion --
the earth considered as a great animal -- the passion of love not the same in a
true son of Esculapius as in other men -- his own amor -- a picture of his
mistress in high taste -- shows his learning in the description of her mouth,
arm and hand -- his mistress dies -- his grief -- and extraordinary consolation
-- his unparalled fidelity -- he apologizes for giving this history of his
amor -- the great difficulties Anatomists have to encounter in the present
times, arising from false delicacy, prejudice and ignorance -- a strong
instance in proof that it was not so formerly -- curious argument to prove the
inconsistency of the present opinions respecting the practice -- he mentions
many obstacles in the road to science -- and reproaches them for their
intestine broils, at a time when not only popular clamor is loud, but even the
powers of government are exerted against them -- he then encourages his
brethren with hopes of better times, founded on the establishment of the
College of Physicians -- is inspired with the idea of the future glory of that
institution -- and prophesies great things.

AN ORATION, WHICH MIGHT HAVE BEEN DELIVERED, etc.
FRIENDS and associates! lend a patient ear,
Suspend intestine broils and reason hear.
Ye followers of F -- your wrath forbear --
Ye sons of S -- your invectives spare;
The fierce dissension your high minds pursue
Is sport for others -- ruinous to you.
SURELY some fatal influenza reigns,
Some epidemic rabies turns your brains --
Is this a time for brethren to engage
In public contest and in party rage?
Fell discord triumphs in your doubtful strife
And, smiling, whets her anatomic knife;
Prepared to cut our precious limbs away
And leave the bleeding body to decay --
SEEK ye for foes! -- alas, my friends, look round,
In every street, see numerous foes abound!
Methinks I hear them cry, in varied tones,
"Give us our father's -- brother's -- sister's bones."
Methinks I see a mob of sailors rise --
Revenge! -- revenge! they cry -- and damn their eyes --
Revenge for comrade Jack, whose flesh, they say,
You minced to morsels and then threw away.
Methinks I see a black infernal train --
The genuine offspring of accursed Cain --
Fiercely on you their angry looks are bent,
They grin and gibber dangerous discontent
And seem to say -- "Is there not meat enough!
"Ah! massa cannibal, why eat poor CUFF?"
Even hostile watchmen stand in strong array
And over our heads their threatening staves display,
Howl hideous discord through the noon of night
And shake their dreadful lanthorns in our sight.
SAY, are not these sufficient to engage
Your high wrought souls eternal war to wage?
Combine your strength these monsters to subdue
No friends of science and sworn foes to you;
On these -- on these your wordy vengeance pour
And strive our fading glory to restore.
AH! think how, late, our mutilated rites
And midnight orgies, were by sudden frights
And loud alarms profaned -- the sacrifice,
Stretched on a board before our eager eyes,
All naked lay -- even when our chieftain stood
Like a high priest, prepared for shedding blood;
Prepared, with wondrous skill, to cut or slash
The gentle sliver or the deep drawn gash;
Prepared to plunge even elbow deep in gore
Nature and nature's secrets to explore --
Then a tumultuous cry -- a sudden fear --
Proclaimed the foe -- the enraged foe is near --
In some dark hole the hard got corse was laid
And we, in wild confusion, fled dismayed.
THINK how, like brethren, we have shared the toil
When in the Potter's Field THE Negro burial ground.
we sought for spoil,
Did midnight ghosts and death and horror brave
To delve for science in the dreary grave --
Shall I remind you of that awful night
When our compacted band maintained the fight
Against an armed host? -- fierce was the fray
And yet we bore our sheeted prize away.
Firm on a horse's back the corse was laid,
High blowing winds the winding sheet displayed;
Swift flew the steed -- but still his burden bore --
Fear made him fleet, who never was fleet before;
Over tombs and sunken graves he cours'd around,
Nor ought respected consecrated ground.
Mean time the battle raged -- so loud the strife,
The dead were almost frightened into life --
Though not victorious, yet we scorned to yield,
Retook our prize and left the doubtful field.
IN this degenerate age, alas! how few
The paths of science with true zeal pursue?
Some trifling contest, some delusive joy
Too often the unsteady minds of youth employ.
For me -- whom ESCULAPIUS has inspired --
I boast a soul with love of science fired;
By one great object is my heart possessed --
One ruling passion quite absorbs the rest --
In this bright point my hopes and fears unite;
And one pursuit alone can give delight.
To me things are not as to vulgar eyes,
I would all nature's works anatomize --
This world a living monster seems, to me,
Rolling and sporting in the aerial sea;
The soil encompasses her rocks and stones
As flesh in animals encircles bones.
I see vast ocean, like a heart in play,
Pant systole and diastole every day,
And by unnumber'd venous streams supplied
Up her broad rivers force the arterial tide.
The world's great lungs, monsoons and trade-winds show
From east to west, from west to east they blow
Alternate respiration --
The hills are pimples which earth's face defile,
And burning Aetna, an eruptive boil:
On her high mountains hairy forests grow,
And downy grass o'erspreads the vales below;
From her vast body perspirations rise
Condense in clouds and float beneath the skies.
Thus fancy, faithful servant of the heart,
Transforms all nature by her magic art.
EVEN mighty LOVE, whose power all power controuls,
Is not, in me, like love in other souls --
Yet I have loved -- and CUPID's subtle dart
Has through my pericardium pierced my heart.
Brown CADAVERA did my soul ensnare,
Was all my thought by night and daily care --
I longed to clasp, in her transcendent charms,
A living skeleton within my arms.
LONG, lank and lean, my CADAVERA stood,
Like the tall pine, the glory of the wood --
Ofttimes I gazed, with learned skill to trace
The sharp edged beauties of her bony face --
There rose Os frontis prominent and bold,
In deep sunk orbits two large eye balls rolled,
Beneath those eye balls, two arched bones were seen
Whereon two flabby cheeks hung loose and lean;
Between those cheeks, protuberant arose,
In form triangular, her lovely nose,
Like EGYPT's pyramid it seemed to rise,
Scorn earth, and bid defiance to the skies;
Thin were her lips, and of a sallow hue,
Her open mouth exposed her teeth to view;
Projecting strong, protuberant and wide
Stood incisores -- and on either side
The canine ranged, with many a beauteous flaw,
And last the grinders, to fill up the jaw --
All in their alveoli fixed secure,
Articulated by gomphosis sure.
Around her mouth, perpetual smiles had made
Wrinkles wherein the loves and graces played;
There, stretched and rigid by continual strain,
Appeared the zygomatic muscles plain,
And broad montanus over her peeked chin
Extended, to support the heavenly grin.
In amorous dalliance often I stroak'd her arm,
Each rising muscle was a rising charm.
Over the flexores my fond fingers played,
I found instruction with delight conveyed --
There carpus, cubitus and radius too
Were plainly felt and manifest to view.
No muscles on her lovely hand were seen,
But only bones envelop'd by a skin.
Long were her fingers and her knuckles bare,
Much like the claw-foot of a walnut chair.
So plain was complex matacarpus shown
It might be fairly counted bone by bone.
Her slender phalanxes were well defined,
And each with each by ginglymus combined.
Such were the charms that did my fancy fire
And love -- chaste scientific love inspire.
AT length my CADAVERA fell beneath
The fatal stroke of all subduing death --
Three days in grief -- three nights in tears I spent,
And sighs incessant gave my sorrows vent.
FEW are the examples of a love so true --
Even from her death I consolation drew,
And in a secret hour approached her grave
Resolved her precious corse from worms to save;
With active haste removed the incumbent clay,
Seized the rich prize and bore my love away.
HER naked charms now lay before my sight,
I gazed with rapture and supreme delight,
Nor could forbear, in ecstasy, to cry --
Beneath that shrivelled skin what treasures lie!
Then feasted to the full my amorous soul,
And skinn'd and cut and slashed without control.
'TWAS then I saw, what long I Would wished to see,
That heart which panted often for love and me --
In detail viewed the form I once adored,
And nature's hidden mysteries explored.
ALAS! too truly did the wise man say
That flesh is grass, and subject to decay --
Not so the bones -- of substance firm and hard
Long they remain the Anatomist's reward.
Wise nature, in her providential care,
Did, kindly, bones from vile corruption spare,
That sons their fathers' skeletons might have
And heaven born science triumph over the grave.
MY true love's bones I boiled -- from fat and lean
These hands industrious scraped them fair and clean,
And every bone did to it is place restore,
As Nature's hand had placed them long before;
These fingers twisted every pliant wire
With patient skill, urged on by strong desire.
Now what remains of CADAVERA's mine,
Securely hanging in a case of pine.
OFTTIMES I sit and contemplate her charms,
Her nodding skull and her long dangling arms,
'Till quite inflamed with passion for the dead
I take her beauteous skeleton to bed --
There stretched, at length, close to my faithful side
She lies all night a lovely grinning bride. --
EXCUSE, my friends, this detail of my love,
You must the intent, if not the tale, approve;
By facts exemplary I meant to show
To what extent a genuine zeal will go.
A mind, so fixed, will not be drawn aside
By vain dissentions or a partial pride;
But every hostile sentiment subdue
And keep the ruling passion still in view.
FALSE delicacy -- prejudices strong,
Which no distinctions know 'twixt right and wrong,
Against our noble science spend their rage
And mark the ignorance of this vulgar age.
TIME was, when men their living flesh would spare
And to the knife their quivering nates bare,
That skilful surgeons TALIACOTIUS.
noses might obtain
For noses lost -- and cut and come again --
But now the living churlishly refuse
To give their dead relations to our use;
Talk of decorum -- and a thousand whims --
Whenever we hack their wives' or daughters' limbs;
And yet their tables daily they supply
With the rich fruits of sad mortality;
Will pick, and gut and cook a chicken's corse,
Dissect and eat it up, without remorse;
Devouring fish, flesh, fowl, whatever comes,
Nor fear the ghosts of murdered hecatombs.
NOW where is the difference? -- to the impartial eye
A leg of mutton and a human thigh
Are just the same -- for surely all must own
Flesh is but flesh, and bone is only bone;
And though indeed, some flesh and bone may grow
To make a monkey -- some to make a beau,
Still the materials are the same, we know.
Nor can our anatomic knowledge trace
Internal marks distinctive of our race. --
WHENCE, then, these loud complaints -- these hosts of foes
Combined, our useful labors to oppose?
How long shall foolish prejudices reign?
And when shall reason her just empire gain?
AH! full of danger is the up-hill road,
That leads the youth to learning's high abode:
His way thick mists of vulgar errors blind,
And sneering satire follows close behind;
Sour envy strews the rugged path with thorns,
And lazy ignorance his labor scorns.
Is this a time, ye brethren of the knife,
For civil contest and internal strife?
When loud against us general clamours cry,
And persecution lifts her lash on high?
When government -- that many headed beast --
Against our practice rears her horrid crest,
And, our nocturnal access to oppose,
Around the dead a penal barrier A LAW past at New York, making it penal to
steal bodies from the burial ground.
throws?
To crush our schools her awful power applies,
And even forbids the gibbet's just supplies. THE wheelbarrow law of
Pennsylvania.

YET in this night of darkness, storms and fears,
Behold one bright benignant star THE Medical College.
appears --
Long may it shine, and, ever it is course is run,
Increase, in size and splendor, to a sun! --
Methinks I see this sun of future days,
Spread far abroad his diplomatic rays --
See life and health submit to his control,
And, like a planet, death around him roll.
METHINKS I see a stately fabric rise,
Reared on the skulls of these our enemies;
I see the bones of our invet'rate foes
Hang round it is walls in scientific rows.
There solemn sit the learned of the day
Dispensing death with uncontrouled sway,
And by prescription regulate with ease
The sudden crisis or the slow disease.
THEN shall physicians their millennium find,
And reign the real sov'reigns of mankind:
Then shall the face of this vile world be changed,
And nature's healthful laws all new arrang'd --
In min'ral powders all her dust shall rise,
And all her insects shall be Spanish flies:
In medicated potions streams shall flow,
Pills fall in hail-storms, and sharp salts in snow;
In every quagmire bolusses be found,
And slimy cataplasms spread the ground --
Nature herself assume the chymist's part,
And furnish poisons unsublim'd by art.
THEN to our schools shall wealth in currents flow,
Our theaters no want of subjects know;
Nor laws nor mobs the Anatomist shall dread,
For graves shall freely render up their dead.

