He gave Himself a^ Ransom for All

1 Timothy ^



MEDITATIONS AND CONTEMPLATIONS. IN TWO VOLUMES.

By JAMES HERVEY, A. M. Late Rector of WESTONFAVEL, in ENGLAND.

I will MEDITATE of all thy Works, and talk of thy Doings.

PSALM lxxvii.1^. VOL. I. FIRST WORCESTER EDITION. PRINTED at WORCESTER,
MASSACHUSETTS, BY ISAIAH THOMAS. Sold at his BOOKSTORE in WORCESTER, and by him
and COMPANY in BOSTON. MDCCLXXXIX.

FRONTISPIECE OF VOL. I.
PRESENTS the inside view of a church -- the floor, the pillars, and the walls,
are interspersed with sepulchral stones, and funeral inscriptions -- on one
side, is the monument of an infant, adorned with an urn, with a weeping statue,
and inscribed with the following Epitaph -- NASCENTES MORIMUR -- No sooner
born, than dead -- on a more elevated tomb, and under an assemblage of military
weapons, is portrayed a warrior, supposed to be mortally wounded, expiring in
the attitude of adoration, and with the spirit of that noble line, "O! save my
Country, Heaven!" -- shall be thy last. A youth, beholding the representation
of this gallant patriot, seems to be struck with admiration, and charmed with
delight. A minister diverts his attention to an object of infinitely higher
dignity, and greater wonder. If the hero died -- PRO PATRIA, In defense of his
country, CHRIST died -- PRO INIMICIS, For the salvation of his enemies. An
instance this, of such disinterested, diffusive, and divine benevolence; as
makes all that heroes have achieved, and patriots suffered, dwindle into
nothing, and scarce deserve our notice.

VERSES TO MR. HERVEY, ON HIS MEDITATIONS.
IN these loved scenes, what rapturous graces shine,
Live in each leaf, and breathe in every line!
What sacred beauties beam throughout the whole,
To charm the sense, and steal upon the soul!
In classick elegance, and thoughts -- his own,
We see our faults as in a mirror, shown:
Each truth, in glaring characters expressed,
All own the twin resemblance in their breast:
His easy periods, and persuasive page,
At once amend, and entertain the age:
Nature's wide fields all open to his view,
He charms the mind with something ever new:
On Fancy's pinions, his adventurous soul
Wantons unbounded, and pervades the whole:
From death's dark caverns in the earth below,
To spheres, where planets roll, or comets glow.
See him explore, ^th more than human eyes,
The dreary sepulcher, where Granville lies:
Converse with stones, or monumental brass,
The rude inscriptions -- or the painted glass:
To gloomy vaults descend with awful tread,
And view the silent mansions of the dead.
To gayer scenes he next adapts his lines,
Where lavish nature in embroid'ry shines:
The jasmine groves, the woodbine's fragrant bowers,
With all the painted family of flowers:
There, Sacharissa! in each fleeting grace,
Read all the transient honors of thy face.
With equal dignity, now see him rise
To paint the sable horrors of the skies:
When all the wide horizon lies in shade;
And midnight phantoms sweep along the glade;
All nature hushed -- a solemn silence reigns,
And scarce a breeze disturbs the sleeping plains,
Last, yet not less, in majesty of phrase,
He draws the full orb'd moon's expansive blaze;
The waving meteors, trembling from on high,
With all the mute artill'ry of the sky:
Systems on systems, which in order roll,
And dart their lambent beams from pole to pole.
Hail, mighty genius! whose excursive soul
No bounds confine, no limits can control:
Whose eye expatiates, and whose mind can rove,
Through earth, through either, and the realms above:
From things inanimate can direct the An allusion to the custom of showing
curious objects, and particularising their respective delicacies, by the
pointing of a rod.
rod,
In just gradation to ascend to GOD.
Taught by thy lines, see hoary age grows wise,
And all the rebel in his bosom dies:
Even thoughtless youth, in luxury of blood,
Fly the infectious world, and dare -- be good:
Thy sacred truths shall reach the impervious heart;
Discord shall cease, disease forget to smart:
Even malice love, and calumny commend;
Pride beg an alms, and avarice turn a friend.
Centred in CHRIST, who fires the soul within,
The flesh shall know no pain; the soul no sin:
Even in the terrors of expiring breath,
We bless the friendly stroke, and live -- in death.
Oxford, April 28, 1748.
By a PHYSICIAN.
CELESTIAL meditant! whose ardours rise
Deep from the tombs, and kindle to the skies;
How shall an earthly bard's profaner string
Resound the flights of thy seraphick wing?
When great ELIJAH, in the fiery car,
Flamed visible to Heaven, a living star,
A seer remained to thunder what he knew,
And with his mantle caught his spirit too.
Wit, fancy, fire, and elegance, have long
Been lost in vicious or ignoble song:
Sunk from the chastely grand, the pure sublime,
They flattered wealth and power, or murdered time.
It Is thine their devious luster to reduce,
To prove their noblest power, their genuine use;
From earth born fumes to clear their tainted flame,
And point their flight to Heaven -- from whence they came.
O more than bard in prose! to whom belong
Harmonious style and thought, in rhymeless song;
Often, by thy friendly conduct, let me tread
The softly whispering mansions of the dead:
Where the grim form, calcining hinds and lords,
Grins at each fond distinction pride records.
Dumb, with immortal energy they teach;
Lifeless, they threaten; mouldering as they preach.
To each succeeding age, through every clime,
The span of life, and endless round of time:
Hence may propitious melancholy flow,
And safety find me in the vaults of woe.
While every virtue forms thy mental feast*
I glow with fair sincerity at least;
I feel (thy face unknown) thy heart refined,
And taste, with bliss, the beauties of thy mind*
Collecting clearly, through thy sacred plan,
What reverence of GOD! what love to man!
-- O! when at last our deathless forms shall rise,
And flowers and stars desist to moralize;
Shall then my soul, by thine informed, survey,
And bear the splendours of essential day?
But while my thoughts indulge the glorious scope,
(My utmost worth beneath my humblest hope)
Conscience, or some exhorting angel, cries,
"No lazy wishes reach above the skies.
"Would you indeed the perfect scenes survey,
"And share the triumphs of unbounded day;
"His love diffusive life with ardour live;
"And die like this divine contemplative."
London, July 9, 1748.
By a PHYSICIAN.
TO form the taste, and raise the nobler part,
To mend the morals, and to warm the heart;
To trace the genial source, we nature call,
And prove the GOD of nature friend of all;
HERVEY for this his mental landscape drew,
And sketch'd the whole creation out to view.
The enameled bloom and variegated flower,
Whose crimson changes with the changing hour;
The humble shrub, whose fragrance scents the morn,
With buds disclosing to the early dawn;
The oaks that grace Britannia's mountains side,
And spicy Lebanon's superior The cedar.
pride;
All loudly SOVEREIGN EXCELLENCE proclaim,
And animated worlds confess the same.
The azure fields that formed the extended sky,
The planetary globes that roll on high,
And solar orbs, of proudest blaze, combine,
To act subservient to the great design.
Men, angels, seraphs, join the general voice:
And in the Lord of Nature, ALL rejoice.
HIS, the gray winter's venerable guise,
Its shrouded glories, and instructive skies; Referring to the Winter Piece.

HIS, the snow's plumes, that brood the sickening blade;
HIS, the bright pendant that impearls the glade;
The waving forest, or the whispering brake;
The surging billow, or the sleeping lake.
The SAME, who pours the beauties of the spring,
Or mounts the whirlwind's desolating wing.
The SAME, who smiles in nature's peaceful form,
Frowns in the tempest, and dire^ts the storm.
It Is thine, bright teacher, to improve the age;
It Is thine, whose life's a comment on thy page.
Thy happy page! whose periods sweetly flow,
Whose figures charm us, and whose colors glow.
Where artless piety pervades the whole,
Refines the genius, and exalts the soul.
For let the witling argue all he can,
It is religion still that makes the man.
It Is this, my friend, that streaks our morning bright;
It Is this, that gilds the horrors of our night.
When wealth forsakes us, and when friends are few;
When friends are faithless, or when foes pursue;
It Is this, that wards the blow, or stills the smart;
Disarms affliction, or repels its dart;
Within the breast bids purest rapture rise;
Bids smiling conscience spread her cloudless skies.
When the storm thickens and the thunder rolls,
When the earth trembles to the affrighted poles;
The virtuous mind, nor doubts nor fears assail;
For storms are zephyrs, or a gentler gale.
And when disease obstructs the laboring breath,
When the heart sickens, and each pulse is death;
Even then religion shall sustain the just,
Grace their last moments, nor desert their dust.
August 5, 1748.
AS some new star attracts the admiring sight,
His splendours pouring through the fields of light,
Whole nights, delighted with the unusual rays,
On the fair heavenly visitant we gaze:
So thy famed volumes sweet surprise impart:
Marked by all eyes, and felt in every heart.
Nature informed by thee, new paths has trod,
And rises, here, a preacher for her GOD;
By fancy's aids mysterious heights she tries,
And lures us by our senses to the skies.
To deck thy style collected graces throng,
Bold as the pencil's tints, yet soft as song.
In themes, how rich thy vein! how pure thy choice!
Transcripts of truth, owned clear from scripture's voice*
Thy judgment these, and piety attest,
Transcripts -- read only fairer in thy breast.
There, what thy works should show, we best may see,
And all they teach in doctrine, lives in thee.
Oh! -- might they live! -- Our prayers their strife engage;
But thy fixed languors yield us sad presage.
In vain skilled medicine tries her healing art:
Disease, long foe, entrenches at thy heart.
Yet on new labors still thy mind is prone,
For a world's good too thoughtless of thy own.
Active, like day's kind orb, life's course you run,
Its sphere's still glorious, though a setting sun.
Redemption opes thee wide her healing plan,
Health's only balm; her sovereign gift to man.
Themes sweet like these thy ardours fresh excite:
Warm at the soul, they nerve thy hand to write;
Make thy tried virtues in their charms appear,
Patience, raised hope, firm faith, and love sincere;
Like a big constellation, bright they glow,
And beam out lovelier by thy night of woe.
Known were thy merits to the public long,
Ever owned thus feebly in my humble song.
Damped are my fires; my heart dark cares depress;
A heart, too feeling from its own distress.
Proud on thy friendship, yet to build my fame,
I gained my page SUNDAY THOUGHTS.
a sanction from thy name.
Weak these returns (by gratitude though led)
Where mine shall in thy favorite leaves be read.
Yet, over my conscious meanness hope prevails;
Love gives me merit, where my genius fails.
On its strong base my small desert I raise,
Averse to flattery, as unskilled to praise.
MOSES BROWN.
Mileend Green, Feb. 23, 1749.
WHENCE flow these solemn sounds? this raptured strain?
Cherubick notes my wondering ear detain!
Yet it is a mortal's voice: It Is HERVEY sings:
Sublime he soars on Contemplation's wings:
In every period breathes ecstatick thought --
HERVEY, 'twas Heaven thy sacred lessons taught.
Celestial visions bless thy studious hours,
Thy lonely walks, and thy sequestered bowers.
What favoring power, dispensing secret aids,
Thy cavern'd cell, thy curtain'd couch, pervades?
Still hovering near, observant of thy themes,
In whispers prompts thee, or inspires thy dreams?
JESUS! effulgence of paternal light!
Ineffably divine! supremely bright!
Whose energy according worlds attest,
Kindled these ardours in thy glowing breast.
We catch thy flame, as we thy page peruse;
And faith in every object JESUS views.
We in the bloomy breathing garden trace
Somewhat -- like emanations of his grace:
Yet must all sweetness and all beauty yield.
Idume's grove, and Sharon's flowery field,
Compared with JESUS: Meanly, meanly shows
The brightest lily, faint the loveliest rose.
Divine instructor! lead through midnight glooms,
To moralizing stars, and preaching tombs:
Through the still void a Savior's voice shall break,
A ray from Jacob's star the darkness streak:
To him the fairest scenes their luster owe;
His covenant brightens the celestial bow;
His vast benevolence profusely spreads
The yellow harvests, and the verdant meads.
Thy pupil, HERVEY, a Redeemer finds
In boundless oceans, and in viewless winds:
He reins at will the furious blast, and guides
The rending tempests, and the roaring tides.
O give, my soul, thy welfare to his trust:
Who raised the world, can raise thy sleeping dust!
He will, he will, when nature's course is run,
Midst falling stars, and an extinguished sun:
He will with myriads of his saints appear.
O may I join them, though the meanest there!
Though nearer to the throne my HERVEY sings;
Though I at humbler distance strike the strings;
Yet both shall mingle in the same employ,
Both drink the fullness of eternal joy.
JOHN DUICK.
Clerkenwell Green, Feb. 24, 1749-50.
WHAT numbers of our race survey
The monarch of the golden day,
Night's ample canopy unfurled,
In gloomy grandeur round the world,
The earth in spring's embroidery dressed,
And ocean's ever working breast!
And still no grateful honors rise
To him who spreads the spacious skies,
Who hung this air suspended ball,
And lives, and reigns, and shines, in all!
To chase our sensual fogs away,
And bright to pour the eternal ray
Of Deity inscribed around
Wide nature to her utmost bound,
Is HERVEY's task: And well his skill
Celestial can the task fulfill:
Ascending from these scenes below,
Ardent the Maker's praise to show,
His sacred contemplations soar,
And teach our wonder to adore.
Now he surveys the realms beneath,
The realms of horror, and of death;
Now entertains his vernal hours
In flowery walks, and blooming bowers;
Now hails the black brow'd night, that brings
Ethereal dews upon her wings;
Now marks the planets, as they roll
On burning axles round the pole:
While tombs, and flowers, and shades, and stars,
Unveil their sacred characters
Of justice, wisdom, power, and love,
And lift the soul to realms above,
Where dwells the God, in glory crowned,
Who sends his boundless influence round.
So Jacob, in his blissful dreams,
Arrayed in Heaven's refulgent beams,
Saw from the ground a scale arise,
Whose summit mingled with the skies:
Angels were pleased to pass the road,
The stage to earth, and path to God.
HERVEY, proceed: For nature yields
Fresh treasure in her ample fields;
And in seraphick ecstasy
Still bear us to the throne on high.
Ocean's wild wonders next explore,
His changing scenes, and secret store;
Or let dire EARTHQUAKE claim thy toil,
EARTHQUAKE, that shakes a guilty isle.
So, if small things may shadow forth,
Dear man, thy labors and thy worth,
The be upon the flowery lawn,
Imbibes the lucid drops of dawn;
Works them in his mysterious mould,
And turns the common dew to gold.
THOMAS GIBBONS.
London, May 26, 1750.
DELIGHTFUL author! whom the saints inspire!
And whispering angels with their ardours fire!
From youth like mine, will thou accept of praise?
Or smile with candor on a stripling's lays?
My little laurel (but a shoot at most)
Has hardly more than one small wreath to boast.
Such as it is -- (Ah! might it worthier be!)
Its scanty foilage all is due to THEE.
Oh! if, amongst the honors of thy brow,
This slender circlet may but humbly grow:
If its faint verdure happily may find place,
A foil to others: Though its own disgrace;
Accept it, HERVEY, from a heart sincere,
And, for the giver's sake -- the tribute wear.
Thy soul improving works perused, what tongue
Can hold from praise, or check the applausive song?
But ah! from whence shall gratitude obtain
Language that may its glowing zeal explain?
How to such wondrous worth adapt a strain?
Described by thee, cold sepulchers can charm;
Storms calm the soul; and freezing winter, warm.
Cleared from her gloomy shades, we view pale night
Surrounded with a blaze of mental light.
Lo! where she comes! all silent! pensive! slow!
On her dark robe unnumber'd meteors glow!
High on her head a starry crown she wears!
Bright in her hand the lamp of reason bears!
Smiling -- behold! she points the soul to Heaven,
And bids the weeping sinner be forgiven!
But when thy fancy shifts this solemn scene,
And ruddy morning gilds the cheerful green;
With sudden joy we view the prospect changed,
And blushing sweets in beauteous order ranged.
We see the violets; smell the dewy rose,
And each perfume that from the woodbine flows:
A boundless perspective there greets our eyes:
Rich vales descend, and verdant mountains rise.
The shepherds' cottages, the rural folds:
All, that thy art describes, the eye beholds!
Amazing limner! whence this matchless power?
Thy work's a garden! -- every word a flower!
Thy lovely tints almost the bloom excel,
And none but Nature's self can paint so well!
Hail, holy man! -- henceforth thy work shall stand
(Like some fair column by a master hand,
Which, whilst it props, adorns the towering pile)
At once to grace, and elevate our isle.
Though simple, lofty; though majestic, plain;
Whose bold design the rules of art restrain.
In which the nicest eye sees nothing wrong:
Though polished, just; and elegant, though strong.
ST. GEORGE MOLESWORTH.
June 14, 1750.
IN pleasure's lap the muses long have lain,
And hung, attentive, on her Siren strain:
Still toils the bard beneath some weak design,
And puny thought but halts along the line:
Or tuneful nothings, stealing on the mind,
Melt into air, nor leave a trace behind.
While to thy rapturous prose, we feel, belong
The strength of wisdom, and the voice of song:
This lifts the torch of sacred truth on high,
And points the captives to their native sky.
How false the joys, which earth or sense inspires,
That clog the soul, and damp her purer fires!
Truths, which thy solemn scenes, my friend, declare,
Whose glowing colors paint us as we are.
Yet not morosely stern, nor idly gay,
Dull melancholy reigns, or trifles sway;
Ill would the strains of levity befit,
And sullen gloom but sadden all thy wit:
Truth, judgment, sense, imagination join;
And every muse, and every grace, is thine.
Religion prompting the true end of man,
Conspiring genius executes the plan;
Strong to convince, and elegant to charm,
Plaintive to melt, or passionate to warm.
Raised by degrees, we elevate our aim;
And grow immortal as we catch thy flame;
True piety informs our languid hearts,
And all the vicious, and the vain, departs.
So, when foul spreading fogs creep slowly on,
Blot the fair morn, and hide the golden sun:
Ardent he pours the boundless blaze of day,
Rides through the sky, and shines the mist away.
O, had it been the Almighty's gracious will,
That I had shared a portion of thy skill;
Had this poor breast received the heavenly beam,
Which spreads its luster through thy various theme;
That speaks deep lessons from the silent tomb,
And crowns thy garden with fresh springing bloom;
Or, piercing through creation's ample whole,
Now sooths the night, or gilds the starry pole;
Or marks how winter calls her howling train,
Her snows and storms, that desolate the plain;
With thee the muse shall trace the pleasing road,
That leads from Nature up to Nature's GOD;
Humble to learn, and, as she knows the more,
Glad to obey, and happy to adore.
PETER WHALLEY.
Northampton, Aug. 25, 1750.
TO MISS R -- T --.
MADAM,
THESE reflections, the one on the deepest, the other on the gayest scenes of
nature, when they proceeded privately from the pen, were addressed to a lady of
the most valuable endowments; who crowned all her other endearing qualities, by
a fervent love of CHRIST, and an exemplary conformity to his divine pattern.
She, alas! lives no longer on earth; unless it be in the honors of a
distinguished character, and in the bleeding remembrance of her acquaintance.

It is impossible, Madam, to wish you a richer blessing, or a more substantial
happiness, than that the same spirit of unfeigned faith, the same course of
undefiled religion, which have enabled her to triumph over death, may both
animate and adorn your life. And you will permit me to declare, that my chief
inducement in requesting your acceptance of the following meditations, now they
make a public appearance from the press, is, that they are designed to
cultivate the same sacred principle, and to promote the same excellent practice.

Long, Madam, may you bloom in all the vivacity and amiableness of youth, like
the charming subject of one of these contemplations. But at the same time
remember, that, with regard to such inferior accomplishments, you must one day
fade, (may it prove some very remote period!) like the mournful objects of the
other. This consideration will prompt you to go on, as you have begun, in
adding the meekness of wisdom, and all the beauties of holiness, to the graces
of an engaging person, and the refinements of a polite education.

And might -- O! might the ensuing hints furnish you with the least assistance,
in prosecuting so desirable an end; might they contribute, in any degree, to
establish your faith, or elevate your devotion; they would then administer to
the author such a satisfaction, as applause cannot give, nor censure take away:
A satisfaction which I should be able to enjoy, even in those awful moments,
when all that captivates the eye is sinking in darkness, and every glory of
this lower world disappearing forever.

These wishes, Madam, as they are a most agreeable employ of my thoughts, so
they come attended with this additional circumstance of pleasure, that they are
also the sincerest expression of that very great esteem, with which I am.

Madam, Your most obedient, Most humble servant, JAMES HERVEY.
Westonfavel, near Northampton, May 20, 1746.
PREFACE.
THE first of these occasional meditations, begs leave to remind my readers of
their latter end; and would invite them to set, not their houses only, but,
which is inexpressibly more needful, their souls, in order: That they may be
able, through all the intermediate stages, to look forward upon their
approaching exit, without any anxious apprehensions; and, when the great change
commences, may bid adieu to terrestrial things, with all the calmness of a
cheerful resignation, with all the comforts of a well grounded faith.

The other attempts to sketch out some little traces of the all sufficiency of
our Redeemer, for the grand and gracious purposes of everlasting salvation:
That a sense of his unutterable dignity, and infinite perfections, may incite
us to regard him, with sentiments of the most profound veneration; to long for
an assured interest in his merits, with all the ardency of desire; and to trust
in his powerful mediation, with an affiance not to be shaken by any
temptations, not to be shared with any performances of our own.

I flatter myself, that the thoughts conceived among the tombs may be welcome
to the serious and humane mind. Because, as there are few who have not
consigned the remains of some dear relations, or honored friends, to those
silent repositories; so there are none but must be sensible, that this is the
house appointed for all living; and that they themselves are shortly to remove
into the same solemn mansions. -- And who would not turn aside, for a while,
from the most favorite amusements, to view the place where his once loved
companions lie? Who would not sometimes survey those apartments where he
himself is to take up an abode, till time shall be no more?

As to the other little essay, may I not humbly presume, that the very subject
itself will recommend the remarks? For, who is not delighted with the prospect
of the blooming creation, and even charmed with the delicate attractions of
flowers? Who does not covet to assemble them in the garden, or wear them in a
nosegay? Since this is a passion so universal, who would not be willing to
render it productive of the sublimest improvement? -- This piece of holy
frugality, I have ventured to suggest, and endeavored to exemplify, in the
second letter; that, while the hand is cropping the transient beauties of a
flower, the attentive mind may be enriching itself with solid and lasting good.
-- And I cannot but entertain some pleasing hopes, that the nicest taste may
receive and relish religious impressions, when they are conveyed by such lovely
monitors; when the instructive lessons are found, not on the leaves of some
formidable folio, but stand legible on the fine sarcenet of a Narcissus; when
they savor, not of the lamp and recluse, but come breathing from the fragrant
bosom of a Jonquil.

CONTENTS OF VOL. I.
MEDITATIONS among the TOMBS.
OCCASION of the meditations -- Solitary walk in a church -- Handsome altar
piece; gratitude celebrated -- Solomon's temple; his noble sentiments at the
dedication; the passage illustrated -- The Holy Ghost dwelling in our hearts; a
rich privilege; an obligation to holiness -- The floor covered with funeral
inscriptions -- Wisdom of meditating on our latter end -- Promiscuous lodgment
and amicable agreement of corpses, suggest humility and concord -- Monument of
an infant; its fortunate circumstances; superior felicity of survivors --
Monument of a youth; grief of the parents; mitigated or aggravated by the
prospect of the invisible state; exhortation to educate children religiously --
Monument of a young man; cut off in his prime; how unexpected and afflictive
the stroke; the frailty of all sublunary happiness -- Reflection on the three
preceding exits; the uncertainty of life; call to be always ready -- This
farther urged from the instance of a person killed by a misfortune; nothing
casual, but all ordered by Providence -- Case of a lady, who died in childbed;
her character: With regard to earthly things, we know not what is really
desirable, or truly good; remarks on Mrs. STONHOUSE's monument, in the great
church at Northampton -- A religious father taken from his young family; his
behavior on a dying bed; their support in a fatherless state -- Monument of a
middle aged person; immersed in business; disappointment of his schemes; his
dying acknowledgments; the folly of worldly mindedness; very bitterness in the
end -- The graves of the aged; the difficulties and hazard of a late
repentance; youth entreated to enter upon a course of holiness without delay --
The singular wisdom and felicity of the righteous; the rest of their bodies;
the calmness of their departure; the safety of their disembodied souls; their
delightful situation till the judgment day -- Monument of a warrior, slain in
battle; reflections on the death of CHRIST, that it was voluntary, foreseen,
undergone for enemies; was most torturous, lingering, and ignominious -- The
meanness of being obliged to a monument for perpetuating our names; author's
wish for himself; true method of eternizing our characters -- The vault; its
awful aspect; grandeur in abasement; the vanity of pleasures, honors, and
riches -- The clock strikes; a warning to redeem the time -- The wonderful
change which takes place in the tomb, displayed in several particulars --
Soliloquy of a lover; admonition to the ladies; true beauty of the fair sex --
Sin the cause of our dissolution -- Subject of mortality brought home to our
own case; incitement to improve life; this the best embalming -- View of our
Savior's sepulcher; his lying in the grave has softened it for his people;
faith in his dying love disarms death -- The resurrection of the righteous;
their meeting the judge; their acceptance at the great tribunal -- Sickness,
sin, and death, destroyed; bliss or misery unchangeable; observations on
eternity -- The wicked; the anguish of their last sickness. No hope but from
the religion they despised; that very precarious; the horror of their
dissolution; this the beginning of sorrows; their treatment in the invisible
world; reserved to the judgment of the great day -- They rise, though
reluctant; are distracted with terror; covered with contempt; condemned to
endless woe -- To be instrumental in saving our fellow creatures from this
misery, the truest exercise of benevolence -- A reflection on the vast
importance of these truths; a persuasive to act under the believing
consideration of them; enforced by the inexpressible necessity of preparing for
them -- The whole closes with a view of the present security, and future glory,
of the righteous.

REFLECTIONS on a FLOWER GARDEN.
WALK in the garden; summer morning; a soaring lark; invitation to early rising
-- Vastness of the heavens; greater extent of divine mercy -- The sun; its
rising glories; emblem of CHRIST, in its enlightening, fructifying, cheering,
and extensive influences -- Dews; their transient brightness; their refreshing
nature; their immense number -- Difficult passage in the Psalms cleared up --
The various, but harmonious, procedure of Providence and Grace -- View of the
country, and its principal productions; particularly of an orchard and kitchen
garden; chiefly characterized as useful -- CHRIST made and recovered, upholds
and actuates all; address to mankind on this occasion -- Observations
contracted to the garden; fields of literature left for the study of the Bible
-- Fragrance of flowers; its fugitive nature, another motive to shake off
sloth; the delightful sensation it creates, faint representation of CHRIST's
sacrifice; all our performances polluted, this the cause of our acceptance --
Colors of flowers, how perfect in every kind; with what skill disposed;
fineness of the flowery texture; inducement to trust in Providence -- The folly
of pride in dress; our true ornaments displayed -- Flowers naturally inspire
delight; what pleasure must arise from the beatifick vision -- Solomon pictures
out the blessed JESUS by the most delicate flowers; beauties in the creature
lead us to the Creator -- Diversity of flowers, in their airs, habits,
attitudes, and lineaments; wisdom of the Almighty Maker; the perfection and
simplicity of his operations -- Difference between individuals of the same
species; emblem of the smaller differences among protestants -- Regular
succession of flowers; some of the choicest sets described; pleasing effects
produced by this economy; a benevolent Providence apparent in conducting it --
This beautiful disposition, and all that is admirable in the creation, referred
to CHRIST as the author; to consider the things that are made, in this view,
has excellent influence on our faith and love -- The structure of flowers so
correct, could not be altered, but to their prejudice; the time of their
appearing, chosen with the nicest precaution; these circumstances, a striking
argument for resignation to the disposals of Heaven -- Quotations from Casimir
and Juvenal translated -- A favorite tenet of Mr. Pope's rightly stated -- The
brute creatures unaffected with flowers; their fine qualities peculiarly
intended to delight mankind; all things constituted with a particular regard to
our advantage; this, an endearing obligation to gratitude; but a more engaging
motive, is the gift of an immortal soul -- Remark on the notion of a great poet
-- The cultivated garden an image of a well nurtured mind; address to persons
concerned in the education of youth -- Flowers in the bud, figurative of a
niggard; flowers in full expansion, expressive of a benevolent disposition --
Sun flower; its remarkable attachment to the sun; such should be our adherence
to the Savior -- Passion flower; its description; with a religious improvement
-- Sensitive plant; shrinks from every touch; such should be our solicitous
care to avoid sin -- The delicacy of flowers, and coarseness of their roots;
the ennobling change of our bodies at the resurrection; this should reconcile
us to the thoughts of dissolution -- Passage from Theocritus; the perfections
of flowers soon decay; the charms of complexion scarce more lasting --
Instances of transitory continuance in the noblest flowers; the honors of the
future state unfading -- All the delights of the flowery season pass away; the
celestial entertainments know no end -- Not flowers only, but the most durable
things in nature, are perishing; their felicity stable, who have GOD for their
portion -- Retreat into an arbor; practice of St. Augustine, pattern for our
imitation -- Coolness of this shady situation; the insufferable heat that rages
abroad; our safety in all the dangers of life, and amidst the terrors of
eternal judgment, if sheltered by the Redeemer's protection, and interested in
his merits -- The bees; their ingenuity; their industry; set an example for the
author -- A distant prospect of the whole scene, with its various decorations,
reminds the beholder of Heaven; its glories not to be described, but most
passionately desired.

A DESCANT upon CREATION.
DESIGN of the whole -- Angels -- The visible heavens -- Stars -- Comets --
Planets -- Sun -- Moon -- Thunders -- Lightnings -- Clouds, wintry and vernal
-- Rainbow -- Storms and tempests -- Pestilence -- Heat and cold -- Ocean --
Woods and shrubs -- Vine and fruit trees -- Meadows and fields -- Mines and
jewels -- Fountains and rivers -- Birds -- Bees -- Silkworm -- Cattle, and
creatures in every element -- General chorus of praise.

HERVEY's MEDITATIONS AMONG THE TOMBS.
In a LETTER to a LADY.
MADAM,
TRAVELING lately into Cornwall, I happened to alight at a considerable
Village, in that county: Where, finding myself under an unexpected necessity of
staying a little, I took a walk to the Church. I had named, in some former
editions, a particular church, viz. KILKHAMPTON; where several of the
monuments, described in the following pages, really exist. But as I thought it
convenient, to mention some cases here, which are not, according to the best of
my remembrance, referred to in any inscriptions there; I have now omitted the
name. That imagination might operate more freely, and the improvement of the
reader be consulted, without any thing that should look like a variation from
truth and fact.
The doors, like the heaven to which they lead, were wide open; and readily
admitted an unworthy stranger. Pleased with the opportunity, I resolved to
spend a few minutes under the sacred roof.

In a situation so retired and awful, I could not avoid falling into a train of
meditations, serious and mournfully pleasing. Which, I trust, were in some
degree profitable to me, while they possessed and warmed my thoughts; and, if
they may administer any satisfaction to you, Madam, now they are recollected,
and committed to writing, I shall receive a fresh pleasure from them.

It was an ancient pile; reared by hands, that, ages ago, were mouldered into
dust. -- Situate in the center of a large burial ground; remote from all the
noise and hurry of tumultuous life. -- The body spacious; the structure lofty;
the whole magnificently plain. A row of regular pillars extended themselves
through the midst; supporting the roof with simplicity, and with dignity. --
The light, that passed through the windows, seemed to shed a kind of luminous
Obscurity; which gave every object a grave and venerable air. -- The deep
Silence, added to the gloomy aspect, and both heightened by the loneliness of
the place, greatly increased the solemnity of the scene. -- A sort of religious
Dread stole insensibly on my mind, while I advanced, all pensive and
thoughtful, along the inmost aisle. Such a dread, as hushed every ruder
passion, and dissipated all the gay images of an alluring world.

Having adored that Eternal Majesty, who, far from being confined to temples
made with hands, has Heaven for his throne, and the Earth for his footstool --
I took particular notice of a handsome Altar piece; presented, as I was
afterward informed, by the master builders of Stow The Name of a grand seat,
belonging to the late Earl of Bath; remarkable formerly for its excellent
workmanship, and elegant furniture; once the principal resort of the quality
and gentry of the West; but now demolished, laid even with the ground, and
scarce one stone left upon another. -- So that corn may grow, or nettles
spring, where Stow lately stood.
; out of gratitude, I presume, to that gracious GOD, who carried them through
their work, and enabled them to bring forth their topstone with joy.

O! HOW amiable is Gratitude! especially when it has the supreme Benefactor for
its object. I have always looked upon gratitude as the most exalted principle
that can actuate the heart of man. It has something noble, disinterested, and
(if I may be allowed the Term) generously devout. Repentance indicates our
nature fallen, and Prayer turns chiefly upon a regard to one's self. But the
exercises of gratitude subsisted in paradise, when there was no fault to
deplore; and will be perpetuated in Heaven, when GOD shall be all in all.

The language of this sweet temper is, I am unspeakably obliged: What return
shall I make? -- And, surely, it is no improper expression of an unfeigned
thankfulness, to decorate our Creator's courts, and beautify "the place where
his honor dwells." Of old, the habitation of his feet was glorious: Let it
not, now, be sordid or contemptible. It must grieve an ingenuous mind, and be a
reproach to any people, to have their own houses wainscotted with cedar, and
painted with vermillion; while the temple of the Lord of hosts is destitute of
every decent ornament.

Here I recollected, and was charmed with Solomon's fine address to the
almighty, at the dedication of his famous temple. With immense charge, and
exquisite skill, he had erected the most rich and finished structure, that the
sun ever saw. Yet, upon a review of his work, and a reflection on the
transcendent perfections of the Godhead, how he exalts the one and abases the
other! -- The building was too glorious, for the mightiest monarch to inhabit;
too sacred for unhallowed feet even to enter; yet infinitely too mean, for the
Deity to reside in. It was, and the royal worshipper acknowledged it to be, a
most mavelous vouchsafement in uncreated excellency, to "put his name there."
-- The whole passage breathes such a delicacy, and is animated with such a
sublimity of sentiment, that I cannot persuade myself to pass on, without
repeating it. 1 Kings, viii.27. But will -- A fine abrupt beginning, most
significantly describing the amazement and rapture of the royal prophet's mind!
-- GOD: He uses no epithet, where writers of inferior discernment would have
been found to multiply them: But speaks of the Deity, as an incomprehensible
Being, whose perfections and glories are exalted above all praise. -- Dwell: To
bestow on sinful creatures a propitious look; to favor them with a transient
visit of kindness; even this were an unutterable obligation. Will he then
vouchsafe to fix his abode among them, and take up his stated residence with
them? -- Indeed: A word, in this connection, peculiarly emphatical; expressive
of a condescension, wonderful and extraordinary almost beyond all credibility.
Behold: intimating the continued, or rather the increasing surprise of the
speaker, and awakening the attention of the hearer. Behold! the Heaven: The
spacious concave of the firmament; that wide extended azure circumference, in
which worlds unnumbered perform their revolutions, is too scanty an apartment
for the Godhead. -- Nay, The Heaven of Heavens: Those vastly higher tracts,
which be far beyond the limits of human survey; to which our very thoughts can
hardly soar: even these (unbounded as they are) cannot afford an adequate
habitation for JEHOVAH; even these dwindle into a point, when compared with the
infinitude of his essence; even these are as nothing before him. -- How much
less proportionate is this poor diminutive speek (which I have been erecting
and embellishing), to so august a Presence, so immense a Majesty!
But will GOD indeed dwell on earth? Behold! The Heaven, and Heaven of Heavens,
cannot contain thee; how much less this house that I have builded! --
Incomparable saying! worthy the wisest of men. Who would not choose to possess
such an elevated devotion, rather than to own all the glittering materials of
that sumptuous edifice?

We are apt to be struck with admiration at the stateliness and grandeur of a
masterly performance in architecture. And, perhaps on a sight of the ancient
Sanctuary, should have made the superficial observation of the disciples; What
manner of stones, and what buildings are here! -- But what a nobler turn of
thought, and juster taste of things, does it discover; to join with Israel's
king, in celebrating the condescension of the Divine Inhabitant! That the High
and Lofty One, who fills immensity with his glory, should, in a peculiar
manner, fix his abode there! Should there manifest an extraordinary degree of
his benedictive presence; permit sinful mortals to approach his Majesty; and
promise "to make them joyful in his house of prayer! -- This should more
sensibly affect our hearts, than the most curious arrangement of stones can
delight our eyes.

Nay, the everlasting GOD does not disdain to dwell in our souls by his holy
spirit; and to make even our bodies his temple. -- Tell me, ye that frame
critical judgments, and balance nicely the distinction of things; "Is this most
astonishing or most rejoicing?" -- He humbles himself, the scripture assures
us, even to behold the things that are in Heaven Psalm. cxiii.6.
. It Is a most condescending favor, if HE pleases to take the least approving
notice of Angels and Archangels, when they bow down in homage from their
celestial thrones. Will he then graciously regard, will he be united, most
intimately united to poor, polluted breathing dust? -- Unparallelled honor!
invaluable privilege! Be this my portion, and I shall not covet crowns, nor
envy conquerors.

But let me remember, what a sanctity of disposition, and uprightness of
conversation, so exalted a relation demands: Remember this, "and rejoice with
trembling." -- Durst I commit any iniquity, while I tread these hallowed
courts? could the Jewish high priest allow himself in any known transgression,
while he made that solemn yearly entrance Heb. ix.7.
into the Holy of Holies, and stood before the immediate presence of JEHOVAH?
No, truly. In such circumstances, a thinking person must shudder at the most
remote solicitation, to any wilful offense. I should now be shocked at the
least indecency of behavior, and am apprehensive of every appearance of evil.
-- And why do we not carry this holy jealousy, into all our ordinary life? Why
do we not, in every place, -- (...), was the favorite maxim of Pythagoras, and
supposed to be one of the best moral precepts, ever given to the Heathen world.
With what superior force, and very singular advantage, does the argument take
place in the christian scheme! where we are taught to regard ourselves, not
merely as intellectual beings, who have Reason for our monitor; but as
consecrated creatures, who have a GOD of the most consummate perfection, ever
with us, ever in us.
reverence ourselves; as persons dedicated to the Divinity, as living temples
of the Godhead? For, if we are real, and not merely nominal christians, the GOD
of Glory, according to his own promise, 2 Cor. vi.16.
dwells in us, and walks in us. -- O! that this one doctrine of our religion
might operate with an abiding efficacy, upon our consciences! It would be
instead of a thousand laws, to regulate our conduct, instead of a thousand
motives, to quicken us in holiness. Under the influence of such a conviction,
we should study to maintain a purity of intention; a dignity of action: and to
walk worthy of that transcendently majestic Being, who admits us to a
fellowship with himself, and with his son JESUS CHRIST.

The next thing, which engaged my attention, was the lettered floor. The
pavement, somewhat like Ezekiel's roll, was written over from one end to the
other. I soon perceived the comparison to hold good, in another respect; and
the inscriptions to be matter of Mourning, lamentation, and woe Ezekiel. ii.10.
. They seemed to court my observation; silently inviting me to read them. And
what would these dumb monitors inform me of? -- That, beneath their little
circumferences, were deposited such and such pieces of clay, which once lived,
and moved, and talked: That they had received a charge to preserve their names,
and were the remaining trustees of their memory.

Ah! said I, is such my situation! The adorable Creator around me, and the
bones of my fellow creatures under me! Surely, then, I have great reason to cry
out, with the revering patriarch, How dreadful is this place! Genesis xxviii.17.
Seriousness and devotion become this house forever. May I never enter it
lightly or irreverently; but with a profound awe, and godly fear!

O! that they were wife Deuteronomy. xxxii.29.
! said the inspired penman. It was his last wish for his dear people. He
breathed it out, and gave up the ghost. -- But what is wisdom! It consists not
in refined Speculations; accurate researches into nature; or an universal
acquaintance with history. The divine lawgiver settles this important point, in
his next aspiration: O! that they understood this! That they had right
apprehensions of their spiritual interests, and eternal concerns! That they had
eyes to discern, and inclinations to pursue, the things which belong to their
peace! -- But how shall they attain this valuable knowledge? I send them not,
adds the illustrious teacher, to turn over all the volumes of literature: They
may acquire, and much more expeditiously, this science of life, by considering
their latter end. This spark of Heaven is often lost, under the glitter of
pompous erudition; but shines clearly, in the gloomy mansions of the tomb.
Drowned in this gentle whisper, amidst the noise of secular affairs: but speaks
distinctly, in the retirements of serious contemplation. -- Behold! how
providentially I am brought to the school of Wisdom! The man how wise, who,
sick of gaudy scenes,
Is led by choice to take his favorite walk
Beneath Death's gloomy, silent, cypress shades,
Unpierc'd by Vanity's fantastic ray!
To read his monuments, to weigh his dust,
Visit his vaults, and dwell among the tombs!
Night Thoughts,
The grave, is the most faithful Wait the great teacher Death* POPE.
master; and these instances of mortality, the most instructive lessons. --
Come then, calm attention, and compose my thoughts: Come, thou celestial
spirit, and enlighten my mind; that I may so peruse these awful pages, as to
become wise unto salvation.

Examining the records of mortality, I found the memorials of a Mista senum ac
juvenum densantur funera. HOR.
promiscuous multitude. They were huddled, at least they rested together,
without any regard to rank or seniority. None were ambitious of the uppermost
rooms, or chief seats, in this house of mourning. None entertained fond and
eager expectations of being honorably greeted, in their darksome cells. The
man of years and experience, reputed as an Oracle in his generation, was
content to lie down at the feet of a babe. In this house appointed for all
living, the servant was equally accommodated, and lodged in the same story with
his master. The poor indigent lay as softly, and slept as soundly, as the most
opulent possessor. All the distinction that subsisted, was, a grassy hillock,
bound with ofiers; or a sepulchral stone, ornamented with imagery.

Why then, said my working thoughts, O! why should we raise such a mighty stir,
about superiority and precedence; when the next remove will reduce us all to a
state of equal meanness? Why should we exalt ourselves, or debase others; since
we must all, one day, be upon a common level, and blended together in the same
undistinguished dust? O! that this consideration might humble my own, and
others pride; and sink our imagination as low, as our habitation will shortly
be!

Among these confused relics of humanity, there are, without doubt, persons of
contrary interests, and contradicting sentiments. But Death, like some able
daysman, has laid his hand on the contending parties; and brought all their
differences to an Hi motus animorum, atque haec certamina tanta,
Pulveris exigui jactu compressa quiescent.
VIRG.
amicable conclusion. Here enemies, sworn enemies, dwell together in unity.
They drop every imbittered thought, and forget that they once were foes.
Perhaps, their crumbling bones mix as they moulder: and those who, while they
lived, stood aloof in irreconcilable variance; here fall into mutual embraces,
and even incorporate with each other in the grave. O! that we might learn from
these friendly ashes, not to perpetuate the memory of injuries; not to foment
the fever of resentment; nor cherish the turbulence of passion. That there may
be as little animosity and disagreement in the land of the living, as there is
in the congregation of the dead! -- But I suspend for a while such general
observations, and address myself to a more particular inquiry.

Yonder white stone, emblem of the innocence it covers, informs the beholder of
one, who breathed out its tender soul, almost in the instant of receiving it.
-- There, the peaceful infant, without so much as knowing what labor and
vexation mean, Job iii.13.
lies still and is quiet; it sleeps and is at rest. Staying only to wash away
its native impurity in the laver of regeneration, it bid a speedy adieu to time
and terrestrial things. -- What did the little hasty sojourner find, so
forbiding and disgustful in our upper world, to occasion its precipitant exit?
It Is written, indeed, of its suffering Savior, that when he had tasted the
vinegar mingled with gall, he would not drink. Matt. xxvii.34.
And, did our new come stranger, begin to sip the cup of life: But, perceiving
the bitterness, turn away its head and refuse the draught? Was this the cause,
why the wary babe only opened its eyes; just looked on the light; and then
withdrew, into the more inviting regions of undisturbed repose?

Happy voyager! No sooner launched, than arrived at the haven! Happy the babe,
who, privileged by fate
To shorter labor, and a lighter weight,
Received but yesterday the gift of breath,
Ordered tomorrow to return to death.
PRIOR'S SOL.
-- But more eminently happy they, who have passed the waves, and weathered all
the storms, of a troublesome and dangerous world! Who through many
tribulations, have entered into the kingdom of heaven; and thereby brought
honor to their divine convoy, administered comfort to the companions of their
toil, and left an instructive example to succeeding pilgrims.

Highly favored probationer! accepted, without being exercised! -- It was thy
peculiar privilege, not to feel the slightest of those evils, which oppress thy
surviving kindred; which frequently fetch groans, from the most manly
fortitude, or most elevated faith. The arrows of calamity, barbed with anguish,
are often fixed deep in our choicest comforts. The fiery darts of temptation,
shot from the hand of hell, are always flying in showers around our integrity.
To thee, sweet babe, both these distresses and dangers were alike unknown.

Consider this, ye mourning parents, and dry up your tears. Why should you
lament, that your little ones are crowned with victory, before the sword is
drawn, or the conflict begun? -- Perhaps, the Supreme Disposer of events,
foresaw some inevitable snare of temptation forming, or some dreadful storm of
adversity impending. And why should you be so dissatisfied, with that kind
precaution; which housed your pleasant plant, and removed into shelter a tender
flower, before the thunders roared: Before the lightnings flew: Before the
tempest poured its rage? -- O remember! they are not lost, but taken away from
the evil to come. Isa. lvii.1.


At the same time, let survivors, doomed to bear the heat and burden of the
day, for their encouragement reflect -- That it is more honorable to have
entered the lists, and to have fought the good fight, before they come off
conquerors. They who have bore the cross, and submitted to afflictive
providence, with a cheerful resignation; have girded up the loins of their
mind, and performed their Master's will, with an honest and persevering
fidelity: -- These, having glorified their Redeemer on earth, will, probably,
be as stars of the first magnitude in heaven. They will shine with brighter
beams, be replenished with stronger joys, in their LORD's everlasting kingdom.

Here lies the grief of a fond mother, and the blasted expectation of an
indulgent father. -- The youth grew up, like a well watered plant; he shot
deep, rose high, and bid fair for manhood. But just as the cedar began to
tower, and promised, ere long, to be the pride of the wood, and prince among
the neighboring trees -- Behold! the ax is laid unto the root; the fatal blow
struck; and all its branching honors tumbled to the dust. -- And did he fall
alone? No: The hopes of his father that begat him, and the pleasing prospects
of her that bare him, fell, and were crushed together with him.

Doubtless, it would have pierced one's heart, to have beheld the tender
parents, following the breathless youth, to his long home. Perhaps, drowned in
tears, and all overwhelmed with sorrows, they stood, like weeping statues, on
this very spot. -- Methinks, I see the deeply distressed mourners attending the
sad solemnity. How they wring their hands, and pour floods from their eyes! --
Is it fancy? or do I really hear the passionate mother, in an agony of
affliction taking her final leave of the darling of her soul? dumb she
remained, while the awful obsequies were performing; dumb with grief, and
leaning upon the partner of her woes. But now the inward anguish struggles for
vent; it grows too big to be repressed. She advances to the brink of the grave*
all her soul is in her eyes. She fastens one more look upon the dear doleful
object, before the pit shuts its mouth upon him. And as she looks, she cries;
-- in broken accents, interrupted by many a rising sob, she cries -- Farewell,
my son! my son! my only beloved! Would to GOD I had died for thee! -- Farewell,
my child! and farewell all my earthly happiness! -- I shall never more see good,
in the land of the living. -- Attempt not to comfort me, I will go mourning,
all my days, till my gray hairs come down, with sorrow, to the grave.

From this affecting representation, let parents be convinced, how highly it
concerns them to cultivate the morals, and secure the immortal interests of
their children. -- If you really love the offspring of your own bodies; if your
bowels yearn over those amiable pledges of conjugal endearment; spare no pains;
give all diligence, I entreat you, to bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the LORD. Then, may you have joy in their life, or consolation in
their death. If their span is prolonged; their unblamable and useful conduct,
will be the staff of your age, and a balm for declining nature. Or, if the
number of their years be cut off in the midst; you may commit their remains to
the dust, with much the same comfortable expectations, as you send the
survivors to places of genteel education. You may commit them to the dust, with
cheering hopes of receiving them again to your arms, inexpressibly improved in
every noble and endearing accomplishment.

It Is certainly a severe trial; and much more afflictive, than I am able to
imagine; to resign a lovely blooming creature, sprung from your own loins, to
the gloomy recesses of corruption. Thus to resign him, after having been long
dandled upon your knees; united to your affections by a thousand ties of
tenderness; and now become, both the delight of your eyes, and the support of
your family! -- To have such a one torn from your bosom, and thrown into
darkness; doubtless, it must be like a dagger in your hearts. -- But O! how
much more cutting to you, and confounding to the child, to have the soul
separated from GOD; and, for shameful ignorance, or early impiety, transmitted
to places of eternal torment! How would it aggravate your distress, and add a
distracting Emphasis to all your sighs, if you should follow the pale corpse
with these bitter reflections! -- This dear creature though long ago capable of
knowing good from evil, is gone out of the world before it had learned the
great disign of coming into it. A short lived momentary existence, it received
from me; but no good instructions, no holy admonitions, nothing to further its
well being in that everlasting state, upon which it is now entered. The poor
body is consigned to the coffin, and carried out to consume away, in the cold
and silent grave. And what reason have I to suppose, that the precious soul is
in a better condition? May I not justly fear, that, sentenced by the righteous
judge, it is going, or gone away, into the pains of endless punishment? --
Perhaps, while I am bewailing its untimely departure, it may be cursing, in
outer darkness, that ever to be deplored, that most calamitous day, when it was
born of such a careless, ungodly parent, as I have been.

Nothing, I think, but the gnawings of that worm which never dies, can equal
the anguish of these self-condemning thoughts. The tortures of a rack must be
an easy suffering, compared with the stings and horror of such a remorse. --
How earnestly do I wish, that as many as are entrusted with the management of
children, would take timely care to prevent these scourges of conscience; by
endeavoring to conduct their minds into an early knowledge of Christ, and a
cordial love of his truth!

On this hand is lodged one, whose sepulchral stone tells a most pitiable tale
indeed! Well may the little images, reclined over the sleeping ashes, hang down
their heads with that pensive air! None can consider so mournful a story,
without feeling some touches of sympathizing concern. -- His age twenty eight;
his death, sudden; himself cut down in the prime of life, amidst all the
vivacity and vigor of manhood; while his breasts were full of milk, and his
bones moistened with marrow. -- Probably he entertained no apprehensions of the
evil hour. And indeed who could have suspected, that so bright a sun should go
down at noon? To human appearance, his hill stood strong. Length of days seemed
written in his sanguine countenance. He solaced himself with the prospect of a
long, long series of earthly satisfactions. -- When, lo! an unexpected stroke
descends! descends from that mighty arm, which overturneth the mountains by
their roots; and crushes the imaginary hero, Job iv.19, (...) -- Ad instar, ad
modum, Tineae. -- I retain this interpretation, both as it is most suitable to
my purpose, and as it is patronized by some eminent commentators; especially
the celebrated Schultens. Though I cannot but give the preference to the
opinion of a judicious friend, who would render the passage more literally,
before the face of a moth: Making it to represent a creature so exceedingly
frail, that even a moth, flying against it, may dash it to pieces. -- Which,
besides its closer correspondence with the exact import of the Hebrew, presents
us with a much finer image of the most extreme imbecility. For it certainly
implies a far greater degree of weakness, to be crushed by the feeble flutter
of the feeblest creature, than only to be crushed as easily as that creature,
by the hand of man. -- The French version is very expressive and beautiful; a
la Rencontre d'un Vermisseau.
before the moth; as quickly, and more easily, than our fingers press such a
feeble fluttering insect to death.

Perhaps, the nuptial joys were all he thought on. -- Were not such the
breathings of his enamoured soul? Yet a very little while, and I shall possess
the utmost of my wishes. I shall call my charmer mine; and, in her, enjoy
whatever my heart can crave. -- In the midst of such enchanting views, had some
faithful friend but softly reminded him of an opening grave, and the end of all
things; how unseasonable would he have reckoned the admonition! Yet, though all
warm with life, and rich in visionary bliss, he was even then tottering upon
the brink of both. -- Dreadful vicissitude! to have the bridal festivity turned
into the funeral solemnity! A distress of this kind is painted in very
affecting colors by Pliny, in an epistle to Marcellinus; O triste plane
acerbumque Funus! O Morte ipsa Mortis Tempus indignius! jam destinata erat
egregio Juveni; jam electus Nuptiarum Dies; jam nos advocati. Quod Gaudium quo
Moerore mutatum est! Non possum exprimere Verbis, quantum Animo vulnus
acceperim, quum audivi Fundanum ipsum (ut multa luctuosa Dolor invenit)
praecipientem, quod in Vestes, Margaritas Gemmas, fuerat erogaturus, hoc in
Thura, and Unguenta, and Ordores impenderetur. PLIN. Lib. V. Epist. 26.
Deplorable misfortune; to be shipwrecked in the very haven! and to perish even
in sight of happiness! -- What a memorable proof is here of the frailty of man,
in his best estate! Look, O! look on this monument, ye gay and careless! Attend
to this date; and boast no more of tomorrow;

Who can tell, but the Bridemaids, girded with gladness, had prepared the
marriage bed? Had decked it with the richest covers, and dressed it in pillows
of down? When -- Oh! trust not in youth, or strength, or in any thing mortal;
for there is nothing certain, nothing to be depended on; beneath the
unchangeable GOD -- death, relentless death, is making him another kind of bed
in the dust of the earth. Unto this he must be conveyed, not with a splendid
procession of joyous attendants; but stretched in the gloomy hearse, and
followed by a train of mourners. On this he must take up a lonely lodging, nor
ever be released, "till the heavens are no more." -- In vain does the
consenting fair one put on her ornaments, and expect her spouse. Did she not,
like Sisera's mother, look out of the lattice; chide the delays of her beloved;
and wonder why his chariot was so long in coming? Little thinking, that the
intended bridegroom had forever done with transitory things; that now
everlasting cares employ his mind, without one single remembrance of his lovely
Lucinda! Go, disappointed virgin! Go, mourn the uncertainty of all created
bliss! Teach thy soul to aspire after a sure and immutable felicity! For the
once gay and gallant Fidelio sleeps in other embraces; even in the icy arms of
death! Forgetful, eternally forgetful, of the world -- and thee.

Hitherto, one is tempted to exclaim against the king of terrors, and call him
capriciously cruel. He seems, by beginning at the wrong end of the register, to
have inverted the laws of nature. Passing over the couch of decrepit age, he
has nipped infancy in its bud; blasted youth in its bloom; and torn up manhood
in its full maturity. -- Terrible indeed are these providence, yet not
unsearchable the counsels: For us they sicken, and for us they die. Night
Thoughts.


Such strokes, must not only grieve the relatives, but surprise the whole
neighborhood. They sound a powerful alarm to heedless dreaming mortals, and
are intended as a remedy for our carnal security. Such passing bells, inculcate
loudly our LORD's admonition; Take ye heed, watch and pray; for ye know not,
when the time is. -- We nod, like intoxicated creatures, upon the very verge of
a most tremendous precipice. These astonishing dispensations, are the kind
messengers of Heaven; to rouse us from our supineness, and quicken us into
timely circumspection. I need not, surely, accommodate them with language, nor
act as their interpreter. Let every one's conscience be awake, and this will
appear their awful meaning -- O! ye sons of men, in the midst of life you are
in death. No state, no circumstances, can ascertain your preservation a single
moment. So strong is the tyrant's arm, that nothing can resist its force; so
true his aim, that nothing can elude the blow. Sudden as lightning, sometimes,
is his arrow launched; and wounds, and kills, in the twinkling of an eye. Never
promise yourselves safety in any expedient, but constant preparation. The fatal
shafts fly so promiscuously, that none can guess the next victim. Therefore, be
ye always ready: For in such an hour as ye think not, the final summons comes.

Be ye always ready: For in such an hour as ye think not -- Important
admonition! methinks, it reverberates from sepulcher to sepulcher; and
addresses me with line upon line, precept upon precept. -- The reiterated
warning, I acknowledge, is too needful; may cooperating grace, render it
effectual! The momentous truth, though worthy to be engraved, on the tables of
a most tenacious memory; is but shightly sketched, on the transient flow of
passion. We see our neighbors fall; we turn pale at the shock: and feel,
perhaps, a trembling dread. No sooner are they removed from our sight; but,
driven in the whirl of business, or lulled in the languors of pleasure, we
forget the providence, and neglect its errand. The impression made on our
unstable minds, is like the trace of an arrow, through the penetrated air; or
the path of a keel, in the furrowed wave. -- Strange stupidity! To cure it,
another monitor bespeaks me, from a neighboring stone. It contains the
narrative of an unhappy mortal, snatched from his friends, and hurried to the
awful bar; without leisure, either to take a last farewell of the one, or to put
up so much as a single prayer preparatory for the other: killed, according to
the usual expression, by a sudden stroke of casualty.

Was it then a random stroke? Doubtless, the blow came from an aiming though
invisible hand. GOD presideth over the armies of heaven; GOD rules among the
inhabitants of the earth; and GOD conducteth what men call chance. Nothing,
nothing comes to pass through a blind and undiscerning fatality. If accidents
happen; they happen according to the exact foreknowledge, and conformably to
the determinate counsels, of eternal wisdom. The LORD, with whom are the issues
of death, signs the warrant, and gives the high commission. The seemingly
fortuitous disaster is only the agent, or the instrument, appointed to execute
the supreme decree. When the king of Israel was mortally wounded, it seemed to
be a casual shot. A certain man drew a bow at a venture 1 Kings xxii.34.
. -- At a venture, as he thought. But his hand was strengthened, by an
omnipotent aid; and the shaft levelled, by an unerring eye. So that, what we
term casualty, is really providence; accomplishing deliberate designs, but
concealing its own interposition. -- How comforting this reflection! Admirably
adapted, to sooth the throbbing anguish of the mourners, and compose their
spirits into a quiet submission! Excellently suited, to dissipate the fears of
godly survivors, and create a calm intrepidity even amidst innumerable perils!

How thin is the partition, between this world and another! How short the
transition, from time to eternity! The partition, nothing more than the breath
in our nostrils; and the transition may be made in the twinkling of an eye.
Poor Chremylus, I remember, arose from the diversion of a card table, and dropped
into the dwellings of darkness. One night, Corinna was all gaiety in her
spirits, all finery in her apparel, at a magnificent ball. The next night, she
lay pale and stiff, an extended corpse, and ready to be mingled with the
mouldering dead. Young Atticus lived to see his ample and commodious seat
completed; but not to spend one joyous hour, under the stately roof. The sashes
were hung, to admit the day; but the master's eyes are closed in endless night.
The apartments were furnished, to invite society, or administer repose; but
their lord rests in the lower parts of the earth, in the solitary, silent
chambers of the tomb. The gardens were planned, and a thousand elegant
decoratious designed; but alas! their intended possessor, is gone down to "the
place of skulls;" is gone down to the valley of the shadow of death.

While I am recollecting, many, I question not, are experiencing the same
tragical vicissitude. The eyes of that sublime being -- who sits upon the
circle of the earth, and views all its inhabitants with one comprehensive
glance -- even now behold many tents in affliction. Such affliction as
overwhelmed the Egyptians in that fatal night, when the destroying angel
sheathed his arrows in all the pride of their strength. -- Some, sinking to the
floor from their easy chair; and deaf even amidst the piercing shrieks of their
distracted relations. -- Some giving up the ghost, as they sit retired, or lie
reclined under the shady arbor, to taste the sweets of the flowery scene. --
Some, as they sail, associated with a party of pleasure, along the dancing
stream, and through the laughing meads. Nor is the grim intruder mollified,
though wine and music flow around. Some intercepted, as they are returning
home; and some interrupted, as they enter upon an important negotiation. --
Some arrested, with the gain of injustice in their hands; and some surprised in
the very act of lewdness, or the attempt of cruelty.

Legions, legions of disasters, such as no prudence can foresee, and no care
prevent, lie in wait to accomplish our doom. A starting horse may throw his
rider; may at once dash his body against the stones, and fling his soul into
the invisible world. A st^ck of chimnies may tumble into the street, and crush
the unwary passenger under the ruins. Even a single tile, dropping from the
roof, may be as fatal as the fall of the whole structure. -- So frail, so very
attenuated is the thread of life, that it not only bursts before the storm, but
breaks even at a breeze. The most common occurrences, those from which we
suspect not the least harm, may prove the weapon of our destruction, a grape
stone, a despicable fly, may be more mortal than Goliath, with all his
formidable armor. -- Nay, if GOD give command, our very comforts become
killing. The air we breathe, is our bane; and the food we eat, the vehicle of
death. -- That last enemy has unnumbered avenues for his approach. Yea; lies
entrenched in our very bosom, and holds his fortress in the seat of our life.
The crimson fluid, which distributes health, is impregnated with the seeds of
death. Heat may inflame it, or toil oppress it; and make it destroy the parts,
it was designed to cherish. Some unseen impediment may obstruct its passage, or
some unknown violence may divert its course; in either of which cases, it acts
the part of a poisonous draught, or a deadly stab.

Ah! in what perils is vain life engaged!
What slight neglects, what trivial faults destroy
The hardiest frame! Of indolence, of toil
We die; of want, of superfluity.
The all surrounding heaven, the vital air,
Is big with death.
Since then we are so liable to be dispossessed of this earthly tabernacle, let
us look upon ourselves only as tenants at will; and hold ourselves in perpetual
readiness, to depart at a moment's warning. Without such an habitual readiness,
we are like wretches, that sleep on the top of a mast, while a horrid gulf
yawns, or furious waves rage, below. And where can be the peace, what the
satisfaction, of such a state? -- Whereas, a prepared condition will inspire a
cheerfulness of temper, not to be dismayed by any alarming accident; and create
a firmness of mind, not to be overthrown by the most threatening dangers. When
the city is fortified with walls, furnished with provision, guarded by able and
resolute troops; what have the inhabitants to fear? what may they not enjoy?
So, just so, or rather by a much surer band, are connected the real taste of
life, and the constant thought of death.

I said, our very comforts may become killing. -- And see the truth inscribed
by the hand, sealed with the signet of fate. The marble, which graces yonder
pillar, informs me, that, near it, are deposited the remains of Sophronia; the
much lamented Sophronia, who died in childbed. -- How often does this calamity
happen! The branch shoots; but the stem withers. The babe springs to light; but
she that bare him, breathes her last. She gives life, but gives it (O pitiable
consideration!) at the expense of her own; and becomes, at once, a mother, and
a corpse. -- Or else, perhaps, she expires in severe pangs, and is herself a
tomb for her infant; while the melancholy complaint of a monarch's woe, is the
epitaph for them both; the children are come to the birth, and there is not
strength to bring forth. Isa. xxxvii.3.
-- Less to be lamented, in my opinion, this misfortune than the other. Better,
for the tender stranger, to be stopped in the porch; than to enter, only to
converse with affliction. Better, to find a grave in the womb, than to be
exposed on a hazardous world without the guardian of its infantile years,
without the faithful guide of its youth.

This monument is distinguished by its finer materials, and more delicate
appendages. It seems to have taken its model from an affluent hand; directed by
a generous heart; which thought it could never do enough for the deceased. --
It seems, also, to exhibit an emblematical picture of Sophronia's person and
accomplishments. Is her beauty, or, what is more than beauty, her whiterobed
innocence, represented by the snowy color? The surface, smoothly polished,
like her amiable temper, and engaging manners. The whole adorned, in a well
judged medium between extravagant pomp, and sordid negligence; like her
undissembled goodness, remote from the least ostentation, yet in all points
exemplary. -- But ah! how vain, were all these endearing charms! How vain, the
luster of thy sprightly eye! How vain, the bloom of thy bridal youth! How vain,
the honors of thy superior birth! How unable to secure the lovely possessor,
from the savage violence of death! -- How ineffectual, the universal esteem of
thy acquaintance; the fondness of thy transported husband; or even the spotless
integrity of thy character; to prolong thy span, or procure thee a short
reprieve! -- The concurrence of all these circumstances reminds me of those
beautiful and tender lines -- How loved, how valued once, avails thee not;
To whom related, or by whom begot:
A heap of dust alone remains of thee:
It Is all THOU art! -- and all the PROUD shall be! These verses are inscribed
on a small, but elegant monument, lately erected in the great church at
Northampton. Which, in the Hieroglyphical decorations, corresponds with the
description introduced above. In this circumstance particularly, that it is
dedicated to the memory of an amiable woman, Mrs. ANNE STONHOUSE; the excellent
wife of my worthy friend Dr. STONHOUSE. Who has seen all the powers of that
healing art, to which I, and so many others have been greatly indebted, failing
in their attempts to preserve a life dearer to him than his own. Nec prosunt
Domino, quae prosunt omnibus, Arts.
No longer his all healing art avails;
But every remedy its master fails.
In the midst of this tender distress, he has sought some kind of consolation,
even from the sepulchral marble. By teaching it to speak, at once, his esteem
for her memory; and his veneration for that religion, which she so eminently
adorned. Nor could this be more significantly done, than by summing up her
character, in that concise, but comprehensive sentence, A SINCERE CHRISTIAN.
Concise enough, to be the motto for a mourning ring; yet as comprehensive, as
the most enlarged sphere of personal, social, and religious worth. For,
whatsoever things are pure; whatsoever things are lovely; whatsoever things are
of good report; are they not all included in that grand and noble aggregate, a
sincere Christian?

The first lines, considered in such a connection, are wonderfully plaintive and
pathetick -- How loved, how valued once, avails thee not;
To whom related, or by whom begot.
They sound, at least in my ears, like the voice of sorrow, mingled with
admiration. The speaker seems to have been lost, for a while, in melancholy
contemplation; suddenly breaks out into this abrupt encomium; then melts into
tears, and can proceed no farther. Yet, in this case, how eloquent is silence!
While it hints the universal esteem which attended, and the superiority of
birth which distinguished, the deceased wife; it expresses, beyond all the pomp
of words, the yearning affection, and heartfelt affliction of the surviving
husband. -- Amidst the group of monumental marbles, which are lavish of their
panegyric; this, I think, resembles the incomparable address of the painter --
who, having placed, round a beautiful expiring virgin, her friends in all the
agonies of grief; represented the unequalled anguish of the father, with far
greater liveliness* and strength, or rather with an inexpressible emphasis, by
drawing a veil over his face.

If the last lines, are a wide departure from the beaten track of our modern
epitaphs, and the very reverse of their highflown compliments -- A heap of dust
alone remains of thee!
It Is all THOU art! -- and all the PROUD shall be!
they are not without a precedent, and one of the most consummate kind. Since
they breathe the very spirit of that sacred elegy, in which all the heart of
the hero and the friend, seems to be dissolved; How are the mighty fallen, and
the weapons of war perished! 2 Samuel i.27. -- They remind the reader, of that
awful lesson, which was originally dictated by the supreme wisdom -- dust thou
art, and unto dust thou shall return, Genesis iii.19. -- They inculcate, with all
the force of the mo^ convincing evidence, that solemn admonition, delivered by
the prophet -- Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils; for wherein
is HE to be accounted of? Isa. ii.22.

That no reader, however inattentive, might mistake the sense and design of
this part of the fourth line -- It Is ALL thou art! -- it is guarded above and
beneath. -- Above, is an expanded book, that seems to be waved, with an air of
triumph, over the emblem of death. Which we cannot but suppose to be the volume
of inspiration, as it exhibits a sort of abridgement of its whole contents, in
those animated words; BE YE NOT SLOTHFUL, BUT FOLLOWERS OF THEM, WHO THROUGH
FAITH AND PATIENCE INHERIT THE PROMISES, Heb. vi.12. -- Beneath, that every
part might be pregnant with instruction, are those striking reflections; worthy
the consideration of the highest proficient in knowledge and piety, yet obvious
to the understanding of the most untaught reader; LIFE, HOW SHORT; ETERNITY,
HOW LONG! -- May my soul learn the forcible purport of this short lesson, in
her contracted span of time! and all eternity will not be too long, to rejoice
in having learned it.



POPE's Miscell.

Yet, though unable to divert the stroke, christianity is sovereign to pluck
out the sting, of death. Is not this the silent language of those lamps, which
burn, and of that heart, which flames; of those palms, which flourish, and of
that crown, which glitters, in the well imitated and gilded marble? Do they
not, to the discerning eye, describe the vigilance of her faith; the fervency
of her devotion; her victory over the world; and the celestial diadem, which
the LORD, the righteous Judge, shall give her at that day? 2 Timothy iv.8.


How happy the husband, in such a sharer of his bed, and partner of his
fortune! Their inclinations were nicely tuned unisons, and all their
conversation was harmony. How silken the yoke to such a pair, and what
blessings were twisted with such bands! every joy was heightened, and every
care alleviated. Nothing seemed wanting to consummate their bliss, but a
hopeful progeny, rising around them. -- That they might see themselves,
multiplied in their little ones; see their mingled graces, transfused into
their offspring; and feel the glow of their affection augmented, by being
reflected from their children. Grant us this gift, said their united prayers,
and our satisfactions are crowned: We request no more.

Alas! how blind are mortals to future events! How unable to discern, what is
really good! Nascia Men's Hominum fati, Sortisqu^ futurae!
Turno Tempus ^rit, magno cum optaverit emptum,
Intactum Pallanta; and cum Spolia ista Diemque
Oderit. --
VIRG.
Give me children, said Rachel, or else I die. Genesis xxx.1.
An ardour of impatience, altogether unbecoming; and as mistaken, as it was
unbecoming. She dies, not by the disappointment, but by the accomplishment, of
her desire. -- If children are, to parents, like a flowery chaplet, whose
beauties blossom with ornament, and whose odours breathe delight; death, or
some fell misfortune, may find means to entwine themselves with the lovely
wreath. Whenever our souls are poured out, with passionate importunity, after
any inferior acquisition; it may be truly said, in the words of our divine
master, Ye know not what ye ask. -- Does Providence withhold the thing that we
long for? It denies in mercy; and only withholds the occasion of our misery,
perhaps the instrument of our ruin. With a sickly appetite, we often loathe what
is wholesome, and hanker after our bane. Where imagination dreams of unmingled
sweets; there, experience frequently finds the bitterness of woe.

Therefore, may we covet immoderately, neither this nor that form of earthly
felicity; but refer the whole of our condition, to the choice of unerring
wisdom. May we learn to renounce our own will; and be ready to make a sacrifice
of our warmest wishes, whenever they run counter to the good pleasure of GOD.
For, indeed, as to obey his laws, is to be perfectly free; so, to resign
ourselves to his disposal, is to establish our own happiness, and to be secure
from fear of evil.

Here, a small and plain stone is placed upon the ground. Purchased, one would
imagine, from the little fund, and formed by the hand, of frugality itself.
Nothing costly: Not one decoration added: Only a very short inscription; and
that so effaced, as to be scarcely intelligible. -- Was the depository
unfaithful to its trust? Or were the letters worn by the frequent resort of the
surviving family; to mourn over the grave of a most valuable and beloved
relative? -- For I perceive, upon a closer inspection, that it covers the
remains of a father. A religious father; snatched from his growing offspring,
before they were settled in the world, or so much as their principles fixed by
a thorough education.

This, sure, is the most complicated distress, that has hitherto come under our
consideration, The solemnities of such a dying chamber, are some of the most
melting and melancholy scenes imaginable. -- There lies the affectionate
husband; the indulgent parent; the faithful friend; and the generous master. He
lies in the last extremities, and on the very point of dissolution. Art has
done its all. The raging discase mocks the power of medicine. It hastens, with
resistless impetuosity, to execute its dreadful errand; to rend asunder the
silver cord of life, and the more delicate tie of social attachment, and
conjugal affection.

A servant or two, from a revering distance, cast many a wishful look, and
condole their honored master in the language of sighs. The condescending
mildness of his commands, was wont to produce an alacrity of obedience, and
render their service a pleasure. The remembrance of both imbitters their grief,
and makes it trickle plentifully down their honest cheeks. -- His friends, who
have so often shared his joys, and gladdened his mind with their enlivening
converse, now are miserable comforters. A sympathizing and mournful pity, is
all the relief, they are able to contribute; unless it be augmented by their
silent prayers for the divine succor, and a word of consolation suggested from
the scriptures. Texts of scripture, proper for such an occasion; containing
promises -- of support under affliction, Lam. iii.32. Heb. xii.6. 2 Cor. iv.17.
-- of pardon, Isai. liii 5. Isai. i.18. 1 John ii.1, 2. Acts x.43. -- of
justification, Romans v.9. Romans viii.33, 34. 2 Cor. v.21. -- of victory over
death, Psalm xxiii.4. Psalm lxxiii.26. 1 Cor. xv.56, 57. -- of a happy
resurrection, John vi.40. 2 Cor. v.1. Rev. vii.16, 17.
Those poor innocents, the children, crowd around the bed; drowned in tears,
and almost frantic with grief, they sob out their little souls, and
passionately cry; Will he leave us? Leave us, in a helpless condition! Leave
us, to an injurious world!

These separate streams are all united in the distressed spouse, and overwhelm
her breast with an impetuous tide of sorrows. In her, the lover weeps; the wife
mourns; and all the mother yearns. To her, the loss is beyond measure
aggravated, by months and years of delightful society, and exalted friendship.
-- Where, alas! can she meet with such unsuspected fidelity, or repose such
unreserved confidence? Where find so discreet a counselor; so improving an
example; and a guardian so sedulously attentive, to the interests of herself,
and her children? -- See! how she hangs over the languishing bed; most tenderly
solicitous to prolong a life, important and desirable far beyond her own. Or,
if that be impracticable, no less tenderly officious to sooth the last agonies
of her dearer self. -- Her hands, trembling under direful apprehensions, wipe
the cold dews from the livid cheeks; and sometimes stay the sinking head on her
gentle arms, and sometimes rest it on her compassionate bosom. -- See! how she
gazes, with a speechless ardour, on the pale countenance, and meagre features.
Speechless her tongue; but she looks unutterable things. While all her soft
passions throb with unavailing fondness, and her very soul bleeds with
exquisite anguish.

The Sufferer, all patient and adoring, submits to the divine will; and, by
submission, becomes superior to his affliction. He is sensibly touched with
the disconsolate state of his attendants; and pierced with an anxious concern,
for his wife and his children. His wife, who will soon be a destitute widow;
his children, who will soon be helpless orphans. Yet, though cast down, not in
despair. He is greatly refreshed by his trust in the everlasting covenant, and
his hope of approaching glory. Religion gives a dignity to distress. At each
interval of ease, he comforts his very comforters; and suffers with all the
majesty of woe.

The soul, just going to abandon the tottering clay, collects all her force,
and exerts her last efforts. The good man raises himself on his pillow; extends
a kind hand to his servants, which is bathed in tears; takes an affecting
farewell of his fri^^ds; clasps his wife in a feeble embrace; kisses the dear
pledges of their mutual love; and then pours all that remains of life and of
strength, in the following words; -- I die, my dear children; but GOD, the
everlasting GOD, will be with you. -- Though you lose an earthly parent; you
have a father in heaven, who lives for evermore. -- Nothing, nothing but an
unbelieving heart, and irreligious life, can ever separate you, from the
regards of his providence -- from the endearments of his love.

He could proceed no farther. His heart was full; but utterance failed. After a
short pause, with difficulty, great difficulty, he added; -- You, the dear
partner of my soul, you are now the only protector of our orphans. -- I leave
you under a weight of cares. -- But GOD, who defends the cause of the widow
-- GOD, whose promise is faithfulness and truth -- GOD has said, I will never
leave thee, nor forsake thee. Heb, xiii.5.
-- This revives my drooping spirits -- let this support the wife of my bosom
-- and now, O father of compassions, into thy hands I commend my spirit --
encouraged by thy promised goodness, I leave my fatherless --

Here, he fainted; fell back upon the bed; and lay, for some minutes, bereft of
his senses. As a taper, upon the very point of extinction, is sometimes
suddenly rekindled, and leaps into a quivering flame: So life, before it
totally expired, gave a parting struggle, and once more looked abroad from the
opening eyelids. -- He would fain have spoke; fain have uttered the sentence,
he began. More than once he assayed; but the organs of speech were become like
a broken vessel; and nothing but the obstructing phlegm, rattled in his throat.
His aspect, however spoke affection inexpressible. With all the father, all the
husband still living in his looks; he takes one more view of those dear
children, whom he had often beheld with a parental triumph. He turns his dying
eyes on that beloved woman, whom he never beheld but with a glow of delight.
Fixed in this posture, amidst smiles of love, and under a gleam of heaven, they
shine out their last.

Upon this, the silent sorrow bursts into loud laments. They weep, and refuse
to be comforted. Till some length of time, had given vent to the excess of
passion; and the consolations of religion; had staunched their bleeding woes.
Then, the afflicted family search for the sentence, which fell unfinished from
those loved, those venerable, and pious lips. They find it recorded by the
prophet Jeremiah, containing the direction of infinite wisdom, and the promise
of unbounded goodness; Leave thy fatherless children; I will preserve them
alive; and let thy widows trust in me. Jerem. xlix.11.
This, now, is the comfort of their life, and the joy of their heart. They
treasure it up in their memories. It is the best of legacies, and an
inexhaustible fund. A fund, which will supply all their wants, by entailing the
blessing of heaven, on all their honest labors. -- They are rich, they are
happy, in this sacred pledge of the divine favor. They fear no evil; they want
no good; because GOD is their portion, and their guardian GOD.

No sooner turned from one memento of my own, and memorial of another's
decease, but a second, a third, a long succession of these melancholy monitors,
crowd upon my sight. -- Plurima mortis imago.
VIRG.
-- That which has fixed my observation, is one of a more grave and fable
aspect than the former. I suppose, it preserves the relics of a more aged
person. One would conjecture, that he made somewhat of a figure* in his station
among the living; as his monument does, among the funeral marbles. Let me draw
near, and inquire of the stone; Who, or what, is beneath its surface? -- I am
informed, he was once the owner of a considerable estate; which was much
improved, by his own application and management: That, he left the world in the
busy period of life; advanced a little beyond the meridian.

Probably, replied my musing mind, one of those indefatigable drudges, who rise
early; late take rest; and eat the bread of carefulness; not to secure the
loving kindness of the LORD; not to make provision for any reasonable
necessity; but only to amass together ten thousand times more than they can
possibly use. -- Did he not lay schemes for enlarging his fortune, and
aggrandizing his family? Did he not purpose to join field to field, and add
house to house; till his possessions were almost as vast, as his desires? That,
then he would -- Hac mente laborem
Sese far, senes ut in otia tuta recedant,
A^unt, cum sibi sint congesta cibaria. --
HOR.
sit down, and enjoy what he had acquired; breathe a while from his toilsome
pursuit of things temporal, and, perhaps, think a little of things eternal.

But see the folly of worldly wisdom! How silly, how childish, is the sagacity
of (what is called) manly and masterly prudence; when it contrives more
solicitously for TIME, than it provides for ETERNITY! How strangely infatuated
are those subtle heads, which weary themselves, in concerting measures for
phantoms of a day; and scarce bestow a thought, on everlasting realities! --
When every wheel moves on smoothly: when all the well disposed designs are
ripening apace for execution; and the long expected crisis of enjoyment seems
to approach; behold! GOD from on high laughs at the Babel builder. Death
touches the bubble, and it breaks; it drops into nothing. The cobweb, most
finely spun indeed, but more easily dislodged, is swept away in an instant; and
all the abortive projects are buried, in the same grave with their projector.
So true is that verdict, which the wisdom from above passes, on these
successful unfortunates: They walk in a vain shadow, and disquiet themselves in
vain. Psalm xxxix.6.


Speak, ye that attended such a one in his last minutes; ye that heard his
expiring sentiments; did he not cry out, in the language of disappointed
sensuality? -- O death! how terrible is thy approach to a man immersed in
secular cares, and void of all concern for the never ending Hereafter! Where,
alas! is the profit, where the comfort, of entering deep into the knowledge,
and of being dexterous in the dispatch, of earthly affairs; since I have, all
the while, neglected the one thing needful! Destructive mistake! I have been
attentive to every inferior interest; I have laid myself out on the trifles of
a moment; but have disregarded heaven; have forgot eternal ages! O! that my
days -- here, he was going on to breathe some fruitless wishes; or to form, I
know not what, ineffectual resolutions. But a sudden convulsion shook his
nerves; disabled his tongue; and, in less than an hour, dissolved his frame.

May the children of this world be warned, by the dying words of an unhappy
brother; and gather advantage, from his misfortune. -- Why should they pant,
with such impatient ardour, after white and yellow earth; as if the universe
did not afford sufficient, for every one to take a little? Why should they lade
themselves with thick clay; when they are to run for an incorruptible crown,
and press toward the prize of their high calling? Why should they overload the
vessel* in which their everlasting ALL is embarked; or fill their arms with
superfluities, when they are to swim for their lives? -- Yet, so preposterous
is the conduct of those persons, who are all industry, to heap up an abundance
of the wealth which perishes; but are scarce so much as faintly desirous, of
being rich toward GOD.

O! that we may walk, through all these glittering toys, at least with a wise
indifference, if not with a superior disdain! Having enough for the
conveniences of life, let us only accommodate ourselves with things below, and
lay up our treasures in the regions above. -- Whereas, if we indulge an anxious
concern, or lavish an inordinate care, on any transitory possessions, we shall
rivet them to our affections with so firm an union, that the utmost severity of
pain must attend the separating stroke. By such an eager attachment, to what
will certainly be ravished from us; we shall only insure to ourselves
accumulated anguish, against the agonizing hour. We shall plant, aforehand, our
dying pillow with thorns. Lean not on earth; 'twill pierce thee to the heart.
A broken reed at best, but often a spear:
On its sharp point peace bleeds, and hope expires.
Night Thoughts, No. III.


Some, I perceive, arrived at threescore years and ten, before they made their
exit; nay, some few resigned not their breath till they had numbered fourscore
revolving harvests. These, I would hope, remembered their creator in the days
of their youth; before their strength became labor and sorrow: -- Before that
low ebb of languishing nature, when the keepers of the house tremble, and those
that look out of the windows are darkened; Eccles. xii.3, 5. I need not remind
my reader, that, by the former of these figurative expressions, is signified
the enervated state of the hands and arms; by the latter the dimness of the
eyes, or the total loss of sight; that, taken in connection with other parts of
the chapter, they exhibit, in a series of bold and lively metaphors, a
description of the various infirmities attendant on old age.
when even the lighting down of the grasshopper, is a burden on the bending
shoulders; and desire itself fails in the listless, lethargick soul. -- Before
those heavy hours come, and those tiresome moments draw nigh; in which, there
is too much reason to say, We have no pleasure in them; no improvement from
them.

If their lamps were unfurnished with oil; how unfit must they be in such
decrepit circumstances, to go to the market, and buy! Matt. xxv.9.
For besides a variety of disorders, arising from the enfeebled constitution;
their corruptions must be surprisingly strengthened, by such a long course of
irreligion. Evil habits must have struck the deepest root; must have twisted
themselves with every fiber of the heart; and be as thoroughly ingrained in the
disposition, as the soot in the Ethiopian's complexion, or the spots in the
leopard's skin. If such a one, under such disadvantages, surmounts all the
difficulties, which lie in his way to glory; it must be a great and mighty
salvation indeed. If such a one escapes destruction, and is saved at the last;
it must, without all peradventure, be -- so as by fire. 1 Cor. iii.15.


This is the season, which stands in need of comfort; and is very improper to
enter upon the conflict. The husbandman should now be putting in his sickle, or
eating the fruit of his labors; not beginning to break up the ground, or
scatter the seed. -- Nothing, it is true, is impossible with GOD; He said, Let
there be light, and there was light: Instantaneous light, diffused, as quick as
thought, through all the dismal dominion of primeval darkness. At his command,
a leprosy of the longest continuance, and of the utmost inveteracy, departs in
a moment. He can, in the greatness of his strength, quicken the wretch who has
lain dead in trespasses and sins, not four days only, but fourscore years. --
Yet trust not, O trust not, a point of such inexpressible importance, to so
dreadful an uncertainty. GOD may suspend his power; may withdraw his help; may
swear in his wrath, that such abusers of his longsuffering shall "never enter
into his rest."

Ye therefore, that are vigorous in health, and blooming in years, improve the
precious opportunity. Improve your golden hours, to the noblest of all
purposes; such as may render you meet for the inheritance of saints in light;
and ascertain your title to a state of immortal youth, to a crown of eternal
glory. May I be permitted to recommend, as a treasure of inestimable value, and
a treatise particularly apposite to my subject. DR. LUCAS's INQUIRY AFTER
HAPPINESS? That part especially, which displays the method, and enumerates the
advantages of improving life, or living much in a little time. Chap. III. p.
158. of the 6th Edit. -- An author, in whom the gentleman, the scholar, and the
christian, are most happily united. A performance; which, in point of solid
argument, unaffected piety, and a vein of thought amazingly fertile, has,
perhaps, no superior. -- Nor can I wish my reader a more refined pleasure, or
a more substantial happiness; than that of having the sentiments of this
entertaining and pathetick writer, wove into the very texture of his heart.
-- Stand not, all the prime of your day, idle; trifle no longer with the
offers of this immense felicity; but make haste, and delay not the time, to
keep GOD's commandments. While you are loitering in a gay insensibility, death
may be bending his bow, and marking you out for speedy victims. -- Not long
ago, I happened to spy a thoughtless Jay. The poor bird was idly busied in
dressing his pretty plumes; or hopping carelessly from spray to spray. A
sportsman coming by observes the feathered rover. Immediately he lift^ the
tube, and levels his blow. Swifter than whirlwind flies the leaden death; and
in a moment lays the silly creature, breathless on the ground. -- Such, such
may be the fate of the man, who has a fair occasion of obtaining grace today;
and wantonly postpones the improvement of it, till tomorrow. He may be cut off,
in the midst of his folly; and ruined forever, while he is dreaming of being
wise hereafter.

Some, no doubt, came to this their last retreat, full of piety, and full of
days; as a shock of corn, ripe with age, and laden with plenty, comes in, in
his season. Job v.26.
-- These were children of light, and wise in their generation. Wise with that
exalted wisdom, which comes from above; and with that enduring wisdom, which
lasts to eternity. -- Rich also they were, more honorably and permanently
rich, than all the votaries of Mammon. The wealth of the one has made itself
wings, and is irrecoverably gone. While the wretched acquirers are transmitted,
to that place of penury and pain, where, not so much as one drop of water is
allowed, to cool their scorched tongues. The stores of the other still abide
with them; will never depart from them; but make them glad for ever and ever,
in the city of their GOD. Their treasures, were such, as no created power could
take away; such as none but infinite beneficence can bestow; and, comfortable
to consider! such as I, and every indigent longing sinner, may obtain;
treasures of heavenly knowledge, and saving faith; treasures of atoning blood,
and imputed righteousness.

Here Some, I know, are offended at our burying corpses within the church; and
exclaim against it, as a very great impropriety and indecency. But this, I
imagine, proceeds from an excessive and mistaken delicacy. If proper care be
taken to secure from injury, the foundations of the building; and to prevent
the exhalation of any noxious effluvia, from the putrefying flesh; I cannot
discover any inconveniences, attending this practice.

The notion, that noisome carcasses (as they are called) are very unbecoming a
place consecrated to religious purposes, seems to be derived from the
antiquated Jewish canon. Whereby it was declared, that a dead body imparted
defilement to the person who touched it; and polluted the spot, where it was
lodged. On which account, the Jews were scrupulously careful, to have their
sepulchers built at a distance from their houses; and made it a point of
conscience, not to suffer burial places to subsist in the city. But as this was
a rite purely ceremonial; it seems to be entirely superseded by the gospel
dispensation.

I cannot forbear thinking, that, under the christian economy, there is a
propriety and usefulness in the custom. -- Usefulness, because it must render
our solemn assemblies more venerable and awful. For when we walk over the dust
of our friends, or kneel upon the ashes of our relations; this awakening
circumstance must strike a lively impression of our own mortality. And what
consideration can be more effectual, to make us serious and attentive in
hearing; earnest and importunate in praying?

As for the fitness of the usage, it seems perfectly suitable to the design of
those sacred edifices. They are set apart for GOD; not only to receive his
worshippers, but to preserve the furniture for holy ministrations, and what is,
in a peculiar manner, appropriated to the divine majesty. Are not the bodies of
the saints the Almighty's property? Were they not once the objects of his
tender love? Are they not still the subjects of his special care? Has he not
given commandment concerning the bones of his elect; and charged the ocean, and
enjoined the grave, to keep them until that day? When rocks bright with gems,
or mountains rich with mines, are ab^ndoned to the devouring flames; will not
these be rescued from the fiery ruin? Will not these be translated into
JEHOVAH's kingdom, and, conjointly with the soul, made "his jewels;" made "his
peculiar treasure;" made to shine as the brightness of the firmament, and as
the stars for ever and ever?

Is not CHRIST the LORD of our bodies? Are they not bought with a price?
bought, not with corruptible things, silver and gold, but with his divinely
precious blood. And, if the blessed JESUS obtained the redemption of our
bodies, at so infinitely dear a rate; can it enter into our hearts to conceive,
that he should dislike to have them reposed, under his own habitation? -- Once
more; are not the bodies of the faithful temples of the Holy Ghost? And is
there not upon this supposition, an apparent propriety, rather than the least
indecorum, in remitting these temples of flesh to the temples made with hands?
They are vessels of honor; instruments of righteousness; and, even when broken
by death, like the fragments of a golden bowl, are valuable; are worthy to be
laid up in the safest, most honorable repositories.

Upon the whole, since the LORD JESUS has purchased them, at the expense of his
blood; and the blessed spirit has honored them, with his indwelling presence:
since they are right dear in the sight of the adorable Trinity, and undoubted
heirs of a glorious immortality, why should it be thought a thing improper, to
admit them to a transient rest, in their heavenly father's house? Why may they
not lie down and sleep in the outer courts, since they are soon to be
introduced, into the inmost mansions of everlasting honor and joy?


lie their bodies in peaceable habitations, and quiet resting places. Here,
they have thrown off every burden, and are escaped from every snare. The head
aches no more; the eye forgets to weep; the flesh is no longer racked with
acute, nor wasted with lingering distempers. Here, they receive a final release
from pain, and an everlasting discharge from sorrow. Here, danger never
threatens them with her terrifying alarms; but tranquillity softens their
couch, and safety guards their repose. -- Rest then, ye precious relics,
within this hospitable gloom. Rest in gentle slumbers, till the last trumpet
shall give the welcome signal; and sound aloud, through all your silent
mansions, Arise; shine; for your light is come, and the glory of the Lord is
risen upon you. Isai. lx.1.


To these, how calm was the evening of life! In what a smiling serenity, did
their sun go down! when their flesh and their heart failed, how reviving was
the remembrance of an all sufficient redeemer; once dying for their sins, now
risen again for their justification! How cheering the well grounded hope of
pardon for their transgressions, and peace with GOD, through JESUS CHRIST our
LORD! How did this assuage the agonies, and sweeten the bitterness of death? --
Where now is wealth, with all her golden mountains? Where is honor, with her
proud trophies of renown? Where are all the vain pomps of a deluded world? Can
they inspire such comfort, can they administer any support, in this last
extremity? Can they compose the affrighted thoughts? or buoy up the departing
soul, amidst all the pangs of dissolution? -- The followers of the Lamb seem
pleased and triumphant, even at their last gasp. GOD's everlasting arms are
underneath Deuteronomy. xxxiii.1.27.
their fainting heads. His spirit whispers peace and consolation to their
consciences. In the strength of these heavenly succors, they quit the field,
not captives but conquerors; with "hopes full of immortality."

And now they are gone. -- The struggles of reluctant nature are over. The body
sleeps in death: The soul launches into the invisible state. -- But, who can
imagine the delightful surprise, when they find themselves surrounded by
guardian angels, instead of weeping friends? How securely do they wing their
way, and pass through unknown worlds, under the conduct of those celestial
guides! -- The vale of tears is quite lost. Farewell, forever, the realms of
woe, and range of malignant beings! They arrive on the frontiers of
inexpressible felicity. They "are come to the city of the living GOD:" while a
voice sweeter than music in her softest strains, sweet as the harmony of
hymning seraphim, congratulates their arrival, and bespeaks their admission:
Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors, that
the heirs of glory may enter in.

Here, then, let us leave the spirits and souls of the righteous; escaped from
an entangling wilderness, and received into a paradise of delights! Escaped
from the territories of disquietude, and settled in regions of unmolested
security! Here they sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the kingdom of
their father. Here, they mingle with an innumerable company of angels, and
rejoice around the throne of the Lamb; rejoice in the fruition of present
felicity, and in the assured expectation of an inconceivable addition to their
bliss; when GOD shall call the heavens from above, and the earth, that he may
judge his people. Seneca 's reflections upon the state of holy souls, delivered
from the burden of the flesh, are sparkling and fine; yet very indistinct and
empty, compared with the particulars mentioned above, and with many others that
might be collected from scripture. In hoc tam procelloso, and in omnes
Tempestates exposito navigantibus Mari, nullus portus, nisi Mortis est. Ne
itaque invideris Fratrituo; quiescit. Tandem liber, tandem tutus, tandem
aeternus est. Fruitur nunc aperto and libero Coelo; ex bumili and depresso, in
eum emicuet Locum, qui solutas Vinculis Anim is beat^ recipit Sinu; and nunc
omnia Rerum Natura Bona cum summa Voluptate percipit. SEN. ad Polyb.


Fools accounted their life madness, and their end to be without honor; but,
they are numbered among the children of GOD; and their lot, their distinguished
and eternal lot, is among the saints! Wisdom v.4, 5.
However, therefore, an undiscerning world may despise, and a profane world
vilify, the truly religious; be this the supreme, the invariable desire of my
heart? Let me live the life, and die the death of the righteous. Oh! let my
latter end, and future state, be like theirs!

What figure is that, which strikes my eye, from an eminent part of the wall?
It is not only placed in a more elevated situation, than the rest; but carries
a more splendid and sumptuous air, than ordinary. Swords and spears; murdering
engines, and instruments of slaughter, adorn the stone with a formidable
magnificence. -- It proves to be the monument of a noble warrior.

Is such respect, thought I, paid to the memory of this brave soldier, for
sacrificing his life to the public good? Then, what honors, what immortal
honors, are due to the great captain of our salvation? Who, though Lord of the
angelick legions! and supreme commander of all the heavenly hosts; willingly
offered himself a bleeding propitiation for sinners!

The one died, being a mortal; and only yielded up a life, which was long
before forfeited to divine justice; which must soon have been surrendered as a
debt to nature, if it had not fallen as a prey to war. -- But CHRIST took
flesh, and gave up the ghost, though he was the great I AM; the fountain of
existence; who calls happiness and immortality all his own. He, who thought it
no robbery to be equal with God; he, whose outgoings were from everlasting;
even he, was made in the likeness of man, and cut off out of the land of the
living. Wonder, O heavens! be astonished, O earth; HE died the death, of whom
it is witnessed, that he is the true GOD, and eternal life. 1 John v.20.


The one exposed himself to peril, in the service of his sovereign and his
country; which, though it was glorious to do, yet would have been ignominious,
in such circumstances, to have declined. -- But CHRIST took the field, though
he was the blessed and only potentate; the KING of Kings, and LORD of Lords,
CHRIST took the field, though he was sure to drop in the engagement; and put on
the harness, though he knew beforehand, that it must reek with his blood. That
prince of heaven resigned his royal person, not barely to the hazard, but to
the inevitable stroke; to death, certain in its approach, and armed with all
its horrors. -- And for whom? Not for those who were in any degree deserving,
but for his own disobedient creatures; for the pardon of condemned malefactors;
for a band of rebels, a race of traitors, the most obnoxious and inexcusable of
all criminals. Whom he might have left to perish in their iniquities, without
the least impeachment of his goodness, and to the display of his avenging
justice.

The one, it is probable, died expeditiously; was suddenly wounded, and soon
slain. A bullet, lodged in his heart; a sword, sheathed in his breast; or a
battle axe, cleaving the brain; might put a speedy end to his misery; dispatch
him "as in a moment." -- Whereas, the divine Redeemer expired in tedious and
protracted torments. His pangs were as lingering, as they we^ exquisite. Even
in the prelude to his last suffering, what a load of sorrows overwhelmed his
sacred humanity! Till the intolerable pressure wrung blood, instead of sweat,
from every pore; till the crimson flood stained all his raiment, and tinged the
very stones. -- But, when the last scene of the tragedy commenced; when the
executioner's hammer, had nailed him to the cross; O! how many dismal hours,
did that illustrious sufferer hang; a spectacle of woe to GOD, to angels, and
to men! His temples mangled with the thorny crown! his hands and feet cleft
with the rugged irons! his whole body covered with wounds and bruises! and his
soul, his very soul, pierced with pangs of unutterable distress!

So long he hung, that nature, through all her dominions, was thrown into
sympathizing commotions. The earth could no longer sustain such barbarous
indignities, without trembling; nor the sun behold them, without horror. Nay,
so long did he hang in this extremity of agony and torture, that the alarm
reached even the remote regions of the dead. -- Never, O my soul, never forget
the amazing truth. The Lamb of GOD was seized, was bound, was slaughtered with
the utmost inhumanity, and endured death, in all its bitterness, for thee. His
murderers, studiously cruel, so guided the fatal cup, that he tasted every drop
of its gall, before he drank it off to the very dregs.

Once again; the warrior died like a hero, and fell gallantly in the field of
battle. -- But, died not CHRIST as a fool dies? 2 Samuel iii.33. Of this
indignity our LORD complains; Are you come out as against a thief? Matt.
xxvi.55.
Not on the bed of honor, with scar^ of glory in his breast; but, like some
execrable miscreant, on a gibbet, with lashes of the vile scourge on his back.
Yes, the blessed JESUS bowed his expiring head on the accursed tree; suspended
between heaven and earth, as an outcast from both, and unworthy of either.

What suitable returns of inflamed and adoring devotion, can we make to the
holy one of GOD; thus dying, that we might live; dying in ignominy and anguish,
that we might live forever in the heights of joy, and sit forever on thrones of
glory. -- Alas! it is not in us, impotent, insensible mortals, to be duly
thankful. He only, who confers such inconceivably rich favors, can enkindle a
proper warmth of grateful affection. Then build thyself a monument, most
gracious IMMANUEL, build thyself an everlasting monument of gratitude in our
souls. Inscribe the memory of thy matchless beneficence, not with ink and pen,
but with that precious blood which gushed from thy wounded veins. Engrave it,
not with the hammer and chizel, but with that sharpened spear which pierced thy
sacred side. Let it stand conspicuous and indelible, not on outward tables of
stone, but on the very inmost tables of our hearts.

One thing more let me observe, before I bid adieu to this entombed warrior,
and his garnished sepulcher. How mean are those o^tentatious methods, of
bribing the vote of fame, and purchasing a little posthumous renown! What a
poor substitute for a set of memorable actions, is polished alabaster, or the
mimickry of sculptured marble! The real excellency of this Sir Bevil Granville,
slain in the civil wars, at an engagement with the rebels -- It may possibly be
some entertainment to the reader, If I subjoin Sir Bevil's character; as it is
drawn by that celebrated pen, which wrote the history of those calamitous
times. -- That which would have clouded any victory, says the noble historian,
and made the loss of others less spoken of, was the death of Sir Bevil
Granville. He was indeed an excellent person, whose activity, interest, and
reputation, were the foundation of what had been done in Cornwall: His temper
and affections so public, that no accident which happened, could make any
impression upon him: And his example kept others from taking any thing ill, or
at least seeming to do so. In a word, a brighter courage, and a gentler
disposition, were never married together, to make the most cheerful and
innocent conversation. CLAR. Hist. Reb. Vol.
bleeding patriot, is written on the minds of his countrymen* It would be
remembered with applause, so long as the nation subsists, without this
artificial expedient to perpetuate it. -- And such, such is the monument I
would wish for myself. Let me leave a memorial in the breasts of my fellow
creatures. Let surviving friends bear witness, that I have not lived to myself
alone, nor been altogether unserviceable in my generation. Oh! let an
uninterrupted series of beneficent offices be the inscription, and the best
interests of my acquaintance, the plat^ that exhibits it.

Let the poor, as they pass by my grave, point at the little spot and
thankfully acknowledge -- There lies the man whose unwearied kindness was the
constant relief of my various distresses; who tenderly visited my languishing
bed, and readily supplied my indigent circumstances. How often were his
counsels, a guide to my perplexed thoughts, and a cordial to my dejected
spirit! It Is owing to GOD's blessing, on his seasonable charities, and prudent
consolations, that I now live, and live in comfort. -- Let a person, once
ignorant and ungodly, lift up his eyes to heaven, and say within himself, as he
walks over my bones -- Here are the last remains of that sincere friend who
watched for my soul. I can never forget with what heedless gaiety, I was
posting on in the paths of perdition; and I tremble to think, into what
irretrievable ruin I might quickly have been plunged, had not his faithful
admonitions arrested me in the wild career. I was unacquainted with the gospel
of peace, and had no concern for its unsearchable treasures; but now,
enlightened by his instructive conversation, I see the all sufficiency of my
Savior; and, animated by his repeated exhortations, I count all things but
loss, that I may win CHRIST. Methinks his discourses, seasoned with religion,
and set home by the divine spirit, still tingle in my ears; are still warm on
my heart; and I trust, will be more and more operative, till we meet each other
in the house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

The only infallible way of immortalizing our characters, a way equally open to
the meanest and most exalted fortune, is, To make our calling and election
sure; to gain some sweet evidence that our names are written in heaven. Then,
however they may be disregarded or forgotten among men, they will not fail to
be had in everlasting remembrance, before the LORD. -- This is of all
distinctions, far the noblest. Ambition, be this thy object, and every page of
Scripture will sanctify thy passion; even grace itself will fan thy flame. --
As to earthly memorials, yet a little while, and they are all obliterated. The
tongue of those, whose happiness we have zealously promoted, must soon be
silent in the coffin. Characters cut with a pen of iron, and committed to the
solid rock, wilt ere long cease to be legible. -- Data sunt ipsis quoque Fata
Sepulchris.
JUV.
But as many as are enrolled in the Lamb's book of life, he himself declares,
shall never be blotted out from those annals of eternity. Rev. iii.5.
When a flight of years has mouldered the triumphal column into dust: When the
brazen statue perishes under the corroding hand of time, those honors still
continue, still are blooming and incorruptible in the world of glory.

Make the extended skies your tomb;
Let stars record your worth:
Yet know, vain mortals, all must die,
As nature's sickliest birth.
Would bounteous Heaven indulge my prayer,
I frame a nobler choice;
Nor, living, wish the pompous pile;
Nor, dead, regret the loss.
In thy fair book of life divine,
My GOD, inscribe my name:
There let it fill some humble place,
Beneath the slaughtered Lamb.
Thy saints, while ages roll away,
In endless ^ame survive;
Their glories, over the wrongs of time
Greatly triumphant, live.
Yonder entrance leads, I suppose, to the Vault. Let me turn aside and take one
view of the habitation, and its tenants. -- The sullen door grates upon its
hinges: Not used to receive many visitants, it admits me with reluctance and
murmurs. -- What means this sudden trepidation, while I descend the steps,
and a^ visiting the pale nations of the dead? -- Be composed, my spirits, there
is nothing to fear in these quiet chambers. Here, even the wicked cease from
troubling.

Good heavens! what a solemn scene! -- How dismal the gloom! Here is perpetual
darkness, and night even at noonday. -- How doleful the solitude! Not one trace
of cheerful society; but sorrow and terror seem to have made this their
dreaded abode. -- Hark! how the hollow dome resounds at every tread. The
echoes, that long have slept are awakened, and lament, and sigh, along the
walls.

A beam or two, finds its way through the grates, and reflects a feeble
glimmer, from the nails of the coffins. So many of those sad spectacles, half
concealed in shades, half seen dimly by the baleful twilight, add a deeper
horror to these gloomy mansions. -- I pore upon the inscriptions and am just
able to pick out, that these are the remains of the rich and renowned. No
vulgar dead are deposited here. The Most Illustrious, and Right Honorable have
claimed this for their last retreat. And, indeed, they retain somewhat of a
shadowy preeminence. They lie ranged in a mournful order, and in a sort of a
silent pomp under the arches of an ample sepulcher: While meaner corpses,
without much ceremony, go down to the stones of the pit.

My apprehensions recover from their surprise. I find here are no phantoms, but
such as fear raises. -- However, it still amazes me to observe the wonders of
this nether world. Those who received vast revenues and called whole lordships
their own, are here reduced to half a dozen feet of earth, or confined in a few
sheets of lead. Rooms of state, and sumptuous furniture are resigned, for no
other ornament than the shroud, for no other apartment than the darksome niche.
-- Where is the star, that blazed upon the breast; or coronet that glittered
round the temples? The only remains of departed dignity are, the weatherbeaten
hatchment and the tattered escutcheon. I see no splendid retinue, surrounding
this solitary dwelling. The lordly equipage hovers no longer about the lifeless
master. He has no other attendant than a dusty statue, which, while the
regardless world is as gay as ever, the sculptor's hand has taught to weep.

Those who gloried in high born ancestors, and noble pedigree, here drop their
lofty pretensions. They acknowledge kindred with creeping things, and quarter
arms with the meanest reptiles. They say to corruption, thou art my father; and
to the worm, thou art my mother and my sister. -- Or, should they still assume
the style of distinction, ah! how impotent were the claim! how apparent the
ostentation! Is it said by their monument? HERE LIES THE GREAT. How easily is
it replied by the spectator! -- False marble! where?
Nothing but poor and sordid dust lies here.
Mortifying truth! Sufficient, one would think, to wean the most sanguine
appetite, from this transitory state of things; from its sickly satisfactions,
its fading glories, its vanishing treasures.

For now, ye living vanities of life!
Ye ever tempting, ever cheating train!
Where are ye NOW? And what is your amount?
What is all the world to these poor breathless beings? -- What are their
pleasures? A bubble broke. -- What their honors? A dream that is forgotten. --
What the sum total of their enjoyments below? Once, perhaps, it appeared to
inexperienced and fond desire, something considerable. But, now death has
measured it with his line, and weighed it in his scale, what is the upshot?
Alas! it is shorter than a span, lighter than the dancing spark, and driven
away like the dissolving smoke.

Indulge, my soul, a serious pause. Recollect all the gay things, that were
wont to dazzle thy eyes and inveigle thy affections. Here examine those baits
of sense. Here form an estimate of their real value. Suppose thyself first
among the favorites of fortune, who revel in the lap of pleasure; who shine in
the robes of honor; and swim in tides of inexhausted riches. Yet, how soon
would the passing bell proclaim thy exit! And, when once that iron call has
summoned thee to thy future reckoning; where would all these gratifications be?
At that period, how will all the pageantry of the most affluent, splendid, or
luxurious circumstances, vanish into empty air! -- And is this a happiness so
passionately, to be coveted?

I Thank you, ye relics of sounding titles and magnificent names. Ye have
taught me more of the littleness of the world than all the volumes of my
library. Your nobility arrayed in a winding sheet; your grandeur mouldering in
an urn; are the most indisputable proofs of the nothingness of created things.
Never, surely, did Providence write this important point in such legible
characters, as in the ashes of my Lord, or on the corpse of his Grace. -- Mors
sola fatetur
Quantula sint Hominum Corpuscula. --
JUV.
-- Let others, if they please, pay their obsequious court to your wealthy
sons, and ignobly fawn, or anxiously sue for preferments. My thoughts shall
often resort, in pensive contemplation, to the sepulchers of their sires, and
learn from their sleeping dust -- to moderate my expectations from mortals --
to stand disengaged from every undue attachment to the little interests of time
-- to get above the delusive, amusements of honor; the gaudy tinsels of
wealth; and all the empty shadows of a perishing world.

Hark! what sound is that! -- In such a situation, every noise alarms. --
Solemn and slow, it breaks again upon the silent air. -- It Is the striking of
the clock, designed, one would imagine, to ratify all my serious meditations.
Methinks it says Amen, and sets a seal to every improving hint. It tells me
that another portion of my appointed time is elapsed. One calls it, "the knell
of my departed hours." It Is the watchword to vigilance and activity. It cries
in the ear of reason, Redeem the time. Catch the favorable gales of
opportunity: O! catch them, while they breathe; before they are irrecoverably
lost. The span of life shortens continually. Thy minutes are all upon the wing,
and hastening to be gone. Thou art a borderer upon eternity, and making
incessant advances to the state thou art contemplating. May the admonition sink
deep into an attentive and obedient mind! May it teach me that heavenly
arithmetic, of numbering my days, and applying my heart unto wisdom!

I have often walked beneath the impending prom^ntory's craggy cliff; I have
sometimes trod the vast spaces of the lonely desert, and penetrated the inmost
recesses of the dreary cavern; but never, never beheld nature louring with so
tremendous a form; never felt such impressions of awe, striking cold on my
heart, as under these black browed arches, amidst these moldy walls, and
surrounded by such rueful objects. Where melancholy, deepest melancholy,
forever spreads her raven wings. -- Let me now emerge from the damp and
dreadful obscurity. -- Farewell, ye seats of desolation, and shades of death!
Gladly I revisit the realms of day.

Having cast a superficial view, upon these receptacles of the dead; curiosity
prompts my inquiry to a more intimate survey. Could we draw back the covering
of the tomb; could we discern what those are now, who once were mortals -- O!
how would it surprise, and grieve us; surprise us, to behold the prodigious
transformation, which has taken place on every individual; grieve us, to
observe the dishonor done to our nature in general, within these subterraneous
lodgments!

Here, the sweet and winning aspect, that wore perpetually an attractive smile,
grins horridly a naked, ghastly skull. The eye, that outshone the diamond's
brilliancy, and glanced its lovely lightning into the most guarded heart: Alas!
where is it? Where shall we find the rolling sparkler? How are all its
sprightly beams eclipsed! totally eclipsed! The tongue, that once commanded all
the power of eloquence, in this strange land has "forgot its cunning." Where
are now those strains of harmony which ravished our ears? Where is that flow of
persuasion which carried captive our judgments. The great master of language
and of song, is become silent as the night that surrounds him. The pampered
flesh, so lately clothed in purple and fine linen, how is it covered rudely
with clods of clay! There was a time when the timorously nice creature would
scarce Deuteronomy. xxviii.56.
adventure to set a foot upon the ground, for delicateness and tenderness; but
is now enwrapped in clammy earth, and sleeps on no softer a pillow than the
ragged gravel stones. Here the strong men bow themselves. The nervous arm is
unstrung; the brawny sinews are relaxed; the limbs, not long ago the seats of
vigor and activity, lie down motionless; and the bones, which were as bars of
iron, are crumbled into dust.

Here the man of business forgets all his favorite schemes, and discontinues
the pursuit of gain. Here is a total stand to the circulation of merchandise,
and the hurry of trade. In these solitary recesses, as in the building of
Solomon's temple, is heard no sound of the hammer and axe. The winding sheet
and the coffin, are the utmost bound of all earthly devices. Hitherto may they
go, but no farther. -- Here the sons of Pleasure take a final farewell of their
dear delights. No more is the sensualist; anointed with oil, or crowned with
rose buds. He chants no more to the melody of the viol, nor revels any longer
at the banquet of wine. Instead of sumptuous tables, and delicious treats, the
poor voluptuary is himself a feast for fattened insects; the reptile riots in
his flesh; the worm feeds sweetly on him. Job xxiv.20.
-- Here also, beauty fails; bright Beauty drops her luster here. O! how her
roses fade, and her lilies languish, in this bleak soil! How does the grand
leveller pour contempt upon the charmer of our hearts! How turn to deformity
what captivated the world before!

Could the lover have a sight of his once enchanting fair one, what a startling
astonishment would seize him! -- Is this the object I not long ago so
passionately admired! I said she was divinely fair, and thought her somewhat
more than mortal. Her form was symmetry itself; every elegance breathed in her
air; and all the graces waited on her motions. -- 'Twas music when she spoke!
but, when she spoke encouragement, 'twas little less than rapture. How my heart
danced to those charming accents! -- And can that, which, some weeks ago, was
to admiration lovely, be now so insufferably loathsome? -- Where are those
blushing cheeks? Where the coral lips? Where that ivory neck, on which the
curling jet in such glossy ringlets, flowed? With a thousand other beauties of
person, and ten thousand delicacies of action? Quo fugit Venus? Heu! Quove
Color? decens
Quo Motus? Quid habet illius, illius,
Quae spiribat Amores,
Quae me supuerat mihi?
HOR.
-- Amazing alteration! Delusory bliss! -- Fondly I gazed upon the glittering
meteor. It shone brightly, and I mistook it for a star; for a permanent and
substantial good. But how is it fallen! fallen from an orb, not its own! And
all that I can trace on earth is but a putrid mass.

Lie, poor Florella! lie deep, as thou do, in obscure darkness. Let night,
with her impenetrable shades, always conceal thee. May no prying eye be witness
to thy disgrace; but let thy surviving sisters think upon thy state, when they
contemplate the idol in the glass. -- When the pleasing image rises gracefully
to view, surrounded with a world of charms, and flushed with joy at the
consciousness of them all -- Then, in those minutes of temptation and danger,
when vanity uses to steal into the thoughts -- Then let them remember, what a
veil of horror is drawn over a face which was once beautiful and brilliant as
theirs. Such a seasonable reflection might regulate the labors of the toilet,
and create a more earnest solicitude to polish the jewel than to varnish the
casket. It might then become their highest ambition to have their mind decked
with divine virtues, and dressed after the amiable pattern of their Redeemer's
holiness.

And would this prejudice their persons, or depreciate their charms? -- Quite
the reverse. It would spread a sort of heavenly glory over the finest set of
features, and heighten the loveliness of every other engaging accomplishment.
-- What is yet a more inviting consideration, these flowers would not wither
with nature, nor be tarnished by time; but would open continually into richer
beauties, and flourish even in the winter of age. -- But, the most incomparable
recommendation of these noble qualities, is, That, from their hallowed relics,
as from the fragrant ashes of the Phoenix, will ere long arise an illustrious
^orm, bright as the wings of angels, lasting as the light of the new Jerusalem.

For my part, the remembrance of this sad revolution shall make me ashamed to
pay my devotion to a shrine of perishing flesh; and afraid to expect all my
happiness from so brittle a joy. It shall teach me not to think too highly of
well proportioned clay, though formed in the most elegant mould, and animated
with the sweetest soul. It Is heaven's last, best, and crowning gift; -- to be
received with gratitude, and cherished with love, as a most valuable blessing,
not worshipped with the incense of flattery, and strains of fulsome adoration,
as a goddess. -- It will cure, I trust, the dotage of my eyes, and incline me
always to prefer the substantial "ornaments of a meek and virtuous spirit,"
before the transient decorations of white and red on the skin.

Here I called in my roving medi^tions from their long excursion on this tender
subject. Fancy listened a while to the soliloquy of a lover. Now judgment
resumes the reins and guides my thoughts to more near and self interesting
inquiries. -- However, upon a review of the whole scene, crowded with
spectacles of mortality, and trophies of death, I could not forbear smiting my
breast, and fetching a sigh, and lamenting over the noblest of all visible
beings, laid prostrate under the feet of "the pale horse, and his rider." Rev.
vi.8.
I could not forbear repeating that pathetick exclamation -- " Oh! thou 2 Esdr.
vii.41.
Adam, what have thou done!" What desolation has thy disobedience wrought in
the earth! -- See the malignity, the ruinous malignity of sin! Sin has
demolished so many stately structures of flesh: Sin has made such havoc among
the most excellent ranks of GOD's lower creation: And sin (that deadly bane of
our nature) would have plunged our better part into the execrable horrors of
the nethermost hell, had not our merciful Mediator interposed, and given
himself for our ransom. Therefore what grateful acknowledgments does the whole
world of penitent sinners owe; what ardent returns of love will a whole heaven
of glorified believers pay, to such a friend, benefactor, and deliverer!

Musing upon these melancholy objects, a faithful remembrancer suggests from
within -- Must this sad change succeed in me also? Am I to draw my last gasp;
to become a breathless corpse; and be, what I deplore? I pass with melancholy
state,
By all these solemn heaps of fate;
And think, as soft and sad I tread
Above the venerable dead,
"Time was, like me, they life possessed;
"And time will be, when I shall rest."
PA^NEL.
Is there a time approaching, when this body shall be carried out upon the
bier, and consigned to its clay cold bed? While some kind acquaintance,
perhaps, may drop one parting tear, and cry, alas! my brother! -- Is the time
approaching? Nothing is more certain. A decree much surer than the laws of the
Medes and Persians, has irrevocably determined the doom.

Should one of these ghastly figures burst from his confinement, and start up,
in frightful deformity, before me -- should the haggard skeleton lift a
clattering hand, and point it full in my view -- should it open the stiffened
jaws, and, with a hoarse tremendous murmur, break this profound silence --
should it accost me, as Samuel's apparition addressed the trembling king -- The
LORD shall deliver thee also into the hands of Death, yet a little while, and
thou shall be with me. 1 Samuel xxviii.19. On this place, the Dutch translator of
the meditations has added a note, to correct, very probably, what he supposes a
mistake. On the same supposition, I presume, the compilers of our rubric
ordered the last verse of Eclus xlvi. to be omitted, in the daily service of
the church. But that the sentiment, hinted above is strictly true; that it was
(...) Samuel himself (not an inferna^ spirit, personating the prophet) who
appeared to the female necromancer at Endor; appeared, not in compliance with
any diabolical incantations, but in pursuance of the divine commission; this, I
think, is fully proved in the historical account of the life of David, Vol. I.
Chap. 23.
-- The solemn warning, delivered in so striking a manner, must strongly
impress my imagination. A message in thunder would scarce sink deeper. Yet,
there is abundantly greater reason to be alarmed, by that express declaration
of the LORD GOD Almighty, " Thou shall surely die." -- Well then, since
sentence is passed, since I am a condemned man; and know not when the dead
warrant may arrive, let me die to sin, and die to the world, before I die
beneath the stroke of a righteous GOD. Let me employ the little uncertain
interval of respite from execution, in preparing for a happier state, and a
better life. That when the fatal moment comes, and I am commanded to shut my
eyes upon all things here below, I may open them again, to see my Savior in
the mansions above.

Since this body, which is so fearfully and wonderfully made, must fall to
pieces in the grave; since I must soon resign all my bodily powers to darkness,
inactivity, and corruption, let it be my constant care to use them well, while
I possess them! -- Let my hands be stretched forth to relieve the needy; and
always be more ready to give than to receive. -- Let my knees bend in deepest
humiliation, before the throne of grace; while my eyes are cast down to the
earth in penitential confusion, or devoutly looking up to heaven for pardoning
mercy! -- In every friendly interview, let the law of kindness dwell on my
lips; or rather, if the seriousness of my acquaintance permits, let the Gospel
of peace flow from my tongue. O! that I might be enabled, in every public
concourse, to lift up my voice like a trumpet, and pour abroad a more joyful
sound than its most melodious accents, in proclaiming the glad tidings of free
salvation! -- But shut my ears, resolutely shut, against the malevolent
whispers of slander, and the contagious breath of filthy talking. But be swift
to hear the instructions of wisdom; be all attention when your Redeemer speaks;
imbibe the precious truths, and convey them carefully to the heart. -- Carry
me, my feet, to the temple of the LORD, to the beds of the sick, and houses of
the poor. May all my members, devoted entirely to my divine Master, be the
willing instruments of promoting his glory!

Then, ye embalmers, you may spare your pains. These works of faith and labors
of love; these shall be my spices and perfumes. Enwrapped in these, I would lay
me gently down, and sleep sweetly in the blessed JESUS, hoping that GOD will
give commandment concerning my bones, and one day fetch them up from the dust,
as silver from the furnace, purified, I say not seven times, but seventy times
seven.

Here my contemplation took wing, and in an instant alighted in the garden
adjoining to mount Calvary. Having viewed the abode of my deceased fellow
creatures, methought I longed to see the place where our LORD lay. -- And O!
what a mavelous spectacle was once exhibited in this memorable sepulcher! He
who clothes himself with light as with a garment; and walks upon the wings of
the wind; The Scriptures, speaking of the supreme Being, say -- He walks upon
the waves of the sea; to denote his uncontrollable power, Job ix.8. -- He
walks in the circuit of heaven; to express the immensity of his presence, Job
xxii.14. -- He walks upon the wings of the wind; to signify the amazing
swiftness of his operation, Psalm. civ.3. -- In which last phrase there is, I
think, an elegance and emphasis, not taken notice of by our commentators, yet
unequalled in any writer. -- Not, He flies; He runs, but, He walks; and
that, on the very wings of the wind; on the most impetuous of elements roused
into its utmost rage, and sweeping along with inconceivable rapidity. -- A
tumult in nature, not to be described, is the composed and sedate work of the
DEITY. A speed, not to be measured, is (with reverence I use the expression,
and to comport with our low methods of conception) the solemn and majestic
foot pace of JEHOVAH. -- How flat are the following lines, even in the great
master of lyrick song, Ocyor Cervis, and agente Nimbos
Ocyor Euro,
when compared with this inimitable stroke of divine poetry! -- He walks upon
the wings of the wind.
HE was pleased to wear the habiliments of mortality, and dwelt among the
prostrate dead. -- Who can repeat the wondrous truth too often? Who can dwell
upon the transporting theme too long? He who sits enthroned in glory, and
diffuses bliss among all the heavenly hosts; HE was once a pale and bloody
corpse, and pressed this little spot.

O Death! how great was thy triumph in that hour! Never did thy gloomy realms
contain such a prisoner before. -- Prisoner, did I say? No: He was more than a
conqueror. He arose, far more mightily than Samson, from a transient slumber;
broke down the gates, and demolished the strong holds of those dark dominions.
-- And this, O mortals, this is your only consolation and security. JESUS has
trod the dreadful path and smoothed it for your passage, -- JESUS, sleeping in
the chambers of the tomb, has brightened the dismal mansion, and left an
inviting odor in those beds of dust. The dying JESUS! (Never let the
comfortable truth depart from your minds! The dying JESUS) is your sure
protection, your unquestionable passport, through the territories of the grave.
Believe in him, and they shall prove a highway to Sion; shall transmit you safe
to paradise. Believe in him, and you shall be no losers, but unspeakable
gainers, by your dissolution. For, hear what the oracle of heaven says, upon
this important point: Whosoever believes in me, shall never die. John xi.26.
-- What sublime and emphatical language is this! Thus much, at least, it must
import -- The nature of that last change, shall be surprisingly altered, for
the better. It shall no longer be inflicted as a punishment; but rather be
vouchsafed as a blessing. To such persons, it shall come attended with such a
train of benefits, as will render it a kind of happy impropriety, to call it
dying. Dying! No; it is then they truly begin to live. Their exit is the end of
their frailty, and their entrance upon perfection. Their last groan, is the
prelude to life and immortality.

O ye timorous souls, that are terrified at the sound of the passing bell; that
turn pale at the sight of an opened grave; and can scarce behold a coffin or a
skull without a shuddering horror: Ye that are in bondage to the grisly
tyrant, and tremble at the shaking of his iron rod; cry mightily to the father
of your spirits, for faith in his dear Son. Faith will free you from your
slavery. Death's terror is the mountain faith removes:
It Is faith disarms destruction. --
Believe, and look with triumph on the tomb.
These, and some other quotations, I am proud to borrow from the Night
Thoughts, especially from Night the Fourth. In which, energy of language,
sublimity of sentiment, and the most exquisite beauties of poetry, are the
least perfections to be admired. Almost every line glows with devotion; rises
into the most exalted apprehensions of the adorable Redeemer; and is animated
with the most lively faith in his all sufficient mediation. The author of this
excellent performance has the peculiar felicity, of ennobling all the strength
of style, and every delicacy of imagination, with the grand and momentous
truths of christianity. These thoughts give the highest entertainment to the
fancy; and impart the noblest improvement to the mind. They not only refine our
taste, but prepare us for death, and ripen us for glory. I never take up this
admirable piece, but I am ready to cry out -- Tecum vivere amem, ^ecum obeam
libens; i. e* Inspire me with such a spirit, and life shall be delightful, nor
death itself unwelcome.


Faith will embolden you to tread on (this fiercest of) serpents. Luke x.19.
-- Old Simeon, clasping the child JESUS in the arms of his flesh, and the
glorious mediator in the arms of his faith, departs with tranquillity and
peace. That bitter persecutor Saul, having won CHRIST; being found in CHRIST;
longs to be dismissed from cumbrous clay, and kindles into rapture at the
prospect of dissolution. Phil. i.23. 2 Timothy iv.7, 8.
Methinks, I see another of IMMANUEL's followers, trusting in his Savior;
leaning on his beloved; go down to the silent shades, with composure and
alacrity. 2 Pet. i.14.
-- In this powerful name, an innumerable company of sinful creatures have set
up their banners; and overcome through the blood of the Lamb. Authorized by the
captain of thy salvation, thou also may set thy feet, upon the neck of this
king of terrors. Furnished with this antidote, thou also may play around
the hole of the asp, and put thy undaunted hand on this cockatrice den. Isai.
xi.8.
Thou may Acts xxviii.55.
feel the viper fastening to thy mortal part, and fear no evil: Thou shall one
day shake it off by a joyful resurrection, and suffer no harm.

Resurrection! That cheering word eases my mind of an anxious thought, and
solves a most momentous question. I was going to ask; Wherefore do all these
corpses lie here in this abject condition? Is this their final state? Has death
conquered! and will the tyrant hold captivity captive? How long will thou
forget them, O LORD? Forever? -- No, says the voice from heaven, the word of
divine revelation; the righteous are all " prisoners of hope." Zech. ix.12.
There is an hour (an awful secret that, and known only to all foreseeing
wisdom) an appointed hour there is, when an act of grace will pass the great
seal above, and give them an universal discharge; a general delivery from the
abodes of corruption. -- Then shall the Lord JESUS descend from heaven, with
the shout of the archangel, and the trump of GOD. Destruction itself shall hear
his call, and the obedient grave give up her dead. In a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, they shake off the sleep of ten thousand years; and spring
forth, like the bounding roe, to "meet their LORD in the air."

And, O! with what cordial congratulations, what transporting endearments, do
the soul and body, those affectionate companions reunite! But, with how much
greater demonstrations of kindness, are they both received, by their
compassionate Redeemer! The ancient of days, who comes in the clouds of heaven,
is their friend, their father, their bridegroom. He comes with irresistible
power and infinite glory; but they have nothing to fear from his majestic
appearance. Those tremendous solemnities, which spread desolation and
astonishment through the universe, serve only to inflame their love, and
heighten their hopes. The judge, the awful judge, amidst all his magnificence
and splendor, vouchsafes to confess their names; vouchsafes to commemorate
their fidelity, before all the inhabitants of the skies, and the whole
assembled world.

Hark! the thunders are hushed. See! the lightnings cease their rage. The
angelick armies stand in silent suspense. The whole race of Adam, is wrapped up
in pleasing, or anxious expectation. -- And now, that adorable person, whose
favor is better than life; whose acceptance is a crown of glory; lifts up the
light of his countenance upon the righteous. He speaks, and what ravishing
words proceed from his gracious lips! What ecstasies of delight they enkindle
in the breasts of the faithful! -- I accept you, O my people! Ye are they, that
believed in my name. Ye are they, that renounced yourselves, and are complete
in me. I see no spot or blemish in you; for ye are washed in my blood, and
clothed with my righteousness. Renewed by my spirit, ye have glorified me on
earth, and have been faithful unto death. Come then, ye servants of holiness,
enter into the joy of your LORD. Come, ye children of light; ye blessed of my
father; receive the kingdom, that shall never be removed; wear the crown, which
fades not away, and enjoy pleasures for evermore!

Then, it will be one of the smallest privileges of the righteous, that they
shall languish no more; that sickness will never again show her pale
countenance, in their dwellings. Isaiah, speaking of the new Jerusalem,
mentions this, as one of its immunities: The inhabitant thereof shall no more
say, I am sick. Another clause, in its royal charter runs thus; GOD shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain. Isai. xxxiii.24. Rev.
xxi.4.
Death itself will be swallowed up in victory. That fatal javelin, which has
drank the blood of monarchs, and finds its way to the hearts of all the sons of
Adam, shall be utterly broken. That enormous scythe, which has struck empires
from their root, and swept ages and generations into oblivion; shall lie by in
perpetual uselessness. Sin also, which filled thy quiver, thou insatiate
archer! -- Sin, which strung thy arm with resistless vigor -- which pointed
all thy shafts with inevitable destruction -- Sin, will then be done away.
Whatever is frail or depraved, will be thrown off with our grave clothes. All
to come is perfect holiness, and consummate happiness; the term of whose
continuance is eternity.

O Eternity! Eternity! How are our boldest, our strongest thoughts, lost and
overwhelmed in thee! Who can set landmarks, to limit thy dimensions, or find
plummets, to fathom thy depths? Arithmeticians have figures, to compute all the
progressions of time. Astronomers have instruments to calculate the distances
of the planets. But what numbers can state, what lines can gauge, the lengths
and breadths of eternity? It is higher than heaven; what can thou do? deeper
than hell; what cast thou know? The measure thereof is longer than the earth,
broader than the sea. Job xi.8, 9.


Mysterious, mighty existence! A sum, not to be lessened by the largest
deductions! An extent, not to be contracted by all possible diminutions! None
can truly say after the most prodigious waste of ages; So much of eternity is
gone. For, when millions of centuries are elapsed, it is but just commencing;
and, when millions more have run their ample round, it will be no nearer
ending. Yea, when ages, numerous as the bloom of spring; increased by the
herbage of summer; both augmented by the leaves of autumn; and all multiplied
by the drops of rain which drown the winter -- when these, and ten thousand
times ten thousand more -- more than can be represented by any similitude, or
imagined by any conception -- when all these are revolved and finished;
eternity, vast, boundless, amazing eternity, will only be beginning!

What a pleasing, yet awful thought is this! Full of delight, and full of
dread. O! may it alarm our fears, quicken our hopes, and animate all our
endeavors! Since we are soon to launch into this endless and inconceivable
state; let us give all diligence, to secure our entrance into bliss. -- Now,
let us give all diligence, because there is no alteration in the scenes of
futurity. The wheel never turns: All is steadfast and immovable beyond the
grave. Whether we are then seated on the throne, or stretched on the rack; a
seal will be set to our condition, by the hand of everlasting mercy, or
inflexible justice. -- The saints always rejoice amidst the smiles of heaven;
their harps are perpetually tuned; their triumphs admit of no interruption. --
The ruin of the wicked is irremediable. The fatal sentence, once passed, is
never to be repealed. No hope of exchanging their doleful habitations. But all
things bear the same dismal aspect forever and ever.

The wicked -- My mind recoils, -- Animus meminisse borret, luctuque refugit.
VIRG.
at the apprehension of their misery. It has studiously waved the fearful
subject, and seems unwilling to pursue it, even now. -- But it is better to
reflect upon it for a few minutes, than to endure it to eternal ages. Perhaps,
the consideration of their aggravated misery, may be profitably terrible; may
teach me more highly to prize the Savior, who "delivers from going down into
the bottomless pit;" may drive me like the avenger's sword, to this only city
of refuge, for obnoxious sinners.

The wicked seem to lie here like malefactors, in a deep and strong dungeon,
reserved against the day of trial. -- " Their departure was without peace."
Clouds of horror sat louring upon their closing eyelids; most sadly foreboding
the "blackness of darkness forever." When the last sickness seized their frame,
and the inevitable change advanced; when they saw the fatal arrow, fitting to
the strings; saw the deadly archer, aiming at their hearts; and felt the
envenomed shaft, fastened in their vitals -- Good GOD! what fearfulness came
upon them! What horrible dread overwhelmed them! How did they stand shuddering
and aghast, upon the tremendous precipice! Excessively afraid to plunge into
the abyss of eternity, yet utterly unable to maintain their standing on the
verge of life.

O! what pale reviews, what startling prospects, conspire to augment their
sorrows! -- They look backward, and behold a most melancholy scene! Sins
unrepented of; mercy slighted; and the day of grace ending! -- They look
forward, and nothing presents itself, but the righteous judge; the dreadful
tribunal; and a most solemn reckoning. -- They roll around their affrighted
eyes, on attending friends. If accomplices in debauchery; it sharpens their
anguish, to consider this farther aggravation of their guilt; that they have
not sinned alone, but drawn others into the snare. If religious acquaintance;
it strikes a fresh gash into their hearts, to think of never seeing them any
more, but only at an unapproachable distance, separated by the unpassable gulf.

At last, perhaps, they begin to pray. Finding no other possible way of relief,
they are constrained to apply unto the Almighty. With trembling lips, and a
faltering tongue, they cry unto that sovereign Being, "who kills and makes
alive." -- But why have they deferred, so long deferred their addresses to GOD?
Why have they despised all his counsels; and stood incorrigible under his
incessant reproofs? How often have they been forewarned of these terrors; and
most importunately entreated, to seek the LORD, while he might be found? -- I
wish, they may obtain mercy at the eleventh, at the last hour. I wish they may
be snatched from the jaws, the opened, the gaping, the almost closing jaws of
damnation But, alas! Who can tell, whether affronted majesty, will lend an ear
to their complaint? Whether the holy One will work a miracle of grace, in
behalf of such transgressors? He may, for aught any mortal knows, laugh at
their calamity, and mock when their fear comes.

Thus they lie, groaning out the poor remains of life; their limbs bathed in
sweat; their heart struggling with convulsive throes; pains unsupportable
throbbing in every pulse; and innumerable darts of agony transfixing their
consicience.

In that dread moment, how the frantic soul
Raves round the walls of her clay tenement;
Runs to each avenue! and shrieks for help.
But shrieks in vain! How wishfully she looks
On all she is leaving, now no longer here is!
A tittle longer, yet a little longer,
0! might she stay, to wash away her crimes,
And sit her for her passage! Mournful sight!
Her very eyes weep blood; and every groan
She heaves, is big with horror: But the foe,
Like a staunch murderer, steady to his purpose,
Pursues her close through every lane of life,
Nor misses once the track; but presses on;
Till, forced at last to the tremendous verge,
At once she sinks. See a valuable Poem, entitled The Grave.
--
If this be the end of the ungodly, My soul, come not thou into their secret!
Unto their assembly, mine honor, be not thou united! -- How awfully
accomplished is that prediction of inspired wisdom! Sin, though seemingly sweet
in the commission; yet at the last, it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like
an adder. -- Fly, therefore from the tents, O! fly from the ways of such
wretched men.

Happy dissolution! were this the period of their woes. But, alas! all these
tribulations, are only the beginning of sorrows; a small drop only from that
Cup of trembling, which is mingled for their future portion. -- No sooner has
the last pang dislodged their reluctant souls, but they are hurried into the
presence of an injured angry GOD. Not under the conducting care of beneficent
angels, but exposed to the insults of accursed spirits; who lately tempted
them, now upbraid them, and will forever torment them. -- Who can imagine their
confusion and distress, when they stand guilty and inexcusable before their
incensed Creator? They are received with frowns. The GOD that made them, has no
"mercy on them. Isa. xxvii.11.
" The prince of peace rejects them with abhorrence. He consigns them over to
chains of darkness, and receptacles of despair; against the severer doom, and
more public infamy of the great day. -- Then, all the vials of wrath, will be
emptied upon these wretched creatures. The law they have violated, and the
gospel they have slighted; the power they have defied, and the goodness they
have abused; will all get themselves honor in their exemplary destruction.
Then GOD, the GOD to whom vengeance belongs, will draw the arrow to the very
head, and set them as the mark of his inexorable displeasure.

Resurection will be no privilege to them; but immortality itself, their
everlasting curse. -- Would they not bless the grave, that land where all
things are forgotten; and wish to lie eternally hid, in its deepest gloom? But
the dust refuses to conceal their persons; or to draw a veil over their
practices. They also must awake; must arise; must appear at the bar; and meet
the judge. A judge, before whom the pillars of heaven tremble, and the earth
melts away. A Judge, once long suffering and very compassionate; but now
unalterably determined, to teach stubborn offenders -- What it is to provoke
the omnipotent Godhead; what it is to trample upon the blood of his son: And
offer despite to all the gracious overtures of his spirit.

O! the perplexity! the distraction! that must seize the impenitent rebels,
when they are summoned to the great tribunal! -- What will they do, in this day
of severe visitation? This day of final decision? -- Where? How? Whence, can
they find help? -- To which of the saints will they turn? Whither betake
themselves for shelter or for succor? -- Alas! it is all in vain, it is all too
late. -- Friends and acquaintance know them no more. Men and angels abandon
them to their approaching doom. Even the Mediator, the MEDIATOR himself,
deserts them in this dreadful hour. -- To fly will be impracticable; to justify
themselves, still more impossible; and now, to make any supplications, utterly
unavailable.

Behold! the books are opened. The secrets of all hearts are disclosed. The
hidden things of darkness are brought to light. How empty, how ineffectual now,
are all those refined artifices; with which hypocrites imposed upon their
fellow creatures, and preserved a character in the sight of men! -- The jealous
GOD, who has been about their path, and about their bed, and espied out all
their ways, sets before them the things that they have done. They cannot answer
him one in a thousand, nor stand in the awful judgment. The heavens reveal
their iniquities, and the earth rises up against them. Job xx.27.
They are speechless with guilt, and stigmatized with infamy, before all the
armies of the sky, and all the nations of the redeemed. -- What a favor would
they esteem it; to hide their ashamed heads, in the bottom of the ocean; or
even to be buried beneath the ruins of the tottering world!

If the contempt, poured upon them, be thus unsupportable; how will their
hearts endure, when the sword of infinite indignation is unsheathed; and
fiercely waved, around their defenseless heads; or pointed directly at their
naked breasts? How must the wretches scream with wild amazement, and rend the
very heavens with their cries, when the right aiming thunderbolts go abroad! Go
abroad, with a dreadful commission, to drive them from the kingdoms of glory;
and plunge them -- not into the sorrows of a moment, or the tortures of an hour
-- but into all the restless agonies, of unquenchable fire, and everlasting
despair. Regions of sorrow, doleful shades, where peace
And rest can never dwell; hope never comes
That comes to all: But torture without end
Still urges, and a fiery deluge, fed
With ever burning sulphur unconsum'd.
MILT.


Misery of miseries! too shocking for reflection to dwell upon. But, if so
dismal to foresee, and that at a distance, together with some comfortable
expectation of escaping it -- O! how bitter, inconceivably bitter, to bear it
without any intermission; or any mitigation; through hopeless and eternal ages!

Who has any bowels of pity? -- Who has any sentiments of compassion? Who has
any tender concern for his fellow creatures? Who? -- In GOD's name, and for
CHRIST's sake, let him show it; by warning every man, and beseeching every man,
to seek the LORD while he may be found: To throw down the arms of rebellion,
before the act of indemnity expires; submissively to adore the Lamb, while he
holds out the golden scepter. Here, let us act the friendly part to mankind.
Here, let the whole force of our benevolence exert itself; in exhorting
relations, acquaintance, neighbors whomsoever we may probably influence, to
take the wings of faith unfeigned; of repentance undelayed; and flee away from
this wrath to come.

Upon the whole; what stupendous discoveries are these! Lay them up in a
faithful remembrance, O my soul. Recollect them, with the most serious
attention; when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. When thou walk,
receive them for thy companions; when thou talkest, listen to them as thy
prompters; and whatever thou do, consult them as thy directors. --
Influenced by these considerations, thy views will greaten; thy affections be
exalted; and thou thyself raised above the tantalizing power of perishing
things. Duly mindful of these, it will be the sum of thy desires, and the scope
of thy endeavors, to gain the approbation of that sovereign being, who will
then fill the throne, and pronounce the decisive sentence. Thou will see
nothing worth a wish, Great day of dread, decision, and despair!
At thought of thee, each sublunary wish
Lets go its eager grasp, and quits the world.
Night Thoughts.
in comparison of having his will for thy rule; his glory for thy aim; and his
holy spirit for thy ever actuating principle.

Wonder, O man; be lost in admiration; at those prodigious events, which are
coming upon the universe. Events, the greatness of which, nothing finite can
measure. Such, as will cause whatever is considerable or momentous in the
annals of all generations, to sink into littleness and nothing. Events (JESUS
prepare us, for their approach; defend us, when they take place!) big with the
everlasting fates, of all the livin^ and all the dead. -- I must see the graves
cleaving; the sea teeming; and swarms unsuspected, crowds unnumbered, yea,
multitudes of thronging nations, rising from both. -- I must see the world in
flames; must stand at the dissolution of all terrestrial things, and be an
attendant on the burial of nature. -- I must see the vast expanse of the sky
wrapped up like a scroll; and the incarnate God, issuing forth from light
inaccessible, with ten thousand times ten thousand angels, to judge both men
and devils. -- I must see the curtain of time drop; see all eternity disclosed
to view; and enter upon a state of being that will never, never have an end.

And ought I not (let the vainest imagination determine; ought I not) to try
the sincerity of my faith, and take heed to my ways? Is there an inquiry, is
there a care, of greater, of equal, of comparable importance? -- Is not this an
infinitely pressing call, to see that my loins are girded about, my lamp
trimmed, and myself dressed for the bridegroom's appearance? That washed in the
fountain opened in my Savior's side, and clad with the marriage garment wove
by his obedience, I may be found in peace, unblamable, and unreprovable. --
Otherwise, how shall I stand with boldness, when the stars of heaven fall from
their orbs? How shall I come forth erect and courageous, when the earth itself
reels to and fro like a drunkard? Isai. xxiv.20.
How shall I look up with joy, and see my salvation drawing nigh, when the
hearts of millions and millions fail for fear.

Now, Madam, lest my meditations set in a cloud; and leave any unpleasing gloom
upon your mind, let me once more turn to the brightening prospects of the
righteous. A view of them, and their delightful expectations, may serve to
exhilarate the thoughts* which have been musing upon melancholy subjects, and
hovering about the edges of infernal darkness. Just as a spacious field,
arrayed in cheerful green, relieves and reinvigorates the eye, which has
fatigued itself by poring upon some minute, or gazing upon some glaring object.

The righteous seem to lie by, in the bosom of the earth, as a wary pilot in
some well sheltered creek, till all the storms which infest this lower world
are blown over. Here they enjoy safe anchorage, are in no danger of foundering
amidst the waves of prevailing iniquity, or of being shipwrecked on the rocks
of any powerful temptation. But, ere long, we shall behold them hoisting the
flag of hope, riding before a sweet gale of atoning merit and redeeming love,
till they make, with all the fails of an assured faith, the blessed port of
eternal life.

Then, may the honored friend, to whom I am writing, rich in good works, rich
in heavenly tempers, but inexpressibly richer in her Savior's righ^eousness --
O! may she enter the harbor, like a gallant stately vessel, returned
successful and victorious from some grand expedition, with acclamations,
honor, and joy! While my little bark, attendant on the solemnity, and a
partaker of the triumph, glides humbly after; and both rest together in the
haven -- the wished for blissful haven of perfect security, and everlasting
repose.

REFLECTIONS ON A FLOWER GARDEN.
In a LETTER to a LADY.
MADAM,
SOME time ago, my meditations took a turn among the tombs. They visited the
awful and melancholy mansions of the dead; Discourses on the vanity of the
creature, which represent the barrenness of every thing in this world, and its
incapacity of producing any solid or substantial happiness, are useful. --
Those speculations also, which show the bright side of things, and lay forth
those innocent entertainments, which are to be met with among the several
objects that encompass us, are no less beneficial. Spect. Vol. V. No. 393. Upon
the plan of these observations, the preceding and following Reflections are
formed.
and you was pleased to favor them with your attention. -- May I now beg the
honor of your company, in a more inviting and delightful excursion? In a
beautiful Flower Garden, where I lately walked, and at once regaled the sense
and indulged the fancy.

It was early in a summer morning. When the air was cool; the earth moist; the
whole face of the creation fresh and gay. The noisy world was scarce awake.
Business had not quite shook off his sound sleep; and riot had but just
reclined his giddy head. All was serene: All was still: Every thing tended to
inspire tranquillity of mind, and invite to serious thought.

Only the wakeful Lark had left her nest, and was mounting on high, to salute
the opening day. Elevated in air, she seemed to call the laborious husbandman
to his toil, and all her fellow songsters to their notes. -- Earliest of birds,
said I, companion of the dawn, may I always rise at thy voice! Rise, to offer
the matin song; and adore that beneficent being, who makes the outgoings of
the morning and evening to rejoice.

How charming to rove abroad, at this sweet hour of prime! To enjoy the calm of
nature; to tread the dewy lawns; and taste the unrifled freshness of the air!
Sweet is the breath of morn, her rising sweet,
With charm of earliest birds. MILTON's Paradise Lost.

What a pleasure do the sons of sloth lose? Little, ah! little is the sluggard
sensible, how delicious an entertainment he foregoes, for the poorest of all
animal gratifications. See! how revelation and reason, the scriptures and the
classicks, unanimously exhort to this most beneficial practice. They both
invite us to early rising, by the most engaging motives, and the most alluring
representations.

Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the field; let us lodge in the
villages. Let us get up early to the vineyard; let us see if the vine flourish,
whether the tender grape appear, and the pomegranates bud forth.

Cant. vii.11, 12. Luciferi primo cum Sidere frigida rura
Carpamus: dum mane novum, dum Gramina canent,
Et Ros in tenera Pecori gratissimus Herba est.
VIRG. Georg. III.


The greyness of the dawn decays gradually. Abundance of ruddy streaks tinge
the fleeces of the firmament. Till at length, the dappled aspect of the east is
lost, in one ardent and boundless blush. -- Is it the surmise of imagination,
or do the skies really redden with shame; to see so many supinely stretched, on
their drowsy pillows? -- Shall man be lost, in luxurious ease? Shall man waste
these precious hours, in idle slumbers? While the vigorous sun is up, and going
on his Maker's errand? While all the feathered choir are hymning the Creator,
and paying their homage in harmony? -- No. Let him heighten the melody of the
tuneful tribes, by adding the rational strains of devotion. Let him improve the
fragrant oblations of nature, by mingling, with the rising odours, the more
refined breath of praise.

It Is natural for man to look upward; to throw his first glance upon the
objects that are above him.

Strait toward heaven my wondering eyes I turned,
And gazed a while the ample SKY. MILTON.

Prodigious theater! Where lightnings dart their fire, and thunders utter their
voice. Where tempests spend their rage, and worlds unnumbered roll at large! --
O the greatness of that mighty hand; which meteth out this amazing
circumference with a span! O the immensity of that wonderful being; before whom
this unmeasurable extent, is no more than a point! -- And O (thou pleasing
thought!) the unsearchable riches of that mercy, which is greater than the
heavens! Psalm cviii.4.
Is more enlarged and extensive, in its gracious exercise; than these
illimitable tracts of air, and sea, and firmament! Which pardons crimes of the
most enormous size, and the most horrid aggravations; pardons them in
consideration of the Redeemer's atonement, with perfect freeness, and the
utmost readiness! More readily, if it were possible, than this all surrounding
expanse admits, within its circuit, a ridge of mountains, or even a grain of
sand.

Come hither, then, ye awakened, trembling sinners, come, The lines which
follow, are admirably descriptive of the spirit and practice, hinted above. In
them desire pants; prayer wrestles; and faith as it were, grasps the prize. --
I take leave to transplant them into this place; and I could wish them a
better, a more conspicuous situation, than either their new or their native
soil. Their native soil, is no other than the lamentation of a sinner, written
by Mr. Sternhold. Notwithstanding the unpromising genius of the performance, I
think, we may challenge the greatest masters, to produce any thing more
spirited and importunate; more full of nature, or more flushed with life.
Mercy, good LORD, mercy I crave;
This is the total sum;
For mercy LORD, is all my suit;
LORD, let thy mercy come.
The short sentences -- Not a single copulative -- The frequent repetition of
the divine name -- The almost incessant reiteration of the blessing, so
passionately desired, and inexpressibly needed. -- This is the genuine language
of ardour; these are beauties obvious to every eye; and cannot fail, either to
please the judicious taste, or to edify the gracious heart.
weary and heavy laden with a sense of your iniquities. Condemn yourselves.
Renounce all reliance on any thing of your own. Let your trust be in the tender
mercy of GOD, forever and ever.

In them has he set a tabernacle for the sun. Psalm xix.4.
-- Behold him coming forth from the chambers of the east. See! the clouds,
like floating curtains, are thrown back at his approach. With what refulgent
majesty does he walk abroad! How transcendently bright is his countenance;
shedding day, and inexhaustible light, through the universe! -- Is there a
scene, though finished by the most elaborate and costly refinements of art,
comparable to these illustrious solemnities of opening sunshine? Before these,
all the studied pageantry of the theater; the glittering economy of an
assembly; or even the heightened ornaments of a royal palace; hide their
diminished heads, and shrink into nothing. -- I have read of a person, so
struck with the splendours of this noble luminary; that he imagined himself
made on purpose to contemplate its glories. O! that christians would adopt his
persuasion, and transfer it to the sun of righteousness! Thus applied, it would
cease to be a chimerical notion, and become a most important truth. For sure I
am, it is the supreme happiness of the eternal state; and therefore may well be
the ruling concern of this present life; to know the only true GOD, and JESUS
CHRIST, whom he has sent. -- Nor do I stand alone in this opinion. The very
best judge of whatever is valuable in science, or perfective of our nature; a
judge, who formed his taste on the maxims of paradise, and received the
finishings of his education in the third heavens; this judge determines to know
nothing but JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified. He possessed, in his own person,
the finest, the most admired accomplishments; yet pronounces them no better
than dung, in comparison of the (...). Phil. iii.7.
supereminent excellency of this saving knowledge.

Methinks, I discern a thousand admirable properties in the sun. It Is
certainly, the best material emblem of the Creator. There is more of GOD in its
luster, energy, and usefulness, than in any other visible being. To worship it
as a deity, was the least inexcusable of all the heathen idolatries. One scarce
can wonder, that fallen reason should mistake so fair a copy, for the adorable
Original. No comparison, in the whole book of sacred wisdom, pleases me more;
than that which resembles the blessed JESUS, to yonder regent of the day. Unto
you, that fear my name, shall the sun of righteousness arise with healing in
his wings. Mal. iv.2.
Who now advances on his azure road, to scatter light and dispense gladness
through the nations.

What were all the realms of the world, but a dungeon of darkness, without the
beams of the sun? All their fine scenes, hid from our view; lost in obscurity.
-- In vain, we roll around our eyes, in the midnight gloom. In vain, we strive
to behold the features of amiable nature. Turn whether we will, no form or
comeliness appears. All seems a dreary waste; an undistinguished chaos. Till
the returning hours, have unbarred the gates of light, and let forth the morn.
-- Then, what a prospect opens! The heavens are paved with azure, and strewed
with roses. A variety of the liveliest verdures array the plains. The flowers
put on a glow of the richest colors. The whole creation stands forth, dressed
in all the charms of beauty. The ravished eye looks round, and wonders.

And what had been the condition of our intellectual nature, without the great
redeemer, and his divine revelation? -- Alas! what absurd and unworthy
apprehensions, did the Pagan sages form of GOD! What idle dreams, what childish
conjectures, were their doctrines of a future state! -- How did the bulk, even
of that favored nation, the Jews, weary themselves in very vanity, to obtain
peace and reconciliation with their offended JEHOVAH! Till JESUS arose upon our
benighted minds and brought life and immortality to light; till HE arose, to
enlighten the wretched Gentiles, and to be the glory of his people Israel.

Now we no longer cry out, with a restless impatience, where is GOD my maker?
For we are allowed to contemplate the brightness of his glory, and the express
image of his person, in the face of JESUS CHRIST. -- Now, we no longer inquire,
with an unsatisfied solicitude, "which is the way to bliss?" Because JESUS has
marked the path, by his shining example; and left us an unerring clue, in his
holy word. -- Now we have no more reason to proceed with misgiving hearts, in
our journey to eternity; or to ask anxiously, as we go; who will roll away the
stone and open the everlasting doors? Who will remove the flaming sword, and
give us admission into the delights of paradise? For it is done, all done, by
the captain of our salvation. Sin he has expiated, by the unblemished sacrifice
of himself. The law he has fulfilled, by his perfect obedience. The sinner he
transforms, by his sanctifying SPIRIT. -- In a word; he has both presented us
with a clear discovery of good things to come; and administered to us an
abundant entrance, into the final enjoyment of them.

Whenever, therefore, we bless GOD for the circling seasons, and revolving day;
let us adore, thankfully adore him, for the more precious appearance of the sun
of righteousness, and his glorious gospel. Without which, we should have been
groping, even to this hour, in spiritual darkness, and the shadow of death.
Without which, we must have wandered in a maze of inextricable uncertainties;
and have stumbled upon the dark mountains of error, till we fell into the
bottomless pit of perdition.

Without that grand enlivening principle, what were this earth, but a lifeless
mass? A rude lump of inactive matter? The trees could never break forth into
leaves, nor the plants spring up into flowers. We should no more behold the
meadows mantled over with green; nor the valleys, standing thick with corn. Or,
to speak in the beautiful language of a prophet; Hab. iii.17.
No longer would the fig tree blossom, nor fruit be in the vine: The labor of
the olive would fail, and the fields could yield no meat: The flocks must be
cut off from the fold, and there would be no herd in the stall. -- The sun
darts its beams among all the vegetable tribes; and paints the spring, and
enriches the autumn. This pierces to the roots of the vineyard and the orchard;
and sets afloat those fermenting juices, which at length burst into floods of
wine, or bend the boughs with a mellow load. -- Nor are its favors confined to
the upper regions; but distributed unto the deepest recesses of creation. It
penetrates the beds of metal, and finds its way to the place of the sapphires.
It tinctures the seeds of gold, that are ripening into ore; and throws a
brilliancy into the water of the diamond, that is hardening on its rock. -- In
short; the beneficial agency of this magnificent luminary, is inexpressible. It
beautifies and impregnates, universal nature. There is nothing hid from the
heat thereof.

Just in the same manner, were the rational world dead in trespasses and sins,
without the reviving energy of JESUS CHRIST. He is the "resurrection and the
life:" The overflowing fountain of the one, and the all powerful cause of the
other. The second Adam is a quickening spirit, and all his saints live through
him. He shines upon their affections; and they shoot forth into heavenly
graces, and abound in the fruits of righteousness. Faith unfeigned, and love
undissembled, those noblest productions of the renewed nature, are the effect
of his operation on the mind. Not so much as one divine disposition could
spread itself, not one christian habit unfold and flourish, without the kindly
influences of his grace.

As there is no fruitfulness, so likewise no cheerfulness, The sun, which is as
the great ^oul of the universe, and produces all the necessaries of life, has a
particular influence in cheering the mind of man, and making the heart glad.
Spect. Vol. V. No. 387.
without the sun. -- When that auspicious sovereign of the day, diffuses the
mildness of his morning splendor, he creates an universal festival. Millions
of gl^ering insects awake into existence, and bask in his rays. The birds start
from their slumbers, and pour their delighted souls in harmony. The flocks,
with bleating accents hail the welcome blessing. The herds in lowing murmurs
express their hoarser acclamations. The valleys ring with rural music; the
hills echo back the artless strains. All that is vocal, joins in the general
choir; all that has breath exults in the cheering influence. -- Whereas, was
that radiant orb extinguished, a tremendous gloom would ensue, and horror
insupportable. Nay, let it only be eclipsed, for a few minutes, and all nature
assumes an air of sadness. The heavens are wrapped in sables, and put on a kind
of mourning. The most sprightly animals hang down their dejected heads. The
songsters of the grove are struck dumb. Howling beasts roam abroad for prey:
Ominous birds come forth and screech: The heart of man fails, or a sudden pang
seizes the foreboding mind. -- So when CHRIST hides away his face; when faith
loses sight of that consolation of Israel, how gloomy are the prospects of the
soul! Our GOD seems to be a consuming fire, and our sins cry loudly for
vengeance. The thoughts bleed inwardly; the christian walks heavily. All
without is irksome; all within is disconsolate. -- Lift up then, most gracious
JESUS, thou nobler dayspring from on high! O lift up the light of thy
countenance, upon thy people! Reveal the fullness of thy mediatorial
sufficiency; make clear our title to this great salvation; an^ hereby impart
What nothing earthly gives, or can destroy,
The soul's calm sunshine, and the heart felt joy. POPE's Eth. Ep.



In one instance more, let me pursue the similitude. The sun, I observe, pours
his luster all around, to every distance, and in every direction. Profusely
liberal of his gifts, he illuminates and cheers all the ends of the earth, and
the whole compass of the skies. The east reddens with his rising radiance; and
the western hills, are gilded with his streaming splendours. The chilly regions
of the north, are cherished by his genial warmth; while the southern tracts,
glow with his fire. -- Thus, are the influences of the sun of righteousness,
diffusive and unconfined. The generations of old felt them; and generations yet
unborn, will rejoice in them. The merits of his precious death extended to the
first, and will be propagated to the last ages of mankind. -- May they, ere
long, visit the remotest climates, and darkest corners of the earth! Command
thy gospel, blessed JESUS, thy everlasting gospel, to take the wings of the
morning, and travel with yonder sun. Let it fly upon strong pinions among every
people, nation, and language. That, where the heat scorches, and the cold
freezes, thou may be known, confessed, and adored! That strangers to thy
name, and enemies to thy doctrine, may be enlightened with the knowledge, and
won to the love of thy truth! O! may that best of eras come; that wished for
period advance, when All the ends of the world shall remember themselves, and
be turned unto the LORD; and all the kindreds of the nations worship before
him! Psalm xxii.27.


From the heavens, we retire to the earth. -- Here, the drops of dew, like so
many liquid crystals, Now morn, her rosy steps in the eastern clime
Advancing, sowed the earth with orient pearl.
MILT.
sparkle upon the eye. How brilliant, and unsullied is their luster! How little
inferior to the proud stone, which irradiates a monarch's crown! They want
nothing but solidity and permanency, to equal them with the finest treasures of
the jeweller's casket -- Here, it must be confessed, they are greatly
deficient; short lived ornaments; possessed of little more than a momentary
radiance. The sun, that lights them up, will soon melt them into air, or exhale
them into vapors. Within another hour, we may "look for their place, and they
shall be away." -- O! may every good resolution of mine, and of my flock's; may
our united breathings after GOD, not be like these transient decorations of the
morning; but like the substantial glory of the growing day! The one shines more
and more, with augmented splendours; while the other, having glittered gaily
for a few moments, disappear and are lost.

How sensibly has this dew refreshed the vegetable kingdoms! The fervent heat
of yesterday's sun had almost parched the face, and exhausted the sweets of
nature. But what a sovereign restorative, are these cooling distillations of
the night! How they gladden, and invigorate the languishing herbs! Sprinkled
with these reviving drops, their verdure deepens; their bloom is new flushed;
their fragrance, faint or intermitted, becomes potent and copious. -- Thus does
the ever blessed SPIRIT revive the drooping troubled conscience of a sinner.
When that almighty comforter sheds his sweet influence on the soul; displays
the all sufficient sacrifice of a divine Redeemer, and "witnesses with our
spirit," that we are interested in the Savior, and, by this means, are
children of GOD; then, what a pleasing change ensues! Former anxieties are
remembered no more. Every uneasy apprehension vanishes. Soothing hopes, and
delightful expectations succeed. The countenance drops its dejected mein; the
eyes brighten with a lively cheerfulness; while the lips express the heart felt
satisfaction, in the language of thanksgiving, and the voice of melody. -- In
this sense, merciful GOD, be as the dew unto Israel! Pour upon them the
continual dew of thy blessing. And O! let not my fleece be dry, while heavenly
benediction descends upon all around.

Who can number these pearly drops? They hang on every hedge; they twinkle from
every spray; and adorn the whole herbage of the field. Not a blade of grass,
not a single leaf, but wears the watery pendants. So vast is the profusion, that
it baffles the arithmetician's art. -- Here, let the benevolent mind
contemplate and admire that emphatical scripture; which, from this elegant
similitude, describes the increase of the Messiah's kingdom. The royal prophet,
speaking of CHRIST, and foretelling the success of his religion, has this
remarkable expression; Psalm cx.3. (...). The most exact translation of this
difficult passage is, I apprehend, as follows; Prae rore uteri aurorae, tibi
est rosjuventutis vel prolis tuae. The dew of thy birth is larger, more
copious, than the dew which proceeds from the womb of the morning. -- I cannot
acquiesce in the new version; because that disjoins the womb of the morning,
from the dew of thy birth. Whereas, they seem to have a clear affinity, and a
close connection. The womb of the morning is, with the utmost pertinency,
applied to the conception and production of dews; agreeably to a delicate line,
in that great master of just description, and lively painting, Mr. Themson: The
meek eyed morn appears, mother of dews.

Summer.

We meet with a fine expression in the book of Job, which may serve to confirm
this remark; may illustrate the propriety of the phrase, used in this
connection. Has the rain a father, or who has begotten the drops of dew? It
seems, the oriental writers delighted to represent the dew, as a kind of birth,
at the offspring of the morning. And if so, surely there could be no image in
the whole compass of the universe, better adapted to the psalmist's purpose; or
more strongly significant of those multitudes of proselytes, which were born,
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of GOD;
by the powerful energy of his word and spirit. -- Upon this supposition, the
whole verse describes The willing subjection, of Christ's converts. The
gracious accomplishments, of Christ's converts. And the vast number, of
Christ's converts.
q. d. In the day of thy power, when thy glorious gospel shall be published in
the world, and accompanied with mavelous efficacy -- In that memorable
period, thy people, discontinuing the former oblations, commanded under the
Mosaic law; shall devote themselves, as so many living sacrifices to thy
honor. Not constrained by force, but charmed with thy excellency, they shall
come in volunteers to thy service, and be free will offerings in thy church. --
Neither shall they be "empty vines," or bare professors; but shall walk in all
the beauties of holiness, and bring forth such amiable fruit, as will adorn the
doctrine they embrace. -- What is still more desirable, they shall be as
numerous as they are willing and holy. Born to thee in numbers, immense and
inconceivable; exceeding even the countless myriads of dew drops, which are
begotten by the night, and issue from the womb of the recent morning.

By this interpretation, the text, I think, is cleared of its obscurity and
appears both truly sublime, and perfectly just.

May I be pardoned the digression, and acquitted from presumption, if, on this
occasion, I take leave to animadvert upon what seems harsh and unnatural in the
common exposition of the last verse of this Psalm? All the commentators (as
many, at least, as I have consulted) inform their readers, that to drink of the
brook in the way, signifies to undergo sufferings and death. Which, in my
opinion, is a construction extremely forced, and hardly supportable; altogether
remote from the import of such poetical forms of diction, customary among the
eastern nations. In those sultry climes, nothing could be more welcome to the
traveller, than a brook streaming near his paths. To quench his thirst, and
lave his feet, in the cooling current, was one of the greatest refreshments
imaginable, and reanimated him to pursue his journey. For which reason, among
others, brooks are a very favorite image with the inspired penmen; used to
denote a situation fertile and delightful, or a state of pleasure and
satisfaction; but never, that I can recollect, to picture out the contrary
condition of tribulation and distress.

The water floods, indeed, in the sacred writings, often represent some
imminent danger, or grievous affliction. But then they are not (...) -- Streams
so calm, that they keep within their banks, and glide quietly by the
traveller's footsteps; so clear, that they are fit for the wayfaring man's use,
and invite his lips to a draught; both which notions are plainly implied in the
text. -- They are rather -- (...) -- boisterous billows; bursting over a ship
or dashing themselves, with dreadful impetuosity, upon the shore: Or -- (...)
-- sweeping inundations; which bear down all before them, and drown the
neighboring country. -- Besides, in these instances of horror, we never find
the word -- (...) -- He shall drink; which conveys a pleasing idea (unless when
it relates to a cup, filled with bitter, intoxicating, or impoisoned liquors; a
case quite different from that under consideration) but either -- (...) --
which imports terror and astonishment, or else -- (...) and (...) -- which
signify to rush upon, to overwhelm, and even to bury under the waves.

Upon the whole: May not the passage more properly allude to the influences of
the Holy Ghost? Which were communicated, in unmeasurable degrees, to our great
high priest; and were, in fact, the cause of his surmounting all difficulties.
-- These are frequently represented by waters; Whosoever beleiveth on me, out of
his belly shall flow rivers of living waters. The enjoyment of them is
described by drinking; He that drinks of the water that I shall give him,
shall never thirst. -- Then, the sense may run in this well connected and
perspicuous manner. Is it asked, How shall the Redeemer be able to execute the
various and important offices, foretold in the preceding parts of the psalm?
The prophet replies, he shall drink of the brook in the way. He shall not be
left barely to his human nature, which must unavoidably sink under the
tremendous work of recovering a lost world. But through the whole course of his
incarnate state, through the whole administration of his mediatorial kingdom,
shall be supported with ominipotent succors. He shall drink at the brook of
almighty power, and travel on in the greatness of an uncreated strength. --
Therefore shall he lift up his head. By this means, shall he be equal to the
prodigious task, and superior to all opposition. By this means, shall he be
thoroughly successful, in whatever he undertakes; and greatly triumphant, over
all his enemies.


The dew of thy birth is of the womb of the morning. (i. e.) As the morning is
the mother of dews; produces them, as it were, from a prolifick womb; and
scatters them, with the most lavish abundance, over all the surface of the
earth: So shall thy seed be, O thou everlasting Father! By the preaching of thy
word, shall such an innumerable race of regenerate children be born unto thee;
and prove an ornament and a blessing to all ages, millions, millions of willing
converts, from every nation under heaven, shall crowd into thy family, and
replenish thy church. Till they become like the stars of the sky, or the sands
of the sea for multitude; or even as numberless as these fine spangles, which
now cover the face of nature. -- Behold then, ye obstinately wicked, though you
are not gathered, yet will the Savior be glorious. His design shall not
miscarry, nor his labor prove abortive; though you render it of none effect,
with regard to yourselves. Think not, that IMMANUEL will want believers, or
heaven inhabitants, because you continue incorrigible. No; the Lamb that was
slain, will "see of the travail of his soul, and be satisfied;" in a never
failing series of faithful people below, and an immense choir of glorified
saints above. Who shall form his retinue, and surround his throne, in shining
and triumphant armies, such as no man can number.

Here, I was reminded of the various expedients which providence, unsearchably
wise, uses, to fructify both the material and intellectual world. -- Sometimes,
you shall have impetuous and heavy showers, bursting from the angry clouds.
They lash the plains, and make the rivers foam. A storm brings them, and a
deluge follows them. -- At other times, these gentle dews are formed, in the
serene evening air. They steal down by slow degrees, and with insensible
stillness. So subtle, that they deceive the nicest eye; so silent, that they
escape the most delicate ear: And when fallen, so very light, that they neither
bruise the tenderest, nor oppress the weakest flower. -- Very different
operations! Yet each concurs in the same beneficial end, and both impart
fertility to the lap of nature.

So, some persons have I known, reclaimed from the unfruitful works of
darkness, by violent and severe means. The Almighty addressed their stubborn
hearts, as he addressed the Israelites at Sinai, with lightning in his eyes,
and thunder in his voice. The conscience, smitten with a sense of guilt, and
apprehensive of eternal vengeance, trembled through all her powers; just as
that strong mountain tottered to its center. Pangs of remorse, and agonies of
fear, preceded their new birth. They were reduced to the last extremities,
almost overwhelmed with despair, before they found rest in JESUS CHRIST. --
Others have been recovered from a vain conversation, by methods more mild and
attractive. The Father of spirits applied himself to their teachable minds, in
a still and small voice. His grace came down, as the rain into a fleece of
wool; or as these softening drops, which now water the earth. The kingdom of
GOD took place in their souls, without noise or observation. They passed from
death unto life, from a carnal to a regenerate state, by almost imperceptible
advances. The transition resembled the growth of corn; was very visible, when
effected; though scarce sensible, while accomplishing. -- O thou author and
finisher of our faith, recall us from our wanderings, and reunite us to thyself!
Whether thou alarm us with thy terrors, or allure us with thy smiles; whether
thou drive us with the scourge of conviction, or draw us with the cords of
love; let us, in any wise, return to thee. For thou art our supreme good; thou
art our only happiness.

Before I proceed farther, let me ascend the terrace, and take one survey of
the neighboring country. -- What a prospect rushes upon my sight! How vast;
how various; how "full and plenteous with all manner of store!" Nature's whole
wealth! -- What a rich and inexhaustible magazine is here: Furnishing
subsistence for every creature! Methinks, I read, in the spacious volumes, a
most lively comment, upon that noble celebration of the divine beneficence; He
opens his hand, and fills all things living with plenteousness.

These are thy glorious works, Parent of good,
Almighty! Thine this universal frame,
Thus wondrous fair! Thyself how wondrous then!
MILT. The fields are covered deep, and stand thick, with corn. They expand the
milky grain to the sun; while the gales, now inclining, now raising each
flexile stem, open all their ranks to the agency of his beams. Which will soon
impart a firm consistence to the grain, and a glossy golden hue to the ear.
That they may be qualified, to fill the barns of the husbandman with plenty,
and his heart with gladness.

Yonder lie the meadows, smoothed into a perfect level; decorated with an
embroidery of the gayest flowers; and loaded with -- Injussa vires^unt
Gramina --
VIRG*
spontaneous crops of herbage. Which, converted into hay, will prove a most
commodious provision for the barrenness of winter; will supply with fodder our
serviceable animals, when all the verdure of the plain is killed by frosts, or
buried in snows. -- A winding stream, glides along the flowery margin and
receives the image of the bending skies, and waters the roots of many a
branching willow. It Is stocked, no doubt, with variety of fish; which afford a
solitary diversion to the angler, and nourish for his table a delicious treat.
Nor is it the only merit of this liquid element, to maintain the finny nations;
it also carries cleanliness, and dispenses fruitfulness, wherever it rolls the
crystal current.

The pastures, with their verdant mounds, chequer the prospect; and prepare a
standing repast for our cattle. There, our oxen are made strong to labor; and
our sheep bring forth thousands and ten thousands. There, the horse acquires
vigor, for the dispatch of our business, and speed to expedite our journeys.
From thence, the kine bring home their udders, distended with one of the
richest, and healthiest liquors in the world.

On several spots, a grove of trees, like some grand colonnade, erects its
towering head. Every one projects a friendly shade, for the beasts; and creates
an hospitable lodging for the birds. Every one stands ready, to furnish timber
for a palace; masts for a navy; or, with a more condescending courtesy, fuel
for our hearths. -- One of them seems skirted with a wild uncultivated heath;
which, like well disposed shades in painting, throws an additional luster on
the more ornamented parts of the landscape. Nor is its usefulness, like that of
a foil, relative only, but real. There, several valuable creatures are
produced, and accommodated; without any expense, or care of ours. There
likewise, spring abundance of those herbs, which assuage the smart of our
wounds, and allay the fiery tumults of the fever. Which impart floridity to our
circulating fluids; add a more vigorous tone to our active solids; and thereby,
repair the decays of our enfeebled constitutions.

Nearer the houses, we perceive an ample spread of branches; not so stately as
the oaks, but more amiable for their annual services. A little while ago, I
beheld them; and all was one beauteous, boundless waste of blossoms. The eye
marvelled, at the lovely sight; and the heart rejoiced, in the prospect of
autumnal plenty. But now, the blooming maid is resigned, for the useful matron.
The flower is fallen, and the fruit swells out on every twig. -- Breathe soft,
ye winds! O, spare the tender fruitage, ye surly blasts! Let the pear tree
suckle her juicy progeny, till they drop into our hands, and dissolve in our
mouths. Let the plum hang unmolested upon her boughs; till she fatten her
delicious flesh, and cloud her polished skin with blue. And as for the apples,
that staple commodity of our orchards, let no injurious shocks precipitate them
immaturely to the ground; till revolving suns, have tinged them with a ruddy
complexion, and concocted them into an exquisite flavor. Then, what copious
hoards, of what burnished rinds, and what delightful relishes, will replenish
the store room! Some to present us with an early entertainment, and refresh our
palates amidst the sultry heats. Some to borrow ripeness from the falling
snows, and carry autumn into the depths of winter. Some, to adorn the salver,
make a part of the dessert, and give an agreeable -- Ab Ovo
Usqu^ ad Mala --
HOR.
close to our feasts. Others to fill our vats with a foaming flood; which,
mellowed by age may sparkle in the glass, with a liveliness and delicacy,
little inferior to the blood of the grape.

I observe several small enclosures, which seem to be apprehensive of some
hostile visit from the north; and, therefore, are defended, on that quarter, by
a thick wood, or a lofty wall. At the same time they cultivate an uninterrupted
correspondence with the south; and throw open their whole dimensions to its
friendly warmth. One, in particular, lies within the reach of a distinguishing
view; and proves to be a kitchen garden. It looks, methinks, like a plain and
frugal republic. Whatever may resemble the pomp of courts, or the ensigns of
royalty, is banished from this humble community. None of the productions of the
olitory affect finery; but all are habited with the very perfection of decency.
Here, those celebrated qualities are eminently united, the utmost simplicity
wi^^ the exactest neatness. Simplex Munditiis.
HOR.
-- A skilful hand has parcelled out the whole ground, into narrow beds, and
intervening alleys. The same discreet management has assigned to each verdant
family, a peculiar and distinct abode. So that there is no confusion, amidst
the greatest multiplicity; because every individual knows its proper home, and
all the tribes are ranged with perfect regularity. -- If it be pleasing to
behold their orderly situation and their modest beauties; how much more
delightful to consider the advantages, they yield! What a fund of choice
accommodations is here! What a source of wholesome dainties! And all, for the
enjoyment of man. Why does the parsley, with her frizzled locks, shag the
border; or why the celery, with her whitening arms, perforate the mold; but to
render his soops savoury? The asparagus shoots its tapering stems, to offer him
the first fruits of the season; and the artichoke spreads its turgid top, to
give him a treat of vegetable marrow. The tendrils of the Virgil, with great
conciseness, and equal propriety, describes the cucumber -- -- Tortusque per
herbam
Cresceret in Ventrem Cucumis. --
Georg. IV.

MILTON has (if we admit Dr. Bentley's alteration, which is, I think, in this
place, unquestionably just) almost translated the Latin poet, -- Forth crept
The swelling gourd --
Par. Lost, B. VII. l. 320.


cucumber creep into the sun; and though basking in its hottest rays, they
secret for their master, and barrel up for his use, the most cooling juices of
the soil. The beans stand firm, like files of embattled troops! the peace rest
upon their props, like so many companies of invalids; while both replenish
their pods with the fatness of the earth, on purpose to pour it on their
owner's table. -- Not one species, among all this variety of herbs, is a
cumberer of the ground. Not a single plant, but is good for food, or some way
salutary. With so beneficent an economy, are the several periods of their
ministration settled; that no portion of the year is left destitute of
nourishing esculents. What is still more obliging, every portion of the year
affords such esculents, as are best suited to the temperature of the air, and
the state of our bodies. -- Why then should the possessor of so valuable a
spot, envy the condition of kings? Hic rarum tamen in Dumis Olus, albaque circum
Lilia, Verbenasque premens, vescumque Papaver,
Regum aequabat Opes Animis; seraque revertens
Nocte domum, Dapibus Mensas ^nerabat inemptis,
VIRG. Georg. IV.
Since he may daily walk amidst rows of peaceable and obsequious, though mute
subjects. Every one of which tenders him some agreeable present, and pays him a
willing tribute. Such as is most happily adapted, both to supply his wants, and
to regale his taste; to furnish him, at once, with plenty and with pleasure.

At a distance, one descries the mighty hills. They heave their huge ridges
among the clouds; and look like the barriers of kingdoms, or the boundaries of
nature. Bare and deformed as their surface may appear, their bowels are fraught
with inward treasures! Treasures, lodged fast in the quarries, or sunk deep in
the mines. From thence, industry may draw her implements, to plow the soil; to
reap the grain; and procure every necessary convenience. From thence, art may
fetch her materials, to rear the dome* to swell the organ; and form the noblest
ornaments of politer life.

On another side, the great deep terminates the view. There go the ships: There
is that leviathan: And there, in that world of waters, an inconceivable number
of animals have their habitation. -- This is the capacious cistern of the
universe; which admits, as into a receptacle; and distributes, as from a
reservoir, whatever waters the whole globe. There Is not a fountain, that gushes
in the unfrequented desert; nor a rivulet, that flows in the remotest
continent; nor a cloud, that swims in the highest regions of the firmament; but
is fed by this all replenishing source. The ocean is the grand vehicle of
trade, and the uniter of distant nations. To us it is peculiarly kind, not only
as it wastes into our ports, the harvest of every climate, and renders our
island the center of trassick; but also as it secures us from foreign
invasions, by a sort of impregnable entrenchment. Whose rampart was the sea.

Nahum iii.8. I hope, this little excursion into the country, will not be
looked upon as a departure from my subject. Because, a rural view, though no
essential part of a garden, is yet a desirable appendage, and necessary to
complete its beauty. -- As usefulness is the most valuable property which can
attend any production; this is the circumstance chiefly touched upon in the
survey of the landscape* Though every piece of this extensive and diversified
scene, is cast in the most elegant mould; yet nothing is calculated merely for
show and parade. You see nothing formed in the taste of the ostentatious
obelisk, or insignificant pomp of the pyramid. No such idle expenses were
admitted into that consummate plan, which regulated the structure of the
universe. All the decorations of nature are no less advantageous, than
ornamental; such as speak the MAKER infinitely beneficent, as well as
incomparably magnificent.




Methinks, the view of this profuse munificence inspires a secret delight, and
kindles a disinterested good will. -- While the "little hills clap their
hands," and the luxuriant "valleys laugh and sing;" who can forbear catching
the general joy? Who is not touched with lively sensations of pleasure? --
While the everlasting Father is scattering blessings through his whole family,
and crowning the year with his goodness; who does not feel his breast
overflowing, with a diffusive benevolence? -- My heart, I must confess, beats
high with satisfaction; and breathes out congratulatory wishes, upon all the
tenants of these rural abodes: Peace be within your walls, as well as
plenteousness around your dwellings. Live, ye highly favored; live sensible of
your benefits, and thankful to your benefactor. Look round upon these
prodigiously large incomes of the fruitful soil, and call them (for you have
free leave) all your own. -- Only let me remind you of one very important
truth. Let me suggest, and may you never forget, that you are obliged to CHRIST
JESUS, for every one of these accommodations, which sprung from the teaming
earth, and the smiling skies.

1. CHRIST When I ascribe the work of creation to the SON, I would by no means
be supposed, to withhold the same honor, from the eternal FATHER, and ever
blessed SPIRIT. The acts of those inconceivably g^rious persons are, like their
essence, undivided and one. But I choose to state the point in this manner,
because this is the manifest doctrine of the new testament; is the express
belief of our church; and a most noble peculiarity of the gospel revelation. --
I choose it also, because I would take every opportunity of inculcating, and
celebrating the divinity of the REDEEMER. A truth, which imparts an unutterable
dignity to christianity: A truth, which lays an immovable foundation, for all
the comfortable hopes of a christian: A truth, which will render the mystery of
our redemption, the wonder and delight of eternity: And with this truth, every
one will observe, my assertion is inseparably connected.

If any one questions, whether this be the doctrine of our church; let the
creed, which we repeat in our most solemn devotions, determine his doubt: "I
believe," says that form of sound words, in one LORD JESUS CHRIST, very God of
very GOD, by whom all things were made. -- If it be farther inquired, from
whence the Nicene fathers derived this article of their faith? I answer, from
the writings of the beloved desciple, who lay on the Savior's bosom; and of
that great apostle, who had been caught up into the third heaven.

John i.3. Coloss. i.16.
made them, when they were not. -- He fetched them up from utter darkness; and
gave them both their being, and their beauty. He created the materials, of
which they are composed; and molded them into this endless multiplicity, of
amiable forms, and useful substances. He arrayed the heavens, with a vesture of
the mildest blue; and clothed the earth in a livery of the gayest green. His
pencil streaked, and his breath perfumed, whatever is beautiful or fragrant in
the universe. His strength set fast the mountains; his goodness garnished the
vales; and the same touch which healed the leper, wrought the whole visible
system into this complete perfection.

2. CHRIST recovered them, when they were forfeited. -- By Adam's sin, we lost
our right to the comforts of life, and fruits of the ground. His disobedience
was the most impious and horrid treason, against the KING of kings.
Consequently, his whole patrimony became confiscated; as well the portion of
temporal good things, settled upon the human race during their minority; as
that everlasting heritage reserved for their enjoyment, when they should come
to full age. But the "Seed of the woman," instantly interposing, took off the
attainder, and redeemed the alienated inheritance. The first Adam being
disinherited, the second Adam Heb. i.2. -- In this sense at least, CHRIST is
the Savior of all men. The former and latter rain; the precious fruits of the
earth; food to eat, and raiment to put on; -- all these he purchased, even for
his irreclaimable enemies. They eat of his bread, who lift up their heel
against him.

We learn from hence, in what a peculiar and endearing light, the christian is
to contemplate the things that are seen. Heathens might discover an eternal
power, and infinite wisdom, in the structure of the universe: Heathens might
acknowledge a most stupendous liberality, in the unreserved grant of the whole
fabric, with all its furniture, to the service of man. But the christian
should ever keep in mind his forfeiture of them, and the price paid to redeem
them. He should recieve the gifts of indulgent providence, as the Israelites
received their law, from the hand of a Mediator. Or rather, to him they should
come, not only issuing from the stores of an unbounded bounty, but swimming (as
it were) in that crimson tide, which streamed from IMMANUEL's veins.


was appointed heir of all things, visible as well as invisible. And we hold
our possession of the former; we expect an instatement in the latter; purely by
virtue of ^r alliance to him, and our union with him.

3. CHRIST upholds them, which would otherwise tumble into ruin. -- By him,
says the oracle of inspiration, all things consist. Col. i.17. I beg leave to
subjoin St. Chrysostom's pertinent and beautiful note, upon the passage; by
which it will appear, that the sentiment of these sections, is not merely a
private opinion, but the avowed belief of the primitive church. (...), says the
eloquent father, (...).


His finger rolls the seasons round, and presides over all the celestial
revolutions. His finger winds up the wheels, and impels every spring, of
vegetative nature. In a word, the whole weight of the creation, rests upon his
mighty arm; and receives the whole harmony of its motion, from his unerring
eye. -- This habitable globe, with all its rich appendages, and fine machinery,
could no more continue, than they could create themselves. Start they would
into instant confusion; or drop into their primitive nothing; did not his power
support, and his wisdom regulate them, every moment. In conformity to his will,
they subsist steadfast and invariable in their orders; and wait only for his
sovereign nod, to fall away like water, that runs apace.

4. CHRIST John. v.17. My Father works hitherto, and I work; or, I exert that
unremitting and unwearied energy, which is the life of the creation. -- Thus
the words are paraphrased by a masterly expositor, who has illustrated the life
of our blessed LORD, in the most elegant taste of criticism; with the most
amiable spirit of devotion, and without any mixture of the malignant spleen, or
low singularities, of a party.

See the Family Expositor, Vol. I. Sect. 47.
actuates them, which would otherwise be lifeless and insignificant. --
Pensioners they are, constant pensioners on his bounty; and borrow their all
from his fullness. He only has life; and whatever operates, operates by an
emanation from his all sufficiency. Does the grape refresh you with its
enlivening juices? It is by a warrant received, and virtue derived, from the
Redeemer. Does bread strengthen your heart, and prove the staff of your life?
Remember, that it is by the Savior's appointment, and through the efficacy of
his operation. You are charmed with his melody, when the Time of the singing of
birds is come, and the voice of the nightingale is heard in your land. You
taste his goodness in the luscious fig, the melting peach, and the musky
flavor of the apricot. You smell his sweetness in the opening honeysuckle, and
every odoriferous shrub.

Could these creatures speak for themselves, they would, doubtless, disclaim
all sufficiency of their own, and ascribe the whole honor to their Maker. --
"We are servants," would they say, of HIM, who died for you. Cisterns only, dry
cisterns in ourselves, we transmit to mortals no more, than the uncreated
fountain transfuses into us. Think not, that, from any ability of our own, we
furnish you with assistance, or administer to your comfort. It Is the divine
energy, the divine energy alone, that works in us, and does you good. -- We
serve you, O ye sons of men, that you may love him, who placed us in these
stations. O! love the LORD, therefore, all ye who are supported by our
ministry; or else we shall Romans viii.22.
groan, with indignation and regret, at your abuse of our services. -- Use us,
and welcome; for we are yours, if ye are CHRIST's. Crop our choicest beauties;
rifle all our treasures; accommodate yourselves with our most valuable
qualities; only let us be incentives to your gratitude, and motives to your
obedience.

Having surveyed the spacious sky, and sent a glance round the inferior
creation, it is time to descend from this eminence, and confine my attention to
the beautiful spot below -- Here nature, always pleasing, every where lovely,
appears with peculiar attractions. Yonder, she seems dressed in her dishabille;
grand, but irregular. Here, she calls in her hand maid art; and shines in all
the delicate ornaments, which the nicest cultivation is able to convey. Those,
are her common apartments, where she lodges her ordinary guests; This, is her
cabinet of curiosities, where she entertains her intimate acquaintance. -- My
eye shall often expatiate over those scenes of universal fertility: My feet
shall sometimes brush through the thicket, or traverse the lawn, or stroll
along the forest glade: But to this delightful retreat, shall be my chief
resort. Thither, will I make excursions; but here, will I dwell.

If, from my low procedure, I may form an allusion to the most exalted
practices; I would observe upon this occasion, that the celebrated Erasmus, and
our judicious Lock, having trod the circle of the sciences, and ranged through
the whole extent of human literature, at length betook themselves solely to the
Bible. Leaving the sages of antiquity, they sat incessantly at the feet of
JESUS. Wisely they withdrew, from that immense multiplicity of learning; from
those endless tracts of amusing erudition, where noxious weeds are mixed with
wholesome herbs; where, is generally a much larger growth of prickly shrubs,
than of fruitful boughs. They spent their most mature hours, in those hallowed
gardens, which GOD's own wisdom planted; which GOD's own spirit waters; and
in which GOD's own son is continually walking. Where, he meets those that
seek him; and reveals to them the glories of his person, and the riches or
his goodness.

Thus would I finish the remainder of my days! Having just tasted (what they
call) the politer studies; I would now devote my whole application to the
lively oracles. From other pursuits, I might glean, perhaps, a few scattered
fragments of low, of lean, of unsatisfactory instruction. From this, I trust to
reap a harvest of the sublimest truths* the noblest improvements; and the
purest joys. Quicquid docetur, veritas; quicquid, praecipitur, bonitas;
quicquid promittitur, felicitas.
-- Wast me then, O! wast my mind to Sion's consecrated bowers. Let my thoughts
perpetually rove through the awfully pleasing walks of inspiration. Here grow
those heaven born plants, the trees of life and knowledge; whose ambrosial
fruits we now may take and eat, and live forever. Here, flow those precious
streams of grace and righteousness; whose living waters "whosoever drinks,
shall thirst no more." And what can the fables of Grecian song, or the finest
pages of Roman eloquence -- what can they exhibit, in any degree comparable to
these matchless prerogatives of revelation? -- Therefore, though I should not
dislike to pay a visit now and then to my heathen masters, I would live with
the prophets and apostles. With those, I would carry on some occasional
correspondence; but these should be my bosom friends; my inseparable
companions; "my delight, and my counselors."

What sweets are these, which so agreeably salute my nostrils? They are the
breath of the flowers; the incense of the garden. -- How liberally does the
jessamine dispense her odoriserous riches? How deliciously has the woodbine
embalmed this morning walk? The air is all perfume. -- And is not this, another
most engaging argument, to forsake the bed of sloth? Who would lie dissolved in
senseless slumbers; while so many breathing sweets, invite him to a feast of
fragrancy? Especially considering, that the advancing day will exhale the
volatile dainties. A fugitive treat they are, prepared only for the wakeful and
industrious. Whereas, when the sluggard lists his heavy eyes, the flowers will
droop; their fine scents be dissipated; and, instead of this refreshing
humidity, the air will become a kind of liquid fire.

With this very motive, heightened by a representation of the most charming
pieces of morning scenery, the parent of mankind awakes his lovely consort.
There is such a delicacy in the choice, and so much life in the description of
these rural images, that I cannot excuse myself, without repeating the whole
passage. -- Whisper it, some friendly genius in the ear of every one, who is
now sunk in sleep, and lost to all these refined gratifications!

Awake: The morning shines, and the fresh field
Calls you: Ye lose the prime, to mark how spring
The tended plants, how blows the citron grove;
What drops the myrrh, and what the balmy reed;
How Nature paints her colors; how the be
Sits on the bloom, extracting liquid sweets. MILT. Par. Lost, B. V. l. 20.

How delightful is the fragrance! It is distributed in the nicest proportion;
neither so strong, as to oppress the organs; nor so faint, as to elude them. We
are soon cloyed at a sumptuous banquet, but this pleasure never loses its
poignancy, never palls the appetite. -- Here, luxury itself is innocent; or
rather, in this case, indulgence is incapable of excess. -- This balmy
entertainment, not only regales the sense, but Ointment and perfume rejoice the
heart.
Prove. xxvii.9.
cheers the very soul; and, instead of clogging, elates its powers. -- It puts
me in mind of that ever memorable sacrifice, which was once made in behalf of
offending mortals, I mean the sacrifice of the blessed JESUS; when he offered
up himself to GOD, "for a sweet smelling favor." Such the Holy Spirit styles
that wonderful oblation; as if no image, in the whole sensible creation, was so
proper to give us an idea of the ineffable satisfaction, which the Father of
Mercies conceived, from that unparalleled atonement; as the pleasing
sensations, which such rich perfumes are capable of raising. Thousands of rams,
and ten thousands of rivers of oil, from an apostate world; the most submissive
acknowledgments, added to the most costly offerings, from men of defiled hands,
and unclean lips; what could they have effected? A prophet represents the High
and lofty One, that inhabiteth eternity, turning himself away from such filthy
rags; turning himself away, with a disdainful abhorrence, Amos v.21, 22.
as from the noisome streams of a dunghill. -- But in CHRIST's immaculate
holiness; in CHRIST's consummate obedience; in CHRIST's most precious
bloodshedding; with what unimaginable complacency, does justice rest satisfied,
and vengeance acquiesce! -- All thy works, O thou surety for ruined sinners!
all thy sufferings, O thou slaughtered Lamb of GOD! as well as all thy
garments, O thou bridegroom of thy church! smell of myrrh, aloes, and cassia!
Psalm xlv.9.
They are infinitely more grateful to the eternal Godhead, than the choicest
exhalations of the garden, than all the odours of the spicy east, can be to the
human nostrils.

As the altar of old sanctified the gift; so this is the great propitiation,
which recommends the obnoxious persons, and unprofitable services of the
believing world. In this, may my soul be interested! By this, may it be
reconciled to the Father! -- There is such a leprous depravity cleaving to my
nature, as pollutes whatever I perform. My most profound adorations, and
sincerest acts of religion, must not presume to challenge a reward, but humbly
implore forgiveness. A writer of distinguished superiority, thus addresses the
great observer of actions, and searcher of hearts; and vindicates my
sentiments, while he so justly and beautifully utters his own; Look down, great
GOD, with pity's softest eye,
On a poor breathing particle in dust.
His crimes forgive; forgive his virtues too,
Those smaller faults, half converts to the right.
Night Thoughts, No. IX.
Renouncing, therefore, myself in every instance of duty; disclaiming all
shadow of confidence See Page 44, and 45, in the second Edition of a most
candid and evangelical little treatise, called CHRISTIANITY the great ORNAMENT
of human life. -- If christians happily avoid the dangerous extreme, and too
often fatal rock, of a dead fruitless faith on the one hand, he [ i. e. Satan]
will endeavor, by all kind of plausible insinuations, to split them on the
opposite, viz. Spiritual pride, ostentation, and dependence on their works, as
if THESE were the meritorious, or procuring cause of all true peace, hope,
consolation, and divine acceptance. -- Now this self dependence may be ranked
among the most dangerous of the infernal politics because the fatal poison
lies deep, and too often undiscerned.
in any deeds of my own; may I now, and evermore, be accepted through the
beloved!

What colors, what charming colors, are here! These, so nobly bold; and
those, so delicately languid. What a glow is enkindled in some! what a gloss
shines upon others! In one, methinks, I see the ruby with her bleeding
radiance; in another, the sapphire with her sky-tinctured blue; in all, such an
exquisite richness of dies, as no other set of paintings in the universe can
boast. -- Who can paint
Like Nature? Can imagination boast,
Amid his gay creation, hues like these?
And can be mix them with that matchless skill,
And lay them on so delicately fine,
And lose them in each other, as appears
In every bud that blows? --
THOMS. Spring^.
-- With what a masterly skill, is every one of the varying tints disposed!
Here they seem to be thrown on with an easy dash of security and freedom;
there, they are adjusted by the nicest touches of art and accuracy. Those which
form the ground, are always so judiciously chosen as to heighten the luster of
the superadded figures; while the verdure of the impalement, or the shadings of
the foliage, impart new liveliness to the whole. Indeed; whether they are
blended, or arranged; softened, or contrasted; they are manifestly under the
conduct of a taste, that never mistakes; a felicity, that never falls short of
the very perfection of elegance. -- Fine, inimitably fine, is the texture of
the web; on which these shining treasures are displayed. What are the labors
of the Persian looms, or the boasted commodities of Brussels, compared with
these curious manufactures of nature? Compared with these, the most admired
chintzes lose their reputation; even superfine cambricks, appear coarse as
canvass in their presence.

What a cheering argument does our Savior derive from hence, to strengthen our
affiance in GOD! He directs us to learn a lesson of heaven depending faith,
from every bird that wings the air; and from every flower, that blossoms in the
field. If providence, with unremitted care supports those inferior creatures,
and arrays these insensible beings with so much splendor; surely, he will in
no wise withhold from his elect children, "Bread to eat, and raiment to put
on." -- Ye faithful followers of the Lamb, dismiss every low anxiety, relating
to the needful sustenance of life. He that feeds the ravens, from an
inexhaustible magazine; he that paints the plants, with such surpassing
elegance; in short, he that provides so liberally, both for the animal and
vegetable parts of his creation; will not, cannot neglect his own people. --
Fear not little flock, ye peculiar objects of almighty love! it is your
Father's good pleasure to give you a kingdom. Luke xii.32.
And if he freely gives you an everlasting kingdom hereafter, is it possible to
suppose* that he will deny you any necessary conveniences here?

One cannot forbear reflecting in this place, on the too prevailing humor, of
being fond and ostentatious of dress. Mr. Addison has a fine remark on a female
warrior, celebrated by Virgil. He observes, that with all her other great
qualities, this little foible mingled itself. Because, as the poet relates, an
intemperate fondness for a rich and splendid suit of armor, betrayed her into
ruin. In this circumstance, our critic discovers a moral concealed; this he
admires, as a neat, though oblique satire, on that trifling passion.

Spect. Vol. I. No. 15. I would refer it to the judicious reader, whether there
is not a beauty of the same kind, but touched with a more masterly hand, in the
song of Deborah. -- Speaking of Sisera's mother, the sacred eucharistick ode
represents her as anticipating, in her fond fancy, the victory of her son; and
indulging the following soliloquy. -- Have they not sped? Have they not divided
the prey? To Sisera a prey of diverse colors, a prey of diverse colors of
needlework; of diverse colors of needlework on both sides; meet for the necks
of them that take the spoil? -- She takes no notice of the signal service,
which her hero would do to his country, by quelling so dangerous an
insurrection. She never reflects on the present acclamations, the future
advancement, and the eternal renown, which are the tribute usually paid to a
conqueror's merit. She can conceive, it seems, nothing greater than to be clad
in an embroidered vesture; and to trail along the ground, a robe of the richest
dies. This is, in her imagination, the most lordly spoil he can win; the most
stately trophy he can erect. -- It is also observable, how the dwells upon the
trivial circumstance, ^eit^rating it again and again. It has so charmed her
ignoble heart; so entirely engrossed her little views; that she can think of
nothing else; speak of nothing else; and can hardly ever desist from the
darling topic. -- Is not this a keen, though delicately couched censure, on
that poor, contemptible, grovelling taste, which is enamoured with silken
finery, and makes the attributes of a butterfly the idol of its affections?

How conspicuous is the elevated and magnificent spirit of that venerable
Mother in Israel, when viewed in comparison with the low, the despicable turn
of this Canaanitish lady! -- Such strong and beautiful contrasts are, I think,
some of the most striking excellencies of poetic painting; and in no book are
they more frequently used, or expressed with greater life, than in the sacred
volumes of inspiration.


What an abject and mistaken ambition is this! How unworthy the dignity of
immortal, and the wisdom of rational beings! Especially, since these little
productions of the earth, have indisputably the preeminence in such outward
embellishments. -- Go, clothe thyself with purple, and fine linen; trick
thyself up in all the gay attire, which the shuttle or the needle can furnish.
Yet know, to the mortification of thy vanity, that the native elegance of a
common daisy, Peaceful and lowly in their native soil,
They neither know to spin, nor care to toil;
Yet with confessed magnificence deride
Our mean attire, and impotence of pride.
PRIOR.
eclipses all this elaborate finery. -- Nay, were thou decked like some
illustrious princess, on her coronation day, in all the splendor of royal
apparel; could thou equal even Solomon, in the height of his magnificence
and glory; yet, would the meanest among the flowery populace outshine thee.
Every discerning eye, would give the preference, to these beauties of the Mr.
Cowley, with his usual brilliancy of imagination, styles them stars of earth.
ground. -- Scorn then to borrow thy recommendations from a neat disposition of
threads, and a curious arrangement of colors. Assume a becoming greatness of
temper. Let thy endowments be of the immortal kind. Study to be all glorious
within. Be clothed with humility. Wear the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit.
How beautifully does the prophet describe the furniture of a renewed and
heavenly mind, under the similitude of a rich and complete suit of apparel! I
will greatly rejoice in the LORD; my soul shall be joyful in my GOD; for he
has clothed me with the garments of salvation; he has covered me with the
robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a
bride adorneth herself with her jewels. Isai. lxi.10.
To say all in a word; Put on the LORD JESUS CHRIST: Romans xiii.14.
Let his blood be sprinkled upon thy conscience, and it shall be whiter than
the virgin snows. Let his righteousness, like a spotless robe, adorn thy inner
man, and thou shall be amiable, even in the most distinguishing eye of GOD. Let
his blessed spirit dwell in thy heart; and, under his sanctifying operations,
thou shall be made partaker of a divine nature.

These are the real excellencies; truly noble accomplishments these. In this
manner be arrayed, be beautified; and thou will not find a rival in the
feathers of a peacock, or the foliation of a tulip. These will exalt thee, far
above the low pretensions of lace and embroidery. These will prepare thee to
stand in the beatifick presence, and to take thy seat among the angels of light.

What an enchanting situation is this! One can scarce be melancholy within the
atmosphere of flowers. Such lively hues, and delicious odours, not only address
themselves agreeably to the senses, but touch, with a surprising delicacy, the
sweetest movements of the mind.

-- To the heart inspiring
Vernal I would have my reader endeavor to MORALIZE this natural pleasure of
the soul, and to improve this vernal delight, as Milton calls it, into a
christian virtue. When we find ourselves inspired with this pleasing instinct,
this secret satisfaction and complacency arising from the beauties of the
creation, let us consider to whom we stand indebted for all these
entertainments of sense; and who it is, that thus opens his hand, and fills the
world with good. -- Such an habitual disposition of mind consecrates every
field and wood; turns an ordinary walk into a morning and evening sacrifice;
and will improve those transient gleams, which naturally brighten up and
refresh the soul on such occasions, into an inviolable and perpetual state of
bliss and happiness. Spect. Vol. V. No. 394.
delight and joy.
MILT. B. IV. How often have I felt them dissipate the gloom of thought, and
transfuse a sudden gaiety through the dejected spirit! I cannot wonder, that
kings descend from their thrones to walk amidst blooming ivory and gold; or
retire from the most sumptuous feast, to be recreated with the more refined
sweets of the garden. I cannot wonder, that queens forego, for a while, the
compliments of a nation, to receive the tribute of the parterre; or withdraw
from all the glitter of a court, to be attended with the more splendid equipage
of a bed of flowers. -- But, if this be so pleasing, what transported pleasure
must arise, from the fruition of uncreated excellency! O! what unknown delight,
to enter into thine immediate presence, most blessed LORD GOD! To see thee,
Isaiah represents the felicity of the righteous, in the everlasting world, by
this elegant and amiable image; Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty. --
Milton touches the same subject, with wonderful elevation and majesty of
thought: -- They walk with God,
High in salvation and the climes of bliss.
Words, which like the fiery car, almost transport our affections ^o those
glorious abodes. Isai. xxxiii.17. MILT. B. XI.v.707.
thou King of Heaven, and LORD of glory, no longer through a glass darkly, but
face to face! To have all thy goodness, all thy greatness, shine before us; and
be made glad forever with the brightest discovery of thy perfections, with the
ineffable joy of thy countenance!

This we cannot bear, in our present imperfect state. The effulgence of
unveiled divinity, would dazzle a mortal sight. Our feeble faculties, would be
overwhelmed with such a fullness of superabundant bliss; and must lie oppressed,
under such an exceeding great, eternal weight of glory. -- But, when this
corruptible has put on incorruption, the powers of the soul will be greatly
invigorated; and these earthly tabernacles, will be transformed into the
likeness of CHRIST's glorious body. Then, though the moon shall be confounded,
and the sun ashamed, Isai. xxiv.23.
when the LORD of hosts is revealed from Heaven; yet, shall his faithful people
be enabled to see him as he is. 1 John iii.2.


Here then, my wishes, here be fixed. Be this your determined and invariable
aim. -- Here, my affections, here give a loose to your whole ardour. Cry out,
in the language of inspiration, This one thing have I desired of the LORD,
which, with incessant earnestness, I will require; that I may dwell in the
celestial house of the LORD, all the days of my future life, to behold the fair
beauty of the LORD, Psalm xxvii.4.
and to contemplate, with wonder and adoration -- with unspeakable and
everlasting rapture -- all the attributes of the incomprehensible Godhead.

Solomon, a most penetrating judge of human nature, knowing how highly mankind
is charmed, with the fine qualities of flowers, has figured out the blessed
JESUS, that "fairest among ten thousand," by these lovely representatives. He
styles him Cant. ii.1. Malus ut arboribus dec^ri est, ut vitibus uvae,
Utque r^sae campis, ut lilia vallibus alba,
Sic CHRISTUS decus omne suis. --

The rose of Sharon, and The lilly of the valleys; By the lilly of the valleys,
I apprehend, is meant, not the flower which commonly passes under the
denomination, and is comparatively mean; but the grand, majestic, garden
lilly; growing in a rich irriguous soil, where it flourishes in the most ample
manner, and arrives at the highest perfection. The circumstance of the valleys,
added by the sacred writer, is significant not of the species, but of the
place. -- This is by far the noblest interpretation, and most exactly suitable
to the spiritual sense; which intimates, that the blessed JESUS delights to
dwell, by the communications of his spirit, in humble hearts. -- (...) Lilium
vallibus gaudes.
like the first, full of delights and communicable graces; like the last,
exalted in majesty, and complete in beauty. -- In that sacred pastoral, he
ranges the creation; borrows its most finished forms, and dips his pencil in
its choicest dies, to present us with a sketch of the amiableness of his
person. His amiableness, who is the light of the world; the glory of his
church; the only hope, the sovereign consolation of sinners; and exalted,
infinitely exalted, not only above the sublimest comparison, but even above all
blessing and praise. -- May I also make the same heavenly use of all su^lunary
enjoyments! Whatever is pleasurable, or charming below, let it raise my desire
to those delectable objects, which are above. Which will yield, not partial,
but perfect felicity; not transient, but never ending satisfaction and joy. --
Yes, my soul, let these beauties in miniature, always remind thee of that
glorious person, in whom "dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily." Let
these little emanations teach thee to thirst after the eternal fountain. O! may
the creatures be thy constant clue to the Creator! For this is a certain truth,
and deserves thy frequent recollection, demands thy most attentive
consideration, that the whole compass of finite perfection is only a faint ray,
-- Thou sitt'st above all heavens,
To us invisible, or dimly seen
In these thy lowest works; yet these declare
Thy goodness beyond thought, and power divine.
MILT. Book V.
shot from that immense source -- is only a small drop, derived from that
inexhaustible ocean -- of all good.

What a surprising variety is observable, among the flowery tribes! How has the
bountiful hand of Providence, diversified these nicest pieces of his
workmanship! added the charms of an endless novelty to all their other
perfections! -- A constant uniformity would soon render the entertainment
tiresome or insipid; therefore, every species is formed on a separate plan, and
exhibits something entirely new. The fashion spreads not from family to family;
but every one has a mode of its own, which is truly original. The most cursory
glance, perceives an apparent difference, as well as a peculiar delicacy, in
the airs and habits, the attitude and lineaments, of every distinct class.

Some rear their heads, with a majestic mien, and overlook, like sovereigns or
nobles, the whole paterre. Others seem more moderate in their aims, and advance
only to the middle stations; a genius turned for heraldry, might term them, the
gentry of the border. While others, free from all aspiring views, creep
unambitiously on the ground, and look like the commonalty of the kind. -- Some
are intersected with elegant stripes, o^ studded with radiant spots. Some
affect to be genteely powdered, o^ neatly fringed; while others are plain in
their aspect, unaffected in their dress, and content to please with a naked
simplicity. Some assume the monarch's purple; some look most becoming in the
virgin's white; but black, doleful black, has no admittance into the wardrobe
of spring. The weeds of mourning would be a manifest indecorum, when nature
holds an universal festival. She would now inspire none but delightful ideas;
and therefore always makes her appearance in some -- Nunc formosissimus annus.
VIR^.
amiable suit. -- Here, stands a warrior, clad with crimson; there fits a
magistrate, robed in scarlet; and yonder, struts a pretty fellow, that seems to
have dipped his plumes in the rainbow, and glitters in all the gay colors of
that resplendent arch. Some rise into a curious cup, or fall into a set of
beautiful bells. Some spread themselves in a swelling tuft, or crowd into a
delicious cluster. -- In some, the predominant stain, softens by the gentlest
diminutions; till it has even stole away from itself. The eye is amused at the
agreeable delusion; and we wonder to find our selves insensibly decoyed into a
quite different luster. In others, you would think the fine tinges were emulous
of preeminence. Disdaining to mingle, they confront one another with the
resolution of rivals, determined to dispute the prize of beauty; while each is
improved, by the opposition, into the highest vivacity of complexion.

How manifold are thy works Psalm civ.24.
O LORD! Multiplied even to a prodigy. Yet in wisdom, consummate wisdom, have
thou made them all. -- How I admire the vastness of the contrivance, and the
exactness of the execution! Man, feeble man, with difficulty accomplishes a
single work. Hardly, and after many efforts, does he arrive at a tolerable
imitation of some one production of nature. But, the almighty artist spoke
millions of substances into instantaneous being; the whole collection
wonderfully various, and each individual completely perfect. -- Repeated
experiments generally, I might say always, discover errors, or defects, in our
happiest inventions. Nay, what wins our approbation, at the present hour, or in
this particular place, is very probably, in some remote period or some distant
clime, treated with contempt. Whereas, these fine structures have pleased every
taste, in every country, for almost six thousand years. Nor has any Eccles.
iii.14. I know, that whatsoever GOD does, it shall be for ever: Nothing can be
put to it, nor any thing taken from it.


fault been detected in the original plan, nor any room left for the least
improvement upon the first model. -- All our performances, the more minutely
they are scanned, the more imperfect they appear. With regard to these delicate
objects, the more we search into their properties, the more we are ravished
with their graces. They are sure to disclose fresh strokes of the most masterly
skill; in proportion to the attention, with which they are examined.

Nor is the simplicity of the operation less astonishing, than the accuracy of
the workmanship, or the infinitude of the effects. Should you ask, Where, and
what are the materials, which beautify the blooming world? What rich tints;
what splendid dies; what stores of shining crayons; stand by the Heavenly
Limner* when he paints the robe of nature? It is answered, his powerful pencil
needs no such costly apparatus. A single principle, under his conducting hand,
branches out into an immensity of the most varied, and most finished forms. The
moisture of the earth, and of the circumambient air, passed through proper
strainers, and disposed in a range of pellucid tubes: This performs all the
wonders, and produces all the beauties of vegetation. This creeps along the
fibers of the low spread moss; and climbs to the very tops of the lofty waving
cedars. This, attracted by the root, and circulating through invisible canals;
this bursts into gems, expands itself into leaves, and clothes the forest, with
all its verdant honors. -- This one, When every several effect has a
particular separate cause, this gives no pleasure to the spectator, as not
discovering contrivance. But that work is beheld with admiration and delight,
as the result of deep counsel, which is complicated in its parts, and yet
simple in its operations. Where a great variety of effects are see^ to arise
from one principle operating uniformly. ABERNETHY on the Attributes.
plain and simple cause gives birth to all the charms, which deck the youth and
maturity of the year. This blushes, in the early hepatica; and flames in the
late advancing poppy. This reddens into blood, in the veins of the mulberry;
and attenuates itself into leafen gold, to create a covering for the quince.
This breathes, in all the fragrant gales of our gardens; and weeps odorous gum
in the groves of Arabia. -- So Isa. xxv^^i.29.
wonderful is our creator in counsel, and so excellent in working!

In a grove of tulips, or a knot of pinks, one perceives a difference in almost
every individual. Scarce any two, are turned and tinctured exactly alike. Each
allows himself a little particularity in his dress, though all belong to one
family; so that they are various, and yet the same. -- A pretty emblem this, of
the smaller differences between protestant christians. There are modes in
religion, which admit of variation, without prejudice to sound faith, or real
holiness. Just as the drapery, on these pictures of the spring, may be formed
after a variety of patterns, without blemishing their beauty, or altering their
nature. -- Be it so then, that, in some points of inconsiderable consequence,
several of our brethren dissent; yet, let us all live amicably and sociably
together; for we harmonize in principles, though we vary in punctilios. Let us
join in conversation, and intermingle interests; discover no estrangement of
behavior, and cherish no alienation of affection. If any strife subsists, let
it be to follow our Divine Master most closely, in humility of heart, and
unblameableness of life. Let it be to serve one another most readily, in all
the kind offices of a cordial friendship. Thus shall we be united, though
distinguished; united in the same grand fundamentals, though distinguished by
some small circumstantials; united in one important bond of brotherly love,
though distinguished by some slighter peculiarities of sentiment.

Between christians, whose judgments disagree only about a form of prayer, or
manner of worship, I apprehend there is no more essential difference, than
between flowers which bloom from the same kind of seed, but happen to be
somewhat diversified in the mixture of their colors. Whereas, if one denies
the divinity of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, and degrades the incarnate GOD to the
meanness of a mere creature; if another cries up the worthiness of human works,
and depreciates the alone meritorious righteousness of the glorious Mediator;
if a third addresses the incommunicable honors to a finite being, and bows to
the image, or prays to the saint -- These are errors, extremely derogatory to
the REDEEMER's dignity, and not a little prejudicial to the comfort of his
people: Against these to remonstate; against these to urge every argument, and
use every dissuasive, bespeaks not the censorious bigot, but the friend of
truth, and the lover of mankind. Whereas, to stand neuter and silent, while
such principles are propagated, would be an instance of criminal remissness,
rather than of christian moderation. For the persons, we will not fail to
maintain a tender compassion; we will not cease to put up earnest
intercessions; we will also acknowledge and love, whatever is excellent and
amiable in their character. Yet, we dare not subscribe their creed; we must not
secret our strong reasons; we cannot remit our assiduous, but kind endeavors,
if by any means we may reconcile them to a more scriptural belief, and a purer
worship. In some former editions, I expressed myself on this point, unw^rily
and harshly. But my meaning, and real sentiments, were no other than those
represented above. -- The reader, from such unguarded intimations, might too
naturally be led to conclude, that the author avows, and would stir up a spirit
of persecution. But, this is a method of dealing with opponents in religious
doctrines, which he disclaims, as absurd; and abhors, as iniquitous. He is for
no force, but that of rational conviction; for no constraint, but that of
affectionate persuasion. Thus, if you please, compel them to come in, Luke
xiv.23.


Another circumstance, recommending and endearing the flowery creation, is
their regular succession. They make not their appearance all at once, but in an
orderly rotation. While a proper number of these obliging retainers are in
waiting, the others abscond; but hold themselves in a posture of service, ready
to take their turn, and fill each his respective station, the instant it
becomes vacant. The snowdrop, foremost of the lovely train, breaks her way
through the frozen soil, in order to present her early compliments to her Lord.
Dressed in the robe of innocence, she steps forth, fearless of danger; long
before the trees have ventured to unfold their leaves, even while the icicles
are pendent on our houses. Next, peeps out the crocus; but cautiously, and with
an air of timidity. She hears the howling blasts, and skulks close to her low
situation. Afraid she seems, to make large excursions from her root; while so
many ruffian winds are abroad, and scouring along the ether. Nor is the violet
last, in this shining embassy of the year, which, with all the embellishments,
that would grace a royal garden, condescends to line our hedges, and grow at
the feet of briars. Freely, and without any solicitation, she distributes the
bounty of her emissive sweets; while herself, with an exemplary humility,
retires from sight; seeking rather to administer pleasure, than to win
admiration. Prodesse quam conspici.
Emblem, expressive emblem, of those modest virtues, which delight to bloom in
obscurity; which extend a cheering influence to multitudes, who are scarce
acquainted with the source of their comforts! Motive, engaging motive, to that
ever active beneficence; which stays not for the importunity of the distressed,
but anticipates their suit, and prevents them with the blessings of its
goodness! The poor polyanthus, that lately adorned the border with her
sparkling beauties, and, transplanted into our windows, gave us a fresh
entertainment; is now no more. I saw her complexion fade; I perceived her
breath decay, till at length she expired, and dropped into her grave. -- Scarce
have we sustained this loss, but in comes the auricula, and more than retrieves
it. Arrayed she comes, in a splendid variety of amiable forms; with an eye of
crystal, and garments of the most glossy satin; exhaling perfume, and powdered
with silver. A very distinguished procession this! The favorite care of the
florist! Scarce one among them, but is dignified with a character of renown; or
has the honor to represent some celebrated toast. But these also,
notwithstanding their illustrious titles, have exhausted their whole stock of
fragrance, and are mingled with the meanest dust. -- Who could forbear grieving
at their departure, did not the tulips begin to raise themselves on their fine
wands, or stately stalks? They flush the paterre with one of the gayest dresses
that blooming nature wears. Did ever beau or belle make so gaudy an appearance,
in a birth night suit? Here, one may behold the innocent wantonness of beauty.
Here, she indulges a thousand freaks, and sports herself in the most charming
diversity of colors. Yet, I should wrong her, were I to call her a coquet;
because, she plays her lovely changes, not to enkindle dissolute affections,
but to display her Creator's glory. -- Soon arises the anemone; encircled at
the bottom, with a spreading robe; and rounded at the top, into a beautiful
dome. In its loosely flowing mantle, you may observe a noble negligence; in its
gently bending tufts, the nicest symmetry. I would term it, the fine gentleman
of the garden; because, it seems to have learned the singular address, of
uniting simplicity with refinement, of reconciling art and ease. -- The same
month has the merit of producing the ranunculus. All bold and graceful, it
expands the riches of its foliage; and acquires, by degrees, the lovliest
enamel in the world. As persons of intrinsic worth, disdain the superficial
arts of recommendation, practiced by fops; so, this lordly flower scorns to
borrow any of its excellence, from powders and essences. It needs no such
attractives, to render it the darling of the curious; being sufficiently
engaging from the elegance of its figure, the radiant variety of its tinges,
and a certain superior dignity of aspect. -- Methinks, nature improves in her
operations. Her latest strokes are most masterly. To crown the collection, she
introduces the carnation. Which captivates every eye, with a noble spread of
graces; and charms another sense, with a profusion of exquisite odours. This
single flower has centered in itself, the perfections of all the preceding. The
moment it appears, it so commands our attention, that we scarce regret the
absence of the rest. -- The gilly flower, like a real friend, attends you
through all the vicissitudes and alterations of the season. While others make a
transient visit only, this is rather an inhabitant, than a guest in your
gardens; adds fidelity to complaisance.

It is in vain to attempt a catalogue of these amiable gifts. There is an
endless multiplicity, in their characters; yet an invariable order, in their
approaches. Every month, almost every week, has its peculiar ornaments; not
servilely copying the works of its predecessor, but forming, still forming, and
still executing some new design. So lavish is the fancy, yet so exact is the
process, of nature!

Here, let me stand a while, to contemplate this distribution of flowers,
through the several periods of the year. -- Were they all to blossom together,
there would be at once a promiscuous throng, and at once a total privation. We
should scarce have an opportunity, of adverting to the dainty qualities of
half; and must soon lose the agreeable company of them all. But now, since
every species has a separate post to occupy; and a distinct interval for
appearing; we can take a leisurely and minute survey of each succ^eding set. We
can view and review their forms; enter into a more intimate acquaintance with
their charming accomplishments; and receive all those pleasing services, which
they are commissioned to yield. -- This remarkable piece of economy, is
productive of another very valuable effect. It not only places, in the most
advantageous light, every particular community; but is also a sure provisionary
resource against the frailty of the whole nation. Or, to speak more truly, it
renders the flowery tribes a sort of In allusion to the celebrated practice of
the Persian kings; who maintained, for their life guard, a body of troops,
called immortal; because it perpetually subsisted: For as soon as any of the
men died, another was immediately put into his place. ROLLIN's Ancient History,
VOL. II.
immortal corpse. For, though some are continually dropping, yet, by this
expedient, others are as continually rising, to beautify our borders, and
prolong the entertainment.

What goodness is this, to provide such a series of gratifications for mankind!
Both to diversify, and perpetuate, the fine collation! To take care, that our
paths should be, in a manner, incessantly strewed with flowers! -- And what
wisdom, to bid every one of these insensible beings, know the precise juncture
for their coming forth! Insomuch that no actor on a stage, can be more exact in
performing his part; can make a more regular entry, or a more punctual exit.

Who emboldens the daffodil, to venture abroad in February; and to trust her
flowering gold, with inclement and treacherous skies? Who informs the various
tribes of fruit bearing blossoms, that vernal suns, and a more genial warmth,
are fittest for their delicate texture? Who teaches the clove to stay, till
hotter beams are prepared, to infuse a spicy richness into her odours, and
tincture her complexion with the deepest crimson? -- Who disposes these
beautiful troops, into such orderly bodies; retarding some, and accelerating
others? Who has instructed them to file off, with such perfect regularity; as
soon as the duty of their respective station is over? And, when one detachment
retires, who gives the signal for another immediately to advance? Who, but that
unerring providence, which, from the highest thrones of angels, to the very
lowest degrees of existence, orders all things in "number, weight, and measure!"

These, O my soul, are the regulations of that most adorable, that most
beneficent being, who bowed the Heavens; came down to dwell on earth; and
united the frailty of thy mortal nature, to all the glories of his Godhead. All
the honor of this admirable establishment, belongs to thy ransom, thy surety,
thy Savior. To Him it belongs, who sustained the vengeance, which thou had
deserved, and wast doomed to suffer; who fulfilled the obedience, which thou
wast obliged, but unable, to perform; and who humbled himself (stupendous,
ineffable loving kindness!) humbled himself to death, even the death of the
cross. -- He formed this vast machine, and adjusted its nice dependencies. The
pillars, that support it; the embellishments, that adorn it; and the laws, that
govern it; are the result of his unsearchable counsels. O! the heights of his
majesty, and the depths of his abasement!

Which shall we admire most, his essential greatness, or his free grace? He
created the exalted seraph, that sings in glory; and every the minutest insect,
that flutters in air, or crawls in dust. He marks out a path, for all those
globes of light, which travel the circuit of the skies; and disdains not to
rear the violet from its lowly bed, or to plait the daisy which dresses our
plains. So grand are his operations; yet so condescending his regards! -- If
summer, like a sparkling bride, is brilliant and glorious in her apparel; what
is this, but a feeble reflection of his uncreated effulgence? If autumn, like a
munificent host, opens her stores, and gives us all things richly to enjoy;
what is this but a little taste of his inexhaustible liberality? If thunders
roar, you hear the sound of his trumpet: If lightnings glare, you see the
launching of his glittering spear; If the perpetual hills be scattered, and the
everlasting mountains bowed, you behold a display -- No, says the prophet, you
have rather Hab. iii.4. Nothing can be more magnificently conceived, than the
imagery of this whole chapter; and upon the foot of our interpretation, nothing
was ever more delicately and nobly turned, th^n the sentiment of this clause.
Other senses of the passage, I acknowledge, may be assigned with equal
propriety. But none, I think, can be imagined so majestic and sublime. As the
original will fairly admit of it; as it carries no disagreement with the
context; and expresses a most important, as well as undoubted truth; I hope, I
may be permitted to use it, at least by way of accommodation. -- Especially, as
it suggests one of the finest mottoes imaginable; wherewith to inscribe all the
visible productions of the Creator's hand. When, struck with astonishment, we
consider their grandeur, beauty, and consummate perfections; let us, in justice
to their author, apply the exalted reflection of this sacred ode: In all these
is the ^iding, rather an adequate display, of his matchless power. Though they
challenge our praise, and surpass our comprehension; yet they are by no means
the utmost exertions, but rather some slighter essays, of omnipotent skill. --
Milton, relating the overthrow of the fallen angels, introduces a gran^
circumstance, not much unlike the preceding. Messiah, unaided and alone, had
routed an innumerable host of apostate spirits. This was great and mavelous.
But to create a juster idea of the illustrious conqueror, our poet beautifully
adds; Yet half his strength he put not forth. If we forget to make the same
remark, when we contemplate GOD in his works; we must necessarily form very
scanty conceptions of that SUPREME BEING, before whom all nations are as a drop
of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance.
The hiding of his power. So immense is his power; so uncontrollable and
inconceivable; that all these mighty works are but a sketch, in which more is
concealed than discovered.

Thus, I think, we should always view the visible system; with an evangelical
telescope (if I may be allowed the expression) and with an evangelical
microscope. Regarding CHRIST JESUS, as the great projector and architect; who
planned, and executed, the amazing scheme. Whatever is magnificent or valuable
tremendous or amiable; should ever be ascribed to the redeemer. This, is the
christian's natural philosophy. With regard to this method of considering the
things that are seen; we have an inspired apostle for our preceptor and
precedent. Speaking of CHRIST, he says; Thou, LORD, in the beginning, have laid
the foundation of the earth; and the heavens are the work of thy hands. -- Did
we carefully attend to this leading principle, in all our examinations of
nature; it would, doubtless, be a most powerful means of enkindling our love,
and The apostles, I observe, delight to use this method of displaying the
honors of the Redeemer, and establishing the faith of his people -- The
beloved disciple, teaching that most precious doctrine, "of a Lamb slain to
take away the sins of the world;" in order to evince the sufficiency of
CHRIST's sacrifice for this blessed purpose, affirms, that all things were made
by him: And without him was not any thing, no, not so much as one single being,
made, John i.3. -- St. Paul, preaching the same glad tidings to the Colossians,
and expressly maintaining, that we have redemption through his blood; seems to
foresee an objection of this kind. To expiate transgressions against an
infinite majesty, is a most prodigious act. It must cost vastly more than any
common surety can pay, to redeem a sinful world. What reason have we to
believe, that JESUS, is equal to this mighty undertaking? All possible reason,
replies the apostle, from the dignity of his person, for he is the image of the
invisible GOD; and from the greatness of his works, for by him all things were
made. Consider the operations of his hands, and you cannot doubt the atoning
efficacy of his death, Col. i.15, 16. -- The author of the epistle to the
Hebrews, falls exactly into the same train of arguing. Declaring, that CHRIST
JESUS has purged our sins, by the sacrifice of himself; he proves his ample
ability for this tremendous office, from his essential excellence because he is
the brightness of his father's glory; and from his admirable works, because he
made the worlds, and upholdeth all things by the word of his power, Heb. i.2,
3. -- Which truth, as it is so important in itself; of such signal comfort to
christians; and so particularly insisted on, by the inspired writers; I hope, I
shall need no apology, for an attempt to illustrate and enforce it, in a kind
of evangelical Descant on Creation, annexed to these reflections.
strengthening our faith. When I look round upon millions of noble substances,
and carry with me this transporting reflection, The maker of them all, expired
on a cross for me; how can I remain any longer indifferent? Must not the
coldest heart, begin to glow with gratitude? -- When I survey an immensity of
the finest productions imaginable; and remember, that the author of them all,
is my righteousness and my redemption; how can I choose but repose the most
cheerful confidence, in such a Mediator?

Let me add one more remark, upon the admirable adjustment of every particular,
relating to these fine colonies planted in the paterre. -- With such accuracy
and correctness is their structure finished, that any the least conceivable
alteration, would very much impair their perfection. Should you see, for
instance, the nice disposition of the tulip's attire fly abroad, disorderly and
irregular, like the flaunting woodbine: Should the jessamine rear her
diminutive head on those grand columns which supports the hollihock: Should the
erect and manly aspect of the piony, hang down with a pensive air, like the
flexile bells of the hyacinth: Should that noble plainness, which distinguishes
the lily, be exchanged for the glittering fringes which edge the pink, or the
gaudy stains which bedrop the iris: Should those tapering pillars, which arise
in the middle of its vase, and, tipped with golden pendants, give such a luster
to the surrounding pannels of alabaster -- Should those sink and disappear,
like the chives which cover the heart of the anemone: -- In many of these
cases, would not the transposition be fantastical and awkward? In all, to the
apparent prejudice of every individual?

Again; with regard to the time of their appearing; this circumstance is
settled, by a remarkable foresight and precaution. What would become of the
sailor, if in very stormy weather, he should raise a lofty mast, and crowd it
with all his canvas! Such would be the ill effect; if the most stately species
of flowers, should presume to come abroad in the blustering months. Ah! how
would they rue the imprudent boldness! Therefore, those only that shoot the
^test stems, and display the smallest spread of leaves, or (if you please)
carry the least sail, are launched amidst the blowing seasons. How
injudiciously would the perf^^mer act, if he should unseal his finest essences,
and expose them to the northern winds, or wintry rains! Our blooming artists of
the aromatic profession, at least the most delicate among them, seem perfectly
aware of the consequences of such a procedure. Accordingly, they postpone the
opening of their odoriferous treasures, till a serener air, and more Casimir,
in a very poetical manner, addresses himself to the dormant rose; and most
prettily invites her to venture abroad, by the mention of these two
circumstances: Siderum sacros imitata vultus,
Quid lates dudum, Rosa? Delicatum
Efferre terris caput. O tepentis
Filia coell.
Jam tibi nubes fugiunt aquosae,
Quas fugant albis Zephyri quadrigis;
Jam tibi mulcet Boream jocantis
Aura Favoni^.
Child of the summer, charming rose,
No longer in confinement lie;
Arise to light; thy form disclose;
Rival the spangles of the sky.
The rains are gone; the storms are over;
Winter retires to make thee way:
Come then, thou sweetly blushing flower;
Come, lovely stranger, come away.
The sun is dressed in beaming smiles,
To give thy beauties to the day:
Young Zephyrs wait, with gentlest gales,
To fan thy bosom, as they play.

unclouded skies, grant a protection to their amiable traffic; till they are
under no more apprehensions, of having their spicy cells rifled by rude blasts,
or drowned in incessant showers.

What a striking argument is here for resignation: unfeigned resignation, to
all the disposals of providence! Too often are our dissatisfied thoughts apt to
find fault with divine dispensations. We tacitly arraign our Maker's conduct,
or question his kindness with regard to ourselves. We fancy our lot, not so
commodiously situated; or our condition, not so happily circumstanced; as if we
had been placed in some other station of life. -- But, let us behold this
exquisitely nice regulation of the minutest plants, and be ashamed of our
repining folly. Could any fiber in their composition, be altered; or one line
in their features, be transposed; without clouding some of their beauties?
Could any fold in their vestments be varied, or any link in their orderly
succession be broken, without injuring some delicate property? And does not
that all seeing eye, which preserves so exact a harmony, among these pretty
toys; maintain as watchful a care, over his rational creatures? Does he choose
the properest season, for the cowslip to arise, and drink the dews? And can he
neglect the concerns, or misjudge the conveniences of his sons and daughters?
He, who has so completely disposed, whatever pertains to the vegetable economy;
that the least diminution or addition, would certainly hurt the finished
scheme; does, without all peradventure, preside, with equal attention, over the
interests of his own people.

Be still, then, thou uneasy mortal; Permittas ipsis expendere numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris.
Nam pro jucundis aptissima quaeque dabunt dii:
Carior est illis homo, quam sibi. --
JUV. Since all the downward tracts of time
GOD's watchful eye surveys;
O! who so wise to choose our lot,
And regulate our ways?
Since none can doubt his equal love,
Unmeasurably kind;
To his unerring, gracious will,
Be every wish resigned.
Good when he gives, supremely good;
Nor less, when he denies;
Even crosses, from his sovereign hand,
Are blessings in disguise.

know, that GOD is unerringly wise; and be assured, that, amidst the greatest
multiplicity of beings, he does not overlook thee. Thy Savior has given me
authority to assert, that thou art of far superior value, in the estimate of
omnipotence, than all the herbage of the field. -- If his sacred will ordains
sickness for thy portion, never dare to imagine that uninterrupted health would
be more advantageous. If he pleases to withhold, or take away, children; never
presume to conclude, that thy happiness is blasted, because thy hopes of an
increasing family are disappointed. He, that marshals all the starry host, and
to accurately arranges every the meanest species of herbs; HE orders all the
peculiarities, all the changes of thy state, with a vigilance that nothing can
elude; with a goodness that endures forever. -- Bow thy head, therefore, in
humble acquiescence. Rest satisfied, that whatever is, by the appointment of
heaven, Whatever is, is right -- ^ Mr. Pope understands the maxim, according to
the limitation suggested above, he speaks a most undeniable and glorious truth.
But if that great poet includes whatever comes to pass, through the wild and
extravagant passions of men, surely no thinking person, at least no christian,
can accede to his opinion. -- What GOD orders, is wise, beyond all possibility
of correction; and good, above all that we can ask or think. His decrees, are
the result of infinite discernment; and his dispensations, the issues of
unbounded benevolence. -- But man, fallen man, is hurried away, by his lusts,
into a thousand irregularities; which are deplorably evil in themselves, and
attended with consequences manifestly pernicious to society. -- Let the
sentiment, therefore, be restrained to the disposals of Heaven, and I most
readily subscribe it. But, if it be extended to the conduct of men, and the
effects of their folly, I think myself obliged to enter my protest against it.
For, whatever kindles the divine indignation -- is cause of final ruin to the
author -- is strictly forbidden by GOD's holy word -- is contrary to the whole
design of his revealed will, and the very reverse of his essential attributes
-- This, cannot possibly be right. This, is most undoubtedly wrong.
Omnipotence, indeed, can overrule it, and educe good from it. But the very
notion of overruling, supposes it to be absolutely wrong in itself.
is right, is best.

Among all the productions of the third creating day, this of flowers seems to
be peculiarly designed for man. Man has the monopoly of this favor; it is
conferred on him by a sort of exclusive charter. See the imperial crown,
splendid and beautifully grand! See the tuberose, delicate and languishingly
fair! See all the pomp and glory of the parterre, where paint and perfume do
wonders. Yet the inferior animals are neither smit with their beauties, nor
regaled with their odours. The horse never stands still to gaze upon their
charms; nor does the ox turn aside to browse upon their sweets. Senses they
have, to discern these curious objects in the gross, but no taste, to
distinguish or relish their fine accomplishments. -- Just so* carnal and
unenlightened men may understand the literal meaning of scripture, may
comprehend the evidences of its divine inspiration; yet, have no relish of the
heavenly truths it teaches, no ardent longing for the spiritual blessings it
offers; and see no form or comeliness in the Savior it describes, so as to
render him the supreme desire of their souls.

The chief end of these beautiful appearances, philosophers say, is to enfold
and cherish the embryo seed; or to swathe the tender body during its infant
state. -- But, whatever is the chief end of nature, it is certain, she never
departs from the design of administering delight to mankind. We find that the
most important parts in the vegetable world, are those which are the most
beautiful. These are the seeds by which the several races of plants are
propagated and continued, and which are always lodged in flowers or blossoms.
Nature seems to hide her principal design, and to be industrious in making the
earth gay and delightful, while she is carrying on her great work, and intent
upon her own preservation. Spect. Vol. V. No. 387.
This is inseparably connected with her other views. -- Were it only to secure
a reproductive principle, what need of such elegant complications? Why so much
art employed, and so many decorations added? Why should vestments be prepared
richer than brocades, more delicate than lawns, and of a finer glow than the
most admired velvets? -- If the great mother had no other aim, than barely to
accommodate her little offspring, warm flannel, or homely sustian would have
served her turn. Served it full as well as the most sumptuous tissues, or all
the furniture of the mercer's shop.

Evident then it is, that flowers were endued with such enchanting graces for
the pleasure of man. In pursuance of this original intention, they have always
paid their court to the human race; they still seem particularly solicitous of
recommending themselves to our regard. The finest of each species crowd about
our habitations, and are rarely to be seen at a distance from our abodes. They
thrive under our cultivating hand, and observing eye; but degenerate, and pine
away, if unregarded by their lord. -- To win his attention, and deck his
retreats, they hide their deformities under ground; and display nothing but the
most graceful forms, and engaging colors, to his sight. -- To merit a farther
degree of his esteem, the generality of them dispense a delightful perfume.
What is still more obliging, they -- The flowers,
That open now their choicest bosomed smells,
Reserved from night, and kept for thee in store.
MILT.
reserve their richest exhalations, to embalm his morning and evening walks.
The twining jasmine, and the blushing rose,
With lavish grace their morning scents disclose;
The smelling tub'rose and jonquil declare
The stronger impulse of an evening air.
PRIOR's Sol.
Because he usually chooses those cool hours, to recreate himself among their
blooming ranks; therefore, at those hours, they are most lavish of their
fragrance, and breathe out their choicest spirits.

O man, greatly beloved by thy Creator! The darling of Providence! Thou art
distinguished by his goodness; distinguish thyself also by thy gratitude. Be it
thy one undivided aim to glorify him, who has been at so much expense to
gratify thee! -- While all these inferior creatures, in silent eloquence,
declare the glory of GOD, do thou lend them thy tongue. Be thou the high priest
of the mute creation. Let their praises become vocal in thy songs. -- Adore the
Supreme Benefactor for the blessings he showers down upon every order of
beings. Adore him for numberless mercies, which are appropriated to thyself.
But, above all, adore him for that noble gift of a rational and immortal soul.
-- This constitutes us masters of the globe, and gives us the real enjoyment of
its riches. This discovers ten thousand beauties, which otherwise had been
lost, and renders them both a source of delights, and a nursery of devotion. --
By virtue of this exalted principle, we are qualified to admire our Maker's
works, and capable of bearing his illustrious image; bearing his illustrious
image, not only when these ornaments of the ground have resigned their honors,
but, when the great origin of day is extinguished in the skies, and all the
flaming orbs on high are put out in obscure darkness. -- Then to survive, to
survive the ruins of one world, and to enjoy GOD -- to resemble GOD -- to be
"filled with all the fullness of GOD," in another -- What a happiness, what an
inestimable happiness is this! Yet, this is thy privilege (barter it not for
trifles of an hour!) this thy glorious prerogative, O man!

O! the goodness, the exuberant goodness, of our GOD! I cannot forbear
celebrating it once more, before I pass to another consideration. -- How much
should we think ourselves obliged to a generous friend, who should build a
stately edifice, I cannot persuade myself, that the comparison is stretched
beyond proper bounds, when carried to this pitch. It is my steadfast opinion,
that the world, at least this lower world, with its various appurtenances, was
intended purely for man; that it is appropriated to him; and that he (in
subordination to GOD's glory) is the end of its creation. -- Other animals, it
is true, partake of the Creator's benefits; but then, they partake, under the
^otion of man's domestics, or on the foot of retainers to him; as creatures
which bear some relation to his service, and some way or other contribute to
his good. So that, still, he is the center of the whole; or, as our
incomparable Milton, equally master of poetry and divinity, expresses himself,
All things live for man. Par. Lost, B. XI.161.

Mr. Pope, in his ethick epistles, is pleased to explode this tenet, as the
height of pride, and a gross absurdity. -- For my part, I see no reason for
such a charge. With all submission to so superior a genius, it seems very
remote from pride, to be duly sensible of favors vouchsafed; to contemplate
them in all the extent of their munificence, and acknowledge them accordingly.
I should rather imagine, that to contract their size, when they are immensely
large; to stint their number, when they are altogether innumerable; that such a
procedure favors more of insensibility, than our hypothesis of presumption;
and has more in it of ingratitude, than that of arrogance.

And how can it be deemed an absurdity, to maintain that GOD gave us a world
for our possession, when it is our duty to believe, that he gave us his only
son, for our propitiation? Sure, it can be neither difficult, nor extravagant
to suppose, that he designed the habitable globe, with its whole furniture, for
our present use, since he withheld not his holy child JESUS, but freely
delivered him up, for our final salvation.

Upon the whole, I cannot but conclude, that the attempt of our famous poet is
neither kind, with regard to his fellow creatures -- nor grateful, with regard
to his Creator -- neither is his scheme, in fact, true. The attempt not kind,
with regard to man; because, it robs him of one of the most delightful and
ravishing contemplations imaginable. To consider the great author of existence,
as having me in his eye, when he formed universal nature; as contriving all
things, with an immediate view to the exigencies of my particular state; and
making them all in such a manner, as might be most conducive to my particular
advantage: This must occasion the strongest satisfactions, whenever I cast a
glance on the objects that surround me -- Not grateful, with regard to GOD;
because it has the most direct tendency to diminish our sense of his kindness,
and by that means to throw a damp upon our gratitude. It teaches us to look
upon ourselves, as almost lost among a crowd of other beings, or regarded only
with an occasional and incidental beneficence. Which must certainly weaken the
disposition, and indeed slacken the ties to the most adoring thankfulness. --
To which, I apprehend, we may justly add, Neither is the scheme, in fact, true.
For, not to mention what might be urged from the sure word of revelation, this
one argument appears sufficiently conclusive. The world began with man; the
world must cease with man; consequently, the grand use, the principal end of
the world, is, to subserve the interest of man. It is on all sides agreed, that
the edifice was erected, when man was to be furnished with an habitation; and
that it will be demolished, when man has no farther need of its accommodations.
When he enters into the house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, "the
earth, and all the works that are therein, shall be burnt up." From which it
seems a very obvious and fair deduction, that man is the final cause of this
inferior creation.

So that I think my readers and myself privileged (not to say, on the
principles of gratitude, obliged) to use those lovely lines of our author, with
a propriety and truth equal to their elegance and beauty: For me kind Nature
wakes her genial power,
Suckles each herb, and spreads out every flower!
Annual, for me, the grape, the rose renew
The juice nectareous, and the balmy dew;
For me, the mine a thousand treasure^ brings;
For me, health gushes from a thousand springs.
Eth. Ep. I. ver. 120.


purely for our abode! But, how greatly would the obligation be increased, if
the hand that built should also furnish it! And not only furnish it with all
that is commodious and comfortable, but ornament it also with whatever is
splendid and delightful! This, has our most indulgent Creator done, in a manner
infinitely surpassing all we could wish, or imagine.

The earth is assigned us for a dwelling. -- The skies are stretched over us,
like a magnificent canopy dyed in the purest azure, and beautified, now with
pictures of floating silver, now with colorings of reflecting crimson. -- The
grass is spread under us, as a spacious carpet wove with silken threads of
green, and damasked with flowers of every hue. -- The sun, like a golden lamp,
is hung out in the ethereal vault, and pours his effulgence all the day, to
lighten our paths. -- When night approaches, the moon takes up the friendly
office; and the stars are kindled in twinkling myriads, to cheer the darkness
with their milder luster, not disturb our repose by too intense a glare. -- The
clouds, besides the rich paintings they hang around the heavens, act the part
of a shifting screen, and defend us, by their seasonable interposition from the
scorching beams of summer. May we not also regard them, as the great watering
pots of the globe, which, wasted on the wings of the wind, dispense their
moisture This circumstance, amidst abundance of other delicate and edifying
remarks upon the wonders of nature, is finely touched in the philosophical
transactions recorded in the book of Job, Chap. xxxviii. ver. 15. (...) Who
has divided a water course for the overflowing of waters? -- The Hebrew is so
pregnant and rich with sense, that no translation can do it justice. The
following paraphrase, perhaps, may represent the principal idea^ comprehended
in the expressive original. -- Who has branched out, and with admirable
judgment, disposed a variety of aqueducts, for that immense collection of
waters, which float in the sky? Who distributes those pendulous floods, through
all the borders of the earth? Distributes them, not in dreadful cataracts, or
promiscuous glu^s of rain but in kindly drops, and refreshing showers; with as
much regularity and economy, as if they were conveyed by pipes from a conauit?
-- To whom shall we ascribe that niceness of contrivance, which now emits, now
restrains them; sometimes derives their humid train to one place, sometimes to
another; dispenses them to this soil in larger, to that in smaller
communications; and, in a word, so manages the mighty fluid, that every spot is
supplied, in exact proportion to its wants; none destroyed, by an
undistinguishing deluge?
evenly through the universal garden, and ^ructify with their showers whatever
our hands plant. -- The fields are our exhaustless granary. -- The ocean is our
vast reservoir. -- The animals spend their strength, to dispatch our business;
resign their clothing, to replenish our wardrobe; and surrender their very
lives, to provide for our tables. -- In short, every element is a storehouse of
conveniences; every season brings us the choicest producttions; all nature is
our caterer; and, which is a most endearing recommendation of these favors,
they are all as lovely, as they are useful. You observe nothing mean or
inelegant. All is clad in beauty's fairest robe, Perhaps, it was from such an
observation that the Greeks those critical and refined judges of things,
expressed the mundane system by a word, which signifies beauty -- (...).
and regulated by proportion's nicest rule. The whole scene exhibits a fund of
pleasures to the imagination, at the same time that it more than supplies all
our wants. Those several living creatures which are made for our service or
sustenance, at the same time either fill the woods with their music, furnish
us with game, or raise pleasing ideas in us by the delightfulness of their
appearance. Fountains, lakes, and rivers, are as refreshing to the imagination,
as to the soil through which they pass. Spect. Vol. V. No. 387.


Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man! whosoever thou art, that rebellest
against thy maker. He surrounds thee with unnumbered benefits, and follows thee
with an effusion of the richest, noblest gifts. He courts thy affections, he
solicits thy gratitude, by liberalities which are never intermitted, by a
bounty which knows no limits. -- Most blessed LORD, let this thy goodness, thy
unwearied goodness, lead us to repentance. Win us to thyself, thou Fountain of
Felicity, by these sweet inducements. Draw us to our duty, thou GOD of our
salvation, by these "cords of love."

What a lively picture is here, of the beneficial effects of industry! By
industry and cultivation this neat spot is an image of Eden. Here is all that
can entertain the eye, or Omnis copia narium.
HO^.
regale the smell. Whereas, without cultivation, this sweet garden had been a
desolate wilderness. Vile thistles had made it loathsome, and tangling briers
inaccessible. Without cultivation, it might have been a nest for serpents, and
the horrid haunt of venomous creatures. But, the spade and pruning knife, in
the hand of industry, have improved it into a sort of terrestrial paradise.

How naturally does this lead our contemplation to the advantages which flow
from a virtuous education; and the miseries which ensue from the Neglectis
uren^a ^lix innascitur agri^.
HO^.
neglect of it! -- The mind, without early instruction, will, in all
probability, become like the "vineyard of the sluggard." If left to the
propensities of its own depraved will, what can we expect, but the most
luxuriant growth of unruly appetites, which, in time, will break forth into all
manner of scandalous irregularities? What? -- but that Anger, like a prickly
thorn, arm the temper with an untractable moroseness; Peevishness, like a
stinging nettle, render the conversation irksome and forbidding; Avarice, like
some choking weed, teach the fingers to gripe, and the hands to oppress;
Revenge, like some poisonous plant, replete with baneful juices, rankle in the
breast, and meditate mischief to its neighbor: While unbridled lusts, like
swarms of noisome insects, taint each rising thought; and render every
imagination of the heart, only evil continually. -- Such are the usual products
of savage nature! Such, the furniture of the uncultivated soul!

Whereas, let the mind be put under the nurture and admonition of the LORD; let
holy discipline clear the soil; let sacred instructtion sow it with the best
seed; let skill and vigilance dress the rising shoots; direct the young ideas
how to spread; the wayward passions, how to move. -- Then, what a different
state of the inner man will quickly take place! Charity will breathe her
sweets, and Hope expand her blossoms; the personal virtues display their
graces, and the social ones their fruits; This transformation of the heart, and
renewal of the life, are represented in Scripture, by similitudes very nearly
allied to the images used above. -- GOD, by his sanctifying spirit, will make
the soul as a watered garden. Under the operation of this divine principle, the
desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose. Wherever it exerts the refining
and ennobling energy, instead of the thorn, shall come up the f^r tree; and,
instead of the brier, the myrtle tree. Jerem. xxxi.12. Isa. xxxv.1.lv.13.
the sentiments become generous; the carriage endearing; the life honorable
and useful. -- A teneris assuescere tanti est!
VIRG. -- (...). ARISTOT. The principles we imbibe, and the habits we contract,
in our early years, are not matters of small moment, but of the utmost
consequence imaginable. They not only give a transient, or superficial
tincture* to our first appearance in life; but most commonly stamp the form of
our whole future conduct, and even of our eternal state.




O! that governors of families, and masters of schools, would watch, with a
conscientious solicitude, over the morals of their tender charge! What pity it
is, that the advancing generation should lose these invaluable endowments,
through any supineness in their instructors! -- See! with what assiduity the
curious florist attends his little nursery! He visits them early and late;
furnishes them with the properest mould; supplies them with seasonable
moisture; guards them from the ravages of insects; screens them from the
injuries of the weather; marks their springing buds; observes them attentively,
through their whole progress; and never intermits his anxiety, till he beholds
them blown into full perfection. -- And shall a range of painted leaves, which
flourish today, and tomorrow fall to the ground -- Shall these be tended with
more zealous application, than the exalted faculties of an immortal soul!

Yet trust not in cultivation alone. It is the blessing of the Almighty
Husbandman which imparts success to such labors of love. If GOD seal up the
bottles of heaven, and command the clouds to withhold their fatness, the best
manured plot becomes a barren desert. And if HE restrain the dew of his
heavenly benediction, all human endeavors miscarry; the rational plantation
languishes; our most pregnant hopes, from youths of the most promising genius,
prove abortive. Their root will be as rottenness, and their blossom will go up
as dust. Isa. v.24.
-- Therefore, let parents plant; let tutors water; but, let both look up to
the Father of spirits, for the desired increase.

On every side, I espy several budding flowers. As yet, they are like bales of
cloth from the packer's warehouse. Each is wrapped within a strong enclosure, and
its contents are tied together by the firmest bandages. So that all their
beauties lie concealed, and all their sweets are locked up. -- Just such is the
niggardly wretch, whose aims are all turned inward, and meanly terminated upon
himself; who makes his own private interests, or personal pleasures, the sole
center of his designs, and the scanty circumference of his actions.

Ere long the searching beams will open these silken folds, and draw them into
a graceful expansion. Then, what a lovely blush will glow in their cheeks, and
what a balmy odor exhale from their bosoms! -- So, when divine grace shines
upon the mind, even the churl becomes bountiful. The heart of stone is taken
away, and a heart of flesh, a heart susceptible of the softest, most
compassionate emotions, is introduced in its stead. O! how sweetly do the
social affections dilate themselves, under so benign an influence! Just like
these disclosing gems, under the powerful eye of day. The tender regards are no
longer confined to a single object, but extend themselves into a generous
concern for mankind, and shed liberal refreshments on all within their reach.
The prophet, describing the charitable temper, very beautifully says -- If thou
draw out thy soul to the hungry! -- This, I think, may not improperly be
illustrated by the circumstances observed above. The opening of those buds into
a large and extensive spread, is a pretty portrait of the amplitude of a
generous heart, which cannot shut up its compassion, or remain unconcerned at
any human calamity. The freeness and copiousness, with which the expanded
flowers are continually pouring out their choicest essences, may represent the
various acts of an unwearied liberality; together with those endearing words,
and that cordial affection, which embalm, as it were, a gift; double its value;
and constitute what the sacred penman styles, drawing out the soul. (...)
Deprompse^i^ anima^ tuam. Isa. lviii.10.


Arise then, thou son of righteousness, arise, with healing under thy wings,
and transfuse thy gentle, but penetrating ray, through all our intellectual
powers. Enlarge every narrow disposition, and fill us with a diffusive
benevolence. Make room in our breasts for the whole human race, and teach us to
love all our fellow creatures, for their amiable Creator's sake. May we be
pleased with their excellencies, and rejoice in their happiness; but feel their
miseries as our own, and with a brother's sympathy, hasten to relieve them!

Disposed at proper distances, I observe a range of strong and stately stalks.
They stand like towers along the walls of a fortified city; or rise, like lofty
spires amidst the group of houses. They part, at the top, into several pens^le
spiky pods; from each of which we shall soon see a fine figure displaying
itself, rounded into a form which constitutes a perfect circle; spread wide
open, into the most frank and communicative air; and tinged with the color
which is so peculiarly captivating to the miser's eye.

But the property I chiefly admire, is its passionate fondness for the sun.
When the evening shades take place, the poor flower droops and folds up its
leaves. It mourns all the long night, and pines amidst the gloom, like some
forlorn lover, banished from the object of his affections. No sooner does
Providence open the eyelids of the morning, but it meets -- Illa suum, quamvis
radice tenetur,
Vertitur ad Solemn. --
OVID.
and welcomes the returning light; courts and caresses it all the day; nor ever
loses sight of the refulgent charmer, so long as he continues above the
horizon! -- In the morning you may perceive it, presenting a golden bosom to
the east; at noon, it points upward to the middle sky; in the evening, follows
the same attractive influence to the west.

Surely nature is a book, and every page rich with sacred hints. To an
attentive mind the garden turns preacher, and its blooming tenants are so many
lively Sermons. What an engaging pattern, and what an excellent lesson, have we
here! -- So, let the redeemed of the LORD look unto JESUS, Heb. xii. 2.
and be conformed to their beloved. Let us all be heliotropes (if I may use the
expression) to the Son of Righteousness. Let our passions rise and fall, take
this course or that, as his word determines, as his holy example guides. Let us
be so accommodated, both to his commanding and providential will, as the wax is
turned to the imprinted seal; or, as the aspect of this enamoured flower, to
the splendid star which creates our day.

In every enjoyment, O thou watchful christian, look unto JESUS; receive it as
proceeding from his love, and purchased by his agonies. He sunk beneath our
heavy woes,
To raise us to his throne:
There Is not a gift his hand bestows,
But cost his heart a groan.
WATTS.
-- In every tribulation look unto JESUS; mark his gracious hand managing the
scourge, or mingling the bitter cup; attempering it to a proper degree of
severity; adjusting the time of its continuance; and ready to make these
seeming disasters productive of real good. -- In every infirmity and failing
look unto JESUS, thy merciful high priest, pleading his atoning blood, and
making intercession for transgressors. -- In every prayer look unto JESUS, thy
prevailing advocate, recommending thy devotions, and bearing the iniquity of
thy holy things. Exodus xxviii.38.
-- In every temptation look unto JESUS, the author of thy strength, and
captain of thy salvation, who alone is able to lift up the hands which hang
down, to invigorate the enfeebled knees, and make thee more than conqueror over
all thy enemies. -- But especially, when the hour of thy departure approaches;
when "thy flesh and thy heart fail;" when all the springs of life are
irreparably breaking, then look unto JESUS with a believing eye. Look unto ME,
and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth. Isa. xlv.22.
Like expiring Stephen, behold him standing at the right hand of GOD, on
purpose to succor his people, in this their last extremity. Yes, my christian
friend, when thy journey through life is finished, and thou art arrived on the
very verge of mortality; when thou art just launching out into the invisible
world, and all before thee is vast eternity; then, O then, be sure to look
steadfastly unto JESUS! "See by faith the LORD's CHRIST." View him as the only
way John xiv.6.
to the everlasting mansions, as the only door John x.9,
to the abodes of bliss.

Yonder tree, which faces the south, has something too remarkable to pass
without observation. -- Like the fruitful though feeble vine, she brings forth
a large family of branches; but, unable to support them herself, commits them
to the tuition of a sunny wall. As yet the tender twigs have scarce gemmed
their future blossoms. However, I may anticipate the well known productions,
and picture to myself the passion flower; which will, in due time, with a long
and copious succession, adorn the boughs.

I have read, in a Latin author, of flowers inscribed with the names of kings;
Dic, quibus in terris inscripti nomina regum
Nascantur Flores? --
VIRG.
but here is one emblazoned with the marks of the bleeding Prince of life. I
read, in the inspired writings, of apostolic men, who bore about in their
bodies the dying of the LORD JESUS: 2 Cor. iv.10.
But, here is a blooming religioso, that carries apparent memorials of the same
tremendous and fatal catastrophe. -- Who would have expected to find such a
tragedy of woe exhibited in a collection of the most delicate delights? -- Or
to see Calvary's horrid scene, pourtrayed on the softest ornaments of the
garden? -- Is nature then actuated by the noble ambition of paying
commemorative honors to her agonizing sovereign? Is she kindly officious to
remind forgetful mortals of that miracle of mercy, which it is their duty to
contemplate, and their happiness to believe? -- Or, is a sportive imagination
my interpreter; and all the supposed resemblance no more than the precarious
gloss of fancy? Be it so; yet even fancy has her merit, when she sets forth, in
such pleasing imagery, the crucified JESUS. Nor shall I refuse a willing regard
to imagination herself, when she employs her creative powers, to revive the
sense of such unparalleled love, and prompt my gratitude to so divine a friend.

That spiral tendril, arising from the bottom of the stalk, is it a
representation of the scourge, which lashed the Redeemer's unspotted flesh, and
inflicted those stripes by which our souls are healed? Or, is it twisted for
the cord, which bound his hands in painful and ignominious confinement; those
beneficent hands, which were incessantly stretched out to unloose the heavy
burdens, and to impart blessings of every choice kind? -- Behold the nails,
which were drenched in his sacred veins, and riveted his feet to the accursed
tree; those beautiful How beautiful are the feet of him that brings good
tidings, that publishes peace, that brings good tidings of good, that
publishes salvation! Isa. lii.7.
feet, which always went about doing good; and traveled far and near, to
spread the glad tidings of everlasting salvation. -- See the hammer, ponderous
and massy, which drove the rugged irons through the shivering nerves, and
forced a passage for those dreadful wedges, between the dislocated bones. --
View the thorns, which encircled our Royal Master's brow, and shot their keen
afflictive points into his blessed head. O the smart! the racking smart! when
instead of the triumphal laurel, or the odoriferous garland, that pungent and
ragged wreath, was planted on the meek Messiah's forehead! When violent and
barbarous blows of the strong eastern cane, They took the reed, says the sacred
historian, and sm^te him on the head; and so, as it were, nailed down the
thorns into his forehead and temples, and occasioned thereby exquisite pain, as
well as a great effusion of blood. Family Expositor, Vol. II. Sect. 188. -- It
is most probable, adds the same judicious critic, this was a walking staff
which they put into his hand as a scepter; for a blow with a slight reed would
scarce have been felt, or have deserved a mention in a detail of such dreadful
sufferings.
struck the prickly crown, and fixed every thorn deep in his throbbing temples!
The smart, attending this unparalleled piece of contempt and barbarity, must be
inexpressibly severe; not only, on account of the many painful punctures made
in the flesh; but principally, because the periosteum, an exquisitely sensible
tegument of the bones, lying in those parts, very near the external skin, must
receive a multitude of terrible wounds. The anguish of which could not fail of
being inflamed to an excess of rage, by the continuance of so many thorny
lancets, in that extremely tender membrane, which, in such a case, --
Tremblingly alive all over,
Must smart and agonize at every part.

-- There stand the disciples, ranged in the green impalement, and forming a
circle round the instruments of their great Commander's death. They appear like
so many faithful adherents, who breathe a gallant resolution, either of
defending their LORD to the last extremity, or of dropping honorably by his
side. But did they give such proofs of zeal and fidelity in their conduct, as
their steady posture and determined aspect seem to promise? Alas! what is all
human firmness, when destitute of succors from above, but an expiring vapor?
What is every saint, if unsupported by powerful grace, but an abandoned
traitor? -- Observe the glory, delineated in double rays, grand with imperial
purple, and rich with ethereal blue. But ah! how incapable are threads, though
spun by summer's finest hand, though dyed in snows, or dipped in Heaven, to
display the immaculate excellency of his human, or the ineffable majesty of his
divine nature! Compared with these sublime perfections, the most vivid
assemblage of colors fades into an unmeaning flatness, the most charming
effects of light and shade, are not only mere daubings, but an absolute blank.

Among all the beauties which shine in sunny robes, and sip the silver dews,
this, I think, has the noblest import, if not the finest presence. Were they
all to pass in review, and expect the award of superiority from my decision, I
should not hesitate a moment. Be the prize assigned to this amiable candidate,
which has so eminently distinguished, and so highly dignified herself, by
bearing such a remarkable resemblance to the righteous branch, the plant of
renown. So the blessed JESUS is described, Jerem. xxiii.5. Ezekiel. xxxiv.29.
While others appoint it a place in the parterre, I would transplant the
passion flower, or rather transfer its sacred significancy to my heart. There
let it bloom, both in summer and in winter; bloom, in the most impressive
characters, and with an undecaying luster. That I also may wear -- wear on my
very soul, the traces of IMMANUEL, pierced for my sins, and bruised for my
transgressions. That I also may be crucified with CHRIST, Gal. ii.20.
at least in penitential remorse, and affectionate sympathy. That I may know
the fellowship of his sufferings, Phil. iii.10.
and feel all my evil affections wounded by his agonies, mortified by his death.

There is another subject of the verdant kingdom, which, on account of its very
uncommon qualities, demands my particular notice: One so extremely diffident in
her disposition, and delicate in her constitution, that she dares not venture
herself abroad in the open air, but is nursed up in the warmth of a hot bed,
and lives cloistered in the cells of a green house; but the most curious
peculiarity is, that, of all her kindred species, she alone partakes of
perceptive life, at least advances nearest to this more exalted state of being,
and may be looked upon as the link which connects the animal and the vegetable
world. A stranger, observing her motions, would almost be induced to suspect,
that she is endued with some inferior degrees of consciousness and caution.
For, if you offer to handle this sensitive plant, she immediately takes an
alarm, hastily contracts her fibers, and, like a person under apprehensions of
violence, withdraws from your finger, in a kind of precipitate disorder.
Perhaps the beauty of her aspect might be fullied, or the niceness of her
texture discomposed, by the human touch. Therefore, like a coy virgin, she
recedes from all unbecoming familiarities, and will admit no such improper, if
not pernicious, freedoms.

Whatever be the cause of this unusual effect, it suggests an instructive
admonition to the christian. Such should be our apprehensive timorous care,
with regard to sin, and all, even the most distant approaches of vice. So
should we avoid the very appearance of evil, and stand aloof from every
occasion of falling. -- If sinners entice, if forbidden pleasures tempt, or if
opportunity beckon, with the gain of injustice in her hand, O! turn from the
gilded snare, touch not the beauteous bane; but fly, fly with haste, fly
without any delay, from the bewitching ruin. -- Does anger draw near with her
lighted torch, to kindle the flame of resentment in our breasts? Does flattery
ply our ears, with her enchanting and intoxicating whispers? Would discontent
lay her leaden hand upon our temper, and mould into our minds her sour leaven,
in order to make us a burden to ourselves, and unamiable to others? Instantly
let us divert our attention from the dangerous objects, and not so much
endeavor to antidote, as to shun the moral contagion. Let us revolve in our
meditations, that wonderful meekness of our distressed master, which, amidst
the most abusive and provoking insults, maintained an uniform tenor of
unshaken serenity. Let us contemplate that prodigious humiliation, which
brought him from an infinite height above all worlds, to make his bed in the
dust of death. Let us soothe our jarring, our uneasy passions, with the
remembrance of that cheerfulness and resignation, which rendered him, in the
deepest poverty, unfeignedly thankful; and, under the heaviest tribulations,
most submissively patient.

Harbor not, on any consideration, the betrayer of your virtue. Always
maintain a holy sensibility of soul. Be deaf, inflexibly deaf, to every
beguiling solicitation. If it obtrude into the unguarded heart, give it
entertainment, no, not for a moment. To parley with the enemy, is to open a
door for destruction. Our safety consists in flight; and, in this case
suspicion is the truest prudence; fear, the greatest bravery. -- Play not on
the brink of the precipice. Flutter not round ^e edges of the flame. Dally not
with the stings of death. But reject, with a becoming mixture of solicitude and
abhorrence, the very first insinuations of iniquity, as cautiously as the
smarting sore shrinks even from the softest hand, as constantly as this jealous
plant recoils at the approaching touch. The prophet Isaiah, in an elegant and
lively description of the upright man, says, he shakes his hands from holding
of bribes; and, I may add, from practicing any kind of iniquity. The image,
exceedingly beautiful, and equally expressive, both illustrates and enforces
the doctrine of this whole section. -- Shakes his hands, just as a person
would do, who happens to have burning coals fall into his lap, or some venomous
creature fastening upon his flesh. In such a case, none would stand a moment to
consider, or to debate with himself the expediency of the thing. He would
instantly fling off the pernicious encumbrance; instantly endeavor to
disengage himself from the clinging mischief. --

Isa. xxxiii.15. I have represented the danger of not extinguishing immediately
the very first sparks of temptation, in a variety of views. Because a proper
behavior, in this conjuncture, is of such vast importance to the purity, the
safety, and the comfort of our minds. -- Because I had the royal moralist in my
eye, who, deterring his pupils from the path of the wicked, cries, with an air
of deep concern, and in the language of vehement importunity, cries, Avoid it,
pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away. How strongly is the counsel urged,
by being so frequently repeated, in such a remarkable diversity of concise and
abrupt, consequently of forcible and pressing admonitions!

Prove. iv.15.


Not long ago, these curious productions of the spring were coarse and
misshapen roots. Had we opened the earth and beheld them in their seed, how
uncouth and contemptible had their appearance been! -- But now they are the
boast of nature, the delight of the son^ of m^ finished patterns for enamelling
and embroidery, o^ shining even the happiest strokes of the pencil. The are
taught to bloom, but with a very inferior luster, (...) in the richest
tapestries, and most magnificent silks* Art never attempts to equal their
incomparable elegancies, but places all her merit, in copying after these
delicate originals. Even those, who glitter in silver, or whose clothing is of
wrought gold, are desirous to borrow additional ornaments from a sprig of
jessamine, or a little assemblage of pinks.

The cowslip smiles in brighter yellow dressed,
Than that which veils the nubile virgin's breast:
A fairer red stands blushing in the rose,
Than that which on the bridegroom's vestments flows.
PRIOR's Sol.
What a fine idea may we form from hence, of the resurrection of the just, and
the state of their reanimated bodies! As the roots even of our choicest
flowers, when deposited in the ground, are rude and ungraceful, but, when they
spring up into blooming life, are most elegant and splendid; so the flesh of a
saint, when committed to the dust, alas! what is it? A heap of corruption; a
mass of putrefying clay. But, when it obeys the great Archangel's call, and
starts into a new existence, what an astonishing change ensues! What a most
ennobling improvement takes place! -- That which was sown in weakness, is
raised in all the vivacity of power. That which was sown in deformity, is
raised in the bloom of celestial beauty. Exalted, refined, and glorified, it
will shine "as the brightness of the firmament," when it darts the inimitable
blue, through the fleeces -- the snowy fleeces of some cleaving cloud.

Fear not then, thou faithful christian; fear not, at the appointed time, to
descend into the tomb. Thy soul thou may trust with thy omnipotent Redeemer,
who is LORD of the unseen world; Who has the keys of hell and of death. Most
safely may thou trust thy better part in those beneficent hands, which were
pierced with nails, and fastened to the ignominious tree, for thy salvation. --
With regard to thy earthly tabernacle, be not dismayed. It is taken down, only
to be rebuilt upon a diviner plan, and in a more heavenly form. If it retires
into the shadow of death, and lies immured in the gloom of the grave, it is
only to return from a short confinement, to endless liberty. If it falls into
dissolution, it is in order to rise more illustrious from its ruins, and wear
an infinitely brighter face of perfection and of glory.

Having now made my panegyric, let me next take up a lamentation, for these
loveliest productions of the vegetable world. -- For I foresee their
approaching doom. Yet a little while, and all these pleasing scenes vanish. Yet
a little while, and all the sweets of the breathing, all the beauties of the
blooming spring, are no more. Every one of these amiable forms must be
shrivelled to deformity, and trodden to the earth. -- Significant resemblance
this of all created beauty. All flesh is grass; like the green herbage, liable
and prone to fade. Nay, all the goodliness thereof, its finest accomplishments,
and what the world universally admires, is as the flower of the field; Isa.
xl.6.
which loses its gloss, decays and perishes, more speedily than the grass
itself. -- Behold, then, ye brightest among the daughters of Eve; behold
yourselves in this glass. See the charms of your person eclipsed by the luster
of these little flowers; and the frailty of your state represented (...)^
(...)^
(...)^
(...)^
(...).
The reader will excuse me, if I imitate, rather than translate, these lines
from Theocritus. If I vary one image, add another, and give a new turn to the
whole.

When snows descend and robe the fields
In winter's bright array;
Touched by the sun, the luster fades,
And weeps itself away.
When spring appears, when violets blow,
And shed a rich perfume;
How soon the fragrance breathes its last!
How short lived is the bloom!
Fresh in the morn, the summer rose
Hangs withering ere it is noon;
We scarce enjoy the balmy gift,
But mourn the pleasure gone.
With gliding fire, an evening star
Streaks the autumnal skies;
Shook from the sphere, it darts away,
And, in an instant, dies.
Such are the charms that flush the cheek,
And sparkle in the eye:
So, from the lovely finished form
The transient graces fly.
To this the seasons, as they roll,
Their attestation bring:
They warn the fair; their every round
Confirms the truth I sing.

by their transient glories. A fever may scorch those polished veins; a
consumption may emaciate the dimpling cheeks; and a load of unexpected sorrows,
depress those lively spirits. Or should these disasters, in pity, spare the
tender frame; yet age, inexorable age and wrinkles, will assuredly come at
last; will wither all the fine features, and blast every sprightly grace.

Then, ye fair, when those sparkling eyes are darkened, and sink in their orbs;
when they are rolling in agonies, or swimming in death; how will you sustain
the affliction? How will you repair the loss? -- Apply your thoughts to
religion. Attend to the one thing needful. Believe in, and imitate the blessed
JESUS. Then shall your souls mount up to the realms of happiness, when the well
proportioned clay is mingling with its mean original. The light of GOD's
countenance will irradiate, with matchless and consummate perfection, all their
exalted faculties. Cleansed entirely from every dreg of corruption, like some
unsullied mirror, they will reflect the complete image of their Creator's
holiness. -- O! that you would thus dress your minds, and prepare for the
immortal state! Then, from shining among your fellow creatures on earth, you
shall be translated, to shine around the throne of GOD. Then, from being the
sweeteners of our life, and the delight of our eyes here below, you shall pass,
by an easy transition, into angels of light; and become an everlasting
excellency, the joy of all generations.

Yes, ye flowery nations, ye must all decay. -- Yonder lily, that looks like
the queen of the gay creation -- see, how gracefully it erects its majestic
head! What an air of dignity and grandeur ennobles its aspect! For elevated
mien, as well as for incomparable luster, justly may it be preferred to the
magnificent monarch of the east. Matt. vi.29.
But, all stately and charming as it is, it will hardly survive a few more
days. That unspotted whiteness must quickly be tarnished, and the snowy form
defiled in the dust.

As the lily pleases, with the noble simplicity of its appearance; the tulip is
admired for the gaiety and multiplicity of its colors. Never was cup either
painted, or enamelled, with such a profusion of dies. Its tinges are so
glowing, its contrasts so strong, and the arrangement of them both, so elegant
and artful! -- It was lately the pride of the border, and the reigning beauty
of the delightful season. As exquisitely fine as the rainbow, and almost as
extremely transient. It spread, for a little moment its glittering plumage; but
has now laid all its variegated and superior honors down. Those radiant
stripes are blended, alas! rudely blended with common mould.

To a graceful shape, and blooming complexion, the rose adds the most agreeable
perfume. Our nostrils make it repeated visits, and are never weary of drinking
in its sweets. A fragrance, so peculiarly rich and reviving, transpires from
its opening tufts, that every one covets its acquaintance. How have I seen even
the accomplished Charissa, for whom so many votaries languish, fondly caressing
this little flower! That lovely bosom, which is the s^at of innocence and
virtue; whose least excellency it is, to rival the delicacy of the purest
snows; among a thousand charms of its own, thinks it possible to adopt another
from the damask rose bud. -- Yet, even this universal favorite must fail. Its
native balm cannot preserve it from putrefaction. Soon, soon must it resign all
those endearing qualities, and hang neglected on its stem, or drop despised to
the ground.

One could wish, methinks, these most amiable of the inanimate race a longer
existence; but, in vain. They fade, almost as soon as they flourish. Within
less than a month, their glories are extinct. Let the sun take a few more
journies through the sky; then visit this enchanting walk, and you will find
nothing but a wretched wilderness of ragged or naked stalks. -- But (my soul
exults in the thought) the garment of celestial glory, which shall ere long
array the reanimated body, will never wax old. The illustrious robes of a
Savior's consummate righteousness, which even now adorn the justified spirit,
are incorruptible and immortal. No moth can corrode their texture; no number of
ages sully their brightness. The light of day may be quenched, and all the
stars sink in obscurity; but the honors of just men made perfect, are subject
to no diminution. Inextinguishable and unfading is the luster of their crown.

Yes, ye flowery nations, ye must all decay. -- Winter, like some enraged and
irresistible conqueror, that carries fire and sword wherever he advances, that
demolishes towns, depopulates countries, spreads slaughter and desolation on
every side; -- so, just so, will winter, with his savage and unrelenting
blasts, invade this beautiful prospect. The storms are gathering, and the
tempests mustering their rage, to fall upon the vegetable kingdoms. They will
ravage through the dominions of nature, and plunder her riches, and lay waste
her charms. -- Then, ye trees, must ye stand stripped of your verdant apparel;
and, ye fields, be spoiled of your waving treasures. Then, the earth, disrobed
of all her gay attire, must sit in sables, like a disconsolate widow. The sun
too, who now rides in triumph round the world, and scatters gaiety from his
radiant eye, will then look faintly from the windows of the south; and, casting
a short glance* on our dejected world, will leave us to the uncomfortable gloom
of tedious nights. -- Then, these pretty choristers of the air, will chant no
more to the gentle ga^es. The lark, the linnet, and all the feathered
songsters, abandon their notes, and indulge their woes. The harmony of the
woods is at an end; and silence, (unless it be interrupted by howling winds) a
sullen silence, sits brooding upon the boughs; which are now made vocal by a
thousand warbling throats.

But, sweet recollection! ravishing expectation! the songs of saints in light,
never admit a pause for sadness. All Heaven will resound with the melody of
their gratitude, and all eternity echo to their triumphant acclamations. The
hallelujahs of that world, and the harmonious joy of its inhabitants, will be
as lasting as the divine perfections they celebrate. -- Come then, holy love,
and tune my heart; descend, celestial fire, and touch my tongue; that I may
stand ready to strike up, and bear my part, in that great hosanna, that
everlasting hymn.

Yes, yes, ye flowery nations, ye must all decay. -- And, indeed, could you add
the strength of an oak, or the stability of a pyramid, I know not any
performance, in which the transitory nature of these most durable monuments of
human grandeur, is hinted with such a modest air of instruction; or their
hideous ruin described, in such a pomp of pleasing horror* ^s in a small, but
solemn, picturesque, and majestic poem, entitled -- THE RUINS OF ROME, written
by the Rev. Mr. DYER. Whom the reader (if he has the pleasure of perusing that
beautiful piece) will easily perceive, to have taken his draughts from the
originals themselves; as nothing, but the sight of those magnificent remains,
could have inspired his lines with such vivacity. -- As a specimen of the work,
and a confirmation of the remark suggested above, I take leave to transcribe
the following passage: -- The pilgrim often,
At dead of night, mid his oraison hears
Aghast the voice of time, disparting towers,
Tumbling all precipitate down dashed,
Rattling around, loud thundering to the moo^.

to all the delicacy of your texture; yet short, exceeding short, even then
would your duration be. For I see, that all things come to an end. The pillars
of nature are tottering. The foundations of the round world are falling away.
The Heavens themselves wax old like a garment. -- But, amidst these views of
general ruin, here is our refuge; this is our consolation; We know that our
Redeemer lives. Thy years, blessed JESUS, shall not fail. From everlasting to
everlasting thou art still the same; the same most excellent and adorable
person; the same omnipotent and faithful friend; the same all sufficient and
inestimable portion. O! may we but partake of thy merits, be sanctified by thy
grace, and received into thy glory! -- Then perish, if ye will, all inferior
delights. Let all that is splendid in the skies expire; and all that is amiable
in nature be expunged. Let the whole extent of creation be turned again into
one undistinguishable void, one universal blank. -- Yet, if GOD be ours, we
shall have enough. If GOD be ours, we shall have all, and abound. His hand the
good man fastens on the skies,
And bids earth roll, nor feels the idle whirl.
Night Thoughts, No. IV.
All that our circumstances can want, or our wishes crave, to make us
inconceivably blessed and happy. Blessed and happy, not only through this
little interval of time, but through the unmeasurable revolutions of eternity.

The sun is now come forth in his strength, and beats fiercely upon my
throbbing pulse. -- Let me retire to yonder inviting arbor. There, the
woodbines retain the lucid drop; there the jessamines, which line the verdant
alcove, are still impearled, and deliciously wet with dews. -- Welcome, ye
refreshing shades! I feel, I feel, your cheering influence. My languid spirits
revive; the slackened sinews are new strung; and life bounds brisker through
all her crimson channels.

Reclined on this mossy couch, and surrounded by this fragrant coldness, let me
renew my aspirations to the ever present deity. Here let me remember, and
imitate the pious Augustine, and his mother Monica. Who, being engaged in
discourse on the beauties of the visible creation, rose, by these ladders, to
the glories of the invisible state, till they were inspired with the most
affecting sense of their supereminent excellency, and actuated with the most
ardent breathings after their full enjoyment; insomuch that they were almost
wrapped up into the bliss they contemplated; and scarce knew, whether they were
in the body, or out of the body.

When tempests toss the ocean; when plaintive signals of distress are heard
from the bellowing deep; and melancholy tokens of shipwreck come floating on
the foaming surge; then how delightful to stand safe on shore, and hug one's
self in conscious security. As Lucretius gave the hint for these observations,
so he assigns the reason of the pleasure specified. It arises, not from the
consideration of another's misery; this would argue the rankest malevolence;
but from the agreeable contemplation of our own personal safety; which, while
we view circumstances, that are pernicious to others, but harmless to
ourselves, is not a little heightened by the contrast. Suave mari magno, etc.
-- When a glut of waters bursts from some mighty torrent; rushes headlong over
all the neigbouring plains; sweeps away the helpless cattle, and drives the
affrighted shepherd from his hut; then, from the top of a distant eminence, to
descry the danger, we need not fear; how pleasing! -- Such methinks is my
present situation. For now, the sun blazes from on high: The air glows with his
fire: The fields are rent with chinks: The roads are scorched to dust: The
woods seem to contract a sickly aspect, and a russet hue: The traveller,
broiled as he rides, hastens to his inn, and intermits his journey: The
labourer, bathed in sweat, drops the scythe, and desists from his work: The
cattle flee to some shady covert, or else pant and toss under the burning noon.
Even the stubborn rock, smit with the piercing beams, is ready to cleave. All
things languish beneath the dazzling deluge -- while I shall enjoy a cool hour,
and calm reflection, amidst the gloom of this bowery recess, which scarce
admits one speck of sunshine.

Thus, may both the flock, and their shepherd, dwell beneath the defense of the
Most High, and abide under the shadow of the Almighty. Psalm xci.1.
Then, though This was written when a very infectious and mortal distemper
raged in the neighborhood.
the pestilence walks in darkness, and the sickness destroys at noonday;
though thousands fall beside us, and ten thousands at our right hand; we need
fear no evil. Either the destroying angel shall pass over our houses; or else
he shall dispense the corrections of a friend, not the scourges of an enemy;
which, instead of hurting us, shall work for our good. -- Then, though
profaneness and infidelity, far more malignant evils, breathe deadly contagion,
and taint the morals of multitudes around us; yet, if the great Father of
Spirits hide us in the hollow of his hand, we shall hold fast our integrity,
and be faithful unto death.

Let then, dearest LORD, O! let thy servant, and the people committed to his
care, be received into thy protection. Let us take sanctuary under that tree of
life, erected in thy ignominious cross. Let us fly for safety to that city of
refuge, opened in thy bleeding wounds. These shall be a sacred hiding place,
not to be pierced by the flames of divine wrath, or the fiery darts of
temptation. Thy dying merits, and perfect obedience, shall be to our souls, as
rivers of water in a dry place, or as the shadow of a great rock in a weary
land. Isa. xxxii.2.


But most of all, in that last tremendous day, when the Heavens are rent
asunder, and wrapped up like a scroll; when thy Almighty arm shall arrest the
sun in his career, and dash to pieces the structure of the universe; when the
dead, both small and great, shall be gathered before the throne of thy glory;
and the fates of all mankind hang on the very point of a final irreversible
decision: -- Then, blessed JESUS, let us be owned by thee, and we shall not be
ashamed; defended by thee, and we shall not be afraid. O! may we, at that
awful, that unutterably important juncture, be covered with the wings of thy
redeeming love, and we shall behold all the horrible convulsions of expiring
nature, with composure, with comfort! We shall even welcome the dissolution of
all things, as the times of refreshing from the presence of the LORD. Acts
iii.19.


There are, I perceive, who still attend the flowers; and, in defiance of the
sun, ply their work on every expanded blossom. The bees I mean; that nation of
chemists, to whom nature has communicated the rare and valuable secret, of
enriching themselves, without impoverishing others; who extract the most
delicious syrup from every fragrant herb, without wounding its substance, or
diminishing its odours. -- I take the more notice of these ingenious operators,
because I would willingly make them my pattern. -- Ego apis matinae
More modoque
Grata carpentis thyma.
HOR.
While the gay butterfly flutters her painted wings, and sips a little
fantastic delight, only for the present moment; while the gloomy spider, worse
than idly busied, is preparing his insidious nets for destruction, or sucking
venom even from the most wholesome plants; this frugal community are wisely
employed in providing for futury, and collecting a copious stock of the most
balmy treasures. -- And O! might these meditations sink into my soul! Would the
GOD, who suggested each heavenly thought, vouchsafe to convert it into an
established principle, to determine all my inclinations, and regulate my whole
conduct! I should, then, gather advantages from the same blooming objects, more
precious than your golden stores, ye industrious artists. I also should go home
^den with the richest sweets, and the noblest spoils; though I crop not a leaf,
nor call a single flower my own.

Here I behold, assembled in one view, almost all the various beauties which
have been severally entertaining my imagination. The vistas, struck through an
ancient wood, or formed by rows of venerable elms; conducting the spectator's
observation to some remarkable object; or leading the traveller's footsteps to
this delightful seat: -- The walls, enriched with fruit trees, and faced with a
covering of their leafy extensions; I should rather have said, hung with
different pieces of nature's noblest tapestry: -- The walks, neatly shorn, and
lined with verdure; or finely smoothed, and coated with gravel: -- The alleys,
arched with shades, to embower our noontide repose; or thrown open for the free
accession of air, to invite us to our evening recreation: -- The decent edgings
of box, which enclose, like a plain selvage, each beautiful compartment, and
its splendid figures: -- The shapely evergreens, and flowery shrubs, which
strike the eye, and appear with peculiar dignity, in this distant situation: --
The basin, with its crystal fount, floating in the center; and diffusing an
agreeable freshness through the whole: -- The waters, falling from a remote
cascade, and gently murmuring, as they flow along the pebbles: -- These, added
to the rest, and all so disposed, that each recommends and endea^ each, render
the whole a most sweet ravishing scene, of order and variety, of elegance and
magnificence.

From so many lovely prospects, clustering upon the sight, it is impossible not
to be reminded of Heaven, that world of bliss, those regions of light, where
the Lamb that was slain manifests his beatifick presence, and his saints live
for evermore. -- But O! what pencil can sketch out a draught of that goodly
land! What colors, or what style, can express the splendours of IMMANUEL's
kingdom! Would some celestial hand draw aside the veil, but for one moment, and
permit us to throw a single glance on those divine abodes; how would all
fublunary possessions become tarnished in our eyes, and grow flat upon our
taste! A glimpse, a transient glimpse of those unutterable beatitudes, would
captivate our souls, and engross all their faculties. Eden itself, after such a
vision, would appear a cheerless desert; and all earthly charms intolerable
deformity.

Very excellent things are spoken of thee, thou city of GOD. Psalm lxxxvii.2.
Volumes have been written, and those by inspired men, to display the wonders
of thy perfections. All that is rich and resplendent in the visible creation,
has been called in to aid our conceptions, and elevate our ideas. But, indeed,
no tongue can utter, no pen can describe, no fancy can imagine, what GOD, of
his unbounded munificence, has prepared for them that love him. -- Seeing then,
that all terrestrial things must come to a speedy end; and there remains a
rest, a blissful and everlasting rest, for the people of GOD; let me never be
too fondly attached to any present satisfactions. Weaned from whatever is
temporal, may I maintain a superior indifference, for such transitory
enjoyments; but long, long earnestly, for the mansions that are above; the
paradise which the LORD has planted, and not man. Thither, may I transmit the
chief of my conversation; and from thence expect the whole of my happiness. Be
that the sacred, powerful magnet, which ever influences my heart, ever attracts
my affections. There are such transcendent glories, as eye has not seen; there
are such transporting pleasures, as ear has not heard; there is such a fullness
of joys, as the thought of man cannot conceive.

Into that consummate felicity, those eternal fruitions, permit me, Madam, to
wish you, in due time, an abundant entrance; and to assure you, that this wish
is breathed, with the same sincerity and ardour, for my honored correspondent,
as it is, MADAM, for

Your most obedient, etc. J. HERVEY.

A DESCANT UPON CREATION.
IF the reader pleases to look back on page 105, he will find me engaged, by a
promissory note, to subjoin a DESCANT upon CREATION.

To know the love of CHRIST; to have such a deep apprehension of his
unspeakable kindness, as may produce in our hearts an adoring gratitude, and an
unfeigned faith: This, according to St. Paul's estimate, is the highest and
happiest attainment in the sacred science of Christianity. Ephesians. iii.19.
What follows, is an attempt to assist the attentive mind, in learning a line
or two of that best and greatest lesson. It introduces the most conspicuous
parts of the visible system, as so many prompters to our dull affections; each
suggesting a hint, adapted to the important occasion, and suited to its
respective character.

Can there be a more powerful incentive to devout gratitude, than to consider
the magnificent and delicate scenes of the universe, with a particular
reference to CHRIST, as the Creator? -- Every object, viewed in this light,
will surely administer incessant recruits to the languishing lamp of divine
love. Every production in nature will strike a spark into the soul; and the
whole creation concur to raise the smoking fla^ into a flame.

Can any thing impart a stronger joy to the believer, or more effectually
confirm his faith in the crucified JESUS, than to behold the Heavens declaring
his glory, and the firmament showing his handy work? -- Surely, it must be
matter of inexpressible consolation to the poor sinner, to observe the honors
of his Redeemer, written with sun beams, over all the face of the world.

We delight to read an account of our incarnate JEHOVAH, as he is revealed in
the books of Moses and the prophets, as he is displayed in the writings of the
evangelists and apostles. Let us also endeavor to see a sketch of his
perfections, as they stand delineated in that stately volume, where every leaf
is a spacious plain -- every line, a flowing brook -- every period, a lofty
mountain.

Should any of my readers be unexercised in such speculations, I beg leave (in
pursuance of my promise) to present them with a specimen; or to offer a clue,
which may possibly lead their minds into this most improving and delightful
train of thinking.

Should any be inclined to suspect the solidity of the following observations,
or to condemn them, as the voice of rant, and the lawless flight of fancy; I
must entreat such persons to recollect, that the grand doctrine, the hinge on
which they all turn, is warranted and established by the unanimous testimony of
the inspired penmen, who frequently celebrate IMMANUEL, or CHRIST JESUS, as the
great Almighty cause of all; assuring us, that all things were created by him,
and for him; and that in him all things consist. Col. i.16, 17. Before my
reader enters upon the following descant, he is desired to per^e the note, page
82.


On such a subject, what is wonderful, is far from being extravagant. To be
wonderful, is the inseparable characteristick of GOD and his works; especially,
of that most distinguished and glorious even of the divine works, REDEMPTION;
so glorious, that all the miracles in Egypt, and the mavelous acts in the
field of Zoan; all that the Jewish annals have recorded, or the human ear has
heard; all dwindle into trivial events, are scarce worthy to be remembered,
Isa. xliii.18.
in comparison of this infinitely grand and infinitely gracious transaction. --
Kindled, therefore, into pleasing astonishment, by such a survey, let me give
full scope to my meditations. Let me pour out my whole soul on the boundless
subject; not much regarding the limits, which cold criticism, or colder
unbelief, might prescribe.

O ye angels, that surround the throne; ye princes of Heaven, "that excel in
strength," and are clothed with transcendent brightness; he, who placed you in
those stations of exalted honor, and dignified your nature with such
illustrious endowments; he, whom you all obey, and all adore; he took not on
him the angelick form, but was made flesh, and found in fashion as a man. Like
us, wretched mortals, he was subject to weariness, pain, and every infirmity,
sin only excepted; -- that we might, one day, be raised to your sublime abodes;
be adopted into your blissful society; and join with your transported choir, in
giving glory to HIM that sits upon the throne, and to the LAMB forever and
ever. Rev. v.13.


O ye Heavens, whose azure arches rise immensely high, and stretch unmeasurably
wide; stupendous amphitheatre! amidst whose vast expansive circuit, orbs of the
most dreadful grandeur are perpetually running their amazing races.
Unfathomable depths of ether! where worlds unnumbered float; and to our
limited sight, worlds unnumbered are lost: -- He, who adjusted your dimensions
with his span, and formed the magnificent structure with his word; he was once
wrapped in swaddling clothes, and laid in a manger: -- That the benefits accruing
to his people, through his most meritorious humiliation, might have no other
measure of their value, than immensity; might run parallel, in their duration,
with eternity.

Ye stars, that beam with inextinguishable brilliancy, through the midnight
sky; oceans of flame, and centres of worlds, though seemingly little points of
light! -- He, who shone, with essential effulgence, innumerable ages, before
your twinkling tapers were kindled; and will shine with everlasting majesty and
beauty, when your places in the firmament shall be known no more: He was
involved, for many years, in the deepest obscurity; lay concealed in the
contemptible city Nazareth; lay disguised under the mean habit of a carpenter's
son; -- that he might plant the Heavens, Isai. li.16.
as it were, with new constellations; and array these clods of earth, these
houses of clay, with a radiancy far superior to yours; a radiancy, which will
adorn the very Heaven of Heavens, when you shall vanish away like smoke;
Alluding to a passage in Isaiah, which is, I think, grand and elevated beyond
all comparison. -- Lift up your eyes to the Heavens, and look upon the earth
beneath; for the Heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax
old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die like the feeble
insect; but my righteousness shall be forever, and my salvation shall not be
abolished, Isa. li.6. -- With the great Vitringa, I translate the words (...)
not, in like manner; but, like the feeble insect; which renders the period more
complete; the sense more emphatical; and is more agreeable as the genius of the
sacred original.
or expire, as momentary sparks from the smitten steel.

Comets, that sometimes shoot into the illimitable tracts of ether, farther
than the discernment of our eye is able to follow; sometimes return from the
long, long excursion, and sweep our affrighted hemisphere with your enormous
fiery train; that sometimes make near approaches to the sun, and burn almost in
his immediate beams; sometimes retire to the remotest distance, and freeze, for
ages, in the excessive rigours of winter: -- He, who at his sovereign pleasure
withdraws the blazing wonder; or leads forth the portentous stranger, to shake
terror over guilty kingdoms; he was overwhelmed with the most shocking
amazement, and plunged into the deepest anxiety; was chilled with apprehensions
of fear, and scorched by the flames of avenging wrath: -- That I, and other
depraved rebellious creatures, might not be eternally agitated with the
extremes of jarring passions; opposite, yet, on either side, tormenting; far
more tormenting to the soul, than the severest degrees of your heat and cold to
the human sense.

Ye planets, that, winged with unimaginable speed, traverse the regions of the
sky; sometimes climbing millions and millions of miles above, sometimes
descending as far below, the great axle of your motions: Ye, that are so
minutely faithful to the vicissitudes of day and night; so exactly punctual, in
bringing on the changes of your respective seasons: -- He, who launched you, at
first, from his mighty arm; who continually impels you, with such wonderful
rapidity, and guides you, with such perfect regularity; who fixes the
habitation of his holiness and his glory, infinite heights above your scanty
rounds: HE once became a helpless infant, sojourned in our inferior world,
fled from the persecutor's sword, and wandered as a vagabond in a foreign land:
-- That he might lead our feet into the way or peace; that he might bring us
aliens near to GOD, bring us exiles home to Heaven.

Thou sun, inexhausted source of light, and heat, and comfort! Without whose
presence an universal gloom would ensue, and horror unsupportable; who,
without the assistance of any other fire, sheddest day through a thousand
realms; and, not confining thy munificence to realms only, extendest thy
enlightening influences to surrounding worlds: Prime cheerer of the animal, and
great enlivener of the vegetable tribes! So beautiful in thyself, so beneficial
in thy effects, that erring Heathens addressed thee with adorations, and
mistook thee for their maker! -- He who filled thy orb with a profusion of
luster; luster, in its direct emanations, unsufferably bright, but, rebated by
thy reflection, delightfully mild: -- He, before whom thy meridian splendours
are but a shade; whose love, transfused into thy heart, is infinitely more
exhilarating, than even the sweet and clear shining after the rain: -- HE
divested himself of his all transcending distinctions, and drew a veil over the
effulgence of his divinity; that, by speaking to us, face to face, as a man
speaks unto his friend, he might dispel our intellectual darkness. His visage
was marred Isa. lii.14.
, and he became the scorn of men, the outcast of the people; that, by this
manifestation of his unutterably tender regard for our welfare, he might
diffuse many a gleam of joy through our dejected minds: That, in another state
of things, he might clothe even our fallen nature, with the honors of that
magnificent luminary; and give all the righteous to shine forth as the sun, in
the kingdom of their Father.

Thou moon, that walk among the host of stars, and, in thy lucid appearance,
art superior to them all: Fair ruler of the night! Sometimes, half restoring
the day, with thy waxing brightness; sometimes, waning into dimness, and
scarcely scattering the nocturnal gloom; sometimes, covered with sackcloth, and
alarming the gazing nations! -- He, who dresses thy opake globe, in beaming,
but borrowed silver; he, whose dignity is unchangeable, underived, and all his
own; he vouchsafed to wear a body of clay: He was content to appear as in a
bloody eclipse, shorn of his resplendent beams, and surrounded with a night of
horror, which knew not one reviving ray. -- Thus, has he empowered his church,
and all believers, to tread the moon under their feet. Rev. xii.1.
Hence, inspired with the hope of brighter glory, and of more enduring bliss,
are they enabled to triumph over all the vain anxieties, and vainer amusements,
of this sublunary, precarious, mutable world.

Ye thunders, that, awfully grumbling in the distant clouds, seem to meditate
indignation, and form the first essays of a far more frightful peal; or,
suddenly bursting over our heads, rend the vault above, and shake the ground
below, with the hideous, horrid crack: Ye, that send your tremendous vollies
from pole to pole, startling the savage herds, Psalm. xxix.8.
and astonishing the human race: -- He, who permits terror to found her
trumpet, in your deep, prolonged, enlarging, aggravated roar: He uttered a
feeble infantile cry in the stable, and strong expiring groans on the accursed
tree: -- That he might, in the gentlest accents, whisper peace to our souls;
and, at length, tune our voices to the melody of Heaven.

O ye lightnings, that brood and lie couchant, in the sulphurous vapors; that
glance, with forked fury, from the angry gloom, swifter and fiercer than the
lion rushes from his den; or open into vast expansive sheets of flame,
sublimely waved over the prostrate world, and fearfully lingering in the
frighted skies: Ye, that formerly laid in ashes the licentious abodes of lust
and violence; that will, ere long, set on fire the elements, and cooperate in
the conflagration of the globe: He, who kindles your flash, and directs you
when to sally, and where to strike: He, who commissions your whirling bolts,
whom to kill, and whom to spare: HE resigned his sacred person to the most
barbarous indignities; submitted his beneficent hands to the ponderous hammer,
and the piercing nail; yea, withheld not his heart, his very heart, from the
stab of the executioner's spear; and, instead of flashing confusion on his
outrageous tormentors* instead of striking them dead to the earth, or plunging
them to the depths of Hell, with his frown; he cried -- in his last moments,
and with his agonizing lips, he cried -- FATHER, FORGIVE THEM; FOR THEY KNOW
NOT WHAT THEY DO! -- O! what a pattern of patience for his saints! What an
object of admiration for angels! What a constellation of every mild, amiable,
and benign virtue; shining, in this hour of darkness, with ineffable splendor
and beauty! One can hardly forbear animadverting upon the disingenuous temper,
and perverse taste of Celsus, who attempts to turn this most distinguishing and
ornamental part of our LORD's life into ridicule and reproach. -- Having spoken
of CHRIST, as despitefully used, and arrayed in a purple robe; crowned with
thorns; and holding, by way of mock majesty, a reed instead of a scepter (for
he enters into all these circumstances, which is a testimony to their truth
even from the mouth of an enemy) he adds -- (...); Orig. contra CELLS. p. 81. i.
e. Why, in the name of wonder, does he not, on this occasion, at least, act the
GOD? Why does he not deliver himself from this shocking ignominy; or execute
some signal vengeance, on the authors of such injurious and abusive insults,
both of himself and his Father? -- Why, Celsus? Because, HE was meekness and
gentleness itself: Whereas your deities were slaves to their own turbulent and
resentful passions. Because, they were little better than savages in human
shape; who too often made a merit of slaughter, and took a horrid pride in
spilling blood. While CHRIST was the Prince of peace, and came not to destroy
men's lives, but to save. Because, any madman on earth, or fury from Hell, is
capable of venting his rage. But who, amidst such unsufferable provocations and
barbarities; who, having in his own hand, the power to rescue himself, the
power to avenge himself; could submit to all, with an unruffled serenity of
patience; and not only not be exasperated, but overcome, in so triumphant a
manner, evil with good? None but CHRIST! None but CHRIST! This was compassion
worthy of a GOD; clemency and charity truly divine.

Therefore, the calumny raised by the same virulent objector, in another place,
carries its own confutation; or rather, falls with a weight of infamy on his
dunghill deities; while it bears a most honorable testimony, to the majestic
and invincible meekness of our Savior. -- (...), says he to the Christian,
(...), ibid. p 404. i. e. You, indeed, take upon you, to deride the images of
our deities; but if Bacchus himself, or Hercules, had been present, you would
not have dared to offer such an affront; or if you had been so presumptuous,
would have severely smarted for your insolence. Whereas, they who tormented the
very person of your GOD, and even extended him with mortal agony on the cross,
suffered no effects of his displeasure.


-- Hence, hence it is, that we are not trembling under the lightnings of mount
Sinai; that we are not blasted by the flames of divine vengeance; or doomed to
dwell with everlasting burnings.

Ye frowning wintry clouds; oceans pendent in the air, and burdening the winds:
He, in whose hand you are an overflowing scourge; or, by whose appointment, an
arsenal Juvenal seems to consider the clouds, under this same character, in
that beautiful line.

Quicquid habent telorum armamentaria Caeli.
of warlike stores: He, who opens your sluices, and a flood gushes forth, to
destroy the fruits of the earth, and drown the husbandman's hopes: Who moulds
you into frozen balls, and you are shot, linked with death, Job has informed
us, for what purpose the magazines of the firmament are stocked with hail. That
they may be ready, against the day of battle and war. -- Job xxxviii.23. Joshua
has recorded, what terrible slaughter has been made, by those missive weapons
of the Almighty. -- Josh. x.11. Modern historians relate, that, when Edward
III. invaded France, a shower of hailstones descended, of such a prodigious
size, that six thousand horses, and one thousand men were struck dead
instantaneously. But, the most dreadful description of this great ordnance of
the Heavens, is given us in Rev. xvi.21. There fell upon men a great hail out
of Heaven, every stone about the weight of a talent.
on the troops of his enemies. HE, instead of discharging the furiousness of
his wrath upon this guilty head, poured out his prayers, poured out his sighs,
poured out his very soul, for me and my fellow transgressors. -- That, by
virtue of his inestimable propitiation, the overflowings of divine good will
might be extended to sinful men, that the skies might pour down righteousness,
and peace on her downy wings, peace with her balmy blessings, descend to dwell
on earth.

Ye vernal clouds, furls of finer air, folds of softer moisture; he who draws
you in copious exhalations from the briny deep, bids you leave every
distasteful quality behind, and become floating fountains of sweetest waters;
he who dissolves you into gentle rain, and dismisses you in fruitful showers,
who kindly commissions you to drop down fatness as you fall, and to scatter
flowers over the field. -- HE, in the unutterable bitterness of his spirit, was
without any comforting sense of his Almighty Father's presence: He, when his
bones were burnt up like a firebrand, had not one drop of that sacred
consolation, which, on many of his afflicted servants has been distilled as the
evening dews, and has "given songs in the night" of distress. -- That, from
this unallayed and inconsolable anguish of our all gracious master, we, as from
a well of salvation, might derive large draughts of spiritual refreshment.

Thou grand ethereal bow, whose beauties flush the firmament, and charm every
spectator. He, who paints thee on the fluid skirts of the sky, who decks thee
with all the pride of colors, and bends thee into that graceful and majestic
figure; at whose command thy vivid streaks sweetly rise, or swiftly fade: --
HE, through all his life, was arrayed in the humble garb of poverty; and, at
his exit wore the gorgeous garment of contempt. Insomuch, that even his own
familiar friends, ashamed or afraid to own him, hid as it were their faces from
him. Isa. liii.3. (...) Fuit tanquam aliquis, a qu^ quisque facitem occultaret.
He was as some flagitious and abandoned wretch, from whom every one, disdaining
such a character, and disclaiming such an acquaintance studiously hid his face.
-- To teach us a becoming disdain, for the unsubstantial and transitory
glitter of all worldly vanities: To introduce us, in robes brighter than the
tinges of thy resplendent arch, even in the robes of his own immaculate
righteousness, to introduce us before that august and venerable throne, which
the peaceful rainbow surounds; surrounds, as a pledge of inviolable fidelity,
and infinite mercy.

Ye storms and tempests, which vex the continent, and toss the seas; which dash
navies on the rocks, and drive forests from their roots: He whose breath rouses
you into such resistless fury, and whose nod controls you in your wildest
career: He, who holds the rapid and raging hurricane in streightened reins, and
walks dreadfully serene on the very wings of the wind; he went, all meek and
gentle like a lamb to the slaughter for us; and as a sheep before her shearer^
is dumb, so he opened not his mouth. -- Thus, are we instructed to bear, with
decent magnanimity, the various assaults of adversity, and to pass, with a
becoming tranquillity of temper, through all the rude blasts of injurious
treatment. Thus, are we delivered from the unutterably fiercer storms of
incensed and inexorable justice; from the fire, the brimstone, and the horrible
tempest, which will be the final portion of the ungodly.

Thou pestilence, that scatterest ten thousand poisons from thy baleful wings,
tainting the air, and infecting the nations; under whose malignant influence,
joy is blasted, and nature sickens; mighty regions are depopulated, and once
crowded cities are left without inhabitants: He, who arms thee with inevitable
destruction, and bids thee march before Before him went the pestilence, Hab.
iii.5.
his angry countenance, to spread desolation among the tents of the wicked, and
be the forerunner of far more fearful indignation: HE, in his holy humanity,
was arraigned as a criminal; and, though innocence itself yea, the very pattern
of perfection, was condemned to die, like the most execrable miscreant. As a
nuisance to society, and the very bane of the public happiness, he was hurried
away to execution, and hammered to the gibbet: -- That by his blood, he might
prepare a sovereign medicine, to cure us of a more fatal distemper, than the
pestilence which walks in darkness, or the sickness which destroys at noon
day: That he might himself say to our last enemy, O death, I will be thy
plague; O grave, I will be thy destruction Hos. xiii.14.
.

Heat, whose burning influence parches the Libyan wilds; tans into soot the
Ethiopian's complexion; and makes every species of life pant, and droop, and
languish. Cold, whose icy breath glazes yearly the Ruffian seas; often glues
the frozen sailor to the cordage; and stiffens the traveller into a statue of
rigid flesh: -- HE, who sometimes blends you both, and produces the most
agreeable temperature; sometimes, suffers you to act separately, and rage with
intolerable severity: That king of Heaven, and controler of universal nature,
when dwelling in a tabernacle of clay, was exposed to chilling damps, and
smitten by sultry beams: The stars, in their midnight watches, heard him pray;
and the sun, in his meridian fervours, saw him toil. -- Hence are our frozen
hearts dissolved, into a mingled flow of wonder, love, and joy; being conscious
of a deliverance from those insufferable flames, which, kindled by divine
indignation, burn to the lowest hell.

Thou ocean, vast world of waters! He, who sunk that capacious bed for thy
reception, and poured the liquid element into unfathomable channels; before
whom all thy foaming billows, and floating mountains, are as the small drop of
a bucket: who, by the least intimation of his will, swell's thy fluid kingdoms
in wild confusion, to mingle with the clouds; or reduces them, in calm
composure, to slumber on the shores: He, who once gave thee a warrant to
overwhelm the whole earth, and bury all its degenerate inhabitants in a watery
grave; but has now laid an everlasting embargo on thy boisterous waves; and
bound thee, all fierce and madding as thou art, in chains stronger than
adamant, yet formed of despicable sand: -- All the waves of vengeance and
wrath, of tribulation and anguish, passed over HIS crucified body, and HIS
agonizing soul; that we might emerge from those depths of misery, from that
abyss of guilt, into which we were plunged by Adam's fall, and more
irretrievably sunk by our own transgressions; that, at the last, we might be
restored to that happy world, which is represented in the vision of GOD, as
having "no sea; Rev. xxi.1.
" to denote its perpetual stability, and undisturbed serenity.

Ye mountains, that overlook the clouds, and project a shade into distant
provinces: Everlasting pyramids of nature, not to be shaken by conflicting
elements; not to be shattered by the bolts of thunder; nor impaired even by the
ravages of time: -- He, who bid your ridges rise so high, and your foundations
stand so fast: He, in whose scale you are lighter than dust; in whose eye, you
are less than nothing: -- HE sunk, beneath a load of woes; woes insupportable,
but not his own; when he took our iniquities upon himself, and heaved the more
than mountainous burden from a guilty world.

Ye verdant woods, that crown our hil's, and are crowned yourselves with leafy
honors: Ye humble shrubs, adorned in spring with opening blossoms; and fanned
in summer by gentle gales: Ye, that in distant climes, or in cultivated
gardens, breathe out spicy odours, and embalm the air with delightful perfumes:
Your all glorious and ever blessed Creator's head was incircled with the thorny
wreath; his face was defiled with contumelious spitting; and his body bathed in
a bloody sweat: That we might wear the crown, the crown of glory, which fades
not away; and live for evermore, surrounded with delights, as much surpassing
yours, as yours exceed the rugged desolations of winter.

Thou mantling vine, he who hangs on thy slender shoots, the rich, transparent,
weighty cluster; who, under thy unornamented foliage, and amidst the pores of
thy otherwise worthless bough, prepares the liquor, the refined and exalted
liquor, which cheers the nations, and fills the cup of joy. Trees, whose
branches are elevated and waving in air; or diffused, in easy confinement,
along a sunny wall: He, who bends you with a lovely burden of delicious fruits;
whose genial warmth beautifies their rind, and mellows their taste: -- HE, when
voluntarily subject to our wants, instead of being refreshed with your generous
juices, or regaled with your luscious pulp; had a loathsome portion of vinegar,
mingled with gall, addressed to his lips: -- That we might sit under the shadow
of his merits, with great tranquillity, and the utmost complacency: That, ere
long, being admitted into the paradise of GOD, we might eat of the tree of
life; Rev, ii.7.
and drink new wine with him, in his father's kingdom.

Ye luxuriant meadows, he who, without the seedman's industry, replenishes your
irriguous lap, with never failing crops of herbage; and enamels their cheerful
green with flowers of every hue: -- Ye fertile fields, he, who blesses the
labors of the husbandman, enriches your well tilled plains with waving
harvests, and calls forth the staff of life from your furrows: He, who causes
both meadows and fields to laugh and sing for the abundance of plenty: -- HE
was no stranger to corroding hunger, and parching thirst: He, alas! eat the
bitter bread of woe, and had plenteousness of tears to drink: -- That we might
partake of richer dainties, than those which are produced by the dew of Heaven,
and proceed from the fatness of the earth: That we might feed on "the hidden
manna," and eat the bread which gives life, eternal life, unto the world.

Ye mines, rich in yellow ore, or bright with veins of silver; that distribute
your shining treasures, as far as winds can waft the vessel of commerce; that
bestow your alms on monarchs, and have princes for your pensioners: -- Ye beds
of gems, toyshops of nature! which form, in dark retirement, the glittering
stone: Diamonds, that sparkle with a brilliant water: Rubies, that glow with a
crimson flame: Emeralds, dipped in the freshest verdure of spring: Sapphires,
decked with the fairest drapery of the sky: Topaz, emblazed with a golden
gleam: Amethyst, impurpled with the blushes of the morning: -- He, who
tinctures the metallic dust, and consolidates the lucid drop: HE, when
sojourning on earth, had no riches, but the riches of disinterested
benevolence; had no ornament, but the ornament of unspotted purity: Poor he was
in his circumstances, and mean in all his accommodations: That WE might be rich
in grace, and "obtain salvation with eternal glory:" That we might inhabit the
new Jerusalem; that splendid city! whose streets are paved with gold; whose
gates are formed of pearl; and the walls garnished with all manner of precious
stones. Rev. xxi.19, 21.


Ye gushing fountains, that trickle potable silver through the matted grass. Ye
fine transparent streams, that glide in crystal waves along your fringed
banks: Ye deep and stately rivers, that wind and wander in your course, to
spread your favors wider; that gladden kingdoms in your progress, and augment
the sea with your tribute: -- He, who supplies all your currents from his own
everflowing and inexhaustible liberality: HE, when his nerves were racked with
exquisite pain, and his blood inflamed by a raging fever, cried, I THIRST; and
was denied (unparalleled hardship!) in this his great extremity, was denied the
poor refreshment of a single drop of water: -- That we, having all sufficiency
in all things, might abound to every good work; might be filled with the
fullness of spiritual blessings here, and hereafter be satisfied with that
fullness of joy, which is at GOD's right hand for evermore.

Ye birds, cheerful tenants of the bough, gaily dressed in glossy plumage; who
wake the morn, and solace the groves, with your artless lays: Inimitable
architects! who, without rule or line, build your pensile structures, with all
the nicety of proportion: You have each a commodious nest, roofed with shades,
and lined with warmth, to protect and cherish the callow brood -- But he, who
tuned your throats to harmony and taught you that curious skill; HE was a man
of sorrows, and had not where to lay his head; had not where to lay his head,
till he felt the pangs of dissolution, and was laid in the silent grave: --
That we, dwelling under the wings of Omnipotence, and resting in the ^osom of
infinite love, might spend an harmonious eternity, in "singing the song of
Moses and of the LAMB."

Bees, industrious workmen! that sweep, with busy wing, the flowery garden; and
search the blooming heath; and sip the mellifluous dews: Strangers to idleness!
That ply, with incessant assiduity, your pleasing task; and suffer no opening
blossom to pass unexplored, no sunny gleam to slip away unimproved: Most
ingenious artificers! That cling to the fragrant buds; drain them of their
treasured sweets; and extract (if I may so speak) even the odoriferous souls of
herbs, and plants, and flowers: -- You, when you have completed your work; have
collected, refined, and securely lodged the ambrosial stores; when you might
reasonably expect the peaceful fruition of your acquisitions; you, alas! are
barbarously destroyed, and leave your hearded delicacies to others; leave them
to be enjoyed by your very murderers: I cannot but pity your hard destiny! --
How then should my bowels melt with sympathy, and my eyes flow with tears*
Can thou ungrateful man, his torments see,
Nor drop a tear for HIM, who poured his blood for thee?
PITTS's Poems.
when I remember, that thus, thus it fared with your and our incarnate Maker!
After a life of the most exemplary and exalted piety; a life filled with
offices of beneficence, and labors of love; HE was, by wicked hands, crucified
and slain: He left the honey of his toil, the balm of his blood, and the riches
of his obedience, to be shared among others; to be shared even among those, who
too often crucify him afresh, and put him to open shame.

Shall I mention the animal, No one, I hope, will be offended at my
introducing, on such an occasion, creatures of so low a rank. Since, even the
volumes of inspiration seem to lend me the sanction of their sacred authority.
As they disdain not to compare the blessed JESUS to a door, a highway, etc.
And, perhaps, all comparisons, which respect a being of infinite dignity, are
not only mean, but equally mean and unworthy.

I am sensible, likewise, that in this paragraph, and some others, all the
circumstances are not completely correspondent. But if, in some grand
particulars, the reddition answers to the description; this, I trust, will be
sufficient for my purpose, and satisfactory to my readers. -- Perhaps, it would
be no mistaken caution, to apply the same observation to many of the beautiful
similitudes, parables, and allegories, used by our LORD; such as the brazen
serpent, the unjust steward, the thief in the night, etc. which, if
scrupulously sifted, or rigorously strained, for an entire coincidence in every
circumstance, must appear to great disadvantage, and lead into palpable
inconveniences.


which spins her soft, her shining, exquisitely fine silken thread? Whose
matchless manufactures lend an ornament to grandeu^, and make royalty itself
more magnificent. -- Shall I take notice of the cell, in which, when the gaiety
and business of life are over, the little recluse immures herself, and spends
the remainder of her days in retirement? -- Shall I rather observe the
sepulcher, which, when cloyed with pleasure and weary of the world, she
prepares for her own interment? Or how, when a stated period is elapsed, she
wakes from a death like inactivity; breaks the enclosure of her tomb; throws
off the dusky shroud; assumes a new form; puts on a more sumptuous array; and,
from an insect creeping on the ground, becomes a winged inhabitant of the air?
-- No: This is a poor reptile; and therefore unworthy to serve as an
illustration, when any character of the son of GOD comes under consideration.
But let me correct myself. Was not CHRIST (to use the language of his own
blessed Spirit) a worm, and no man? Psalm xxii.6.
In appearance such, and treated as such. Did he not also bequeath the fine
linen of his own most perfect righteousness, to compose the marriage garment
This, and several other hints, interspersed in this work refer to the active
and passive righteousness of CHRIST, imputed to believers, for their
justification: Which, in the opinion of many great expositors, is the mystical
and the most sublime meaning of the wedding garment, so emphatically and
forcibly recommended by the teacher sent from GOD, Matt. xxii.11. A doctrine,
which some of those who honor my meditations with a perusal, probably may not
receive with much, if any approbation. I hope, the whole performance will not
be cashiered, for one difference in sentiment. And I beg, that the sentiment
itself may not hastily be rejected, without a serious hearing. For, I have the
pleasure of being intimately acquainted with a gentleman of good learning, and
distinguished sense, who had once as strong prepossessions against this tenet,
as can well be imagined: Yet now, he not only admits it as a truth; but
embraces it, as the joy of his heart; and cleaves to it, as the rock of his
hopes.

A clear and cogent treatise, entitled Submission to the Righteousness of GOD,
was the instrument of removing his prejudices, and reduced him to a better
judgment, -- in which he has been happily confirmed by the authority of the
most illustrious names, and the works, of the most eminent pens, that have ever
adorned our church and nation. In this number are -- Bishop Jewel, one of our
great reformers; and the other venerable compilers of our homilies --
Archbishop Usher, that oracle of universl learning -- Bishop Hall, the devout
and sprightly oracle of his age -- the copious and fervent Bishop Hopkins --
the singularly good and unaffected Bishop Beveridge -- that everlasting honor
of the bench of judicature, Lord Chief Justice Hales -- the nervous, florid,
and persuasive Dean Stanhope -- the practical and perspicuous Mr. Burkitt --
and to summon no other evidence, that matchless genius Milton; who in various
parts of his divine poem, inculcates this comfortable truth; and, in one
passage, represents it under the very same image, which is made use of above,
Book X. l. 222.

I had almost forgot to mention that the treatise entitled Submission, etc. was
written by Mr. Benjamin Jenks; -- whose book of devotions has deservedly passed
through eleven editions; is truly admirable for the sublimity, spirituality,
and propriety of the sentiments; as well as for the concise form, and pathetick
turn of the expression: -- Whose book of meditations, though no less worthy of
general acceptance, has for a considerable time, been almost unknown and
extinct; but is now revived, and is lately republished. For which service, he
has my thanks: I flatter myself, he will have the thanks of the public; as I
am persuaded, could religion and virtue speak, he would have their
acknowledgments also. Since few treatises are more happily calculated to
represent religion in its native beauty, and to promote the interests of
genuine virtue. -- On which account, I trust, the candid will excuse me, and
the judicious will not condemn me, even though the recommendation of those
devotions and of these meditations, may appear to be a digression from my
subject.

N. B. Should the reader be inclined to examine the aforementioned tenet, he
will find it stated, discussed, and applied to its due improvement, in a piece
entitled THEREON and ASPASIO, written by Mr. HERVEY.


for our disarrayed and defiled souls! Did he not, before his flesh saw
corruption, emerge triumphant from the grave; and not only mount the lower
firmament, but ascend the heaven of heavens; taking possession of those sublime
abodes, in our name, and as our forerunner?

Ye cattle, that rest in your enclosed pastures: Ye beasts, that range the
unlimited forest: Ye fish, that rove through trackless paths of the sea: Sheep,
clad in garments, which, when left by you, are wore by kings: Kine, who feed on
verdure, which, transmuted in your bodies, and strained from your udders,
furnishes a repast for queens: Lions, roaring after your prey; Leviathan,
taking your pastime in the great deep; with all that wing the firmament, or
tread the soil, or swim the wave: -- He, who spreads his ever hospitable board;
who admits you all to be his continual guests; and suffers you to want no
manner of thing that is good: HE was destitute, afflicted, tormented: He
endured all that was miserable and reproachful, in order to exalt a degenerate
race, who had debased themselves to a level with the beasts that perish, unto
seats of distinguished and immortal honor; in order to introduce the slaves of
sin, and heirs of hell, into mansions of consummate and everlasting bliss.

Surely, the contemplation of such a subject, and the distant anticipation of
such a hope, may almost turn earth into heaven, and make even inanimate nature
vocal with praise. Let it then break forth from every creature. Let the meanest
feel the inspiring impulse; let the greatest acknowledge themselves unable,
worthily to express the stupendous goodness.

Praise HIM, ye insects that crawl on the ground; who, though high above all
height, humbled himself to dwell in dust. Birds of the air, waft on your wings,
and warble in your notes, HIS praise; who, though LORD of the celestial abodes,
while sojourning on earth, wanted a shelter commodious as your nests. -- Ye
rougher world of brutes, join with the gentle songsters of the shade, and howl
to HIM your hoarse applause; who breaks the jaw bones of the infernal lion; who
softens into mildness the savage disposition; and bids the wolf lie down, in
amicable agreement, with the lamb. Bleat out, ye hills; let broader lows be
responsive from the vales; ye forests catch, and ye rocks retain, the
inarticulate hymn: Because MESSIAH the prince feeds his flock, like a shepherd.
He gathers the lambs with his arm; he carries them in his bosom; and gently
leads those that are with young Isa. xl.11.
. -- Wave, ye stately cedars, in sign of worship, wave your branching heads to
HIM, who meekly bowed his own, on the accursed tree. Pleasing prospects, scenes
of beauty, where nicest art conspires with lavish nature, to form a paradise
below; lay forth all your charms, and in all your charms confess yourselves a
mere blank, compared with his amiableness, who is fairest among ten thousand,
and altogether lovely. -- Drop down, ye showers; and testify, as you fall;
testify of HIS grace, which descends more copiously than the rain, distills more
sweetly than the dew. Let sighing gales breathe, and murmuring rivulets flow;
breathe and flow, in harmonious consonance to HIM; whose spirit is far more
reviving, than the cooling breeze; who is himself the fountain of living waters.

Ye lightnings, blaze to his honor; ye thunders, sound HIS praise; while
reverberating clouds return the roar, and bellowing oceans propagate the
tremendous anthem. ^utest of creatures, add your silent oratory, and display
the triumphs of HIS meekness; who, though he makes the clouds his chariot, and
treads upon the waves of the sea; though the thunder is his voice, and the
lightning his sword of justice; yet, amidst the most abusive and cruel
injuries, was submissive and lifted not his hand; was "dumb and opened not his
mouth." -- Great source of day, address thy radiant homage to a far sublimer
sun; write, in all thy ample round, with every lucid beam, O! write a testimony
to HIM, who is the brightness of his father's glory; who is the sun of
righteousness to a sinful world; and is risen, never to go down; is risen, to
be our everlasting light. -- Shine clear, ye skies; look gay, thou earth; let
the floods clap their hands, and let every creature wear a smile: For he
comes, the CREATOR himself comes, to be manifested in the flesh; and with him
comes pardon, peace, and joy; every virtue and all felicity comes in his train.
-- Angels and archangels, let your songs be of JESUS, and teach the very
Heavens to echo with his adored and majestic name: Ye beheld him, with greater
transports of admiration, when you attended his agony in the garden, and saw
him prostrate on the ground, than when you beheld universal nature rising at
his call, and saw the wonders of his creating might. Tune to loftiest notes
your golden harps, and waken raptures, unknown before even in heavenly breasts;
while all that has breath, swells the concert of harmony; and all that has
being, unites in the tribute of praise.

Chiefly, let man exalt his voice; let man, with distinguished hosannas, hail
the REDEEMER. For man, he was stretched on the racking cross; for man, he was
consigned to the gloomy sepulcher; for man, he procured grace unmeasurable, and
bliss inconceivable. -- However different, therefore, in your age, or more
different in your circumstances, be unanimous, O men, in magnifying a Savior,
who is no respecter of persons, who gave himself a ransom for all. -- Bend, ye
kings, from your thrones of ivory and gold; in your robes of imperial purple,
fall prostrate at HIS feet; who forsook a nobler throne, and laid aside more
illustrious ensigns of majesty, that you might reign with GOD forever and ever.
-- Children of poverty, meanest of mortals (if any can be called poor, who are
thus enriched; if any can be accounted mean, who are thus ennobled) rejoice,
greatly rejoice, in GOD your Savior; who chose to be indigent, was willing to
be contemned, that you might be entitled to the treasures, and be numbered with
the princes of Heaven. -- Sons of affliction, though harassed with pain, and
inured to anguish, O! change your groans into songs of gratitude. Let no
complaining voice, no jarring string be heard, in the universal symphony; but
glorify the LAMB even in the fires; Isai. xxiv.15.
who himself bore greater torment, than you feel; and has promised you a share
in the joy, which he inherits; who has made your sufferings short, and will
make your rest eternal. -- Men of hoary locks, bending beneath a weight of
years, and tottering on the brink of the grave; let CHRIST be your support,
under all infirmities; lean upon Christ, as the rock of your salvation; let his
name, his precious name, form the last accents, which quiver on your pale
expiring lips. -- And let this be the first, that lisps on your tongues, ye
tender infants. Remember your REDEEMER, in your earliest moments. Devote the
choice of your hours, to the learning of his will, and the chief of your
strength, to the glorifying of HIS name; who, in the perfection of health, and
the very prime of manhood, was content to become a motionless and ghastly
corpse, that you might be girt with the vigor, and clothed with the bloom, of
eternal youth.

Ye spirits of just men made perfect, who are released from the burden of the
flesh, and freed from all the vexatious solicitations of corruption in
yourselves, delivered from all the injurious effects of iniquity in others: Who
sojourn no longer in the tents of strife, or the territories of disorder; but
are received into that pure, harmonious, holy society, where every one acts up
to his amiable and exalted character; where GOD himself is pleased graciously
and immediately to preside: -- You find, not without pleasing astonishment,
your hopes improved into actual enjoyment, and your faith superseded by the
beatifick vision: You feel all your former shyness of behavior happily lost in
the overflowings of unbounded love, and all your little differences of opinion
entirely borne down by tides of invariable truth. Bless, therefore, with all
your enlarged powers, bless his infinitely larger goodness; who, when he had
overcome the sharpness of death, opened the gates of paradise, opened the
kingdom of heaven to all generations, and to every denomination of the faithful.

Ye men of holy conversation, and humble tempers, think of HIM who loved you,
and washed you from your sins in his own blood: Think of him, on your silent
couch; talk of him, in every social interview; glory in his excellencies; make
your boast of his obedience; and add, still continue to add, the incense of a
dutiful life, to all the oblations of a grateful tongue* -- Weakest of
believers, who go mourning under a sense of guilt, and conflicting with the
ceaseless assaults of temptation; put off your sackcloth, and be girded with
gladness; because JESUS is as merciful to hear, as he is mighty to help;
because he is touched with the tenderest sympathizing concern for all your
distresses; and he lives, ever lives, to be your advocate with the FATHER: Why
then should uneasy doubts sadden your countenances? Why should desponding fears
oppress your souls? Turn, turn those disconsolate sighs into cheerful hymns;
since you have his powerful intercession and his inestimable merits to be your
anchor in all tribulations, to be your passport into eternal blessedness.

Most of all, ye ministers of the sanctuary, heralds commissioned from above;
lift, every one his voice like a trumpet, and loudly proclaim the REDEEMER. Get
ye up, ye ambassadors of peace, get ye up into the high mountains; and spread
far and wide the honors of the LAMB "that was slain, but is alive for
evermore." Teach every sacred roof to resound with his fame; and every human
heart to glow with his love: Declare, as far as the force of words will go,
declare the inexhaustible fullness of that great atonement, whose merits are
commensurate with the glories of the DIVINITY. If in this place and others, I
have spoken magnificently of the blood of CHRIST, and its insuperable efficacy
to expiate guilt; I think, it is no more than is expressed, in a very
celebrated hymn, written by one of the greatest wits, who had also been one of
the greatest libertines, and afterward commenced one of the most remarkable
penitents in France. A hymn, which even Mr. Bail confesses to be a very fine
one; which another great critic calls an admirable one; and w^ch a genius,
superior to them both, recommends as a noble one. (See Spect. Vol. VII. No.
513.) The author, having acknowledged his crimes to be beyond measure heinous,
and almost beyond forgiveness provoking; -- so provoking as to render tears
from such eyes offensive, and prayers from such lips abominable; -- composes
himself to submit, without the least repining sentiment; to submit, even with
praise and adoration, to the most dreadful doom. Accordingly, he stands in
resigned expectation of being instantly struck by the bolts of vengeance; but
-- with a turn of thought equally surprising and sprightly; with a faith
properly sounded, and happily firm; he adds, Yet where! O where! can even thy
thunders fall?
CHRIST's blood o'erspreads and shields me from them all.
O Goodness infinite! Goodness immense!
And Love that passes knowledge! -- Words are vain;
Language is lost in wonder so divine.
"Come then, expressive SILENCE, muse his praise."



Tell the sinful wretch, what pity yearns in IMMANUEL's bowels; what blood he
has spilt, what agonies he has endured, what wonders he has wrought, for the
salvation of his enemies. Invite the indigent to become rich; entreat the
guilty to accept of pardon; because, with the crucified JESUS is plenteous
redemption, and all sufficiency to save -- While you, placed in conspicuous
stations, pour the joyful sound; may I, as I steal through the vale of humble
life, catch the pleasing accents! For me, the author of all blessings became a
curse; for me, his bones were dislocated, and his flesh was torn; he hung, with
streaming veins, and an agonizing soul, on the cross for me. O! may I, in my
little sphere, and amidst the scanty circle of my acquaintance, at least
whisper these glad transporting tidings; whisper them from my own heart, that
they may surely reach, and sweetly penetrate theirs.

But, when men and angels raise the grand hymn; when all worlds, and all
beings, add their collective acclamations; this full, fervent, and universal
chorus, will be so inferior to the riches of the REDEEMER's grace; so
disproportionate to the magnificence of his glory, that it will seem but to
debase the unutterable subject it attempts to exalt. The loud hallelujah will
die away, in the solemn mental eloquence of prostrate, rapturous, silent
adoration.

END of VOL. I.
^hen I con^der thy Heavens, the work of thy Fingers
the Moon and the ^ltars which the^ had ordained.
Lord what is Man that thou art mindful of him* and
the son of Man that thou (...) been Psalm. ^



MEDITATIONS AND CONTEMPLATIONS. IN TWO VOLUMES.

By JAMES HERVEY, A. M. Late Rector of WESTONFAVEL, in ENGLAND.

My MEDITATION of HIM shall be sweet.

PSALM civ.34. VOL. II. FIRST WORCESTER EDITION. PRINTED at WORCESTER,
MASSACHUSETTS, BY ISAIAH THOMAS. Sold at his BOOKSTORE in WORCESTER, and by him
and COMPANY in BOSTON. MDCCLXXXIX.

FRONTISPIECE OF VOL. II.
EXHIBITS a view of the nocturnal Heavens. -- On the top of an OBSERVATORY two
persons examine the celestial bodies with their telescopes: Instruments, which
gave rise to the most important improvements in the science of astronomy.

An aged philosopher it represented, instructing his pupils. He describes, with
his compasses, the order and courses of the planets, according to the Newtonian
hypothesis, intimated by a book bearing that great author's name. -- The whole
tenor of the lecture, in concert with the whole structure and economy of the
skies, ENARRANT GLORIAM DEI, professedly declare the Glory of GOD. -- Behind
the philosopher stands one of his scholars, with an air of close attention,
computing on his fingers the distances, the magnitudes, the velocities of the
planetary orbs. -- Another at his right hand, attending to the description of
the stupendous system, is struck with surprise, and impressed with awe. -- A
third, with conscious humiliation in his countenance, holds a scroll, inscribed
with a diagram, expressing the joint action of the centrifugal and centripetal
forces: As by the one, the planets are continually endeavoring to fly off; but
by the other are perpetually drawn toward the center of their motion; SIC
GRATIA DEI, Such is the operation of Divine Grace; correcting the irregular
impulse of our natural depravity; determining our desires to the center of
happiness; and directing our goings in the circle of duty. -- A youth on the
left, overwhelmed with veneration for the Almighty Maker, in a transport of
gratitude, and a posture of adoration, pours out his soul in those emphatical
words -- When I consider thy Heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the
stars which thou have ordained: -- LORD, what is man, that thou art mindful of
him; and the son of man, that thou visitest him? Psalm viii.3, 4.

TO PAUL ORCHARD, OF STOKE ABBEY, in DEVONSHIRE, Esquire
DEAR SIR,
AS your honored father was pleased to make choice of me to answer in your
name at the font, and to exercise a sort of guardianship over your spiritual
interests; permit me, by putting these little treatises into your hand, to
fulfill some part of that solemn obligation.

Gratitude for many signal favors, and a conscientious regard to my sacred
engagement, have long ago inspired my breast with the warmest wishes, both for
your true dignity, and real happiness. Nor can I think of a more endearing, or
a more effectual way, of advancing either the one or the other, than to set
before you a sketch of your excellent father's character. -- Illustrious
examples are the most winning incitements to virtue. And none can come attended
with such particular recommendations to YOU, Sir, as the pattern of that worthy
person, from whom you derive your very being.

A most cordial, and reverential esteem for the Divine Word, was one of his
remarkable qualities. Those, orcles of Heaven were his principal delight, and
his inseparable companions. Your gardens, your solitary walks, and the hedges
of your fields, can witness, Josh. xxiv.27.
with what an unwearied assiduity he exercised himself in the law of the LORD.
From hence he fetched his maxims of wisdom, and formed his judgment of things.
The sacred precepts, were the model of his temper, and the guide of his life;
while the precious promises were the joy of his heart, and his portion for ever.

Improving company was another of his most relishing pleasures. Few gentlemen
were better furnished, either with richness of fancy, or copiousness of
expression, to bear a shining part in conversation. With these talents, he
always endeavored to give some useful, generally some religious, turn to the
discourse. Nor did he ever reflect, with greater complacency on his social
hours, than when they tended to glorify the Eternal Majesty; and to awaken, in
himself and others, a more lively spirit of devotion.

To project for the good of others, was his frequent study; and to carry those
benevolent contrivances into execution, his favorite employ. When visited by
the young persons of the neighborhood, far from taking an ungraceful pride to
initiate them in debauchery, or confirm them in a riotous habit, it was his
incessant aim, by finely adapted persuasives, to encourage them in industry,
and establish them in a course of s^briety; to guard them against the
allurements of vice, and animate them with the principles of piety. A noble
kind of hospitality this! which will probably transmit its beneficial influence
to their earthly possessions; to their future families; and even to their
everlasting state.

A conviction of human indigence, and a thorough persuasion of the divine all
sufficiency, induced him to be frequent in prayer. To prostrate himself, in
profound adoration, before that infinitely exalted being, who dwells in light
inaccessible, was his glory; to implore the continuance of the Almighty favor,
and the increase of all christian graces, was his gain. In those moments, no
doubt, he remembered you, Sir, with a particular earnestness; and lodged many
an ardent petition in the court of Heaven, for his infant son. Cease not to
second them with your own devout supplications, that they may descend upon your
head, "in the fullness of the blessings of the Gospel of peace."

To give their genuine luster to all his other endowments, he was careful to
maintain an humble mind. Though his friends might admire his superior
abilities, or his acquaintance applaud his exemplary behavior, he saw how far
he fell short of the mark of his high calling; saw, and lamented his defects;
saw, and renounced himself; relying, for final acceptance, and endless
felicity, on a better righteousness than his own; even on the transcendently
perfect righteousness, and inconceivably precious death, of JESUS the Redeemer.
This was the rock of his hope, and the very crown of his rejoicing.

These, Sir, are some of the distinguished characteristicks of your deceased
parent. As you had the misfortune to lose so valuable a relative, before you
was capable of forming any acquaintance with his person; I flatter myself, you
will the more attentively observe his picture. This his moral picture;
designed, not to be set in gold, or sparkle in enamel, but to breathe in your
spirit, and to live in all your conduct. -- Which, though it be entirely your
own, calculated purely for yourself, may possibly (like the family pieces in
your parlour, that glance an eye upon as many as enter the room) make some
pleasing and useful impression on every beholder. -- May every one, charmed
with the beautiful image, catch its resemblance; and each, in his respective
sphere, "go and do likewise."

But you, Sir, are peculiarly concerned to copy the amiable original. As the
order of an indulgent Providence has made you heir of the affluent
circumstances; let not a gay and thoughtless inadvertence, cut you off from the
richer inheritance of these noble qualifications. -- These will be your
security, amidst all the glittering dangers, which are inseparable from
blooming years, and an elevated situation in life. These are your path, your
sure and only path, to true greatness, and solid happiness. -- Tread in these
steps, and you cannot fail to be the darl^ng or your friends, and the favorite
of Heaven. Tread in these steps, and you will give inexpressible joy to one of
the best of mothers; you will become an extensive blessing to your fellow
creatures; and which, after such most engaging motives, is scarce worthy to be
mentioned, you will be the delight, the honor, and the boast of,

Dear Sir, Your very affectionate Godfather, And most faithful humble Servant,
JAMES HERVEY.
Westonfavel, near Northampton, July 14, 1747.
PREFACE.
WE have already exercised out speculation, on the tombs and flowers; surveying
nature, covered with the deepest horrors, and arrayed in the richest beauties.
Allegory taught many of the objects, to speak the language of virtue; while
imagination lent her coloring, to give the lessons an engaging air. -- And
this with a view of imitating that Divine Instructor, who commissioned the
lily, Matt. vi.26, 28, 29, 30.
in her silver suit, to remonstrate in the ear of unbelieving reason; who sent
his disciples (men ordained to teach the universe) to learn maxims of the last
importance, from the most insignificant birds, Matt. vi.26, 28, 29, 30.
that wander through the paths of the air; from the very meanest herbs, Matt.
vi.26, 28, 29, 30.
that are scattered over the face of the Celebrated writers, at Demosthenes and
Cicero, Thucydides and Livy, are observed to have a style peculiar to
themselves. -- Now, whoever considers the discourses of Christ, will find him
distinguishing himself by a style, which may properly be called HIS OWN.
Majestic, yet familiar; happily uniting dignity with condescension; it
consists, in teaching his followers the sublimest truths, by spiritualizing on
the most common occurrences. Which, besides its being level to the lowest
apprehensions; and admirably adapted to steal into the most inattentive heart;
is accompanied with this very singular advantage, that it turns even the sphere
of business into a school of instruction; and renders the most ordinary objects
a set of monitors, ever soliciting our regard, because ever present to our
senses. -- So that I believe, it may be said of this amiable method, in which,
our LORD conveyed, as well as of that powerful energy, which attended his
doctrines, that never man spoke like this man. -- The harvest approaching, he
reminds his disciples of a far more important harvest, John iv.35. Matt.
xiii.39. when immortal beings shall be reaped from the grave, and gathered in
from all the quarters of the earth; when every human creature shall sustain the
character of valuable wheat, or despicable tares; and accordingly be lodged in
mansions of everlasting security, or consigned over to the rage of unquenchable
fire. -- In his charge to fishermen, when they are commencing preachers, Matt.
iv.19, he exhorts them, conformably to the nature of their late occupation, to
use the same assiduity and address in winning souls, as they were wont to
exercise in catching the finny prey. -- For the farther illustration of this no
less useful, than curious subject, I would refer my reader to a valuable note
in Sir Isaac Newton's observations on the prophecies, p. 148.4 to edition.
ground.

Emboldened by the kind acceptance of the preceding sketches, I beg leave to
confide in the same benevolence of taste, for the protection and support of the
two remaining essays; which exhibit a prospect of still li^e, and grand
operation; which moralize on the most composed and most magnificent appearances
of things: -- In which, fancy is again suffered to introduce her imagery; but
only as the handmaid of truth; in order to dress her person, and display her
charms; to engage the attention, and win the love, even of the gay, and of the
fashionable; which is more likely to be effected, by forming agreeable pictures
of nature, and deriving instructive observations, than by the laborious method
of long deduced arguments, or close connected reasonings. -- The contemplation
of the heavens and the earth, of their admirable properties and beneficial
changes, has always afforded the most exalted gratification to the human mind.
In compliance with this prevailing taste, I have drawn my serious admonitions
from the stupendous theater, and variegated scenery, of the universe; that the
reader may learn his duty, from his very pleasures -- may gather wisdom,
mingled with virtue, from the most refined entertainments, and noblest delights.

The evening, drawing her sables over the world, and gently darkening into
night, is a season peculiarly proper for sedate consideration: All
circumstances concur, to hush our passions, and soothe our cares; to tempt our
steps abroad, and prompt our thoughts to serious reflection: -- Then is the
time,
For those, whom wisdom, and whom nature charm,
To steal themselves from the degenerate crowd,
And soar above this little scene of things;
To tread low thoughted vice beneath their feet;
To soothe the throbbing passions into peace;
And woo lone quiet in her silent walks. THOMPS. Autumn, l. 97^.



The favor I would solicit for the first of the following compositions, is,
that it may be permitted to attend, in such retired and contemplative
excursions; to attend, if not under the character of a friend, at least, in the
humble capacity of a servant, or a page; -- as a servant, to open the door of
meditation, and remove every impediment to those best exercises of the mind,
which blend advantage with amusement, and improve while they delight; -- as a
page, to gather up the unstable, fluctuating train of fancy; and collect her
fickle powers into a consistent, regular, and useful habit of thinking.

The other, conversant among the starry regions, would had the imagination
through those beautiful tracts of unclouded azure; and point out to the
judgment some of those astonishing particulars, which so eminently signalize
the celestial worlds. A prospect this, to which curiosity attracts our eyes,
and to which scripture itself often directs our study, A prospect beyond all
others most excellently calculated, to enlarge the soul, and ennoble its
conceptions; -- to give the grandest apprehensions of the everlasting GOD, and
create sentiments of becoming superiority, with relation to all transitory
interest; in a word, to farnish faith with the surest foundation for a steady
affiance, and true magnanimity of spirit; to afford piety the strongest
motives, both for a lively gratitude, and profound veneration.

While Galileo lifts his tube, and discovers the prodigious magnitude of those
radiant orbs; -- while Newton measures their amazing distances, and unites the
whole system, in harmonious order, by the subtle influences of attraction; -- I
would only, like the herald before that illustrious Hebrew, Genesis xli.4^.
proclaim at every turn, bow the knee, and adore the Almighty Maker; magnify
his eternal name, and make his praise, like all his works, to be glorious.

CONTENTS OF VOL. II.
CONTEMPLATIONS on the NIGHT.
A DELIGHTFUL evening walk; the unmolested enjoyment of such pleasures, owing
to our late victory over the rebels -- The setting sun -- Twilight; its
usefulness; serious consideration -- The dewy coolness; its beneficial
influence on nature; returns of solitude equally useful to man -- Angels our
spectators; GOD ever present; comfortable improvement of this truth -- The day
ended; the swiftness, the shortness of time; the work to be done while it
lasts; to squander it away, the most destructive extravagance -- The profound
silence -- Universal cessation of business -- The variations of nature,
pleasing and advantageous -- Darkness; the obliging manner of its taking place;
wild beasts of the desert, and savages in human shape, make use of this
opportunity -- Darkness renders the least spark visible, yet steals from our
sight all the lovely distinctions of things -- Sleep; its cheering nature; the
gift of Heaven; fine preparatives for its approach; the kindness of Providence
in guarding our slumbers -- Dreams; their unaccountable oddness; many people's
waking thoughts, no less chimerical -- A very singular, and very happy
circumstance, attending sleep and dreams -- Ghosts; our unreasonable
timorousness on this occasion; the true object of fear; the reality and design
of apparitions, deducted from a passage in Job -- The owl; its gloomy
disposition; unholy persons incapable of relishing the delights of Heaven --
Owl screaming, supposed to be a token of death; the many real presages of this
great change; due preparation pointed out, and pressed -- The nightingale; her
charming song; entertains the lovers of retirement; how to have a sweeter
melody in our own breasts -- The very different circumstances of mankind,
particularly of the gay, and the afflicted; address to the devotees of mirth
and sensuality -- The glow worm and ignis fatuus; the pleasures of the world,
and powers of unenlightened reason -- A comet; imagined to be the forerunner of
judgments; licentiousness abounding in a nation, a much more formidable omen;
the distemper among the cattle -- Northern lights; the panick they occasion;
the general conflagration -- The moon rising; brightens as she advances; such
should be our moral conduct -- Moon opens a majestic scene; how worthy our
admiration -- Moon, a most serviceable appendage to our globe -- Moon, shines
with derivative light; christians receive their all from their Savior -- Moon
always varying; the things of this world liable to perpetual vicissitudes; our
own righteousness unequal and imperfect; our Redeemer's complete, and always
the same -- Moon under an eclipse; gazed at by multitudes; the faults of
eminent persons seldom escape observation -- Moon reflected by the ocean; the
virtues of persons, in distinguished stations, influential on others -- Moon
actuates the sea; the everlasting joys of Heaven attract and refine the
affections -- Prayer, a reasonable service; praise, a delightful duty; with
devout recollections proper for the night.

CONTEMPLATIONS on the STARRY HEAVENS.
WALK on the summit of a hill -- The advancing night withdraws the rural
prospect; opens the beauties of the sky -- Fragrance of the blooming beans --
The Heavens, a noble field for the display of the Divine perfections -- Folly
of judicial astrology; right use of contemplating the stars -- A sketch of the
most remarkable discoveries of our modern astronomy -- Religion, and necessary
business; religion, and innocent pleasure, as consistent, as the annual and
diurnal motions of the earth -- The sun, its enormous size -- Stars, the
centres of systems; their inconceivable distance -- Other skies furnished with
other stars -- The greatness of the Creator -- The preceding observations
inculcate humility -- Show the littleness of terrestrial things -- The
stupendous condescension of GOD in his gracious regards to the children of men
-- The prodigious heinousness of human guilt -- The richness of CHRIST's
atonement, and its complete sufficiency for the most deplorable cases of sin
and misery -- The power of GOD manifested in the starry heavens; this the
christian's constant safeguard, and sure resource -- The miserable condition of
the ungodly, who have Omnipotence for their enemy -- The unwearied patience of
this Almighty Being -- The wisdom of GOD displayed in the skies; submission to
his dispensations, even when they seem most frowning and severe; all spring
from love, and will terminate in good -- The goodness of GOD, diffused through
the vast system of created things; but far more illustriously exemplified in
the work of redemption; the former view gives a most amiable, the latter a
perfectly ravishing* idea of the Divine Beneficence -- The purity of GOD,
faintly represented by the unspotted firmament; the defilement of sinful man;
the immaculate excellence of his surety -- The unmeasurable dimensions of the
sky; the greater extent of the divine bounty and mercy; the last of these
subjects being so peculiarly comfortable to sinners, considered somewhat
copiously -- What sustains the arch of heaven, and supports the globes it
contains; the same invisible hand upholds the christian in his course -- The
faithfulness of GOD pourtrayed, in the stability of the heavenly bodies, and
perpetuity of their motions; the unreasonableness of our unbelief; motives to
an assured faith -- Various attributes of the divine nature appear, with a
glimmering light, in the celestial luminaries; all shine forth, with the
fullest luster, in CHRIST JESUS -- The dignity of prayer, and happiness of
having GOD for our portion -- The horrible ingratitude, and destructive
perverseness, of living without GOD in the world -- All the rolling worlds on
high, punctually obedient to their Maker's orders; are a pattern, in this
respect, and a provocative to the rational creation -- The gradual appearance
of stars; and progressive state of a true conversion -- The multitude of stars;
especially in the galaxy; the more attentively surveyed, the great^ number
discovered; this applied to the unsearchable treasures of wisdom in the
scriptures, of merit in CHRIST, of bliss in Heaven -- The celestial bodies
disposed in such a manner, as to be delightful and serviceable to man* adorn
his abode, and measure his time; a silent admonition this, to improve the
talent -- Brightness of the stars; encouragement to fidelity in the ministerial
office -- Polar star; its invariable situation; guide to the ancient mariners;
such the word of GOD to our souls; persuasive to follow its unerring dictates
-- Variety in the magnitude, and splendor of the stars; different degrees in
the world of glory; yet all the blessed completely happy -- Projection and
attraction, the grand principles that actuate the planetary system; faith and
love bear much the same propo^, in the economy of christianity -- The admirable
effects, and extensive influences of attraction; the agency of the HOLY GHOST
on the human mind -- Vast gradation in the scale of beings; all are objects of
the Divine Care, and full of the Divine Presence -- The surpassing worth of an
immortal soul; a solicitude for its final welfare urged -- An unthinking view
of the skies is affecting; much more a rational and devout one -- The
scantiness of our knowledge, with regard to the celestial bodies; after all our
search, they are objects of admiration, rather than of science; exhortation to
such pursuits, as are of easy attainment, and will be of everlasting advantage
-- Short recapitulation of the whole; and an hymn of praise, suited to the
occasion.

N. B. It may seem unaccountable to an unlearned reader, that astronomers
should speak such amazing things; and speak them with such an air of assurance;
concerning the distances and magnitudes, the motions and relations, of the
heavenly bodies. I would desire such a person to consider the case of ECLIPSES,
and with what exactness they are calculated. They are not only foretold, but
the very instant of their beginning is determined. The precise time of their
continuance is assigned; assigned, almost to the nicety of a moment; and, what
is still more surprising, for the space of hundreds or thousands of years to
come. -- As this is a matter of fact, absolutely indisputable; it is also a
very obvious, yet solid demonstration, that the principles of science, on which
those calculations proceed, are not mere conjecture, or precarious supposition;
but have a real, a certain foundation, in the nature and constitution of things.

A WINTER PIECE.
INTRODUCTION -- Shortness of the winter's day -- Incessant rain, producing a
flood -- Tempest; its effects; at land, by sea -- Pitchy darkness; riding in it
-- Thick rhyme -- Keen frost, and serenity of weather -- Severe cold, and
piercing winds -- Deep snow -- General thaw -- Evergreens -- Storm of hail --
Rainbow.

HERVEY's CONTEMPLATIONS ON THE NIGHT.
THE business of the day dispatched, and the sultry heats abated, invited me to
the recreation of a walk. A walk, in one of the finest recesses of the country;
and in one of the most pleasant evenings, which the summer season produced.

The limes and elms, uniting their branches over my head, formed a verdant
canopy, and cast a most refreshing shade. Under my feet lay a carpet of
nature's velvet; grass intermingled with moss, and embroidered with flowers.
Jessamines, in conjunction with woodbines, twined around the trees; displaying
their artless beauties to the eye, and diffusing their delicious sweets through
the air. On either side, the boughs, rounded into a set of regular arches,
opened a view into the distant fields, and presented me with a prospect of the
bending skies. The little birds, all joyous and grateful for the favors of the
light, were paying their acknowledgments in a tribute of harmony, and soothing
themselves to rest with songs* while a French horn, from a neighboring seat,
sent its melodious accents, softened by the length of their passage, to
complete the concert of the grove.

Roving in this agreeable manner, my thoughts were exercised on a subject still
more agreeable than the season, or the scene. I mean, our late signal victory
over the united forces of intestine treason, and foreign invasion. A victory,
which pours joy through the present age, and will transmit its influence to
generations yet unborn. -- Are not all the blessings, which can endear society,
or render life itself desirable, centred in our present happy constitution, and
auspicious government? Were they not all struck at, by that impious and horrid
blow, meditated at Rome; levelled by France; and seconded by factious spirits
at home? Who then can be sufficiently thankful, for the gracious interposition
of Providence; which has not only averted the impending ruin, but turned it,
with aggravated confusion, on the authors of our troubles?

Methinks, every thing valuable, which I possess; every thing charming, which I
behold; conspire to enhance this ever memorable event. To this it is owing,
that I can ramble unmolested along the vale of private life, and taste all the
innocent satisfactions of a contemplative retirement. -- Had rebellion
Referring to the rebellion set on foot in the year 1745; -- which, for several
months, made a very alarming progress in the north -- but was happily
extinguished by the glorious and decisive victory at Culloden.
succeeded in her detestable designs, instead of walking with security and
complacence in these flowery paths, I might have met the assassin with his
dagger; or have been obliged to abandon my habitation, and embrace the rock for
a shelter. -- Farewell then, ye fragrant shades; seats of meditation, and calm
repose! I should have been driven from your loved retreats, to make way for
some barbarous, some insulting victor. -- Farewell then, ye pleasing toils, and
wholesome amusements of my rural hours! I should no more have reared the tender
flower to the sun; no more have taught the espalier to expand her boughs; nor
have fetched, any longer, from my kitchen garden, the purest supplies of health.

Had rebellion succeeded in her detestable designs, instead of being regaled
with the music of the woods, I might have been alarmed with the sound of the
trumpet, and all the thunder of war. Instead of being entertained with this
beautiful landscape, I might have beheld our houses ransacked, and our villages
plundered; I might have beheld our fenced cities encompassed with armies, and
our fruitful fields "clothed with desolation;" or have been shocked with the
more frightful images, of "garments rolled in blood," and of a ruffian's blade
reeking from a brother's heart. Instead of peace, with her cheering olives,
sheltering our abodes; instead of justice, with her impartial scale, securing
our goods; persecution had brandished her sword, and slavery clanked her chains.

Nor are these miseries imaginary only, or the creatures of a groundless
panick. There are, in a neighboring kingdom, who very lately experienced them
in all their rigor. See a pamphlet entitled, Popery always the same. -- Which
contains a narrative of the persecutions and severe hardsh^ps, lately suffered
by the Protestants, in the southern parts of France; and closes with a most
seasonable, alarming, and spirited address to the inhabitants of Great britain.
Printed 1746.
And, if the malignant spirit of popery had forced itself into our church; if
an abjured pretender had cut his way to our throne; we could have no reason to
expect a mitigation of their severity, on our behalf. -- But, supposing the
tender mercies of a bigoted usurper to have been somewhat less cruel; where,
alas! would have been the encouragement, to cultivate our little portion; or
what pleasure could arise, from an improved spot; if both the one and the other
lay, every moment, at the mercy of lawless power? This imbittering circumstance
would spoil their relish; and by rendering them a precarious, would render them
a joyless acquisition. -- In vain might the vine spread her purple clusters; in
vain be lavish of her generous juices; if tyranny, like a ravenous harpy,
should be always hovering over the bowl, and ready to snatch it from the lip of
industry, or to wrest it from the hand of liberty.

Liberty, that dearest of names; and property, that best of charters; give an
additional, an inexpressible charm to every delightful object -- See, how the
declining sun has beautified the western clouds; has arrayed them in crimson,
and skirted them with gold. Such a refinement of our domestic bliss, is
property; such an improvement of our public privileges, is liberty. -- When
the lamp of day shall withdraw his beams, there will still remain the same
collection of floating vapors; but O! how changed, how gloomy! The carnation
streaks are faded; the golden edgings are worn away; and all the lovely tinges
are lost, in a leade^ colored louring sadness. Such would be the aspect of all
these scenes of beauty, and all these abodes of pleasure, if exposed
continually to the caprice of arbitrary sway, or held in a state of abject and
cringing dependence.

The sun has almost finished his daily race, and hastens to the goal. He
descends lower and lower, till his chariot wheels seem to hover on the utmost
verge of the sky. What is somewhat remarkable, the orb of light, upon the point
of setting, grows considerably broader. The shadows of objects, just before
they become blended in undistinguishable darkness, are exceedingly lengthened.
Majoresque cadunt altis de montibus umbrae. VIRG.
-- Like blessings, little prized, while possessed, but highly esteemed, the
very instant they are preparing for their flight, bitterly regretted when once
they are gone, and to be seen no more.

The radiant globe is, now, half immersed beneath the dusky earth; or, as the
ancient poets speak, is shooting into the ocean, and sinks in the western sea:
-- And could I view the sea, at this juncture, it would yield a most amusing
and curious spectacle. The rays, striking horizontally on the liquid element,
give it the appearance of floating glass; or, reflected in many a different
direction, form a beautiful multiplicity of colors. -- A stranger, as he walks
along the sandy beach, and, lost in pensive attention, listens to the
murmurings of the restless flood, is agreeably alarmed by the gay decorations
of the surface: With entertainment, and with wonder he sees the curling waves,
here glistering with white, there glowing with purple; in one place, wearing an
azure tincture; in another, glancing a cast of undulating green; in the whole,
exhibiting a piece of fluid scenery, that may vie with yonder pensile
tapestries, though wrought in the loom, and tinged with the dies of Heaven.

While I am transported by fancy to the shores of the ocean, the great luminary
is sunk beneath the horizon and totally disappears. The whole face of the
ground is overspread with shades, or with what one of the finest painters of
nature calls a dun obscurity. Only a few very superior eminences are tipped with
streaming silver. The tops of groves and lofty towers catch the last smiles of
day, See this remarkable appearance delicately described, and wrought into a
comparison, which, in my opinion, is one of the most just, beautiful and noble
pieces of imagery to be found in modern poetry; Night Thoughts, No. 11.
are still irradiated by the departing beams. -- But, O! how transient is the
distinction! how momentary the gift! Like all the blessings which mortals enjoy
below, it is gone almost as soon as granted. See! how languishingly it trembles
on the leafy spire, and glimmers, with a dying faintness, on the mountain's
brow. The little vivacity that remains, decays every moment: It can no longer
hold its station: While I speak it expires, and resigns the world to the
gradual approaches of night.

-- Now twilight gray
Has in her sober liv'ry all things clad. MILT. Par. Lost, B. IV. l.598.

Every object, a little while ago, glared with light; but now all appears under
a more qualified luster. The animals harmonize with the insensible creation;
and what was gay in those, as well as glittering in this, gives place to an
universal gravity. In the meadows all was jocund and sportive; but now the
gamesome lambs are grown weary of their frolicks, and the tired shepherd has
imposed silence on his pipe. In the branches all was sprightliness and song;
but now the lively green is wrapped in the descending glooms, and no tuneful airs
are heard, only the plaintive stockdove cooing mournfully through the grove. --
Should I now be vain and trifling, the heavens and the earth would rebuke my
unseasonable levity. Therefore, be these moments devoted to thoughts sedate as
the closing day, solemn as the face of things. And, indeed, however my social
hours are enlivened with innocent pleasantry, let every evening, in her sable
habit, toll the bell to serious consideration. Nothing can be more proper for a
person who walks on the borders of eternity, and is hasting continually to his
final audit; nothing more proper than daily to slip away from the circle of
amusements, and frequently to relinquish the hurry of business, in order to
consider and adjust the things that belong to his peace.

Since the sun is departed, from whence can it proceed that I am not involved
in pitchy darkness? Whence these remainders of diminished brightness, which,
though scarcely forming a refulgence, soften and soothe the horrors of night?
I see not the shining ruler, yet am cheered with a real, though faint
communication of his splendor. -- Does he remember us in his progress through
other climes? Does he send a detachment of his rays to escort us during his
personal absence, or to cover (if I may use the military term) our retreat from
the scene of action? Has he bequeathed us a dividend of his beams, sufficient
to render our circumstances easy, and our situation agreeable, till sleep pours
its soft oppression on the organs of sense; till sleep suspends all the
operations of our hands, and entirely supersedes any farther occasion for the
light?

No: It is ill judged and unreasonable to ascribe this beneficent conduct to
the sun. Not unto him, not unto him, but unto his Almighty Maker we are obliged
for this pleasing attendant, this valuable legacy. The gracious Author of our
being has so disposed the collection of circumambient air, as to make it
productive of this fine and wonderful effect. The sunbeams, falling on the
higher pa^ts of the aerial fluid, instead of passing on in straight lines, are
bent inwards and conducted to our sight. Their natural course is overruled, and
they are bidden to wheel about, on purpose to favor us with a welcome and
salutary visit: By which means, the blessing of light and the season of
business are considerably prolonged: And, what is a very endearing
circumstance, prolonged most considerably, when the vehement heats of summer
incline the student to postpone his walk till the temperate evening prevails;
when the important labors of the harvest call the husbandman abroad, before
the day is fully risen.

After all the ardours of the sultry day, how reviving is this coolness! --
This gives new verdure to the fading plants, new vivacity to the withering
flowers, and a more exquisite fragrance to their mingled scents. -- By this the
air also receives a new force, and is qualified to exert itself with greater
activity; qualified to brace our limbs, to heave our lungs, and cooperate, with
a brisker impulse, in perpetuating the circulation of our blood. -- This I
might call the grand alembick of nature, which distills her most sovereign
cordial, the refreshing dews. Incessant heat would rob us of their beneficial
agency, and oblige them to evaporate in imperceptible exhalations. Turbulent
winds, or even the gentler motions of Aurora's fan, would dissipate the rising
vapors, and not suffer them to form a coalition: But, favored by the
stillness, and condensed by the coolness of the night, they unite in pearly
drops, and create that finely tempered humidity which cheers the vegetable
world, as sleep exhilarates the animal.

Not unlike to these are the advantages of solitude. The world is a troubled
ocean; and who can erect stable purposes on its fluctuating waves? The world is
a school of wrong; and who does not feel himself warping to its pernicious
influences? Nunquam a turba m^res, quos extuli, refer^. Aliquid, ex ec quod
composui, turbatur; aliquid, ex his quae fugavi, redit. Inimica est multorum
conversatio. SENEC.
On this sea of glass, Rev. xv.2.
how insensibly we slide from our own stedfastness! Some sacred truth, which
was struck in lively characters on our souls, is obscured if not obliterated.
Some worthy resolution, which Heaven had wrought in our breasts, is shaken if
not overthrown. Some enticing vanity, which we had solemnly renounced, again
practices its wiles, and again captivates our affections. How often has an
unwary glance kindled a fever of irregular desire in our hearts? How often has
a word of applause dropped luscious poison into our ears; or some disrespectful
expression raised a gust of passion in our bosoms? Our innocence is of so
tender a constitution, that it suffers in the promiscuous crowd. Our purity is
of so delicate a complexion, that it scarce touches on the world without
contracting a stain. We see, we hear, with peril.

But here safety dwells. Every meddling and intrusive avocation is secluded.
Silence holds the door against the strife of tongues, and all the impertinences
of idle conversation. The busy swarm of vain images, and cajoling temptations
which beset us, with a buzzing importunity, amidst the gaieties of life, are
chased by these thickening shades. -- Here I may, without disturbance, commune
with my own heart, and learn that best of sciences, to know myself. Here the
soul may rally her dissipated powers, and grace recover its native energy. This
is the opportunity to rectify every evil impression, to expel the poison, and
guard against the contagion of corrupting examples. This is the place where I
may, with advantage, apply myself to subdue the rebel within, and be master,
not of a scepter, but of myself. -- Throng then, ye ambitious, the levees of
the powerful; I will be punctual in my assignations with solitude. To a mind
intent upon its own improvement, solitude has charms incomparably more engaging
than the entertainments presented in the theater, or the ^onours conferred in
the drawing room.

I said, solitude. -- Am I then alone? -- It Is true my acquaintance are at a
distance. I have stole away from company, and am remote from all human
observation. But that is an alarming thought, Millions of spiritual creatures
walk the earth,
Uns^en, both when we wake, and when we sleep. Milt. Par. Lost, B. IV. l. 677.



Perhaps there may be numbers of those invisible beings patrolling this same
retreat, and joining with me in contemplating the Creator's works. Perhaps
those ministering spirits, who rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, and hold
up the goings of the righteous, may follow us to the lonely recess, and, even
in our most solitary moments, be our constant attendants. -- What a pleasing
awe is awakened by such a reflection! How venerable it renders my retired
walks! I am struck with reverence as under the roof of some sacred edifice, or
in the presence chamber of some mighty monarch. O! may I never bring any pride
of imagination, nor indulge the least dissolute affection, where such refined
and exalted intelligences exercise their watch!

It Is possible that I am encompassed with such a cloud of witnesses; but it is
certain that GOD, the infinite eternal GOD, is now and ever with me. The great
JEHOVAH, before whom all the angelick armies bow their heads and veil their
faces, surrounds me, supports me, pervades me. In HIM I live, move, and have my
being. -- The whole world is his august temple, and, in the most sequestered
corner, I appear before his adorable majesty, no less than when I worship in
his house, or kneel at his altar. In every place, therefore, let me pay him the
homage of a heart cleansed from idols, and devoted to his service. In every
circumstance, let me feel no ambition but to please him, nor covet any
happiness but to enjoy him.

How sublime is the description, and how striking the sentiment in that noble
passage of the psalms! Whither shall I go from thy spirit, or whither shall
flee from thy presence? If I climb up into the heights of heaven, thou art
there enthroned in light. If I go down to the depths of the grave, thou art
there also in thy pavilion of darkness. If I retire to the remotest eastern
climes, where the morning first takes wing; if, swifter than the darting ray, I
pass to the opposite regions of the west, and remain in the uttermost parts of
the sea; Psalm. cxxxix.7, 8, 9. There is, I think, an additional strength and
beauty in the thought, if, with the learned Mr. Mudge, we suppose an antithesis
between the two clauses of the last verse, as there evidently is between those
of the preceding; and that they express, in a poetical style, the extremities
of the east and the west.


shall I, in that distant situation, be beyond thy reach; or, by this sudden
transition, escape thy notice! So far from it, that could I, with one glance of
thought, transport myself beyond all the bounds of creation, I should still be
encircled with the in^nsity of thy essence; or rather, still be enclosed in the
hollow of thy hand. -- Awful, yet delightful truth! Let it be interwoven with
every thought! and become one with the very consciousness of my existence! that
I may continually walk with GOD; and conduct myself, in every step of my
behavior, "as ^e^ing HIM that is invisible."

They are the happy persons; felicity, true felicity, is all their own, who
live under an habitual sense of GOD's omnipresence, and a sweet persuasion of
his special love. If dangers threaten, their impregnable defense is at hand.
Nothing can be so near to terrify, as their Almighty Guardian to secure them.
-- To these the hours can never be tedious, and it is impossible for them to be
alone. Do they step aside from the occupations of animal life, a more exalted
set of employments engage their attention. They address themselves, in all the
various acts of devotion, to their heavenly Father; who now sees in secret, and
will hereafter reward them openly. They spread all their wants before his
indulgent eye, and disburden all their sorrows into his compassionate bosom. Do
they withdraw from human society, they find themselves under the more immediate
regards of their Maker. If they resign the satisfaction of social intercourse,
it is to cultivate a correspondence with the condescending DEITY, and taste the
pleasures of divine friendship. -- What is such a state but the very suburbs of
Heaven? What is such a conduct, but an antepast of eternal blessedness?

Now, my soul, the day is ended: The hours are all fled: They are fled to the
supreme Judge, and have given in their evidence; an evidence registered in
Heaven! and to be produced at the great audit. Happy they! whose improvement
has kept pace with the fleeting minutes; who have seized the important
fugitives, and engaged them in the pursuit of wisdom, or devoted them to the
service of virtue.

Fugitives indeed they are. Our moments slip away silently and insensibly. The
thief steals not more unperceived from the pillaged house. -- And will the
runagates never stop? No: Where^er we are, however employed, Time pursues his
inc^ant course. Though we are listless and dilatory, the great measurer of our
days presses on; still presses on, in his unwearied career, Sed fugit interea,
fugit irreparabile tempus. VIRG.
and whirls our weeks, and months, and years away. -- Is it not then
surprisingly strange, to hear people complain of the tediousness of their time,
and how heavy it hangs upon their hands? To see them contrive a variety of
amusing artifices, to accelerate its ^light and get rid of its burden? -- Ah!
thoughtless mortals! why need you urge the headlong torrent? Your days are
swifter than a post, which, carrying dispatches of the last importance, with
unremitted speed scours the road. They pass away like the nimble ships, which
have the wind in their wings, and skim along the watery plain. They hasten to
their destined period with the rapidity of an eagle, which leaves the stormy
blast behind her, while she cleaves the air, and darts upon her prey. Job.
ix.25, 26. By these three very expressive images, the inspired poet represents
the unintermitted and rapid flight of time. The passage is illustrated with
great judgment and equal delicacy, in Dr. Gray 's most ingenious abridgment of
Sebultens. -- Quae tribus in elementis velocissima, hic admirabili cum emphasi
congeruntur. In terris, nil pernicius cursore, and quidem laeti quid ferente.
Rapidius tamen adhuc undas, non secant, sed supervolant, navigiola papyro
contexta. Omnium rapidissime aerem grandibus alis permittitur aquila,
praecipiti lapsu ruens in praedam.




Now the day is gone, how short it appears! When my fond eye beheld it in
perspective, it seemed a very considerable space: Minutes crowded upon minutes,
and hours ranged behind hours, exhibited an extensive draught, and flattered me
with a long progression of pleasures. But upon a retrospective view, how
wonderfully is the scene altered! The landscape, large and spacious, which a
warm fancy drew, brought to the test of cool experience, shrinks into a span;
just as the shores vanish, and mountains dwindle to a spot, when the sailor,
surrounded by skies and ocean, throws his last look on his native land. -- How
clearly do I now discover the cheat! May it never impose upon my unwary
imagination again! I find there is nothing abiding on this side eternity. A
long duration, in a state of finite existence, is mere illusion.

Perhaps the healthy and the gay may not readily credit the serious truth;
especially from a young pen, and new to its employ. Let us then refer ourselves
to the decision of the ancient. Ask some venerable old person, who is just
marching off the mortal stage -- How many have been the days of the years of
thy life? Genesis xlvii.8. Heb. Bib.
It was a monarch's question, and therefore can want no recommendation to the
fashionable world. -- Observe how he shakes his hoary locks, and from a deep
felt conviction replies -- Fourscore years have finished their rounds, to
furrow these cheeks, and clothe this head in snow. Such a term may seem long
and large to inconsiderate youth: But O! how short, how scanty, to one that has
made the experiment! Short as a gleam of transient sunshine; scanty at the
shadow that departs. Methinks, it was but yesterday that I exchanged my
childish sports for manly exercises; and now I am resigning them both for the
sleep of death. As soon as we are born we begin to draw to our end; and how
small is the interval between the cradle and the tomb. -- O! may we believe
this testimony of mature age! May every evening bring it, with clearer
evidence, to our minds! And may we form such an estimate of the little
pittance, while it is upon the advancing hand, as we shall certainly make when
the sands are all run down!

Let me add one reflection on the work to be done, while this shuttle is flying
through the loom. My days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle. Job vii.6.
A work of no small difficulty, yet of the utmost consequence! -- Have thou not
seen, have thou not known, the excellent of the earth, who were living images
of their Maker? His divine likeness was transfused into their hearts, and
beamed forth in all their conduct: Beamed forth in meekness of wisdom, and
purity of affection, in all the tender offices of love, and all the noble
efforts of zeal. To be stamped with the same beautiful signature, and to be
followers of them, as they were of CHRIST; this, this is thy business: On the
accomplishment of this thy eternal all depends. And, will an affair of such
unspeakable weight admit of a moment's delay, or consist with the least
remissness? -- Especially, since much of thy appointed^time is already elapsed,
and the remainder is all uncertainty, save only that it is in the very act to
fly. -- Or suppose thou had made a covenant with the grave, and wast assured
of reaching the age of Methuselah, how soon would even such a lease expire!
Extend it, if you please, still farther; and let it be coexistent with nature
itself: How inconsiderable is the addition! For, yet a very little while, and
the commissioned archangel lifts up his hand to Heaven, and swears by the
Almighty Name, that time shall be no longer. This alludes to the beginning of
Revelations the xth; which, abstracted from its spiritual meaning, and
considered only as a stately piece of machinery, well deserves our attention;
and, I will venture to say, has not its superior, perhaps not its equal, in
any of the most celebrated masters of Greece and Rome. -- All that is gloomy or
beautiful in the atmosphere, all that is striking or magnificent in every
element, is taken to heighten the idea. Yet nothing is disproportionate; but an
uniform air of ineffable majesty greatens, exalts, ennobles the whole. -- Be
pleased to observe the aspect of this august personage. All the brightness of
the sun shines in his countenance, and all the rage of the fire burns in his
feet. -- See his apparel. The clouds compose his robe, and the drapery of the
sky floats upon his shoulders. The rainbow forms his diadem; and that which
"compasses the heaven with a glorious circle," is the ornament of his head. --
Behold his attitude. One foot stands on the ocean, the other rests on the land.
The wide extended earth, and the world of waters, serve as pedestals for those
mighty columns. -- Consider the action. His hand is lifted up to the height of
the stars. He speaks; and the regions of the firmament echo with the mighty
accents, as the midnight desert resounds with the lion's roar. The artillery of
the skies is discharged at the signal; a peal of sevenfold thunders spreads the
alarm, and prepares the universe to receive his orders. -- To finish all, and
give the highest grandeur, as well as the utmost solemnity to the
representation, hear the decree that issues from his mouth. He swears by HIM
that lives forever and ever. In whatever manner so majestic a person had
expressed himself, he could not fail of commanding universal attention. But
when he confirms his speech, by a most sacred and inviolable oath, we are not
only wrapped in silent suspense, but overwhelmed with the profoundest awe. -- He
swears that time shall be no longer. Was ever voice so full of terror; so big
with wonder? It proclaims, not the fall of empires, but the final period of
things. It strikes off the wheels of nature; bids ages and generations cease to
roll; and with one potent word, consigns a whole world over to dissolution. --
This is one among a multitude of very sublime and masterly strokes, to be found
in that too much neglected book -- the BIBLE.
Then, abused opportunities will never return; and new opportunities will never
more be offered. Then, should negligent mortals wish -- wish ever so
passionately -- for a few hours -- a few moments only -- to be thrown back from
the opening eternity, thousands of worlds would not be able to procure the
grant.

Shall I now be industrious to shorten what is no longer than a span; or to
quicken the pace of what is ever on the wing? Shall I squander away what is
unutterably important while it lasts; and when once departed, is altogether
irrevocable! O! my soul, forbear the folly; forbear the desperate extravagance.
Will thou chide as a loiterer, the arrow that boundeth from the string; or
sweep away diamonds, as the refuse of thy house? -- Throw time away!
Astonishing, ruinous, irreparable profuseness! Throw empires away, and be
blameless. But O! be parsimonious of thy days; husband thy precious hours. They
go connected, indissolubly connected, with heaven or hell: I remember to have
seen upon a sundial in a physician's garden at Northampton, the following
inscription; which, I think, is the most proper motto for the instrument that
measures our time, and the most striking admonition that can possibly be
presented to every eye* AB HOC MOMENTO P^NDET AETERNITAS. The weighty sense of
which, I know not how to express in English, more happily than in those words
of Dr. Watts: Good God! on what a slender thread
[Or, on what a moment of time]
Hang everlasting things!

Improved, they are a sure pledge of everlasting glory; wasted, they are a sad
preface to never ending confusion and anguish.

What a profound silence has composed the world! So profound is the silence,
that my very breath seems a noise; the ticking of my watch is distinctly heard;
if I do but stir, it creates a disturbance. -- There is now none of that
confused din from the tumultuous city: No voice of jovial rusticks, from the
neighboring meadow: No chirping melody from the shady thicket. -- Every lip is
sealed. Not the least whisper invades the air; nor the least motion rustles
among the boughs. Echo herself sleeps unmolested. The expanded ear, though all
attention, catches no sound, but the liquid lapse of a distant murmuring stream.

All things are hushed, as nature's self lay dead. If, in the midst of this
deep and universal composure, ten thousand bellowing thunders should burst over
my head, and rend the skies with their united vollies; how should I bear so
unexpected a shock? It would stun my senses, and confound my thoughts: I should
shudder in every limb; perhaps sink to the earth with terror. -- Consider
then, O mortals! consider the much more prodigious and amazing call, which
will, ere long, alarm your sleeping bones. When the tenants of the tomb have
slumbered in the most undisturbed repose, for a multitude of ages, what an
inconceivable consternation must the shout of the archangel, and the trump of
GOD occasion! Will it not wound the ear of the ungodly, and affright, even to
distraction, the impenitent sinner? The stupendous peal will sound through the
vast of heaven; will shake the foundations of nature; and pierce, even the
deepest recesses of the grave: And how -- O! how will the prisoners of Divine
Justice, be able to endure that tremendous summons, to a far more tremendous
tribunal? -- Do thou, my soul, listen to the still voice of the Gospel: Attend,
in this thy day, to the gracious invitations of thy Savior. Then shall that
great midnight cry lose its horror, and be music in thy ears. It shall be
welcome to thy reviving clay, as the tidings of liberty to the dungeon captive;
as the year of jubilee to the harassed slave. This, this shall be its charming
import -- Awake, and sing, ye that dwell in dust. Isa. xxvi.19.


What a general cessation of affairs has this dusky hour introduced! A little
while ago, all was hurry, hurry. Life and activity exerted themselves in a
thousand busy forms: The city swarmed with passing and repassing multitudes:
All the country was sweat and dust: The air floated in perpetual agitation, by
the flitting birds, and humming bees. Art sat prying with her piercing eyes;
while industry plied her restless hands. -- But see, how all this fervent and
impetuous bustle is fled with the setting sun. The beasts are slunk to their
grassy couch; and the winged people are retired to their downy nests. The
hammer has resigned its sounding task, and the file ceases to repeat its flying
touches. Shut is the well frequented shop, and its threshold no longer worn by
the feet of numerous customers. The village swain lies drowned in slumbers, and
even his trusty dog, who, for a considerable time stood centry at the door, is
extended at his ease, and snores with his master. -- In every place toil
reclines her head, and application folds her arms. All interests seem to be
forgot; all pursuits are suspended; all employment is sunk away* sunk away with
those fluttering myriads, which lately sported in the sun's departing rays. --
It is like the Sabbath of universal nature; or as though the pulse of life
stood still.

Thus will it be with our infinitely momentous concerns, when once the shadows
of the evening (that long evening which follows the footsteps of death!) are
stretched over us. The dead cannot seek unto GOD; the living, the living alone,
are possessed of this inestimable opportunity. Behold! now is the accepted
time. Behold! now is the day of salvation.

2 Cor. vi.2. Haste, haste, he lies in wait, he is at the door,
Insidious death! Should his strong hand arrest,
No composition sets the prisoner free.

There is no work or device, no repentance or amendment, in the grave, They who
are gone down to the grave, are represented ( Isa. xxxviii.11.) by the phrase,
(...) -- rendered by Vitringa, those that inhabit the land of intermission or
cessation. -- Which prevents all appearance of ta^tology in the sentence; and
is, I think, a valuable improvement of the translation, as it conveys an idea,
not only distinct from the preceding, but of a very poetical and very
afflicting nature; such as was perfectly natural for the royal singer, and
royal sufferer to dwell upon, in his desponding moments. -- Thus interpreted
the sense will run -- I shall see man no more; I shall be cut off from the
cheerful ways of men, and all the sweets of human society. And, what is a
farther aggravation of the threatened stroke, I shall, by its taking place, be
numbered with those, that inherit the land of cessation and inactivity. Where
there will be no more possibility of contributing to the happiness of my
kingdom; no more opportunity of advancing my Creator's glory, or of making my
own final salvation sure. -- A sentiment like this is grand, important, and
full of benevolence; removes all suspicion of unbecoming pusillanimity, and
does the highest honor to the monarch's character.
whither we are all hastening. When once that closing scene is advanced, we
shall have no other part to act on this earthly theater. Then the sluggard, who
has slumbered away life in a criminal inactivity, must lie down in hopeless
distress and everlasting sorrow. Then that awful doom will take place, He that
is holy, l^ him be holy still; and he that is filthy, let him be filthy forever.

Is it so, my soul? Is this the only, only time allotted for obtaining the
great reward, and making thy salvation sure? And art thou lulled in a vain
security, or dreaming in a supine inadvertency? Start, O! start from thy
trance. Gird up the loins of thy mind, and work while it is day. Improve the
present seed time, that eternity may yield a joyful harvest. -- We especially,
who are watchmen in Israel, and ministers of the glorious Gospel, may we be
awakened, by this consideration, to all assiduity in our holy office. Some or
other of our people are ever and anon departing into the invisible state; all
our friends are making incessant approaches to their long home; and we
ourselves shall very shortly be transmitted to the confinement of the tomb.
This is the favorable juncture wherein alone we can contribute to their
endless welfare. This is the crisis, the all important crisis of their final
felicity. Instantly, therefore, let us pour in our wholesome instructions;
instantly let us ply them with our earnest exhortations. A moment's delay may
be an irreparable loss; may be irretrievable ruin. While we procrastinate, a
fatal stroke may intervene, and place us beyond the power of administering, or
place them beyond all possibility of receiving any spiritual good. The case
represented by the prophet (1 Kings xx.40.) seems perfectly applicable on this
occasion -- As thy servant was busy here and there, he was gone. So, while we
are either remiss in our function, or laying ourselves out upon inferior
cares, the people of our charge may be gone -- gone beyond the influence of our
counsels, beyond the reach of our prayers -- gone into the unchangeable and
eternal state.


How frequently is the face of nature changed! and, by changing, made more
agreeable! -- The long continued glitter of the day renders the soothing shades
of the evening doubly welcome: Nor does the morn ever purple the east with so
engaging a luster, as after the gloom of a dark and dismal night. -- At present
a calm of tranquillity is spread through the universe. The weary winds have
forgot to blow. The gentle gales have fanned themselves asleep. Not so much as
a single leaf nods. Even the quivering aspin rests. And not one breath curls
over the stream. -- Sometimes, on the contrary, the tempest summons all the
forces of the air, and pours itself, with resistless fury, from the angry
north. The whole atmosphere is tossed into tumultuous confusion, and the watery
world is heaved to the clouds. The astonished mariner and his straining vessel,
now scale the rolling mountain, and hang dreadfully visible on the broken
surge; now shoot, with headlong impetuosity, into the yawning gulf, and neither
hulk nor mast is seen. The storm sweeps over the continent; raves along the
city streets; struggles through the forest boughs; and terrifies the savage
nations with a howl more wildly horrid than their own. The knotty oaks bend
before the blast; their iron trunks groan, and their stubborn limbs are dashed
to the ground. The lofty dome rocks, and even the solid tower totters on its
basis.

Such variations are kindly contrived, and with an evident condescension to the
fickleness of our taste. Because a perpetual repetition of the same objects
would create satie^y and disgust; therefore, the indulgent Father of our race
has diversified the universal scene, and bid every appearance bring with it the
charm of novelty. -- This circumstance is beneficial as well as entertaining.
Providence, ever gracious to mortals, ever intent upon promoting our felicity,
has taken care to mingle, in the constitution of things, what is pleasing to
our imagination, with what is serviceable to our interests. The piercing winds
and rugged aspect of winter, render the balmy gales and flowery scenes of
spring peculiarly delightful. At the same time, the keen frosts mellow the
soil, and prepare it for the hand of industry. The rushing rains impregnate the
glebe, and fit it to become a magazine of plenty. The earth is a great
laboratory, and December's cold collects the gross materials, which are
sublimated by the refined warmth of May. The air is a pure elastic fluid; and
were it always to remain in this motionless serenity, it would lose much of its
active spring; was it never agitated by those wholesome concussions, it would
contract a noisome, perhaps a pestilential taint. In which cases our
respiration, instead of purifying, would corrupt the vital juices; instead of
supplying us with refreshment, would be a source of diseases; or every gasp we
draw, might be unavoidable death. Considering the immense quantity of coals and
other combustible materials, which are daily consumed, and evaporate into the
air: Considering the numberless steams, and clouds of smoke, which almost
continually overwhelm populous cities; the noisome exhalations which arise from
thronged infirmaries and loathsome jails; from stagnating lakes and putrid
fens; the variety of offensive an^ unwholesome effluvia which proceed from
other causes -- it is a very remarkable instance of a Providence, at once
tenderly kind an^ infinitely powerful, that mankind is not suffocated with
stench; the the air is not choked with filth. -- The air is the common sewer*
(...) which ten thousand times ten thousand nuisances are incessantly
discharged; yet it is preserved so thoroughly clear, as to afford the most
transparent medium for vision; so delicately undulatory, as to transmit, with
all imaginable distinctness, every diversity of sound; so perfectly pure, as to
be the constant refiner of the fluids in every animal that breathes.
-- How then should we admire, how should we adore, that happy union of
benignity and wisdom, which, from a variety of dispensations, produces an
uniformity of good! Produces a perpetual succession of delights, and an
uninterrupted series of advantages!

The darkness is now at its height; and I cannot but admire the obliging manner
of its taking place. It comes, not with a blunt and abrupt incivility, but
makes gentle and respectful advances. A precipitate transition; from the
splendours of day to all the horrors of midnight, would be inconvenient and
frightful. It would bewilder the traveller in his journey; it would strike the
creation with amazement; and, perhaps, be pernicious to the organs of sight.
Therefore the gloom rushes not upon us instantaneously, but increases by slow
degrees; and, sending twilight before as its harbinger, decently advertises us
of its approach. By this means, we are neither alarmed nor incommoded by the
change, but are able to take all suitable and timely measures for its
reception. -- Thus graciously has Providence regulated, not only the grand
vicissitudes of the seasons, but also the common interchanges of light and
darkness, with an apparent reference to our comfort.

Now the fierce inhabitants of the forest forsake their dens: A thousand grim
forms, a thousand growling monsters, pace the desert. Death is in their jaws,
while stung with hunger, and athirst for blood, they roam their nightly rounds.
-- Unfortunate the traveller who is overtaken by the night in those dismal
wilds! How must he stand aghast at the mingled yell of ravenous throats, and
lions roaring after their prey! Defend him, propitious Heaven! or else he must
see his endearing spouse, and hail his native home, no more! -- Now the
prowling wolf, like a murderous ruffian, dogs the shepherd's footsteps, and
besets his bleating charge. The fox, like a crafty felon, steals to the
thatched cottage, and carries off the feathered booty.

Happy for the world, were these the only destroyers that walk in darkness:
But, alas! there are savages in human shape, who, muffled in shades, infest the
abodes of civilized life. The sons of violence make choice of this season --
When night
Darkens the streets, then wander forth the sons
Of Belial, flown with insolence and wine.
MILT.
to perpetrate the most outrageous acts of wrong and robbery. The adulterer
waits for the twilight, and, baser than the villain on the highway, betrays
the honor of his bosom friend. Now faction forms her close cabals, and
whispers her traitorous insinuations. Now rebellion plans her accursed plots,
and prepares the train to blow a nation into ruin. Now crimes, which hide their
odious heads in the day, haunt the seats of society, and stalk through the
gloom with audacious front. Now the vermin of the stews crawl from their
lurking holes, to wallow in sin, and spread contagion through the night; each
soothing himself with the fond notion, that all is safe, that no eye sees.

Are they then concealed? Preposterous madmen! to draw the curtain between
their infamous practices and a little set of mortals, but lay them open to all
these chaste and wakeful eyes of Heaven! -- Sed luna videt, sed sidera testes
Intendunt oculos.

As though the moon and stars were made to light men to their revels, and not
to GOD. -- Are they then concealed? No, truly. Was every one of these vigilant
luminaries closed, an eye keener than the lightning's flash, an eye brighter
than ten thousand suns, beholds their every motion. Their thickest shades are
beaming day This is finely and very forcibly expressed by the psalmist -- If I
say, Peradventure the darkness shall cover me; then shall my night be turned to
day: Or, as it may be rendered somewhat more emphatically, Even the night shall
be broad daylight all around me. Psalm. cxxxix.10.
to the jealous Inspector and supreme Judge of human actions. -- Deluded
creatures! have ye not heard, have ye not read, That clouds and darkness are
HIS majestic residence? Psalm. xcvii.2.
In that very gloom to which you fly for covert, he erects his throne: What you
reckon your screen, is the bar of his tribunal. O! remember this! Stand in awe,
and sin not. Remember that the great and terrible GOD is about your path, The
original words are much stronger than the translation: (...) and (...) signify,
Thou fiftest my path, and art intimately acquainted with all my ways. The
former, I apprehend, denoting the exact cognizance which the Almighty takes;
the latter implying the constant inspection which he exercises, over all the
circumstances of our conduct. Psalm. cxxxix.2.
when you take your midnight range; is about your bed, when you indulge the
loose desire; and spies out all your ways, be they ever so secretly conducted
or artfully disguised.

Some minutes ago a passenger crossed along the road: His horse's foot struck
the ground and fetched fire from a flint. My eye, though at a distance, catched
the view, and saw, with great clearness, the transient sparkles; of which, had
I been ever so near, I should not have discerned the least glimpse, under the
blaze of Day. -- So, I beg leave to inform the young gentleman, whose name
dignifies my dedication, that this was a remark of his honored father, when we
rode together, and conversed in a dusky evening. I mention this circumstance,
partly to secure the paragraph from contempt; partly to give him, and the
world, an idea of that eminently serious taste which distinguished my deceased
friend. -- The less obvious the reflection, the more clearly it discovers a
turn of mind, remarkably spiritual; which would suffer nothing to escape
without yielding some religious improvement. The meaner the incident, the more
admirable was the fertility of imagination, which could deduce the sublimest
truths, from the most trivial occurrences.
when sickness has drawn a veil over the gaiety of our hearts; when misfortunes
have eclipsed the splendor of our outward circumstances, how many important
convictions present themselves, with the brightest evidence! Under the sunshine
of prosperity, they lay undiscovered; but, when some intervening cloud has
darkened the scene, they emerge from their obscurity, and even glitter upon our
minds. Then, the world, that delusive cheat, confesses her emptiness; but
JESUS, the bright and morning star, beams forth with inimitable luster. Then,
vice loses all her fallacious allurements; that painted strumpet is horrible as
the hags of hell; but virtue, despised virtue, gains loveliness from a louring
providence, and treads the shades with more than mortal charms. -- May this
reconcile me, and all the sons of sorrow, to our appointed share of suffering!
If tribulation tend to dissipate the inward darkness, and pour heavenly day
upon our minds, welcome distress, welcome disappointment, welcome whatever our
froward flesh, or peevish passions would miscal calamities. These light
afflictions, which are but for a moment, shall sit easy upon our spirits, since
they befriend our knowledge, promote our faith, and so work out for us, a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 2 Cor. iv.17. The great St^phens,
that oracle of Grecian learning, translates (...). Quo nihil majus dici aut
fingi potest. But how does the sense rise! How is the idea enlarged, under two
such forcible expressions! (...). -- The whole verse is a master piece of the
beautiful antithesis, the lively description, and the nervous diction. It is
one of those exquisite passages in the inspired writings, which, like some rich
aromatic plants, cannot be transferred from their own generous and native
soil, without being impaired in their vivacity, and losing much of their
delicacy: Perhaps, the following version may be somewhat less injurious to the
sacred original, than the common translation -- Our very light affliction,
which is but just for the present moment, works out a far more exceeding, and
incomparably great, and eternal weight of glory.


How has this darkness snatched every splendid and graceful object from my
sight! It has dashed the sponge over the pictures of spring, and destroyed all
the delicate distinctions of things. Where are now the fine tinges which so
lately charmed me from the glowing parterre? The blush is struck out from the
cheeks of the rose, and the snowy hue is dropped from the lily. I cast my eyes
toward a magnificent seat; but the aspiring columns, and fair expanded front,
are mingled in rude confusion. Without the sun, all the elegance of the
blooming world, is a mere blank; all the symmetry of architecture, is a
shapeless heap.

Is not this an expressive emblem of the loveliness which the sun of
righteousness transfuses into all that is amiable? Was it not for JESUS, and
his merits, I should sigh with anguish of spirit, even while I rove through
ranks of the most beautiful flowers, or breathe amidst a wilderness of sweets.
Was it not for JESUS, and his merits, I should roam like some disconsolate
spectr^, even through the smiles of creation, and the caresses of fortune. My
conversation in this world, though dressed in the most engaging forms of
external pleasure, would be like the passage of a condemned malefactor, through
enamelled meadows, and bowers of bliss, to be broke upon the wheel, or to
expire on the rack. But a daily reflection on the LAMB's atoning blood; a
comfortable trust, that my soul is reconciled through this divine expiation;
this is the ray, the golden ray, which irradiates the face of the universe.
This is the oil of beauty, which makes all things wear a cheerful aspect; and
the oil of gladness, which disposes the spectator to behold them with delight.
Thus applied, that fine piece of flattery, addressed to the heathen emperor,
is strictly and literally true. -- Vultus ubi tuus
Affulsit populo, gratior it dies,
Et sol^s melius nitent.
HORAT. Which I would cast into a christian mould, and thus translate: When
faith presents the Savior's death,
And whispers, "this is thine;"
Sweetly my rising hours advance,
And peacefully decline.
While such my views, the radiant sun
Sheds a more sprightly ray;
Each object smiles; all nature charms;
I sing my cares away.

This, this is the secret charm which teaches nature, in all her prospects and
all her productions, so-exquisitely to please.

Man goes forth to his work, and to his labor, till the evening. But then his
strength fails, his spirits flag, and he stands in need, not only of some
respite from toil, but of some kindly and sovereign refreshments. -- What an
admirable provision for this purpose is sleep! Sleep introduces a most welcome
vacation, both for the soul and the body. The exercises of the brain, and the
labors of the hand, are at once discontinued. So that the weary limbs repair
their exhausted vigor, while the pensive thoughts drop their load of sorrows,
and the busy ones rest from their fatigue of application. -- Most reviving
cordial! Equally beneficial to our animal and intellectual powers. It supples
the fleshy machine, and keeps all its nice movements in a proper posture for
easy play. It animates the thinking faculties with fresh alacrity, and
rekindles their ardour for the studies of the dawn. Without these enlivening
recruits, how soon would the most robust constitution be wasted into a walking
skeleton, and the most learned sage degenerate into a hoary idiot! -- Some time
ago, I beheld with surprise poor Florio. His air was wild, his countenance
meagre, his thoughts roving, and speech disconcerted. Inquiring the cause of
this strange alteration, I was informed, that for several nights, he had not
closed his eyes in sleep. For want of which noble restorative, that sprightly
youth (who was once the life of the discourse, and the darling of the company)
is become a spectacle of misery and horror.

How many of my fellow creatures are, at this very instant, confined to the bed
of languishing, and complaining, with that illustrious sufferer of old,
Wearisome nights are appointed to me! Job vii.3.
Instead of indulging soft repose, they are counting the tedious hours, telling
every striking clock, or measuring the very moments by their throbbing pulse.
How many, harassed with pain, most passionately long to make some little truce
with their agonies, in peaceful slumbers! How many, sick with disquietude, and
restless, even on their downy pillows, would purchase this transient oblivion
of their woes, almost at any rate! -- That which wealth cannot procure, which
multitudes sigh for in vain, thy GOD has bestowed on thee, times out of number.
The welcome visitant, punctual at the needed hour, has entered thy chamber, and
poured his poppies round thy couch! has gently closed thy eyelids, and shed his
slumberous dews over all thy senses.

Since sleep is so absolutely necessary, so inestimably valuable, observe, what
a fine apparatus Almighty Goodness has made, to accommodate us with the balmy
blessing. With how kind a precaution he removes whatever might obstruct its
access, or impede its influence! He draws around us the curtain of darkness,
which inclines us to a drowsy indolence, and conceals every object that might
too strongly agitate the sense. He conveys peace into our apartments, and
imposes silence on the whole creation. Every animal is bidden to tread softly,
or rather to cease from its motion, when man is retiring to his repose. -- May
we not discern, in this gracious disposition of things, the tender care of a
nursing mother, who hushes every noise, and secludes every disturbance, when
she has laid the child of her love to rest? So, by such soothing circumstances,
and gently working opiates, HE gives, to his beloved, sleep. Psalm xcvii.2.


Another signal instance of a Providence intent upon our welfare, is, that we
are preserved safe in the hours of slumber. How are we then lost to all
apprehension of danger; even though the murderer be at our bed side, or his
naked sword at our breast! Destitute of all concern for ourselves, we are
unable to think of, much more to provide for, our own security. At these
moments, therefore, we lie open to innumerable perils; perils, from the
resistless rage of flames; perils, from the insidious artifices of thieves, or
the outrageous violence of robbers; perils, from the irregular workings I think
it is referable only to a superintending, and watchful Providence, that we are
not hurried into the most pernicious actions, when our imagination is heated,
and our reason stupefied by dreams. -- We have sometimes heard of unfortunate
persons, who, walking in their sleep, have thrown themselves headlong from a
window, and been dashed to death on the pebbles. And whence is it, that such
disastrous accidents are only related as pieces of news, not experienced by
ourselves, or our families? Were our minds more sober in their operations, or
more circumspect in their regards? No, verily: Nothing could be more wild than
their excursions, and none could be more inattentive to their own welfare.
Therefore, if we have laid us down, and s^ept in peace, it was, because the
LORD vouchsafed us the sweet refreshment; if we rose again in safety, it was,
because the LORD sustained us with his unremitted protection.

Will the candid reader excuse me, if I add a short story, or rather a matter
of fact, suitable to the preceding remark? -- Two persons, who had been hunting
together in the day, slept together the following night. One of them was
renewing the pursuit in his dreams, and, having run the whole circle of the
chase, came at last to the fall of the stag. Upon this, he cries out with a
determined ardour, I Will kill him; I Will kill him; and immediately feels for the
knife, which he carried in his pocket. His companion happening to be awake, and
observing what passed, leaped from the bed. Being secure from danger, and the
moon shining into the room, he stood to view the event. When, to his
inexpressible surprise, the infatuated sportsman gave several deadly stabs, in
the very place where, a moment before, the throat and the life of his friend
lay. -- This I mention as a proof, that nothing hinders us, even from being
assassins of others, or murderers of ourselves, amidst the mad sallies of
sleep, only the preventing care of our Heavenly Father.


of our own thoughts, and especially from the incursions of our spiritual enemy.

What dreadful mischief might that restless, that implacable adversary of
mankind work, was there not an invisible hand to control his rage, and protect
poor mortals! What scenes of horror might he represent to our imaginations,
and scare us with dreams, or terrify us with visions! What a complete master
that malignant spirit is, in exhibiting visionary representations, appears from
his conduct toward CHRIST on the high mountain; and that he is too ready, if
not restrained by an over ruling power, to employ his dexterity in afflicting
mankind, is evident from his treatment of Job. See Luke iv.5. Job vii.14.
But the Keeper of Israel, who never slumbers nor sleeps, interposes in our
behalf, at once to cherish us under his wings, and to defend us as with a
shield. -- It is said of Solomon, that threescore valiant men were about his
bed, all expert in war; every one with his sword upon his thigh, because of
fear in the night. Cant. iii.7, 8.
But one greater than Solomon, one mightier than myriads of armed hosts, even
the great JEHOVAH, in whom is everlasting strength, he vouchsafes to encamp
about our houses, to watch over our sleeping minutes, and to stop all the
avenues of ill. -- O! the unwearied and condescending goodness of our Creator!
who lulls us to our rest, by bringing on the silent shades, and plants his own
ever watchful eye as our sentinel, while we enjoy the needful repose.

Reason now resigns her sedate office, and fancy, extravagant fancy, leads the
mind through a maze of vanity. The head is crowded with false images, and
tantalized with the most ridiculous misapprehensions of things. Some are
expatiating amidst fairy fields, and gathering garlands of visionary bliss,
while their bodies are stretched on a wisp of straw, and sheltered by the
cobwebs of a barn. Others, quite insensible of their rooms of state, are
mourning in a doleful dungeon, or struggling with the raging billows: Perhaps,
with hasty steps, they climb the craggy cliff; and, with real anxiety, fly from
the imaginary danger: Or else, benumbed with sudden fear, and finding
themselves unable to escape, they give up at once their hopes and their
efforts; and, though reclined on a couch of ivory, are sinking, all helpless
and distressed, in the furious whirlpool. So unaccountable are the vagaries of
the brain, while sleep maintains its dominion over the limbs!

But is this the only season when absurd and incoherent irregularities play
their magic on our minds? Are there not those who dream, even in their waking
moments? -- Some pride themselves in a notion of superior excellency, because
the royal favor has annexed a few splendid titles to their names; or because
the dying silkworm has bequeathed her finest threads to cover their nakedness.
-- Others congratulate their own signal happiness, because loads of golden
lumber are amassed together in their coffers; or promise themselves a most
superlative felicity indeed, when some thousands more are added to the useless
heap. -- Nor are there wanting others, who gape after substantial satisfaction
from airy applause; and flatter themselves with, I know not what immortality,
in the momentary buz of renown. -- Are any of these a whit more reasonable in
their opinions, than the poor ragged wretch in his reveries; who, while snoring
under a hedge, exults in the possession of his stately palace, and sumptuous
furniture? -- If persons, who are very vassals to their own domineering
passions, and led captive by numberless temptations; if these persons pique
themselves with a conceit of their liberty, and fancy themselves the generous
and gallant spirits of the age; where is the difference between theirs and the
madman's frenzy; who, though chained to the floor, is throned in thought, and
wielding an imaginary scepter? -- In a word, as many as borrow their dignity
from a plume of feathers, or the gaudy trappings of fortune; as many as send
their souls to seek for bliss in the blandishments of sense, or in any thing
short of the divine favor, and well grounded hope of the incorruptible
inheritance; These give a sacred, and homefelt delight,
A sober certainty of waking bliss.
MILT. Comu^.
what are they, but dreamers with their eyes open; delirious, though in health?

Would you see their picture drawn to the very life, and the success of their
schemes calculated with the utmost exactness, cast your eye upon that fine
representation exhibited by the prophet: It shall be even as when a hungry man
dreameth, and behold, he eats; but he awaketh, and his soul is empty: Or as
when a thirsty man dreameth, and behold, he drinks; but he awaketh, and
behold, he is faint, and his soul has appetite. Isa. xxix.8.
Such is the race, and such the prize, of all those candidates for honor and
joy, who run wide from the mark of the high calling of GOD in CHRIST JESUS.
They live in vanity, and die in woe. -- Awaken us, merciful LORD, from these
noontide trances! -- Awaken us, while conviction may turn to our advantage, and
not serve only to increase our torment. O! let our eyes be enlightened, to
discern the things that are excellent; and no longer be imposed upon by
fantastic appearances, which, however pompous they may seem, will prove more
empty than the visions of the night, more transient than the dream that is
forgotten.

Having mentioned sleep and dreams, let me once again consider those remarkable
incidents of our frame; so very remarkable, that I may venture to call them a
kind of experimental mystery, and little less than a standing miracle. --
Behold the most vigorous constitution, when stretched on the bed of ease, and
totally resigned to the slumbers of the night. Its activity is oppressed with
fetters of indolence; its strength is consigned over to a temporary
annihilation; the nerves are like a bow unstrung, and the whole animal system
is like a motionless log. -- Behold a person of the most delicate sensations,
and amiable dispositions. His eyes, though thrown wide open, admit not the
visual ray; at least, distinguish not objects. His ears, with the organs
unimpaired, and articulate accents beating upon the drum, perceive not the
sound; at least, apprehend not the meaning. The senses, and their exquisitely
fine feelings, are overwhelmed with an unaccountable stupefaction. You call him
a social creature; but where are his social affections? He knows not the father
that begat him, and takes no notice of the friend that is as his own soul. The
wife of his bosom may expire by his side, and he lie more unconcerned than a
barbarian. The children of his body, may be tortured with the severest pangs,
and he, even in the same chamber, remain untouched with the least
commiseration. -- Behold the most ingenious scholar, whose judgment is
piercing, and able to trace the most intricate difficulties of science; his
taste refined, and quick to relish all the beauties of sentiment and
composition: Yet, at this juncture, the thinking faculties are unhinged, and
the intellectual economy quite disconcerted. Instead of close connected
reasonings, nothing but a disjointed huddle of absurd ideas; instead of well
digested principles, nothing but a disorderly jumble of crude conceptions. The
most palpable delusions impose upon his imagination. The whole night passes,
and he frequently mistakes it for a single minute; is not sensible of the
transition, hardly sensible of any duration.

Yet, no sooner does the morning dawn, and daylight enter the room, but this
strange enchantment vanishes. The man awakes, and finds himself possessed of
all the valuable endowments, which, for several hours, were suspended, or lost.
His sinews are braced, and fit for action. His senses are alert and keen. The
romantic visionary brightens into the master of reason. The frozen or benumbed
affections, melt with tenderness, and glow with benevolence. And, what is
beyond measure surprising, the intoxicated mind works itself sober, not by slow
degrees; but, in the twinkling of an eye, recovers from its perturbation. --
Why does not the stupor, which deadens all the nice operations of the animal
powers, hold fast its possession? When the thoughts are once disadjusted, why
are they not always in confusion? How is it, that they are rallied in a moment,
and, from the wildest irregularity, reduced to the most orderly array? -- From
an inactivity, resembling death, how is the body so suddenly restored to vigor
and agility? From extravagances bordering upon madness, how is the
understanding instantaneously reestablished in sedateness and harmony? --
Surely, this is the LORD's doing, and it should be mavelous in our eyes;
should awaken our gratitude, and inspirit our praise.

This is the time in which ghosts are supposed to make their appearance. Now
the timorous imagination teems with phantoms, and creates numberless terrors
to itself. Now dreary forms, in sullen state, stalk along the gloom; or,
swifter than lightning, glide across the shades. Now voices more than mortal
Vox quoque per lucos vulgo exaudita silentes
Ingens, and simulacra modis pallentia miris
Visa sub obscurum noctis. --
VIRG.
are heard from the echoing vaults, and groans issue from the hollow tombs. Now
melancholy specter visit the ruins of ancient monasteries, and frequent the
solitary dwellings of the dead. They pass and repass, in unsubstantial images,
along the forsaken galleries; or take their determined stand over some lamented
grave. -- How often has the school boy fetched a long circuit, and trudged many
a needless step, in order to avoid the haunted church yard? Or, if necessity,
sad necessity, has obliged him to cross the spot, where human skulls are lodged
below, and the bal^l yews shed supernumerary horrors above, a thousand hideous
stories rush into his memory. Fear adds wings to his feet: he scarce touches
the ground; dares not once look behind him; and blesses his good fortune, if no
frightful sound purred at his heels, if no ghastly shape bolted upon his sight.

It Is strange, to observe the excessive timidity which possesses many people's
minds, on this fanciful occasion; while they are void of all concern, on others
of the most tremendous import. Those who are startled, in any dark and lonely
walk, at the very apprehension of a single spectre, are nevertheless
unimpressed at the sure prospect of entering into a whole world of disembodied
beings. Nay, are without any emotions of awe, though they know themselves to be
hastening into the presence of the Great, Infinite, and Eternal Spirit. --
Should some pale messenger from the regions of the dead, draw back our curtains
at the hour of midnight, and, appointing some particular place, say, as the
horrid apparition to Brutus, I Will meet thee there; The story of Brutus, and his
evil genius, is well known. Nor must it be denied, that the precise words of
the spectre to the hero were, I Will meet thee at Philippi. But, as this would
not answer my purpose, I was obliged to make an alteration, in the circumstance
of place.
I believe the boldest heart would feel something like a panick; would
seriously think upon the adventure, and be in pain for the event. But, when a
voice from heaven cries, in the awakening language of the prophet, Prepare to
meet thy GOD, O Israel; Amos iv.12.
how little is the warning regarded! how soon is it forgot! Preposterous
stupidity! to be utterly unconcerned, where it is the truest wisdom to take the
alarm; and to be all trepidation, where there is nothing really terrible! -- Do
thou, my soul, remember thy Savior's admonition; I will forewarn you, whom you
shall fear. Fear not these imaginary horrors of the night: But fear that awful
Being, whose revelation of himself, though with expressions of peculiar mercy,
made Moses, his favorite servant, tremble exceedingly. Whose manifestation,
when he appears with purposes of inexorable vengeance, will make mighty
conquerors, who were familiar with dangers, and estranged to dismay, call upon
the mountains to fall on them, and the rocks to cover them. The menace of whose
majestic eye, when he comes attended with thousand thousands of his immortal
hosts, will make the very heavens cleave asunder, and the earth flee away. --
O! dread HIS displeasure; secure HIS favor; and then thou may commit all
thy other anxieties to the wind: Thou may laugh at every other fear.

This brings to my mind a memorable and amazing occurrence, recorded in the
book of Job; Job. iv.12, 14, etc.
which is, I think, no inconsiderable proof of the real existence of
apparitions, Is a proof of the real existence of apparitions, -- if the sense
in which I have always understood this passage be true. -- Eliphaz, I
apprehend, was neither in a trance, nor in a dream, but perfectly awake. --
Though he speaks of sleep, he speaks of it, as fallen not upon himself, but
upon other men. He does not mention dreams, though (...) somnia, would have
suited the verse (if the book be in meter) altogether as well as (...)
visiones. -- It could not surely be a wind, as some translate the word (...);
because, the circumstance of standing still, is not so compatible with the
nature of a wind; and a wind would have passed above him, all around him, as
well as before him. Not to add, how low a remark it is, and how unworthy of a
place in so august a description, that he could not discern the form of a wind.
-- It seems, therefore, to have been a real spirit; either angelical as were
those, which presented themselves to Abraham resting at the door of his tent,
and to Lot sitting in the gate of Sodom; or else, the spirit of some departed
saint, as in the case of Samuel's apparition, or the famous appearance of Moses
and Elijah on the mount of transfiguration. -- A spirit, assuming some vehicle,
in order to become visible to the human eye; which, accordingly, Eliphaz saw,
exhibiting itself as an object of sight: But saw so obscurely and indistinctly,
that he was not able, either to describe its aspect, or to discern whom it
resembled.
on some very extraordinary emergences; while it discountenances those legions
of idle tales, which superstition has raised, and credulity received. Since it
teaches us, that if, at any time, those visitants from the unknown world,
render themselves perceivable by mortals, it is not upon any errand of
frivolous consequence; but, to convey intelligences of the utmost moment, or to
work impressions of the highest advantage.

'Twas in the dead of night. All nature lay shrouded in darkness. Every
creature was buried in sleep. The most profound silence reigned through the
universe. In these solemn moments, Eliphaz alone, all wakeful and solitary, was
musing upon sublime and heavenly subjects. -- When, lo! an awful being from the
invisible realms, burst into his apartment. I have given this solemn picture a
modern dress, rather for the sake of variety and illustration, than from any
apprehension of improving the admirable original. Such an attempt, I am
sensible; would be more absurdly vain, than to lacquer gold, or paint the
diamond. The description, in Eliphaz's own language, is awful and affecting to
the last degree. A night piece, dressed in all the circumstances of the deepest
horror. I question, whether Shakespeare himself, though so peculiarly happy
for his great command of terrifying images, has any thing superior or
comparable to this. The judges of fine composition see the masterly strokes;
and, I believe, the most ordinary reader feels them chilling his blood, and
awakening emotions of dread in his mind.
A spirit passed before his face. Astonishment seized the beholder. His bones
shivered within him; his flesh trembled all over him* and the hair of his head
stood erect with horror. -- Sudden and unexpected was the appearance of the
phantom; not such its departure. It stood still, to present itself more fully
to his view. It made a solemn pause, to prepare his mind for some momentous
message. -- After which a voice was heard; a voice, for the importance of its
meaning, worthy to be had in everlasting remembrance; for the solemnity of its
delivery, enough to alarm a heart of stone. It spoke; and this was the purport
of its words -- Shall man, frail man, be just before the mighty GOD? Shall even
the most accomplished of mortals be pure in the sight of his Maker? There seems
to be a significant and beautiful gradation in the Hebrew words (...) and
(...), which I have endeavored to preserve, by a sort of paraphrastick
version. -- The reader will observe a new turn given to the sentiment;
preferable, I think, to that which our English translation exhibits. Not, Shall
man be more just than GOD? But, Shall man be just before, or in the sight of
GOD? The passage, thus rendered, speaks a truth incomparably more weighty, and
needful to be inculcated: A truth, exactly parallel to that humbling confession
of the prophet, We are all as an unclean thing; and to that solemn declaration
of the psalmist, In thy sight shall no man living be justified.
Behold, and consider it attentively. He put no such trust in his most exalted
servants, as should bespeak them incapable of defect: And his very angels he
charged with folly; as sinking, even in the highest perfection of their
holiness, infinitely beneath his transcendent glories; as falling, even in all
the fidelity of their obedience, inexpressibly short of the homage due to his
adorable Majesty. If angelick natures must not presume to justify, either
themselves or their services, before uncreated purity, how much more absurd is
such a notion, how much more impious such an attempt, in them that dwell in
houses of clay, whose original is from the dust, and whose state is all
imperfection!

I would observe from hence, the very singular necessity of that poverty of
spirit which entirely renounces its own seize, and most thankfully
submits to the righteousness of the incarnate GOD. -- To inculcate this lesson,
the Son of the Blessed came down from Heaven, and pressed no other principle,
with so repeated It is well worthy of our observation, says an excellent
commentator, That no one sentence uttered by our LORD, is so frequently
repeated as this -- Whosoever shall exalt himself, shall ^e abased; and he that
shall humble himself, shall be exalted: Which often occurs in the evangelists,
but is never duly accomplished in us, till we disclaim all pretension to merit
and righteousness of our own, and seek them only in the atonement and obedience
of JESUS CHRIST,
an importunity, on his hearers. To instill the same doctrine, the HOLY GHOST
touched the lips of the apostles with sacred eloquence, and made it an eminent
part of their commission, "to demolish every high imagination." That no
expedient might be wanting to give it a deep and lasting efficacy on the human
mind, a phantom arises from the valley of the shadow of death, or a teacher
descends from the habitation of spirits. -- Whatever then we neglect, let us
not neglect to cultivate this grace, which has been so variously taught, so
powerfully enforced.

Hark! a doleful voice -- With sudden starts and hideous screams, it disturbs
the silence of the peaceful night. It Is the scre^ch owl, sometimes in frantic,
sometimes in disconsolate accents, uttering her woes. Solaequ^ culminibus
ferali carmi^e b^be
Saepe queri, longasque in flatum ducere voces.
Thus sung that charming genius, that prince of the ancient poets, that most
consummate master of elegance and accuracy, all whose sentiments are nature,
whose every description is a picture, whose whole language is music -- VIRGIL.
She flies the vocal grove, and shuns the society of all the feathered choir.
The blooming gardens and flowery meads have no charms for her. Obscene shades,
ragged ruins, and walls overgrown with ivy, are her favorite haunts. Above,
the mouldering precipice nods, and threatens a fall; below, the toad crawls, or
the poisonous adder hisses. The sprightly morning, which awakens other animals
into joy, administers no ^easure to this gloomy recluse. Even the smiling face
o^ day is her aversion, and all its lovely scenes create nothing but uneasiness.

So, just so, would it fare with the ungodly, were it possible to suppose their
admission into the chaste and bright abodes of endless felicity. They would
find nothing but disappointment and shame, even at the fountain head of
happiness and honor. For how could the tongue habituated to profaneness, taste
any delight in the harmonious adorations of Heaven? How could the lips cankered
with slander, relish the raptures of everlasting praise? Where would be the
satisfaction of the vain beauty, or the supercilious grandee; since, in the
temple of the skies, no incense of flattery would be addressed to the former,
nor any obsequious homage paid to the latter? -- The spotless and inconceivable
purity of the blessed GOD would flash confusion on the lascivious eye. The
envious mind must be on a rack of self tormenting passions, to observe millions
of happy beings, shining in all the perfections of glory, and solacing
themselves in the fullness of joy. -- In short, the unsanctified soul, amidst
holy and triumphant spirits, even in the refined regions of bliss and
immortality, would be like this melancholy bird, dislodged from her darksome
retirement, and imprisoned under the beams of day. I would beg of the reader to
observe with what emphasis and propriety our LORD touches this important point,
in his memorable reply to Nicodemus: Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a
man be born again, he CANNOT enter into the kingdom of Heaven: q. d. I wave the
authority of the Supreme Judge, and speak with the condescension of a teacher
in Israel. Though I might, without being liable to the least control, pass it
into a sovereign decree, that unrenewed mortals, who are slaves to corrupt
appetite, SHALL NOT enter the habitations of the just; I rather choose to
represent it as a case utterly impossible, and charge the calamity, not upon
divine severity, but upon human folly. Such persons, from the very nature of
things, preclude themselves; they incapacitate their own minds; and
contrarieties must be reconciled, before they, in their unregenerate condition,
can be partakers of those spiritual and sublime delights. John iii.3.


The voice of this creature screaming at our windows, or of the raven croaking
over our houses, is, they say; a token of approaching death. There are persons,
who would regard such an incident with no small degree of solicitude: Trivial
as it is, it would damp their spirits, perhaps break their rest. -- One cannot
but wonder that people should suffer themselves to be affrighted at such
fantastical, and yet be quite unaffected with real, presages of their
dissolution. Real presages of this awful event address us from every quarter.
What are these incumbent glooms which overwhelm the world, but a kind of ^all
provided for nature, and an image of that long night which will quickly cover
the inhabitants of the whole earth? What an affinity has the sleep, Et
consanguineus let^i sopor. VIRG.
which will very soon weigh down my drowsy eyelids, with that state of entire
cessation, in which all my senses must be laid aside! The silent chamber, and
the bed of slumber, are a very significant representation of the land where all
things are hushed, all things are forgotten. -- What meant that deep death bell
note, which, the other evening, saddened the air? Laden with heaviest accents,
it struck our ears, and seemed to knock at the door of our hearts. Surely it
brought a message to surviving mortals, and thus the tidings ran -- Mortals,
the destroyer of your race is on his way! The last enemy has begun the pursuit,
and is gaining ground upon you every moment. His paths are strewed with heaps
of slain. Even now his javelin has laid one of your neighbors in the dust; and
will soon, very soon, aim the inevitable blow at each of your lives.

We need not go down to the charnel house, nor carry our search into the
repositories of the dead, in order to find memorials of our impending doom: A
multitude of these remembrancers are planted in all our paths, and point the
heedless passengers to their long home. I can hardly enter a considerable town,
but I meet the funeral procession, or the mourners going about the streets. The
hatchment suspended on the wall, or the crape streaming in the air, are silent
intimations, that both rich and poor have been emptying their houses, and
replenishing their sepulchers. I can scarce join in any conversation, but
mention is made of some that are given over by the physician, and hovering on
the confines of eternity; of others that have just dropped their clay amidst
weeping friends, and are gone to appear before the Judge of all the earth.
There is not a newspaper comes to my hand, but, amidst all its entertaining
narrations, reads several serious lectures of mortality. What else are the
repeated accounts, of age worn out by slow consuming sicknesses -- of youth
dashed to pieces by some sudden stroke of casualty -- of patriots exchanging
their seats in the senate for a lodging in the tomb -- of misers resigning
their breath, and (O relentless destiny!) leaving their very riches for others?
-- Even the vehicles of our amusement are registers of the deceased; and the
voice of fame seldom sounds, but in concert with a knell.

These monitors crowd every place; not so much as the scenes of our diversion
excepted. What are the decorations of our public buildings, and the most
elegant furniture of our parlours, but the imagery of death, and trophies of
the tomb? That marble bust, and those gilded pictures, how solemnly they
recognize the fate of others, and speakingly remind us of our own! -- I see, I
hear, and O! I feel this great truth: It is interwoven with my constitution.
The frequent decays of the structure foretell its final ruin. What are all the
pains that have been darted through my limbs, what every disease that has
assaulted my health, but the advanced guards of the foe? What are the languors
and weariness that attend the labors of each revolving day, but the more
secret practices of the adversary, slowly undermining the earthly tabernacle?

Amidst so many notices, shall we go on thoughtless and unconcerned? Can none
of these prognostics, which are sure as oracles, awaken our attention, and
engage our circumspection? Noah, it is written, being warned of GOD, prepared an
ark. Imitate, my soul, imitate this excellent example: Admonished by such a
cloud of witnesses, be continually putting thyself in a readiness for the last
change. Let not that day, of which thou have so many infallible signs, come
upon thee unawares. -- Get the ivy untwined, and thy affections disentangled
from this enchanting world, that thou may be able to quit it without
reluctance. Get the dreadful handwriting cancelled, and all thy sins blotted
out, that thou may depart in peace, and have nothing to fear at the decisive
tribunal. Get, O! get thyself interested in the Redeemer's merits, and
transformed into his sacred image; then shall thou be meet for the inheritance
of saints in light, and may even desire to be dissolved and to be with
CHRIST.

Sometimes, in my evening walk, I have heard -- The wakeful bird
Sing darkling, and, in shadiest covert hid
Tune her nocturnal note. MILT. Par. Lost, B. III.l.38.

How different the airs of this charming songster from those harsh and boding
outcries! The little creature ran through all the variations of music, and
showed herself mistress of every grace which constitutes or embellishes
harmony. -- Sometimes she swells a manly throat, and her song kindles into
ardour: The tone is so bold, and strikes with such energy, you would imagine
the sprightly serenader in the very next thicket. Anon the strain languishes,
and the mournful warbler melts into tenderness: The melancholy notes just steal
upon the shades and faintly touch your ear; or, in soft and sadly pleasing
accents, they seem to die along the distant vale. Silence is pleased, and night
listens to the trilling tale.

What an invitation is this, to slip away from the thronged city! This coy and
modest ministrel, entertains only the lovers of retirement. Those who are
carousing over their bowls, or ranting at the riotous club, lose this feast of
harmony. -- In like manner, the pleasures of religion, and the joy of
reconciliation with GOD; the satisfactions arising from an established interest
in CHRIST, and from the prospect of a blissful immorality; these are all lost
to the mind that is ever in the crowd, and dares not, or delights not, to
retire into itself. -- Are we charmed with the nightingale's song? Do we wish
to have it nearer, and hear it oftener? Let us seek a renewed heart, and a
resigned will; a conscience that whispers peace, and passions that are tuned by
grace. Then shall we never want a melody in our own breasts, far more musically
pleasing than sweet Philomela's sweetest strains.

As different as the voices of these birds, are the circumstances of those few
persons who continue awake. -- Some are squandering, pearls shall I say, or
kingdoms? No; but what is unspeakably more precious, time: Squandering this
inestimable talent with the most senseless and wanton prodigality. Not content
with allowing a few spare minutes for the purpose of necessary recreation, they
lavish many hours, devote whole nights, to that idle diversion of shuffling,
ranging, and detaching a set of painted pasteboards. -- Others, instead of this
busy trifling, act the part of their own tormentors. They even piquet
themselves, Alluding to a very painful punishment inflicted on delinquents
among the soldiery.
and call it amusement; they are torn by wild horses, yet term it a sport. What
else is the gamester's practice? His mind is stretched on the tenter hooks of
anxious suspense, and agitated by the fiercest extremes of hope and fear. While
the dice are rattling, his heart is throbbing, his fortune is tottering, and
possibly, at the very next throw, the one sinks in the gulf of ruin, the other
is hurried into the rage of distraction.

Some, snatched from the bloom of health, and the lap of plenty, are confined
to the chamber of sickness; where they are constrained, either to plunge into
the everlasting world, in an unprepared condition, or else (sad alternative!)
to think over all the follies of a heedless life, and all the bitterness of
approaching death. The disease rages, it baffles the force of medicine, and
urges the reluctant wretch to the brink of the precipice; while furies rouse
the conscience, and point at the bottomless pit below. -- Perhaps, his drooping
mother, deprived long ago of the husband of her bosom, and berest of all her
other offspring, is, even now, receiving the blow which consummates her
calamities. This brings to my mind one of the deepest mourning pieces extant in
the productions of the pen. The sacred historian paints it in all the
simplicity of style, yet with all the strength of coloring. -- When JESUS came
nigh to the gate of the city, behold! there was a dead man carried out, the
only son of his mother, and she was a widow. -- What a gradation is here! How
pathetically beautiful! Every fresh circumstance widens the wound, aggravates
the calamity, till the description is worked up into the most finished picture
of exquisite and inconsolable distress. -- He was young man, cut off in the
flower of life, amidst a thousand gay expectations and smiling hopes: A son --
an only son -- the afflicted mother's all: So that none remained to preserve
the name, or perpetuate the family. What rendered the case still more
deplorable, she was a widow; left entirely desolate; abandoned to her woes;
without any to share her sorrows, or to comfort her under the irreparable loss.
-- Is not this a fine sketch of the impassioned and picturesque? Who can
consider the narrative with any attention, and not feel his heart penetrated
with a tender commiseration? Luke vii.12.
In vain she tries to assuage the sorrows of a beloved son; in vain she
attempts, with her tender offices, to prolong a life dearer than her own. He
faints in her arms -- he bows his head -- he sinks in death. Fatal, doubly
fatal, that last expiring pang! While it dislodges the unwilling soul, it rends
an only child from the yearning embraces of a parent, and te^rs away the
support of her age, from a disconsolate widow.

While those long for a reprieve, others invite the stroke. Quite weary of the
world, with a restless impatience they sigh for dissolution. Some, pining away
under the tedious decays of an incurable consumption; or gasping for breath,
and almost suffocated, by an inundation of dropsical waters. On some, a
relentless cancer has fastened its envenomed teeth, and is gnawing them, though
in the midst of bodily vigor, in the midst of pitying friends, gradually to
death. Others are on a rack of agonies, by convulsive fits of the stone: O! how
the pain writhes their limbs; how the sweat bedews their flesh; and their
eyeballs wildly roll! Methinks, the night condoles with these her distressed
children, and sheds dewy tears over their sorrowful abodes. -- But of all
mortals, they are the most exquisitely miserable, who groan beneath the
pressure of a melancholy mind, or smart under the lashes of a resentful
conscience: Though robed in ermine, or covered with jewels, the state of a ^ave
chained to the galleys, or of an exile condemned to the mines, is a perfect
paradise compared with theirs.

O! that the votaries of mirth, whose life is a continued round of merriment
and whim, would bestow one serious reflection on this variety of human woes! It
might teach them to be less enamoured with the few languid sweets, that are
thinly scattered through this vale of tears, and environed with such a
multitude of ragged thorns. It might teach them no longer to dance away their
years with a giddy rambling impulse, but to aspire, with a determined aim,
after those happy regions, where delights, abundant and unembittered, flow.

Can there be circumstances which a man of wisdom would more earnestly
deprecate, than these several instances of grievous tribulation? There are;
and, what is very astonishing, they are frequently the desire and the choice of
those who fancy themselves the sole heirs of happiness. Those, I mean, who are
launching out into the depths of extravagance, and running excessive lengths of
riot; who are prostituting their reputation, and sacrificing their peace, to
the gratification of their lusts; sapping the foundation of their health, in
debaucheries; or shipwrecking the interests of their families, in their bowls;
and, what is worse, are forfeiting the joys of an eternal heaven, for the
sordid satisfactions of the beast; for the transitory sensations of an hour. --
Ye slaves of appetite, how far am I from envying your gross sensualities and
voluptuous revels! Little, ah! little are you sensible, that, while indulgence
showers her roses, and luxury diffuses her odours, they scatter poisons also,
and shed unheeded bane; Yes; in the flowers that wreathe the sparkling bowl,
F^ll adders hiss, and poisonous serpents roll.
PRI^'s Sol.
evils, incomparably more malignant than the wormwood and gall of the sharpest
affliction. -- Since death is in the drunkard's cup, and worse than poinards in
the harlot's embrace, may it ever be the privilege of the man whom I love, to
go without his share of these pestilent sweets! Quam suav^ est suavitatibus
istis carere! was St. Augustine's pious exclamation: The substance of which Mr.
Pope has expressed, with more simplicity, and with no less dignity: Count all
the advantage prosperous vice attains,
It Is but what virtue flies from, and disdains.



Abundance of living sparks glitter in the lanes, and twinkle under the hedges.
I suppose they are the glow worms, which have lighted their little lamps, and
obtained leave, through the absence of the sun, to play a feeble beam. A faint
glimmer just serves to render them perceivable, without tending at all to
dissipate the shades, or making any amends for the departed day, -- Should some
weather beaten traveller, dropping with wet, and shivering with cold, hover
round this mimickry of fire, in order to dry his garments, and warm his
benumbed limbs: Should some bewildered traveller, groping for his way, in a
starless night and trackless desert, take one of these languid tapers, as a
light to his feet and a lantern to his paths; how certainly would both the one
and the other be frustrated of their expectation! -- And are they more likely
to succeed, who, neglecting that sovereign balm which distilled from the cross,
apply any carnal diversion to heal the anxiety of the mind? Who, deaf to the
infallible decisions of revelation, resign themselves over to the erroneous
conjectures of reason, in order to find the way that leads unto life? Or
lastly, who have recourse to the froth of this vain world for a satisfactory
portion, and a substantial happiness? Their conduct is in no degree wiser;
their disappointment equally sure; and their miscarriage infinitely more
disastrous. To speak in the delicate language of a sacred writer, they sow the
wind, and will reap the whirlwind. Hos. viii.7.


To speak more plainly; the pleasures of the world* which we are all so prone
to dote upon; and the powers of fallen reason, which some are so apt to
idolize, I hope it will be observed, that I am far from decrying that noble
faculty of reason, when exerted in her proper sphere; when acting in a
deferen^ial subordination to the revealed will of Heaven. While she exercises
her powers within these appointed limits; she is unspeakably serviceable, and
cannot be too industriously cultivated. -- But, when she sets up herself in
proud contradistinction to the sacred oracles; when, all arrogant and self
sufficient, she says to the word of scripture, I have no need of thee; she is
the^, I must be bold to maintain, not only a glow worm, but an ig^ fat^; not
only a bubble, but a snare.

May not this remark, with the strictest propriety, and without the least
limitation, be applied to the generality of our modern romances, novels, and
theatrical entertainments? These are commonly calculated, to inflame a wanton
fancy; or, if conducted with so much modesty as not to debauch the affections,
they pervert the judgment and bewilder the taste. By their incredible
adventures; their extravagant parade of gallantry; and their characters, widely
different from truth and nature; they inspire foolish conceits; beget idle
expectations; introduce a disgust of genuine history; and indispose their
admirers to acquiesce in the decent civilities, or to relish the sober
satisfactions, of common life.


are not only vain, but treacherous; not only a painted flame, like these
sparkling animals, but much like those unctuous exhalations which arise from
the marshy ground, and often dance before the eyes of the benighted wayfaring
man. Kindled into a sort of fire, they personate a guide, and seem to offer
their service; but, blazing with delusive light, mislead their follower into
hidden pits, headlong precipices, and unfathomable gulfs; where, far from his
beloved friends, far from all hopes of succor, the unhappy wanderer is
swallowed up, and lost.

Not long ago, we observed a very surprising appearance in the western sky. A
prodigious star took its flaming route through those coasts, and trailed, as it
passed, a tremendous length of fire, almost over half the heavens. Some, I
imagine, viewed the portentous stranger with much the same anxious amazement,
as Belshazzar beheld the hand writing upon the wall. Some looked upon it as a
bloody Liquida si quando nocte cometae
Sanguinei lugubre rubent. --
VIRG.
flag, hung out by divine resentment, over a guilty world. Some read, in its
glaring visage, the fate of nations, and the fall of kingdoms. -- Crinemque
timendi
Sideris, and terris mutantem regna cometem.
LUCAN.
To others, it shook, or seemed to shake, pestilence and war from its horrid
hair. -- For my part, I am not so superstitious as to regard what every
astrologer has to prognosticate upon the accession of a comet, or the
projection of its huge vapoury train. Nothing can be more precarious and
unjustifiable, than to draw such conclusions from such events; since they
neither are preternatural effects, nor do they throw the frame of things into
any disorder. I would rather adore that omnipotent Being, who rolled those
stupendous orbs from his creating hand, and leads them, by his providential
eye, through unmeasurable tracts of other. Who bids them now approach the sun,
and glow with unsufferable ardours; The comet in the year 1680, according to
Sir Isaac Newton's computation, was, in its nearest approach, above 166 times
nearer the sun than the earth is. Consequently, its heat was then 28000 times
greater than that of summer. So that a ball of iron as big as the earth, heated
by it, would hardly become cool in 50000 years. DER^. Astr. Theol. p. 237.
now retreat to the utmost bounds of our planetary system, and make their entry
among other worlds.

They are harmless visitants. I acquit them from the charge of causing, or
being accessory to, desolating plagues. Would to GOD there were no other more
formidable indications of approaching judgments, or impending ruin! But, alas!
when vice becomes predominant, and irreligion almost epidemical; when the
Sabbaths of a jealous GOD, are notoriously profaned, and that "name, which is
great, wonderful and holy," is prostituted to the meanest, or abused to the
most execrable purposes; when the worship of our great Creator and Preserver is
banished from many of the most conspicuous families, and it is deemed a piece
of rude impertinence, so much as to mention the gracious Redeemer in our
genteel interviews; when it passes for an elegant freedom of behavior, to
ridicule the mysteries of christianity; and a species of refined conversation,
to taint the air with lascivious hints; when those who sit in the scorner's
chair, sin with a high hand; and many of those who wear the professor's garb,
are destitute of the power, and content themselves with the mere form of
godliness; when such is the state of a community, there is reason, too apparent
reason, to be horribly afraid. Such phoenomena, abounding in the moral world,
are not fanciful, but real omens. Will not an injured GOD be avenged on such a
nation as this? Will he not be provoked, to "sweep it with the besom of
destruction?" Isa. xiv.23. The Eternal Sovereign, speaking of Babylon,
denounces this threatening, I will swe^p it with the bosom destruction. -- What
a noble but dreadful image, i^ here! How strongly and awfully pourtrayed! How
pregnant also in its signification! intimating the vile nature, and expressing
the total extirpation, of this wicked people; at the same time, suggesting the
perfect ease with which the righteous GOD would execute his intended vengeance.


O! that the inhabitants of Greatbritain would lay these alarming
considerations to heart! The LORD of hosts has commanded the sword of civil
discord to return into its sheath: But have we returned, every one from his
evil ways? Are we become a renewed people; devoted to a dying Savior, and
zealous of good works? -- What mean those peals of sobs, which burst from the
expiring cattle? What mean those melancholy moans, where the lusty droves were
wont to low? If these papers should be so happy as to outlive their author,
perhaps it may be needful to inform posterity, that the abovementioned hints
allude to a most terrible, contagious, and mortal distemper, raging among the
horned cattle, in various parts of the kingdom.
What mean those arrows of untimely death, discharged on our innocent and
useful animals?

No wantonness or sloth, has vitiated the blood of these laborious, temperate
creatures. They have contracted no disease from unseasonable indulgencies, and
inordinate revellings. The pure stream is their drink; the simple herb their
repast. Neither care disturbs their sleep, nor passion inflames their breast.
Whence then are they visited with such terrible disorders, as no prudence can
prevent, nor any medicines heal? -- Surely, these calamities are the weapons of
divine displeasure, and manifest chastisements of an evil generation. Hinc
laetis viculi vulgo moriuntur in herbis,
Et dulces animas plena ad praesepia reddunt.
Balatu hinc pecorum, and crebris magitibus amnes,
Arentesque sonant ripae, collesque supini.

Surely GOD, the "GOD to whom vengeance belongs," has still a controversy
with our sinful land. And who can tell, where the visitation will end? What a
storm may follow these prelusive drops? -- O! that we may "hear the rod, and
who has appointed it!" Taught by these penal effects of our disobedience, may
we remove the accursed thing Josh. vi.^8.
from our tents, our practices, our hearts! May we turn from all ungodliness,
before wrath come upon us to the uttermost; before iniquity prove our ruin!

Sometimes, at this hour, another most remarkable sight amuses the curious, and
alarms the vulgar. A blaze of lambent meteors is kindled, or some very
extraordinary lights are refracted, in the quarters of the north. -- The
streams of radiance, like legions rushing to the engagement, meet and mingle,
insomuch that the air seems to be all conflicting fire. Within a while they
start from one another; and, like legions in precipitate flight, sweep, each a
separate way, through the firmament. Now they are quiescent; anon they are
thrown into a quivering motion; presently the whole horizon is illuminated with
the glancing flames. Sometimes, with an aspect awfully ludicrous, they
represent extravagant and antic vagaries. At other times, you would suspect
that some invisible hand was playing off the dumb artillery of the skies, and,
by a strange expedient, giving us the flash, without the roar.

The villagers gaze at the spectacle, first with wonder, then with horror. A
general panick seizes the country. Every heart throbs, and every face is pale.
The crowds that flock together, instead of diminishing, increase the dread.
They catch contagion from each other's looks and words; while fear is in every
eye, and every tongue speaks the language of terror. Some see hideous shapes;
armies mixed in fierce encounter, or fields swimming with blood. Some foresee
direful events; states overthrown, or mighty monarchs tottering on their
thrones. Others, scared with still more frightful apprehensions, think of
nothing but the day of doo^. Sure, says one, the unalterable hour is struck,
and the end of all things come. See, replies another, how the blasted stars
look wan^! Are not these the signs of the Son of Man, coming in the clouds of
Heaven? JESUS prepare us (cries a third, and lifts his eyes in devotion) for
the archangel's trump, and the great tribunal!

If this waving brightness, which plays innocently over our heads, be so
amazing to multitudes; what inexpressible consternation must overwhelm
unthinking mortals, when the general conflagration commences! The day, the
dreadful day, is approaching, In the which the heavens shall pass away with a
great noise, 2 Pet. iii.10. I have often thought this verse an eminent instance
of that kind of beautiful writing, in which the very sound b^ars a sort of
significancy, at least, carries an exact correspondence with the sense. The
original expression -- (...) -- is one of the hoarsest and deepest words in
language. Nothing could be more exquisitely adapted to affect the ear, as well
as impress the imagination, with the wreck of nature, and the crash of a
falling world. -- I scarce ever read this clause, but it brings to my mind that
admired description in MILTON: -- On a sudden open fly,
With impetuous recoil, and jarring sounds,
The infernal doors, and on their hinges grate
Harsh thunder. --
Book II. ^. 879. It is a pleasing employ, and a very laudable office of true
criticism, to point out these inferior recommendations of the sacred
classicks. Though, I believe, the inspired writers themselves, amidst all the
elevation and magnificence of their divine ideas, disdained a scrupulous
attention to such little niceties of style.
and the elements shall melt with fervent heat; the earth also, and all the
works that are therein, shall be burnt up. That mighty hand, which once opened
the windows from on high, and broke up the fountains of the great deep, will
then unlock all the magazines of fire, and pour a second deluge upon the earth.
The vengeful flames, kindled by the breath to the Almighty, spread themselves
from the center to the circumference. Nothing can withstand their impetuosity;
nothing can escape their rage. Universal desolation attends their progress.
Magnificent palaces, and solemn temples, are laid in ashes. Spacious cities,
and impregnable towers, are mingled in one smoking mass. Not only the
productions of human art, but the works of Almighty power, are fuel for the
devouring element. The everlasting mountains melt, like the snows which cover
their summit. Even vast oceans serve only to augment the inconceivable rapidity
and fury of the blaze. -- O! how shall I, or others, stand undismayed amidst
the glare of a b^rning world, unless the LORD JEHOVAH be our defense? How shall
we be upheld in security, when the globe itself is sinking in the fiery ruin,
unless the Rock of ages be our support?

Behold! a new spectacle of wonder! The moon is making her entry on the eastern
sky. See her rising in clouded majesty! opening, as it were, and asserting her
original commission, to rule over the night. All grand and stately, but
somewhat sullied in her aspect. However, she brightens as she advances; and
grows clearer, as she climbs higher: Till, at length, her silver loses all its
dross; she unveils her peerless light; and becomes "the beauty of Heaven, the
glory of the stars;" Ecclus xliii.9.
-- Lucidum coeli di^.
HOR.
delighting every eye, and cheering the whole world, with the brightness of her
appearance, and the softness of her splendours. -- O! thou queen of the shades!
may it be my ambition, to follow this thy instructive example! While others are
fond to transcribe the fashions of little courts, and to mimick personages of
inferior states; be it mine to imitate thy improving purity! May my conduct
become more unblemished, and my temper more refined, as I proceed farther and
farther, in my probationary course! May every sordid desire wear away, and
every irregular appetite be gradually lost, as I make nearer approaches to the
celestial mansions! -- Will not this be a comfortable evidence, that I too
shall shine in my adored Redeemer's kingdom? Shine with a richer luster, than
that which radiates from thy resplendent orb; shine, with an unfading luster,
when every ray that beams from thy beauteous sphere, is totally extinguished?

The day afforded us a variety of entertaining sights. These were all
withdrawn, at the accession of darkness. The stars, kindly off^cious,
immediately lent us their aid. This served to alleviate the frown of night,
rather than to recover the objects from their obscurity. A faint ray, scarcely
reflected, and not from the entire surface of things, gave the straining eye a
very imperfect glimpse: such as rather mocked, than satisfied vision. -- Now
the moon is risen, and has collected all her beams, the veil is taken off from
the countenance of nature. I see the recumbent flocks; I see the green
hedg^rows, though without the feathered choristers hopping from spray to spray.
In short, I see once again the world's great picture; not indeed in its late
lively colors, but more delicately shaded, and arrayed in softer charms. --
Now reigns
Full orb'd the moon, and with more pleasing light
Shadowy sets off the face of things. --
MILT.


What a majestic scene is here! incomparably grand, and exquisitely fine! --
The moon, like an immense crystal lamp, pendent in the magnificent ceiling of
the heavens. The stars, like so many thousands of golden tapers, fixed in their
azure sockets. All pouring their luster on spacious cities, and lofty
mountains; glittering on the ocean; gleaming on the forest; and opening a
prospect, wide as the eye can glance, more various than fancy can paint. As
when the moon, refulgent ^p of night,
Over Heaven's clear a^re sp^ her sacred light;
When not a breath dist^ deep serene,
And not a ^d (...) the solemn scene:
Around her throne the vivid planets roll,
And stars unnumber'd gild the glowing pole;
Over the dark trees a yellower verdure shed,
And tip with silver every mountain's head;
Then shine the vales; the rocks in prospect rise;
A flood of glory bursts (...) all the skies;
The conscious swains, rejoicing in the sight,
Eye the blue vault, and bless the useful light.
Iliad VIII. I transcribe these lines, because Mr. Pope says, they exhibit, in
the original, the finest night piece in poetry. And, if they are so beautiful
in Homer's language* who can suspect their suffering any disadvantage, from the
pen of his admirable translator?


-- We are forward to admire the performances of human art. A landscape,
elegantly designed, and executed with a masterly hand; a piece of statuary,
which seems, amidst all the recommendations of exact proportion, and graceful
attitude, to soften into flesh, and almost breathe with life; these little
imitations of nature, we behold with a pleasing surprise. And shall we be less
affected, less delighted, with the inexpressibly noble and completely finished
original! -- The ample dimensions of Ranelaugh's dome; the gay illuminations of
Vauxhall grove; I should scorn to mention on such an occasion, were they not
the objects of general admiration. Shall we be charmed with those puny essays
of finite ingenuity, and touched with no transport at this stupendous display
of omnipotent skill? at the august grandeur, and shining stateliness of the
firmament? which forms an al^ove for ten thousand worlds, and is ornamented
with myriads of everlasting luminaries. -- Surely, this must betray, not only a
total want of religion, but the most abject littleness of mind, and the utmost
poverty of genius.

The moon is not barely an ornament in the high places of the LORD; Ecclus
xliii.9.
but of signal service to the inhabitants of the earth. -- How uncomfortable is
deep, pitchy, total darkness! especially, in the long absence of the winter's
sun. Welcome therefore, thrice welcome, this auspicious gift of Providence, to
enliven the nocturnal gloom, and line with silver the raven colored mantle of
night! -- How desirable to have our summer evenings illuminated! that we may be
able to ^read the dewy meads, and breathe the delicious fragrance of our
gardens; especially, when the sultry heats render it irksome and fatiguing, to
walk abroad by day. -- How cheering to the shepherd, the use of this universal
lantern; as he tends his fleecy charge, or late consigns them to their hurdled
cots! How comfortable and how ^dvantageous to the mariner, as he ploughs the
midnight main, to adjust the tackling, to explore his way, and, under the
influence of this beaming sconce, to avoid the fatal rock! -- For these, and
other beneficial purposes, the hand of the ALMIGHTY has hung the stately branch
on high; and filled it with a splendor, not confined to a single edifice, or
commensurate to a particular square, but diffusive as the whole extent of the
hemisphere.

The most faithful of our inferior servants are sometimes tardy in their
office; sometimes negligent of their duty. But this celestial attendant is most
exactly punctual, at all the stated periods of her ministration. If we choose
to prolong our journey, after the sun is gone down; the moon, during her whole
increase, is always ready to act in the capacity of a guide. If we are inclined
to set out very early in the morning; the moon, in her decrease prevents the
dawn, on purpose, to offer her assistance. And, because it is so pleasant a
thing, for the eyes to behold the light, the moon at her full, by a course of
unintermitted waiting, gives us, as it were, a double day. -- How apparently
has the divine wisdom interested itself, in providing even for the pleasurable
accommodation of man! How desirous, that he should want no piece of commodious
furniture; no kind of delightful convenience! And, in prosecution of these
benevolent intentions, has annexed so valuable an appendage to the terrestrial
globe. -- Justly, therefore, does the psalmist celebrate that admirable
constitution, which ordained the moon and the stars to govern the night, as an
instance of rich goodness and of a mercy which endures forever. Psalm. cxxxvi.9.


The moon, it is confessed, is no luminous body. All the brightness, which
beautifies her countenance, is originally in the sun, and no more than
transmissively in her. That glorious orb is the parent of day, and the palace
of light. From thence, the morning star gilds her horn; I might, to justify
this expression, observe, that the planet Venus, commonly called the morning
star, is found, by our telescopes, frequently to appear horned; or to have a
crescent of light, somewhat like the moon a little before or after her
conjunction. But this would be a remark, too deep and refined for my scheme;
which proceeds only upon a superficial knowledge, and the most obvious
appearances of nature.
from thence the planetary circles are crowned with luster; and from thence,
the moon derives all her silver radiance. -- It is pleasing to reflect, that
such is the case with the all sufficient Redeemer, and his dependent people. We
are replenished from his fullness. What do we possess, which we have not
received; and what can we desire, which we may not expect, from that never
failing source of all good? He is the author of our faith, and the former of
our graces. In his unspotted life, we see the path; in his meritorious death,
the price; and in his triumphant resurrection, the proof of bliss and
immortality. If we offend, and fall seven times a day; he is the LORD our
peace. Judge. vi.23.
If we are depraved, and our best deeds very unworthy; he is the LORD our
righteousness Jer. xxiii.6.
. If we are blind, and even brutish, in heavenly knowledge; he is the LORD our
wisdom: 1 Cor. i.30.
His word dispels the shades; his spirit scatters the intellectual gloom; his
eye looks our darkness into day. In short, we are nothing, and "CHRIST is all.
Worse than defective in ourselves, "we are complete in him." So that if we
shine, it is with delegated rays, and with borrowed light. We act by a
strength, and glory in merits, not our own. -- O! may we be thoroughly sensible
of our dependence on the Savior! may we constantly imbibe his propitious
beams; and never, by indulging unbelief, or backsliding into folly, withdraw
our souls from his benign influences; lest we lose our comfort, and our
holiness; as the fair ruler of the night loses her splendor, when her urn is
turned from its fountain, Alluding to those truly poetical lines in Milton:
Hither, as to their fountain, other stars
Repairing, in their golden ^rns draw light.
Par. L^st, B. VII. l. 364.
and receives no more communications of solar effulgence.

The moon is incessantly varying, either in her aspect, or her stages.
Sometimes she looks full upon us, and her visage is all luster. Sometimes she
appears in profile, and shows us only half her enlightened face. Anon a radiant
crescent but just adorns her brow. Soon it dwindles into a slender streak.
Till, at length, all her beauty vanishes, and she becomes a beamless orb. --
Sometimes she rises with the descending day, and begins her procession amidst
admiring multitudes. Ere long she defers her progress till the midnight
watches, and steals unobserved upon the sleeping world. -- Sometimes she just
enters the edges of the western horizon, and drops us a ceremonious visit.
Within awhile she sets out on her nightly tour, from the opposite regions of
the east; traverses the whole hemisphere; and never offers to withdraw, till
the more refulgent partner of her sway renders her presence unnecessary. -- In
a word, she is, while conversant among us, still waxing or waning, and "never
continues in one stay."

Such is the moon, and such are all sublunary things; exposed to perpetual
vicissitudes. -- How often, and how soon, have the faint echoes of renown slept
in silence, or been converted into the clamours of obloquy! The same lips,
almost with the same breath, cry hosanna and crucify. -- Have not riches
confessed their notorious treachery, a thousand and a thousand times? Either
melting away, like snow in our hands, by insensible degrees, or escaping, like
a winged prisoner from its cage, with a precipitate flight. -- Have we not
known the bridegroom's closet, an antechamber to the tomb; and heard the voice,
which so lately pronounced the sparkling pair husband and wife, proclaim an
everlasting divorce, and seal the decree with that solemn asseveration, "ashes
to ashes, dust to dust?" -- Our friends, though the medicine of life; our
health, though the balm of nature; are a most precarious possession. How soon
may the first become a corpse in our arms; and how easily is the last destroyed
in its vigor! -- You have seen, no doubt, a set of pretty painted birds,
perching on your trees, or sporting in your meadows. You was pleased with the
lovely visitants that brought beauty on their wings, and melody in their
throats. But could you insure the continuance of this agreeable entertainment?
No, truly. At the least disturbing noise, at the least terrifying appearance,
they start from their seats; they mount the skies; and are gone in an instant,
are gone forever. Would you choose to have a happiness which bears date with
their arrival, and expires at their departure? If you could not be content with
a portion, enjoyable only through such a fortuitous term, not of years, but of
moments, O! take up with nothing earthly; set your affections on things above;
there alone is "no variableness or shadow of turning."

Job is not a more illustrious pattern of patience, than an eminent
exemplification of this remark. -- View him in his private estate. He heaps up
silver as the dust; he washes his steps in butter, and the rock pours him out
rivers of oil. -- View him in his public character. Princes revere his
dignity; the aged listen to his wisdom; every eye beholds him with delight;
every tongue loads him with blessings. -- View him in his domestic
circumstances. On one hand, he is defended by a troop of sons; on the other,
adorned with a train of daughters; and on all sides, surrounded by a very great
household. -- Never was human felicity so consummate; never was disastrous
revolution so sudden. The lightning which consumed his cattle, was not more
terrible, and scarce more instantaneous. The joyful parent is bereft of his
offspring, and his children are buried in death. The man of affluence is
stripped of his abundance; and he who was clothed in scarlet embraces the
dunghill. The venerable patriarch is the derision of scoundrels; and the late
darling of an indulgent Providence, is become a brother to dragons, a companion
of owls. -- Nor need we go back to former ages for proofs of this afflicting
truth. In our times, in all times, the wheel continues the same incessant
whirl. And frequently those who are triumphing today in the highest elevations
of joy, tomorrow are bemoaning the instability of mortal affairs, in the very
depths of misery. I believe I may venture to apply what the Temanite says of
the affairs of the wicked, to all sublunary things, as a true description of
their very great instability. Job xxii.16. (...) -- rendered by Schultens,
Flumen fusum fundamentum little: Their foundation (or what they reckon their
most solid and stable possession) is a stood poured out. -- Which is one of the
boldest images, and most poetical beauties, I ever met with in any language,
sacred or profane. In order to have a tolerable conception of the image, and a
taste of its beauty, you must suppose a torrent of waters, rushing in broken
cataracts, and with impetuous rapidity, from a steep and craggy mountain. Then
imagine to yourselves an edifice, built upon the surge of this rolling
precipice, which has no other basis than one of those headlong whirling waves.
Was their ever such a representation of transitory prosperity, tending, with
inconceivable swiftness, unto ruin? Yet such is every form of human felicity,
that is not grounded on JESUS, and a participation of his merits, who is the
rock of ages; on JESUS, and his image formed in our hearts, which is the hope
of glory.
-- Amidst so much fluctuation and uncertainty, how wretched is the condition,
which has no anchor of the soul, sure and steadfast! May thy loving kindness, O
GOD, be our present treasure; and thy future glory, our reversionary
inheritance! Then shall our happiness not be like the full orbed moon, which is
a light that decreaseth in its perfection; but like the sun, when he goes
forth in his strength, and knows no other change, but that of shining more
and more unto the perfect day.

Methinks, in this ever varying sphere, I see a representation, not only of our
temporal advantages, but also of our spiritual accomplishments. Such, I am
sure, is what the kind partiality of a friend would call my righteousness: And
such, I am apt to suspect, I would not be understood, as measuring, in this
respect, others by myself; but as taking my estimate, from the unerring
standard of scripture. And indeed, proceeding on this evidence, supported by
this authority, I might have ventured farther than a bare suspicion. For, there
is not a just man upon earth, that does good, and sins not, says the spirit
of inspiration by Solomon (Eccles. vii 20.) -- Nay, such is the purity, and so
extensive are the demands of the divine law, that an apostle makes a still more
humbling acknowledgment; "in many things we offend all." (James iii.2) -- And
the unerring teacher, who most thoroughly knew our frame, directs the most
advanced, most astablished, and most watchful christians, to pray daily for the
forgiveness of their daily trespasses. -- To which testimonies, I beg leave to
add an elegant passage from the Canticles; because it not only expresses the
sentiment of this paragraph, but illustrates it by the very same similitude.
She (the church) is fair as the moon; clear as the sun. Fair as the moon, the
lesser and changeable light, in her sanctification: Clear as the sun, the
greater and invariable luminary, in her justification. The inherent holiness of
believers being imperfect, and subject to many inequalities, while their
imputed righteousness is every way complete, and constantly like itself. Cant.
vi.10.
is the righteousness of every man living. Now we exercise it, in some few
instances, in some little degrees. Anon sin revives, and leads our souls into a
transient, though unwilling captivity. Now we are meek; but soon a ruffling
accident intervenes, and turns our composure into a fretful disquietude. Now we
are humble; soon we reflect upon some inconsiderable or imaginary superiority
over others, and a sudden elatement swells our minds. Now, perhaps we possess a
clean heart, and are warm with holy love. But O! how easily is the purity of
our affections sullied; how soon the fervor of our gratitude cooled! And is
their not something amiss, even in our best moments? Something to be ashamed
of, in all we are; something to be repented of, in all we do?

With what gladness, therefore, and adoring thankfulness, should we submit to
the righteousness of our incarnate GOD; and receive, as a divine gift, what
cannot be acquired by human works! Romans v.17. -- x.3.
A writer of the first distinction, and nicest discernment, styles the
obedience of our glorious surety, an everlasting righteousness; Dan. ix.24.
such as was subject to no interruption, nor obscured by the least blemish; but
proceeded always i^ the same uniform tenor of the most spotless perfection. --
This righteousness, in another sense, answers the prophet's exalted
description, as its beneficial and sovereign efficacy knows no end; but lasts
through all our life; lasts in the trying hour of death; lasts at the decisive
day of judgment; lasts through every generation; and will last to all eternity.

Sometimes I have seen that resplendent globe stripped of her radiance; or,
according to the emphatical language of scripture, "turned into blood." The
earth, interposing with its opake body, intercepted the solar rays, and cast
its own gloomy shadow on the moon. The malignant influence gained upon her
sickening orb; extinguished, more and more, the feeble remainders of light;
till at length, like one in a deep swoon, no comeliness was left in her
countenance; she was totally overspread with darkness. -- At this juncture,
what a multitude of eyes were gazing upon the rueful spectacle! Even of those
eyes, which disregarded the empress of the night, or beheld her with
indifference, when, robed in glory, and riding in her triumphal chariot, she
shed a softer day through the nations. But now, under these circumstances of
disgrace, they watch her motions with the most prying attention. In every
place, her misfortune is the object of general observation; and the prevailing
topic of discourse, in every company.

Is it not thus with regard to persons of eminence, in their respective
spheres? Kings, at the head of their subjects; nobles, surrounded with their
dependents; and (after names of so much grandeur, may I be allowed to add?)
ministers laboring among their people, Ye are the light of the world. A city
that is set on an hill, cannot be hid. Matt. v.14.
are each in a conspicuous station. Their conduct in its minutest step,
especially in any miscarriage, will be narrowly surveyed, and critically
scanned. Can their be a louder call to ponder the paths of their feet, and to
be particularly jealous over all their ways? -- Those who move in inferior
life, may grossly offend, and little alarm be given, perhaps no notice taken.
But it is not to be expected, that the least slip in their carriage, the least
flaw in their character, will pass undiscovered. Malice, with her eagle eyes,
will be sure to discern them; while censure, with her shrill trumpet, will be
as far from concealing them, as calumny, with her treacherous whispers, from
extenuating them. A planet may sink below the horizon; or a star, for several
months, withdraw its shining; and scarce one in ten thousand perceive the loss.
But, if the moon suffers a transient eclipse, almost half the world are
spectators of her dishonor.

Very different was the case, when, at this late hour, I have taken a solitary
walk on the western cliffs. At the foot of the steep mountain, the sea, all
clear and smooth, spread itself into an immense plain, and held a watery mirror
to the skies. Infinite heights above, the firmament stretched its azure
expanse, bespangled with unnumbered stars, and adorned with the moon, walking
in brightness. Job xxxi.26.
She seemed to contemplate herself, with a peculiar pleasure; while the
transparent surface, both received and returned her silver image. Here, instead
of being covered with sackcloth, she shone with double luster; or rather, with
a luster multiplied in proportion to the number of beholders, and their various
situations.

Such, methinks, is the effect of an exemplary behavior, in persons of exalted
rank. Their course, as it is nobly distinguished, so it will be happily
influential. Others will catch the diffusive ray; and be ambitious to resemble
a pattern so attracting, so commanding. Their amiable qualities will not
terminate in themselves; but we shall see them reflected from their families,
their acquaintance, their retainers: Just as we may now behold another moon,
trembling Splendet tremulo sub Lumine Pontus.
VIRG.
in the stream, glittering in the canal, and displaying its lovely impress, on
every collection of waters.

The moon, philosophy says, is a sort of sovereign over the great deep. Her
orb, like a royal scepter, sways the ocean, and actuates the fluid realms. It
swells the tides, and perpetuates the reciprocal returns of ebb and flow. By
which means, the liquid element purges off its filth, and is preserved from
being putrefied itself, and from poisoning the world. -- Is the moon thus
operative on the vast abyss? And shall not the faith of eternal and infinite
delights to come, be equally efficacious on this soul of mine? -- Far above her
argent fields, are treasures of happiness, unseen by mortal eye, by mortal ear
unheard, and unconceived by any human imagination. In that desira^le world, the
most distinguished and exalted hono^ also are conferred; in comparison with
which, the thrones and diadems of earthly monarchs, are empty pageants, and
childish toys. -- Yonder arch of sapphire, with all its spangles of gold, is
but the floor of those divine abodes. What then are the apartments; what is the
palace? How bright with glories; how rich with bliss?

O! ye mansions of blessedness; ye beauties of my Father's kingdom; which far
outshine these lamps of the visible heaven; transmit your sweet and winning
invitations to my heart. Attract and refine all my affections. Withdraw them
from stagnating on the sordid shores of flesh; never suffer them to settle upon
the impure lees of sense; but impress them with emotions of restless desire
after sublime and celestial joys: -- Joys that will proceed, still proceed in a
copious and everlasting flow, when seas shall cease to roll: -- Joys, that will
charm every faculty with unimaginable pleasure, when the moon, with her waxing
splendours, shall cheer our sight no more.

Enough for the present evening. My thoughts have been sufficiently exercised,
and my steps begin to be attended with weariness. Let me obey the admonition of
nature, and give respite to my meditations, slumber to my eyes. -- But stay. --
Shall I retire to the bed of sleep, with as little ceremony, and with as much
inattention as the brutes to their sordid lairs? Are no acknowledgments due to
that Divine Being, who is the support of my life, and the length of my days?
Have I no farther need of his protecting care; no more occasion for the
blessings of his goodness? -- Lepidus, perhaps, may laugh at the bended knee,
and have a thousand darts of raillery ready to discharge on the practice of
devotion. The wits, I know, are unmercifully severe on what they call the
drudgery of prayer, and the fantastical rant of praise. These they leave to the
illiterate labourer, and the mean machanick; or treat them, with a contemptuous
sneer, as the parson's ignoble trade.

Is it then an instance of surperstitious blindness, to distinguish; or of
whimsical zeal, to celebrate, the most supereminent excellency and merit? Is it
an ungraceful business, or does it argue a grovelling disposition, to magnify
goodness transcendently rich and diffusive? -- What can be so truly becoming a
dependent state, as to pay our adoring homage to the Author of all perfection,
and profess our devoted allegiance to the Supreme Almighty Governor of the
universe? -- Can any thing more significantly bespeak an ingenuous temper, or
administer a more real satisfaction to its finest feelings, than the exercises
of penitential devotion: By which we give vent to an honest anguish, or melt
into filial sorrows, for our insensibility to the best of friends, for our
disobedience to the best of parents? -- In a word, can there be a more sublime
pleasure, than to dwell, in fixed contemplation, on the beauties of the Eternal
Mind; the amiable Original of all that is fair, grand, and harmonious; the
beneficent Giver of all that is convenient, comfortable, and useful? -- Can
there be a more advantageous employ, than to present our requests to the Father
of mercies; opening our minds to the irradiation of his wisdom, and all the
faculties of our souls to the communications of his grace? -- It is strange,
unaccountably strange, that the notion of dignity in sentiment, and the pursuit
of refined enjoyment, should ever be disunited from devotion: That persons who
make pretensions to an improved taste, and exalted genius, should neglect this
most ennobling intercourse with the wisest and best of beings, the
inexhaustible source of honor and joy.

Shall I be deterred from approaching this source of the purest delight?
Deterred from pursuing this highest improvement of my nature? Deterred from all
by a formidable banter, or confuted by one irrefragable smile? -- No: Let the
moon, in her resplendent sphere; and yonder pole, with all its starry train;
witness, if I be silent even or morn; if I refrain to kindle in my heart and
breathe from my lips, the reasonable incense of praise. Praise to that great
and glorious GOD, who formed the earth, and built the skies; who poured from
his hand the watery world, and shed the all surrounding air abroad. -- Thou
also made the night, Maker omnipotent! and thou, the day! which I, though
less than the least of all thy mercies, have passed in safety, tranquillity,
and comfort. -- When I was lost in the extravagance of dreams, or lay immersed
in the insensibility of sleep, thy hand recovered me from the temporary
lethargy: Thy hand set a new, a delicately fine edge, on all my blunted senses;
and strung my sinews with recruited vigor. When my thoughts were benumbed and
stupefied, thy quickening influence roused them into activity; when they were
disconcerted and wild, thy regulating influence reduced them into order:
Refitted me at once to relish the innocent entertainments of an animal, and to
enjoy the sublime gratifications of a rational capacity: When darkness covered
the creation, at thy command, the sun arose; painted the flowers, and
distinguished every object; gave light to my feet, and gave nature, with all
her beautiful scenes, to my eye. -- To thee, O thou GOD of my strength, I owe
the continuance of my being, and the vivacity of my constitution. By thy sacred
order, without any consciousness of mine, the wheels of life move, and the
crimson fountain plays. Overruled by thy exquisite skill, it transforms itself,
by the nicest operations of an inexplicable kind of chemistry, into a variety
of the finest secretions; which glide into the muscles, and swell them for
action; or pour themselves into the fluids, and repair the incessant decays;
which cause cheerfulness to sparkle in the eye, and health to bloom in the
cheek.

Disastrous accidents, injurious to the peace of my mind, or fatal to the
welfare of my body, beset my paths. But thy faithfulness and truth, like an
impenetrable shield, guarded me all around. Under this divine protection, I
walked secure, amidst legions of apparent perils; and passed unhurt through a
far greater multiplicity of unseen evils. Not one of my bones was broken; not a
single shaft grazed upon my ease; even when the eye that watched over me, saw,
in its wide survey, thousands falling beside me, in irrecoverable ruin; and ten
thousands deeply wounded, on my right hand. -- If sickness has, at any time,
saddened my chamber, or pain harrowed my flesh, it was a wholesome discipline,
and a gracious severity. The chastisement proved a sovereign medicine, to cure
me of an immoderate fondness, for this imperfect troublesome state; and to
quicken my desires, after the unembittered enjoyments of my eternal home. --
Has not thy munificence, unwearied and unbounded, spread my table; and
furnished it with the finest wheat; replenished it with marrow and fatness?
While temperance sweetened the bowl; appetite seasoned the dish; contentment
and gratitude crowned the repast. -- Has not thy kindness, O GOD of the
families of Israel! preserved my affectionate relations; who study, by their
tender offices, to soften every care, and heighten every joy? Has not thy
kindness given me valuable friends; whose presence is a cordial to cheer me in
a dejected hour; and whose conversation mingles improvement with delight?

When sin lay disguised amidst flowery scenes of pleasure; enlightened by thy
wisdom, I discerned the latent mischief; made resolute by thy grace, I shunned
the luscious bane. If, through the impulse of sensuality, or the violence of
passion, I have been hurried into the snare, and stung by the serpent, thy
faithful admonitions have recalled the foolish wanderer; while the blood of thy
Son has healed his deadly wounds. -- Some, no doubt, have been cut off in the
midst of their iniquities, and transmitted from the thrillings of polluted joy,
to the agonies of eternal despair. Whereas I have been distinguished by
long-suffering mercy; and, instead of lifting up my eyes in torments, to behold
a heaven irrecoverably lost, I may lift them up under the pleasing views of
being admitted, ere long, into those abodes of endless felicity. -- In the mean
time, thou have vouchsafed me the revelation of thy will; the influences of thy
spirit; and abundance of the most effectual aids, for advancing in knowledge,
and growing in godliness; for becoming more conformable to thy image, and more
meet for thy presence; for tasting the pleasures of religion, and securing the
riches of eternity.

How various is thy benificence, O thou Lover of souls! It has unsealed a
thousand sources of good; opened a thousand avenues of delight; and heaped
blessings upon me, with a ceaseless liberality. If I should attempt to declare
them, they would be more than the starry host, which glitter in this unclouded
sky; more than the dewy gems, which will adorn the face of the morning.

And shall I forget the GOD of my salvation, the Author of all my mercies?
Rather let my pulse forget to beat! -- Shall I render Him no expressions of
thankfulness? Then might all nature reproach my ingratitude. -- Shall I rest
satisfied with the bare acknowledgment of my lips? No: Let my life be vocal,
and speak his praise, in that only genuine, that most emphatical language --
the language of devout obedience. Let the bill be drawn upon my very heart; let
all my affections acknowledge the draught; and let the whole tenor of my
actions, in time and through eternity, be continually paying the debt -- the
ever pleasing, ever growing debt of duty, veneration, and love.

And can I, O thou Guide of my goings, and Guardian of all my interests -- can
I distrust such signal, such experienced goodness? Thou have been my helper,
through all the busy scenes of day, therefore, under the shadow of thy wings
will I repose myself, during the darkness, the danger, and deathlike inactivity
of the night. Whatever defilement I have contracted, wash it thoroughly away,
in redeeming blood; and let neither the sinful stain, nor the sinful
inclination, accompany me to my couch! -- Then shall I lay me down in peace,
and take my rest; cheerfully referring it to thy allwise determination, whether
I shall open my eyes in this world, or awake in the unknown regions of another.

HERVEY's CONTEMPLATIONS ON THE STARRY HEAVENS.
THIS evening, I exchange the nice retreats of art for the noble theater of
nature: Instead of measuring my steps under the covert of an arbor, let me
range along the summit of this gently rising hill. -- There is no need of the
leafy shade, since the sun has quitted the horizon, and withdrawn his scorching
beams. But see, how advantages and inconveniences are usually linked, and
chequer our affairs below! If the annoying heat ceases, the landscape, and its
pleasing scenes, are also removed. -- The majestic castle, and the lowly
cottage, are vanished together. I have lost the aspiring mountain, and its
russet brow; I look round, but to no purpose, for the humble vale, and its
flowery lap. The plains whitened with flocks, and the heath yellow with furze,
disappear. The advancing night has wrapped in darkness the long extended forest,
and drawn her mantle over the windings of the silver stream. I no longer behold
that luxuriant fertility in the fields; that wild magnificence of prospect, and
endless variety of images; which have so often touched me with delight, and
struck me with awe, from this commanding eminence.

The loss, however, is scarcely to be regretted, since it is amply compensated
by the opening beauties of the sky. Here I enjoy a free view of the whole
hemisphere; without any obstacle from below, to confine the exploring eye; or
any cloud from above, to overcast the spacious concave. It Is true, the lively
vermilion which so lately streaked the chambers of the west, is all faded. But
the planets, one after another, light up their lamps; the stars advance in
their glittering train; a thousand and a thousand luminaries, shine forth in
successive splendours; and the wole firmament is kindled into the most
beautiful glow. The blueness of the either, heightened by the season of the
year, and still more enlivened by the absence of the moon, gives those gems of
heaven the strongest luster.

One pleasure more, the invading gloom has not been able to snatch from my
sense. The night rather improves, than destroys, the fragrance which exhales
from the blooming beans. With these, the sides of this sloping declivity are
lined; and with these, the balmy zephyrs perfume their wings. Does Arabia, from
all her spicy groves, breathe a more liberal, or a more charming gale of
sweets? And, what is a peculiar recommendation of the rural entertainments,
presented in our happy land, they are alloyed by no apprehensions of danger. No
poisonous serpent lurks under the blossom; nor any ravenous beast lies ready to
start from the thicket. -- But, I wander from a far more exalted subject. My
thoughts, like my affections, are too easily diverted from the heavens, and
detained by inferior objects. Away, my attention, from these little
blandishments of the earth; since all the glories of the sky invite thy regard.

We have taken a turn among the tombs, and viewed the solemn memorials of the
dead, in order to learn the vanity of mortal things, and to break their soft
enchantment. -- We have surveyed the ornaments of the garden; not that the
heart might be planted in the parterre, or take root among the flowery race;
but that these delicacies of a day might teach us to aspire after a better
paradise, where beauty never fades, and delight is ever in the bloom. -- A
third time we lighted the candle of meditation, and sought for wisdom, not in
the crowded city, or wrangling schools, but in the silent and lonely walks of
ancient night. Referring to the several subjects of the three preceding essays.
-- Let us once more indulge the contemplative vein, and raise our speculations
to those sublimer works of the great Creator, which the regions of the sky
contain, and this dusky hour unveils. Night open the noblest scenes, and sheds
an awe,
Which gives those venerable scenes full weight,
And deep reception in the entender'd heart.
Night Thoughts, No. IX.


If we have discerned the touches of his pencil, glowing in the colors of
spring; if we have seen a sample of his beneficence, exhibited in the stores of
nature; and a ray of his brightness, beaming in the blaze of day; what an
infinitely richer field for the display of his perfections, are the heavens!
The heavens, in the most emphatical manner, declare the glory of GOD. The
heavens are nobly eloquent of the Deity, and the most magnificent heralds of
their Maker's praise. They speak to the whole universe; for there is neither
speech so barbarous, but their language is understood; nor nation so distant,
but their voices are heard among them. Psalm. xix.3.
-- Let me then, in this solemn season, formed for thought, and a calm
intercourse with heaven; let me listen to their silent lectures. Perhaps, I may
receive such impressive manifestations of "the eternal Power and Godhead," as
may shed religion on my soul, while I walk the solitary shades; and may be a
tutelary friend to my virtue, when the call of business, and the return of
light, expose me again to the inroads of temptation.

The Israelites, instigated by frenzy rather than devotion, worshipped the host
of heaven. And the pretenders to judicial astrology talk of, I know not what,
mysterious efficacy, in the different aspect of the stars, or the various
conjunction and opposition of the planets. -- Let those who are unacquainted
with the sure word of revelation, give ear to these sons of delusion, and
dealers in deceit. For my part, it is a question of indifference to me, whether
the constellations shone with smiles, or loured in frowns, on the hour of my
nativity. Let CHRIST be my guard; and, secure in such a protection, I would
laugh at their impotent menaces. Let CHRIST be my guide; and I shall scorn to
ask, as well as despair of receiving, any predictory information from such
senseless masses. -- What! shall the living seek to the dead? Isa. viii.19.
Can these bodies advertise me of future events, which are unconscious of their
own existence? Shall I have recourse to dull unintelligent matter, when I may
apply to that all wise Being, who, with one comprehensive glance, distinctly
views whatever is lodged in the bosom of immensity, or forming in the womb of
futurity? -- Never, never will I search for any intimations of my fate; but
often trace my Creator's footsteps, "It is most becoming," says a great author,
such imperfect creatures as we are, to contemplate the works of GOD, with this
design, that we may discern the manifestations of wisdom in them; and thereby
excite in ourselves those devout affections, and that superlative respect,
which is the very essence of praise, as it is a reasonable and moral service.
ABERNETHY on the Attributes. -- And indeed, if we are sincerely disposed to
employ ourselves in this excellent, this delightful duty of praising the
infinite Creator, the means and the motives are both at hand. His works, in a
wonderful and instructive variety, present themselves, with pregnant
manifestations of the most transcendent excellencies of their Maker. They pour
their evidence from all quarters, and into all the avenues of the mind. They
invite us, especially in the magnificent system of the universe, to contemplate
-- counsel consummately wise, and execution inimitably perfect -- power to
which nothing is impossible, and goodness which extends to all, which
endures forever. -- To give, not a full display, but only some slight
strictures of these glorious truths, is the principal scope of the following
remarks.
in yonder starry plains. In the former case, they would be teachers of lies;
in the latter, they are oracles of truth. In this therefore, this sense only, I
profess myself the pupil of the stars.

The vulgar are apprehensive of nothing more than a multitude of bright
spangles, dropped over the ethereal blue. They have no higher notion of these
fine appearances, than that they are so many golden studs, with which the
empyrean arch is decorated. -- But studious minds, that carry a more accurate
and strict inquiry among the celestial bodies, bring back advices of a most
astonishing import. Let me just recollect the most material of those stupendous
discoveries, in order to furnish out proper subjects for contemplation. And let
the unlearned remember, that the scene I am going to display, is the
workmanship of that incomprehensible GOD, who is "perfect in knowledge, and
mighty in power:" Whose name, whose nature, and all whose operations, are
"great and mavelous:" Who summons into being, with equal ease, a single
grain, or ten thousand worlds. -- To this if we continually advert, the
assertions, though they will certainly excite our admiration, need not
transcend our belief.

The earth is, in fact, a round body; however it may seem, in some parts, to be
sunk into vales, and raised into hills; A learned writer, I think Dr. Derbam,
has somewhere an observation to this purpose* -- That the loftiest summits of
hills, and the most enormous ridges of mountains, are no real objection to the
globular or round form of the earth. Because, however they may render it to our
limited sight, vastly uneven and protuberant, yet they bear no more proportion
to the entire surface of the terraqueous hall, than a particle of dust casually
dropped on the mathematician's globe, bears to its whole circumference.
Consequently, the rotund figure is no more destroyed in the former case, than
in the latter. -- On the same principle, I have not thought it necessary to
take any notice of the comparatively small difference between the polar and
equatorial diameter of the earth.
in other parts, to be spread into a spacious plain, extending to the confines
of the heavens, or terminated by the waters of the ocean: -- We may fancy that
it has deep foundations, and rests upon some prodigiously solid basis. But it
is pendent in the wide transpicuous either, without any visible cause, to uphold
it from above, or support it from beneath. -- It may seem to be sedentary in
its attitude, and motionless in its situation. But it is continually sailing
With what amazing speed, this vessel (if I may carry on the allusion) filled
with a multitude of nations, and freighted with all their possessions, makes
her way through the etherial space.
through the depths of the sky; and in the space of twelve months, finishes the
mighty voyage. Which periodical rotation produces the seasons, and completes
the year. -- As it proceeds in the annual circuit, it spins upon its own
center; and turns its sides alternately to the fountain of light. By which
means, the day dawns in one hemisphere, while the night succeeds in the other.
Without this expedient, one part of its regions would, during half the great
revolution, be scorched with excessive heat, or languish under an unintermitted
glare; while the other, exposed to the contrary extremes, would be frozen to
ice, and buried under a long oppression of dismal and destructive darkness.

I cannot forbear taking notice, that, in this compound motion of the earth,
the one never interferes with the other, but both are perfectly compatible. Is
it not thus with the precepts of religion, and the needful affairs of the
present life; not excepting even the innocent gratifications of our appetites?
-- Some, I believe, are apt to imagine, that they must renounce society, if
they devote themselves to CHRIST; and abandon all the satisfactions of this
world, if they once become zealous candidates for the felicity of another. --
But this is a very mistaken notion, or else a very injurious representation, of
the doctrine which is according to godliness. It was never intended to drive
men into deserts; but to lead them, through the peaceful and pleasant paths of
wisdom, into the blissful regions of life eternal. It was never intended to
strike off the wheels of business, or cut in sunder the sinews of industry; but
rather, to make men industrious from a principle of conscience, not from the
instigations of avarice; that so they may promote their immortal happiness,
even while they provide for their temporal maintenance. It has no design to
extirpate our passions, but only to restrain their irregularities; neither
would it extinguish the delights of sense, but prevent them from evaporating
into vanity, and subsiding into gall. -- A person may be cheerful among his
friends, and yet joyful in GOD. He may taste the sweets of his earthly estate;
and, at the same time, cherish his hopes of a nobler inheritance in Heaven. The
trader may prosecute the demands of commerce, without neglecting to negotiate
the affairs of his salvation. The warrior may wear his sword; may draw, in a
just cause, that murderous weapon; yet be a good soldier of JESUS CHRIST, and
obtain the crown that fades not away. The parent may lay up a competent
portion for his children, and not forfeit his title to the treasures, either of
grace or of glory. -- So far is christianity from obstructing any valuable
interest, or withholding any real pleasure; that it improves the one, and
advances the other. Just as the diurnal and annual motions are so far from
clashing, that they entirely accord; and instead of being destructive of each
other, by mutually blending their effects, they give proportion and harmony to
time, fertility and innumerable benefits to nature.

To us who dwell on its surface, the earth is by far the most extensive orb
that our eyes can any where behold. It is also clothed with verdure;
distinguished by trees; and adorned with a variety of beautiful decorations.
Whereas, to a spectator placed on one of the planets, it wears an uniform
aspect; looks all luminous, and no larger than a spot. To beings who dwell at
still greater distances, it entirely disappears. -- That which we call
alternately, the morning and the evening star; as in one part of her orbit, she
rides foremost in the procession of night; in the other, ushers in and
anticipates the dawn; is a planetary world: Which, with the four others, that
so wonderfully vary their my stick dance, are in themselves dark bodies, and
shine only by reflection; have fields, and seas, and skies of their own: Are
furnished with all accommodations for animal subsistence, and are supposed to
be the abodes of intellectual life. All which, together with this our earthly
habitation, are dependent on that grand dispenser of divine munificence, the
sun; receive their light from the distribution of his rays, and derive their
comforts from his benign agency.

The sun, which seems to perform its daily stages through the sky, is, in this
respect, I say, in this respect, that I may not seem to forget, or exclude, the
revolution of the sun round its own axis.
fixed and immovable. It Is the great axle of heaven, about which the globe we
inhabit, and other more spacious orbs, wheel their stated courses. -- The sun,
though seemingly smaller than the dial it illuminates, is abundantly larger A
hundred thousand times, according to the lowest reckoning. Sir ISAAC NEWTON
computes the sun to be 900,000 times bigger than the earth. Religious
Philosopher, page 749.
than this whole earth; on which so many lofty mountains rise, and such vast
oceans roll. A line extending from side to side, through the center of that
resplendent orb, would measure more than eight hundred thousand miles: A
girdle, formed to go round its circumference, would require a length of
millions; were its solid contents to be estimated, the account would overwhelm
our understanding, and be almost beyond the power of language to express. Dr.
DERHAM, after having calculated the dimensions of the planets, adds, Amazing as
these masses are, they are all far outdone by that stupendous globe of light,
the sun; which, as it is the fountain of light and heat to all the planets
about it, so does it far surpass them all in its bulk: Its apparent diameter
being computed at 822,148 English miles, its ambit at 2,582,873 miles, and its
solid contents at 290,971,000,000,000,000. Astroth^l. book I. chap. 2.
-- Are we startled at these reports of philosophy? Are we ready to cry out in
a transport of surprise? How mighty is the Being, who kindled such a prodigious
fire, and keeps alive, from age to age, such an enormous mass of flame! Let us
attend our philosophic guides, and we shall be brought acquainted with
speculations more enlarged and more amazing.

This sun, with all its attendant planets, is but a very little part of the
grand machine of the universe. Every star, though, in appearance, no bigger
than the diamond that glitters upon a lady's ring, is really a vast globe, like
the sun in size and in glory, no less spacious, no less luminous, than the
radiant source of our day. So that every star is not barely a world, but the
center of a magnificent system; has a retinue of worlds, irradiated by its
beams, and revolving round its attractive influence: All which are lost to our
sight, in unmeasurable wilds of either. -- That the stars appear like so many
diminutive, and scarce distinguishable points, is owing to their immense and
inconceivable distance. Immense and inconceivable indeed it is; since a ball
shot from the loaded cannon, and flying with unabated rapidity, must travel, at
this impetuous rate, almost seven hundred thuosand years, See Religious
Philosopher, page 819.
before it could reach the nearest of those twinkling luminaries.

Can any thing be more wonderful than these observations? Yes: There are truths
far more stupendous; there are scenes far more extensive. As there is no end of
the Almighty Maker's greatness; so no imagination can set limits to his
creating hand. -- Could you soar beyond the moon, and pass through all the
planetary choir; could you wing your way to the highest apparent star, and take
your stand on one of those lofty pinnacles of heaven; you would there see other
skies expanded; another sun distributing his inexhaustible beams by day; other
stars, that gild the horrors of the alternate night; and other, See
As^rotheology, book II. chap. ii. -- Where the author, having assigned various
reasons to support this theory of our modern astronomers, adds -- Besides the
forementioned strong probabilities, we have this farther recommendation of such
an account of the universe, that it is far more magnificent, and worthy of the
infinite Creator, than any other of the narrower schemes.
perhaps nobler systems, established; established, in unknown profusion,
through the boundless dimensions of space. -- Nor does the dominion of the
universal Sovereign terminate there. Even at the end of this vast tour, you
would find yourself advanced no farther than the suburbs of creation; arrived
only at the frontiers of the great JEHOVAH's kingdom. Job, after a most
beautiful dissertation on the mighty works of GOD, as they are distributed
through universal nature, from the heights of Heaven, to the very depths of
Hell, closes the magnificent account with this acknowledgment -- Lo! these are
parts of his ways. Or, as the original word more literally signifies, and may,
I think, be more elegantly ^endered -- These are only the skirts, the very
outermost borders of his works. No more than a small preface to the immense
volume of the creation. -- From the Hebrew (...) extremities, I cannot forbear
thinking on the extreme and very attenuated fibers of the root, when compared
with the who^e substance of the trunk; or on the exquisitely small size of the
capiliary vessels, when compared with the whole structure of the body. Job
xxvi.14.


And do they tell me, that the sun, the moon, and all the planets are but a
little part of HIS works? How great, then, are his signs! and how mighty are
his wonders! Dan. iv.3.
-- And if so, what is the CREATOR himself! How far exalted above all praise!
Who is so high, that he looks down on the highest of these dazzling spheres,
and sees even the summit of creation in a vale; so great, that this prodigious
extent of space, is but a point in his presence; and all this confluence of
worlds, as the lightest atom that fluctuates in air, and sports in the meridian
ray. This puts me in mind of a very fine remark on a scriptural beauty, and a
solid correction of the common translation, made by that learned, sagacious,
and devout expositor, Vitringa. -- Isa. xl.15. we find it written of the
Supreme Being, that he takes up the is^ as a very little thing. -- Which, our
critic observes, is neither answerable to the import of the original, nor
consonant to the structure of the discourse. The prophet had no intention to
inform mankind, what the Almighty could do with regard to the islands, if he
pleased to exert uncontrollable power. His design was to show, how
insignificant, or rather what mere nothings they are, in his esteem, and before
his majesty. -- The islands, says he, though so spacious, as to afford room for
the erection of kingdoms, and the abode of nations; though so strong, as to
withstand, for many thousands of years, the raging and reiterated assaults of
the whole watery world; are yet, before the adored JEHOVAH, small as the
minutest grain, which the eye can scarce discern; light as the feathered mote,
which the least breath hurries away like a tempest. -- (...) Insulae sunt ut
leve quid, quod avolat. The deep rooted islands are as the volatile atom,
which, by the gentlest undulations of the air, is wafted to and fr^ in
perpetual agitation.


Thou most sublime and incomprehensibly glorious GOD, how am I overwhelmed with
awe! how sunk into the lowest prostration of mind! when I consider thy "
exccellent greatness," and my own utter insignificancy! -- And have I,
excessively mean as I am, have I entertained any conceited apprehensions of
myself? Have I felt the least elatement of thought, in the presence of so
majestic and adorable a Being? How should this wound me with sorrow, and cover
me with confusion! -- O my GOD, was I possessed of all the high perfections,
which accomplish and adorn the angels or light; amidst all these noble
endowments, I would fall down in the deepest abasement at thy feet. Lost in the
infinitely superior blaze of thy uncreated glories, I would confess myself to
be nothing; to be less than nothing and vanity. -- How much more ought I to
maintain the most unfeigned humiliation, before thy divine majesty; who am not
only dust and ashes, but a compound of ignorance, imperfection and depravity!

While beholding this vast expanse, I learn my own extreme meanness, I would
also discover the abject littleness of all terrestrial things. -- What is the
earth, with all her ostentatious scenes, compared with this astonishingly grand
furniture of the skies? What but a dim speck, hardly perceivable in the map of
the universe? It is observed, by a very judicious writer, Spect. Vol. VIII. No.
565.
that if the sun himself, which enlightens this part of the creation, was
extinguished; and all the host of planetary worlds, which move about him, were
annihilated; they would not be missed, by an eye that can take in the whole
compass of nature, any more than a grain of sand upon the sea shore. The bulk
of which they consist, and the space which they occupy, is so exceedingly
little incomparison of the whole, that their loss would scarce leave a blank in
the immensity of GOD's works. -- If then, not our globe only, but this whole
system, be so very diminutive; what is a kingdom or a county? What are a few
lordships, or the so much admired patrimonies of those who are styled wealthy?
Java^ inter sidera vagantem divitum pavimenta ridere, et totam cum auro suo
terram. SEN.
When I measure them with my own little pittance, they swell into proud and
bloated dimensions. But, when I take the universe for my standard, how scanty
is their size, how contemptible their figure! They shrink into pompous
nothings. Terrellae grandia inania.
WATTS's Hor. Lyr.


When the keen eyed eagle soars above all the feathered race, and leaves their
very sight below; when she wings her way with direct ascent, up the steep of
heaven; and steadily gazing on the meridian sun, accounts its beaming
splendours all her own: Does she then regard, with any solicitude, the mote
that is flying in the air, or the dust which she shook from her feet? And shall
this eternal mind, which is capable of contemplating its Creator's glory; which
is intended to enjoy the visions of his countenance; shall this eternal mind,
endued with such great capacities, and made for such exalted ends, be so
ignobly ambitious, as to sigh for the tinsels of state; or so poorly covetous,
as to grasp after ample territories on a needle's point? -- No: Under the
influence of such considerations, I feel my sentiments expand, and my wishes
acquire a turn of sublimity. My throbbing desires after worldly grandeur die
away; and I find myself, if not possessed of power, yet superior to its
charms. -- Too long, must I own, have my affections been pinioned by vanity,
and immured in this earthly clod. But these thoughts break the shackles: The
soul of man was made to walk the skies,
Delightful outlet of her prison here!
There, disencumber'd from her chains, the ties
Of toys terrestrial, she can rove at large;
There freely can respire, dilate, extend,
In full proportion let loose all her powers.
Night Thoughts, No. IX.
These objects open the door of liberty. My soul, fired by such noble
prospects, weighs anchor from this little nook, and coasts no longer about its
contracted shores; dotes no longer on its painted shells. The immensity of
things is her range; and an infinity of bliss is her aim.

Behold this immense expanse, and admire the condescension of thy GOD. -- In
this manner an inspired and princely astronomer, improved his survey of the
nocturnal heavens: When I consider thy heavens, even the works of thy fingers,
the moon and the stars which thou have ordained, I am smitten with wonder at
thy glory, and cry out in a transport of gratitude, LORD what is man, that thou
art mindful of him? or the son of man, that thou visitest him? Psalm. viii.3, 4.
How amazing, how charming, is that Divine Benignity which is pleased to bow
down its sacred regards, to so foolish and worthless a creature! Yea, disdains
not, from the height of infinite exaltation, to extend its kind providential
care, to our most minute concerns! -- This is amazing. But that the everlasting
sovereign should give his son, to be made flesh, and become our Savior! shall
I call it a miracle of condescending goodness? Rather, what are all miracles,
what are all mysteries, to this ineffable gift!

Had the brightest archangel been commissioned to come down, with the olive
branch of peace in his hand, signifying his eternal Maker's readiness to be
reconciled; on our bended knees, with tears of joy, and a torrent of
thankfulness, we ought to have received the transporting news. But when,
instead of such an angelick envoy, he sends his only begotten Son; his Son
beyond all thought illustrious, to make us the gracious overture: -- Sends him
from the habitation of his holiness and glory, to put on the infirmities of
mortality, and dwell in a tabernacle of clay: -- Sends him, not barely to make
us a transient visit, but to abide many years in our inferior and miserable
world: -- Sends him, not to exercise dominion over monarchs, but to wear out
his life in the ignoble form of a servant; and, at last, to make his exit under
the infamous character of a malefactor! Was ever love like this? Did ever grace
stoop so low? This reminds me of a very noble piece of sacred oratory, where,
in a fine series of the most beautiful gradations, the Apostle displays the
admirably condescending kindness of our Savior. -- He thought it no robbery,
it was his indisputable right, to be equal with the infinite, self existent,
immortal GOD. Yet, in mercy to sinners, he emptied himself of the
incommunicable honors, and laid aside the robes of incomprehensible glory. --
When he entered upon his mediatorial state, instead of acting in the grand
capacity of universal Sovereign, he took upon him the form of a servant; and
not the form of those ministering spirits, whose duty is dignity itself; who
are throned, though adoring. -- He took not on him the nature of angels, but
stooped incomparably lower; assumed a body of animated dust, and was made in
the likeness of men, those inferior and depraved creatures. -- Astonishing
condescension! but not sufficient for the overflowing riches of the Redeemer's
love: For, being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself farther still:
Occupied the lowest place, where all was low and ignoble. He not only submitted
to the yoke of the law, but also bore the infirmities, and ministered to the
necessities of mortals. He even washed the feet of others, and had not where to
lay his own head: -- Yea, he carried his meritorious humiliation to the very
deepest degrees of possible abasement. He became obedient unto death -- and not
to a common or natural death, but a death more infamous than the gibbet -- more
torturous than the rack -- even the accursed death of the cross. Phil. ii.6, 7,
8.
-- Should the sun be shorn of all his radiant honors, and degraded into a
clod of the valleys; should all the dignitaries of Heaven be deposed from their
thrones, and degenerates into insects of a day; great, great would be the
abasement. But nothing to thine, most blessed JESUS; nothing to thine, thou
Prince of peace; when, for us men, and for our salvation, thou did not abhor
the coarse accommodations of the manger; thou did not decline even the gloomy
horrors of the grave.

It Is well, the sacred oracles have given this doctrine the most explicit
confirmation, and evidence quite incontestable. Otherwise, a favor so
undeserved, so unexpected, and rich beyond all imagination, might stagger our
belief. -- Could HE who launches all these planetary globes, through the
illimitable void, and leads them on, from age to age, in their extensive
career; could HE resign his hands to be confined by the girding cord, and his
back to be ploughed by the bloody scourge? -- Could HE who crowns all the stars
with inextinguishable brightness, be himself defiled with spitting, and
disfigured with the thorny scar? It is the greatest of wonders, and yet the
surest of truths.

O! ye mighty orbs, that roll along the spaces of the sky; I wondered, a little
while ago, at your vast dimensions, and ample circuits. But now my amazement
ceases; or rather, is entirely swallowed up by a much more stupendous subject.
Methinks your enormous bulk is shrivelled to an atom; your prodigious
revolutions are contracted to a span; while I muse upon the far more elevated
heights, and unfathomable depths; the infinitely more extended lengths, and
unlimited breadths, of this love of GOD in CHRIST JESUS. Ephesians. iii.18, 19.


Contemplating this stately expanse, I see a mirror which represents, in the
most awful colors, the heinousness of human guilt. -- Ten thousand volumes,
wrote on purpose to display the aggravations of my various acts of
disobedience, could not so effectually convince me of their inconceivable
enormity, as the consideration of that all glorious Person, Quo quisque altius
ascendit in agnitione CHRISTI, ^o profundius peccati atrocitatem cognoscet.
who, to make an atonement for them, spilt the last drop of his blood. -- I
have sinned, may every child of Adam say; and what shall I do unto Thee. O thou
Observer of men? Job vii.20. Not Preserver, as it stands in our version, but
Observer of men. Which phrase, as it denotes the exact and incessant inspection
of the divine eye -- as it intimates the absolute impossibility, that any
transgression should escape the divine notice, is evidently most proper, both
to assign the reason, and heighten the emphasis of the context.
Shall I give my first born for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the
sin of my soul? Vain commutation! and such as would be rejected by the blessed
GOD, with the utmost abhorrence. -- Will all the potentates, that sway the
scepter in a thousand kingdoms, devote their royal and honored lives, to
rescue an obnoxious creature from the stroke of vengeance? Alas! it must cost
more, incomparably more, to expiate the malignity of sin, and save a guilty
wretch from Hell. -- Will all the principalities of Heaven be content to assume
my nature, and resign themselves to death for my pardon? Milton sets this
thought in a very poetical and striking light. -- All the sanctities of Heaven
stand round the throne of the Supreme Majesty. GOD foresees and foretells the
fall of man -- the ruin which will unavoidably ensue on his transgression, and
the utter impossibility of his being able to extricate himself from the abyss
of misery. He, with his whole posterity, must die;
Die he, or justice must; unless for him
Some other able, and as willing pay
The rigid satisfaction, death for death.
After which affecting representation, intended to raise the most tender
emotions of pity, the following inquiry is addressed to all the surrounding
angels: Say, heavenly powers, where shall we find such love?
Which of you will be mortal, to redeem
Man's mortal crime? and die, the dead to save?
He asked; but all the heavenly choir stood mute,
And silence was in Heaven.
There is, to me at least, an inimitable spirit and beauty in the last
circumstance. -- That such an innumerable multitude of generous and
compassionate beings, should be struck dumb with surprise and terror, at the
very mention of the deadly forfeiture and ransom set! No language is so
eloquent as this silence. Words could not possibly have expressed, in so
emphatical a manner, the dreadful nature of the task; the absolute inability of
any or all creatures to execute it; the supereminent and matchless love of the
eternal Son, in undertaking the tremendous work; not only without reluctance,
but unsought and unimplored; with readiness, alacrity, and delight. Paradise
Lost, book III. line 209.
Even this would be too mean a satisfaction for inexorable justice; too scanty
a reparation of GOD's injured honor. So flagrant is human guilt, that nothing
but a victim of infinite dignity could constitute an adequate propitiation. --
He who said, let there be light, and there was light; let there be a firmament,
and immediately the blue curtains floated in the sky; He must take flesh; HE
must feel the fierce torments of crucifixion; and pour out his soul in agonies,
if ever such transgressors are pardoned.

How vast is that debt, which all the wealth of both the Indies cannot
discharge! How vitiated that habit of body, which all the drugs produced by
nature herself, cannot rectify! But how much more ruined was thy condition, O
my soul! how much more heinous were thy crimes! Since nothing less than the
sufferings and death of Messiah, the Son of GOD, and radiant image of his
glory, could effect thy recovery, or cancel thy iniquity. -- Though perhaps
thou art not sunk so very deep in pollution as some of the most abandoned
profligates, yet remember the inestimable ransom paid to redeem thee from
everlasting destruction. Remember this, and "never open thy mouth any more,"
Ezekiel, xvi.63.
either to murmur at the divine chastisement, or to glory in thy own
seize. Remember this; and even loath thyself, Ezekiel. xxxvi.31.
for the multitude of thy provocations, and thy great baseness.

Once more: Let me view this beautiful, this magnificent expanse; and conceive
some juster apprehensions of the unknown richness of my Savior's atonement. --
I am informed, by a writer who cannot mistake, that the High Priest of my
profession, who was also the sacrifice for my sins, is higher than the heavens:
Heb. vii.26.
more exalted in dignity, more bright with glory, than all the heavenly
mansions, and all their illustrious inhabitants. If my heart was humbled at the
consideration of its excessive guilt; how do all my drooping powers revive at
this delightful thought? The poor criminal, that seemed to be tottering on the
very brink of the infernal pit, is raised, by such a belief, even to the
portals of paradise. My self abasement, I trust, will always continue; but my
fears, under the influence of such a conviction, are quite gone. I am sorry to
find, that some of my readers were a little disgusted at this expression, " My
fears are quite gone;" as thinking it discovered a tincture of arrogance in the
writer, and tended to discourage the weak christian. But I hope a more mature
consideration will acquit me from both these charges. -- For what has the
author said? Only, that at some peculiarly happy moments, when the Holy Ghost
bears witness of CHRIST in his heart, and he is favored with a glimpse of the
Redeemer's matchless excellency -- that, in these brighter intervals of life,
his trembling fears, with regard to the decisive sentence of the great
tribunal, are turned into pleasing expectations. And what is there in such a
declaration offensive to the strictest modesty, or dispiriting to the weakest
believer? Instead of creating discouragement, it points out the way to obtain a
settled tranquillity. Its natural tendency is, to engage the serious mind in a
more constant and attentive meditation on the unknown merits of the Divine
MEDIATOR. And were we more thoroughly acquainted, more deeply affected, with
his unutterable dignity, I am persuaded, our uneasy apprehensions would
proportionably vanish, our faith ^e established, our hopes brightened, and our
joys enlarged.
I do not, I cannot, doubt the efficacy of this propitiation. While I see a
glimpse of its matchless excellency, and verily believe myself interested in
its merits, I know not what it is to feel any misgiving suspicions; but am
steadfast in faith, and joyful through hope.

Be my iniquities like debts of millions of talents, here is more than full
payment for all that prodigious sum. Let the enemy of mankind, and accuser of
the brethren, load me with invectives; this one plea -- A divine Redeemer died,
most thoroughly quashes every indictment. For, though there be much turpitude,
and manifold transgressions, there is no condemnation to those that are in
CHRIST JESUS. -- Nay, were I chargeable with all the vilest deeds which have
been c^mmitted in every age of the world, by every nation of men; even in this
most deplorable case, I need not sink into despair. Even such guilt, though
grievous beyond all expression, is not to be compared with that abundance of
grace and righteousness, which dwell in the incarnate Divinity. -- How great,
how transcendently glorious are the perfections of the adored JEHOVAH! So
great, so superlatively precious, is the expiation of the dying JESUS. It Is
impossible for the human mind to exalt this atonement This doctrine, though
rich with consolation to the ruined sinner, yet is it not likely to open a door
for licentiousness, and embolden transgressors to prosecute their vices? -- No:
It is the most powerful motive to that genuine repentance, which flows from an
unfeigned love of GOD, and operates in a hearty detestation of all sin. One who
knew the unmeasurable goodness of the LORD, and was no stranger to the sinful
perverseness of our nature, says, There is mercy with thee: Therefore shall
thou be feared. Psalm. cxxx.4. -- Words full to my purpose; which at once add
the highest authority to this sentiment, and direct our minds to its proper
influence, and due improvement.
too highly: It Is impossible for the humble penitent to confide in it too
steadily. The scriptures, the scriptures of eternal truth have said it, (exult,
my soul, in the belief of it!) that the blood on which we rely, is GOD's own
blood; Acts xx.28.
and therefore all sufficient to expiate, omnipotent to save.

David, that egregious sinner, but more exemplary saint, seems to have been
well acquainted with this comfortable truth. What else can be the import of
that very remarkable, but most devout declaration? Thou shall purge Psalm. li.7.
Thou shall purge. I prefer this translation before the new one. Because this
speaks the language of a more steadfast belief, and gives the highest honor to
the divine goodness. Were the words intended to bear no more than the common
petitionary sense, and not to be expressive of a noble plerophory of faith;
they would rather have been (...) and (...) imperatives, not futures.
me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: Thou shall wash me, and I shall be
whiter than snow. -- I have been guilty, I must confess, of the most
complicated and shocking crimes: Crimes, inflamed by every aggravating
circumstance, with regard to myself, my neighbor, and my GOD. Myself, who have
been blessed above men, and the distinguished favorite of Providence; my
neighbor, who, in the most dear and tender interests, has been irreparably
injured; my GOD, who might justly expect the most grateful returns of duty,
instead of such enormous violations of his law. Yet, all horrid and execrable
as my offense is, it is nothing to the superabundant merit of that great
Redeemer, who was promised from the foundations of the world; in whom all my
fathers trusted; who is the hope of all the ends of the earth. Though my
conscience be more loathsome, with adulterous impurity, than the dunghill;
though treachery and murder have rendered it even black as the gloom of Hell;
yet, washed in the 'fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness,' Zech. xiii.1.
I shall be -- I say, not pure only; this were a disparagement to the efficacy
of my Savior's death; but I shall be fair as the lily, and white as the snow.
Nay, let me not derogate from the glorious object of my confidence; cleansed by
this sovereign sanctifying stream, I shall be fairer than the full blown lily,
whiter than the new fallen snows.

Power, says the scripture, belongs unto GOD. Psalm. lxii.11.
-- And in what majestic lines is this attribute of JEHOVAH written,
throughout the whole volume of the creation? Especially, through those
magnificent pages, unfolded in yonder starry regions: Which are therefore
styled, by the sweet and seraphick singer of Israel, The firmament of his
power; Psalm. cl.1.
because the grand exploits of omnipotence are there displayed with the utmost
pomp, and recorded in the most legible characters.

Who, that looks upward to the midnight sky, and, with an eye of reason,
beholds its rolling wonders; who can forbear inquiring -- Of what were those
mighty orbs formed? -- Amazing to relate! They were produced without materials.
They sprung from emptiness itself. The stately fabric of universal nature
emerged out of nothing. -- What instruments were used by the Supreme Architect,
to fashion the parts with such ^xquisite niceness, and give so beautiful a
polish to the whole. How was all connected into one finely p^oportioned, and
nobly finished structure? -- A bare fiat accomplished all. Let them be, said
GOD: He added no more; and immediately the mavelous edifice arose, adorned
with every beauty; displaying innumerable perfections; and declaring, amidst
enraptured seraphs, its great Creator's praise. By the word of the LORD were
the heavens made, and all the hosts of them by the breath of his mouth. If this
thought is admitted a second time, and suffered to ennoble the next paragraph,
it is partly, because of its unequalled sublimity; partly, because it awakens
the most grand idea of creating power; and partly, because the practice of the
Psalmist, an authority too great to be controverted, is my precedent. -- The
beautiful stanza quoted from Psalm. xxxiii.6, is a proof, how thoroughly the
royal poet entered into the majesty of the Mosaic narration. The repetition of
the sentiment, ver. 9, intimates, how peculiarly he was charmed with that noble
manner of describing the divine operations; while the turn of his own
composition shows, how perfectly he possessed the same elevated way of
thinking: And this, long before Longinus wrote the celebrated treatise, which
has taught the heathen, as well as the christian world, to admire the dignity
of the Jewish legislator's style. Vid. LONGIN. de sublim. sect. IX.
-- What forceful machinery fixed some of those ponderous globes on an
immovable basis? What irresistible impulse bowled others through the circuit
of the heavens? What coercive energy confined their impetuous courses within
limits, astonishingly large, yet most minutely true? -- Nothing but his
sovereign will. For all things were at first constituted, and all to this day
abide, "according to his ordinance."

Without any toilsome assiduity or laborious process, to raise -- to touch --
to speak such a multitude of immense bodies into being -- to launch them
through the spaces of the sky, as an arrow from the hand of a giant -- to
impress on such unwieldy masses, a motion far outstripping the swiftness of the
winged creation; To give one instance of this remark. -- The earth, in the
diurnal revolution, which it performs on its own axis, whirls about at the rate
of above a thousand miles an hour. And as the great orbit which it describes
annually round the sun, is reckoned at 540 millions of miles, it must travel
near a million and an half each day. -- What a force must be requisite, to
protrude so vast a globe, and wheel it on, loaded as it is with huge mountains,
and ponderous rocks, at such a prodigious degree of rapidity! It surpasses
human conception! -- How natural, how pertinent, how almost necessary, after
such an observation, is the acknowledgment made by holy Job, I know that THOU
can do every thing; and that no thought, no imaginable scheme, can be
withholden from thee, can lie beyond thy power to execute. Chap. xlii.2.
and to continue them in the same rapid whirl, for thousands and thousands of
years! -- What an amazing instance of infinite might is this! -- Can any thing
be impossible to the LORD, the LORD GOD; the Creator and Controller of all the
ends of the earth, all the regions of the universe? Rather, is not all that we
count difficult, perfect ease to that glorious Being, who only spoke, and the
world was made? Psalm. xxxiii.9.
Who only gave command, and the stupendous axle was lodged fast, the lofty
wheels moved complete? -- What a sure defense, O my soul, is this everlasting
strength of thy GOD! Be this thy continual refuge, in the article of danger;
this thy never failing resource, in every time of need.

What cannot this uncontrollable power of the great JEHOVAH effect for his
people? Be their miseries ever so galling, cannot this GOD relieve them? Be
their wants ever so numerous, cannot this GOD supply them? Be their corruptions
within, ever so inveterate; or their temptations without, ever so importunate;
cannot this mighty, mighty GOD subdue the former, and fortify them against the
latter? -- Should trials, with an incessant vehemence, sift thee as wheat;
should tribulation, with a weight of woes, almost grind thee to powder; should
pleasure, with her bewitching smiles, solicit thee to delicious ruin; yet "hold
thee fast by GOD," and lay thy help upon him that is omnipotent. It is a most
charming description, as well as a most comfortable promise, which we find in
Isa. xl.29, 30, 31. -- HE gives power to the feeble; and to them that have no
might at all, he not only imparteth, but increases strength; making it to
abound, where it did not so much as exist. -- Without this aid of JEHOVAH, even
the youths, amidst the very prime of their vigor and activity, shall become
languid in their works, and weary in their course. And the young men, to whose
resolution and abilities nothing seemed impracticable, shall not only not
succeed, but utterly fall, and miscarry in their various enterprises. --
Whereas, they that wait upon the LORD, and confide in his grace, shall press
on, with a generous ardour, from one degree of religious improvement to
another. Instead of exhausting, they shall renew their strength; difficulties
shall animate, and toil invigorate them. They shall mount up as with soaring
wings, above all opposition; they shall be carried through every
discouragement, as eagles cleave the yielding air. They shall run with speed
and alacrity, the way of GOD's commandments, and not be weary: They shall hold
on ((...) progredientur, carpent iter) with constancy and perseverance, in
those peaceful paths, and not faint; but arrive at the end of their progress,
and receive the prize of their high calling.

To this most cheering doctrine, permit me to add its no less beautiful and
delightful contrast. Eliphaz, speaking of the enemies of the righteous, says --
(...) -- which is rendered by a great critic in sacred learning, Nihil excisum
factio nobis adversari^. We should reckon our language acquitted itself
tolerably well, if, when depreciating the abilities of an adversary, it should
represent them weak as the scorched thread, feeble as the dissolving smoke. But
these are cold forms of speech, compared with the eloquence of the east.
According to the genius of our Bible, all the power that opposes the godly, is
a mere nothing; or, to speak with a more emphatical air of contempt, a
destroyed, an extirpated nothing. -- Admire this expression, ye that are
charmed with daring images, and (what Tully calls verbum ardens) a spirited and
glowing diction. -- Remember this declaration, ye that fight the good fight of
faith. The united force of all your enemies, be it ever so formidable to the
eye of flesh, is, before your Almighty Guardian, nihil nihilissimum, not only
nothing, but less than nothing and vanity.

Job xxii.20.
Thou can not be involved in such calamitous circumstances, or exposed to
such imminent peril, but thy GOD, whom thou servest, is able to deliver thee
from the one, and to support thee under the other. -- To support! to deliver!
Let me not dishonor the unlimited greatness of his power. He is able to exalt
thee, from the deepest distress, to the most triumphant joy; and to make even a
complication of evils work together for thy everlasting good. He is able, not
only to accomplish what I have been speaking, but to do exceeding abundantly
above all that we can ask or think. I should, in this place, avoid swelling the
notes any farther, was it not to take notice of the inimitable passage quoted
above, and to be found Ephesians. iii.20. -- Which, if I do not greatly mistake, is
the most complete representation of divine power, that it is possible for words
to frame. -- To do all that our tongue can ask, is a miracle of might. But we
often think more than we can express, and are actuated with " groanings
unutterable." Yet, to answer these vast desires, is not beyond the
accomplishment of our heavenly Father. -- Nay, to make his gifts and his
blessings commensurate to the largest stretch of human expectations, is a sma^l
thing with the GOD of glory. He is able to do above all that the most enlarged
apprehension can imagine; yea, to do abundantly more, exceeding abundantly
more, than the mind itself, in the utmost exertion of all its faculties, is
capable of wishing, or knows how to conceive.


O! the wretched condition of the wicked, who have this LORD of all power for
their enemy! O! the desperate madness of the ungodly, who provoke the Almighty
to jealousy! -- Besotted creatures! are you able to contend with your Maker,
and enter the lists against incensed Omnipotence? Can you bear the fierceness
of his wrath, or sustain the vengeance of his lifted arm? At his presence,
though awfully serene, the hills melt like wax, and the mountains skip like
frighted lambs. At the least intimation of his displeasure, the foundations of
nature rock, and the pillars of heaven tremble. How then can a withered leaf
endure, when his lips are full of indignation, and his tongue as a devouring
fire? -- Or can any thing screen a guilty worm, when the great and terrible GOD
shall whet his glittering sword, and his hand take hold on inexorable judgment?
When that hand, which shoots the planets, masses of excessive bulk, One of the
planets (Saturn) is supposed to be more than ninety times as big as the globe
on which we live. According to the same calculation, the largest of the planets
(Jupiter) is above 200 times vaster than this vast collection of spacious
forests, towering mountains, extensive continents, and boundless oceans. --
Such enormous magnitude! winged with such prodigious speed! -- It raises
astonishment beyond expression. With GOD is terrible majesty! Job xxxvii.22. --
Who shall not fear THEE, O LORD! and glorify thy name? Rev. xv.4.
with such surprising rapidity, through the sky; that hand, which darts the
comets to such unmeasurable distances, beyond the orbit of our remotest planet,
beyond the pursuit of the strongest eye: When THAT HAND is stretched out to
punish, can the munition of rocks, the intervention of seas, or even
interposing worlds, divert the blow? -- Consider this, ambition; and bow thy
haughty crest. Consider this, disobedience; and bend thy iron sinew. O!
consider this, all ye that forget, or affront the tremendous JEHOVAH. He can,
by a single act of his will, lay the universe in utter ruin: And can he want
power to bring you, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, to the dust of
death, or to the flames of Hell? He has -- I say not, ten thousand lightnings
to scorch you to ashes; ten thousand thunders to crush you into atoms; but,
what is unspeakably more dreadful -- He has an army of terrors, even in the
look of his angry countenance. His very frown is worse than destruction.

I cannot dismiss this subject, without admiring the patience of the blessed
GOD. Who, though so strong and powerful, yet "is provoked every day." --
Surely, as is his majesty, so is his mercy; his pity altogether commensurate to
his power. If I vilify but the name of an earthly monarch, I lose my liberty,
and am confined to the dungeon. If I appear in arms, and draw the sword against
my national sovereign, my life is forfeited, and my very blood will scarce
atone for the crime. But thee I have dishonored, O! thou King immortal and
invisible! Against thee my breast has fomented secret disaffection; my
behavior has risen up in open rebellion; and yet I am spared, yet I am
preserved. Instead of being banished from thy presence, I sit at thy table, and
am fed from thy hand. Instead of pursuing me with thunder bolts of vengeance,
thy favors surround me on every side. That arm, that injured arm, which might
justly fall with irretrievable ruin, on a traitor's head, is most graciously
stretched out, to caress him with the tenderest endearments; to cherish him
with every instance of parental kindness -- O! thou mightiest, thou best of
beings, how am I pained at my very soul, for such shameful and odious
disingenuity! Let me always abominate myself, as the basest of creatures; but
adore that unwearied long suffering of thine, which refuses to be irritated;
love that unremitted goodness, which no acts of ingratitude could stop, or so
much as check, in its gracious current. O! let this stubborn heart, which duty
could not bind, which threatenings could not awe, be the captive, the willing
captive, of such triumphant beneficence.

I have often been struck with wonder at that almighty skill, which weighed the
mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance; which proportioned the waters
in the hollow of its hand, and adjusted the dust of the earth Isa. xl.12. The
dust of the earth, in this sublime scripture, signifies the dry land, or solid
part of our globe; which is placed in contradistinction to the whole collection
of fluid matter, mentioned in the preceding clause. -- Perhaps this remarkable
expression may be intended to intimate, not only the extreme niceness which
stated the dimensions of the world in general, or in the gross; but also that
particular exactness, with which the very smallest materials that constitute
its frame, (not excepting each individual atom) were calculated and disposed.
-- q. d. It is a small thing to say, no such enormous redundancies, as
unnecessary ridges of mountains, were suffered to subsist. There was not so
much as the least grain of sand superfluous, or a single particle of dust
deficient. -- As the grand aim of the description is, to celebrate the
consummate wisdom exemplified in the creation, and to display that perfect
proportion, with which every part tallies, coincides, and harmonises with the
whole, I have taken leave to alter the word of our English translation,
comprehend, and introduce in its stead, a term equally faithful to the Hebrew,
and more significative of the prophet's precise idea.
by a measure. But how much more mavelous is that magnificent economy, which
poised the stars with inexpressible nicety, and meted out the heavens with a
span! Where all is prodigiously vast; immensely various; and yet more than
mathematically exact. Surely the wisdom of GOD manifests itself in the skies,
and shines in those lucid orbs: Shines on the contemplative mind, with a luster
incomparably brighter than that which their united splendours transmit to the
eye.

Behold yonder countless multitude of globes; consider their amazing magnitude;
regard them as the sovereigns of so many systems, each accompanied with his
planetary equipage. Upon this supposition, what a multiplicity of mighty
spheres must be perpetually running their rounds, in the upper regions! Yet
none mistake their way, or wander from the goal, though they pass through
trackless and unbounded fields. None fly off from their orbits, into
extravagant excursions; none press in upon their center with too near an
approach. None interfere with each other in their perennial passage, or
intercept the kindly communications of another's influence. The interception of
light, by means of an eclipse, happens very rarely. And then it is of so short
a continuance, as not to be at all inconvenient. Nay, it is attended with such
circumstances, as render it rather useful, than prejudicial.
But all their rotations proceed in eternal harmony; keeping such time, and
observing such laws, as are most exquisitely adapted to the perfection of the
whole.

While I contemplate this excellent wisdom, which made the heavens, and attunes
all their motions, how am I abashed at that mixture of arrogance and folly,
which has, at any time, inclined me to murmur at thy dispensations, O LORD!
What is this, but a sort of implicit treason against thy supremacy, and a tacit
denial of thy infinite understanding? -- Have thou so regularly placed such a
wonderful diversity of systems, through the spaces of the universe? -- Did
thou, without any probationary essays, without any improving retouches, speak
them into the most consummate perfection? -- Do thou continually superintend
all their circumstances, with a sagacity that never mistakes the minutest title
of propriety? And shall I be so unaccountably stupid, as to question the
justness of thy discernment, in choosing my inheritance, and fixing the bounds
of my habitation! -- Not a single erratum in modelling the structure;
determining the distance, The sun in particular, (and let this serve as a
specimen of that most curious exactness, with which the other celestial bodies
are constituted, and all their circumstances regulated) the sun is formed of
such a determinate magnitude, and placed at such a convenient distance, as not
to annoy, but only refresh us, and nourish the ground with its kindly warmth.
If it was larger, it would set the earth on fire; if smaller, it would leave it
frozen. If it was nearer us, we should be scorched to death; if farther from
us, we should not be able to live for want of heat. STACKHOUSE's History of the
Bible.
and conducting the career of unnumbered worlds! And shall my peevish humor
presume to censure thy interposition, with regard to the affairs of one
inconsiderable creature; whose stature, in such a comparative view, is less
than a span, and his present duration little more than a moment?

O! thou GOD, in whose hand my breath is, and whose are all my ways, let such
sentiments as now possess my thoughts, be always lively on my heart! These
shall compose my mind into a cheerful acquiescence, and a thankful submission,
even when afflictions gall the sense, or disappointments break my schemes. Then
shall I, like the grateful patriarch, See Genesis xii.7, 8.
in all the changes of my condition, and even in the depths of distress, erect
an altar of adoring resignation, and inscribe it with the Apostle's motto -- To
GOD ONLY WISE. Then, should thou give me leave to be the carver of my own
fortunes, I would humbly desire to relinquish the grant, and recommit the
disposal of myself to thy unerring beneficence. Fully persuaded that thy
counsels, though contrary to my froward inclinations, or even afflictive to my
flesh, are incomparably more eligible, than the blind impulse of my own will,
however soothing to animal nature.

On a careless inspection, you perceive no accuracy or uniformity in the
position of the heavenly bodies. They appear like an illustrious chaos; a
promiscuous heap of shining globes; neither ranked in order, nor moving by
line. -- But what seems confusion, is all regularity. What carries a show of
negligence, is really the result of the most masterly contrivance. You think,
perhaps, they rove in their aereal flight; but they rove by the nicest rule,
and without the least error. Their circuits, though seemingly devious; their
mazes, though intricate to our apprehensions, -- Mazes intricate,
Eccentrick, intervolv'd; yet regular
Then most, when most irregular they seem.
MILT
are marked out, not indeed with golden compasses, but by the infinitely more
exact determinations of the all wise Spirit.

So, what wears the appearance of calamity, in the allotments appointed for the
godly, has really the nature of a blessing. It issues from fatherly love, and
will terminate in the richest good. If Joseph is snatched from the embraces of
an indulgent parent, and abandoned to slavery in a foreign land, it is in order
to save the holy family from perishing by famine; and to preserve the seed in
whom all the nations of the earth should be blessed. If he falls into the
deepest disgrace, it is on purpose that he may rise to the highest honors.
Even the confinement of the prison, by the unsearchable workings of Providence,
opens his way to the right hand of the throne itself. -- Let the most afflicted
servant of JESUS, wait the final upshot of things. He will then discover the
apparent expediency of all those tribulations, which now, perhaps, he can
hardly admit without reluctance, or suffer without some struggles of
dissatisfaction. Then the gushing tear, and the heaving sigh, will be turned
into tides of gratitude, and hymns of holy wonder.

In the mean time, let no audacious railer presumptuously impeach the divine
procedure; but, adoring where we cannot comprehend, let us expect the evolution
of the mysterious plan. Then shall every eye perceive, that the seeming
labyrinths of Providence, were the most direct and compendious way to effect
his general purposes of grace, and to bring about each one's particular
happiness. -- The moral world,
Which, though to us it seems embroiled, moves on
In higher order; fitted, and impelled
By wisdom's finest hand, and issuing all
In general good.
THOMS. Wint. l. 586.
-- Then also, shall it be clearly shown, in the presence of applauding worlds,
why virtue pined in want, while vice rioted in affluence: Why amiable innocence
so often dragged the dungeon chain, while horrid guilt trailed the robe of
state. -- That day of universal audit, that day of everlasting retribution,
will not only vindicate, but magnify the whole management of Heaven. The august
sessions shall close with this unanimous, this glorious acknowledgment: Though
clouds and darkness, impenetrable by any human scrutiny, were sometimes round
about the supreme Conductor of things, yet righteousness and judgment were the
constant habitation of his seat; Psalm. xcvii.2*
the invariable standard of all his administrations. -- Thus (if I may
illustrate the grandest truths by inferior occurrences) while we view the
arras, on the side of least distinction, it is void of any elegant fancy;
without any nice strokes of art; nothing but a confused jumble of incoherent
threads. No sooner is the piece beheld in its proper aspect, but the suspected
rudeness vanishes, and the most curious arrangement takes place. We are charmed
with designs of the finest taste, and figures of the most graceful form. All is
shaped with symmetry; all is clad in beauty.

The goodness of GOD is most eminently displayed in the skies. -- Could we take
an understanding survey of whatever is formed by the divine Architect,
throughout the whole extent of material things, our minds would be transported
with their excellencies, and our tongues echo back that great encomium, they
are "good, very good*" Genesis i.31.
Most beautiful This (...) of the universe, and all its parts, has been very
highly, and very justly extolled, by the ancient inquirers into nature; and
was, indeed, an illustrious scene spread before the sages of the heathen world,
wherein to contemplate the goodness and the glories of the Supreme Being. -- It
was nobly said, by a Pagan philosopher, on this occasion; (...); That GOD, when
he undertook the work of creation, transformed himself into love. -- But he
need not transform himself into this amiable principle; for "GOD is love;" as
w^ much more nobly said by one, whom that philosopher would have termed a
barbarian. 1 John iv.8.
in themselves; contrived by unerring wisdom, and executed with inimitable
skill. Most useful This (...) of the universe, and all its parts, has been very
highly, and very justly extolled, by the ancient inquirers into nature; and
was, indeed, an illustrious scene spread before the sages of the heathen world,
wherein to contemplate the goodness and the glories of the Supreme Being. -- It
was nobly said, by a Pagan philosopher, on this occasion; (...); That GOD, when
he undertook the work of creation, transformed himself into love. -- But he
need not transform himself into this amiable principle; for "GOD is love;" as
w^ much more nobly said by one, whom that philosopher would have termed a
barbarian. 1 John iv.8.
in their functions; exactly ^itting the places they fill, and completely
answering the purposes for which they were intended. -- All the parts of the
inanimate creation proclaim, both by their intrinsic and relative
excellencies, the all diffusive beneficence of their Maker.

How much more wonderful are the displays of divine indulgence, in the worlds
of life! Because dead matter is incapable of delight, therefore the gracious
Creator has raised innumerable ranks of perceptive existence: Such as are
qualified to taste his bounty, and enjoy each a happiness suited to its
peculiar state. With this view, he furnished the regions of inferior nature
with an order and a series of sensitive beings: The waters teem with shoals of
finny inhabitants: The dry land swarms with animals of every order: The
dwellings of the firmament are occupied by multitudes of winged people: Not so
much as a green leaf, philosophers say, but lodges and accommodates its puny
animalcule tenants. A very celebrated poet, in a beautiful paragraph on this
subject, informs his readers, that all nature swarms with life. In subterranean
cells, the earth heaves with vital motion. Even the hard stone, in the very
inmost recesses of its impenetrable citadel, holds multitudes of animated
inhabitants. The pulp of mellow fruit, and all the productions of the orchard,
feed the invisible nations. Each liquid, whether of acid taste or milder
relish, abounds with various forms of sensitive existence. Nor is the pure
stream, or transparent air, without their colonies of unseen people. -- In
which constitution of things, we have a wonderful instance, not only of the
divine goodness to those minute beings, in giving them a capacity for animal
gratifications; but of his tender care for mankind, in making them
imp^rceptible to our senses. -- These concealed
By the kind art of forming Heaven, escape
The grosser eye of man: For if the worlds
In worlds enclosed should on his senses burst;
From cates ambrosial, and the nectar'd bowl,
He Would turn abhorrent; and, in dead of night,
When silence s^eeps over all, be stunned with noise.
THOMSON's Summer.
-- And wherefore this diversity, this profusion of living creatures, flying
the air, treading the ground, and gliding through the paths of the sea? For
this most glorious reason -- that the eternal sovereign may exercise his
surperabundant goodness; that his table may be furnished with millions and
millions of guests; that he may fill, every hour, every moment, their mouths
with food, or their hearts with gladness.

But what a small theater are three or four elements for the operations of
JEHOVAH's bounty! His magnificent liberality scorns such scanty limits. If you
ask, wherefore has he created all worlds, and replenished them with an unknown
multiplicity of beings, rising, one above another, in an endless gradation of
still richer endowment, and still nobler capacities? the answer is -- For the
manifestation of his own glory, and especially for the communication of his
inexhaustible beneficence. A sacred writer, considering this delightful
subject, and confining his observation within the narrow limits of his own
country, cries out, with a mixture of amazement and gratitude, how great is his
goodness, and how great is his beauty! -- Who then can forbear being lost in
wonder, and transported with delight, when he extends his survey to those
infinitely more copious communications of divine bounty; which, like salutary
and refreshing streams, run through all worlds; and make, not only the little
valleys of a single kingdom, but the immensity of creation, laugh and sing?
Zech. ix.17.
-- The great Creator could propose no advantage to himself. His bliss is
incapable of any addition. Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the
earth and the world were made, he was supremely happy in his own independent
and all sufficient self. His grand design therefore, in erecting so many
stately fabrics, and peopling them with so many tribes of inhabitants, was to
transfuse his exuberant kindness, and impart felicity in all its forms. Ten
thousand worlds, stocked with ten thousand times ten thousand ranks of
sensitive and intelligent existence, are so many spacious gardens, which, with
rivers of communicated joy, this ever flowing fountain waters continually.

Boundless In this sense, there is none good, but one, that is GOD: None
universally and essentially good: None whose goodness extends itself, in an
infinite variety of blessings, to every capable object; or, who always
dispenses his favors, from the sole principle of free and disinterested
benevolence.
and (which raises our idea of this divine principle, to the very highest
degree of perfection) disinterested In this sense, there is none good, but one,
that is GOD: None universally and essentially good: None whose goodness extends
itself, in an infinite variety of blessings, to every capable object; or, who
always dispenses his favors, from the sole principle of free and disinterested
benevolence.
muni^icence! How inexpressibly amiable is the blessed GOD, considered in this
charming light! Is it possible to conceive any excellence so adorable and
lovely, as infinite benevolence, guided by unerring wisdom, and exerting
almighty power, on purpose to make a whole universe happy? -- O my soul, what
an irresistible attractive is here! What a most worthy object for thy most
fervent affection! Shall now every glittering toy become a rival to this
transcendently beneficent Being, and rob him of thy heart? -- No. Let his all
creating arm teach thee, to trust in the fullness of his sufficiency: -- Let his
all superintending eye incline thee to acquiesce in the dispensations of his
providence: -- And let his bounty, so freely vouchsafed, so amply diffused,
induce thee to love him, with all the ardour of a grateful and admiring soul;
induce thee to serve him, not with a joyless awe, or slavish dread, but with
unfeigned alacrity, and a delightful complacency.

If the goodness of GOD is so admirably seen, in the works of nature, and the
favors of Providence; with what a noble superiority does it even triumph in
the mystery of redemption! In this, and in other parts of the Contemplations,
the reader will observe, that the attributes of the Deity are represented, as
shining with more distinguished luster in the wonders of redemption, than in
the works of creation. If such remarks should seem to be unprecedented, or to
stand in need of a vindication, permit me to subjoin the sentiments of a great
critic, equally versed in both those sublime theories. -- "In a perfect
orator," he says, Tully requires some skill in the nature of heavenly bodies;
because his mind will become more extensive and unconfined; and, when he
descends to treat of human affairs, he will both think and write in a more
exalted and magnificent manner. For the same reason, that excellent master
would have recommended the study of those great and glorious mysteries which
revelation has discovered to us; to which the noblest parts of this system of
the world, are as much inferior, as the creature is less excellent than the
Creator. Spect. vol. VIII. No. 633.
Redemption, is the brightest mirror, in which to contemplate this most lovely
attribute of the Deity. Other gifts are only as mites from the divine treasury;
but redemption opens, I had almost said exhausts, all the stores of indulgence
and grace. Herein "GOD commends his love; Romans v.8.
" not only manifests, but sets it off, as it were, with every bright and grand
embellishment; manifests it in so stupendous a manner, that it is beyond
parallel; beyond thought; "above all blessing and praise." -- Was he not thy
Son, everlasting GOD, thy only Son; the Son of thy bosom from eternal ages; the
highest object of thy complacential delight? Was not thy love to this adorable
Son, incomparably greater than the tenderest affection of any, or the united
affections of all, mortal parents? Was not the blessed JESUS more illustrious
in excellency, than all angels; more exalted in dignity, than all Heavens? Yet
did thou resign HIM, for poor mortals; for vile sinners! -- Could thou see
him descend from his royal throne, and take up his abode in the sordid stable?
See him forego the homage of the seraphim, and stand exposed to the reproachful
indignities of an insolent rabble? See him arraigned at the bar, and sentenced
to death; numbered with malefactors, and nailed to the gibbet; bathed in his
own innocent blood, and pouring out his soul in agonies of sorrow? -- Could the
Father, the Father himself, with unknown philanthropy, Philanthropy, that is,
loving kindness to man.
say -- It shall, it shall be so! My pity to rebellious man, pleads, and
prevails. Awake, therefore, O sword, Zech. xiii.7.
edged with divine wrath: Awake, and be sheathed in that immaculate breast;
pierce that dearly beloved heart. I am content that my son endure the sharpness
of death, rather than sinful mortals perish forever. -- Incomprehensible love!
May it henceforward be the favorite subject of my meditation; more delightful
to my musing mind, than applause to the ambitious ear! May it be the darling
theme of my discourse; sweeter to my tongue, than the droppings of the
honeycomb to my taste! May it be my choicest comfort, through all the changes
of life; and my reviving cordial, even in the last extremities of dissolution
itself.

A prophet contemplating, with a distant survey, this unexampled instance of
almighty love, is wrapped into a transport of devotion. At a loss for proper
acknowledgments, he calls upon the whole universe to aid his laboring breast,
and supply his lack of praise. Sing melodiously, ye vaulted heavens; exult, and
even leap for gladness, thou cumberous earth; ye mountains, break your long
silence, and burst into peals of loudest acclamations; Isa. xlix.13. -- I have
not adhered to our common translation, but endeavored to preserve, somewhat
more faithfully, the noble pathos, and inimitable energy, of the sacred
original. -- The love of GOD, manifested in a divine and dying Savior, is a
blessing of such inconceivable richness, as must render all acknowledgments
flat, and all encomiums languid: Yet, I think, the most poetical and most
emphatical celebration of that unspeakable instance of goodness, is contained
in this rapturous exclamation of the prophet: Which intimates, with a wonderful
majesty of sentiment, that even the whole compass of the inanimate creation,
could it be sensible of the benefit, and capable of delight, would express its
gratitude, in all these demonstrations of the most lively and exuberant joy.
for the LORD, by this precious gift, and this great salvation, has comforted
his people. -- A sacred historian has left it upon record, that, at the first
exhibition of this ravishing scene, there was with the angel who brought the
blessed tidings, a multitude of the heavenly host, praising GOD, and making the
concave of the skies resound with their hallelujahs. At the dawn of the Sun of
righteousness, when he was beginning to rise with healing in his wings, the
morning stars sang together, and all the sons of GOD shouted for joy. -- And
shall man, whom this gracious dispensation principally respects; shall man, who
is the center of all these gladdening rays; shall he have no heart to adore, no
anthem to celebrate, this Love without end, and without measure grace?

MILT.

How pure is the state of the sky, and how clear its aspect! clearer than the
limpid stream; purer than the transparent crystal; and more curiously fine
than the polished mirror. That stately ceiling; fretted with gold, and
stretched to an extent of many millions of leagues, is not disfigured with a
single flaw. That azure canopy, embroidered with stars, and spacious enough to
form a covering for unnumbered worlds, is without the least spot or wrinkle. --
Yet this, even this, will scarcely yield us so much as a faint representation
of the divine purity. GOD, is a GOD of matchless and transcendent excellency.
His ways are uprightness itself. His counsels and words are the very sanctity
of wisdom and of truth. The laws which he has given to universal nature, are
exquisitely contrived, and beyond all possibility of improvement. The precepts
which he has appointed for the human race, are a complete summary of all that
is honorable in itself, and perfective of the rational mind. -- Not the least
oversight in planning a series of events for all futurity. Not the least
maladministration, in managing the affairs of every age since time began; and
of every nation under the whole heavens. -- Pardon these disparaging
expressions. A negative perfection is far, far beneath thy dignity, O thou Most
Highest. O thou Most Highest! -- This expression occurs more than once in the
psalms used by the established church. It is, I think, one of those beauties,
which, because often exhibited, generally escape our notice. It is a
superlative formed on a superlative; and, though not strictly conformable to
grammatical rules, is nobly superior to them all. -- The language seems to be
sensible of its own deficiency, when the incomprehensible JEHOVAH is addressed,
or celebrated. Oppressed, as it were, with the glories of the subject, it
labors after a more emphatical manner of diction, than the ordinary forms of
speech afford. -- It is, if I rightly judge, one of those daring and happy
peculiarities of a masterly genius, which Mr. Pope so finely describes; and,
while he describes, exemplifies: Great wits sometimes may gloriously offend,
And rise to faults true critics dare not mend;
From vulgar bounds with brave disorder part,
And snatch a grace beyond the reach of art.
Essay on Criticism. St. Paul's -- (...) -- is a beautiful passage of the like
nature; which our translators have very properly rendered, less than the least
of all saints. -- His (...) is another instance of the same kind. But here the
English version fails. Far better is extremely flaccid, compared with the
nervous original. And I greatly question, whether it is possible to translate
the sentence, with equal conciseness, and with equal spirit. See Ephesians. iii.8.
Phil. i.23.
In all these instances; in all thy acts, and all thy attributes, thou art not
only holy, but " glorious in holiness."

So inconceivably holy is the LORD GOD of hosts, that he sees defilement even
in the brightness of the firmament. The living sapphire of the heavens, before
his majesty, loses its luster. Yea, the stars (though the most pure and
resplendent part of the heavens) are not pure in his sight. How much less man,
who, in his fallen and depraved state, is but as a worm, that crawls in the
corrupted carcass; and the son of man, who, by reason of his manifold actual
impurities, is, too justly compared to an insect, that wallows amidst stench
and putrefaction? Job xxv.5, 6. I submit it to the judgment of the learned,
whether this is not the true meaning of the text. -- It may, not perhaps,
recommend itself to the squeamishly nice critic; or to those persons who dream
of, I know not what, dignity in our fallen nature. But it seems, in preference
to every other interpretation, suitable to the sacred context; and is far, far
from being injurious to the character of that apostate race, which is
"altogether become abominable," and "is as an unclean thing." -- On this
supposition, there is not only an apparent, but a very striking contrast,
between the purity of GOD, and the pollution of man: The purity of the most
high GOD, which outshines the moon, and eclipses the stars; the pollution of
degenerate man, which, exclusive of a Savior, would render him as loathsome to
the all seeing eye, as the vilest vermin are in ours. -- Without assigning this
sense to the passage, I cannot discern the force of the antithesis, nor indeed
the propriety of the sentiment. Worms, in the general, give us an idea of
meanness and infirmity; not of defilement and impurity; unless they are
insects, hatched amidst putrefaction, and considered in such noisome
circumstances. -- The two words of the original, (...) and (...) are evidently
used in this signification, by Moses and Isaiah: By the former, to denote the
vermin which devoured the putrefied manna; by the latter, to express the
reptiles which swarm in the body that sees corruption. Exodus xvi.20. Isa.
xiv.11.
-- Is there not then abundant cause, for the most irreproachable and eminent
of mankind, to renounce all arrogant pretensions; to lay aside every assuming
air; to take nothing but shame and confusion to themselves? A holy prophet, and
a holy prince, felt such humbling impressions, from a glimpse of the uncreated
Purity. I abhor myself in dust and ashes, Job xlii.6.
was the declaration of the one: I am a man of unclean lips, Isa. vi.5.
the confession of the other. -- Should not this teach us all to adore the
divine mercies, for that precious purifying fountain, In that day there shall
be a fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanness. Zech. xiii.1.
which was foretold from the foundation of the world, but was opened at that
awful juncture when knotty whips tore the flesh; when ragged thorns mangled the
temples; when sharpened nails cut fresh sluices for the crimson current; when
the gash of the spear completed the dreadful work, and forthwith flowed there,
from the wounded heart, blood and water?

Especially, since GOD himself saw no blemish in his dear son. He looks to
the moon, and it shines not: Yet his all penetrating and jealous eye,
discerned nothing amiss, nothing defective, in our glorious Redeemer. Nothing
amiss? He bore this most illustrious testimony, concerning his holy child
JESUS: In him I am well pleased; I acquiesce, with entire complacency, and with
the highest delight, in his person; his undertaking, and the whole execution of
his office. -- How should this thought enliven our hopes, while the other
mortifies our pride? Should not our hearts spring within us, and even leap for
joy, at the repeated assurances given us by revelation, that such a divinely
excellent person is our Mediator? What apparent reason has every believer, to
adopt the blessed virgin's exclamation! My soul does magnify the LORD, for his
transcendent mercy; and my spirit rejoices, not in wide extended harvests,
waving over my fertile glebe; The inspired penman, from these two occasions of
distinguished joy, sets forth the incomparably greater delight which arises
from the gift of a Savior, and the blessing of redemption. Isa. ix. ver. 3.
compared with ver. 6.
not in armies vanquished, and leaving the peculiar treasure of nations for my
spoil; The inspired penman, from these two occasions of distinguished joy, sets
forth the incomparably greater delight which arises from the gift of a Savior,
and the blessing of redemption. Isa. ix. ver. 3. compared with ver. 6.
but an infinitely richer, nobler blessing, even in GOD my Savior. -- That a
person so sublime and perfect, has vouchsafed to become my surety; to give
himself for my ransom in the world below, and act as my advocate in the royal
presence above; yea, to make my recovery the reward of his sufferings; my final
felicity the honor of his mediatorial kingdom!

When an innumerable multitude This refers, not only to the planets which pass
and repass about our sun, but also to the other planetary worlds, which are
supposed to attend the several fixed stars.
of bodies, many of them more than a hundred thousand miles in diameter, The
diameter of Jupiter is calculated at 130,650 miles, while its orbit is reckoned
to consist of 895,134,000. Which computation, according to the maxims of
astronomy, and the laws of proportion, may, as is taken for granted in the
Contemplations, be applied to other planets revolving round other suns.
are all set in motion: -- When the orbits, in which they perform their
periodical revolutions, are extended at the rate of several hundreds of
millions: -- When each has a distinct and separate sphere for finishing his
vast circuit: -- When no one knows what it is to be cramped; but each most
freely expatiates in his unbounded career: -- When every one is placed at such
an immense remove from each other, that they appear to their respective
inhabitants only as so many spots of light: -- How astonishing must be the
expanse, which yields room for all those mighty globes, and their widely
diffused operations! To what prodigious lengths did the Almighty Builder
stretch his line, when he marked out the stupendous platform! -- I wonder at
such an immeasurable extent. My very thoughts are lost in this abyss of space.
But, be it known to mortals, be it never forgot by sinners, that in all its
most surprising amplitude, it is small, it is scanty, compared with the bounty
and the mercy of its Maker.

His bounty is absolutely without limits, By bounty, I mean not the actual
exercise, or the sensible effects of this excellency in the Deity. These are,
and always must be, through the immense perfection of the attribute, and the
necessary scantiness of the recipient, bounded. But I would be understood as
speaking of the divine power, and the divine will, to exert divine beneficence.
These can have no real, no imaginable limits: These, after a profusion of
blessings, distributed to unnumbered worlds, continued through unnumbered ages,
must still have more to bestow; for ever have more to bestow; infinitely more
to bestow, than it is possible for creation itself to receive.
and without end. The most lavish generosity cannot exhaust, or even diminish
his munificence. O! all ye tribes of men, or rather, all ye classes of
intelligent creatures, ye are not straitened in the liberality of your ever
blessed Creator; be not straitened in your own expectations. Open your mouth
wide, and he shall fill it, with copious and continual draughts from the cup of
joy. Your GOD, on whom is your whole dependence, is more than able, is more
than willing, to supply all your need, according to his riches in glory. --
When the LORD JEHOVAH is the giver, and his grace 2 Cor. ix.8. GOD is able to
make all grace abound toward you, that ye, having all sufficiency in all
things, may abound to every good work. -- How beautiful and emphatical is this
description! inferior to nothing, but that extent of ability, and those riches
of liberality, which it so eloquently celebrates. Does it not exhaust all the
powers of language, while it attempts to give us a specimen of the munificence
of the LORD?
the gift, let your wishes be unbounded, and your cravings insatiable. All that
created beings can possibly covet, is but a very small pittance of that unknown
happiness, which the everlasting Benefactor is ready to bestow. Suppose every
charitable disposition which warms the hearts of the human race, added to those
more enlarged affections which glow in heavenly bosoms; what were they all,
even in their highest exercise, compared with the benignity of the Divine
Nature? -- Bless me then, thou eternal Source of love; bless all that reverence
thy holy name, according to thy own most profuse goodness; whose great
prerogative it is to disdain all measure. O! bless us, in proportion to that
grace, the richness of which (unutterable by the tongues of men, and of angels)
was once spoken in the groans, and written in the wounds of thy expiring Son!

Spacious indeed are these heavens! Where do they begin? Where do they end?
What is their extent? Can angels answer my question? Have angels traveled the
vast circuit? Can angels measure the bounds of space? No; it is boundless, it is
unknown, it is amazing all. -- How charming then to reflect, that the mercy of
GOD is "greater than the heavens;" is more extensive than the dimensions of the
sky. Transporting reflection! let me indulge thee once more. Once more refers
to page 65. of Reflections on a Flower Garden. -- The following pages, to the
1236, exhibit a digressive view of the divine mercy. I thought it proper to
apprise my reader of this excursion, though I hope it will be needless to offer
an apology for enlarging upon a theme incomparably joyous. Who can complain of
tediousness, while I speak consolation to distressed, and recovery to ruined
creatures? The divine mercy is the sole fountain of all ou^ present and future
blessings. In conformity to this benign attribute, human hopes arise, and human
felicity flows. Who, therefore, can be weary of viewing and reviewing, when the
lengths and breadths of forgiving grace, are the ravishing prospect?
Let me think over the delightful displays of this lovely attribute; and, while
I admire the trophies of forgiving goodness, add one to the number. -- With
what amiable and affecting colors, is this represented in the parable of the
prodigal! What could induce that foolish youth to forsake his father's house?
Had he not been tenderly cherished by the good parent, and loaded with benefits
from his indulgent hand? Were not the restraints of parental government an easy
yoke; or rather a preservative from ruin? Notwithstanding every endearing
obligation, he revolts from his duty, and launches into such scandalous
irregularities, as were dishonorable to his family, and destructive to
himself. -- When necessity, not choice, but sharp necessity drove him to a
submissive return, does the injured father stand aloof, or shut his doors?
Quite the reverse. He espies him, while he is yet a great way off; and the
moment he beholds the profligate youth, he has compassion on him. His bowels
yearn; they "sound like an harp," touched with notes divinely soft. He never
once thinks of his ungracious departure, and infamous debaucheries. Pity,
parental pity, passes an act of oblivion; and, in one instant, cancels a series
of long continued provocations. -- So strong are the workings of fatherly
affection, that he is almost impatient to embrace the naked and destitute
wretch. The son's pace is slow, he arose and came; the father's is swift, he
sprung forth (aged as he was) and ran. And is there a single frown in his brow,
or one upbraiding word on his tongue? -- Instead of loathing the sordid
creature, or reproaching him for his odious excesses, he falls on his neck,
clasps him in his arms, and hugs him to his bosom. Instead of disowning the
riotous spendthrift, or rejecting him for his undutiful behavior, he receives
and welcomes him with kisses of delight. He rejoices at his return from
extravagance and vice, as he formerly rejoiced on the day of his nativity. --
When this companion of harlots opens his mouth, before he speaks, the father
hears. He interrupts him in the midst of his intended speech. The overflowings
of his compassionate heart can brook no delay. He seems to be uneasy himself,
till he has made the afflicted penitent glad with the assurance of his
acceptance, and the choicest of his favors. -- While the poor abashed offender
seeks nothing more than not to be abhorred, he is thoroughly reconciled, and
honored before the whole family. While he requests no other indulgence, than
only to be treated as the meanest servant, he is clothed with the best robe; he
is feasted with the fatted calf; he is caressed as the dearest of children. --
Was there ever so bright and winning a picture of the tenderest mercy, most
freely vouchsafed, even to the most unworthy of creatures? Yet thus, my soul,
and thus, my fellow sinner, will the LORD GOD of everlasting compassions
receive us, if, sensible of our misery, and thirsting for salvation, we turn to
him through JESUS CHRIST.

Where sin has abounded, says the proclamation from the court of Heaven, grace
does much more abound. -- Manasseh was a monster of barbarity; for he caused
his own children to pass through the fire, and filled Jerusalem with innocent
blood. Manasseh was an adept in iniquity; for he not only multiplied, and to an
extravagant degree, his own sacrilegious impieties, but he poisoned the
principles, and perverted the manners of his subjects, making them to do worse
than the most detestable of the heathen idolaters. See 2 Chronicles. xxxiii.
Yet, through this super-abundant grace, he is humbled; he is reformed; and
becomes a child of forgiving love, an heir of immortal glory. -- Behold that
bitter and bloody persecutor Saul, when breathing out threatenings, Acts ix.1.
(...), Soul yet breathing out threatening and slaughter. -- What a
representation is here of a mind, mad with rage, and abandoned to the fiercest
extremes of barbarity! I scarce know whether I am more shocked at the
persecutor's savage disposition, or charmed with the evangelist's lively
description. -- The adverb (...) seems referable to chap. viii. ver. 3. and
has, in this connection, a peculiar force. The havoc he had committed, the
inoffensive families he had already ruined, were not sufficient to assuage his
vengeful spirit. They were only a tas^e; which, instead of glutting the
bloodhound, made him more closely pursue the track, and more eagerly pant for
destruction. -- He is still athirst for violence and murder. So eager and
insatiable is his thirst, that he even breathes out threatening and slaughter.
His words are spears and arrows, and his tongue a sharp sword. It Is as natural
for him to menace the christians, as to breathe the air. -- Nay, they bleed
every hour, every moment, in the purposes of his rancorous heart. It is only
owing to want of power, that every syllable he utters, every breath he draws,
does not deal about deaths, and cause some of the innocent disciples to fall.
and bent upon slaughter, he worried the Lamb, and put to death the disciples
of JESUS. Who, upon the principles of human judgment, would not have pronounced
him a vessel of wrath, destined to unavoidable damnation? Nay, would not have
been ready to conclude, that if there were heavier chains, and a deeper dungeon
in the world of woe, they must surely be reserved for such an implacable enemy
of true godliness? Yet (admire and adore the inexhaustible treasures of grace!)
this Saul is admitted into the the goodly fellowship of the prophets; is
numbered with the noble army of martyrs; and makes a distinguished figure among
the glorious company of the apostles. -- The Corinthians were flagitious, even
to a proverb. Some of them wallowed in such abominable vices, and habituated
themselves to such outrageous acts of injustice, as were a reproach to human
nature. Yet, even these sons of violence, and slaves of sensuality, "were
washed; were sanctified; were justified:" 1 Cor. vi.9, 10, 11.
Washed in the precious blood of a dying Redeemer; sanctified by the powerful
operations of the Blessed Spirit; justified through the infinitely tender
mercies of a gracious GOD. Those who were once the burden of the earth, are now
the joy of Heaven, and the delight of angels.

There is another instance in scripture, which most loudly publishes that
sweetest of the divine names, The LORD, the LORD GOD, merciful and gracious
long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth; keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin. Exodus xxxiv.6, 7.
An instance this, which exceeds all the former; which exceeds whatever can be
imagined; which if I was to forget, the very stones might cry out, and sound it
in my ears: I mean the case of those sinners, who murdered the Prince of Peace,
and LORD of glory. -- These men could scarce have the shadow of an excuse for
their crime; hardly a circumstance to extenuate their guilt. They were well
acquainted with his exemplary conversation; they had often heard his heavenly
doctrines; they were almost daily spectators of his unequalled miracles. They
therefore had all possible reason to honor him, as the most illustrious of
beings; and to receive his Gospel, as the most inestimable of blessings. Yet,
notwithstanding all these engaging motives to love him, even above their own
lives, they seize his person; asperse his character; drag him before a heathen
tribunal; and extort a sentence of death against innocence and holiness itself.
Never was the vilest slave so contumeliously abused; nor the most execrable
mal^factor so barbarouly executed. The sun was confounded at the shocking
scene; and one cannot but wonder, how the avenging lightnings could withhold
their flashes. The earth trembled at the horrid deed; and why, why did it not
cleave asunder, and open a passage for such bloodthirsty miscreants into the
nethermost Hell? Shall these ever hope to obtain forgiveness from the righteous
Judge? Shall not these be consigned over to inexorable wrath, and the severest
torments? -- O the miraculous effects of divine grace! O the triumphant
goodness of GOD our Savior! Many, even of these impious wretches, at the
descent of the Holy Ghost, were convinced of their miserable state; were
wounded with penitential remorse; fled to the sanctuary of the cross; had their
pardon ratified by the baptismal seal; and, continuing in the apostles'
doctrine, were made partakers of the kingdom of Heaven: Where they now shine,
as so many everlasting monuments of most distinguished mercy; and receive
beatitude past utterance, from that very Redeemer, who once "with wicked hands
they crucified and slew."

Well might the prophet cry out, with a pleasing amazement, Who is a GOD like
unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by transgression! Mic. vii.18.
-- Let all flesh know assuredly; let all flesh rejoice greatly; that with the
LORD there is such mercy, and with his CHRIST such plentiful redemption -- And
O! for the voice of an archangel, to circulate the glad tidings through the
universe; that the American savage, as well as the European sage, may learn the
exceeding riches of grace in Christ: Through whose infinite satisfying
propitiation, all manner of sin, barbarity and blasphemy, are freely forgiven
unto men.

What a grand and majestic dome is the sky! Where are the pillars which
support the stately concave? What art, most exactly true, balanced the
pressure? What props of insuperable strength sustain the weight? How is that
immeasurable arch upheld, unshaken and unimpaired, while so many generations of
busy mortals have sunk, and disappeared, as bubbles upon the stream? -- If
those stars are of such an amazing bulk, how are they also fastened in their
lofty situation? By what miracle in mechanics, are so many thousands of
ponderous orbs kept from falling upon our heads! kept from dashing, both the
world to pieces, and its inhabitants to death? Are they hung in golden or
adamantine chains? Rest they their enormous* load on rocks of marble, or
columns of brass? -- No; they are pendulous in fluid either; yet are more
immoveably fixed, than if the everlasting mountains lent their forests for an
axletree, or their ridges for a basis. The Almighty Architect stretches out the
north, and its whole starry train, over the empty place. He hangs the earth,
and all the etherial globes, upon nothing. Job xxvi.7.
Yet are their foundations laid so sure, that they can "never be moved at any
time."

No unfit representation, to the sincere christian, of his final perseverance;
With regard to the final perseverence of the true believer, I am sensible this
point is not a little controverted. -- The sentiments which follow, are my
steadfast belief. It is by no means proper, in a work of this nature, to enter
upon a discussion of the subject: Neither have I room so much as to hint, what
might be urged for its support. Let my reader observe, that I am far from
delivering it as essential to christianity, or necessary to salvation. Millions
of the very contrary conviction, are, I doubt not, high in the favor of GOD,
and in a growing meetness for his heavenly kingdom. As I blame none for
rejecting, none, I hope, will be offended with me for espousing, this
particular doctrine. -- To be of different opinions, at least in some inferior
instances, seems an unavoidable consequence of our present state; where
ignorance, in part, cleaves to the wisest minds, and prejudice easily besets
the most impartial judgments. This may turn to our common advantage, and afford
room for the display and exercise of those healing virtues, moderation,
meekness, and forbearance. -- Let me only be permitted to ask, whether this
tenet does not evidently tend to establish the comfort of the christian, and to
magnify the fidelity of GOD our Savior? whether, far from countenancing sloth,
or encouraging remissness, to know that our labor shall not be in vain, is not
the most prevailing inducement to abound in the work of the LORD? 1 Cor. xv.58.

Is any one inclined to examine the reasons which made the author a proselyte
to this persuasion, he may find them displayed in the memorial delivered by
several select and eminent divines of the church of England, at the renowned
Synod of Dordt. -- (See Acta Synod. Dordrech. par. II. p. 246. of the Latin
edition, published in a single quarto volume.) -- Those who have no opportunity
of consulting the memoirs of that venerable assembly, I would refer to the
works of the indefatigable and very learned Turrettine, or to those of the
candid and elegant Witsius. -- Turret. tom. II. q. xvi. Wits. Oecon. lib. III.
chap. xiii.

The latest and fullest view of the point, which I ever remember to have met
with, in any of our English writers, is in the Limestreet lectures: Which are a
defense of several most important doctrines of the Gospel, and contained in two
octavo volumes; the united labors of nine modern divines; most of whom are
well known to the world by their other evangelical and useful writings. In
those lectures, the final perseverance of the saints is very particularly
stated, and, to my apprehension at least, most satisfactorily proved. The
arguments ^ally urged against ^t, are impartially considered; and I cannot but
think (with all due deference to the judgment of others) unanswerably confuted.

And here (not to swell this note any farther) I shall only just hint, that the
judicious Hooker (an authority, perhaps, as weighty and unexceptionable as any
that can well be produced) gives a solemn attestation to this tenet, in a short
discourse on the perpetuity of faith, subjoined to his Ecclesiastical Polity,
fol. edit.


such as points out the cause which effects it, and constitutes the pledge
which ascertains it. -- His nature is all enfeebled. He is not able, of
himself, to think a good thought. He has no visible safeguard, nor any
sufficiency of his own. And yet whole legions of formidable enemies are in a
confederacy to compass his ruin. The world lays unnumbered snares for his feet:
The devil is incessantly urging the siege, by a multitude of fiery darts, or
wily temptations: The flesh, like a perfidious inmate, under color of
friendship, and a specious pretense of pleasure, is always forward to betray
his integrity. -- But, amidst all these threatening circumstances, of personal
weakness, and imminent danger, an invisible aid is his defense. " I will uphold
thee," says the blessed GOD, with the right hand of my righteousness. Isa.
xli.10.
Comfortable truth! the arm, which fixes the stars in their order, and guides
the planets in their course, is stretched out to preserve the heirs of
salvation. " -- My sheep," adds the great Redeemer, are mine; and they shall
never perish; neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. John x.28.
What words are these! and did they come from HIM, who has all power in
Heaven, and on earth! and were they spoke to the weakest of the flock; to every
unfeigned follower of the great Shepherd? Then omnipotence itself must be
vanquished, before they can be destroyed, either by the seductions of fraud, or
the assaults of violence.

If you ask therefore, what security we have of enduring to the end, and
continuing faithful unto death? -- The very same that establishes the heavens,
and settles the ordinances of the universe. Can these be thrown into confusion?
Jer. xxxi.35, 36.
Then may the true believer draw back unto perdition. Can the sun be dislodged
from his sphere, and rush lawlessly through the sky? Then, and then only, can
the faith of GOD's elect Tit. i.2.
be finally overthrown. -- Be of good courage then, my soul; rely on those
divine succors which are so solemnly stipulated, so faithfully promised.
Though thy grace be languid as the glimmering spark; though the overflowings of
corruption threaten it with total extinction; yet, since the great JEHOVAH has
undertaken to cherish the dim principle, many waters cannot quench it, nor all
floods drown it. Nay, though it were feeble as the smoking flax, The tenderness
and faithfulness of GOD to his people, are finely pictured by the prophet
Isaiah, ch^p. xl^i. ver. 3. Which passage, because of its rich consolation, and
uncommon beauty, is deservedly adopted by St. Matthew, and ingrafted into the
system of evangelical truths. He will not himself break, nor suffer to be
broken by any other, the bruised reed; nor quench the smoking flax. Was it
possible to have chosen two more delicate and expressive representations? --
Could any image be more significant of a very infirm and enfeebled faith, than
the flexile reed, that bends before every wind; which, besides its natural
weakness, is made abundantly weaker by being bruised, and so is ready to fall
in pieces of itself? Or, could any thing with a more pathetical exactness,
describe the extreme imbecility of that other principle of divine life, l^ve?
The state of the flax, just beginning ^o burn, is liable to be put out by the
least blast: More liable still is the wick of the lamp, when it is not so much
as kindled into a glimmering flame, but only breathing smoke, and uncertain
whether it shall take fire or no: -- Yet true faith, and heavenly love, though
subsisting amidst such pitiable infirmities, will not be abandoned by their
great Author; shall not be extinguished by any temptation; but be maintained,
invigorated, and made finally triumphant. Matthew. xii.20.
goodness and faithfulness stand engaged to augment the heat; to raise the
fire, and feed the flame; till it beam forth, a lamp of immortal glory, in the
heavens.

As to the faithfulness of a covenanting GOD, this may be emblematically seen,
in the stability of the heavenly bodies, and the perpetuity of their motions.
Psalm. cxix.89, 90.
-- Those that are fixed or stationary, continue unalterable in their grand
elevations. No injurious shocks, no violence of conflicting elements, are able
to displace those everlasting hinges, on which dependent worlds revolve.
Through the whole flight of time, they recede not, so much as a hair's breadth,
from the precise central point of their respective systems. -- While the
erratick, or planetary, perform their prodigious stages, without any
intermission, or the least embarrassment. How soon, and how easily is the most
finished piece of human machinery disconcerted! But all the celestial movements
are so nicely adjusted; all their operations so critically proportioned; and
their mutual dependencies so strongly connected, that they prolong their
beneficial courses, throughout all ages. -- While mighty cities are overwhelmed
with ruin, and their very names lost in oblivion: While vast empires are swept
from their foundations, and leave not so much as a shadowy trace of their
ancient magnificence: While all terrestrial things are subject to vicissitude,
and fluctuating in uncertainty: These are permanent in their duration: These
are invariable in their functions: "Not one fails." -- Who doubts the
constant succession of day and night, or the regular returns of summer and
winter? And why, O! why shall we doubt the veracity of GOD, or distrust the
accomplishment of his holy word? Can the ordinances of Heaven depart? Then only
can GOD forget to be gracious, or neglect the performance of his promise. --
Nay, our LORD gives us yet firmer ground of affiance. He affords us a surer
bottom for our faith, than the fundamental laws of the universe. Heaven and
earth, he says, shall pass away; but my words shall not, in a single instance,
or in one tittle of their import, pass away. No; his sacred word, whatever may
obstruct it, whoever may oppose it, shall be fulfilled to the very uttermost.

O powerful word! How astonishing is its efficacy! When this word was issued
forth, a thousand worlds emerged out of nothing. Should the mighty orders be
repeated, a thousand more would spring into existence. By this word, the vast
system of created things is upheld, in constant and immutable perfection.
Should it give command, or cease to exert its energy, the universal frame would
be dissolved, and all nature revert to her original chaos. And this very word
is pledged for the safety, the comfort, the happiness of the godly. This
inviolable, this almighty word, speaks in all the promises of the Gospel. --
How strangely infatuated are our souls, that we should value it so little! What
infidels are we in fact, that we should depend upon it no more! Did it create
whatever has a being; and shall it not work faith in our breasts? Do unnumbered
worlds owe their support to this word; and shall it not be sufficient to buoy
up our souls in troubles, or establish them in trials? Is it the life of the
universe, and shall it be a dead letter to mankind?

If I wish to be heard when I implore heavenly blessings, is not this privilege
most clearly made over to my enjoyment in that well known text, Ask, and it
shall be given you? Matthew. vii.7.
-- If I long for the eternal Comforter to dwell in my heart, and sanctify my
nature, have I not an apparent title to this high prerogative, conferred in
that sweet assertive interrogation, How much more shall your heavenly Father
give the holy Spirit to those that ask him? Luke xi.13.
-- If I earnestly covet the inestimable treasures that are comprised in the
great IMMANUEL's mediation, can I have a firmer claim to the noble portion,
than is granted in that most precious scripture; Him that comes to me, I will
in no wise cast out? John vi.37.
-- What an assurance of being interested in these unspeakable mercies would I
desire? What form of conveyance, what deed of settlement, were it left to my
own option, should I choose? Here is the word of a King; the King immortal and
invisible; all whose declarations -- If these fa^l,
The pillar'd firmament is rottenness,
And earth's base built on stubble.
MILT. Comus.
are truth itself. -- If a monarch bestow immunities on a body of men, and
confirm them by an authentic charter, no one controverts, no one questions,
their ^ight to the royal favors. And why should we suspect the validity of
those glorious grants, which are made by the everlasting Sovereign of Nature;
which he has also ratified by an oath, and sealed with the blood of his Son? --
Corporations may be disfranchised, and charters revoked. Even mountains may be
removed, and stars drop from their spheres: But a tenure founded on the divine
promise, is unalienably secure; is lasting as eternity itself.

We have endeavored to spell a syllable of the Eternal Name, in the ancient
manuscript of the sky. We have catched a glimpse of the Almighty's glory, from
the luster of innumerable stars. But would we behold all his excellencies
portrayed in full perfection, and drawn to the very life, let us attentively
consider the REDEEMER. -- I observe there are some parts of the firmament, in
which the stars seem, as it were, to cluster. They are sown thicker, they lie
closer than usual, and strike the eye with redoubled splendor. Like the jewels
on a crown, they mingle their beams, and reflect an increase of brilliancy on
each other. -- Is there not such an assemblage, such a constellation of the
divine honors, most amiably effulgent in the blessed JESUS?

Does not infinite wisdom See the next note.
shine, with surpassing brigthness, in CHRIST? To the making of a world, there
was no obstacle; but to the saving of man, there seemed to be unsurmountable
bars. If the rebel is suffered to escape, where is the inflexible justice which
denounces "death as the wages of sin?" If the offender is thoroughly pardoned,
where is the inviolable veracity which has solemnly declared, the soul that
sins, shall die? These awful attributes are set in terrible array, and, like
an impenetrable battalion, oppose the salvation of apostate mankind. Who can
suggest a method to absolve the traitorous race; yet vindicate the honors of
almighty sovereignty? This is an intricacy, which the most exalted of finite
intelligences are unable to clear. -- But behold the unsearchable secret
revealed! revealed in the wonderful redemption, accomplished by a dying
Savior! So plainly revealed, that "he who runs may read;" and even babes
understand what minds of the deepest penetration could not contrive. -- The Son
of GOD, taking our nature, obeys the law, and undergoes death in our stead. By
this means, the threatened curse is executed in all its rigor, and free grace
is exercised in all its riches. Justice maintains her rights, and, with a
steady hand, administers impartial vengeance; while mercy dispenses her
pardons, and welcomes the repentant criminal into the tenderest embraces.
Hereby the seemingly thwarting attributes are reconciled. The sinner is saved,
not only in full consistence with the honor of the supreme perfections, but to
the most illustrious manifestation of them all.

Where does the divine power CHRIST, the wisdom of GOD, and the power of GOD. 1
Cor. i.24. -- To the intent that now, unto the principalities and powers in
heavenly places, might be known by the church (by the amazing contrivance, and
accomplishment of its redemption) the deep, extensive, and ((...)) greatly
diversified wisdom of GOD. Ephesians. iii.10.
so signally exert itself, as in the cross of CHRIST, and in the conquest of
grace? -- Our LORD, in his lowest state of humiliation, gained a more glorious
victory, than when, through the dividing sea, and the waste howling wilderness,
he rode upon his chariots and horses of salvation. When his hands were riveted
with irons to the bloody tree, he disarmed death of its sting, and plucked the
prey from the jaws of Hell. Then, even then, while he was crucified in
weakness, he vanquished the strong man, and subdued our most formidable
enemies. Even then, he spoiled principalities, triumphed over the powers of
darkness, and led captivity captive. -- Now he is exalted to his heavenly
throne, with what a prevailing efficacy does his grace go forth, "conquering,
and to conquer!" -- By this, the slaves of sin are rescued from their bondage,
and restored to the liberty of righteousness. By this, depraved wretches, whose
appetites were sensual, and their dispositions devilish, are not only renewed,
but renewed after the image of GOD, and made partakers of a divine nature.
Millions, millions of lost creatures are snatched, by the interposition of
grace, like brands from the burning, and translated into everlasting mansions,
shine brighter than the stars, shine bright as the sun, in the kingdom of their
Father.

Would you then see an incomparably more bright display of the divine
excellence, than the unspotted firmament, the spangles of heaven, of the golden
fountain of day exhibit, contemplate JESUS of Nazareth. He is the brightness of
his Father's glory, and the express image of his person. In his immaculate
nature, in his heavenly temper, in his most holy life, the moral perfections of
the Deity are represented to the highest advantage. In this sense, that saying
of our LORD is eminently true, He that has seen ME, has seen the FATHER. John
xiv.9.
-- Hark! how mercy, with her charming voice, speaks in all he utters. See! how
benevolence pours her choicest stores in all he does. Did ever compassion look
so amiably soft, as in those pitying tears which swelled his eyes, and trickled
down his che^ks, to bedew the rancour of his inveterate enemies? -- Was it
possible for patience to assume a form so lovely, as that sweetly winning
conduct, which bore the contradiction of sinners? Which entreated the obstinate
to be reconciled; besought the guilty not to die? -- In other things, we may
find some scattered rays of JEHOVAH's glory; but in CHRIST they are all
collected and united. In CHRIST they beam forth with the strongest radiance,
with the most delightful effulgence. Out of Sion, and in Sion's great Redeemer,
has GOD appeared in perfect beauty.

Search then, my soul, above all other pursuits, search the records of
redeeming love. Let these be the principal objects of thy study. Here employ
thyself with the most unwearied assiduity. -- In these are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Coloss. ii.3. -- Not a mean degree, but a
treasure; not one treasure, but many; not many only, but all treasures of true
wisdom and saving knowledge, are in CHRIST, and his glorious Gospel. -- The
transcendent excellency of those treasures, seems to be finely intimated in
that other expression (...), hid; (which may be interpreted by the Hebrew
(...), Job iii.21.) laid up, with the utmost care, and the greatest safety. Not
left at all adventures, to be stumbled upon by every giddy wanderer, or to fall
into the arms of the yawning sluggard; but, like jewels of the brightest
luster, or riches of the highest value, kept in store, to adorn and reward the
diligent searcher.
Such wisdom, as charms and astonishes the very angels; engages their closest
attention, and fills them with the deepest adoration. This, I believe, is the
import of the apostle's language, though it is not a literal translation of
(...). 1 Pet. i.12. -- I never had such a lively apprehension of the beautiful
significancy of the last word, as when I have attended a dissection of some
part of the animal body. In order to discern the minutiae of the admirable
frame, the latent wonders of art and mechanism, the eye is so sharpened, and
its application so intensely bended, as gives a very just experimental comment
on that expressive phrase, (...). -- With such earnest attention is the
everlasting Gospel contemplated by the angelick orders! How much more, if it
were possible, does it deserve the devout and incessant consideration of human
minds? since, by them, it is not only to be speculated as a bright and
ravishing display of the divine attributes, but to be applied to their fallen
nature, as a most benign scheme of recovering grace; as the sure and only
method of obtaining life and immortality.
Such knowledge, as qualifies the possessor, if not for offices of dignity on
earth, yet for the most honorable advancements in the kingdom of Heaven.
Disunited from which knowledge, all application is but elaborate impertinence;
and all science, no better than pompous ignorance. -- These records contain the
faultless model of duty, and the noblest motives to obedience. Nothing so
powerful to work a lively faith, and a joyful hope, as an attentive
consideration of our LORD's unutterable merits. Nothing so sovereign to
antidote the pestilential influence of the world, and deliver our affections
from a slavery to ignoble objects, as an habitual remembrance of his extreme
agonies. The genuine, the ever fruitful source of all morality, is the
unfeigned love of CHRIST; and the cross, the cross is the appointed And I, says
our LORD, if I be lifted up from the earth, and extended on the cross, will
draw all men unto me; will give such a rich and transcendent display of my
love, as shall constitute the most powerful and prevailing attractive of
theirs. John xii.32.
altar, from which we may fetch a coal, Alluding to Isaiah vi.6.
to enkindle this sacred fire.

Behold, therefore, the man; the matchless and stupendous man; whose practice
was a pattern of the most exalted virtue, and his person the mirror of every
divine perfection. Examine the memoirs of his heavenly temper, and exemplary
conversation. Contemplate that choir of graces which were associated in his
mind, and shed the highest luster on all his actions. Familiarize to thy
thoughts his instructive discourses, and enter into the very spirit of his
refined doctrines; that the graces may be transfused into thy breast, and the
doctrines transcribed in thy life. -- Follow him to Calvary's horrid eminence;
to Calvary's fatal catastrophe; where innocence, dignity, and merit, were made
perfect through sufferings; each shining, with all possible splendor, through
the tragical scene; somewhat like his own radiant bow, then glowing with the
greatest beauty, when appearing on the darkest cloud. -- Be thy most constant
attention fixed on that lovely and sorrowful spectacle. Behold the spotless
victim nailed to the tree, and stabbed to the heart. Hear him pouring out
prayers for his murderers, before he poured out his soul for transgressors. See
the wounds that stream with forgiveness, and bleed balm for a distempered
world. O! see the justice of the Almighty and his goodness; his mercy and his
vengeance; every tremendous and gracious attribute manifested, manifested with
inexpressible glory, in that most ignominious, yet grandest of transactions.

Since God is so inconceivably great, as these his mavelous works declare:
Since the great Sovereign sends ten thousand worlds,
To tell us, he resides above them all,
In glory's unapproachable recess -- For this quotation, and several valuable
hints, I acknowledge myself indebted to those beautiful and sublime poems,
entitled, Night Thoughts: Of which I shall only say, that I receive fresh
pleasure and richer improvement, from every renewed perusal; -- and, I think, I
shall have reason to bless the indulgent Bestower of all wisdom, for those
instructive and animating compositions, even in my last moments. Than which
nothing can more emphatically speak their superior excellence, nor give a more
solid satisfaction to their worthy author. -- Happy should I think myself, if
these little sketches of contemplative devotion might be honored with the most
inferior degree of the same success; might receive a testimony, not from the
voice of same, but from the dying lips of some edified christian!

how can we forbear hastening with Moses, bowing ourselves to the earth, and
worshipping?

O! what an honorable, as well as advantageous employ, is prayer! --
Advantageous. By prayer, we cultivate that improving correspondence with
JEHOVAH; we carry on that gladdening intercourse with his SPIRIT, which must
begin here, in order to be completed in eternity. -- Honorable. By prayer we
have access to that mighty Potentate, whose scepter sways universal nature, and
whose rich regalia fill the skies with luster. Prayer places us in his presence
chamber; while "the blood of sprinkling" procures us a gracious audience.

Shall I then blush to be found prostrate before the throne of grace? Shall I
be ashamed to have it known, that I offer up social supplications in the
family, or am conscientious in observing my private retirements? Rather let me
glory in this unspeakable privilege. Let me reckon it the noblest posture, to
fall low on my knees before his footstool; and the highest honor, to enjoy
communion with his most exalted Majesty. -- Incomparably more noble, than to
sit in person, on the triumphal chariot, or to stand in effigy, amidst the
temple of worthies.

Most inestimable, in such a view, is that promise, which so often occurs in
the prophetic writings, and is the crowning benefit of the new covenant, I
will be thy God. Heb. viii.10.
-- Will this Supremely excellent, and Almighty Being vouchsafe to be my
portion? to settle upon a poor sinner, not the heritage of a country, not the
possession of the whole earth, but his own ever blessed self? May I then,
through his free condescending grace, and the unknown merits of his Son, look
upon all these infinitely noble attributes as my treasure? May I regard the
wisdom, which superintends such a multitude of worlds, as my guide; the power
which produced, and preserves them in existence, as my guard; the goodness
which, by an endless communication of favors, renders them all so many
habitations of happiness, as my exceeding great reward? -- What a fund of
felicity is included in such a blessing! How often does the Israelitish prince
exult in the assurance, that this unutterable and boundless good is his own?
Interested in this, he bids defiance to every evil that can be dreaded, and
rests in certain expectation of every blessing that can be desired. The LORD is
my light, and my salvation; whom then shall I fear? The LORD (with an air of
exultation, he repeats both his affiance, and his challenge) is the strength of
my life; of whom then shall I be afraid? Psalm. xxvii.1.
Nothing so effectual as this appropriating faith, to inspire a dignity of mind
superior to transitory trifles; or to create a calmness of temper, unalarmed
by vulgar fears, unappalled by death itself. -- The LORD is my shepherd, says
the same truly gallant and heroic personage; therefore shall I lack nothing.
Psalm. xxiii.1.
How is it possible he should suffer want, who has the allsufficient fullness
for his supply? So long as unerring wisdom is capable of contriving the means;
so long as uncontrollable power is able to execute them; such a one cannot fail
of being safe and happy; whether he continue amidst the vicissitudes of time,
or depart into the unchangeable eternity.

Here let us stand a moment, and humbly contemplate this great GOD, together
with ourselves, in a relative view. -- If we reflect on the works of material
nature, their number incomprehensible, and their extent unmeasurable; each of
them apart, so admirably framed; the connexions of the whole so exquisitely
regulated, and all derived from one and the same glorious Agent. -- If we
recollect the far more noble accomplishments of elegant taste, and discerning
judgment; of refined affections, and exalted sentiments, which are to be found
among the several orders of intelligent existence; and all of them flowing in
rich emanations from the one sole Fountain of intellectual light: -- If we
farther consider this Author of material beauty, and moral excellency, as a
guardian, a governor, and benefactor to all his creatures; supporting the
whole system, and protecting each individual, by an ever watchful providence;
presiding over the minutest affairs, and causing all events to terminate in the
most extensive good; heaping, with unremitted liberality, his benefits upon
every capable object, and making the circuit of the universe a seminary of
happiness: -- Is it possible for the human heart, under such captivating views,
to be indifferent toward this most benign, most bountiful Original of being
and of bliss? Can any be so immersed in stupidity, as to say unto the Almighty
-- in the language of an irreligious temper, and licentious life, to say,
Depart from us; we implore not thy favor, nor desire the knowledge of thy
ways? -- Wonder, O heavens! be amazed, O earth! and let the inhabitants of both
express their astonishment at this unparalleled complication of disingenuous,
ungrateful, destructive perverseness!

If we consider our fallen and imperfect state; frail in our bodies, enfeebled
in our minds, in every part of our constitution, and in all the occurrences of
life, "like a tottering wall, or a broken hedge." -- If we survey our indigent
and infirm state, without holiness, without spiritual strength; our possession
of present conveniences, entirely dependent on GOD's sovereign pleasure; yea,
forfeited, justly forfeited, with every future hope, by a thousand aggravated
iniquities. -- If we add the various disasters of our condition; agitated as we
are by tumultuous passions; oppressed with dispiriting fears; held in suspense
by a variety of perplexing Perplexing. -- Those who read the original language
of the New Testament, are sufficiently apprised, that such is the significancy
of that benevolent dissuasive urged by our LORD, (...), Matthew. vi.25. -- I beg
leave, for the sake of the unlearned reader, to observe, that our translation,
though for the most part faithful and excellent, has here misrepresented our
Divine Master's meaning. Take no thought for your food, for your raiment, for
your bodily welfare, is not only not the true sense, but the very reverse of
this scriptural doctrine. We are required to take a prudent and moderate
thought for the necessaries of life. The sluggard who neglecte^ his decent
precaution, is severely reprimanded; is sent to one (...) the meanest animals,
to blush for his folly, and learn discretion fr^ her conduct, Prove. vi.6. Our
Savior's precept, and the exact sense of his expression, is, Take no anxious
thought; indulge no perplexing care; no such care as may argue an unreasonable
distrust of Providence, or may rend and tear your minds with distressing, with
pernicious solicitude.
cares; liable to pains, and exposed to troubles; troubles from every quarter;
troubles of every kind: -- Can we, amidst so many wants, under such deplorable
infirmities, and subject to such disastrous accidents -- can we be unconcerned,
whether GOD's omnipotent, irresistible, all conducting hand be against us, or
for us? Imagination itself shudders at the thought! -- Can we rest satisfied,
without a well grounded persuasion, that we are reconciled to this supreme
LORD, and the object of his unchangeable goodness? -- If there be an abandoned
wretch, whose apprehensions are so fatally blinded; who is so utterly lost to
all sense of his duty and of his interest; let me bewail his misery, while I
abhor his impiety. Bewail his misery; though popularity, with her choicest
laurels, adorn his brow; though affluence, with her richest delicacies, load
his table; though half a nation, or half a world, conspire to call him happy.

May I, by a believing application, solace myself in this everlasting source of
love, perfection, and joy! Grant me this request, and I ask no more. -- Only
that I may expect, not with a reluctant anxiety, but with a ready cheerfulness,
the arrival of that important hour, when this veil of flesh shall drop, and the
shadows of mortality flee away. When I shall no longer complain of obscure
knowledge, languid affections, and imperfect fruition -- but shall see the
uncreated and immortal Majesty. See him, not in this distant and unaffecting
method of reasoning from his works; but with the most clear and direct
intuition of the mind. -- When I shall love him, not with a cold and contracted
spirit; but with the most lively and enlarged emotions of gratitude. -- When I
shall incessantly enjoy the light of his countenance; and be united,
inseparably united to his all glorious GODHEAD. -- Take, ye ambitious, unenvied
and unopposed, take to yourselves the toys of state. May I be enabled to
rejoice in this blessed hope; and to triumph in that amiable, that adorable,
that delightful name, the LORD MY GOD! And I shall scarce bestow a thought, on
the splendid pageantry of the world, unless it be to despise its empty pomp,
and to pity its deluded admirers.

All these bodies, though immense in their size, and almost infinite in their
multitude, are obedient to the divine command. The GOD of wisdom tells their
numbers, and is intimately acquainted with their various properties. The GOD of
power calls them all by their names, and assigns them whatsoever office he
pleases. -- He marshals all the starry legions with infinitely greater ease,
and nicer order, than the most expert general arranges his disciplined troops.
He appoints their posts; he marks their route; he fixes the time for their
return. The posts which he appoints, they occupy without fail. In the route
which he settles, they persevere, without the least deviation. And to the
instant The planets, and all the innumerable host of heavenly bodies, perform
their courses and revolutions, with so much certainty and exactness, as never
once to fail; but, for almost 6000 years, come constantly about to the same
period, in the hundredth part of a minute. STACKHOUSE's Hist. Bible.
which he fixes for their return, they are precisely punctual. -- He has given
them a law, which, through a long revolution of ages, shall not be broken,
unless his sovereign will interposes for its repeal. Then indeed the motion of
the celestial orbs is controlled; their action remains suspended; or their
influence receives a new direction. -- The sun, at his creation, issued forth
with a command to travel perpetually through the heavens. Since which, he has
never neglected to perform the great circuit, rejoicing as a giant to run his
race. But, when it is requisite to accomplish the purposes of divine love, the
orders are countermanded; the flaming courier remits his career; stands still
in Gibeon; This is spoken in conformity to the scripture language, and
according to the common notion. With respect to the power which effected the
alteration, it is much the same thing, and alike miraculous, whether the sun or
the earth be supposed to move.
and, for the convenience of the chosen people, holds back the falling day. --
The moon was dispatched, with a charge never to intermit her revolving course,
till day and night come to an end. But when the children of Providence are to
be favored with an uncommon continuance of light, she halts in her march;
makes a solemn pause in the valley of Ajalon; Josh. x.12, 13. -- The prophet
Habakkuk, according to his lofty manner, celebrates this event; and points out,
in very poetical diction, the design of so surprising a miracle. -- The sun and
the moon stood still in their habitation: In the light, the long continued and
miraculous light, thy arrows, edged with destruction, walked on their awful
errand; in the clear shining of the day, protracted for this very purpose, thy
glittering-spear, launched by thy people, but guided by thy hand, sprung to its
prey. Hab. iii.11.
and delays to bring on her attendant train of shadows. -- When the enemies of
the LORD are to be discomfited, the stars are levied into the service; the
stars are armed and take the field; the stars, in their courses, fought against
Sisera. Judge. v.20. -- The scriptural phrase fought against, will, I hope, be a
proper warrant for every expression I have used on this occasion. -- The
passage is generally supposed to signify, that some very dreadful meteors
(which the stars were thought to influence) such as fierce flashes of
lightning, impetuous showers of rain, and rapid storms of hail, were employed
by the Almighty, to terrify, annoy, and overthrow the enemies of Israel. If so,
there cannot be a more clear and lively paraphrase on the text, than those fine
lines of a Jewish writer. -- His severe wrath shall HE sharpen for a sword; and
the world shall fight with him against the ungodly. Then shall the right aiming
thunderbolts go abroad; and from the clouds, as from a well drawn bow, shall
they fly to their mark. And hail stones, full of wrath, shall be cast out of a
stone bow; and the water of the sea shall rage against them; and the floods (as
was the case of the river Kishon) shall cruelly drown them; yea, a mighty wind
shall stand up against them; and, like a storm, shall blow them away. Wisd.
v.20, 21, 22, 23.


So dutiful is material nature! So obsequious, in all her forms, to her
Creator's pleasure! -- The bellowing thunders listen to his voice; and the
vollied lightnings observe the direction of his eye. The flying storm, and
impetuous whirlwind, wear his yoke. The raging waves revere his nod; they shake
the earth; they dash the skies; yet never offer to pass the limits which he has
prescribed. -- Even the planetary spheres, though vastly larger than this wide
extended earth, are in his hand, as clay in the hands of a potter. Though,
swifter than the northern blast, they sweep the long tracts of either; yet are
they guided by his reins, and execute whatever he enjoins. -- All those
enormous globes of central fire, which beam through the boundless azure, in
comparison of which, an army of planets, were like a swarm of summer insects;
those, even those, are conformable to his will, as the melting wax to the
impressed seal. -- Since all, ALL is obedient, throughout the whole ascent of
things, shall man be the only rebel against the Almighty Maker? Shall these
unruly appetites, reject his government, and refuse their allegiance? Shall
these headstrong passions, break loose from divine restraint, and run wild, in
exorbitant sallies, after their own imaginations?

O my soul, be stung with remorse, and overwhelmed with confusion, at the
thought! Is it not a righteous thing, that the blessed GOD should sway the
scepter, with the most absolute authority, over all the creatures which his
power has formed? especially over those creatures, whom his distinguishing
favor has endued with the noble principle of reason, and made capable of a
blissful immortality? Sure, if all the ranks of inanimate existence conform to
their Maker's decree, by the necessity of their nature, this more excellent
race of beings, should pay their equal homage, by the willing compliance of
their affections. This argument, I acknowledge, is not absolutely conclusive:
But it is popular and striking. Nor can I think myself obliged, in such a work,
where fancy bears a considerable sway, to proceed always with the caution and
exactness of a disputer in the schools. If there be some appearance of analogy
between the fact and the inference, it seems sufficient for my purpose; though
the deduction should not be necessary, nor the process strictly syllogistical.
-- One of the apostolic fathers has an affecting and sublime paragraph, which
runs entirely in this form: (...). The sun, the moon, and the starry choir,
without the least deviation, and with the utmost harmony, perform the
revolutions appointed them by the supreme decree. From which remark, and
abundance of other similar instances, observable in the economy of nature, he
exhorts christians to a cordial unanimity among themselves, and a dutiful
obedience to GOD. Vid. Clem. Roman. 1 ep. ad. Corinth. sect. 20. -- See also a
beautiful ode in Dr. Watts's Lyrick Poems, entitled, The Comparison and
Complaint, which turns upon this very thought,
-- Come then, all ye faculties of my mind; come all ye powers of my body; give
up yourselves, without a moment's delay, without the least reserve, to his
governance. Stand, like dutiful servants, at his footstool; in an everlasting
readiness, to do whatsoever he requires; to be whatsoever he appoints; to
further, with united efforts, the purposes of his glory in this earthly scene;
or else to separate, without reluctance, at his summons; the one, to sleep in
the silent dust; the other, to advance his honor, in some remoter colony of
his kingdom. -- Thus may I join with all the works of the LORD, in all places
of his dominion, to recognize his unversal supremacy; and proclaim him
Sovereign of souls, as well as Ruler of worlds.

At my first coming abroad, all these luminaries were eclipsed by the
overpowering luster of the sun. They were all placed in the very same stations,
and played the same sprightly beams, yet not one of them was seen. As the
daylight wore away, and the sober shades advanced, Hesperus, who leads the
starry train, disclosed his radiant forehead, and catched my eye. While I stood
gazing on his bright and beautiful aspect, several of his attendants peeped
through the blue curtains. Scarce had I turned to observe these fresh
emanations of splendor, but others dropped the veil; others stole into view.
When lo! faster and more numerous, multitudes sprung from obscurity; they
poured in shining troops, and in sweet confusion, over all the empyrean plain;
till the firmament seemed like one vast constellation, and a flood of glory
burst from all the skies.

Is not such the rise, and such the progress of a true conversion, in the
prejudiced infidel, or inattentive sinner? During the period of his vainer
years, a thousand interesting truths lay utterly undiscovered; a thousand
momentous concerns were entirely disregarded. But when divine grace dissipates
the delusive glitter which dazzled his understanding, and beguiled his
affections; then he begins to discern, dimly to discern the things which belong
unto his peace. Some admonition of scripture darts conviction into his soul, as
the glimmering of a star pierces the gloom of night. -- Then, perhaps, another
awful, or cheering text, impresses terror, or diffuses comfort. A threatening
alarms his fears, or a promise awakens his hopes. This, possibly, is succeeded
by some afflictive dispensation of Providence, and improved by some edifying
and instructive conversation: All which is established as to its continuance,
and enlarged as to its influence, by a diligent study of the sacred word. -- By
this means, new truths continually pour their evidence. Scenes of refined and
exalted, but hitherto unknown delight, address him with their attractives: New
desires take wing; new pursuits are set on foot: A new turn of mind forms his
temper; a new habit of conversation regulates his life. In a word, old things
are passed away, and all things become new. He who was sometimes darkness, is
now light, and life, and joy in the LORD.

The more attentively I view the crystal concave, the more fully I discern the
richness of its decorations. Abundance of minuter lights, which lay concealed
from a superficial notice, are visible on a closer examination; especially in
those tracts of the sky, which are called the galaxy, and are distinguishable
by a sort of milky path. There the stars are crowded, rather than disseminated.
The region seems to be all on a blaze, with their blended rays. -- Besides this
vast profusion which, in my present situation, the eye discovers; was I to make
my survey from any other part of the globe, lying nearer the southern pole, I
should behold a new choir of starry bodies, which have never appeared within
our horizon. -- Was I (which is still more wonderful) either here or there, to
view the firmament with the virtuoso's glass, I should find a prodigious
multitude of flaming orbs, which, immersed in depths of either, escape the
keenest unassisted sight. Come forth, O man, yon azure round survey,
And view those lamps, which yield eternal day.
Bring forth thy glasses: Clear thy wondering eyes:
Millions beyond the former millions rise:
Look farther; -- millions more blaze from remoter skies.
See an ingenious poem, entitled, The Universe.
-- Yet in these various situations, even with the aid of the telescopick tube,
I should not be able to descry the half, perhaps not a thousandth part, of
those majestic luminaries which the vast expansive heavens contain. How noble,
considered in this view, are the celebrations of the divine Majesty, which
frequently occur in the sacred writings! It is the LORD that made the Heavens.
Psalm. xcvi.5. -- What a prodigious dignity does such a sense of things give to
that devout ascription of praise! Thou, even thou, art LORD alone; thou have
made Heaven, the Heaven of heavens, with all their host. Nehem. ix.6. --
Examined by this rule, the beautiful climax in our inspired hymn, is sublime
beyond compare. Praise HIM, sun and moon: Praise HIM, all ye stars of light:
Praise HIM, ye Heavens of heavens. Psalm. cxlviii.3, 4.
-- So, the more diligently I pursue my search into those oracles of eternal
truth, the scriptures, I perceive a wider, a deeper, an ever increasing fund of
spiritual treasures. I perceive the brighter strokes of wisdom, and the richer
displays of goodness; a more transcendent excellency in the illustrious
Messiah, and a more deplorable vileness in fallen man; a more immaculate purity
in GOD's law, and more precious privileges in his Gospel. Yet, after a course
of study ever so assiduous, ever so prolonged, I should have reason to own
myself a mere babe in heavenly knowledge; or, at most, but a puerile
proficient, in the school of CHRIST.

After all my most accurate inspection, those starry orbs appear but as
glittering points. Even the planets, though so much nearer our earthly mansion,
seem only like burning bullets. If then, we have such imperfect apprehensions
of visible and material things, how much more scanty and inadequate must be our
notions of invisible and immortal objects! -- We behold the stars. Though every
one is incomparably bigger than the globe we inhabit, yet they dwindle, upon
our survey, into the most diminutive forms. Thus, we see by faith the glories
of the blessed JESUS, the atoning efficacy of his death, the justifying merit
of his righteousness, and the joys which are reserved for his followers. But
alas! even our most exalted ideas are vastly below the truth: As much below the
truth, as the report which our eyes make of those celestial edifices, is
inferior to their real grandeur. -- Should we take in all the magnifying
assistances which art has contrived, those luminous bodies would elude our
skill, and appear as small as ever. Should an inhabitant of earth travel
toward the cope of Heaven, and be carried forwards in his aerial journey, more
than a hundred and sixty millions of miles; This, incredible as it may seem, is
not a mere supposition, but a real fact. For, about the twenty first of
December, we are above 160,000,000 of miles nearer the northern parts of the
sky, than we were at the twenty first of June: And yet, with regard to the
stars situate in that quarter, we perceive no change in their aspect, nor any
augmentation of their magnitude.
even in that advanced situation, those oceans of flame would look no larger
than radiant specks. -- In like manner, conceive ever so magnificently of the
Redeemer's honors, and of the bliss which he has purchased for his people, yet
you will fall short. Raise your imagination higher; stretch your invention
wider; give them all the scope which a soaring and excursive fancy can take;
still your conceptions will be extremely disproportionate to their genuine
perfections. -- Vast are the bodies which roll in the expanse of heaven: Vaster
far are those fields of either, through which they run their endless round: But
the excellency of JESUS, and the happiness laid up for his servants, are
greater than either -- than both -- than all. An inspired writer calls the
former, "the unsearchable riches of CHRIST;" and styles the latter, an
exceeding great and eternal weight of glory.

If those stars are so many inexhaustible magazines of fire, and immense
reservoirs of light, there is no reason to doubt, but they have some very grand
uses, suitable to the magnificence of their nature. To specify, or explain the
particular purposes they answer, is altogether impossible in our present state
of distance and ignorance. This, however, we may clearly discern; they are
disposed in that very manner, which is most pleasing and most serviceable to
mankind. -- They are not placed at an infinite remove, so as to lie beyond our
sight; neither are they brought so near our abode, as to annoy us with their
beams. We see them shine on every side. The deep azure, which serves them as a
ground, heightens their splendor. At the same time, their influence is gentle,
and their rays are destitute of heat. So that we are surrounded with a
multitude of fiery globes, which beautify and illuminate the firmament, without
any risque, either to the coolness of our night, or the quiet of our repose. --
Who can sufficiently admire that wondrous benignity, which, on our account,
strews the earth with blessings of every kind, and vouchsafes to make the very
heavens subservient to our delight?

It is not solely to adorn the roof of our palace with costly gildings, that
GOD commands the celestial luminaries to glitter through the gloom. We also
reap considerable benefits from their ministry. -- They divide our time, and
fix its solemn periods. They settle the order of our works, and are, according
to the destination mentioned in sacred writ, for signs, and for seasons: for
days, and for years. The returns of heat and cold alone, would have been too
precarious a rule. But these radiant bodies, by the variation, and also by the
regularity of their motions, afford a method of calculating, absolutely
certain, and sufficiently obvious. By this the farmer is instructed when to
commit his grain to the ^urrows, and how to conduct the operations of
husbandry. By this the sailor knows when to proceed on his voyage with least
peril, and how to carry on the business of navigation with most success.

Why should not the christian, the probationer for eternity, learn from the
same monitors, to number -- for nobler purposes, to number his days; and duly
to transact the grand, grand affairs of his everlasting salvation? Since GOD
has appointed so many bright measures of our time, to determine its larger
periods, and to minute down its ordinary stages, sure, this most strongly
inculcates its value, and should powerfully prompt us to improve it. -- Behold!
the supreme LORD marks the progress of our life, in that most conspicuous
calendar above. Does not such an ordination tell us, and in the most emphatical
language, that our life is given for use, not for waste? That no portion of it
is delivered, but under a strict account; that all of it is entered as it
passes, in the divine register; and, therefore, that the stewards of such a
talent, are to expect a future reckoning? -- Behold! the very heavens are
bidden to be the accomptants of our years, and months, and days. O! may this
induce us to manage them with a vigilant frugality; to part with them as misers
with their hoarded treasure, warily and circumspectly; and, if possible, as
merchants with their rich commodities, not without an equivalent, either in
personal improvement, or social usefulness!

How bright the starry diamonds shine? The ambition of eastern monarchs could
imagine no distinction more noble and sublime, than that of being likened to
those beaming orbs. Numb. xxiv.17. Dan. viii.10.
-- They form night's richest dress, and sparkle upon her sable robe, like
jewels of the finest luster. Like jewels! I wrong their character. The lucid
stone has no brilliancy; quenched is the flame even of the golden topaz,
compared with those glowing decorations of Heaven. -- How widely are their
radiant honors diffused! No nation so remote, but sees their beauty, and
rejoices in their usefulness. They have been admired by all preceding
generations; and every rising age will gaze on their charms, with renewed
delight. -- How animating then, is that promise, made to the faithful ministers
of the Gospel! They that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars
forever and ever. Dan. xii.3.
Is not this a most winning encouragement "to spend and be spent," in the
service of souls? Methinks the stars beckon as they twinkle. Methinks they show
me their splendours, on purpose to inspire me with alacrity, in the race set
before me; on purpose to enliven my activity, in the work that is given me to
do. -- Yes; ye majestic monitors, I understand your meaning. If honor has any
charms; if true glory, the glory which comes from GOD, is any attractive; you
display the most powerful incitements to exercise all assiduity in my holy
vocation. I will, henceforth, observe your intimation, and, when zeal becomes
languid, have recourse to your heavenly lamps. If so be I may rekindle its
ardour at those inextinguishable fires.

Of the polar star, it is observable, that while other luminaries alter their
situation, this seems invariably fixed. I speak in conformity to the appearance
of the object. For though this remarkable star revolves round the pole, its
motion is so slow, and the circle it describes so small, as render both the
revolution, and change of situation, hardly perceivable.
While other luminaries, now mount the battlements of Heaven, and appear upon
duty; now retire beneath the horizon, and resign to a fresh set, the watches of
the night: this never departs from its station; this, in every season,
maintains an uniform position; and is always to be found, in the same tract of
the northern sky. -- How often has this beamed bright intelligence on the
sailor, and conducted the keel to its desired haven! In early ages, those who
went down to the sea in ships, and occupied their business in great waters, had
scarce any other sure guide for their wandering vessel. This therefore they
viewed, with the most solicitous attention. By this they formed their
observations, and regulated their voyage. When this was obscured by clouds, or
inveloped in mists, the trembling mariner was bewildered on the watery waste.
His thoughts fluctuated, as much as the floating surge; and he knew not where
he was advanced, or whither he should steer. But, when this auspicious star
broke through the gloom, it dissipated the anxiety of his mind, and cleared up
his dubious passage. He reassumed, with alacrity, the management of the helm,
and was able to shape his course, with some tolerable degree of satisfaction
and certainty.

Such, only much clearer in its light, and much surer in its direction, is the
holy wo^d of GOD, to those myriads of intellectual beings, who are bound for
the eternal shores; who, embarked in a vessel of feeble flesh, are to pass the
waves of this tempestuous and perilous world. In all difficulties, those sacred
pages shed an encouraging ray; in all uncertainties, they suggest the right
determination, and point out the proper procedure. What is still a more
inestimable advantage, they, like the star which conducted the eastern sages,
make plain the way of access to a Redeemer. They display his unspeakable
merits; they discover the method of being interested in his great atonement;
and lead the weary soul, tossed by troubles, and shattered by temptations, to
that only harbor of peaceful repose. -- Let us, therefore, attend to this
unerring directory, with the same constancy of regard, as the seafaring man
observes his compass. Let us become as thoroughly acquainted with this sacred
chart, as the pilot is with every trusty mark, that gives notice of a lurking
rock; and with every open road, that yields a safe passage into the port. Above
all, let us commit ourselves to this infallible guidance with the same implicit
resignation; let us conform our conduct to its exalted precepts, with the same
sedulous care, as the children of Israel, when sojourning in the trackless
desert, followed the pillar of fire, and the motions of the miraculous cloud.
-- So will it introduce us, not into an earthly Canaan, flowing with milk and
honey, but into an immortal paradise, where is the fullness of joy, and where
are pleasures for evermore. It will introduce us into those happy, happy
regions, where our sun shall no more go down, nor our moon withdraw itself; for
the LORD shall be our everlasting light, and the days of our mourning, together
with the fatigues of our pilgrimage, shall be ended. Isa. lx.20.


I perceive a great variety in the size and splendor of those gems of heaven.
Some are of the first magnitude; others of an inferior order. Some glow with
intense flame; others glimmer with fainter beams. Yet all are beautiful; all
have their peculiar luster, and distinct use; all tend, in their different
degrees, to enamel the cope of heaven, and embroider the robe of night -- This
circumstance is remarked by an author, whose sentiments are a source of wisdom,
and the very standard of truth. One star, says the apostle of the Gentiles,
differs from another star in glory: So also is the resurrection of the dead.

In the world above, are various degrees of happiness, various seats of honor.
Some will rise to more illustrious distinctions, and richer joys. 1 Cor. xv.41,
42. The great Mr. Mede prefers the sense here given; and the learned Dr.
Hammond admits it into his paraphrase. Whose joint authority, though far from
excluding any other, yet is a sufficient warrant for this application of the
words.
Some, like vessels of ample capacity, will admit more copious accessions of
light and excellence. Yet there will be no want, no deficiency, in any; but a
fullness, both of divine satisfactions, and personal perfections. Each will
enjoy all the good, and be adorned with all the glory, that his heart can wish,
or his condition receive. -- None will know what it is to envy. Not the least
malevolence, nor the least selfishness, but everlasting friendship prevails,
and a mutual complacency in each other's delight. Love, cordial love, will give
every particular saint a participation of all the fruitions, The invidiam, et
tuum est quod habeo: Toll invidiam, et meum, est quod habes. AUGUSTINE.
which are diffused through the whole assembly of the blessed. -- No one
eclipses, but each reflects light upon his brother. A sweet interchange of rays
subsists; all enlightened by the great fountain, and all enlightening one
another. By which reciprocal communication of pleasure and amity, each will be
continually receiving from, each incessantly adding to, the general felicity.

Happy, supremely happy they, who are admitted into the celestial mansions.
Better to be a door keeper in those "ivory palaces," Psalm. xlv.8.
than to fill the most gorgeous throne on earth. The very lowest place at GOD's
right hand, is distinguished honor, and consummate bliss. -- O! that we may,
in some measure, anticipate that beatifick state, while we remain in our
banishment below! May we, by rejoicing in the superior prosperity of another,
make it our own! And, provided the general result is harmony, be content, be
pleased with whatsoever part is assigned to our share, in the universal choir
of affairs.

While I am considering the heavenly bodies, I must not entirely forget those
fundamental laws of our modern astronomy, projection and attraction. One of
which is the all combining cement, the other is the ever operative spring of
the mighty frame. -- In the beginning, the allcreating FIAT impressed a proper
degree of motion on each of those whirling orbs; which, if not controlled,
would have carried them on, in strait lines, and to endless lengths, till they
were even lost in the abyss of space. But, the gravitating property, being
added to the projectile force, determined their courses to a circular I am
aware the planetary orbits are not strictly circular, but rather elliptical.
However, as they are but a small remove from the perfectly round figure, and
partake of it incomparably more than the trajectories of the comets, I choose
to represent the thing in this view. Especially, because the notion of a circle
is so much more intelligible to the generality of readers, than that of an
ellipsis; and because I laid it down for a rule, not to admit any such abstruse
sentiment, or difficult expression, as should demand a painful attention,
instead of raising an agreeable idea. For which reason, I have avoided
technical terms; have taken no notice of Jupiter's satellites, or Saturn's
ring; have not so much as mentioned the names of the planets, nor attempted to
wade into any depths of the science; lest, to those who have no opportunity of
using the telescope, or of acquainting themselves with a system of astronomy, I
should propound riddles, rather than display entertaining and edifying truths.
form, and obliged the reluctant rovers to perform their destined rounds. --
Were either of those causes to suspend their action, all the harmoniously
moving spheres would be disconcerted -- would degenerate into sluggish inactive
masses; and, falling into the central fire, be burnt to ashes: Or else would
exorbitate into wild confusion; and each, by the rapidity of its whirl, be
dissipated into atoms. But, the impulsive and attractive energy, being most
nicely attempered to each other, and, under the immediate operation of the
Almighty, exerting themselves in perpetual concert, the various globes run
their radiant races, without the least interruption or the least deviation; so
as to create the alternate changes of day and night, and distribute the useful
vicissitudes of succeeding seasons; so as to answer all the great ends of a
gracious Providence, and procure every comfortable convenience for universal
nature.

Does not this constitution of the material, very naturally lead the thoughts
to those grand principles of the moral and devotional world, faith and love? --
These are often celebrated by the inspired apostle, as a comprehensive summary
of the Gospel. Col. i.4. Philem. ver. 5.
These inspirit the breast, and regulate the progress of each private
christian. These unite the whole congregation of the faithful to GOD, and one
another. To GOD, the great center, in the bonds of gratitude and devotion; to
one another, by a reciprocal intercourse of brotherly affections, and friendly
offices. -- If you ask, Why is it impossible for the true believer to live at
all adventures? to stagnate in sloth, or habitually to deviate from duty? -- We
answer, It is owing to his faith, working by love. Gal. v.6.
He assuredly trusts, that CHRIST has sustained the infamy, and endured the
torment due to his sins. He firmly relies on that divine propitiation, for the
pardon of all his guilt; and humbly expects everlasting salvation, as the
purchase of his Savior's merits. This produces such a spirit of gratitude, as
refines his inclinations, and animates his whole behavior. He cannot, he
cannot run to excess of riot; because love to his adorable Redeemer, like a
strong, but silken curb, sweetly restrains him. He cannot, he cannot lie lulled
in a lethargick indolence; because love to the same infinite Benefactor, like a
pungent, but endearing spur, pleasingly excites him. -- In a word, faith
supplies the powerful impulse, while love gives the determining bias, and leads
the willing feet through the whole circle of GOD's commandments. By the united
efficacy of these heavenly graces, the christian conduct is preserved in the
uniformity and beauty of holiness; as by the blendid power of those Newtonian
principles, the solar system revolves in a steady and magnificent regularity.

How admirable, how extensive, how diversified is the force of this single
principle, attraction! I mean, the attraction both of gravitation and cohesion.
-- This penetrates the very essence of all bodies, and diffuses itself to the
remotest limits of the mundane system. -- By this, the worlds, impressed with
motion, hang self balanced on their centres; Ponderibus librata suis.
and, though orbs of immense magnitude, require nothing but this amazing
property, for their support. -- To this we ascribe a phenomenon, of a very
different kind, the pressure of the atmosphere; which, though a yielding and
expansive fluid, yet, constipated by an attractive energy, surrounds the whole
globe, and incloses every creature, as it were, with a tight bandage. An
expedient this, absolutely necessary to preserve the texture of our bodies; and
indeed, to maintain every species of animal existence. -- Attraction! Urged by
this wonderful impetus, the rivers circulate, copious and unintermitted, among
all the nations of the earth: Sweeping with rapidity down the steeps, or softly
ebbing through the plains. Impelled by the same mysterious force, the
nutritious juices are detached from the soil; and, ascending the trees, find
their way through millions of the finest meanders, in order to transfuse
vegetative life into all the branches. -- This confines the ocean within proper
bounds. Though the waves thereof roar; though they toss themselves with all the
madness of indignant rage; yet, checked by this potent, this inevitable curb,
they are unable to pass even the slight barrier of sand. To this the mountains
owe that unshaken firmness, which laughs at the shock of careering winds, and
bids the tempest, with all its mingled horrors, impotently rave. -- By virtue
of this invisible mechanism; without the aid of crane or pulley, or any
instrument of human device, many thousand tons of water are raised, every
moment, into the regions of the firmament. By this, they continue suspended in
thin air, without any capacious cistern to contain their substance, or any
massy pillars to sustain their weight. By this same variously acting power,
they return to the place of their native residence; distilled in gentle falls
of dew, or precipitated in impetuous showers of rain. They slide into the
fields in fleecy flights of snow, or are darted upon the houses in clattering
storms of hail. -- This occasions the strong cohesion of solid bodies. Without
which, our large machines could exert themselves with no vigor; and the nicer
utensils of life, would elude our expectations of service. This affords a
foundation for all those delicate or noble mechanic arts, which furnish
mankind with numberless conveniences, both of ornament and delight. -- In
short, this is the prodigious ballast, which composes the equilibrium, and
constitutes the stability of things: This, the great chain which forms the
connexions of universal nature; and the mighty engine which prompts,
facilitates, and, in good measure, accomplishes all her operations. -- What
complicated effects, from a single cause! See another remarkable instance of
this kind, in the Reflections on a Flower Garden, vol. I. page 97 -- together
with a fine observation, quoted in the corresponding note.
What profusion, amidst frugality! An unknown profusion of benefits, with the
utmost frugality of expense!

And what is this attraction? Is it a quality, in its existence, inseparable
from matter* and, in its acting, independent on the DEITY! -- Quite the
reverse. It is the very singer of GOD: The constant impression of divine power:
A principle, neither innate in matter, nor intelligible by mortals. -- Does it
not, however, bear a considerable analogy to the agency of the HOLY GHOST, in
the christian economy? Are not the gracious operations of the blessed Spirit,
thus extensive, thus admirable, thus various? -- That Almighty Being transmits
his gifts through every age, and communicates his graces to every adherent on
the Redeemer. All, either of illustrious memory, or of beneficial tendency; in
a word, all the good that is done upon earth, he does it himself. Strong in his
aid, and in the power of his might, the saints of all times, have trod vice
under their feet; have triumphed over this abject world; and conversed in
Heaven, while they dwelt on earth. Not I, but the grace of GOD which was with
me, 1 Cor. xv.10.
is the unanimous acknowledgment of them all. -- By the same kindly succors,
the whole church is still enlightened, quickened, and governed. Through his
benign influences, the scales of ignorance fall from the understanding; the
leprosy of evil concupiscence is purged from the will; and the fetters, the
more than adamantine fetters of habitual iniquity, drop off from the
conversation. He breathes even upon dry bones, See that beautiful piece of
sacred and allegorical imagery displayed, Ezekiel. xxxvii.
and they live; They are animated with faith; they pant with ardent and
heavenly desire; they exercise themselves in all the duties of godliness. --
His real, though secret inspiration, dissolves the flint in the impenitent
breast, and binds up the sorrows of the broken heart; or raises the thoughts
high in the elevations of holy hope; yet lays them low, in the humiliations of
inward abasement; steels the soul with impenetrable resolution, and persevering
fortitude; at the same time, softens it into a dovelike meekness, and melts it
in penitential sorrow.

When I contemplate those ample and magnificent structures, erected over all
the etherial plains: -- When I look upon them as so many splendid repositories
of light, or fruitful abodes of life: -- When I remember that there may be
other orbs, vastly more remote than those which appear to our unaided sight;
orbs, whose effulgence, though traveling ever since the creation, is not yet
arrived upon our coasts: If this conjecture (which has no less a person than
the celebrated Mr. Huygens for its author) concerning unseen stars, be true;
if, to this observation be added, what is affirmed by our skilful astronomers,
that the motion of the rays of light is so surprisingly swift, as to pass
through ten millions of miles in a single minute -- how vast! beyond
imagination vast and unmeasurable, are the spaces of the universe! -- While the
mind it distended with the grand idea; or rather, while she is dispatching her
ablest powers of piercing judgment, and excursive fancy, and finds them all
dropped short; all baffled by the amazing subject -- permit me to apply that
spirited exclamation, and noble remark -- -- Say, proud arch,
Built with divine ambition; in disdain
Of limit built; built in the taste of Heaven!
Vast concave! ample dome! wast thou designed
A meet apartment for the DEITY?
Not so: That thought alone thy state impairs:
Thy lofty sinks; and shallows thy profound;
And streightens thy diffusive. --
Night Thoughts, No. IX.
-- When I stretch my thoughts to the innumerable orders of being which inhabit
all those spacious systems, from the loftiest seraph to the lowest reptile;
from the armies of angels which surround the throne of JEHOVAH, to the puny
nations which tinge with blue the surface of the plum, Even the blue down the
purple plum surrounds,
A living world, thy failing sight confounds.
To him a peopled habitation shows,
Where millions taste the bounty GOD bestows.
See a beautiful and instructive Poem, styled -- DEITY.
or mantle the standing pool with green: -- How various appear the links in
this immense chain! How vast the gradations in this universal scale of
existence! Yet all these, though ever so vast and various, are the works of
GOD's hand, and are full of his presence.

He rounded in his palm those dreadful large globes, which are pendulous in the
vault of heaven. He kindled those astonishing bright fires, which fill the
firmament with a flood of glory. By him they are suspended in fluid either, and
cannot be shaken: By him they dispense a perpetual tide of beams, and are never
exhausted. -- He formed, with inexpressible nicety, that delicately fine
collection of tubes; that unknown multiplicity of subtle springs, whch
organize, and actuate the frame of the minutest insect. He bids the crimson
current roll; the vital movements play; and associates a world of wonders, even
in an animated point. There are living creatures abundantly smaller than the
mite. Mr. Bradley, in his Treatise on Gardening, mentions an insect, which,
after accurate examination, he found to be a thousand times less than the least
visible grain of sand. Yet such an insect, though quite imperceptible to the
naked eye, is an elephant, is a whale, compared with other animal^ule^, almost
infinitely more minute, discovered by Mr. Lewenboeck. -- If we consider the
several limbs which compose such an organized particle; the different muscles
which actuate such a set of limbs; the flow of spirits, incomparably more
attenuated, which put those muscles in motion; the various fluids which
circulate; the different secretions which are performed; together with the
peculiar minuteness of the solids, before they arrive at their full growth; not
to mention other more astonishing modes of diminution -- sure, we shall have
the utmost reason to acknowledge, that the adored Maker is -- MAXIMUS IN MI
NIMIS; greatly glorious, even in his smallest works.
-- In all these is a signal exhibition of creating power; to all these are
extended the special regards of preserving goodness. From hence let me learn to
rely on the providence, and to revere the presence of the Supreme Majesty.

To rely on his providence. -- For, amidst that inconceivable number and
variety of beings which swarm through the regions of creation, not one is
overlooked, not one is neglected by the great Omnipotent Cause of all. However
in considerable in its character, or diminutive in its size, it is still the
production of the universal Maker, and belongs to the family of the Almighty
Father. -- What though enthroned archangels enjoy the smiles of his
countenance! yet the low inhabitants of earth, the most despicable worms of the
ground, are not excluded from his providential care. Though the manifestation
of his perfections is vouchsafed to holy and intellectual essences; his ear is
open to the cries of the young raven; his eye is attentive to the wants, and to
the welfare of the very meanest births of nature. -- How much less then are his
own people disregarded? Those for whom he has delivered his beloved Son to
death, and for whom he has prepared habitations of eternal joy. They
disregarded! No: THEY are "kept as the apple of an eye." The very hairs of
their head are all numbered. The fondest mother may forget her infant, that is
"dandled upon her knees," and sucks at her breast, Isa. xlix.15. Can a woman
forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her
womb? Yea, they may forget; yet will I not forget thee. -- How delicate and
expressive are the images in this charming scripture! How full of beauty, if
beheld in a critical, how rich with consolation, if considered in a believing
view. -- Can a woman! one of the softer sex; whose nature is most impressible,
and whose passions are remarkably tender -- can such a one, not barely
disregard, but entirely forget; not suspend her care for a while, but utterly
erase the very memory -- of her child; her own child, not another's; -- a child
that was formed in her womb, and is a part of herself? -- her son -- the more
important, and therefore more desirable species; to whom it peculiarly belongs
to preserve the name, and build up the family: -- Her only son -- for the word
is singular, and refers to a case where the offspring, not being numerous, but
centred in a single birth, must be productive of the fondest endearment: -- Can
she divest herself of all concern for such a child; not when he is grown up to
maturity, or gone abroad from her house, but while he continues in an infantile
state, and must owe his whole safety to her kind attendance; while he lies in
her bosom, rests on her arm, and even sucks at her breast? -- Especially if the
poor innocent be racked with pain, or seized by some severe affliction, and so
become an object of compassion, as well as of love. Can she hear its piercing
cries -- can she see it all restless, all helpless, under its misery, and feel
no emotions of parental pity! -- If one such monster in humanity might be found
-- could all (here the Prophet, to give his comparison the utmost energy,
changes the singular number into the plural. It is not (...), or (...), but
(...)) could all mothers be so degenerate? This, sure, cannot be suspected,
need not be feared. Much less need the true believer be apprehensive of the
failure of my kindness. An universal extinction of those strongest affections
of nature, is a more supposable case, than that I should ever be unmindful of
my people, or regardless of their interests.
much sooner than the Father of everlasting compassion can discontinue, or
remit, his watchful tenderness to his people -- his children -- his heirs.

Let this teach me also a more lively sense of the divine presence. -- All the
rolling worlds above, all the living atoms below, together with all the beings
that intervene betwixt these wide extremes, are vouchers for an ever present
Deity. GOD has not left himself without witness. The marks of his footsteps are
evident in every place, and the touches of his finger distinguishable in every
creature. Thy name is nigh, O thou allsupporting, allinforming LORD! and that
do thy wondrous works declare. Psalm. lxxx.1.
Thy goodness warms in the morning sun, and refreshes in the evening breeze.
Thy glory shines in the lamps of midnight, and smiles in the blossoms of
spring. We see a trace of thy incomprehensible grandeur in the boundless extent
of things, and a sketch of thy exquisite skill in those almost evanescent
sparks of life, the insect race. -- How stupid is this heart of mine, that,
amidst such a multitude of remembrancers, thronging on every side, I should
forget thee a single moment! Grant me, thou great I AM! thou source and support
of universal existence! -- O grant me an enlightened eye, to discern thee in
every object; and a devout heart, to adore thee on every occasion. Instead of
living without GOD in the world, may I be ever with him, and see all things
full of him!

-- The glittering stars,
By the deep ear of meditation heard,
Still in their midnight watches sing of HIM*
He nods a calm. The tempest blows his wrath.
The thunder is his voice; and the red flash
His speedy sword of justice. At his touch
The mountains flame. He shakes the solid earth,
And rocks the nations. Nor in these alone,
In every common instance GOD is seen.
THOMSON's Spring. If the beautiful spangles which a clear night pours on the
beholder's eye; if those other fires, which beam in remoter skies, and are
discoverable only by that revelation to the sight, the telescope; if all those
bright millions are so many fountains of day, enriched with native and
independent luster, illuminating planets, and enlivening systems of their own:
Consult with reason; reason will reply,
Each lucid p^int, which glows in yonder sky,
Informs a system in the boundless space,
And fills, with glory, its appointed place:
With beams unborrow'd, brightens other skies;
And worlds to thee unknown, with heat and life supplies.
The Universe.
What pomp, how majestic and splendid, is disclosed in the midnight scene!
What riches are disseminated through all those numberless provinces of the
great JEHOVAH's empire! -- Grandeur beyond expression! -- Yet there is not the
meanest slave, but carries greater wealth in his own bosom, possesses superior
dignity in his own person. The soul that informs his clay; -- the soul that
teaches him to think, and enables him to choose; that qualifies him to relish
rational pleasure, and to breathe sublime desire; In this respect, as vested
with such capacities, the soul even of fallen men, has an unquestionable
greatness and dignity; is majestic, though in ruin.
-- the soul that is endowed with such noble faculties, and, above all, is
distinguished with the dreadful, the glorious capacity, of being pained or
blessed forever; -- this soul surpasses in worth, whatever the eye can see;
whatever of material the fancy can imagine. Before one such intellectual being,
all tho treasure, and all the magnificence of unintelligent creation, becomes
poor and contemptible. I beg leave to transcribe a pertinent passage, from that
celebrated master of reason, and universal literature, Dr. Bentley; whom no one
can be tempted to suspect either tinctured with enthusiasm, or warped to
bigotry. -- "If we consider," says he, the dignity of an intelligent being, and
put that in the scale against brute and inanimate matter, we may affirm,
without overvaluing human nature, that the soul of one virtuous and religious
man, is of greater worth and excellency than the sun and his planets, and all
the stars in the world. See his Sermons at Boyle's Lect. No. 8.
For this soul, Omnipotence itself has waked, and worked through every age. To
convince this soul, the fundamental laws of nature have been controlled, and
the most amazing miracles* have alarmed all the ends of the earth. To instruct
this soul, the wisdom of Heaven has been transfused into the sacred page; and
missionaries have been sent from the Great King, who resides in light
unapproachable. To sanctify this soul, the Almighty Comforter takes the wings
of a dove, and, with a sweet transforming influence, broods on the human heart.
And O! to redeem this soul from guilt; to rescue it from Hell, the Heaven of
heavens was bowed, and GOD himself came down to dwell in dust.

Let me pause, a while, upon this important subject. -- What are the schemes
which engage the attention of eminent statesmen and mighty monarchs, compared
with the grand interests of an immortal soul? The support of commerce, and the
success of armies, though extremely weighty affairs, yet, if laid in the
balance against the salvation of a soul, are lighter than the downy feather,
poised against talents of gold. To save a navy from shipwreck, or a kingdom
from slavery, are deliverances of the most momentous nature, which the
transactions of mortality can admit. But O! how they shrink into an
inconsiderable trifle, if (their aspect upon immortality forgot) they are set
in competition with the delivery of a single soul, from the anguish and
horrors of a distressed eternity! Not all you luminaries quenched at once,
Were half so sad, as one benighted mind,
Which gropes for happiness, and meets despair.
Night Thoughts, No. IX.


Is such the importance of the soul! What vigilance then can be too much; or
rather, what holy solicitude can be sufficient for the overseers of the
Savior's flock, and the guardians of this great, this venerable, this
invaluable charge? -- Since such is the importance of the soul, will thou not,
O man, be watchful for the preservation of thy own? Shall every casual incident
awaken thy concern -- every transitory toy command thy regard; and shall the
welfare of thy soul, a work of continual occurrence -- a work of endless
consequence, sue in vain for thy serious care? -- Thy soul, thy soul is thy
all. If this be secured, thou art greatly rich, and wilt be unspeakably happy:
If this be lost, a whole world acquired, will leave thee in poverty; and all
its delights enjoyed, will abandon thee to misery.

I have often been charmed and awed at the sight of the nocturnal heavens, even
before I knew how to consider them in their proper circumstances of majesty and
beauty. Something like magic has struck my mind, on a transient and unthinking
survey of the ethereal vault, tinged throughout with the purest azure, and
decorated with innumerable starry lamps. I have felt, I know not what, powerful
and aggrandizing impulse, which seemed to snatch me from the low entanglements
of vanity, and prompted an ardent sigh for sublimer objects. Methought I heard,
even from the silent spheres, a commanding call, to spurn the abject earth, and
pant after unseen delights. -- Henceforward I hope to imbibe more copiously,
this moral emanation of the skies; when, in some such manner as the preceding,
they are rationally seen, and the sight is duly improved. The stars, I trust,
will teach as well as shine; and help to dispel both nature's gloom, and my
intellectual darkness. To some people they discharge no better a service, than
that of holding a flambeau to their feet, and softening the horrors of their
night. To me and my friends, may they act as ministers of a superior order; as
counselors of wisdom, and guides to happiness! Nor will they fail to execute
this nobler office, if they gently light our way into the knowledge of their
adored Maker; if they point out, with their silver rays, our path to his
beatifick presence.

I gaze, I ponder; I ponder, I gaze; and think ineffable things. I roll an eye
of awe and admiration. Again and again I repeat my ravished views, and can
never satiate either my curiosity or my inquiry. I spring my thoughts into this
immense field, till even fancy tires upon her wing. I find wonders ever new;
wonders more and more amazing; -- yet, after all my present inquiries, what a
mere nothing do I know -- by all my future searches, how little shall I be able
to learn -- of those vastly distant suns, and their circling retinue of worlds!
Could I pry with Newton's piercing sagacity, or launch into his extensive
surveys, even then my apprehensions would be little better than those dim and
scanty images, which the mole, just emerged from her cavern, receives on her
seeble optic. -- This, sure, should repress all impatient or immoderate ardour
to pry into the secrets of the starry structures, and make me more particularly
careful to cultivate my heart. To fathom the depths of the divine essence, or
to scan universal nature with a critical exactness, is an attempt which sets
the acutest philosopher very nearly on a level with the idiot; since it is
almost, if not altogether, as impracticable by the former, as by the latter.

Be it then my chief study, not to pursue what is absolutely unattainable, but
rather to seek what is obvious to find, easy to be acquired, and of inestimable
advantage when possessed. O! let me seek that charity which edifieth, 1 Cor.
viii.1. I need not inform my reader, that in this text, in that admirable
chapter, 1 Cor. xiii. and in ^arious other passages of scripture, the word
charity should by no means be confined to the particular act of alms giving, or
external, beneficence. It is of a much more exalted and extensive nature. It
signifies that divinely precious grace, which warms the soul with supreme love
to GOD, and enlarges it with disinterested affection for men; -- which renders
it the reigning care of the life, and chief delight of the heart, to promote
the happiness of the one, and the glory of the other. -- This, this is that
charity of which so many excellent things are every where spoken; which can
never be too highly extolled, or too earnestly coveted, since it is the image
of GOD, and the very spirit of Heaven.
that faith which purifieth. Love, humble love, not conceited science, keeps
the door of Heaven: -- Faith, a childlike faith in JESUS, not the haughty self
sufficient spirit, which scorns to be ignorant of any thing, presents a key The
righteousness of CHRIST. This is what MILTON beautifully styles, -- The golden
key,
That opes the palace of eternity.

to those abodes of bliss. -- This present state is the scene destined to the
exercise of devotion; the invisible world is the place appointed for the
enjoyment of knowledge. There the dawn of our infantile minds, will be advanced
to the maturity of perfect day; or rather, there our midnight shades will be
brightened into all the luster of noon. There, the souls which come from the
school of faith, and bring with them the principles of love, will dwell in
light itself; will be obscured with no darkness at all; will know even as they
are known. 1 Cor. xlii.12.
-- Such an acquaintance, therefore, do I desire to form, and to carry on such
a correspondence with the heavenly bodies, as may shed a benign influence on
the seeds of grace implanted in my breast. Let the exalted tracts of the
firmament, sink my soul into deep humiliation: Let those eternal fires kindle
in my heart, an adoring gratitude to their Almighty Sovereign: Let yonder
ponderous and enormous globes, which rest on his supporting arm, teach me an
unshaken affiance in their incarnate Maker: -- Then shall I be -- if not wise
as the astronomical adept, yet wise unto salvation.

Having now walked and worshipped in this universal temple, that is arched with
skies, emblazed with stars, and extended even to immensity -- having cast an
eye like the enraptured patriarch; Genesis xv.3.
an eye of reason and devotion, through the magnificent scene: -- With the
former, having discovered an infinitude of worlds; and with the latter, having
met the Deity in every view -- having beheld, as Moses in the flaming bush, a
glimpse of JEHOVAH's excellencies, reflected from the several planets, and
streaming from myriads of celestial luminaries -- having read various lessons
in that stupendous book of wisdom, -- For Heaven
Is as the book of GOD before thee set,
Wherein to read his wondrous works.
MILT.
where unmeasurable sheets of azure compose the page, and orbs of radiance
write, in everlasting characters, a comment on our creed -- what remains but
that I close the midnight solemnity, as our LORD concluded his grand
sacramental institution, with a song of praise? -- And behold a hymn suited to
the sublime occasion, indicted by Psalm. x^x.
inspiration itself; transferred into our language, by ADDISON, Spect. vol. VI.
No. 465.
one of the happiest efforts of human ingenuity.

The spacious firmament on high,
With all the blue ethereal sky,
And spangled heavens, a shining frame,
Their great Original proclaim:
The unwearied sun from day to day,
Does his Creator's power display;
And publishes to every land,
The work of an almighty hand.
Soon as the evening shades prevail,
The moon takes up the wondrous tale;
And nightly, to the listening earth,
Repeats the story of her birth:
While all the stars that round her burn,
And all the planets in their turn,
Confirm the tidings as they roll,
And spread the truth from pole to pole.
What though, in solemn silence, all
Move round the dark terrestrial ball?
What though, nor real voice nor sound
Amid their radiant orbs be found?
In reason's ear they all rejoice,
And utter forth a glorious voice,
Forever singing, as they shine,
The hand that made us, is divine.
A WINTER PIECE.
IT is true, in the delightful seasons, HIS tenderness and HIS love are most
eminently displayed. -- In the vernal months, all is beauty to the eye, and
music to the ear. The clouds drop fatness; the air softens into balm; and
flowers, in rich abundance, spring wherever we tread, bloom wherever we look.
-- Amidst the burning heats of summer, He expands the leaves, and thickens the
shades. He spreads the cooling arbor to receive us, and awakes the gentle
breeze to fan us. The moss swells into a couch, for the repose of our bodies:
while the rivulet softly rolls, and sweetly murmurs, to soothe our imagination.
-- In autumn, HIS bounty covers the fields with a profusion of nutrimental
treasure, and bends the boughs with loads of delicious fruit. He furnishes his
hospitable board with present plenty, and prepares a copious magazine for
future wants. -- But, is it only in these smiling periods of the year, that
GOD, the all gracious GOD, is seen? Has winter, stern winter, no tokens of his
presence? Yes: All things are eloquent of his praise. "His way is in the
whirlwind." Storms and tempests fulfill his word, and extol his power. Even
piercing frosts bear witness to his goodness, while they bid the shivering
nations tremble at his wrath. -- Be winter then, for a while, our theme. A
sketch of this nature* I must acknowledge, is quite different from the subject
of the book; and, I cannot but declare, was as far distant from the thoughts of
the author. But the desire of several acquaintance, together with an intimation
of its usefulness, by a very polite letter from an unknown hand, prevailed with
me to add a few descriptive touches, and improving hints, on what is so often
experienced in these northern regions. I hope the attempt I have made to oblige
these gentlemen, will obtain the approbation, or at least the excuse, of my
other readers.
Perhaps those barren scenes may be fruitful of intellectual improvement.
Perhaps that rigorous cold, which binds the earth in icy chains, may serve to
enlarge our hearts, and warm them with holy love.

See! how the day is shortened! -- The sun, detained in fairer climes, or
engaged in more agreeable services, rises, like an unwilling visitant, with
tardy and reluctant steps. He walks, with a shy indifference, along the edges
of the southern sky; casting an oblique glance, he just looks upon our dejected
world, and scarcely scatters light through the thick air. Dim is his
appearance, languid are his gleams, while he continues. Or, if he chance to
wear a brighter aspect, and a cloudless brow; yet, like the young and gay in
the house of mourning, he seems uneasy, till he is gone; is in haste to depart.
-- And let him depart. Why should we wish for his longer stay, since he can
show us nothing but the creation in distress? The slowery families lie dead,
and the tuneful tribes are struck dumb. The trees, stripped of their verdure, and
lashed by storms, spread their naked arms to the enraged and relentless
heavens. Fragrance no longer floats in the air; but chilling damps hover, or
cutting gales blow. Nature, divested of all her beautiful robes, sits, like a
forlorn disconsolate widow, in her weeds. While winds, in doleful accents howl;
and rains, in repeated showers, weep.

We regret not, therefore, the speedy departure of the day. When the room is
hung with funeral black, and dismal objects are all around, who could desire to
have the glimmering taper kept alive, which can only discover spectacles of
sorrow; can only make the horror visible? -- And, since this mortal life is
little better than a continual conflict with sin, or an unremitted struggle
with misery, is it not a gracious ordination, which has reduced our age to a
span? Fourscore years of trial, for the virtuous, are sufficiently long; and
more than such a term, allowed to the wicked, would render them beyond all
measure vile. Our way to the kingdom of Heaven lies through tribulations. Shall
we then accuse, shall we not rather bless the providence which has made the
passage short? Soon, soon we cross the vale of tears, and then arrive on the
happy hills, where light forever shines, where joy forever smiles.

Sometimes the day is rendered shorter still; is almost blotted out from the
year. Involvere diem nimbi, et nox humida coelum
Abstulit. --
VIRG.
The vapors gather; they thicken into an impenetrable gloom, and obscure the
face of the sky. At length the rains descend: The sluices of the firmament are
opened, and the low hung clouds pour their congregated stores: Copious and
unintermitted, still they pour, and still are unexhausted. The waters drop
incessantly from the eaves, and rush in rapid streams from the spouts: They
roar along the channelled pavements, and stand in foul shallows amidst the
village streets. Now, if the inattentive eye, or negligent hand, has left the
roof but scantily covered, the insinuating element finds its way into every
flaw, and oozing through the ceiling, at once upbraids and chastises the
careless inhabitant. The ploughman, soaked to the skin, leaves his half tilled
acre. The poor poultry, dripping with wet, crowd into shelter. The tenants of
the bough fold up their wings, afraid to launch into the streaming air. The
beasts, joyless and dispirited, ruminate under their shades. The roads swim,
and the brooks swell. -- The river, amidst all this watery ferment, long
contained itself within its appointed bounds: But, swollen by innumerable
currents, and roused at last into uncontrollable rage, bursts over its banks,
shoots into the plain, bears down all opposition, spreads itself far and wide,
and buries the meadow under a brown, sluggish, soaking deluge.

How happy for man, that this inundation comes, when there are no flowery crops
in the valley, to be overwhelmed; no fields standing thick with corn, to be
laid waste! At such a juncture, it would have been ruin to the husbandman and
his family: But, thus timed, it yields manure for his ground, and promises him
riches in reversion. -- How often, and how long, has the Divine Majesty bore
with the most injurious affronts from sinners! His goodness triumphed over
their perverseness, and graciously refused to be exasperated. But, O
presumptuous creatures! multiply no longer your provocations: Urge not, by
repeated iniquities, the Almighty arm to strike; lest his long suffering cease,
and his fierce anger break forth; break forth like a flood of waters, Hos. v.10.
and sweep you away into irrecoverable and everlasting perdition.

How mighty! how majestic! and O how mysterious are thy works, thou GOD of
Heaven, and LORD of Nature! When the air is calm, where sleep the stormy winds?
In what chambers are they reposed, or in what dungeons confined, till thou art
pleased to awaken their rage, and throw open their prison doors? Then, with
irresistible impetuosity, they fly forth, scattering dread, and menacing
destruction.

The atmosphere is hurled into the most tumultuous confusion. The aerial
torrent bursts its way over mountains, seas, and continents. All things feel
the dreadful shock. All things tremble before the furious blast. The forest,
vexed and tore, groans under the scourge. Her sturdy sons are strained to the
very roof, and almost sweep the soil they were wont to shade. The stubborn oak,
that disdains to bend, is dashed headlong to the ground; and, with shattered
arms, with prostrate trunk, blocks the road. -- While the flexile reed, that
springs up in the marsh, yielding to the gust (as the meek and ^pliant temper
to injuries, or the resigned and patient spirit to misfortunes), eludes the
force of the storm, and survives amidst the wide spread havoc.

For a moment, the turbulent and outrageous sky seems to be assuaged; but it
intermits its wrath, only to increase its strength. Soon the sounding squadrons
of the air return to the attack, and renew their ravages with redoubled fury.
The stately dome rocks amidst the wheeling clouds. The impregnable tower
totters on its basis, and threatens to overwhelm whom it was intended to
protect. The ragged rock is rent in pieces; 1 Kings, xix.11.
and even the hills, the perpetual hills, on their deep foundations, are
scarcely secure. -- Where now is the place of safety? When the city reels, and
houses become heaps! Sleep affrighted flies. Diversion is turned into horror.
All is uproar in the elements; all is consternation among mortals; and nothing
but one wide scene of rueful devastation through the land. -- Yet, this is only
an inferior minister of divine displeasure; the executioner of milder
indignation. How then, O! how will the lofty looks of man be humbled, and the
haughtiness of men be bowed down, -- Mortalia corda
Per gentes humilis stravit pavor. --
One would almost imagine, that Virgil had read Isaiah, and borrowed his ideas
from chap. ii. ver. 11. The humilis and stravit of the one* so exactly
correspond with the humbled -- bowed down -- of the other. But, in one
circumstance, the prophet is very much superior to the poet. The prophet, by
giving a striking contrast to his sentiments, represents them with incomparably
greater energy. He says not, men in the gross, or the human heart in general;
but men of the most elated looks, hearts big with the most arrogant
imaginations. Even these shall stoop from their supercilious heights; even
these shall grovel in the dust of abasement, and shudder with all the extremes
of an abject pusillanimity.


when the LORD GOD Omnipotent shall meditate terror -- when he shall set all
his terrors in array -- when he arises to judge the nations, and to shake
terribly the earth!

The ocean swells with tremendous commotions. The ponderous waves are heaved
from their capacious bed, and almost lay bare the unfathomable deep. Flung into
the most rapid agitation, they sweep over the rocks; they lash the lofty
cliffs, and toss themselves into the clouds. Navies are rent from their
anchors; and, with all their enormous load, are whirled, swift as the arrow,
wild as the winds, along the vast abyss. -- Now they climb the rolling
mountain; they plough the frightful ridge; and seem to skim the skies. Anon
they plunge into the opening gulf; they lose the sight of day; and are lost
themselves to every eye. How vain is the pilot's art! how impotent the
mariner's strength! They reel to and fro, and stagger in the jarring hold; or
cling to the cordage, while bursting seas foam over the deck. Despair is in
every face, and death sits threatening on every surge. -- But why, O ye
astonished mariners, why should you abandon yourselves to despair? Is the
LORD's hand shortened, because the waves of the sea rage horribly? Is his ear
deafened by the roaring thunders, and the bellowing tempest? Cry, cry unto HIM,
who holds the winds in his fist, and the waters in the hollow of his hand. HE
is all gracious to hear, and almighty to save. If HE command, the storm shall
be hushed to silence; the billows shall subside into a calm; the lightnings
shall lay their fiery bolts aside; and, instead of sinking into a watery grave,
you shall find yourselves brought to the desired haven.

Sometimes, after a joyless day, a more dismal night succeeds. -- The lazy,
louring vapors had wove so thick a veil, as the meridian sun could scarcely
penetrate. What gloom then must overwhelm the nocturnal hours! The moon
withdraws her shining. Not a single star is able to struggle through the deep
arrangement of shades. All is pitchy darkness, without one enlivening ray. How
solemn! how awful! It is like the shroud of nature, or the return of chaos. I
do not wonder, that it is the parent of terrors, and so apt to engender
melancholy. -- Lately, the tempest marked its rapid way with mischief; now the
night dresses her silent pavilion with horror.

I have sometimes left the beaming tapers, withdrawn from the ruddy fire, and
plunged into the thickest of those sooty shades, without regretting the change,
rather exulting in it as a welcome deliverance. The very gloom was pleasing,
was exhilarating, compared with the conversation I quitted. The speech of my
companions (how does it grieve me, that I should even once have occasion to
call them by that name!) was the language of darkness -- was horror to the
soul, and torture to the ear. Their teeth were spears and arrows, and their
tongue a sharp sword, to stab and assassinate their neighbor's character:
Their throat was an open sepulcher, gaping to devour the reputation of the
innocent, or tainting the air with their virulent and polluted breath.
Sometimes their licentious and ungovernable discourse, shot arrows of
profaneness against Heaven itself; and, in proud defiance, challenged the
resentment of Omnipotence. Sometimes, as if it was the glory of human nature to
cherish the grossest appetites of the brute, or the mark of a gentleman to have
served an apprenticeship in a brothel, the filthiest jests of the stews (if low
obscenity can be a jest) were nauseously obtruded on the company. All the
modest part were offended and grieved, while the other besotted creatures
laughed aloud, though the leprosy of uncleanness appeared on their lips. -- Are
not these persons prisoners of darkness, though blazing sconces pour artificial
day through their rooms? Are not their souls immured in the most baleful
shades, though the noon tide sun is brightened by flaming on their gilded
chariots? -- They discern not that great and adorable Being, who fills the
universe with his infinite and glorious presence; who is all eye to observe
their actions* all ear to examine their words: They know not the all sufficient
Redeemer, nor the unspeakable blessedness of his heavenly kingdom: They are
groping for the prize of happiness, but will certainly grasp the thorn of
anxiety: They are wantonly sporting on the brink of a precipice, and are every
moment in danger of falling headlong into irretrievable ruin, and endless
despair.

They have forced me out, and are, perhaps, deriding me in my absence; are
charging my reverence for the ever present GOD, and my concern for the dignity
of our rational nature, to the account of humor and singularity; to narrowness
of thought, or sourness of temper. Be it so. I will indulge no indignation
against them: If any thing like it should arise, I will convert it into prayer.
-- Pity them, O thou Father of mercies! Show them the madness of their
profaneness! Show them the baseness of their vile ribaldry! -- Let their
dissolute rant be turned into silent sorrow and confusion, till they open their
lips to adore thine insulted majesty, and to implore thy gracious pardon. Till
they devote to thy service, those social hours, and those superior faculties,
which they are now abusing, to the dishonor of thy name -- to the
contamination of their own souls -- and (unless timely repentance intervene) to
their everlasting infamy and perdition.

I ride home amidst the gloomy void. All darkling and solitary, I can scarce
discern my horse's head, and only guess out my blind road. No companion but
danger; or, perhaps "destruction ready at my side." Job xviii.12.
But, why do I fancy myself solitary? Is not the Father of lights; the GOD of
my life; the great and everlasting friend; always at my right hand? Because the
day is excluded, is his omnipresence vacated? Though I have no earthly
acquaintance near, to assist in case of a misfortune, or to beguile the time,
and divert uneasy suspicions, by entertaining conferences, may I not lay my
help upon the Almighty, and converse with GOD by humble supplication? For this
exercise, no place is improper, no hour unseasonable, and no imposture
incommodious. This is society, the best of society, even in solitude; -- this
is a fund of delights, easily portable, and quite inexhaustible; -- a treasure
this of unknown value; liable to no hazard from wrong or robbery; but perfectly
secure to the lonely wanderer, in the most darksome paths.

And why should I distress myself with apprehensions at peril? This access to
GOD, is not only an indefeasible privilege, but a kind of ambulatory garrison.
Those who make known their requests unto GOD, and rely upon his protecting
care, he gives his angels charge over their welfare. His angels are
commissioned to escort them in their traveling, and to hold up their goings,
that they dash not their foot against a stone. Psalm. xci.11, 12.
Nay, he himself condescends to be their guardian, and keeps all their bones,
so that not one of them is broken. -- Between these persons, and the most
mischievous objects, a treaty of peace is concluded: The articles of this grand
alliance, are recorded in the book of revelation; and will, when it is for the
real benefit of believers, assuredly be made good in the administrations of
providence. In that day, says the LORD, will I make a covenant for them with
the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the creeping
things of the ground; and they shall be in league with the stones of the field.
Job v.23. Hos. ii.18.
Though they fall headlong on the flints; even the flints, fitted to fracture
the skull, shall receive them as into the arms of friendship, and not offer to
hurt whom the LORD is pleased to preserve.

May I then enjoy the presence of this gracious GOD, and darkness and light
shall be both alike. Let HIM whisper peace to my conscience, and this dread
silence shall be more charming than the voice of eloquence, or the strains of
music. Let HIM reveal his ravishing perfections in my soul, and I shall not
want the saffron beauties of the morn, the golden glories of noon, or the
impurpled evening sky. -- I shall sigh only for those most desirable and
distinguished realms, where the light of HIS countenance perpetually shines,
and consequently -- "there is no night there." Rev. xxi.25.


How surprising are the alterations of nature! I left her the preceding
evening, plain and unadorned; but now a thick rhyme has shed its hoary honors
over all. It has shagged the fleeces of the sheep, and crisped the traveller's
locks. The hedges are richly fringed, and all the ground is profusely powdered.
The downward branches are tasseled with silver, and the upright are feathered
with the plumy wave.

The fine are not always the valuable. -- The air, amidst all these gaudy
decorations, is charged with chilling and unwholesome damps: -- The raw hazy
influence spreads wide, sits deep, hangs heavy and oppressive on the springs of
life. A listless languor clogs the animal functions, and the purple stream
glides but faintly through its channels. In vain the ruler of the day exerts
his beaming powers: In vain he attempts to disperse this insurrection of
vapors: The sullen, malignant cloud refuses to depart: It envelopes the world,
and intercepts the prospect. I look abroad for the neighboring village; I send
my eye in quest of the rising turret, but am scarce able to discern the very
next house. -- Where are the blue arches of Heaven? Where is the radiant
countenance of the sun? Where the boundless scenes of creation? -- Lost, lost
are their beauties; quenched their glories. The thronged theater of the
universe, seems an empty void, and all its elegant pictures, an undistinguished
blank. -- Thus would it have been with our intellectual views, if the Gospel
had not come in to our relief. We should have known neither our true good, nor
real evil: We had been a riddle to ourselves; the present state all confusion,
and the future impenetrable darkness. -- But, the Sun of righteousness, arising
with potent and triumphant beams, has dissipated the interposing cloud; has
opened a prospect more beautiful than the blossoms of spring; more cheering
than the treasures of autumn; and far more enlarged than the extent of the
visible system; -- which, having led the eye of the mind through fields of
grace, over rivers of righteousness, and hills crowned with knowledge,
terminates at length in the heavens; sweetly losing itself in regions of
infinite bliss, and endless glory.

As I walk along the fog, it seems, at some little distance, to be almost solid
gloom; such as would shut out every glimpse of light, and totally imprison me
in obscurity. But, when I approach and enter it, I find myself agreeably
mistaken, and the mist much thinner than it appeared. -- Such is the case with
regard to the sufferings of the present life; they are not, when experienced,
so dreadful as a timorous imagination surmised. Such also, is the case with
reference to the gratifications of sense; they prove not, when enjoyed, so
substantial as a sanguine expectation represented. In both instances we are
graciously disappointed. The keen edge of the calamity is blunted, that it may
not wound us with incurable anguish; the exquisite relish of the prosperity is
palled, that it may not captivate our affections, and enslave them to inferior
delights.

Sometimes the face of things wears a more pleasing form; the very reverse of
the foregoing. The sober evening advances to close the shortlived day: The
firmament, clear and unsullied, puts on its brightest blue: The stars, in
thronging multitudes, and with a peculiar brilliancy, glitter through the fair
expanse; while the frost pours its subtle and penetrating influence all around.
Sharp and intensely severe, all the long night, the rigid ^ther continues its
operations. -- When, late and slow, the morning opens her pale eye, in what a
curious and amusing disguise is nature dressed! The icicles, jagged and uneven,
are pendent on the houses: A whitish film incrusts the windows, where mimick
landscapes rise, and fancied figures swell. The fruitful fields are hardened to
iron; the moistened meadows are congealed to marble; and both resound (an
effect unknown before) with the peasant's hasty tread. The stream is arrested
in its career, and its ever flowing surface chained to the banks: The fluid
paths become a solid road; where the finny shoals were wont to rove, the
sportive youth slide, or the rattling chariots roll. Concrescunt subito
currenti in fiumini ^rustae;
Undaque jam tergo ferratos sustinet orbs,
Puppibus illa prius patulis, nunc bospita plaustris
Aeraque dissi^iunt vulgo.
VIRG.
And (what would seem to an inhabitant of the southern world, as unaccountable
as the deepest mysteries of our religion) that very same breath of Heaven which
cements the lakes into a crystal pavement, cleaves the oaks, as it were, with
invisible wedges; breaks in picces the northern iron and the steel; even while
it builds a bridge of icy rock over the seas. Job xxxviii.30. The waters are
hid, locked up from the cattle's lips, and secured from the fisher's net, as
wells were wont to be closed with a ponderous and impenetrable stone. And not
only lakes and rivers, but the surface of the great deep, with its restless and
uncontrollable surges, is taken captive (...) by the frost, and bound in
shining fetters.


The air is all serenity; -- refined by the nitrous particles, it affords the
most distinct views, and extensive prospects. The seeds of infection are
killed, and the pestilence destroyed, even in embryo: So the cold of affliction
tends to mortify our corruptions, and subdue our vicious habits. The crowding
atmosphere constringes our bodies, and braces our nerves: The spirits are
buoyant, and sally briskly on the execution of their office. In the summer
months, such an unclouded sky, and so bright a sun, would have melted us with
heat, and softened us into supineness: We should have been ready to throw our
limbs under the spreading beach, and to lie at ease by the murmuring brook. But
now, none loiters in his path; none is seen with folded arms: All is in motion;
all is activity: Choice, prompted by the weather, supplies the spur of
necessity. Thus the rugged school of misfortune, often trains up the mind to a
vigorous exertion of its faculties. The bleak climate of adversity, often
inspirits us with a manly resolution; when a soft and downy affluence, perhaps,
would have relaxed all the generous spring of the soul, and have left it
enervated with pleasure, or dissolved in indolence.

" Cold comes out of the north." Job xxxvii.9
The winds, having swept those deserts of snow, arm themselves with millions of
frozen particles, and make a fierce descent upon our isle. Under black and
scouling clouds, they drive, dreadfully whizzing, through the darkened air:
They growl around our houses, assault our doors, and, eager for entrance,
fasten on our windows. Walls can scarce restrain them; bars are unable to
exclude them; through every cranny they force their way. Ice is on their wings;
they scatter agues through the land; and winter, all winter, rages as they go.
Their breath is as a searing This, I suppose, is the meaning of that figurative
expression used by the prophet Habakkuk; who, speaking of the Chaldean's
invading Judea, says -- Their faces, or the incursions they make, shall sup up,
shall swallow greedily, shall devour utterly, the inhabitants of the country,
and their valuable effects; as the keen, corroding blasts of the east wind
destroy every green thing in the field. Hab. i.9.
iron to the little verdure left in the plains: Vastly more pernicious to the
tender plants, than the sharpest knife, they kill their branches, and wound the
very root. Let not the corn venture to peep too freely from the entrenchment of
the furrow; let not the fruit bearing blossoms dare to come abroad from their
lodgment in the bark, lest these murderous blasts intercept and seize the
unwary strangers, and destroy the hopes of the advancing year.

O, it is severely cold! Who is so hardy, as not to shrink at this excessively
pinching weather? See! every face is pale. Even the blooming cheeks contract a
gelid hue, and the teeth hardly forbear chattering. -- Ye that sit easy and
joyous, amidst your commodious apartments, solacing yourselves in the diffusive
warmth of your fire, be mindful of your brethren, in the cheerless tenement of
poverty. Their shattered panes are open to the piercing winds; a tattered
garment scarcely covers their shivering flesh; while a few faint and dying
embers on the squalid hearth, rather mock their wishes, than warm their limbs.
-- While the generous juices of Oporto sparkle in your glasses; or the streams,
beautifully tinged and deliciously flavoured with the Chinese leaf, smoke in
the elegant porcelain; O remember, that many of your fellow creatures, amidst
all the rigor of these inclement skies, are emaciated with sickness, benumbed
with age, and pining with hunger. Let their loins bless you, for comfortable
clothing. Restore them with medicine; regale them with food; and baffle the
raging year. So may you never know any of their distresses, but only by the
hearing of the ear, the seeing of the eye, or the feeling of a tender
commiseration! -- Methinks the bitter blustering winds plead for the poor
indigents. May they breathe pity into your breasts, while they blow hardships
into their huts! -- Observe those blue flames, and ruddy coals, in your
chimney: Quickened by the cold, they look more lively, and glow more strongly.
Silent, but seasonable admonition to the gay circle, that chat and smile around
them! Thus, may your hearts, at such a juncture of need, kindle into a peculiar
benevolence! Detain not your superfluous piles of wood. Let them hasten to the
relief of the starving family. Bid them expire in many a willing blaze, to
mitigate the severity of the season, and cheer the bleak abodes of want. So
shall they ascend, mingled with thanksgivings to GOD, and ardent prayers for
your welfare -- ascend, more grateful to Heaven, than columns of the most
costly incense.

Now the winds cease. Having brought their load, they are dismissed from
service. They have wasted an immense cargo of clouds, which empty themselves in
snow. At first, a few scattered shreds come wandering down the saddened sky.
This slight skirmish is succeeded by a general onset. The flakes, large and
numerous, and thick wavering, descend. They dim the air, and hasten the
approach of night. Through all the night, in softest silence, and with a
continual flow, this fleecy shower falls. In the morning, when we awake, what a
surprising change appears! -- Is this the same world? Here is no diversity of
color! I can hardly distinguish the trees, from the hills on which they grow.
Which are the meadows, and which the plains? Where are the green pastures, and
where the fallow lands? All things lie blendid in bright confusion. So bright,
that it heightens the splendor of day, and even dazzles the organs of sight.
-- The lawn is not so fair, as this snowy mantle which invests the fields; and
even the lily, was the lily to appear, would look tarnished in its presence. I
can think of but one thing, which excels or equals the glittering robe of
winter. Is any person desirous to know my meaning? He may find it explained in
that admirable hymn, Can any thing be whiter than snow? Yes, says David -- If
GOD be pleased to wash me from my sins in the blood of CHRIST, I shall be even
whiter than snow. Psalm. li.7. See page 97.
composed by the royal penitent. Is any desirous to possess this matchless
ornament? He will find it offered to his acceptance in every page of the Gospel.

See! (for the eye cannot satisfy itself, without viewing again and again the
curious, the delicate scene) see! how the hedges are habited, like spotless
vestals! The houses are roofed with uniformity and luster. The meadows are
covered with a carpet of the finest ermine. This animal is milk white. As for
those black spots which we generally see in linings of ermine, they are added
by the furrier, in order to diversify the appearance, or heighten the beauty of
the native color.
The groves bow beneath the lovely burden, and all, all below, is one wide,
immense shining waste of white^ -- By deep snows, and heavy rains, GOD seals
up the hand of every man. And for this purpose, adds our sacred philosopher,
that all men may know his work. Job xxxvii.7.
He confines them within their doors, and puts a stop to their secular
business, that they may consider the things which belong to their spiritual
welfare. That, having a vacation from their ordinary employ, they may observe
the works of his power, and become acquainted with the mysteries of his grace.

And worthy, worthy of all observation, are the works of the great Creator.
They are prodigiously various, and perfectly amazing. How pliant and ductile is
nature under his forming hand! At his command, the self same substance assumes
the most different shapes, and is transformed into an endless multiplicity of
figures. If HE ordains, the water is molded into hail, and discharged upon the
earth like a volley of shot; or it is consolidated into ice, and defends the
rivers, as it were with a breast plate. At the bare intimation of his will, the
very same element is scattered in hoar frost, like a sprinkling of the most
attenuated ashes; or is spread over the surface of the ground, in these couches
of swelling and flaky down.

The snow, however it may carry the appearance of cold, affords a warm garment
for the corn; screens it from nipping frosts, and cherishes its infant growth.
It will abide for a while, to exert a protecting care, and exercise a fostering
influence. Then, touched by the sun, or thawed by a softening gale, the furry
vesture melts into genial moisture; sinks deep into the soil, and saturates its
pores with the dissolving nitre; replenishing the glebe with those principles
of vegetative life, which will open into the bloom of spring, and ripen into
the fruits of autumn. -- Beautiful emblem this, and comfortable representation
of the divine word, both in the successful and advantageous issue of its
operation! As the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not
thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may
give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater: So shall my word be, that goes
forth out of my mouth: It shall not return unto me void, but shall accomplish
that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereunto I sent it.
Isa. lv.10.11.


Nature, at length, puts off her lucid veil. She drops it in a trickling thaw.
The loosened snow rolls in sheets from the houses. Various openings spot the
hills; which, even while we look, become larger, and more numerous. The trees
rid themselves, by degrees, of the hoary encumbrance. -- Shook from the
springing boughs, part falls heavy to the ground, part flies abroad in shining
atoms. Our fields and gardens, lately buried beneath the drifted heaps, rise
plain and distinct to view. -- Since we see nature once again, has she no
verdant traces, no beautiful features left? They are, like real friends, very
rare; and therefore the more particularly to be regarded, the more highly to be
valued. -- Here and there, the holly hangs out her glowing berries; the
laurustinus spreads her graceful tufts; and both under a covert of unfading
foliage. -- The plain, but hardy ivy clothes the decrepid, crazy wall; nor
shrinks from the friendly office, though the skies frown, and the storm roars.
-- The laurel, firm, erect, and bold, expands its leaf of vivid green. In spite
of the united, the repeated attacks of wind, and rain, and frost, it preserves
an undismayed lively look; and maintains its post, while withering millions
fall around. Worthy, by vanquishing the rugged force of winter, worthy to adorn
the triumphant conqueror's brow. -- Nor must I forget the baytree, which scorns
to be a mean pensioner on a few transient sunny gleams; or, with a servile
obsequiousness, to vary its appearance, in conformity to the changing seasons.
By such indications of sterling worth, and staunch resolution, reading a
lecture to the poet's genius, while it weaves the chaplet for his temples. --
These, and a few other plants, clad with native verdure, retain their comely
aspect, in the bleakest climes, and in the coldest months.

Such, and so durable are the accomplishments of a refined understanding, and
an amiable temper. The tawdry ornaments of dress, which catch the unthinking
vulgar, soon become insipid and despicable. The rubied lip and the rosy cheek
fade. Even the sparkling wit, How little does GOD esteem the things that men
count great; the endowments of wit and eloquence that men admire in some! Alas!
how poor are they to him! He respects not any who are wise in heart: They are
nothing, and less than nothing in his eyes. Even wise men admire how little it
is that men know; how small a matter lies under the sound of these popular
wonders, a learned man, a great scholar, a great statesman. How much more does
the allwise GOD meanly account of these? He often discovers, even to the world,
their meanness. He befools them. So valor, or birth, or worldly greatness,
these he gives, and gives as things he makes no great reckoning of, to such as
shall never see his face; and calls to the inheritance of glory, poor despised
creatures, that are looked on as the offscourings and refuse of the world.

-- Thus says an excellent author, who writes with the most amiable spirit of
benevolence; with the most unaffected air of humility; and, like the sacred
originals, from which he copies, with a majestic simplicity of style. Whose
select works I may venture to recommend, not only as a treasure, but as a mine
of genuine, sterling, evangelical piety. -- See page 520, of Archbishop
LEIGHTON's Select Works, the Edinburgh edition, octavo: Which it is necessary
to specify, because the London edition does not contain that part of his
writings, which has supplied me with the preceding quotation.


as well as the sparkling eye, please but for a moment; -- but the virtuous
mind has charms which survive the decay of every inferior embellishment --
charms which add to the fragrancy of the flower, the permanency of the
evergreen.

Such likewise, is the happiness of the sincerely religious; like a tree, says
the inspired moralist, whose leaf shall not fall. He borrows not his peace from
external circumstances; but has a fund within, and is "satisfied from himself."
Prove. xiv.14.
Even though impoverished by calamitous accidents, he is rich in the possession
of grace, and richer in the hope of glory. His joys are infinitely superior
to, as well as nobly independent on, the transitory glow of sensual delight, or
the capricious savours of what the world calls fortune.

If the snow composes the light armed troops of the sky, methinks the hail
constitutes its heavy artillery. He casts forth his i^e like morsels. Psalm.
cxlvii.17. Which, in modern language, might be thus expressed -- He pours his
^a^l like a volley of shot. The word (...) inadequately translated morsels,
alludes, I think, to those fragments of the rock, or those smooth stones from
the brook, which, in the day of battle, the warriors hurried from their slings.
When driven by a vehement wind, with what dreadful impetuosity does that stony
shower fall! How it rebounds from the frozen ground, and rattles on the
resounding dome! It attenuates the rivers into smoke, or scourges them into
foam. It crushes the infant flowers, cuts in pieces the gardener's early
plants, and batters the feeble fortification of his glasses into shivers. It
darts into the traveller's face; -- he turns with haste from the stroke, or
feels on his cheek for the gushing blood. If he would retreat into the house,
it follows him even thither; and, like a determined enemy, that pushes the
pursuit, dashes through the crackling panes. But the fierce attack is quickly
over. The clouds have soon spent their shafts -- soon unstrung their bow. Happy
for the inhabitants of the earth, that a sally so dreadfully furious, should be
so remarkably short! What, else, could endure the shock, or escape destruction?

But, behold a bow, of no hostile intention! A bow, painted in variegated
colors, on the disburdened cloud* How vast is the extent, how delicate the
texture of that flowery arch! It compasses the Heavens with a glorious circle,
and teaches us to forget the horrors of the storm. Elegant its form, and rich
its tincture; but more delightful its sacred significancy. While the violet and
the rose blush in its beautiful aspect, the olive branch smiles in its gracious
import. It writes, in radiant dies, what the angels sung in harmonious strains;
"peace on earth, and good will toward men." It is the stamp of insurance, for
the continuance of seed time and harvest -- for the preservation and security
of the visible world. Genesis ix.12, 16.
It is the comfortable token Rev. iv.3.
of a better state and a happier kingdom -- a kingdom where sin shall cease,
and misery be abolished; where storms shall beat and winter pierce no more --
but holiness, happiness, and joy, like one unbounded spring, for ever, ever
bloom.

A TABLE OF THE TEXTS More or less illustrated in this WORK.
N. B. As Dr. SHAW, in the supplement to his excellent book of travels, and
several other authors of the greatest eminence, have given an index of
scriptures, occasionally explained in their writings, I doubt not, but I shall
oblige many of my readers, by what I here subjoin; those especially, whose
taste is happily formed to relish the beauties of the sacred records.

Chap. Ver. Vol. Page. GENESIS. xxx. 1. I 22 DEUTERONOMY. xxxii. 29. I 6, 7 JOSH. x.
12, 13. II 138 JUDGE. v. 20. II 139 v. 30. I 90 1 SAMUEL xxviii. 19. I 48 1 KINGS.
viii. 27. I 3, 4 xx. 40. II 33 NEHEM. ix. 6. II 142 JOB. iv. 14, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19. II 48, 49, 50. iv. 19. I 13 v. 23. II 173 vii. 20. II 95 ix. 8. I 50
ix. 25, 26. II 27 xix. 25. I 131 xxii. 14. I 50 xxii. 16. II 70 xxii. 20. II
102 xxv. 5, 6. II 115 xxvi. 14. II 89 xxxviii. 25. I 114 xxxviii. 30. II 175
PSALMS. viii. 3, 4. II 92 xxiii. 1. II 135 xxvii. 1. II 135 xxvii. 4. I 94
xxxiii. 6, 9. II 100 xlv. 8. I 88 li. 7. II 98 xcvi. 5. II 142 xcvii. 2. II 108
civ. 3. I 50 civ. 24. I 96 cviii. 4. I 65 cx. 3. I 72, 73 cx. 7. I 73, 74
cxxxvi. 9. II 67 cxxxix. 2. II 37 cxxxix. 7, 8, 9. II 25 cxxxix. 10. II 37
PROVERBS. iv. 15. I 125 ECCLES. xii. 3, 5. I 29 (...). ii. 1. I 94 vi. 10. II
71 ISA. ii. 11. II 169 ix. 3. II 116 xiv. 23. II 61 xxix. 8. II 44 xxxiii. 15.
I 125 xxxiii. 17. I 93 xxxv. 1. I 116 xxxviii. 11. II 32 xl. 12. II 104, 105
xl. 15. II 90 xl. 29, 30, 31. II 101 xli. 10. II 125 xlii. 3. II 126 xlix. 13.
II 113 li. 16. I 140 liii. 3. I 145 lv. 13. I 116 lviii. 10. I 118 lxi. 10. I
92 JEREMIAH. xxxi. 12. I 116 xlix. 11. I 26 EZEKIEL. xvi. 63. II 96 DAN. ix. 24.
II 72 xii. 3. II 146 HABAK. i. 9. II 176 iii. 4. I 104 iii. 11. II 138 ZECH.
ix. 17. II 110 xiii. 1. II 116 MATT. vi. 25. II 136 LUKE. vii. 12. II 56 xiv.
23. I 99 xv. 11. etc. II 119 xviii. 19. II 111 JOHN. i. 3. I 105 iii. ^ II 52
v. 17. I 84 x. 9. I 120 xi. 26. I 51 xii. 32. II 132 xiv. 6. I 120 xiv. 9. II
131 ACTS. ix. 1. II 121 xx. 28. II 98 ROMANS v. 8. II 112 v. 20. II 120 xiii. 14.
I 92 1 COR. i. 24, II 130 i. 30. II 68 xv. 41, 42. II 148 2 COR. iv. 17. II 38
vi. 16. I 5 ix. 8. II 118 GAL. ii. 20. I 123 EPHESIANS. iii. 10. II 130 iii. 18, 19.
II 94 iii. 20. II 102 PHILIP. ii. 6, 7, 8. II 93 iii. 10. I 123 COLOSS. ii. 3.
II 131 HEB. i. 2, 3. I 105 vii. 26. II 96 viii. 10. II 134 xii. 2. I 119 1 PET.
i. 12. II 131 2 PET. iii. 10. II 63 REV. x. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. II 29 xii. 1. I
142 xxi. 1. I 148

FINIS.

