DARBY's RETURN. A COMIC SKETCH. AS PERFORMED AT THE NEW YORK THEATER.
NOVEMBER, 24, 1789, FOR THE BENEFIT OF Mr. WIGNELL.

WRITTEN BY WILLIAM DUNLAP.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY HODGE, ALLEN, AND CAMPBELL. And Sold at their respective
Bookstores, and by BERRY AND ROGERS. M.DCC.LXXXIX.

TO THE PUBLIC.
THE following Dramatic trifle was not written for publication, but merely to
serve the Gentleman on whose night it was performed. -- The Author is fully
sensible, that the plea of its being a hasty Production is no excuse for
obtruding on the Public an incorrect Composition; but, being importuned by his
Friends, he has consented to throw this Child of the Day on the protection of
the World, encouraged by the flattering reception it received at the Theater,
and the candor once before shown to its Author.

The lines marked with inverted comma's, were omitted in the representation.

CHARACTERS.
MEN.
Darby, Mr. WIGNELL. Dermot, Mr. WOOLLS. Clown, Mr. RYAN. Father Luke, Mr.
BIDDLE.
WOMEN.
Old Woman, Mrs. HAMILTON. Kathleen* Mrs. MORRIS.
DARBY's RETURN.
SCENE. The Village of Carton.
AFTER some airs from the Poor Soldier, the curtain draws, and discovers Darby,
surrounded by Father Luke, Dermot, Kathleen, and villagers -- They huzza and
advance.

AIR. -- " What true Felicity."


FATHER LUKE. Come neighbors come, come, all around me come,
Let Us welcome home,
This silly loon,
That Is wandering been,
Through many a scene,
And left his own village to mourn him.

KATHLEEN. Now Darby we are glad to see you,
Good wishes have ever been wi' you,
Since Dermot is mine,
My friendship is thine;
No longer good Darby I Will flout you.

CHORUS of Villagers. Now Darby we are glad to see you,
Good wishes have ever been wi' you,
Now where have you been?
And what have you seen?
I prithee good fellow now tell us?

FATHER LUKE. Now Darby let us hear of the many scars,
You got in wars;
The man who dares
In battle to mix,
It Is seven to six,
But he would make a good seive ever after.

DARBY. Oh trust me no bit of a wound sir,
Over Darby's whole carcass is found sir;
He does not know fear --
But he never could bear,
To dirty good clothes on the ground sir.

CHORUS of Villagers. Now Darby we are glad to see you,
Good wishes have ever been wi' you,
Now where have you been?
And what have you seen?
I prithee good fellow now tell us!

"DARBY. "I prithee good people now stand away --
"Make room I pray!
"Hear what I say --
"I Will tell you such feats,
"In colds and in heats,
"As will make ye all gape 'till ye choke sirs.
"Now neighbors stand off; pray don't crowd so,
"And what need ye all gabble loud so,
"Who the devil can speak,
"While ye cackle and squeak,
"Like so many geese in a hog-stye.

"CHORUS of Villagers. "Now Darby we are glad to see you;
"Good wishes have ever been wi' you;
"Now where have you been?
"And what have you seen?
"I prithee good fellow now tell us!"

Music ceases. DARBY, advancing. Now! give me room to breathe; there! stand
away:
All form a ring, and then we'll see fair play.
You --

OLD WOMAN. Darby I Am deaf, and must nearer come.


DARBY. If you would hear good dame, you must be dumb.
You all remember, neighbors, ah! too well,
(Though faith! full cheery I Will the story tell.)
How I was jilted by this gypsy here -- to Kathleen.
Never tight Irish boy sure, felt so queer:
Then Pat must come too, with his "row de dow,"
So, for a gen'ral's staff I sold my plough,
My bald faced Robin, and my brindled Cow;
Then off to Dublin, joy, I nimbly pack,
And there I played a game at paddy whack:
Oh, to be sure, I didn't flash at all!
I did not dance a little at the ball!
But having spent my cash -- for cash will go!

FATHER LUKE. Ah, Darby! that is a truth we all well know!


DARBY. Sure I resolved for London; aye my boys!
When I took leave we made a glorious noise!

OLD WOMAN. Good souls! shed tears so, ha?


DARBY. Tears, mother! no*
We nothing shed but whisky: -- Off I go!
Pop board a ship -- fuddled -- mistock my way;
And when I come to rub my eyes next day.
Was on my way to Dan^^ick: Silly loon! --

OLD WOMAN. Poor Darby! taken see sick (...) so soon!


CLOWN. Oh, Darby, did you ever see a whale!


DERMOT. Hush, neighbors, hush, let Darby tell his tale.


DARBY. Well, see me landed; sure, without a farthing,
So, Prussian hero turned, to keep from starving;
Drilled, drub'd and basted, cursed and kick't and fisted.
My nice shock golden hair, black't, greased and twisted:
I Am sure I wonder how it ever come
To bring its own dear carrot color home;
So close screwed up, -- sure, Dermot, you would think,
My skin like drum-head tight: -- I couldn't wink;
Loaded with belts and buckles at all points,
We moved like wooden men with iron joints.
-- But merit cannot be hid: -- I soon was raised.

OLD WOMAN. Aye, aye, I warrant, goodness now be praised!


FATHER LUKE. What, to a Halbert? Thirteen-pence a day?


DARBY. No, to three halberts; -- cat-o-nine-tail pay:
There I was saved by little Captain Pat,
And where do you think I went to after that?
To Austria, my lads! and there I swagger'd,
Strutted and puffed, looked big, drank hard and staggered.
While my great master, doing much the same,
Bully'd the Dutchman -- thus we played the game;
Till the cursed Turks, those whisker'd, sabred dogs,
Men-eating Hannibals, with hearts like logs,
Made war upon us; then I thought 'twas best,
To seek an army that was more at rest;
Not that I minded fighting: Not a button!
(For some may think I meant to save my mutton:)
No, no! -- But being taught by Father Luke,
That Turks are heretics, I wisely took
Precautions not to have my morals hurt,
By any intercourse with such vile dirt:
So finding this was not the place for me,
Once more, good neighbors, I embarked for sea.

KATHLEEN. Alas! what hardships 'twas your lot to prove.


DARBY. Yes, Kathleen, yes! and all for sake of love.
Now on the waves again, with swelling sail --

CLOWN. Do Darby tell me! -- Did you see a whale?


DARBY. Whales! Aye, yes -- thick as hops -- since you must know,
Dancing Scotch reels -- two thousand strong or so.

CLOWN. Oh marcy!


OLD WOMAN. Gooddy!


CLOWN. Odds bobs sningers.


OLD WOMAN. Oh!


DARBY. Well neighbors, now by destinies and fates,
See me safe landed in the United States;
And now I Am at the best part of my story,
For there poor Darby was in all his glory;
From north to south, where ever I appeared,
With deeds and words, my spirits often they cheered;
But more especially I liked to work,
At one nice little place they called New York;
Oh! there they loved me dearly, never fear
But Darby loves them too, with heart sincere.
There too I saw some mighty pretty shows;
A revolution without blood or blows;
For as I understood the cunning elves,
The people all revolted from themselves;
Then after joining in a kind confession,
They all agreed to walk in a procession;
So turners, tailors, tinkers, tavern-keepers,
With parsons, blacksmiths, lawyers, chimney sweepers,
All neatly dressed, and all in order fair,
Nice painted standards, waving in the air,
Marched through the town -- eat beef -- and drank strong beer.
Soon after that I saw another show,
A man who'd fought to free the land from woe,
Like me had left his farm a soldiering to go;
But having gained his point, he had, like me,
Returned his own potatoe ground to see;
But there he coldn't rest; -- with one accord
He Is called to be a kind of --, not a Lord --
I don't know what -- he is not a great man, sure,
For poor men love him, just as he was poor!
They love him like a father or a brother.

DERMOT. As we poor Irishmen love one another.


DARBY. Just so.


FATHER LUKE. Why that is the strangest sight of all.


KATHLEEN. How looked he Darby? Was he short or tall?


DARBY. Why sure I didn't see him: to be sure,
As I was looking hard from out the door,
I saw a man in regimentals fine,
All lace and glitter, bother'um and shine;
And so I looked at him, till all was gone,
And then, I found that he was not the one.
"By this time, boys, I wanted to get home;
"I thought you would be glad to see me come;
"So, as I Have often heard the people say,
"The farthest round is much the shortest way,
"I went to France. I always did love quiet,
"And there I got in the middle of a riot.
"There they cried " vive la nation," "liberty"
"And all the bag and tails swore they would be free;
"They caught the fire quite across the ocean,
"And to be sure, they are in a nice commotion:
"(Down with the bastile -- tuck up the jailor,
"Cut off my lor's head, then pay his tailor.)
"Oh bless their hearts, if they can but get free,
"They Will soon be as fat and as jolly as we;
"Some took the liberty to plunder others,
"Because equality is more like brothers*
"You may be sure I didn't stay there long,
"So here I am boys, hearty hale and strong!"
But oh, New-York's the place to get a wife.
Aye, that is the place to lead a merry life.

FATHER LUKE. Why Darby, boy, why didn't you stay there?


DARBY. Because I wished to pay a visit here;
To see how all the Carton lasses thrive,
And ask ye, sure, if ye are all alive.
But I Will go back again, oh never fear!
I Will not be after leaving them, my dear:
You will not catch me staying a great while,
From where I Am never seen without a smile.
Oh may their little country ever prove,
The land of liberty and seat of love.
Oh bless their little hearts, and all they have got,
And may they soon have all that they have not.

CLOWN. Well, Darby, but did you see nothing more?
Did see no Indians?

DARBY. Indians? -- By the score.
I saw balloons too, and I learned a song;
I Will sing it to ye -- it is not very long.
AIR -- " The Tailor done over."
I.
We had a balloon there, as big as a church sirs,
And when it went off we were left in the lurch sirs;
For while we were watching, like sportsmen for plover.
The linen took fire -- and did us all over.
Over, over, oh!
II.
Oh when we looked up and saw nothing but smoke sirs;
We all of us laughed; -- though none found out the joke sirs.
Then all in a flock, like beforementioned plover,
We sneaked into town; -- very fairly done over.
Over, over, oh*
III.
Thus Darby his travels, has briefly related,
And all his adventures, in due order stated:
And as he has proved, that of truth he is a lover,
He hopes the pit critics -- will not do him over.
Over, over, oh!
IV.
He looks to the boxes, in hopes to find favor,
He Is a tight Irish boy -- though of clownish behavior;
Let the ladies remember, love made him a rover,
And they cannot have the heart, sure -- to do Darby over.
Over, over, oh*
V.
You jolly round faces, poor Darby's long loved you,
(to the gallery.
Your applause he may hope* since he often has proved you:
May you never want for fun, while you're here under cover,
And the fiddles still play you -- the Tailor done over.
Over, over, oh!
VI.
Your healths will he drink, in a cup of brown nappy*
(all around.
May the single be married, the married be happy:
And as gratitude many great failings may cover,
Darby's heart shall be grateful -- till death does him over.
Over, over, oh!

THE END
JUST PUBLISHED, AND TO BE SOLD BY Hodge, Allen and Campbell, The FATHER; or,
AMERICAN SHANDY-ISM. A COMEDY, as performed at the New York Theater, by the Old
American Company. Written in the Year 1789.

With what fond hope, through many a blissful hour,
We give the soul to fancy's pleasing power.
Conquest of Canaan. The Dead Alive; or, Double Funeral. A COMIC OPERA -- In
Two Acts. WITH ADDITIONS AND ALTERATIONS. As performed by the OLD AMERICAN
COMPANY, WITH UNIVERSAL APPLAUSE.

BY JOHN O'KEEFE, ESQUIRE; AUTHOR OF THE POOR SOLDIER, AGREEABLE SURPRISE, AND
TWENTY-FOUR OTHER DRAMATIC PIECES.

WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE AUTHOR.

The HISTORY of the RISE, PROGRESS, and ESTABLISHMENT of the INDEPENDENCE of
the UNITED STATES of AMERICA. Including an Account of the late War, and of the
Thirteen Colonies, from their Origin to that Period.

By WILLIAM GORDON, D. D.

Quid verum **** curo, et rogo et omnis in hoc sum.

Horat. 1 Ephesians. 1 Lib. In three Volumes, large Octavo, ornamented with
Copper Plates.

A Treatise of the Materia Medica. By WILLIAM CULLEN, M. D.

Professor of the Practice of Physic in the University of Edinburgh; -- First
Physician to his Majesty for Scotland; Fellow of the Royal College of
Physicians of Edinburgh; of the Royal Societies of London and of Edinburgh; of
the Royal Society of Medicine of Paris; of the Royal College of Physicians of
Madrid; of the American Philosophical Society of Philadelphia; of the Medical
Society of Copenhagen; of the Medical Society of Dublin; of the Royal Medical,
and of the Royal Physico-Medical, Societies of Edinburgh; -- Author of the
First Lines of the Practice of Physic, Synopsis Nosologiae -- Institutions of
Medicine, and the Essay on the Recovery of Drowned Persons.

Two Octavo Volumes, neatly printed from the last British Edition.

THE Young Gentleman and Lady's Monitor; And English Teacher's Assistant.

Being a Collection of Select Pieces from our best Modern Writers: Calculated
to eradicate vulgar Prejudices and Rusticity of Manners: Improve the
Understanding; Rectify the Will; Purify the Passions; Direct the Minds of Youth
to the Pursuit of proper Objects; and to facilitate their Reading, Writing, and
Speaking the English Language, with Elegance and Propriety.

Particularly adapted for the Use of our eminent Schools and Academies, as well
as private Persons, who have not an Opportunity of perusing the Works of those
celebrated Authors, from whence this Collection is made.

Divided into small Portions for the Ease of Reading in Classes; with
considerable Amendments and Alterations.

THE FIFTH EDITION.

By J. HAMILTON MOORE, Author of the Practical Navigator and Seaman's New Daily
Assistant.


