THE POLITICIAN OUTWITTED, A COMEDY, IN FIVE-ACTS. Written in the YEAR 1788.
BY AN AMERICAN.

"Then let not Censure, with malignant joy,

"The harvest of his humble hope destroy!"

Falconer's Shipwreck. NEW YORK: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, BY W. ROSE, IN
BROAD-STREET, AND SOLD BY THE DIFFERENT BOOKSELLERS. M.DCC.LXXXIX.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
TRUEMAN, Old LOVEYET, CHARLES LOVEYET, engaged to Harriet. FRANKTON, his
Friend. WORTHNOUGHT, HUMPHRY, TOUPEE, THOMAS.
WOMEN.
HARRIET, Daughter to Trueman. MARIA, her Friend. TABITHA CANTWELL, HERALD,
DOLLY.
SCENE, The city of NEW YORK. -- Time of four acts is one day, and the fifth
act commences the second day.

THE POLITICIAN OUTWITTED.
Act I.
Scene I. Old LOVEYET'S House.
Enter Old LOVEYET. UGH, ugh, ugh, -- what a sad rage for novelty there is in
this foolish world! How eagerly all your inspectors in the Daily Advertiser,
the New York Packet, and all the long catalogue of advertisers and
intelligencers, caught at the news of the day just now at the Coffee-House;
though a wife man and a king has told them, there is nothing new under the sun.
Ugh, ugh, ugh.

EnterTHOMAS. Well, Thomas, what is the news?

Eagerly.
Thomas. Nothing strange, sir.


Loveyet. That Is more than I can say, Thomas, for I Am sure it is strange to hear
so many people praise this same new Constitution, as it is called. -- Has the
New York Journal been brought to day?


Thomas. Yes, sir.

Fetches the news-paper.
Loveyet. Look if it contains any thing worth reading, Thomas; any thing in
behalf of the good old cause.


Thomas. Yes sir, here is something will suit your honor's notion to a hair.

Offers it to Loveyet.
Loveyet. No, Thomas, do you read it, -- I Am afraid I shall cast my eyes upon
something that is on the other side of the question; some wicked consolidation
scheme or another.


Thomas. Why, you know, sir, there is never any thing in this paper but what is
on your side of the question.


Loveyet. True, true; by my body, you're right enough, Tom. -- I forgot that;
but never mind; since you have got the paper, do you read it.


Thomas. He only wants me to read, because he cannot see to do it himself, --
he is almost as blind as a bat, and yet he will not use spectacles for fear of
being thought old.

Aside.
Loveyet. Come, Thomas, let us have it, -- I Am all ears to hear you.


Thomas. It Is a pity you have not a little more eyesight and brains along with
your ears. Aside. Reads. "Extract of a letter from a gentleman in Boston, dated
February the third, 1788. -- Our convention will pass the federal government by
a considerable majority: The more it is examined, the more converts are made
for its adoption. This you may rely on."


Loveyet. It Is a cursed lie. -- Why, why, you confounded scoundrel, do you mean
to ridicule your master?


Thomas. I ask pardon, sir; I thought it was the New York Journal; but I see it
is Mr. Childs's Daily Advertiser.


Loveyet. A plague on his aristocratic intelligence! -- Begone, you vile foe to
American Liberty, or I Will --

Exit Thomas.
Enter TRUEMAN. What, my friend Trueman! well, what is the news, egh?


Trueman. I have not learned a single monosyllable, sir.


Loveyet. Nothing concerning this same Constitution there is so much talk
about, friend Horace? A miserable Constitution, by the bye. If mine was no
better, -- ugh, ugh, ugh, -- I say, if -- ugh, ugh, if my constitution was no
better than this same political one, I solemnly swear, as true as I am this
day, man and boy, two score and three years, five months, eleven days, six
hours, and, and, -- pulling out his watch fifty nine minutes old; why, I -- I
-- I would, -- I don't know what I would not do. -- Ugh, ugh.


Trueman. Mr. Loveyet, you run on in such a surprising manner with your
narrations, imprecations, admirations, and interrogations, that, upon my
education, sir, I believe you are approaching to insanity, phrenzy, lunacy,
madness, distraction, -- a man of your age --


Loveyet. Age. sir, age! -- And what then, sir, egh! -- what then? I Would have you
to know, sir, that I shall not have lived forty years 'till next spring
twelvemonth, old as I am; and if my countenance seems to belie me a little or
so, why -- trouble, concern for the good of my country, sir, and this
tyrannical villainous Constitution have made me look so; but my health is
sound, sir; my lungs are good, sir, raising his voice -- ugh, ugh, ugh, -- I am
neither spindle-shank'd nor crook-back'd, and I can kiss a pretty girl with as
good a relish as -- ugh, ugh, -- ha, ha, ha. A man of five and forty, old,
forsooth! ha, ha. My age, truly! -- ugh, ugh, ugh.


Trueman. You talk very valiantly, Mr. Loveyet; very valiantly indeed; I dare
say now you have temerity and enterprise enough, even at this time of day, to
take a wife.


Loveyet. To be sure I have. Let me see, -- I should like a woman an inch or
two less than six feet high now, and thick in proportion: By my body, such a
woman would look noble by the side of me when she was entient.


Trueman. Oh, monstrous! Entient! an entient woman by the side of an ancient
husband! Most preposterous, unnatural, and altogether incongruous!


Loveyet. Poh, a fig for your high-flown nonsense. I suppose you think it would
cost me a great deal of trouble.


Trueman. No, no; some clever young blade will save you the trouble.


Loveyet. By my body, I should love dearly to have such a partner; she would be
a credit to me when she had me under the arm.


Trueman. Under the thumb, you mean.


Loveyet. Under the Devil, you mean.


Trueman. You're right; you might as well be under the Devil's government as
petticoat government; you're perfectly right there.


Loveyet. I Am not perfectly right; -- I -- I -- I mean you are not perfectly
right; and as for her age, why I should like her to be -- let me see -- about
ten years younger than myself: a man should be at least ten years older than
his wife.


Trueman. Ten years; -- fifty three and ten are sixty three. -- Then you mean
your wife shall be fifty three years of age.


Loveyet. God's Death, sir! I tell you I am but two and forty years old: She shall not
be more than thirty odd, sir, and she shall be ten years younger than I am too.


Trueman. Yes. thirty odd years younger than you are; ha, ha. The exiguity of
those legs is a most promising earnest of your future exploits, and demonstrate
your agility, virility, salubrity, and amorosity; ha, ha, ha. I cannot help
laughing to think what a blessed union there will be between August and
December; a jolly, buxom, wanton, wishful, plethoric female of thirty odd, to
an infirm, decrepit, consumptive, gouty, rheumatic, asthmatic, phlegmatic
mortal of near seventy; ha, ha. Exquisitely droll and humorous, upon my
erudition. It puts me in mind of a hot bed in a hard winter, surrounded with
ice, and made verdant and flourishing only by artificial means.


Loveyet. Psha, you're a fool!


Enter TOUPEE. Toupee. Pardonnez moy, monsieur. I hope it not be any intrusion;
par dieu, I will not frize dat Jantemon a la mode Paris no more, becase he vas
front me.


Trueman. What Is the matter, Mr. Toupee?


Toupee. I will tella your honare of the fracas. I vas vait on monsieur a --
chooses, and make ma compliment avec beaucoup de grace, ven monsieur vas read de
news papier; so I say, is your honare ready for be dress? De great man say, "No
--, d -- n de barbare." in a low voice. I tell de parsone, sare, I have promise
'pon honare for dress one great man vat is belong to de Congress, 'bout dis
time, sans manquer: De ansare vas (excuse moy, monsieur) "go to h -- ll, if you
be please; I must read 'bout de Constitution." Dis is de ole affair, monsieur,
en verite.


Loveyet. Sixty three, indeed! Heaven forbid! But if I was so old, my
constitution is good; age is nothing, the constitution is all, -- ugh, ugh, ugh.


Toupee. Sare, you vill give me leaf, vat is dat Constitution?


Loveyet. Hold your prating, you booby.


Toupee. You booby, -- Vat is dat booby, I vonder!


Trueman. Ha, ha, a good constitution! With great propriety did the man ask you
what constitution you meant. Ha, ha, ha.


Toupee. Par Dieu, monsieur de Schoolmastare sall larn a me vat is de booby!
oui, an de Constitution, -- foy d'Homme d'Honneur.


Trueman. What a figure for a sound constitution! ha, ha.


Loveyet. Ugh, hang you for an old simpleton! Talk of my age and constitution.
-- Ugh, ugh, ugh.

Exit.
Trueman. Fractious old blockhead!


Toupee. Blockhead! Pourquoi you call a mine head von block, fare?


Trueman. I mean that old curmudgeon who goes hobbling along there, like a man
of forty.


Toupee. Pardonnez moy, monsieur; S'il vous plait, ve make de eclaircissement,
if you tell me vat is de interpretation -- you booby.


Trueman. What! have you the effrontery to call me a booby? God's Death, you
scoundrel, what do you mean?


Toupee. Vous ne m' entendez pas.

Hastily.
Trueman. Do you threaten me, you insignificant thing? Do you call me names?


Toupee. Diable! me no stand under your names.


Trueman. Zounds and fury! I am raving. -- Must I bear to be abused in this
manner, by a vile Tonsor?


Toupee. Yes, you Schoolmastare; you tell me vat be you booby.


Trueman. Pertinacious, audacious reptile!

Canes Toupee.
Toupee. Ah, mon dieu! mon dieu!

Runs off.
Trueman. To insult a professor of Orthography, Analogy, Syntax, and Prosody.


SCENE III. A STREET.
Enter Young LOVEYET. In compliance with the commands of a Father, here I am,
once more in the place of my nativity. Duty to him, and curiosity to know, why
he has enjoined my sudden departure so peremptorily, as well as a desire to see
New York (perhaps never to leave it more) have all conspired to bring me here
sooner than I am expected, -- let me see -- yes, I must try to find out
Frankton first. Humphry crosses the stage. Here, friend, honest man, prithee
stop.


Humphry. What Is your will?


Loveyet. Can you inform me, friend, where one Mr. Frankton lives?


Humphry. No, I don't know where any body lives in this big city, not I; for my
part, I believe how they all lives in the street, there is such a monstrous
sight of people a scrouging backards and forards, as the old saying is. If I
was home now --


Loveyet. Where is your home, if I may make so free?


Humphry. Oh, you may make free and welcome, for the more freer the more
welcomer, as the old saying is; I never thinks myself too good to discourse my
superiors: There Is some of our townsfolks now, why some of um is not so good as
I, to be sure. -- There Is Tom Forge, the blacksmith, and little Daniel Snip,
the tailor, and Roger Peg, the cobbler, and Tim Frize, the barber, and Landlord
Tipple, that keeps the alehouse at the sign of the Turk's Head, and Jeremy
Stave, the clark of the meeting house, why, there an't one of 'um that is a
single copper before a beggar, as the old saying is; but what o'that? We is not
all born alike, as father says; for my part, I likes to be friendly, so give us
your hand -- You mus'n't think how I casts any reflections on you; no, no, I
scorn the action. They shake hands. -- That Is hearty now -- Friendship is a
fine thing, and, a friend indeed is a friend in need, as the saying is.


Loveyet. What an insufferable fool it is!

Half aside.
Humphry. Yes, it is insufferable cool, that is sartin; but it is time to expect
it.


Loveyet. Worse and worse!


Humphry. Yes, I warrant you it vill be worser and worser before long; so I
must even go home soon, and look after the corn and the wheat, or else old
father will bring his pigs to a fine market, as the old proverb goes.


Loveyet: You're quite right; you mean your father would bring his corn to a
sine market: You means it as figurative expression, I presume.


Humphry. Not I, I is not for none of your figure expressions, do you see, becase
why, I never larnt to cipher; -- every grain of corn a pig! Ha, ha, ha. That Is
pleasant, ecod; why the Jews would not dare for to show their noses out o'doors,
every thing would smell so woundily of pork! Ha, ha, ha.


Loveyet. A comical countryman of mine this.

Aside.
What is your name, my honest lad?

Humphry. Why, if you will tell me your name, I Will tell you mine, do you see; for,
one good turn desarves another, as the old saying is, and, evil be to them that
evil thinks, every tub must stand upon its own bottom, and, when the steed is
stolen, shut the stable door, and, while the grass grows, the mare starves --
the horse I mean; it don't make no odds, a horse is a mare, but a mare an't a
horse, as father says, do you see -- and --


Loveyet. What a monstrous combination of nonsense!


Humphry. Don't tell me what I am, but tell me what I have been --


Loveyet. Prithee, Mr. Sancho, let us have no more of those insipid proverbs.
You was going to tell me your name.


Humphry. My name is Cubb, -- Humphry Cubb, at your sarvice, as the saying is.


Loveyet. Hah! my worthy friend Frankton --


Enter FRANKTON. Frankton. My best, my long expected Charles! -- your arrival
has made me the happiest man alive.

They embrace.
Loveyet. I am heartily glad to see you, George, and to meet you so
opportunely; it is not fifteen minutes since I landed on my native soil, and you
are the very person, above every other in the city, whom I wished first to see.


Frankton. Then you have not forgot your friend.


Loveyet. Far from it, Frankton; be assured that the joy I now feel at meeting
with you, is by no means the least I expect to experience.


Frankton. Our satisfaction is then mutual -- your friends are all happy and
well, and I know your arrival will not a little contribute to their felicity,
as well as mine -- but who have you here, Loveyet? Landed not fifteen minutes
ago, and in close confab with one of our Boors already?


Humphry. A boar! why you're worfer than he there -- he only took father's corn
for pigs, but do you take me for a boar, egh? Do I look like a hog, as the
saying is?


Frankton. Begone, you illiterate lubber! -- My dear Charles, I have a thousand
things to say to you, and this is an unfit place for conversation.


Loveyet. We will adjourn to the Coffee-House.


Frankton. No, you shall go with me to my lodgings.


Humphry. Why, what a cruel-minded young dog he is! See how he swaggers and
struts -- he looks very like the Pharisee's head, on old Coming Sir, honest
Dick Tipple's sign, I think -- No, now I look at him good, he is the very moral
of our Tory.


Loveyet. I wait your pleasure, Frankton.


Frankton. Then allons!

Exeunt Frankton and Loveyet.
Humphry. Burlesquing them. Forward, march -- as our Captain says -- struts
after them. -- Literary lubber, egh! But I Will be up with the foutre.


[FRANKTON and LOVEYET return.] Frankton. Do you call me a foutre, you rascal?


Humphry. Call you a future! ha, ha, ha. I was a talking about something that I
was a going for to do some other time, sir, -- Does Not future magnify some
other time, egh?


Frankton. The future signifies the time to come, to be sure.


Humphry. Well, then, is not I right? What argufies your signifies, or your
magnifies? There an't the toss up of a copper between um -- I would not give a
leather button for the choice, as the old proverb goes.


Frankton. Harkee, Mr. Talkative, if you ever --


Humphry. No, Sir, never, -- that I will not -- no, no, you may be sure of that.


Frankton. Sure of what?


Humphry. Nothing, Sir; we can be sartin of nothing in this world, as Mr.
Thumpum says.


Loveyet. Ha, ha, ha.


Frankton. Oh, what a precious numscull it is!


Loveyet. to Frankton I have a letter here, which announces to my father, my
intention to leave the West Indies the beginning of March, but I missed of the
expected conveyance -- I have half a mind to send it yet. I would not have him
apprized of my arrival; for I wish to try if he would know me; -- and yet I
long to embrace my aged and venerable parent. Will you do me the favor to take
this letter to my father, Mr. Cubb? He lives at number two hundred and fifty,
in Queen Street, in a three story red brick house. -- I Will reward you for it.


Humphry. As for your rewards, I Am above it, do you see: If I do it, I Will do it
without fear or reward, as the saying is; but if you think fit, you may treat a
body to the valuation of a mug or so. Don't you love ale? for they says how the
Yorkers is cursed fellows for strong beer.


Loveyet. What a digression!


Humphry. I scorn your words -- it is no transgression at all to drink ale --
Why Parson Thumpum himself drinks ale.


Loveyet. Well, will you carry the letter? You shall have as much strong beer
when you come back as you can stagger under.


Humphry. Why, if I was for to have my beer a-board before I go, I shou'dn't
get top-heavy, as the saying is; for I can carry as much weight in my head as
ever a he that wears a head, without staggering.


Frankton. I dare say you can; you have always plenty of that.


Humphry. Yes, you're right -- I know what you mean; I Have got it here a little,
as old Mr. Scourage says. Exeunt Frankton and Loveyet. But as for what you said
just now -- no, no, Sir; I Will never foutre you, I warrant you -- I always
curses and swears in plain English, do you see -- I -- what is he gone? I hope he
will not come back again for the sixth time; three times has he been in and out
within the circumference of a minute. But I will not stay here no longer -- I Will
go and try if I cannot find out where Doll lives, my old sweetheart; I an't so
poor, but what I can buy her a ribbon or so; and, if all comes to all, I can
get a new pair o'breeches too; for, to be sure, this one does not look quite so
decent, and if that does not fetch her, the devil shall, as the old saying is.
I Am cursedly afraid, I shall not be able to find out her quarters.

Exit.
SCENE III. Mr. FRIENDLY'S House.
Enter HARRIET, and MARIA. Harriet. Pray, Maria, how were you entertained at
the Assembly last night?


Maria. Very indifferently, I assure you, my dear: You know, Harriet, I do most
cordially hate dancing at any time; but what must one do with one's self these
irksome, heavy, dreary Winters? If it were not for cards, visits to and from,
and --


Harriet. Assemblies.


Maria. Yes, as my last resource, Assemblies, I should absolutely be in a state
of despair before Spring. -- Then one may take an excursion on York or
Long Island -- an agreeable sail on the East-river -- a walk in the Broad-way,
Pharisee like, to be seen of men, and -- to see them -- and then how refreshing
to take a negligent stroll on the Battery, the Fort, the Mall, and from thence
to Miss Such-a-one, then to Mrs. Such-a-one, then to Lady What's-her-name, and
then home; -- but now I am half of my time as motionless as Pitt's statue; as
petrified and inanimate as an Egyptian mummy, or rather frozen snake, who
crawls out of his hole now and then in this season to bask in the rays of the
sun.


Harriet. And whenever the sunshine of Mr. Frankton's eyes breaks upon you,
you revive.


Maria. Psha -- I wish you had Mr. Frankton yourself, since you are so full of
his sweet image.


Harriet. I Am sure you did not wish so last night: Your eyes seemed to say, --
I wish I could secure the good-for-nothing, agreeable rake.


Maria. Oh, you heard my eyes say so, did you? I ask pardon of your penetration.


Harriet. But do you really think the Winter is so destitute of comforts?


Maria. Ha, ha, comforts! by comforts I suppose you mean the sweets of domestic
life -- the large portion of comfort arising from a large winter fire, and the
very pleasing tittle-tattle of an antiquated maiden aunt, or the equally
pleasing (though less loquacious) society of a husband, who, with a complaisance
peculiar to husbands, responds -- sometimes by a doubtful shrug, sometimes a
stupid yawn, a lazy stretch, an unthinking stare, a clownish nod, a surly no,
or interrogates you with a -- humph? 'till bed time, when, heaven defend us!
you are doomed to be snor'd out of your wits 'till daybreak, when --


Harriet. Hold, Maria -- what a catalogue of uncomfortable comforts have you
ran over. -- Pleasure and Comfort are words which imply the same thing with me;
but in this enlightened age, when words are so curiously resin'd and desin'd,
modern critics and fashionable word-mongers have, in the abundance of their
wisdom, made a very nice distinction between them -- for my part, I always
endeavor to reconcile modish pleasure with real comfort, and custom with
reason, as much as is any way consistent with the obligation one is under to
conform a little to the perverse notions of mankind.


Maria. There now! -- You know I cannot abide to hear you moralize -- prithee,
my dear Harriet, leave that to gray beards and long-ear'd caps -- every thing
is beautiful in its season, you know.


Harriet. Common sense and propriety are ever in season, Maria, and I was going
to mention a sentimental pleasure, a rational enjoyment, which is peculiar to
the present season, though beautiful in every one, if you had not got frightened
at the idea of being comforted.


Maria. Well, my dear comfortable, rational, sentimental Harriet! Let me hear
what this rational enjoyment of yours is?


Harriet. Hearing a good play, my dear.


Maria. Hearing a good play! why not seeing it, pray?


Harriet. Because I believe plays are frequently seen, and not heard; at least,
not as they ought to be.


Maria. I protest you are quite a critic, Harriet.


Harriet. If you desire amusement, what so likely to beguile the heavy hours as
Comedy? If your spirits are despress'd, what so replete with that which can
revive them as the laughter-loving Thalia? If the foibles and vices of human
nature ought to suffer correction, in what way can they be satiriz'd so happily
and successfully as on the stage; -- or if elegance of language, and refinement
of sentiment --


Maria. Humph -- there is sentiment again.


Harriet, You dislike every good thing I have mentioned this morning, Maria, --
except one.


Maria. What Is that, my dear?


Harriet. Mr. Frankton.


Maria. Ha, ha. Why, to be sure, the good things of this life are not to be
despised, and men are not the worst creatures belonging to this life, nor Mr.
Frankton the worst of men, but -- apropos, about plays -- did you observe how
much I was affected the other night at the tragedy of Zara?


Harriet. I really did not -- I wish I had seen such a pleasing proof of your
sensibility.


Maria. Oh, you cruel creature! -- wish to see your friend in tears?


Harriet. It Is rather unusual to see a lady of your taste and spirit, either
weep at a pathetic incident in tragedy, or laugh at a comic scene; and as for
the gentlemen, your lads of spirit, such as are falsely called ladies' men,
they are not so masculine as to understand, and therefore not so effeminate as
to weep; though one would conclude, from their effeminacy in appearance and
behavior, that they would cry if you were to look at them.


Maria. To be sure, a little matter will draw tears from the feminine part of
mankind.


Harriet. For your part, you seemed to be neither laughing nor crying, but
rather displeased and uneasy.


Maria. Oh, you mistake the matter entirely, my dear; your skill in physiognomy
is but indifferent, I find -- why, after the tragedy was over, I laughed most
inordinately for a considerable time.


Harriet. On what account, pray?


Maria. Why, you must know, my dear, Mr. Frankton sat in the box opposite to
the one I was in.


Harriet. Yes, I know your dear Mr. Frankton was in the opposite box.


Maria. My dear Mr. Frankton! Did I say so? Why I could not say more of him,
were he my husband.


Harriet. If you conform to custom, you would not say so much of a husband.


Maria. But I did not say any such thing. -- Says I, you must know, my dear
Harriet, --


Harriet. No, no, there was no Harriet mentioned.


Maria. But I say there was -- so, as I was going to tell you, you must know,
my dear Harriet, that Mr. Frankton sat opposite to me at the Theater; and as he
seemed to be very much chagrin'd at the attention which was paid me by a couple
of beaux, I took some pains to mortify him a little; for, though he strove to
hide his uneasiness by chattering, and whispering, and tittering, and showing
his white teeth, his embarrassment was very visible under his affected
unconcern.


Harriet. How exactly she has described her own situation and feelings! aside
-- I find that you acquire your skill in physiognomy from sympathy; or from
making suitable comparisons, and drawing natural inferences from them; but now
for the remainder of your pleasant anecdote, Maria.


Maria. So, I was extremely civil to my two worshipping votaries, grinn'd when
they did, and talked as much nonsense as either of them. During this scene of
mock-gallantry, one of my lovesick swains elevated his eyes in a most
languishing manner; and, clasping his sweet, unlucky hands together rather
eagerly, my little dog Muff happened to be in the way, by which means my pet
was squeezed rather more than it liked, and my Adonis's finger bit by it so
feelingly, that it would have delighted you to see how he twisted his soft
features about, with the excruciating anguish. Ha, ha, ha.


Harriet. Ha, ha, ha. Exceeding ludicrous indeed! -- But pray, my dear
careless, sprightly Maria, was you not a little nettled to see Mr. Frankton and
his nymphs so great? And are you not deeply in love with each other,
notwithstanding your coquetry at the Theater, and his levity at the Assembly?
-- Yes, yes, -- your aversion to the dancing last night was only pretense. I
hope when your hearts are cemented by wedlock, you will both do better.


Maria. It will be well if I do no worse; but, to hear you talk, one would
swear you were not in love yourself.


Harriet. Love is an amiable weakness, of which our sex are peculiarly
susceptible.


Maria. Ha, ha, ha; of which our sex are peculiarly susceptible -- what an
evasion! -- and so my dear lovelorn, pensive, sentimental, romantic Harriet has
never experienced that same amiable weakness which, it seems, the weaker sex is
so susceptible of. But I will not teaze you about Mr. Loveyet any more; adieu.

Going
Harriet. Ha, ha; why in such sudden haste, my dear?


Maria. I have already made my visit longer than I intended, and I have plagued
you enough now; adieu.


Harriet. Ha, ha, ha; that is laughable enough.

Exeunt separately.
End of the FIRST ACT.
Act II.
Scene I. FRANKTON'S Lodgings.
FRANKTON and Young LOVEYET sitting. LOVEYET. WHEN did you say you see her?


Frankton. Last night, in company with several other belles of no small note
who did not look a tittle the handsomer for appearing at the same time with
her, I assure you.


Loveyet. Then she is as charming as ever.


Frankton. Charming as ever! By all that is beautiful, a Seraphim is nothing to
her! And as for Cherubims, when they compete with her.

Conscious of her superior charms they stand,
And rivaled quite by such a beauteous piece
Of mortal composition; they, reluctant,
Hide their diminished heads.

Loveyet. You extol her in very rapturous strains, George -- I hope you have
not been smitten by her vast perfection, like the Cherubims.


Frankton. I am really enraptured with the bewitching little Goddess!


Loveyet. Do you positively think her so much superior to the generality of
women?


Frankton. Most indubitably I do -- don't you, pray?


Loveyet. I thought her handsome once -- but -- but -- but you certainly are
not in love with her.


Frankton. Not I, faith. Ha, ha, ha. My enamorata and yours are two distinct
persons, I assure you -- and two such beauties! -- By all that is desirable, if
there was only one more in the city who could vie with the lovely girls, and
boast of the same elegantly proportioned forms; the same beauty, delicacy and
symmetry of features; the same celestial complexion, in which the lily and
carnation are equally excelled; the same --


Loveyet. Oh, monstrous! Why, they exceed all the Goddesses I ever heard of, by
your account.


Frankton. Well, if you had let me proceed, I should have told you that if one
more like them could be found in town, they would make a more beautiful triple
than the three renowned goddesses who were candidates for beauty and a golden
apple long ago; but no matter now. -- The account you have given of the lovely
Harriet, has rekindled the flame she so early inspired me with, and I already
feel myself all the lover; how then shall I feel, when I once more behold the
dear maid, like the mother of mankind -- "with grace in all her steps, heaven
in her eye; in every gesture, dignity and love!"


Frankton. Ay, -- and what do you think of your father's sending for you to
marry you to this same beautiful piece of mortality?


Loveyet. Is it possible! Then I am happy indeed! But this surpasses my most
sanguine hopes!


Frankton. Did you suppose he would object to the alliance then?


Loveyet. I did not know, -- my hope was only founded on the probability of his
approving it.


Frankton. Well, I can now inform you that your hope has a better basis to rest
on, and that there is as fair a prospect of its being shortly swallowed up in
fruition as ever Cupid and Hymen presented to a happy mortal's view. -- For
your farther comfort, I have the pleasure to acquaint you, that Mr. Trueman is
equally fond of the match.


Loveyet. Better and better -- my dear George! You are the best of friends, --
my happy genius! My very guardian angel!


Frankton. Well said, Heroics -- come, spout away.


Loveyet. Yes, I am happy, very happy, indeed: Moralists disparage this world
too much, -- there is such a thing as happiness under the sun, -- I feel it now
most irrefragably, -- here it vibrates in a most extatic manner.


Frankton. Why you are positively the arrantest lovesick swain that ever had
recourse to a philter.


Loveyet. Profane heretic in love! Did not you extol the two Seraphims just now
in the same generous language? But you have never experienced the blissful
transition from doubt and solicitude to certainty and peace, as I do now.


Frankton. How do you know that?


Loveyet. I only conjecture so -- Did you ever feel the same transports I do?


Frankton. How, in the name of sense, should I know how you feel?


Loveyet. Feel! -- I feel that kind heaven, my friend, my father and my dearest
girl, all conspire to bless me!


Frankton. There he rides his hobbyhorse again.


Loveyet. Ay, and a generous horse he is -- he carries me very pleasantly, I
assure you.


Frankton. Yes, and, I dare say, could convey you more agreeably and speedily
to Paradise than the Ass did Mahomet.


Loveyet. Ha, ha. I think you have improved my idea.


Frankton. To improve your reason, and check your strange delirium, I have.


Loveyet. I will talk more dispassionately; -- but my heart will palpitate at
the thought of meeting the lovely source of its joy, and the ultimatum of all
its wishes!


Frankton. I suppose you know she lives with Mr. Friendly.


Loveyet. With Mr. Friendly!


Frankton. Yes, she is nearly related to his family, and as the style in which
they live, corresponds with her former prosperity better than the present
ineligible situation of her father does, he has granted them her valuable
company, after their repeated solicitations had proved the sincerity of their
regard.


Loveyet. But how do you account for Mr. Trueman's poverty, since fortune has
lately put it so much in Harriet's power to relieve him from it? I dare not
think it arises from her want of filial regard; I do not know any thing so
likely to abate the ardour of my attachment as a knowledge of that; but it is
an ungenerous suggestion, unworthy the benignity and tenderness of the gentle
Harriet.


Frankton. It is so. -- Two things, on the part of the old gentleman, are the
cause: his pride will not suffer him to be the subject of a daughter's bounty;
and his regard for that daughter's welfare, makes him fearful of being
instrumental in impairing her fortune.


Loveyet. I thought the angelic girl could not be ungrateful to the parent of
her being; but don't let us tarry -- I am already on the wing.


Frankton. You are too sanguine; you must not expect to succeed without a
little opposition.


Loveyet. How! what say you? pray be explicit.


Frankton. I will remove your suspense. -- There is a Mr. Worthnought, a thing
by some people called a man, a beau, a fine gentleman, a smart fellow; and by
others a coxcomb, a puppy, a baboon and an ass.


Loveyet. And what of him?


Frankton. Nothing; only he visits Miss Harriet frequently.


Loveyet. Hah! -- and does she countenance his addresses?


Frankton. I Will explain. -- He imagines she is fond of him, because she does
not actually discard him; upon which presumption he titters, capers, vows,
bows, talks scraps of French, and sings an amorous lay -- with such an
irresistably languishing air, that she cannot do less than compliment him -- on
the fineness of his voice, for instance; the smartness of his repartees, the
brilliancy of his wit, the gaiety and vivacity of his temper, his genteel
carriage, his handsome person, his winning address, his --


Loveyet. Hah! you surely cannot be in earnest, Frankton.


Frankton. To be serious then, -- the sum total of the affair, I take to be
this. -- In order to kill a heavy hour, she sometimes suffers the fool to be in
her company, because the extravagance of his behavior, and the emptiness of
his upper region furnish her with a good subject for ridicule; but your
presence will soon make him dwindle into his primitive insignificance.


Loveyet. If your prediction proves false, Harriet will be false indeed; -- but
I must see her straitway.


Frankton. I think you go pretty well fraught with the fruits of our united
deliberations.


Loveyet. Deliberations! -- away with the musty term --

No caution need my willing footsteps guide; --
When Love impels -- what evil can betide?
Patriots may fear, their rulers lack more zeal,
And nobly tremble for the public weal;
To front the battle, and to fear no harm,
The shield must glitter on the warrior's arm:
Let such dull prudence their designs attend,
But Love, unaided, shall obtain its end!
Exeunt.
SCENE II. Old LOVEYET'S House.
Enter Old LOVEYET, and TRUEMAN. Loveyet. I tell you it is the most infernal
scheme that ever was devised.


Trueman. And I tell you, sir, that your argument is heterodox, sophistical,
and most preposterously illogical.


Loveyet. I insist upon it, sir, you know nothing at all about the matter; and,
give me leave to tell you, sir, --


Trueman. What -- give you leave to tell me I know nothing at all about the
matter! I shall do no such thing, sir -- I Am not to be governed by your ipse
dixit.


Loveyet. I desire none of your musty Latin, sir, for I don't understand it,
not I.


Trueman. Oh the ignorance of the age! To oppose a plan of government like the
new Constitution. Like it, did I say? -- There never was one like it: --
neither Minos, Solon, Lycurgus, nor Romulus, ever fabricated so wise a system;
-- why it is a political phoenomenon, a prodigy of legislative wisdom, the fame
of which will soon extend almost ultramundane, and astonish the nations of the
world with its transcendent excellence. -- To what a sublime height will the
superb edifice attain!


Loveyet. Your aspiring edifice shall never be erected in this State, sir.


Trueman. Mr. Loveyet, you will not listen to reason; only attend calmly one
moment -- reads -- "We the people of the United States, in order to form a more
perfect union, establish justice, insure domestic tranquillity, provide -- "


Loveyet. I tell you I will not hear it.


Trueman. Mark all that. Reads again "Section the first. -- All legislative
powers herein granted, shall be vested in a Congress of the United States,
which shall consist of a Senate and House of Representatives." Very judicious
and salutary, upon my erudition. -- "Section the second -- "


Loveyet. I Will hear no more of your sections.


Trueman. "Section the second. -- The House of Representatives" --


Loveyet. They never shall represent me, I promise them.


Trueman. Why you will not hear me out.


Loveyet. I have heard enough to set me against it.


Trueman. You have not hear a quantum sufficit to render you competent to give
a decisive opinion; besides, you hear with passion and prejudice.


Loveyet. I don't care for that; I say it is a devilish design upon our liberty
and property; by my body, it is; -- it would reduce us to poverty and slavery.


Enter HUMPHRY, listening. Humphry. What Is that about liberty, and property,
and slavery, and popery, and the devil? I hope the pope and the devil an't come
to town for to play the devil, and make nigers of us!


Trueman. You will have it your own way.


Loveyet. To be sure I will -- in short, sir, the old Constitution is good
enough for me.


Humphry. I wonder what Constitution magnifies.


Trueman. The old Constitution! -- ha, ha, ha, ha. Superlatively ludicrous and
facetious, upon my erudition; and highly productive of risibility -- ha, ha,
ha. The old Constitution! A very shadow of a government -- a perfect caput
mortuum; -- why, one of my schoolboys would make a better; it is grown as
superannuated, embecilitated, valetudinarianated, invalidated, enervated and
dislocated as an old man of sixty odd.


Loveyet. Ah, that is me -- that is me -- Sixty odd, egh -- Aside. -- I -- I --
ugh, ugh, I know what you want: -- a consolidation and annihilation of the
States.


Trueman. A consolidation and annihilation! -- You certainly have bid defiance
to the first rudiments of grammar, and sworn was against the whole body of
Lexicographers. Mercy on me! If words are to be thus abused and perverted,
there is an end of the four grand divisions of grammar at once: If
consolidation and annihilation are to be used synonymously, there is a total
annihilation of all the moods, tenses, genders, persons, nouns, pronouns,
verbs, adverbs, substantives, conjunctions, interjections, prepositions,
participles, -- Coughs.


Humphry. Oh dear, oh dear, -- what a wise man a Schoolmaster is!


Trueman. How can the States be consolidated and annihilated too? If they are
consolidated or compounded into one national mass, surely the individual States
cannot be annihilated, for, if they were annihilated, where would be the States
to compose a consolidation? -- Did you ever study Logic, sir?


Loveyet. No, but I Have studied common sense though, and that tells me I am right,
and consequently you are wrong; there, that is as good logic as yours.


Trueman. You mean Paine's Common Sense, I suppose -- yes, yes, there you
manifest something like common sense, Mr. Loveyet.


Loveyet. It Is no such thing, sir; it lately took three speakers, and much
better ones than Pain, no less than three whole days, to prove that
consolidation and annihilation are one and the same thing.


Trueman. An execrable Triumvirate -- a scandalum magnatum to all public
bodies: I suppose they and their adherents are now sitting in Pandemonium,
excogitating their diabolical machinations against us.


Loveyet. A pack of nonsensical stuff!


Trueman. Harkee, Mr. Loveyet, I will propound a problem to you. We will
suppose there are two parallel lines drawn on this floor, which notwithstanding
they may be very contiguous to each other, and advance ad infinitum, can never
approximate so near as to effect a junction, in which fundamental axiom all
mathematicians profess a perfect congruity and acquiescence: -- now, to
elucidate the hypothesis a little, we will suppose here is one line; and we
will further suppose here is another line. draws his cane over Loveyet's feet,
which makes him jumb. Now we will suppose that line is you, and this line is
composed, formed, constituted, made up of discernment, political knowledge,
public spirit, and true republicanism, -- but, as I predicated antecedently,
that line is you -- striking his cane on Loveyet's feet. you must not forget
that.


Loveyet. God's Death, sir, do you mean to make a mathematical instrument of me, to
try experiments with?


Trueman. Now take notice -- as the East is to the West, the North Pole to the
South ditto, the Georgium Sidus to this terraqueous globe, or the Aborigines of
America to the Columbians of this generation, so is that line to this line, or
Mr. Loveyet to true wisdom and judgment; sometimes appearing to verge toward a
coalition with them, but never to effect it. There, sir -- in this argument,
you have a major, a minor and a conclusion, consonant to the received
principles of logic.


Loveyet. Confound your senseless comparisons; your problems, your mathematics,
and your Georgium Sidus.


Humphry. Ay, confound your gorgon hydras, I say too.


Loveyet. Here you have been spending your breath to prove -- what? -- that I
am not a rational human being, but a mathematical line.


Trueman. I know you are not a mathematical line; you are not the twentieth
part so straight and well made; -- I only wish to convince you that the present
government is an ignis satuus that is leading you and thousands more to ruin.


Loveyet. But I don't choose to be convinced by you.


Trueman. No more than you will be convinced you are sixty odd years old, I
suppose.


Loveyet. Now see there again, see there! is not this enough to try Job's
patience? I Will let you know that my bodily and political Constitutions are both
good, sir, both sound alike.


Trueman. I know they are. Ha, ha, ha.


Humphry. Pray, old gentleman, what sort of thing may them same constitutions
he?


Trueman. Avaunt, thou plebeian, thou ignoramus!


Humphry. Why I lay now I can say that as good as you, for all you're such a
fine scholard. -- I will not be plain, thou ignorant mouse.


Trueman. "Monstrum horrendum, cui lumen ademptum!"


Humphry. Monstrous memorandums, cu -- no, I cannot say that; that is too hard
for me. Well, what a glorious thing it is for to have good larning.


Loveyet. Sixty odd years indeed! provoking wretch!


Humphry. what a bloody passion he is in!


Trueman. Pray, Mr. Loveyet, do not anathematize me so; -- if you do not
civilize your phraseology a little, I must have recourse to a little
castigation, for, necessitas non habet legem, you know, Mr. Loveyet.


Loveyet. I know nothing about such nonsense, not I.


Trueman. You are the most unenlightened, contumacious, litigious, petulant,
opprobrious, proditorious, misanthropic mortal I ever confabulated a coloquy
with; by the dignity of my profession, you are.


Humphry. What monstrous queer words he discourses the old fellow with!


Loveyet. Mighty pleasant and witty, by my body; sixty years, forsooth! -- But
I Will be avenged of you. -- Your daughter sha'n't have my son -- there, sir, --
how do you like that? Sixty years, indeed! Ugh, ugh.


Humphry. What an old reprobate it is! He swears 'till he sweats again.


Trueman. What an unlucky affair!

Aside.
Loveyet. And give me leave to tell you, Mr. Schoolmaster, I was an old -- I
-- I mean -- I was a great fool to disparage him so much as to think of the
match.


Trueman. Illiberal aspersion! But were I as contemptible as you think me, a
disast'rous war has rendered me so; and as for my child, providence has placed
her above dependence on an unfortunate father: the bequest of a worthy relation
has made her, what the world calls, rich; but her mind -- is far richer; the
most amiable temper, improved by a virtuous and refined education (not to
mention her beauty)deservedly makes her the object of general love and respect,
and renders your present resolution a matter of perfect indifference to me.


Loveyet. Well, well, so be it; but you never shall be Charles's father-in-law,
for all that -- that is as fixed as fate, -- you may beg my forgiveness for your
faults by and by, but your daughter shall never be mine, I promise you.

Exit.
Trueman. Conceited old sot!


Humphry. He Is gone at last.


Loveyet. What brought you here, pray?


Humphry. Why, my legs, to be sure. -- Here, old gentleman, if you will promise
you will not get in such a passion as you did just now, I Have got some news to tell
you.


Loveyet. I in a passion? it is no such thing -- I didn't mind any thing he
said, because he is old and fretful; -- but what news, egh -- what news?


Humphry. Here Is a letter for you.

Gives it to Loveyet.
Loveyet. Opens the letter and reads. I am heartily glad, 'faith! reads again.
-- 'Od's my life, I Am as happy as the Great Mogul, and as good-natured --


Humphry. That Is clever; I likes to see people good-natured, -- it makes me as
happy as the Great Pogul.


Loveyet. I Will go tell old Trueman's daughter, Charles is coming, but not for
her -- I know she will be mortified, poor girl, but I cannot help that. Who gave
you this letter?


Humphry. Why your son, to be sure.


Loveyet. When did you leave the Havanna, pray?


Humphry. The Havanna?


Loveyet. Yes, are you not from the West Indies?


Humphry. Who -- me? -- not I.


Loveyet. Why, what the plague makes you think he was my son, then?


Humphry. Becase he said you was his father -- that is a good reason, an't it?
But it is a wise son knows his own father, as the old saying is.


Loveyet. How can that be, when the letter is dated in the Island of Cuba, the
twentieth day of January, and he says he don't expect to leave it 'till the
beginning of March, and this is only February, so it is impossible he should be
here yet.


Humphry. May be you an't the old gentleman, then.


Loveyet. To be sure I an't an old gentleman. Did he say I was old, egh?


Humphry. Yes, I believe he did.


Loveyet. I believe you lie -- and I Will let you know that I an't old enough to
be his father, you --


Humphry. Well, if the case lies there, that settles the harsh, do you see; but,
for my part, I think how you look old enough and ugly enough to be his
great-grand-father, as the old saying is.


Loveyet. Sirrah, get out of my house, or I Will break your bones for you.


Humphry. I Am a going -- howsomever, give me the letter again; you have got no
business with it -- you an't his father.


Loveyet. You lie! I am his father -- if he was here, he would not deny it.


Humphry. Why he is here, I tell you -- here in New York. I suppose how he is
made a small mistake about the day of the month, and says he is just arrived
from the East Indies, for he is cursed apt for to make blunders; -- that about
the corn and the pigs; ha, ha, ha.


Loveyet. Do you laugh at me, you vagabond?


Humphry. Not I, old gentleman; I Have got too much respect for old age, I Will
insure you.


Loveyet. I shall go distracted!


Humphry. Put on your spectacles and look again -- I Am sure your eyes must
perceive you, for I Will give my corporal oath he an't in the East Indies.


Loveyet. It is not the East Indies, you great calf; you mean the West Indies.


Humphry. No matter if it is east or west; the odds an't much for the matter
o'that.


Loveyet. What an abominable fool!


Humphry. I Am no more a fool than you are --


Loveyet. Be gone, you scoundrel! Here, Thomas, -- enter Thomas lug this fellow
out of doors.


Thomas. Yes, sir.


Humphry. No, you sha'n't though, do you see.


Thomas. I Am cursedly afraid of the great two-handed fellow too.

Aside, and Exit with Humphry.
LOVEYET manet. Abusive rascal! -- But I will not put myself in a passion with
such a vile animal. -- I -- I Will read the letter again.

"Honored Sir,

"I have just time enough to acquaint you by the Oceanus, captain Seaborn, who
is now preparing to sail, that I have at length adjusted my business so as to
be able to leave this place for New York, the beginning of March; in which case
you may look for me before the first of April next; when I promise myself the
happiness of seeing you once more, and enjoying the society of the best of
parents: 'till then I shall continue to be, with truly filial attachment, and
anxious expectation of the happy event, your obliged and dutiful son, --
CHARLES LOVEYET."

I wonder he don't say any thing of the coffee and madeira I wrote to him
about; -- egad, I must mind the main chance; a penny saved, is a penny got; and
charity begins at home. By strictly attending to these excellent maxims, I am
worth about five and twenty per cent. more than any other merchant in the city;
and as for that stupid proverb, money is the root of all evil, it is well enough
for those to say so, who have none; for my part, I know that much of the good
things of this world is better than not enough -- that a man can live longer
upon a hundred thousand pounds than one thousand pounds -- that if, the more we
have the more we want, the more we have the more we make -- and that it is
better to make hay while the sun shines against a rainy day, when I shall be
upon my last legs, than to work and toil like an ass in the rain; so it plainly
appears that money is the root of all good; -- that is my logic. -- I long to
see the young rogue though -- I dare say he looks very like his father; -- but,
had I thought old Trueman would have used me so ill, I would not have wrote for
him yet; for he shall not have his old sweetheart: -- if he offers to disobey
me in this respect, by my body, I Will disinherit the ungracious dog immediately.

Exit.
SCENE III. Another Part of LOVEYET'S House. DOLLY and THOMAS.
Thomas. I Have set a bowl of grog before him, pretty much to the northward, and
a luncheon of bread and beef almost as big as his head; for he said he was
consumed hungry.


Dolly. I language to behold him; -- but I Am afraid he will be rude to a body.
Enter Humphry, with a large luncheon of bread and butter. Oh, as I Am alive, it
is Humphry; old Cubb, the miller's son! Now will the great bear be for rumpling
and hugging a body, as he used to do.

Aside.
Humphry. How do you do again, as the saying is? You're a devilish honest fellow,
as I Am a gentleman; and thank'e for your frugality, with all my heart: I Have
eaten up all the beef and grog, so I thought I would go to the cup-board, and
cut a small slice of bread and butter, do you see.


Thomas. Why didn't you cut your (...), while you was about it?


Humphry. Oh, it is big enough, thank'e; I never eat much at a meal; but if I
crave more, I Will speak. Sees Dolly. Wha -- what -- Doll! is that you? Oh, the
wonderful works of nature! Who'd have thought to have found you here. What, don't
you know me? not know your old sweetheart? By Job, I want to buss you, most
lasciviously. Crams all the bread in his mouth in haste, and offers to kiss
her. -- Thomas hinders him.


Dolly. Oh, oh!


Thomas. What, do you dare to do such a thing before me, you country brute?


Humphry. Ay, no sooner said than done; that is my way.


Thomas. But you sha'n't say nor do your lascivious tricks before me, I warrant
you.


Dolly. Oh, the filthy beast! he has frightened me out of my seventy seven
senses; he has given me a fever.


Humphry. I don't care if you will give me a favor, or not; for I don't value it
an old horse-shoe, not I; I can get favors enough in New York, if I go to the
expense. -- I know what -- I suppose you forget when Jack Wrestle, the country
mackmarony --


Dolly. Oh, oh!


Humphry. Why, in the country you used for to kiss me without axing.


Dolly. I scorn your words, you worthless black-guard; so I do.

Cries.
Thomas. Sir, I Would have you to know, sir, that I will not suffer you, sir, to abuse
this young lady, sir, in this manner, sir; and, sir -- in short, sir, you're a
dirty fellow, for your pains, sir.


Humphry. And you're a great litterly lubber, as the saying is; and if you will
be so friendly as for to fetch the mug of ale you promised me, I Will lick you
out of pure gratitude: have a care -- grog makes me fight like a tiger


Thomas. It Is bargain, -- I should be sorry to try you; but I Will go lace your
ale a little, and that will spoil your fighting, I warrant you.

Aside, and exit.
Dolly. You sha'n't fight him. -- Oh, law, I would not trust myself with him
alone, for the riches of the Indians!

Exit, after him.
Humphry. Mimicking her. What an unfaithless trollop! She Is got to be very
vartuous since she is lived in town, but vartue is but skin deep, as the saying
is: -- would not even let me kiss her; -- I meant nothing but the genteel thing
neither, -- all in an honest way. I wonder what she can see in that clumsy
booby's face, for to take his part, sooner than I! -- but I Will go buy a new
coat and breeches, and get my head fricaseed, and my beard combed a little, and
then I Will cut a dash with the best on 'em. I Will go see where that ill-looking
fellow stays with the ale.

Exit.
End of the SECOND ACT.
Act III.
Scene I. A BARBER'S SHOP.
Humphry in new clothes, reading a news paper. -- Toupee shaving him. HUMPHRY,
PRAY now, master barber, what does Constitution mean? I hears so many people a
quarrelling about it, -- I wish I could get somebody to give me the exclamation
of it; here it is among the news too. It Is spelt C, O, N, con -- S, T, I, sti
-- consti -- T, U, tu -- constitu -- T, I, ti -- constituti -- O, N, on --
Con-sti-tu-ti-on, -- but your city folks calls it Constitushon; they have got
such a queer pronouncication.


Toupee. Vat you please, sare?


Humphry. Yes, it pleases me well enough; I only want to know what it magnifies.


Toupee. Je ne vous entens pas, monsieur.


Humphry. Why, what outlandish dialogue is that you're a talking? I cannot
understand your lingo as well as the Schoolmaster's, with his monstrous
memorandums, and his ignorant mouses.


Toupee. You be 'quainted with monsieur de Schoolmastare, monsieur?


Humphry. Yes, mounsieur; he and the consumptive old gentleman, old what is his
name, was a wrangling about that confounded name that I was axing you about; --
caw -- con -- looks at the paper ay, Constitution.


Toupee. Dat Constitution is no bon; -- de Schoolmastare vas strike me for dat.
By gar, I get de satisfaction!


Humphry. He talks as crooked as a Guinea niger.

Aside.
Toupee. He vas call me -- ah, le diable! -- block; dis -- Points to his head.
blockhead, oiii, blockhead.


Humphry. If you have got a mind, I Will lather him for you.


Toupee. Yes; den I will lader you for nothing.


Humphry. You lather me for nothing? -- I Will lather you for less yet, you
barber-looking --


Toupee. No, no; me lader you so.

Lathers Humphry's face.
Humphry. Oh, with soap-suds, you mean: -- I ax pardon, mounsieur; I thought
how you was a going for to lather me without soap-suds or razor, as the old
proverb is.


Toupee. Dat is no possible, monsieur.


Humphry. I believe not; you should be shaved as clean as a whistle, if you
was; 'faith should you.


Toupee. Yes, I will shave you very clean; -- here is do bon razor for shave de
beard. Draws the razor over the back of Humphry's hand, to show him it can cut
a hair.


Humphry. Bellowing out. You ill-looking, lousy, beardcombing, head-shaving
rascal! Did you ever know any body for to have a beard upon their hand?


Toupee. You be von big 'merican brute, sur mon ame!


Humphry. You lie, as the saying is. What a mouth he makes whenever he goes for
to talk his gibberage! -- He screws it up for all the world like a pickled
oyster. I must have a care I don't get some of that snuff out of his nose.


Toupee. You please for taste de snuff?


Humphry. I don't care if I smell some. Takes a pinch of snuff, which makes him
sneeze, while Toupee is shaving him; by which he gets his face cut.


Toupee. Prennez guard a vous!


Humphry. The devil take the snuff and you!

Going.
Toupee. S'il vous plait, monsieur, you vill please for take de -- de -- vat is
dat -- de -- lettre -- de shallange to monsieur de Schoolmastare, for fight me?


Humphry. Yes, that I will, with the most carefullest manner; -- he shall have
it in the greatest pleasure.

Toupee gives a paper to Humphry.
Toupee. Dat is de bon civility. -- I will be your -- a -- very good friend.


Humphry. Thank'e kindly, Mounsieur.

Exeunt severally.
SCENE II. A STREET.
Enter Young LOVEYET and HUMPHRY. Loveyet. Not find where he lives?


Humphry. No; -- you're the most unluckyest gentleman for making of blunders,
-- didn't you tell me how your father lived in number two hundred and fifty, in
Queen Street, in the three-story brick house?


Loveyet. I did; is not that the house?


Humphry. No -- why your father don't live there.


Loveyet. Did you enquire for Mr. Loveyet?


Humphry. Yes, I saw Mr. Loveyet.


Loveyet. The devil is in the fellow, I believe. Did you give him my letter?


Humphry. Yes, but I didn't want to.


Loveyet. Why not?


Humphry. Becase I wanted for to carry it to your father.


Loveyet. What makes you think Mr. Loveyet is not my father?


Humphry. Some body told me so that is got a good right to know; I Have his own
words for it.


Loveyet. My father tell you so?


Humphry. The young man is crazy, I believe. -- I say Mr. Loveyet said you
was not his son; so I suppose he cannot be your father by that.


Loveyet. I forgot that the letter would probably produce this
misunderstanding. Aside. -- He is the only one I know, whom I have a right to
call my father.


Humphry. May be you're the old fellow's bastard, and if you're a bastard, you
cannot be a son, you know: ay, that is the catch, I suppose.


Loveyet. Your new clothes make you quite smart, Mr. Cubb.


Humphry. Yes, don't I look quite smart, with these here new clothes? they are
all new, I Will insure you -- only a little the worse for wear; I bought 'em at
the vandue option, at the FlyMarket.


Loveyet. But how came you by that patch on one side of your face, and that
large crop of beard on the other?


Humphry. Mounsieur, the outlandish barber, give me a small cut across the
whiskers; but the best of all you have not s seen yet; -- see here.

Pulls off his hat.
Loveyet. Ay, now you look something like -- quite fierce -- entirely the fine
gentleman, upon my falsehood. A genteel dress is the very soul of a man, Mr.
Cubb.


Humphry. Like enough, for I Have got more soul to show myself, now I cut such a
dash; I Have got a soul to see the shows at the playhouse; and, I think, I Have
got a great deal more soul to spend a few shillings at the alehouse.


Loveyet. That Is true; I Am glad you remind me of my promise.


Humphry. Not I, I didn't remind you, -- I scorn it.


Loveyet. I dare say you do. Gives him money. There, drink my health with that.


Humphry. With all my heart -- soul, I mean; -- ay, here is soul enough --
Gingling the money. -- to buy the matter of twenty mugs; -- come, let us go at
once.


Loveyet. I? -- excuse me, sir; I have particular business elsewhere. -- Sir,
your most humble servant.


Humphry. Sir, I am your most humble sarvint too. Bows aukwardly.

Exeunt severally.
SCENE III. Mr. FRIENDLY'S House.
Enter HARRIET. [ Knocking at the door.] What an incessant knocking! Mr.
Friendly's family are out, and between their company and my own. I expect to be
engaged all day: I am fairly tired of these morning visits; -- they are
fashionable, and therefore agreeable, to those who can make propriety and
happiness subservient to custom and false politeness; but, for my part --


Enter Servant. Servant. Miss Airy is waiting in her carriage, madam.


Harriet. Admit her. Exit servant. She is the only one I wish to see this
morning.


Enter MARIA. Maria. My dear Harriet, I am rejoiced to find you at home; -- I
this minute heard something, which I knew would make you happy; and that, I
trust, is a good excuse for troubling you twice to day with my company.


Harriet. You wrong my friendship, Maria, if you think you can oblige me too
often with your desirable company; it is true I was wishing for a little
cessation of that torrent of formal visitors which is pouring in from morning
'till night; but far be it from Harriet to reckon her Maria among that number.


Maria. You are very good, my dear; but you must give me leave to be an little
jealous that I am not the only one who is favored with such a preference.


Harriet. Indeed, I do not know any one I have a particular desire to see this
morning, except yourself.


Maria. You forget Mr. Loveyet, when you say so.


Harriet. Poh! I am not talking of men.


Maria. No; but it is very probable you are thinking of a man.


Harriet. And pray what reason have you to think, that my thoughts run upon
such an improper subject?


Maria. Improper subject, -- ha, ha, ha. So my very discreet, prudish little
Harriet, never lets man enter into her head; though it is pretty notorious
somebody has entered into her heart long ago.


Harriet. Your discernment must be very subtle, if you know all that is in my
heart.


Maria. I only judge of your heart, by your tongue; and the abundance of the
former is generally inferred from the speech of the latter. -- Yes, yes -- that
constant, hypocritical heart of yours is now throbbing with love, hope,
curiosity, and -- a thousand speechless sensations, the improper subject of
which, I do not hesitate to declare, is odious man; and that man, the
accomplished Mr. Loveyet.


Harriet. Psha, -- how can you tantalize one so?


Maria. Well, well, it shall not be served like Tantalus any more: he was
doomed to behold; and, beholding, to wish and languish for the tempting
draught, in vain: but a better doom awaits the happy Harriet; -- what she
desires is not thus interdicted, but will soon be obtained, and --


Harriet. How strangely you talk, Maria.


Maria. Well, I will not keep you in suspense any longer. Old Mr. Loveyet has
received a letter from his son, signifying his intention to leave the
West Indies shortly after its date, so you may expect to see him very soon.
Then hey for a wedding, etc.


Harriet. Ha, ha; you are a droll girl.


Maria. But my time is precious; I am just going to the widow Affable's: --
about twelve months ago she paid me a visit, when, agreeably to the form in
such cases made and provided, she begged I would be more sociable, and she would
take it so kindly of me: -- accordingly I shall step in en passant, to show her
my sociability and kindness, which I shall, perhaps, repeat at the end of
another year.


Harriet. How can you be so cruel? The pleasure I experience in your society,
makes me regret that any one should be deprived of it.


Maria. That is very strange: -- I should imagine, if you prized my company so
much, you would wish me to withold it from others; because, the more I bless
them with my presence, the less will come to your share, you know, my dear; --
nor is it easy to conceive how you could be so found of my sweet person,
without being jealous at the partiality of others; -- but, after all, good
people, they say, are scarce; and my humble admirers shall find the saying
verified in me; because they are not fully sensible of my superior value; but,
since your prove the contrary, by extolling my conversation and friendship so
much, I likewise shall observe a contrary conduct, and indulge you with a tete
a tete frequently, my dear. -- But I have fifty places to call at yet: -- I am
to wait on Miss Nancy Startup, Miss Biddy Dresswise, Miss Candy, Miss
Titterwell, Mrs. Furbelow, Mrs. Neverhome, Mrs. --, et cetera, et cetera; which
visits I mean to pay with all the formality and fashionable shortness in my
power: from thence I shall proceed to Mademoiselle Mincit, the milliner; from
thence to two or three score of shops in William-Street, to buy a prodigious
number of important --


Harriet. Trifles.


Maria. You are right, my dear; -- as I live, I would not be one of those
officious "Nothing else, Ma'ams?" for all the goods from the North Church to
Maiden-Lane. -- Adieu, -- I leave you to meditate on what I have told you.


Harriet. Farewell. Exit Maria. Now Maria is gone, I will see no more company.
-- If any thing can be an excuse for a falsehood, the present occasion offers a
very good one: -- I feel my mind pretty much at ease, and I do not choose to
have it disturbed by the impertinence of pretended friends. -- Who is there?


Enter Servant. Servant. Madam.


Harriet. Whoever calls to see me to day, remember I am not at home.


Servant. Mr. Worthnought is here now, Madam; must I deny you to him?


Harriet. Undoubtedly. Exit Servant. I am disgusted with the repetition of that
coxcomb's nonsense. -- Sighs. -- I wish Charles was here: -- In spite of the
false delicacy of that tyrant, Custom, which forbids us to speak the exquisite
effusions of a susceptible heart, I can now speak boldly, while that heart
dictates to the willing tongue what complacence it feels at the prospect of
it is Charles's return.

Exit.
SCENE IV. Another Part of Mr. FRIENDLY'S House.
WORTHNOUGHT, discovered solus. Worthnought. Who comes here! He sha'n't see
her, if I don't, 'foregad -- Curse me, but he shall go away with a slay in his
ear.


Enter Young LOVEYET, followed by HUMPHRY. Humphry. Mr. Lovit -- Mr. Lovit. --
Takes him aside. As I was a going along, do you see, I see you pop in here, and
so I followed you, to tell you, how old Mr. Lovit said he was intend for to go
for to see the old fellow's daughter, to tell her something about the letter.
Don't Mrs. Harriet live here?


Loveyet. I Will make haste, and supersede the design of his errand, if possible;
-- it would be a pity he should come before I had appriz'd Harriet I was not in
the West Indies. Aside. -- I am obliged to your for your information.

to Humphry.
Humphry. Thank'e, as the saying is. Going, -- Worthnought whispers with him.
-- What Is that to you? -- How clumsy mounsieur has dressed his calabash! --
Power'd over the face and eyes.

Exit.
Worthnought. I wish I knew what he wanted with him; -- perhaps it is something
about me.

Aside.
Loveyet. What Butterfly is this we have here! -- I suppose it is the fop,
Frankton mentioned.

Aside.
Worthnought. Sir, I have the hanor to be, with the profoundest respect and
esteem, your most obedient, most devoted, and most obliged humble slave, foy d'
Homme d' Honneur. -- Tol lol, etc.

Sings.
Loveyet. A very pompous salutation, truly. Aside. -- Your polite address does
me too much honor, sir; -- I cannot conceive how you can be my obliged slave,
as I do not recollect I ever saw you before.


Worthnought. Why, sir, I Will tell you: -- Your appearance, sir, bespeaks the
gentleman of distinction, sir, --


Loveyet. My appearance; -- superficial coxcomb!

Aside.
Worthnought. It Is true, my words were words of course; but I meant every word,
sir, 'pan hanor. -- "Cupid, Gad of fast persuasion, etc."

Sings affectedly, and takes snuff.
Loveyet. Humph -- To whom, sir, am I indebted, for so much civility?


Worthnought. Dick Worthnought, esquire, at your service, sir.


Loveyet. The very fool.

Aside.
Worthnought. And give me leave to add, sir, that I feel the highest felicity,
that you have given me so good an apportunity of asking you, in my turn, for
the favor of your name, sir.


Loveyet. My name is Loveyet, sir. -- With what solemnity the coxcomb talks!

Aside.
Worthnought. A native of this city, I presume, Mr. Loveyet.


Loveyet. I am, sir; but I have been absent for some years, and, as I was a
youth when I left the city, I cannot be supposed to have retained much of the
Yorker.


Worthnought. Pardon me, sir; -- to a person of penetration, the Yorker is
still conspicuous under the disguise of the foreigner; and I am proud to have
the hanor of being your countryman, sir.


Loveyet. I fancy the honor is by no means reciprocal.

Aside.
Worthnought. You are acquainted with Miss Harriet Trueman, I presume, Mr.
Loveyet.


Loveyet. I was formerly acquainted with the lady.


Worthnought. You must know, sir, that your humble servant has the hanor and
felicity of being that lady's very humble admirer.


Loveyet. I dare say she is admired by all who have the pleasure of knowing her.


Worthnought. Give me leave, sir, -- I mean her lover.


Loveyet. Conceited ape!

Aside.
Worthnought. You have no pretensions, sir, I presume.


Loveyet. Pretensions?


Worthnought. Ay, sir; I thought you might have a small penchant, as the French
call it; -- your apprehend me; -- but she don't intend to see company to day. I
am monstrously chagrin'd, sir, 'foregad, that I have it not in my power to
introduce you to the divine mistress of my heart; but, as matters are
circumstanc'd, I think it is not worth our while to stay.


Loveyet. I mean to see Miss Trueman before I shall think so.


Worthnought. Oh, fie, sir; -- you would not force a lady to give you her
company against her inclination: -- perhaps, indeed, she may appear to receive
you with some warmth, and you may flatter yourself you have fairly made a
canquest of her, and think Dick Worthnought, esquire, is out-rival'd; but if
so, you are most demnably bit, 'foregad, for she is as slippery as ice, though not
quite so cold; -- she is the very standard of true modern coquetry, the
quintessence of the beau-monde, and the compleatest example of New York levity,
that New York has the hanor to call its beautiful inhabitant: ha, ha, -- she will
jilt you; -- however, the dear creature, with all her amiable foibles, has been
so profuse of her attention to me, that I should be ungrateful not to
acknowledge the various favors she has hanor'd me with.


Loveyet. Consummate impudence! Aside. -- Miss Trueman's character is well
known, sir.


Worthnought. Miss Trueman's character! Demme, sir, do you mean to say any
thing against her character?


Loveyet. No; -- and I will take care you shall not, with impunity.


Worthnought. You are the most unmannerly fellow I ever conversed with, 'pan
hanor.


Loveyet. And you the most contemptible puppy; or that fellow would be
unmannerly enough to chastise you for your insolence.


Worthnought. That Is a demnable rub, demme; -- curse him, I Am afraid he is not
afraid of me, after all. Aside. -- You would find me as brave as yourself then;
demme, but you would.


Loveyet. I Will try you. Offers to cane him, which makes him cry out. -- Then
enter Harriet, hastily.


Harriet. Oh, dear! -- what is the matter?

Seeing Charles, she shrieks.
Loveyet. My dearest, -- my adorable Harriet!


Harriet. Is it possible? I did not dream that Mr. Loveyet was the person who
wanted to see me.


Loveyet. And am I again blessed with a sight of the dear object of all my wishes
and affections! -- I thank you, heaven; you have been bountiful, indeed! The
rolling billows, under your propitious guidance, have at length wafted me to my
native land, to love and my dear Harriet.


Worthnought. What the devil does he mean!

Aside.
Harriet. Your unexpected appearance, and the unaccountable circumstance which
attends it, have discomposed me in such a manner, that I cannot express, as I
wish, how happy I am in your safe arrival.


Worthnought. Hah, -- happy in his arrival! If so, she will not be very happy
in his rival, I Am afraid.

Aside.
Loveyet. I will explain the occasion of my charmer's fright immediately; -- at
present I can only tell you that your wou'd-be lover, here --


Harriet. My lover!


Loveyet. So he confidently called himself, and took such other insufferably
vain and impudent freedoms with your name, that I attempted to give him a
little wholesome admonition with this, if his effeminate cries had not brought
my lovely Harriet in to prevent me; but the very attempt has proved him to be
the basest of dastards. While he is saying this, Worthnought makes several
attempts to interrupt him.


Harriet. To Worthnought. I am equally surpised and incensed, sir, that you
would dare to take such freedoms with my name.


Loveyet. Be assured, Miss Harriet, if you condescend to grant your valuable
company to such superficial gentry, they will ever prove themselves as unworthy
of it as he has; but your goodness does not let you suspect the use which such
characters make of the intimacy they are honored with, or you would spurn their
unmeaning flattery, and ridiculous fopperies, with indignation.


Harriet. I ever 'till now considered him as a respectful, wellmeaning person,
as far as regarded myself; and as such, gave him a prudent share of my
civilities; but I never thought either his intellects or his person sufficient
to entitle him to a partial intimacy.


Worthnought. You cannot deny, madam, that I have repeatedly experienced the
most flattering proofs of your partiality, that a lady (who values her
reputation) can ever bestow on her admirer.


Harriet. Contemptible thing! An admirer, forsooth! Of what? -- Your ideas are
too mean and frothy to let you admire any thing but my dress, or some other
trifle as empty and superficial as the trifler I am speaking to. My demeanor
toward you was nothing but the effect of cheerfulness and politeness;
qualities which, I believe, are inherent in me, and of which, therefore, all
with whom I am acquainted are the objects; but your present unmanly and
insupportably impudent discourse, makes me despise myself almost as much as
you, for allowing such a wretch even that small degree of attention which he so
illy deserved.


Worthnought. You are very insulting, madam, 'pan hanor. --


Loveyet. How apt such fellows are to have honor in their mouths.

Aside.
Worthnought. This is only a trick to conceal your inconstancy during his
absence; but it is the nature of the sex to deceive us.


Harriet. It Is the nature of a fool to say so; and if that fool does not
instantly quit the subject and the house together, I must request the favor of
Mr. Loveyet to make him.


Loveyet. "As matters are circumstanced, Mr. Worthnought, I think it is not
worth your while to stay."


Worthnought. Her unparalled rudeness shall not compel me to leave the house,
'till I please.


Loveyet. "Oh, fie, sir, -- you would not force a lady to give you her company
against her inclination."


Worthnought. You are very fond of echoing my words, it seems.


Loveyet. Yes, when I can apply them to your disappointment and disgrace. -- "I
am monstrously chagrin'd, sir, 'foregad, that I have it not in my power to
introduce you to the divine mistress of my heart." Ha, ha, ha.


Worthnought. It Is very well, -- I will have revenge; -- if the laws of
politeness, (which I would rather die than infringe) did not forbid swearing
before a lady, in a contemptuous tone curse me, but I would d -- n you for a --


Loveyet. Interrupting him. -- "You must know, sir, I have the hanor and
felicity of being this lady's very humble admirer." -- You have failed in your
predictions, I think, sir.


Worthnought. Yes, and she shall soon pay for her duplicity; though I would not
have you think that her ill usage mortifies me in the least: I never was in
love with her, nor did I ever intend marriage, which is more than she can say;
and, I believe, it is fortunate for us both, that you arrived when you did, or
something might have happened, which would have obliged me to marry her, merely
to prevent her from being miserable. -- Ha, ha, ha. Tol lol, etc.

Exit.
Harriet. What a surperlative wretch!


Loveyet. He is too contemptible to cost you a thought, Harriet; -- none but
the puppy tribe, and a few splenetic old maids, will pay any attention to his
slander; they, no doubt, will spread it with avidity; -- but to be traduced by
such, is to be praised. -- Hah -- there comes my father; -- I forgot to tell
you I expected him here: I will try if he knows me.


Enter Old LOVEYET. Old Loveyet. Madam, your most obedient; -- Sir, your
servant.


Loveyet. Bows. I find he does not know me: -- Nature, be still; for now I feel
he is indeed my father.


Harriet. Mr. Loveyet, I am happy to see you.


Old Loveyet. She would not be quite so happy, if she knew my errand. Aside. --
I have waited on you, madam, upon disagreeable business.


Harriet. How, sir? -- I beg you will not leave me in suspense: What is it?


Old Loveyet. It is a matter of a delicate nature, madam, and therefore must
not be spoken at random.


Loveyet. Heaven avert any unfavorable event!

Aside.
Harriet. Mr. Loveyet, your cautious inuendoes give me sensible uneasiness.


Loveyet. I will withdraw, Miss Trueman: -- My love -- friendship, I would say,
though it wishes to afford you happiness, and participate in your troubles,
does not presume to intrude on the private conversation Mr. Loveyet wishes.


Harriet. I dare say your presence is no restraint, sir.


Old Loveyet. I don't know that, madam: pray, who is the gentleman?


Harriet. The gentleman is my very particular friend, sir.


Old Loveyet. By my body, here is rare work going on. -- Aside. -- well, madam,
as the gentleman is your very particular friend; and as his love -- friendship,
I mean, is so great, that you dare to entrust all your secrets with him. I
shall acquaint you, that, as you and my son have long entertained a partiality
for each other, and being desirous to fulfill all my engagements, as well as to
make him happy, I have wrote for him to come and conclude the marriage; but,
for very good reasons, I have this day determined to forbid the bans; and Mr.
Trueman says, he is very willing too.


Loveyet. Hah! -- what can all this mean?

Aside.
Old Loveyet. You must know, madam, your father has used me very ill; and -- to
be plain with you, madam, your familiarity with this person, convinces me you
would have played the fool with my son, without my breaking the match. Ugh, ugh.


Loveyet. The old gentleman imagines I am going to cut myself out, it seems.

Aside to Harriet.
Harriet. You do not know who this is, sir, or you would not put any improper
constructions on the friendly freedom you have observed between us.


Loveyet. True; and therefore you need not be concerned at what he says. --
Since he has made this unlucky resolution, he must not know who I am.

Aside, to Harriet.
Old Loveyet. How well she dissembles! -- Friendly freedom. -- a pretty term
that, for the wanton hussy. Aside. -- I wish Charles was here now; he would
acknowledge his father's kindness in preventing a match, which, I am sure,
would end in sorrow and disappointment.


Loveyet. I doubt that much. -- This parent of mine is a singular character.

Aside, to Harriet.
Harriet. It is necessary you should be made acquainted with some of his
oddities: his most striking peculiarity is a desire to be thought younger than
he is; and, I dare say, some remark of my father, respecting his age, is the
only cause of his present ill humor.


Old Loveyet. Look how they whisper! -- well, she is the most brazen coquette I
ever knew! -- Yes, yes, now her scandalous conduct is glaring enough. Aside. --
I wish you and your very particular friend, a good day, madam.

Exit.
Harriet. I think our troubles increase fast: how unlucky, that this dispute
should happen at the very crisis of your arrival; -- an event which we fondly
expected would be attended with the most pleasing circumstances.


Loveyet. Those fond expectations, my lovely partner in trouble, shall soon be
realized; -- this is only the momentary caprice of old age.


Harriet. You must take care not to talk of age, before him.


Loveyet. Yes, my fair monitor; I shall think of that: and now permit me, in my
turn, to give you a little advice. -- In the first place, I would have you go
to your father -- fall at his feet -- clasp your fair hands, thus -- beseeching
him in such terms as that gentle heart is so well formed to dictate, and
persuading him with the all-prevailing music of that tuneful voice, to recall
his rigorous intention, nor doom such angelic goodness and beauty to despair,
by persisting to oppose an alliance which alone can make you blessed; and without
which, the most faithful of lovers will be rendered the most wretched one on
earth. I shall take a similar method with my old gentleman, and I think I can
insure myself success.


Harriet. This is all very fine; but -- to have the voluntary consent of the
parent one loves, -- how infinitely more agreeable* I would not offend mine,
for the world; and yet --


Loveyet. And yet you will be obliged to offend him, by having me, egh?


Harriet. Psha; -- how strangely you misconstrue my meaning: I was going to
observe, that I expect his obstinacy and pride will prove invincible, in spite
of all the rhetoric you are pleased to ascribe to me.


Loveyet. Then we will employ a little rhetoric, against which another class of
fathers are not quite so invincible. -- Parsons are plenty, you know; and Gold
and Silver are persuasive little words. Love inspires me with the spirit of
prophecy, and tells me, I shall soon with propriety call the loveliest of her
sex, mine.


Harriet. You are very eloquent, Mr. Loveyet: I do not think the subject merits
so many florid speeches.


Loveyet. Not merit them! --

It Is not in human language, to define
Merit so rare, and beauty -- so divine!
Then what avails this little praise of mine?

[Har.] Harriet deserves not praise so great as thine.

Exeunt. End of the THIRD ACT.
Act IV.
Scene I. TRUEMAN'S House.
TRUEMAN, solus. I Sincerely lament this unfortunate dispute. -- I know Harriet
loves that young fellow, though he has been so long absent; and therefore I
regret it; for, to what end do I live but to see her happy! -- But I will not
give way to his father; -- perhaps he may think better of the matter, for I
know him to be of a placable nature, though passionate; -- and yet he seems to
be inflexible in his resolution.


Enter HUMPHRY. Humphry. Sarvint, Mr. Schoolmaster; -- here is a challenge for
you.

Gives Trueman the barber's note.
Trueman. A challenge! Surely the old blockhead would not make himself so
ridiculous.


Humphry. Yes, it is for that; -- I remember he said you called him a blockhead.


Trueman. You may go and tell him I advise him to relinquish his knight-errand
project, or I will expose his absurdity by taking the advantage which the law
offers in such cases.


Humphry. That is, you will take the law of him, if he goes for to fight you.


Trueman. Fight me! -- Oh, grovelling idea! Wit-forsaken progeny of a more than
soporific pericranium! Fight me! -- Hear and be astonished, Oh Cicero,
Demosthenes, Socrates, Plato, Seneca, Aristotle, --


Humphry. Oh, for shame! -- Do you read Haristotle?


Trueman. Be it known to thee, thou monstrous mass of ignorance, if such an
uninformed clod, dull and heavy as that element to which it must trace its
origin, can comprehend these very obvious and palpable truths, expressed in the
most plain, simple, easy, unscholastic diction. -- I repeat again, that you may
apprehend me with the greater perspicuity and facility, -- be it known to thee,
that those immaculate sages would have died rather than have used such an
expression; by the dignity of my profession, they would: -- it is true that the
ancients had such things as single combats among the Olympic games, and they
were always performed by the populace; but such a fight, alias a tilt, a
tournament, a wrestle, could not, according to the rule of right, and the
eternal fitness and aptitude of things, be properly denominated a bona fide
sight; for, as I before observed, it was ipso facto, a game, an Olympic game.
-- Olympic, from Olympus.


Humphry. Pray now, Mr. Schoolmaster, if a body might be so bold, what do you
think of the last war? Does your Schoolmastership think how that was a fona
bide fight?


Trueman. You are immensely illiterate; but I will reply to your interrogatory.
-- My opinion of the late war, is as follows, to wit. -- Imprimis. The
Americans were wise, brave and virtuous to struggle for that liberty,
independence and happiness, which the new government will now render secure. --
Item. The Americans were prodigious fortunate to obtain the said liberty,
independence and happiness. A war, encounter, combat, or, if you please, fight
like this, is great and glorious; it will immortalize the name of the renowned
WASHINGTON, -- more than that of Cincinnatus, Achilles, Aeneas, Alexander the
Great, Scipio, Gustavus Vassa, Mark Anthony, Kouli Khan, Caesar or Pompey.


Humphry. Caesar and Pompey! Why them is nigers names.


Trueman. O tempora! O mores!


Humphry. He talks Greek like a Trojan. -- Tempora mores; -- I suppose how
that is as much as to say, it was the temper of the Moors, that is the nigers,
for to be called Caesar and Pompey. -- I guess how he can give me the
exclamation of that plaguey word. -- Con -- let me see Spells it in the manner
he did before. -- Please your worshipful reverence, Mr. Schoolmaster, what is
Latin for Constitution?


Trueman. To tell you what is Latin for Constitution, will not make you a
particle the wiser; I will therefore explain it in the vernacular tongue. --
Constitution then, in its primary, abstract, and true signification, is a
concatenation or coacervation of simple, distinct parts, of various qualities
or properties, united, compounded, or constituted in such a manner, as to form
or compose a system or body, when viewed in its aggregate or general nature. In
its common, or generally received, acceptance, it implies two things. --
First, the nature, habit, disposition, organization or construction of the
natural, corporeal, or animal system. -- Secondly, a political system, or plan
of government. This last definition, I apprehend, explains the Constitution you
mean.


Humphry. Like enough, but I don't understand a single word you have been a
talking about.


Trueman. No! It Is not my fault then: -- If plainness of language, clearness of
description, and a grammatical arrangement of words will not suffice. I can do
no more.


Enter Old LOVEYET, listening. Humphry. I mean the Constitution that you read
in the newspapers about; that that your worship was a going to get at
loggerheads with old Mr. What's-his-name, about.


Loveyet. I Will old you, you rascal!


Trueman. Did you never hear your friends in the country talk of the new
Constitution?


Humphry. Not I, I never heard any body talk about it, at the Pharisee's Head;
-- I don't believe Jeremy Stave, the clark of the meeting house, no, nor Parson
Thumpum himself ever heard of such a word -- No, not even old Mr. Scourge, the
Schoolmaster.


Trueman. A hopeful genius, for a Schoolmaster, upon my education. Do you send
him to me, -- I Will qualify him for that important station.


Humphry. And I Will be qualified I never larnt such a word when I went to his
school.


Trueman. Nor any other one, I believe, properly speaking.


Humphry. Oh yes, I Will say that for him; -- he used to take a great deal of
pains for to larn us proper speaking.


Trueman. The Constitution you hear so much noise about, is a new government,
which some great and good men have lately contrived, and now recommend for the
welfare and happiness of the American nation.


Loveyet. Oh, the traitor!


Humphry. But didn't old Mr. What's-his-name say, how they wanted for to make
slaves of us?


Loveyet. There Is old Mr. What's-his-name, again.


Trueman. Mr. Loveyet is a weak man; -- you must not mind what he says.


Loveyet. Oh, I shall burst!


Trueman. Only think now of his sending me a challenge, because I told him he
was sixty odd years of --


Loveyet. Running toward them. Death and the devil! Have I sent you a
challenge?


Humphry. No, not you, old gentleman.


Loveyet. I Will give you old gentleman. -- Take that, for calling me old again.
[ Offers to strike him; but missing his blow, he falls down. Oh, what an
unlucky dog I am! My evil genius is certainly let loose to day.


Trueman. Let us coolly enquire into this enigmatical affair, Mr. Loveyet.
Breaks open the note, and reads. -- What is all this? -- Booby -- blockhead --
satisfaction -- challenge -- courage -- honor -- gentleman -- honored per
Monsieur Cubb.


Humphry. Ay, that is I.


Trueman. And pray, Mr. Cubb, who gave you this pretty epistle?


Humphry. Why, mounsieur, the barber.


Trueman. By the dignity of my profession, it must be so; -- Now there is a
solution to the enigma. -- Mr. Loveyet, you will excuse my mistaking this
business so much; -- the paltry Frisieur never entered my head; -- you
recollect I gave him a little flagellation this morning.


Loveyet. Yes, and I recollect the occasion too: -- this confounded upstart
Constitution, (that cause of all my crosses and troubles) is at the bottom of
every mischief.


Trueman. Yes, your wou'd-be Constitution, has indeed done a deal of mischief.


Loveyet. I deny it; -- it is perfectly inoffensive and mild.


Trueman. Mild, indeed: -- happy would it be for America, if her government was
more coercive and energetic! -- I suppose you have heard that Massachusetts has
ratified this upstart Constitution; -- this is the sixth grand column in the
federal edifice; we only want three more to make up the lucky nine; and then
the nine Muses will make our western world their permanent abode; and HE who is
at once their Favorite and Patron, will preside over the whole: then we shall
see another Golden Age; arts will then flourish, and literature be properly
encouraged. That Is the grand desideratum of my wishes.


Loveyet. A fig for your latin and your literature! -- That Is the way your
unconstitutional Constitutionalists, take the advantage of our weak side, and
--


Trueman. And the said weak side being easily discovered, as you have but one
side, -- go on, sir.


Loveyet. And cram their unconstitutional bolus down our throats, with latin;
-- you and your vile junto of perfidious politicians, want to latin us out of
our liberties.


Humphry. Well, why don't they take the law of the pollikitchens then, egh?


Trueman. Mr. Loveyet, I never knew a man of your age and wisdom --


Loveyet. Age, sir! -- Wisdom! -- Yes, wisdom, sir. -- Age again, egh? Ugh, ugh.


Trueman. Was there ever such preposterous behavior! -- You are getting as
crazy as your favorite Constitution.


Loveyet. You are crazier than either, you old blockhead, or you would not make
such a crazy speech: I say my constitution as a thousand per cent. better than
yours. Ugh, ugh, ugh.


Trueman. A pretty figure for a good constitution! What a striking instance of
health, youth, and beauty! How emblematically grotesque! The very image of
deformity and infirmity! A perfect mirror for Milton's description of Sin and
Death.

Not Yorick's skull, nor Hamlet's ghost,
Nor all the magic, stage-made best;
With saucer eyes, and looks aghast,
Would make me run away so fast,
Not all who Milton's head inspire, --
"Gorgons and Hydras and Chimaeras dire!"
Nor haggard Death, nor snake-torn Sin,
Look half so ugly, old and thin;
No -- all his hell-born, monstrous crew,
Are not so dire a sight as you!
While Trueman is saying this, Loveyet appears to be in a violent rage, and
makes several attempts to interrupt the former, who shuns Loveyet, as if
afraid.
Loveyet. Fire and muder! -- Must I bear to be held up for such a monster?
Perdition! -- What shall I do? What shall I say? -- Oh! oh! oh! -- Oh, liberty!
Oh, my country! Look how he ridicules me! -- Did ever any poor man suffer so
much for the good of his country! -- But I will not give up the glorious cause
yet; -- sir, -- Mr. Trueman, -- I insist upon it, the new Constitution, sir, --
I say, that the old -- the new -- that -- that -- 'Zounds and fury! -- Running
toward him, and making an attempt to strike him.


Trueman. My dear Mr. Loveyet, compose yourself a little; -- for heaven's sake,
sir, consider; -- your animal Constitution is not able to withstand the
formidable opposition of my political one; -- the shock is too great; -- let me
persuade you, sir; and as soon as nine States accede to the adoption of the new
Constitution, we will investigate the merits of the old. Ha, ha, ha. This
speech and the preceding one, are to be spoken at the same time; during which,
Trueman and Loveyet run about the stage, and Humphry retreats from them as they
approach him.


Enter HARRIET alarmed. Harriet. Oh, Papa, -- my dear Papa, what is the matter!


Loveyet. And, sir, as sure as -- as -- eight times nine is sixty three, your
new government is nor bottom, not found; and --


Trueman. And as sure as you are sixty three, your head is not found.


Loveyet. Here is your incomparable daughter; -- I came here to acquaint you of
her scandalous conduct; but now she can save me that trouble.


Trueman. How, sir! My daughter's scandalous conduct?


Loveyet. I was going to tell you, I caught her with a strange gallant, -- a
"very particular friend;" whose "love, -- friendship, I would say," was so
sincere, that she was kind enough to grant him a little "friendly freedom," in
my presence.


Trueman. Heaven protect me! There certainly must be something in this.

Aside.
Loveyet. And that I have received a letter from my son.


Humphry. Ay, now he is his son again.

Aside.
Loveyet. And that he will be here soon, and that when he comes, I am going to
marry him to Miss Maria Airy.


Humphry. I must go tell Mr. Lovit of that, at once.

Aside, and exit.
Loveyet. And -- but it is no matter now: -- I suppose she will tell you a fine
story of cock and a bull.


Harriet. I shall not be base enough to deceive father, I give you my honor,
sir.


Loveyet. I am very much mistaken if you have not given that to some body
already: -- A woman's honor is a very perishable commodity; a little thing
often spoils it.


Harriet. By what a feeble tenure does poor woman hold her character and peace
of mind! -- It is true, sir, that a woman's reputation is too frequently, with
ruffian cruelty, blasted in the bud, without a cause; and that so effectually,
that it seldom or never flourishes again; but let me remind you, sir, in the
words of the poet, that --

"Honor's a sacred tie, the law of kings; --

"It ought not to be sported with."


Loveyet. I say it ought to be sported with; and, by my body, it is capital
sport too; -- egh, Horace? -- Sings. -- "Then hoity toity, whisky frisky, etc."


Trueman. A true to your insipid, hard-labour'd wit: the honor you are pleased
to call in question, is not an empty name which can be purchased with gold; it
is too inestimable to be counterpoised by that imaginary good; otherwise the
titles of Honorable and Excellent would be always significant of his Honor's or
his Excellency's intrinsic worth: -- a thing "devoutly to be wished," but
unfortunately too seldom exemplified; for, as the dramatic muse elegantly says
of money, -- "Who steals my purse, steals trash."


Loveyet. I deny it; -- the dramatic muse, as you call him, was a fool: --
trash indeed! Ha, ha, ha. Money trash! Ready Rhino trash! Golden, glittering,
gingling money! -- I Am sure he could not mean the hard stuff.


Trueman. Very sublime conceptions, upon my erudition; and expressed by some
truly elegant epithets; but your ideas, like your conscience, are of the
fashionable, elastic kind; -- self-interest can stretch them like Indian-rubber.


Loveyet. What a stupid old gudgeon! -- Well, you will believe what I tell you,
sooner or later, Mr. Schoolmaster; so your servant: -- as for you, Miss
hypocrite, I wish your Honor farewell, and I guess you may do the (...)

Exit.
Trueman. These insinuations, Harriet, have put my anxiety to the rack.


Harriet. I am happy I can so soon relieve you from it, sir. Young Mr. Loveyet
arrived this morning; but, it seems, the old gentleman has entirely forgot him,
during his long absence; and when he heard his father's resolution, in
consequence of the dispute he had with you, he did not think proper to make
himself known. It was this which made him think me so culpable, that you hear
he talks of marrying him to my friend Maria.


Trueman. I see into the mistake; but the worst construction the affair will
admit, does not justify his using you so indecently; and if it were not for the
more powerful consideration of a daughter's happiness, I would make him repent
it.


Harriet. I have ever found my honored, my only parent, both wise in concerting
plans for that daughter's happiness, and good in executing them to the utmost
of his ability; and, I dare say, he does not think, her alliance with Mr.
Loveyet's son, will prove unfavorable to her happiness.


Trueman. Far from it, my child: -- Your unusual good sense makes a
commonplace lecture unnecessary, Harriet; but beware of flattery and
dissimulation; for the manners of the present age are so dissolute, that the
young fellows of these degenerate days, think they cannot be fine gentlemen
without being rakes, and -- in short, rascals; for they make a merit even of
debauching innocence: -- indeed, that is scarcely to be wondered at, when so
many of those who are called ladies of taste and fashion, strange as it may
seem, like them the better for it; -- but I hope, you and Mr. Loveyet are
exceptions to such depravity.


Harriet. I think I can venture to assure you, we are, sir; -- and now, if my
father has nothing more to impart, I will take my leave of him; and be assured,
sir, your advice shall be treasured here, as a sacred pledge of paternal love.
-- Adieu, Papa.


Trueman. Farewell, Harriet; -- heaven prosper your designs.

Exeunt severally.
SCENE II. A STREET.
Enter HUMPHRY and WORTHNOUGHT, meeting. Worthnought. Sir, your most obedient.


Humphry. Here Is that mackmarony again.

Aside.
Worthnought. I have not the honor to know your name, sir, but if you will
inform me what you were whispering with Mr. Loveyet about, you will make me the
most obsequious and devoted of your slaves.


Humphry. My slave! -- Why I would not have you for a slave, if you was to pay
me for it; -- with your silk satin breeches, and your lily white gloves, and
your crimp'd up toes, and your fine powdered calabash, that is so smart outside.


Worthnought. You entirely mistake my meaning, friend; -- I Am a man of quality.
-- Do I look like a servant, a hireling, a vile menial?


Humphry. No, you look more like a dancing master, a fighting-master, or a
play-actor, or some such flashy folks; but looks is nothing, for every body
dresses alike now a days; like master, like man, as the old saying is; ecod,
you cannot tell a Congress man from a marchant's 'prentice, every body dresses
so fine.


Worthnought. Ha, ha, ha, -- he is pasitively a very eccentric baby, and there
is a small tincture of a barbarous sart wit in what he says; but it wants an
immensity of correction, an infinitude of polishing; he is a mere son of
nature, every thing he says, is expressed in such a Gathic, uncouth,
Anti-Chesterfieldian style; and as for his dress, it is pasitively most
prepasterously clownish and original.


Humphry. Why he talks as many long-winded, old-fashioned words, as the
Schoolmaster.


Worthnought. Mr. -- Mr. -- Pray what is your proper name, besides Humphry?
Your surname, I mean.


Humphry. My proper surname is Humphry Cubb; why our family is the most largest
family within the circumroundibus of fifty miles, and the most grandest too,
though I say it that shou'dn't say it; for my father's father's
great-grand-father was a just-ass of the peace, when king George the third was
a sucking baby, and therefore, as father says, a greater man then, than he was,
ha, ha, ha. And his great aunt, by his mother's side, had the honor to be chief
waiting woman to Mynheer Van Hardsprakencrampdejawmetlongname, the Dutch
governor's public scratchetary; but I needn't go so far back neither, for I Have
got, at this present time, no less than two second cousins; one of 'em is
soup-provider for the county, and the other belongs to the liglislature, and both
belonging to our family too; -- both Cubbs.


Worthnought. Yes, the world abounds with Cubbs, just such unlick'd ones as you
are; -- there is a profusion of them in this city. -- You must know, I am Dick
Worthnought, esquire; a gentleman, a buck of the blood, and a -- you understand
me.


Humphry. Why, your family must be as big as mine, then; for I Have seen hundreds
of such Worth-nothing bloody bucks as you, since I Have been in town.


Worthnought. Your criticisms are perfectly barbarous and disagreeable,
'foregad; but, -- will you let me know what you and the West India young
gentleman were whispering about, at Miss Trueman's?


Humphry. Yes. -- You can have Miss Trueman now, if you have a mind.


Worthnought. Can I? Only prove your words, and enrol me your everlasting, your
indissoluble friend, demme.


Humphry. Friend me none of your friends; I don't want such everlasting friends
as you, do you see, becase why, if you never make a beginning with your
friendship, I Am sure it cannot be everlasting; and if you have got a mind to show
your friendliness, I Am sure you could not have a more sitter time than now.


Worthnought. What would the addity have me say, I wonder.


Humphry. I would not have you say any thing, -- you talk too much already, for
the matter o'that; I like for to see people do things, not talk 'em.


Worthnought. There, Gives him money -- is that what you want?


Humphry. Ay, I thought you understood me well enough. -- Your friendship wants
as much spurring and kicking and coaxing as our lazy old gelding at home; -- I
would not trust such a friend as far as I could fling a cow by the tail.


Worthnought. Poh, poh, -- to the point, to the point.


Humphry. Why, then you must know, how old Mr. Lovit is a going for to marry
the West-Indian young gentleman to young Mistress Airy, I think he called her;
and so you can go try Mistress Harriet yourself, for I Am sure she will not have
him now.


Worthnought. Why, pray?


Humphry. Why if she gets him, she will get a bastard, for old Mr. Lovit is not
his father.


Worthnought. No?


Humphry. No; -- and then he and the Schoolmaster kicked up a proper rumpus
about a challenge I fetched him; and that is all the news you will get for your
money. -- A poor shilling that will not buy ale to my oysters to night.

Exit.
WORTHNOUGHT, manet. This is a lucky meeting, 'foregad; -- I Will go immediately
and report, that young Loveyet has of late seen my quondam charmer carry a copy
of him in miniature about her, which (strange to tell) is continually growing
nearer to the life; and that he refuses to have her, on that account. -- "If
she gets him, she will get a bastard." -- By which I choose to understand, --
matters have gone so far, that she cannot save herself from that disgrace, even
if she marries him. -- Now, in order that this tale of mine may transpire
briskly, I must first see some of my tatling female friends; -- they will set
it a going like wildfire. -- Split me, but it is an excellent thought; -- ha,
ha, ha. Poor Loveyet!

Exit.
SCENE III. HERALD'S House.
Enter CANTWELL and HERALD. Cantwell. I am very happy to find you home; -- I
was almost sat up with the vapors before I saw you. Sighs. -- Well, what is the
news, Miss Herald?


Herald. Nothing strange, Miss Tabitha; I am as barren of any thing new, as an
old Almanac.


Cantwell. Oh shocking! -- "as barren of any thing new." -- What an odious
expression! -- The most vulgarest comparison in nature.


Herald. Umph. -- I suppose, if Mr. Gracely was here, you would not be so much
in the dumps.


Cantwell. Ah, Miss Herald! -- If you felt the corruptions of your wicked
heart, you would be in the dumps too, as you call it.

Sighs.
Herald. I believe there is a certain corruption in your heart, which our sex
are apt to feel very sensibly, and that is the want of a husband.


Cantwell. The want of a husband! -- I vow, you are monstrous indelicate, Miss
Herald; I am afraid you are wandering from the paths of virtue, as dear good
Mr. Gracely says.


Herald. There comes his very reverse, -- Mr. Worthnought.


Cantwell. Ah, he is a profane rake; he is lighter than vanity, as Mr. Gracely
says; -- a mere painted sepulcher.


Herald. That ancient sepulcher of your is pretty much daubed, I think.

Aside.
Enter WORTHNOUGHT. Worthnought. Ladies, J'ay bien de la joye de vous voir. I
have the supernal and superlative hanor and felicity, of being most
respectfully yours.


Cantwell. I hope I have the pleasure to see Mr. Worthnought well.


Worthnought. La, La, Mademoiselle; assez bien: Je vous suis oblige. -- She has
revived her withered chaps with rouge in a very nasty manner, 'pan hanor.
Aside. -- Have you heard the news, respecting Miss Harriet Trueman, ladies?


Cantwell. Yes, now I think on it, there is a report about town, that old Mr.
Loveyet saw her and another rather familiar together.


Worthnought. Oh, you have not heard half, madam.


Cantwell. Do, let us hear, Mr. Worthnought.


Herald. Ay, do; but do not say any thing that will hurt Miss Tabitha's
delicacy; for, before you came in, I was complaining that I was barren of any
thing new, and she was almost ready to swoon at the expression.


Worthnought. If Miss Tabitha has such an antipathy to barrenness, she will not
be offended at my subject, which is a very prolific one, I assure you; for Miss
Trueman is on the verge of bearing a son.


Cantwell. Oh, horrid! What will this wicked world come to at last! -- A
good-for-nothing, wanton hussy.


Worthnought. Very true, madam: -- by persons of easy notions of virtue,
indeed, it would be considered a trifling faux pas, as the French call it; a
perfect bagatelle; or, at most, a superficial act of incontinency; but to those
who have such rigid notions of virtue as Miss Cantwell, for example, or Miss
Herald, or their humble servant; it appears quite another thing, quite another
thing, ladies: -- though it is one of my foibles; -- I own it is a fault to be
so intalerably nice about the affairs of women; but it is a laudable
imperfection, if I may be allowed the phrase; -- it is erring on the safe side,
for women's affairs are delicate things to meddle with, ladies.


Cantwell. You are perfectly in the right, Mr. Worthnought; but one cannot help
speaking up for the honor of one's sex, you know.


Worthnought. Very true, madam: -- to make the matter still worse, ladies, Mr.
Loveyet is just arrived from abroad to be married to her; and the old gentleman
is going to ally him immediately to Miss Maria Airy in consequence of it.


Herald. I am glad of that, however; -- I will forgive Miss Trueman her
failing, if that is the case, for then I shall have a better chance to gain
Frankton.

Aside.
Worthnought. But this is enter nous, ladies. -- Looks at his watch. -- Hah, --
the (...) -- Ladies, I have the hanor to be your slave.

Going.
Cantwell. You are positively the greatest lady's man, Mr. Worthnought, --


Worthnought. I am proud of your compliment, madam; and I wish Miss Tabitha
could consider me such, from her own experience; it would be conferring the
highest hanor on her slave, 'pan hanor.


Cantwell. Oh, sir, -- your politeness quite confuses me.

Curtsying.
Worthnought. Miss Herald, your thrice devoted. -- Mademoiselle, je suis votre
Serviteur tres humble.


Cantwell. Mr. Worthnought, your servant. -- Exit Worthnought. -- Don't you
think he is a very pretty fellow, Miss Herald? -- He Is the very pattern of true
politeness; his address is so winning and agreeable, -- and then, he talks
French, with the greatest felicity imaginable.


Herald. I cannot say I see many perfections in him; but you talked very
differently just now; -- Mr. Worthnought then, was lighter than vanity; and
now, it seems, he has more weight with you, than good Mr. Gracely.


Cantwell. You are only mortified that Mr. Worthnought took so little notice of
you, ma'am; you see he prefers me to you, though you value yourself so much
upon being a little young, ma'am; you see men of sense don't mind a few years,
ma'am; so your servant, ma'am.

Exit.
HERALD, manet. What a vain old fool! Now will she make this story of her
swain, spread like a contagion: as for me, I must circulate it pretty briskly
too; perhaps it may make me succeed better with Frankton; otherwise the poor
girl might lie in peaceably, for me.

Exit.
SCENE IV. -- Old LOVEYET'S House.
Old LOVEYET discovered solus. Enter CHARLES LOVEYET. Charles. Mr. Loveyet,
your most obedient.


Loveyet. Sir, your servant.


Charles. Don't you know me, sir?


Loveyet. Yes, I think I have seen you before.


Charles. You really have, sir.


Loveyet. Oh, yes, I recollect now; -- you are the person who have supplanted
my son.


Charles. Indeed, sir, I am not that person.


Loveyet. How! -- Was you not with Harriet Trueman, this morning?


Charles. Yes, sir; but I have no intention to supplant your son, I assure you;
on the contrary, it is the supreme wish of my heart, that his love may be
rewarded with so rich a treasure as the amiable Harriet.


Loveyet. He shall be rewarded with a much richer one, if he is wife enough to
think so.


Charles. If it be wisdom to prefer another to Harriet, then may I ever remain
a fool!

Aside.
Loveyet. But pray, sir, what is your business with me?


Charles. My business is first to know if you have any objection to my marrying
Miss Trueman, sir.


Loveyet. What a paradoxical fellow this is! Aside, -- Did not you this minute
say, you did not intend to have her?


Charles. I did not, sir; I mean to have her if possible, and that without
disappointing your son; but I shall explain myself better, by telling you who I
am. Look at me well, sir, -- did you never see such a face before?


Loveyet. I hope I am not talking to a lunatic! Aside. -- Yes, I saw you this
morning.


Charles. Did you never see me before that, sir?


Loveyet. Looks at him steadfastly. Yes, -- I Am sure I have; and I Am very much
mistaken, if -- yes, that reconciles all his strange conduct; -- it must be so;
-- it is Charles himself.


Charles. My father!

Embracing him.
Loveyet. And are you indeed my son?


Charles. I hope I am, sir; and as such, I thus kneel to obtain forgiveness for
deceiving you so.

Kneels.
Loveyet. Rise up my lad; -- by my body, I am rejoiced to see you; -- you did
take your father in a little, to be sure; but never mind it; -- I Will take you
in another way, perhaps.


Charles. I wish you would take me in the matrimonial way, sir; -- that would
be a most agreeable take in.


Loveyet. Well, well, we shall not disagree about that: -- I am very happy this
affair clears up Harriet's conduct so well; she is a fine girl, that is certain;
and, if you love her as much as you formerly did, why -- I don't know what I
may not do.


Charles. Oh, sir, you make me unspeakably happy! If my Love is to be the
condition of the welcome Bond, I do not care if it is executed tomorrow; for,
were the penalty an age of love, I am sure I could pay it.


Loveyet. By my body, I Will have a wedding soon, and a merry one too: -- I Will go
and make it up with old Trueman; -- but then he must not talk of the
Constitution. -- That Is true, Charles, what government are you for, egh? -- The
old or the new?


Charles. Sir?


Loveyet. I say, which Constitution do you like best?


Charles. What the mischief shall I say! -- Now Love befriend me. Aside. --
Since you seem desirous of knowing my opinion on this subject, sir; I must
heartily tell you, I am decidedly in favor of the new Constitution.


Loveyet. Hah -- the new Constitution! -- A good-for-nothing, corrupted,
aristocratic profligate! -- But you shall not have her now; that is as fixed as
fate.


Charles. Oh, cruel event! How soon all my towering hopes fall prostrate in the
dust! -- Do, sir, try and think better of the matter; -- I will promise to make
myself think or do any thing you please, rather than have the double misfortune
to offend my father, and lose my Harriet.


Loveyet. Base foe to the liberties of his country!


Charles. It is very strange, sir, that you should be so violent about such
matters, at your time of life.


Loveyet. Hah! do you dare? -- Yes, he wants to provoke me still more; -- to
talk to me about my time of life! Why, I Am not old enough for your father, you
great whelp you: -- Ungracious young bastard, -- to have the assurance to
ridicule his father! -- Out of my house, you 'scape-grace!


Charles. Unnatural usage for so trivial an offense! -- But I obey you, sir:
I Will remain no longer in the house of a father, who is so destitute of a
father's feelings; and since I see you value my happiness so little, sir, I
shall not think myself undutiful, if I take some necessary steps to promote it
myself.


Loveyet. Out of my house, I say! -- Promote your own happiness, forsooth; did
you ever know any one to be happy without money, you fool? -- And what will you
do, if I don't choose to give you any, egh?


Charles. As well as I can: -- I have a few of your unnecessary thousands in my
hands, thank fortune; -- I Will try if they will not befriend me, if their
avaricious owner, and my unnatural parent will not.

Aside, and exit.
Loveyet. My time of life, indeed. -- Provoking profligate! -- I Will give Miss
Airy all I Am worth, if she will consent to have him; -- the graceless fellow has
used me so ill, that he shall be punished for it.

Exit.
End of the FOURTH ACT.
Act V.
Scene I. A STREET.
Enter Young LOVEYET, HUMPHRY, and a Negro, with a trunk on his head. LOVEYET.
DID you hear him say so?


Humphry. Yes; he said how he was intend you should have Miss Mary Airy, or
Airy Mary, or some such a name.


Loveyet. Say you so, father? -- I believe I shall do myself the pleasure to
baulk you. I want you to go a little way with my man; but you will be sure to
make no mistake.


Humphry. No, no, never fear me; I an't so apt for to make blunders as you.


Loveyet. Looking at his watch. 'Sdeath! I should have been with her half an
hour ago. -- I know I can depend on you. Here, Cuffy, go with this gentleman.


Humphry. Why, if I am a gentleman, Mr. Cuffy needn't give himself the trouble;
-- I can carry it myself.


Cuffy. Tankee, massa buckaraw; you gi me lilly lif, me bery glad; -- disa ting
damma heby. Puts down the trunk. -- An de debelis crooka tone in a treet more
worsa naw pricka pear for poor son a bitch foot; an de cole pinch um so too! --


Loveyet. No, no, you shall carry it; -- your head is harder than his.


Humphry. To be sure, my head is a little soft.


Loveyet. You must let him take it to number two hundred and twenty one,
Broad-way; -- will you remember the direction?


Humphry. Yes, number two hundred and twenty one, Broad-way.


Loveyet. Right: -- and enquire for Mr. Frankton, and tell him who it is from.


Humphry. Ay, ay, let me alone for that.

Exit, with negro.
LOVEYET, manet. I think I am even with the old gentleman now; -- but I lament
the necessity of this conduct; and, if a man could eat and digest matrimony,
without a little matter of money, I would forgive my unreasonable father, with
all my heart; and he might eat his gold himself; though, by the bye, this sum
of money, in equity and good conscience, is mine. -- Now he wants to cross my
inclination, by making me the rival of my friend; -- what a strange whim! But
if I don't trick him out of his project and his money too, it shall not be my
fault.

Exit.
SCENE II. Mr. FRIENDLY'S House.
HARRIET, solus. Notwithstanding the arrival of Charles, and the happy result
of the interview with my father, my mind is not at ease; -- these strange
rumors must have some foundation; -- one says he is married to Maria; another
says, he is discovered to be illegitimate; a third reports, he was found in
company with a woman of ill same; and to conclude the catalogue of evil
tidings, a fourth says, that old Mr. Loveyet is going to disinherit him, in
consequence of his having made him a grandfather, since his arrival -- But here
he comes.


Enter Young LOVEYET. Loveyet. She seems very thoughtful; -- perhaps she too
has been unfortunate in her suit to her father; -- or, what is far worse,
perhaps, -- but I will not cherish such gloomy apprehensions. -- Your servant,
Madam.


Harriet. Good day, Mr. Loveyet. -- "Your servant, Madam!" -- What a stoical
salutation! I fear there is too much truth in what I have heard.

Aside.
Loveyet. You seem unusually serious, Miss Harriet: I hope Mr. Trueman has not
proved relentless as you expected.


Harriet. No, sir; it gives me pleasure to acquaint you, my father was all
kindness and forgiveness.


Loveyet. I wish I could say so of mine; -- he indeed was kind and forgiving
too at first; but no sooner had I began to anticipate approaching happiness,
than one luckless circumstance deprived me of all that love and hope had
inspired.


Harriet. An unlucky circumstance, indeed; but would the disappointment really
be so great, if you were obliged to give up the thought of an alliance with me?


Loveyet. How, Miss Harriet! Give up the thought of having you! -- BY heaven,
it must be so! -- Yes, the beau would never have presumed to say so much, if it
were not so; -- and Frankton's ambiguous account of them both, confirms the
suspicion; -- and then the extravagant encomiums he bestowed on her yesterday.
-- Confusion! my fears were just, though he ridiculed me for exposing them. --
But she must not see my anxiety.

Aside.
Harriet. If my doubts are well founded, he must be an adept in the art of
dissimulation. I will try him a little farther. -- Aside. -- What think you,
Mr. Loveyet, of our New York beauties? Have not the superior charms of so many
fine women, been able to overcome such old-fashioned notions as constancy and
priority of affection?


Loveyet. I have beheld their beauty with equal pleasure and astonishment; and
the understanding, the affability, and vivacity, by which strangers, with so
much propriety, characterize my fair countrywomen, give them a pre-eminence
over the ladies of most other countries, that is highly gratifying to a mind
already so much attached to its native city, by the most endearing of all human
ties; -- they are all that the warmest, the most luxuriant fancy can wish;
beautiful -- almost beyond the possibility of an increase of charms; and -- I
had almost said, they furnish room for love and warm conceptions, "even to
madness!"


Harriet. I am in doubt no longer; -- such passionate expressions must have
Love for their prompter.

Aside.
Loveyet. My friend Frankton extolled them highly; but his description
derogates from their desort; -- you too he praised; -- I listened to him --
with unspeakable delight, and believed him with all the ardor of faith and
expectation; for I could readily believe that, which I had so often, so sweetly
experienced; -- but when you last blessed my eyes with that enchanting form, how
was the idea exceeded by the reality! -- To do justice to such perfection, the
praises I this minute bestowed on the ladies I have seen, would be spiritless
and insufficient! -- To charms like Miss Harriet's, what hermit could remain
insensible! -- I was not insensible; -- the tender passion, I began so early to
entertain; a passion, which length of absence and a succession of objects and
events, had rendered too dormant, was then excited to sensations the most
exquisitely sensible; -- was then taught to glow with a flame, too fervent to
be now suppressed!


Harriet. Were I but sure of his sincerity!

Aside.
Loveyet. With what indifference she hears me! -- If she is so insensible to
the genuine effusions of a heart like mine, I am lost indeed! But I will try a
little deception to discover the truth. Aside. -- What a lovely picture, Mr.
Frankton drew of Miss Airy! But it was not too highly finished; for a thousand
Loves and Graces have conspired, to make her the most accomplished of her sex.


Harriet. My pride shall not let him triumph over my chagrin. Aside. -- I know
Miss Airy to be as accomplished as you represent her, sir: and Mr. Frankton
gave such a lovely description of her, you say; -- I dare say he did; -- oh, --
yes -- yes -- Appears disconcerted, by striving to hide her concern. -- he
loves her to distraction; -- Mr. Frankton has doubtless made a wise choice.


Loveyet. By all that is false, she is concerned at Frankton's having praised
his mistress! She absolutely loves him!

Aside.
Harriet. And you have seen the amiable Miss Airy, sir.


Loveyet. Forgive me, honor and veracity. Aside. -- Yes, Miss Trueman; and not
without a deep sense of her uncommon worth and beauty.


Harriet. I admire your discernment, sir; -- Mr. Frankton too, is a very nice
judge of female merit; and he cannot evince his judgment better, than by
praising my friend Maria.


Loveyet. Pardon me, madam: with submission to your friend's merit, I think his
panegyric would better apply to you.


Harriet. That compliment is too great, to be meant, I fancy.


Loveyet. I rather think, you value the author of it so little, that you would
as soon he should withold it, madam.


Harriet. Certainly, sir, when I have reason to think there is another who has
a better right to it, and for whom it is secretly intended.


Loveyet. You wrong me much, madam; -- some tatling gossip or designing knave,
has whispered some falsehood to my prejudice; -- probably my rival, -- Mr.
Worthnought.


Harriet. If you have come here with a design to use me ill, sir, I beg you
will tell me so, and then I shall act accordingly.


Loveyet. Your actions accord very illy with your professions, I think, madam.


Harriet. Your duplicity, sir, both in word and action, justifies my retorting
that ungenerous accusation.


Loveyet. I entreat you to believe me, Miss Harriet, when I say, I am
unconscious of having done any thing I ought to be ashamed of, since my
arrival: I am so confident of this, that the circulation of a malicious rumor,
however dishonorable to me, would give me little disquiet, did I not reflect,
that it is the object of Harriet's credulity; -- a reflection, that is the
source of real unhappiness to me: -- be kind then, Harriet, and tell me wherein
I am guilty; -- obscurity in a matter so interesting, gives more torture to the
mind, than the most unwelcome truth.


Harriet. He must be sincere. Aside. -- Your request shall be complied with,
sir. -- The principal offense you are charged with, is your having been smitten
by the lady, on whom you have bestowed such liberal commendation; -- be that as
it may, I heard Mr. Loveyet talk of such a match: -- I believe it will require
a more able advocate than yourself, to defend this cause.


Loveyet. Suppose I assure you, on the sacred honor of a gentleman, that what
you have heard is false; -- suppose I add the more important sanction of an
oath, to seal the truth.


Harriet. I will save you that trouble: -- you have an advocate here, which has
already gained your cause.


Loveyet. Oh, Harriet, you are too good! -- Conscious as I am of the rectitude
of my conduct, as it respects my Harriet; -- sure as I am of not deserving your
displeasure, I still feel myself unworthy of such matchless goodness.


Harriet. You say too much; and compel me to tell you that you merit my highest
esteem.


Loveyet. Esteem! What a cold epithet! -- And am not I entitled to something
more than esteem?


Harriet. Excuse the poverty of the expression; and be assured, my heart
dictated a more exalted word; -- let this confession atone for the fault.


Loveyet. And yet I would fain attract your esteem too; for, I have heard
connoisseurs in the science of love say, it is possible to love an object, and
that to distraction, without having a particle of esteem for it.


Harriet. I have assured you that my esteem is at least equalled by a more
passionate affection: -- but how strangely you talk! -- First you acknowledge
yourself unworthy of my favor; -- then you are alarmed that I should only
esteem you; and when I talk of a passion, superior to mere Platonic love, you
are afraid, on the other hand, it is a blind, enthusiastic impulse, not founded
on esteem. -- How inconsistent are lovers!


Loveyet. Your reasoning, like your person, surprises, charms and subdues: -- I
will be more consistent; -- but our contention is only for pre-eminence in
love; -- delightful emulation! Agreeable inconsistency!


Harriet. I am now ashamed of my childish suspicions; but I should not have
been so credulous, had it not been for an affection, which rendered my better
judgment blind to the fallacy, and made me more apprehensive of your
inconstancy, than satisfied of your innocence; and this disposed me to
misinterpret every thing you said.


Loveyet. And your apparent indifference, in consequence of that
misinterpretation, excited similar suspicions in me; and thus, mutual distrust
produced mutual misapprehension.


Harriet. But you have not told me the particulars of your interview with old
Mr. Loveyet.


Loveyet. Were you to hear those particulars, they would only afford you pain:
-- it is sufficient for me to tell you he has turned me out of his house, only
because I told him, I was a friend to the new Constitution, forsooth.


Harriet. He is a strange character: -- when I called on my father, I was
alarmed to find them at high words; -- and he abused me most unmercifully.


Loveyet. He did? It Is well for him he has called himself my father; -- but if
my Harriet consents, I will immediately put myself in a situation that will
justify my preventing his future ill usage: -- Fortune has enable me to act
independent either of his frown or his favor: -- I have taken such measures, in
consequence of his base usage, as will guard us against the effects of the one,
without obliging us to cringe for the other.


Harriet. I am happy to hear it; but affluence is not my object, nor poverty my
dread; and I am happy I can convince you how little I desire an alliance for
interest, by now tendering you the whole of my trifling fortune, in case your
father should deprive you of yours.


Loveyet. Charming Harriet! Miracle of disinterested love! Thus let me evince
my gratitude.

Kneels, and kisses her hand.
Harriet. Pray do not worship me, Mr. Loveyet; I am less generous than you
imagine; -- self-love is at the bottom of this noble declaration; for if I did
not suppose you capable of making me happier than any other man, I would keep
both my fortune and my person, to myself.


Loveyet. Better and better! -- Your explanation gives me new reason to adore
such uncommon worth, and makes me blessed beyond measure! By heaven, New York
does not contain such a fortunate fellow!


Enter FRANKTON. Harriet. Seeing Frankton. -- Ha, ha. You could not say more,
if you were addressing my friend Maria.


Loveyet. Talk not of your friend Maria, --


Harriet. You talked enough of her perfections just now, for both of us.


Frankton. He did, egh?

Aside.
Loveyet. I spoke of her as I thought she deserved; she is a lovely creature,
but -- but -- Sees Frankton. -- Frankton!


Frankton. I hope Miss Trueman will excuse my coming in so abruptly: -- I have
been looking for Mr. Loveyet, all over the city; at last I concluded, I might
find him here.


Harriet. Really, sir; and pray, what made you conclude so?


Frankton. I thought it was within the compass of probability, madam.


Loveyet. Perhaps it was the lady you wanted to see so much, Frankton; -- that
she might be here, was certainly within the compass of probability.


Frankton. Had I then known what I have discovered since, I should have looked
for you at some place not very distant from the lady, whose perfections you
have been contemplating with so much admiration; for by Miss Harriet's account,
you have seen her, perhaps more than once.


Loveyet. I saw her yesterday, and was charmed with her beauty. -- Whenever I
am betrayed into one falsehood, I am obliged to support it with twenty more.

Aside.
Harriet. It is really so, sir; -- he was enraptured with her idea just now. --
I fear your friend is your rival, sir.


Loveyet. And I fear my friend is my rival, madam.


Harriet. Nay, what cause have you, for such a fear?


Loveyet. About as good as you have, my dear. -- I am glad you came in when you
did, Frankton; for you must know, we have had certain mutual doubts and
jealousies; in consequence of which, a little ill-natured altercation,
otherwise called love, ensued: a small foretaste of conjugal felicity; but the
short-lived storm soon subsided, and a reconciliation made all calm again.


Frankton. I have something to say to you in private, Loveyet. Aside to
Loveyet. -- I am sorry to deprive you of Mr. Loveyet's company, Madam; but I
trust you will excuse me, when I tell you I have particular business with him


Harriet. By all means, sir.


Frankton. Your most obedient, madam.


Loveyet. Goes up to Harriet. -- Adieu; -- expect me soon, and be assured of my
unalterable fidelity.

Exit with Frankton.
Harriet. Farewell. -- I wish he had looked for you a little farther, before he
had taken you away. -- There are so many captivating objects in the city, (as
he has already seen and declared) and dissipation abounds so much among us,
that who knows, if he is now sincere, how long he will remain so; -- and how
long after marriage: -- "Ah, there is the rub." -- Well, matrimony will put his
constancy to the test, that is one comfort; -- it is a hazardous expedient, but
it is a certain one.


SCENE III. A STREET.
Enter FRANKTON and Young LOVEYET. Loveyet. He denounces perpetual enmity
against me; threatens me with beggary, and (what is worse) resolves to prevent
my union with Harriet, and thus blast all my hopes; but I shall take care to
disappoint his views; -- I have just sent the most valuable part of my property
to --


Frankton. Hah! There goes Miss Airy, I believe: -- pray excuse me, Charles;
perhaps she has observed me. You have eased my mind of its doubts, and your
resolution has made your friend happy. -- Adieu.

Exit in haste.
LOVEYET, manet. A plague take your hurry, I say: -- In the very moment of my
telling him about sending the money to his house, he must conceit he saw Miss
Airy; -- but he has not received it yet, or he would have told me. -- I hope
Humphry has made no mistake; -- I must see about it immediately.

Exit.
SCENE IV. The Street before MARIA'S House.
Enter HUMPHRY, and Negro, with a trunk. Humphry. This here is the house, I
warrant you; -- these crooked figures is enough for to puzzle a lawyer. -- He
said number two hundred and twenty one: -- two two's and a one stands for that,
and there it is. Knocks, -- servant comes out. -- Does one Mr. Frankton live
here, pray?


Servant. No; -- he is here pretty often though, and I expect he will live here
altogether, by and by.


Humphry. Ay, I suppose he is only a lodger; -- yes, this must be the place.


Servant. It Is not the place you want, I believe. -- Mr. Airy lives here.


Humphry. Mr. Airy! Ay, ay, now I Have got it. -- Here, Mr. What-d'ye-call'um,
will you please to tell Miss Mary, somebody wants for to speak to her. Exit
servant. -- Now I Have found out the mistake; -- since I told him how the old man
was a going for to marry him to Miss Mary, he thought he must obey the old
fellow, for fear he shou'dn't let him have any of his money, and she is got a
swinging fortune, they say; so he sent the trunk to her. -- But what should he
tell me to take it to Mr. Frankton's for? -- Why I suppose he thought I should
find him here, for the man says he is here very often: -- and then the number on
the door; why, that settles the matter at once, -- there cannot be two numbers
alike, in the same street, sartainly: -- Yes, he is made one of his old blunders.


Servant returns. Servant. Please to walk in, sir.


Humphry. Ay, ay; -- here, master Cuffy, this way.

They go in.
SCENE V. A Room in MARIA'S House.
MARIA and Old LOVEYET, discovered sitting. Loveyet. It certainly is a mistake,
madam; I have sent nothing out of my house to day.


Maria. He said it was from Mr. Loveyet, sir. -- I confess I could not conceive
what could induce you to send me a trunk of money.


Loveyet. Who brought it, madam?


Maria. A clownish kind of person, sir, -- a countryman, I believe.


Loveyet. Ah, now I begin to suspect something. -- What a sad rascal! -- want
to cheat his father! But this lucky mistake will spoil his project.

Aside.
Maria. You are striving to unravel the mystery, sir. -- I am afraid the man
has made some serious mistake.


Loveyet. No matter, -- it could not have come to a more suitable place; for,
now it is here, it shall be yours, if you will consent to a proposal I have to
make to you; for I have discovered it to be my property, after all.


Maria. If I can with propriety consent to any thing you may propose, I will,
sir; -- but I hope you do not think either your or your son's money will tempt
me.


Loveyet. No, madam, -- that is to say, I dare say it will not tempt you to do
any thing that is wrong; -- but money is a tempting thing too, -- though not
quite so tempting as Miss Maria. -- Hem, hem, -- There was a delietc;acute;ate
compliment for her!

Aside.
Maria. Mercy on me! What can the ugly old mortal mean! It cannot be possible
he would have the vanity to propose his odious self.

Aside.
Loveyet. You must know, madam, my son has lately arrived from the West Indies,
--


Maria. Really? -- You rejoice me, sir. -- Happy, happy Harriet!


Loveyet. Not so happy as you imagine, madam; for she is not to have my son, I
assure you; I intend a lady of greater beauty and merit for him, who is not
very far from me now, -- provided she and her father have no objection. --
There I put it home to her. Aside. Ugh, ugh.


Maria. I fear there is something in this rumor about Harriet.

Aside.
Loveyet. Come, shall it be so, egh? -- Well, silence gives consent. -- I know
you cannot have any particular objection. I must have you for a -- Ugh, ugh, uh.


Maria. I must humor this joke a little. Aside. -- The honor you wish to
confer on me, is so great, Mr. Loveyet, that I want words to empress a suitable
acknowledgment; -- but what will the world say, when a gentleman of Mr.
Loveyet's sedateness and experience stoops to a giddy girl like me?


Loveyet. By my body, she thinks I want to have her myself. -- Why, what a
lucky young dog I am! I wish old Trueman was here now; -- 'ods my heart, and my
life, and my -- ugh, ugh, -- but I must talk the matter over cooly with her.
Hem, hem. Aside. -- Oh, you dear little charming, angelic creature; -- I love
you so much, I could find in my heart to -- 'Zounds! I could eat you up. -- By
my body, but you must give me a sweet kiss. Offers to kiss her. -- 'Sblood! I
cannot bear it any longer. snatches a kiss. -- Ugh, ugh.


Maria. what a preposterous old dotard! Aside. -- You will excuse me, Mr.
Loveyet; I have company waiting for me.


Loveyet. By all means, my blossom; -- it goes to my very heart to part with
you, though; -- but go to your company, my love, go, go. -- I would not
disoblige you, nor put the least thing in your way, for the seraglio -- of the
Grand Seignior. You may give up the trunk to my son now, if he calls for it, my
love. Exit Maria. Oh, what a dear creature! Such sweet lips, -- such panting,
precious, plump, little -- oh, I could jump out of my skin at the thoughts of
it! -- By my body, I must have her, and poor Charles may have Harriet, for all.
-- A fig for both the Constitutions now, I say; I would not give my dear little
Maria for a score of them.

Exit.
SCENE VI. A STREET.
Enter Young LOVEYET. I wish I could find that fellow; -- I cannot think he has
been treacherous; -- but it is very strange, neither he nor my man have
returned yet: -- I am tired of seeking Frankton too; -- since he made free to
call at Harriet's for me, I think I will do to Miss Airy's for him: they say
she lives near by. Enter Humphry. -- Well, sir, what have you done with the
trunk?


Humphry. Why, what you told me, to be sure. I Have been a making your man Cuffy
drunk, with some of the money you give me; but he is 'most sober now.


Loveyet. Did you see Mr. Frankton?


Humphry. No; but I carried the trunk to his lodgings though: I was just a
going to Mr. Airy's, to see if I could not find you there.


Loveyet. Mr. Airy's?


Humphry. Ay, -- where Mr. Frankton lodges; number two hundred and twenty one;
-- there it is before your eyes.


Loveyet. That is number one hundred and twenty two; -- you did not carry it
there, I hope.


Humphry. Yes I did. -- Why is not that the place?


Loveyet. Confound your dull brains! -- Did you not enquire who lived there?


Humphry. Yes. Mr. Airy lives there.


Loveyet. What a strange circumstance! -- You are sure Mr. Airy lives there.


Humphry. Sure and sartin; -- why I see the young lady you're a going to be
married to, and I give her the trunk; for I think the sarvint said how Mr.
Frankton lodged there. -- I hope there is no harm done.


Loveyet. I hope so too; -- I must steps in, and see; but this is the last time
I shall send you with a message.

Goes in.
Humphry. Like enough, for I Am a going home in the country tomorrow.

Exit.
SCENE VII. TRUEMAN'S House.
Enter TRUEMAN, reading a letter. This is very unaccountable; -- Richard
Worthnought, egh: -- I wish, Mr. Worthnought, you had been at my school a
while, before you scrawl'd this wretched epistle: -- but the subject is still
more unintelligible.


Enter WORTHNOUGHT. Worthnought. Mr. Trueman, I am yours.


Trueman. I deny it. -- Heaven forbid, such a thing as you, should be either
mine or my daughter's!


Worthnought. I should not gain much credit by the alliance, I believe. -- You
have received my letter, sir, I presume.


Trueman. I think you presume -- rather more than becomes you, sir.


Worthnought. I find, the foolish old Put don't like me. Aside. -- I am sorry
you do not approve of my offer; but, but -- a -- rat me, but I must have her,
for all that. Ha, ha, ha; -- 'foregad, I must, old gentleman.


Enter Old LOVEYET. Loveyet. But I say you shall not have her, sir; -- there, I
suppose you will have the impudence to call me, old gentleman, next.


Worthnought. Demme, sir; what have you to do with his daughter?


Loveyet. Nothing; but my son has something to do with her: have not he, friend
Horace?


Trueman. Heyday! what does all this mean? -- Has any State rejected the new
Constitution?


Worthnought. Come, let us have no palitics, for gad's sake; -- rat the
canstitution; -- I would not give une Fille de joye, for all the musty
canstitutions in christendom.


Trueman. By the dignity of my profession, you never read Publius then; or you
would have liked one constitution.


Worthnought. Publius! ha, ha, ha. -- I read Publius! Not I, sir, I assure you:
-- an outre fellow, -- a dull, mysterious, mechanical writer, as ever I refused
to read, split me.


Loveyet. So he is, so he is, sir: by my body, I am glad to find somebody of my
mind.

Trueman and Loveyet retire to the back of the stage.
Enter FRANKTON and HUMPHRY. Frankton. You saw him go into Miss Airy's house,
this morning, you say.


Humphry. Yes.

Walks thoughtlessly about the stage.
Frankton. I think, this is a tolerable confirmation of the matter.


Worthnought. Hah, -- Frankton; -- 'foregad, I am yours, superlatively.


Frankton. Are you, positively? Hah, -- she is here. Enter MARIA, on the
opposite side. -- Your humble servant, Miss Airy.


Maria. Pretends to take no notice of Frankton. Mr. Trueman, I hope I have the
pleasure to see you well.


Trueman. I thank you, madam. Resumes his discourse with Loveyet, who does not
yet observe Maria.


Maria. I hoped to have found Miss Harriet here, sir.


Trueman. Madam? --

Turns to Loveyet again.
Loveyet. Therefore, sir, as I was telling you, I am determined to have her.

To Trueman.
Trueman. Leaving Loveyet. How is this, madam? -- Mr. Loveyet tells me, he is
determined to have you.


Frankton. Who! How! -- Have who, sir?

Loud, and earnestly.
Loveyet. Seeing Maria, By my body, there she is herself. -- Have who, sir? --
Why, have this lady, sir; who do you think? -- My sweet Miss Airy, I have the
transcendent pleasure to kiss your hand. ugh, ugh.


Maria. Oh, fie, Mr. Loveyet. -- I will have the pleasure to teaze Frankton,
now. Retires with old Loveyet, whispering, and looking tenderly at him.


Frankton. Amazement! -- The old fellow!

Aside.
Worthnought. This is all very astanishing, 'foregad: -- demme, but she
deserves to die an old maid, if she has him.

Aside.
Maria. Pretends to observe Frankton, for the first time. -- Mr. Frankton! -- I
did not observe you before: I give you joy of your friend's arrival, sir; -- I
suppose you have seen him; -- he is very agreeable.


Frankton. Then I need not ask you, if you have seen him, madam.


Maria. He was at my house not two hours ago.


Frankton. Did not you see him before that, madam?


Maria. I did not, sir.


Frankton. Detested falsehood!

Aside.
Maria. The old gentleman acquainted me of his arrival, only a few minutes
before.


Loveyet. Egh, how, -- old gentleman! -- She did not mean me, I hope.

Aside.
Frankton. And you think Mr. Loveyet is so agreeable then.


Loveyet. Ay, that is me; -- by my body, he is jealous of me. Ha, ha; poor young
fool!

Aside.
Frankton. He thinks very highly of you, I assure you, madam; he speaks of you
with admiration.


Maria. And what of that, sir? -- You speak as if you thought him my only
admirer.

Affectedly.
Frankton. Disgusting vanity! Aside. -- No, madam, -- the number of your
admirers is at least equal to that of your acquaintance; -- but there is only
one, who sincerely loves, as well as admires you.


Loveyet. Come, come, sir; none of your airs, sir: -- love her, indeed; -- why
-- why she don't love you.

Ogling and winking at her, etc.
Worthnought. Ha, ha, gudgeons all, demme; -- old square toes is cursedly bit;
I see that.

Aside.
Maria. Mr. Loveyet, I returned the trunk to your son.


Humphry. His son. -- Ha, ha.


Loveyet. Yes, yes, he told me so just now: -- the poor dog was ready to jump
out of his skin, when I told him he should have Harriet.


Enter CANTWELL and HERALD. Worthnought. Oh, the devil! -- Now shall I be blown
up, like a barrel of gunpowder.

Aside.
Cantwell. Servant, gentlemen and ladies. -- How is your daughter, Mr. Trueman?
I hope she is likely to do well.


Trueman. I hope she is, madam; it is a match which we all approve.


Cantwell. No, no, sir; I mean concerning her late affair.


Herald. Why, young Loveyet certainly would not stoop so low, as to have her
now.


Trueman. 'Zounds! Why not, pray?


Loveyet. What, in the name of ill luck, can they mean! -- I hope, I -- oh,
there they come.


Enter HARRIET and CHARLES LOVEYET. Cantwell. Oh, dear, here they are; -- why
she don't look, as if that was the case.

To Herald.
Trueman. I desire, ladies, to know what you mean, by these mysterious whispers.


Cantwell. La! sir; you only want to put a body to the blush; but if you want
an explanation, that gentleman Pointing to Worthnought. can give it to you.


Charles. The villain! Aside. -- I fancy I could explain it as well.


Worthnought. Hem, hem, -- now comes on my trial.

Aside.
Charles. But first, -- your blessing, sir.

Kneels to his father.
Harriet. And yours, sir.

Kneels to Trueman.
Loveyet. What, -- married already!


Charles. This ten minutes, sir.

Rising.
Cant. and Her. Married!


Worthnought. Then my ill-star'd fortune is decided.

Aside.
Trueman. Upon my erudition, you have been too precipitate, Harriet; but I have
no reason to think, you will repent it; you therefore have my sincerest
benediction.

Raising her.
Maria. I give you joy, my dear.

To Harriet.
Frankton. Now all my fears have vanished.

Aside, and goes to young Loveyet.
Loveyet. By my body, you have made quick work of it, Charles.


Charles. For fear of the worst, I have.

Aside.
Loveyet. But -- but are you in favor of the new Constitution yet?


Charles. At present I can think of no Constitution but that of Love and
Matrimony, sir.


Loveyet. And I shall be sorry if your matrimonial Constitution does not prove
the better one of the two. -- Egh, Maria?


Worthnought. Dick Worthnought, esquire, thou art an ass and a liar; and, what
is worse than both, -- as poor as poverty. Oh, Fortune, thou blind disposer of
human events, when will thou make a man of me?

Going angrily.
Charles. Stay a little, if you please, sir. -- My happiness is too great at
present, to let me take that revenge, which the baseness of your conduct
deserves: but justice bids me accuse you, of having wickedly, and without
cause, endeavored to injure the reputation of this lady, whom it is my highest
boast and felicity now to call my wife; my making her such, however, at the
very time when the baneful tongue of Slander is so diligent to damn her
spotless fame, -- Looking significantly at Cantwell and Herald. -- will at once
convince the public of her innocence, and the cruelty of her enemies. With her,
you have also injured her connexions; but I, for my own part, am fully
satisfied with those symptoms of shame and repentance, which you now evince.


Trueman. Upon my education, I did not think him susceptible of either. -- A
few minutes ago, I received this audacious epistle from him.

"Sir, I have the honor to -- acquaint you -- that I have an inclination -- to
marry your daughter, -- notwithstanding -- the late scandalous -- reports that
are transpiring to her disadvantage, and (what is still worse) the --
comparative meanness -- of her fortune to mine." -- The comparative meanness of
her fortune to mine.


Harriet, Maria, Loveyet, Charles, Frankton, Ha, ha, ha.


Worthnought. Never was put so much to my trumps, 'foregad.

Exit.
Herald. Unmannerly wretches!

Scornfully, and Exit.
Cantwell. Oh, the wickedness of this wicked world!

Exit after her.
Loveyet. Why, this is just as it should be now; -- I think business goes on
finely.


Maria. You will not think so, much longer.

Aside.
Loveyet. By my body, I am as merry as a cricket; -- an't you, Maria? For my
part, I feel so well pleased, I could find in my heart to -- to do as you have
done; to Charles -- could not you, my love?

To Maria.
Maria. Yes, sir,


Loveyet. Oh, you dear little rogue! With whom, egh, with whom? -- Don't be
bashful, -- tell them. -- I know she means me.

Aside
Maria. I beg to be excused from telling that, sir; but I will tell you who it
is I would not have.


Loveyet. Ay, that is him. -- Aside, looking at Frankton. -- Well, who is it you
will not have, Maria, who is it?


Maria. You, sir.

Emphatically.
Loveyet. Me, egh? -- me -- me, Maria?


Charles. Preposterous infatuation!


Loveyet. D -- 'd, wanton, treacherous jilt!

Walks about discomposed.
Maria. You have jilted yourself, sir; -- nothing but excess of dotage and
self-conceit could have let you impose on yourself in such a manner.


Frankton. And may I then hope --


Maria. Hope? -- Oh, yes, sir; -- you have my permission to hope for any thing
you please.


Charles. And you, madam, the disposition to gratify his hopes, I fancy.


Lveyet. I fancy you lie, sir; and you sha'n't have Harriet, for your
impertinence.


Charles. Excuse me father; -- it is not in your power to prevent that; -- the
happy deed is already executed.


Loveyet. 'Zounds! that is true! -- and, what is still worse, the other deed is
executed too. -- Fire and fury* All is lost, for the sake of that inveigling,
perfidious young Siren. Ugh, ugh, ugh.


Trueman. Burlesquing what Loveyet has said in a former Scene. -- "'Sdeath,
sir! I tell you I am but two and forty years old: she sha'n't be more than
thirty odd, sir; and she shall be ten years younger than I am too. -- A man of
five and forty, old, forsooth!" Ha, ha, ha.


Loveyet. Perdition! Is this what I have come to at last? -- Despised, --
betrayed, -- laughed at, -- supplanted by a puppy, -- Pointing to Frankton. --
tricked out of my money by a graceless, aristocratic son, -- I -- I Will -- I Will
go hang myself.

Exit in a passion.
Humphry. This is, for all the world, like the show I see the other night, at the
Playhouse.


Charles. His agitation of mind distresses me: my happiness is not complete,
while it is enjoyed at the expense of a father's: -- painful reflection! -- We
will go immediately, Harriet, and endeavor to pacify him.


His conduct shall instruct the hoary Sage,
That youth and beauty were not meant for age;
His rage, resentment, avarice, dotage, pride,
(Sad view of human nature's frailest side!)
Shall mend us all; -- but chiefly I shall prove,
That all his Politics, can never match my LOVE.
THE END.

