CONSOLATION FROM HOMAR, AN HERMIT of the EAST.

TO WHICH IS ADDED A SOLILOQUY, By the Rev. WILLIAM SMITH, A. M. Rector of St.
Paul's Church, Narraganset^, Rhode Island State.

NEWPORT: PRINTED BY HENRY BARBER, M,DCC,LXXXIX.

CONTENTS.
Introduction. Chap. 1st -- The Parent comforted. Chap. 2d -- The Widow
comforted. Chap. 3d -- Comfort under the Loss of worldly Blessings. Chap. 4th.
-- The Sick-man comforted. Chap. 5th. -- Consolation under Calumny. Soliloquy
of the devout Soul after reading the above Consolations.
Advertisement.
MR. Addison remarks that Inquiries after happiness are not so necessary "and
useful to mankind, as the arts of consolation and supporting one's self under
affliction. Of the justness of this observation, experience and the frequent
scenes of distress may convince, and at the same time plead an apology for
troubling the world with these papers. -- They claim no merit; neither have
they any other, but the benevolent aim, of offering comfort to such suffering
and afflicted characters, into whose hands they may happen to come. If this is
in any degree effected, the good intention has obtained it is reward -- and it
is presumable that God will bless every humble endeavor subservient to so
happy an end. And, should that end be, in any measure obtained -- should one
falling tear be wiped from the moist eye of sorrow -- should the heaving sigh
be repressed at the throbbing heart of woe -- Glory will thereby redound to God
the Almighty source of consolation and relief to the sorrowful hearted. Alike
unmoved by the breath of applause or the blast of censure, let these papers be
permitted to pass; they hurt nobody, and offer their service to do everybody
good, and therefore hope to be viewed in a benevolent light even by those, who
stand in no need of them.

CONSOLATION
From HOMAR, an HERMIT of he EAST.
HOMAR, the Son of Hassan, to all the Children of Affliction, Peace and
Consolation.

The great will of the HOLY GOD be done: for WISDOM dwells with him, and
MERCY is the foundation of his eternal throne.

Glory be to thee JESUS thou PRINCE of sufferers, who did triumph through,
and upon thy cross. Thrice holy Cross! From thee bath been distributed among
all nations the fruit of the TREE OF LIFE: Homar will bear thee with
resignation and thankfulness, and follow his REDEEMER with faith and patience,
to the realms of light and joy. -- Thrice holy cross, I say, thou have
instructed my soul -- understanding and comfort are thy gifts and blessings. I
have taken my station at the foot of the cross of my Savior Jesus, with the
two Mary's, humbly acknowledging, that, in all my afflictions "I receive the
due, reward of my deeds" -- waiting patiently "to bear the indignation of the
LORD, because I have sinned against him."

Tossed on the tempestuous ocean of life, Homar heard not the voice of wisdom,
nor listened to the admonitions of truth. He sailed along, O ye children of
affliction, regardless of Heaven, and its august inhabitants: Heedful only of
the winds of advantage, -- attentive only to the call of pleasure, and animal
gratification. He built his house -- oh vain and self-deceived! -- he built his
house, in towering fancy, on a rock; stability seemed it is ba^e, the angels of
prosperity appeared to be in love with the dwelling! Oh flatering prospect! Oh
delusive imagination! It fell! -- Homar's joys were like a midnight dream!

Behold you towering cedar, on the mountain, how it erects its stately head to
the clouds, and sends far abroad its wide spreading branches. Such was Homar;
high in honor, and reaching forth the arms of his protection to all around. --
Behold you deep and fertilising stream! how it winds i^s mazey course through the
valleys, and every where diffuseth plenty and delight. Such was Homar; blessing
and blessed: a rich stream flowing with comforts through a large train of
relations and dependants!

But now, how changed is Homar! B^hold, and see, O ye children of sorrow; all
of you who have drank deep of the bitter cup of adversity; behold, in the son
of Hassan, the correcting hand of Providence; and learn with him to bow and
adore! -- For, though despoiled of all his former glories; -- though rendered like
the heath in the desert, like the barren rock, or the unfruitful sand on the
seashore; though left alone, like some blighted tree bespoiled of all its
boasted glory, its leaves and branches; -- alone -- and dwelling in a solitary
cottage, amidst an unfrequented wilderness, far removed from the habitations of
men; -- he rejoiceth in comfort unknown to him amidst prosperity; for he
rejoiceth in God. His soul does magnify the Lod, and his Spirit exulteth in God
his Savior, and in the golden hope of everlasting glory with him! --

Come then, and hearken unto me; let me instruct you my fellow sufferers; --
let me lead you to the fountain, whence I have drank such draughts of
consolation and delight.

Approach unto me, all ye who have known affliction from the hand of the Lord.
I offer no barren or unsatisfying comfort: I speak that I do know, and testify
what experience herself has taught me. Come then, and compare your griefs with
mine; and, while we discourse, may the angel of patience diffuse her balm, more
precious than that of Gilead, into our breasts!

But first, Oh First, let us bend the knee of earnest supplication to the
Father of unutterable mercies, to the Prince of sufferers, to the Spirit of
eternal Consolation! For, what work shall succeed, which is not begun with
solemn prayer, for the prevailing benediction of the holy and undivied Trinity
I Hear us, then, All Gracious Tri-Une God, hear and bless the endeavors of the
meanest of thy servants! Prosper his labors to the good of mankind! And make
his sufferings advantageous to others, as hou have been pleased to make them so
advantageous to himself! Give him a tongue, an eloquence that shall teach and
affect; and grant that all who hear and peruse his Consolations, may feel thy
better Consolations at their hear^s, and rejoice, in that they have felt the
instructive rod of Heaven -- directed chastisement.

HOLY, HOLY, HOLY GOD, FATHER, SON, AND SPIRIT, HEAR AND BLESS!

Expectant then of the d^^^ne grace, let us expostulate together, thou child of
sorrow; let us see, what arguments of Comfort we can offer to thee in thy
distress.

CHAP. FIRST. THE PARENT COMFORTED.
AH, wretched Father! Homar sympathizes with thee! thou have lost thy Son, thy
only Son, the staff of thy age the solace and support of thy declining days.
And, now, abandoned to grief and despair, thou art resolved to go mourning to
thy much desired grave.

Melancholy and afflicted Parent! my heart bleeds for thee, and for her the
faithful Companion of thy life, the affectionate and distressed Mother, who
sits weeping in silent sorrow by thy side! Great, indeed, is the calamity which
has befallen you; but let not the cries of anguish drown the so't and
persuasive voice of consolation -- let not the demon of despair prevail over
the angel of truth and reflection.

Great is the calamity which has befallen YOU: but, alas! not greater; than
many fellow sufferers have had cause to deplore.

Oh! my Son, my first born, how does the remembrance of thy untimely fate recur
to my mind! hearken unto me, ye afflicted Parents, and receive comfort from the
lips of a partner in woe.

The Son of Homar was graceful, and pleasing to behold; he grew up as the lilly
of the mountains, and flourished as the rose of Sharon; health mantled in his
cheek, and sensibility spoke from his radiant eye! He lent his ear to
instruction, and received with stall increasing thirst, the slowing cup from
the hand of wisdom! Duty and respect bowed his head every morning to the
Parents who well high adored him; and flattering felicity seemed proud to
accompany his goings.

Lo he fell! my first born, my beloved! A sudden stroke left him a lifeless
corpse in my arms; the lovely flower withered in my bosom! God snatched him from
me -- "he had need of him" -- And, O my God, thy severity was wholesome!

But could I, Oh ye Parents, say, could I refrain from lamentation and tears?
Give to humanity it is tribute! Weep, Oh ye sufferers, your tears are allowed;
weep Oh ye sufferers; but weep as men, as immortals as christians!

But reflect with me: Is your son, your child, your friend, lost -- lost and
gone for ever? Is there no hope, no probability of a future meeting? -- Is all
of the man buried with body in the grave? -- And do all our thoughts and
expectations vanish there? -- Forbid it Reason! -- And thou divine display of
high benevolence to man, thou glorious gospel of my Savior, hail! hail THOU
who has brought LIFE and IMMORTALITY to full and (...)!

M^^^ T^^^sure is IMMORTALITY Sorrow, then, no more, thou Blessed Heir of this
inestimable Treasure. For what is earth, or what is time to thee, who art
appointed to live eternally in the Paradise of thy God? -- There, triumphant
thought! there shall thou receive again the son whom thou now lamentest so
tenderly! There, Oh my Selim, my beloved! there shall thy Father' welcome thee,
once, more, to his embraces; and for ever enjoy the bright display of thy
virtues, without fear of loss, or separation, without the dread of decay, or
the alarming apprehension of seduction or defilement. Placed beyond the reach
of temptation -- beyond the power of sin: death shall never enter there, -- all
shall be stable and perfect, as the God himself who is the light and glory of
his Saints!

Can the reflection fail to cheer thy soul, O melancholy mourner, over thy
departed child! He is not lost. Thou shall go to him, but he cannot return to
thee: wherefore, then, should thou weep? -- Study to resign thyself to the
will of perfect Wisdom; so will thou secure to thyself the fruition of a happy
future meeting. Show not thyself un^u^ored and refractory to the disposal of
Him, who rules over all, mighty in power! -- Was not the Son thou lamentest,
his gift; -- and will thou be resentful, because he re-claims his own! Rather,
Oh rather learn to bow thy head, and meekly say The Lord "gave; and the Lord
has taken away: blessed be the Name of the Lord.

Or can thou think, that he deprived thee of thy child, be whose goodness is
everlasting, for no other cause, but to afflict thy soul, and to draw the throb
of anguish from thy heart! --

Cease thy vain imagination. He corrects not for HIS pleasure, but for OUR
profit: he does not a afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men! --
Sovereign of the world, all-wife, and all-good, I humbly adore thy fatherly
kindness! -- The desire of mine eyes was cut off at a stroke; but the stroke
which pierced the Father's heart, wounded it for God! -- yea and reclaimed it
to him! Selim, my Son, my Son, my first begotten, was dear; to me, than, --
Oh, how shall I dare to speak! Pardon me, thou great gives of the blessing --
that the gift occasioned a forgetfulness of thee. Let me adore thee, O thou
gracious withdrawer of the blessing, that thou have made what was so dear to me
in life, by death, the instrument of my eternal well-being!

Reflect, O ye suffering parents, and see the hand of God in the trial, which
sinks your souls in sorrow! Reflect and look to that immortal kingdom, where,
once more, we shall meet our friends departed; and which, if we are so blessed
as to obtain, we shall thank the adorable Redeemer for every kind chastisement
here, Which has been in any sort instrumental to our obtaining so glorious a
possession.

CHAP. SECOND. THE WIDOW COMFORTED.
BEHOLD and see, all ye that pass by! Behold that Vine, where branches were
lately so strong and well supported, fallen to the ground, and stretching out
it is feeble arn's in search of a stay! In vain are the purple clusters hanging
upon it; for the rude feet of the p^ssenger will ^ead upon them: they ly upon
the (...), and the prop, which sustained them, is torn up by the roots: the
elm, around which the fruitful tendrils twined, is levelled with the dust, and
can uphold them no more!

Ah melancholy widom! ah vine bereaved of thy stay and support, my heart bleeds
for thee: Homar's soul is in sympathy with thine! Oh that he could suppress the
throbbing anguish at thy heart! Oh that he could wipe away the tear from thine
eye! Oh that he could give to thy draught the golden cup of Consolation; and
cause thee to behold thy little Orphans around thee with the eyes of affiance
and joy!

They are not orphans; nor art thou a widow! Rejoice in thy God. He is their
Father -- He is thy Husband! Happy widow! Happy orphans! who, for a mortal,
perishing, and weak Father and Husband; have now obtained One immortal,
everliving, and almighty! I am the Father of "the fatherless, and the Husband
of the Widow, says the GOD OF ALL COMFORT, the eternal JEHOVAH. "Leave thy
fatherless children to me!" To thee, allgracious, all wise! -- Blessed, thrice
blessed are they who repose under thy care: what shall they want, what can they
dread: the LORD is a Sun and a Shield! Oh then dejected daughter of distress!
lift up thine heart, sing for joy, for thy GOD will now take thee more
peculiarly under his wing. To him the care of the widow and the orphan has
always been interesting: search his word, and thou will find it; his word,
whence flows rivers of balm to refresh thy afflicted Soul!

What then, if thou art deprived of some earthly enjoyment; Thy GOD is nearer
to thee; nor will he ever leave or forsake thee, if thou art faithful to him.
And what consideration can be equal to that which springs from the knowledge of
God's constant and providential regard! Do thou thy best, and repose thy Soul,
for God's eye is ever over thee: -- thy Father and thy Husband, almighty to
protect, all-bounteous to give, all-wise to provide, with sleepless eye, and
unremitted love, watches over thee and thine -- the Widow's and the Orphan's
GOD!

"But, thy children, thy poor unfriended children -- alas for them! they have
lost a Father's tender and protecting guidance! -- who shall be their
counselor and defense? -- how shall a weak and melancholy woman provide for
these little ones?

Leave thy despondency and be wise: GOD will provide: do thou thy best; -- and
-- favorable to thy efforts, he will incline the hearts of those to thee, from
whom unexpected good shall arise. He will raise thee friends, who is himself
thy first and greatest friend: HE WILL BE THY SUN TO ENLIVEN ALL THY SPHERE
WITH LIGHT AND COMFORT.

Hearken and be wise: the mother of Homar was early deprived of her Husband;
she was drooping, as the lilly surcharged with rain, she hung her head and wept
continually: six defenseless orphans wept around her: when she beheld their
innocent tears, her maternal heart was near to bursting; she clasped her hands,
and, in despair, lifting up her eyes, swiming with tears, bewailed her hard
fate to GOD! -- That GOD, the FATHER OF MERCY and source of all comfort,
whispered peace and resignation to her Soul. She heard the still voice of
Reason and Grace: She listened to the Angel of Comfort, and learned wisdom.
With patient and unremitting diligence she applied to the instruction of her
children: the taught them VIRTUE, she taught them GOD: she taught them JESUS
their SAVIOR and rock: -- and the OMNIPOTENT crowned her endeavors. He caused
succor and aid to grow up, like rich plants all around her; he poured
blessings, like the dew, upon her: he gave success to her early instructions,
and her children feared GOD. She lived to a good old age; honored and
respected by them; she saw her sons all flourishing in the good things of this
life, like the green bay tree, clothed in perpetual verdure; and her
daughters, samed for their beauty and virtue, espoused to Nobles of the Earth.
Full of days, and full of honor, the thankful Widow went to her celestial
Husband; and her children, with filial but mournful duty, attended her honored
relicts to the grave.

Hearken, O ye Widows! and receive comfort; FEAR GOD, AND SERVE HIM, AND YE
SHALL BE BLESSED, as was the widow of Hassan: commend to the Almighty your
beloved Orphans, he will protect them: the greater their number, the surer your
desence and their prosperity. Only be careful to bring them up in the fear and
knowledge of GOD: be resigned, thankful, and humble -- and GOD, the orphan's
and the widow's GOD, will be your eternal reward.

CHAP. THIRD. CONSOLATION UNDER THE LOSS OF WORLDLY BLESSINGS.
LOOK to the Dan. Cha^ (...)
Babylonish Monarch, and learn understanding. See him GRAVEN from men, eating
grass as oxen, and his body wet with the dew of heaven! Yet blessed was this
chastisement; the angel of affliction instructed him in true widom! He fell
only to rise more glorious! His Reason returned unto him, -- Reason, far more
valuable than his throne; and he praised and honored Him who "lives for ever
and ever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and whose kingdom is from
generation to generation.

Son of man, thou too art fallen. T^y glory and honor, and riches, are departed
from thee! They have made themselves wings and are flown away? Search, then,
thine own heart, examine truly thy own conscience; -- had not the demon of
pride erected her empire there? Had not a total forgetfulness of the SUPREME
BENEFACTOR spread a dark veil over thy memory? And did thou not say, on
contemplating thy possessions -- "Is not this Great Babylon," -- Is not this
large Estate, the acquisition of my hand, and the purchase of my might? --

Ah! vain and erring mortal! The "Lord gives, and the Lord takes away. How
soon is the abject dependency of thy state discovered! How soon is thy weakness
and presumption shown thee! shall the reed, that shakes at every blast, exalt
itself; and, as it boweth it is head to the waters, pretend to claim the
stability of the cedar? No!

But -- let not grief and disappointment absorb the whole man in thee! Lift up
thine head and consider, and -- like the Monarch of Babylon learn wisdom from
thy fall and degradation. What is earth and all its possessions; -- what is
time and all its gratifications; -- compared to the realm, where reigns and
shines for ever the light of life, where the Sun of righteousness never goes
down, and where perpetual brightness, and unfading felicity rejoice the
immortal inhabitants? O glorious kingdom! O transcendent scene of blessedness!
O treasures inexhaustible, and free from all vicissitude and decay! And shall
man, poor, sinful, erring, perishing man, arrive at these realms -- attain
these treasures! Is immortality and glory his birthright, his ALMIGHTY FATHER's
free donation! -- Assert thy dignity then! Rejoice even in the greatest
obscurity -- exult even amidst the deepest distress, even amidst the shipwreck
of every earthly hope! Welcome poverty, -- welcome disappointment, -- welcome
every loss, and every evil, which shows us ourselves, -- which withdraws us
from the flattering love of this alluring world; -- which leads us to WISDOM,
and introduces us to HEAVEN.

Reflect and thy eyes will be opened! Dazzled with the glare of worldly
vanities, thou did vainly imagine, Oh my brother! that there was no luster
which could out shine the diamond of Colconda; -- no brightness to exceed the
gold of Ophir; no glory to excel that which the paltry Princes of this little
globe could give! but now, that this deceitful glory is removed; -- now, that
thy wealth and possessions are diminished and decayed; WISDOM will lead thee to
other and brighter gems; to gold more pure -- to possessions more permanent --
to honor more sure and real, which does nor vanish into air! SHE points to
HUMILITY; SHE would array thee with it, as with a beauteous robe; SHE would
deck thee with the ornaments of a meek, resigned, and patient spirit; SHE would
instruct thee in the love, and in the fear of GOD; SHE would teach thee that
the ALMIGHTY is the only fountain of true honor; that GOD, who gave thee thy
being, and will give thee a perpetuity of bliss in glory ineffable; -- if thou
can shun these transitory temptations, and give thine heart to him, to whom
it is justly due!

O blind and deceived! and thou did fancy, that these worldly possessions,
which early and late it was thy labor to acquire; -- thou did conceive, that
they were real goods! How are thy vain imaginations confuted! -- If thou
placedst thy hope in them. Ah! how shall I deplore thy case -- sorrowing as
thou now greatly art, that thy hope has forsaken thee! -- Real goods can never
deceive or forsake us. But, behold the true estimate of all worldly greatness!
Look to Palestine -- cast thine eyes to Bethlehem -- to Nazareth -- to
Jerusalem; and thou will there discern the value -- the value poor and small of
all earthly pomp and pageantry and power. --

The SON OF GOD IS BORN! -- The promised IMMANUEL is given! -- The long
foretold -- the long and much expected MESSIAH -- The SON OF THE FATHER -- GOD
OF GOD -- LIGHT OF LIGHT -- VERY GOD OF VIRY GOD, has assumed human nature,
and appears A MAN, among his brethren the Sons of ADAM! -- But -- blush,
grandeur blush! -- wealth and luxury hide your diminished heads! He who made
the worlds -- he who gave the diamond to glitter in the mine, -- he who bad the
dust to mingle with the earth -- he who gave and gives to all men all their
power and all their glory, -- HE chose for his birth place a stable, -- for his
cradle a manger -- a poor ignoble Virgin for his Mother -- a Carpenter for his
reputed Father. Blush grandeur, blush; -- and thou, who bewailest thy loss of
substance, look to Bethlehem, and ADORE THY GOD. -- Yet ceased not here the
TRIUMPH of the MESSIAH over proud worldly pomp! -- Why then will thou grieve,
that thou art conformed to his outward estate? Conform thy heart -- thy inward
estate to him, and thou shall be blessed! -- Travel with him therefore in
contemplation, from Bethlehem to Egypt; from Egypt to Nazareth: think of his
thirty years obscurity, and labor there; then think of his labors of love,
his going about doing good, yet having no place where to lay his head! Oh think
of these; -- and address with humility and gratitude, HIM, who has sanctified
POVERTY; and will make, through faith and patience, disappointments blessings;
and losses the greatest gain!

CHAP. FOURTH. THE SICK MAN COMFORTED.
THOU art laid upon the bed of sickness: thy head is bowed down as a bulrush,
and thy strength is dried up as a potsherd. And do thou murmur and complain!
alas! thou feeble and erring mortal, consider a moment. -- Oh consider and be
wise! Wast thou not born to sickness, pain, and suffering? Are not these the
conditions of thy existence? Are they not the common lot of all thy
fellow-mortals? And would thou wish, can thou reasonably hope, to be exempt
from that of which all they brethren partake? Be silent and resigned.

But whence comes sorrow -- whence comes sickness? -- By whom is it
commissioned, and whose is the hand that inflicts the stroke? -- Hear IT with
the voice of serious rebuke, declaring to thee, Am "I come up without the Lord
to try thee? -- The Lord has said to me, go up against this man and afflict
him. And can thou complain? Will thou presume to blame the wise purposes of
HIM who is thy Father, the Father of the universe, whose tender care is ever
watchful of the whole race of rational beings, whose unerring wisdom provides
for their complete welfare, and whose paternal love solicitously desires their
eternal happiness?

It is GOD who afflicts, the good, the gracious and wise FATHER of manking. And
wherefore does he afflict? Son of man, reflect, and be admonished. He is too
benign to afflict thee for his pleasure. -- He is too good to take delight in
thy sufferings. Wherefore then can he afflict -- or, what end can be propose in
sending his solemn messenger, DISEASE, to thee, but thy true and everlasting
welfare? Say, therefore, with acquiescence in thy trouble, I know, O Lord, that
"thy judgments are right, and that thou of very faithfulness has caused me to
be troubled. I know, that whom "thou love thou chastenest. I know that thy
gracious wisdom, Father of love I proposes my advantage; that thou correctest
only to amend, and triest in the furnace, only to purify: I bow my head,
therefore, and adore; I kiss the scourge -- and, Oh may the correction improve
me!

But who art thou that thou should presume to complain? -- Be silent and
abased, son of sorrow! when thy mind contemplates all the great and virtuous of
ages past, all the saints, and chosen servants of God, visited with his
scourge, and tried with sickness and sorrow? Look at the PATRIARCHS and
PROPHETS, the APOSTLES and MARTYRS: look at the GREAT CAPTAIN of our common
Faith and Salvation, and learn submission. Thy bed is a bed of roses, thy
pillow, is of down, compared with that cross upon which his suffering limbs
were stretched and tortured; -- compared to that thorny crown which pierced,
with agonizing pain, his lacerated temples! Son of man, contemplate every hour,
that JESUS suffered, who entered not into his glory before he suffered
extremest pain: then patience will smooth thy pillow, and silent resignation
lay her finger on thy humbled l^ps.

Man is born to suffering: and suffering is one of heaven's b^st blessings. It
^wakens us to knowledge; -- it calls us from the world: it teaches us wisdom.
"Before I was afflicted I went wrong."

Being of Beings! Fountain of Mercy! Thou eternal and incomprehensible I AM!
Thou LORD of Love! All glory be to Thee! Homar will praise Thee for all thy
kind paternal chastisements; nor least for the scourge of sickness, which has
opened his eyes to see the wonders of thy law, and redeeming love! When the
seaver drank up all his strength, when life every moment stood in suspense; --
when all the terrors of death were planted around him in terrible array, when
the wife of his bosom bedewed his parched face with her affectionate tears, and
the children of his heart stood sobbing by his melancholy bed, -- then, O then,
ADORABLE REDEEMER! then did thy comforts refresh his soul. Homar, thou art a
Man! did I say, and therefore must not presume to repine at human This very
significant word Fate has been much perverted, by unbelievers ranking it with
the heathenish word. Luck, Fortune, Chance, and Destiny, to promote their
favorite scheme of excluding the particular Providence of God from the
Government of the affairs of M^n.

Fate (Fatum) signifies WHAT IS SPOKEN; from the Latin word b ARI to SPEAK.
Fate then in it is true and primary sense relates only to what has been SPOKEN
by the Most High God: So Minuti^s Felix tha^ able Lawyer and Great Scholar in
St. Cyprian's time, says, Nihil aliod est Fatum, quam quod de "u^^quoque
Nostram Deus Fatus est. 1: 1: Fate is nothing else than what GOD has SPOKEN
concurring every one of us.

The Heathens too had this idea of Fate; for says Statius, Fatom est quod Dii
Fantur. 1: 1: Fate is that which the Gods speak.

Fate therefore -- or human Fate, may be understood as relative to that awful
WORD which God spoke, when he declared to fallen Man, Dust thou art and "unto
dust sholt thou return. Genesis 3d. 19. In the same view Fate may signify Death;
and Diseases may b^^^^d to be more of less Fatal, as they seem more or less
(...) to fulfill God's WORD, by bringing us (...).


fate: dust thou art, and unto dust must thou return! Homar, thou art a man!
and man is born to suffering, as the sparks fly upwards: willingly therefore,
endure that burden, from which none of thy fellow beings can plead an
exemption! -- And, Oh my SAVIOR! my CONFIDENCE! thou have gone before, and
sanct^sied the thorny path; to thy cross I look, and submissive bow my head in
humble adoration! I behold thy sorrows, and forget my own! Thou have unbarred
the adamantine gates of death! Thou have vanquished the all victorious tyrant!
-- "When thou had overcome the sharpness of death, thou did open the
Kingdom of heaven to all believers -- Thou have given life and immortality to
thy faithful servants persevering unto the end! LORD JESUS! I come! Oh be thou
my support, and no terrors of death shall affright -- No languishments of
sickness shall sour -- no pangs of accutest disease shall draw a groan from my
heart, or a whisper of discontent from my mouth!

I was established on a rock. He who puts his confidence in JESUS, shall be as
the mount Zion, which cannot be removed; health or sickness will make no
disterence with that soul who builds upon HIS love, and walks by HIS pattern --
HE heard and saved nor, for a while, from death! O may it be to speak his
praises and to declare abroad his everlasting mercy and truth! -- Come, then,
and hearken all ye wretched and suffering sons of men, come all ye who in vain
seek tor peace and rest, from sublunary things, -- come, and listen unto m^, --
nor doubt the voic^ of EXPERIENCE and TRUTH, -- and I will "tell you what the
LORD," in much mercy and undeserved loving kindness, "has done for my soul."

"The knowledge of Jesus, is happiness, and his love consummates peace, and
perfect fruition to the Soul.

Reflect, O child of sorrow, whence thy a^^ction comes! Reflect whose hand it
is, which inflicts the stroke! Reflect for what cause this visi^ation, which
thou will be apt to call an evil, is sent! Reflect on all thy fellow morrals of
highest virtue in every age, who have been visi^ed with this scourge! Call to
thy remembrance JESUS, the PRINCE of sufferers, who endured the severest
agonies, in patience and silence; seriously reflect and thou will not fail to
how thy head in humble submiffion, and say "God's will be done -- and not mine
O heavenly Father!"

But further, Son of Man! would thou be exempt from the common lot of
mortals? Or what are thy deservings that thou only would CLAIM BLESSINGS from
the hand of thy Father? Man's goodness is partial; his actions are much debased
with evil mixtures: So is life, checkered with good and evil: -- health and
sickness, in just retribution of our deeds, befall us: 'till thou art perfect in
virtue expect not a fullness of blessings. Thankfully then review the many days
of healch thou have enjoyed: more days of health than hours of sickness; and
with gratesul resignation adore thy CAEATOR, who is pleased to deal with thee,
not according to thy offenses, but "according to his MERCY IN CHRIST JESUS." He
intends thy welfare. High in health, and full of life, thou sailest down the
silver stream of prosperity, attentive only to the gay tackling of thy vessel;
-- to the music that warbles melodious in thine ears; -- to the prospects that
gaily surround thee on all sides. Ah! foolish, and ill-advised! thou dreamest
not of the inevitable gulf, which speedily must overwhelm thee with all thy
false and flattering hopes! To remind thee of duty, and of that eternal haven,
where only thou can safely anchor, the storm of affliction arises, and
causes thee to look up to HIM who alone can give thee aid. Happy sickness
which warns us of eternity! Happy sickness! which compells us to enter into
that state of life most necessary and becoming a Christian Happy sickness!
which obliges to humble and peaceable submission, and preserves from all the
sins and all the evils of full and thankless health!

Thy Sickness is sent to correct thee for thy past sins: -- had thou not
rather suffer this light chastisement now, and amend by it; than uncorrected,
fall into that bottomless gulf, where thy pains and punishments will be
intolerable indeed? -- But, rightly improved, thy sickness will not only be
instrumental to preserve thee from future punishment; but it will be the means
of brightening the luster of thy celestial Crown; for it will be the means of
perfecting those virtues in thee, which are of high estimation in the sight of
GOD, and which, without pain and trouble, could neither have existence nor
exercise.

Look around thee too, and consider the condition of thy fellow-mortals. Art
thou the only sufferer? -- Behold what numbers groan beneath the weight of
affliction, languishing in sickness, -- agonised with pain, -- their minds
dejected, -- their spirits funk, and their senses wandering! See too, how many
are denied the soothing attendance of sym pathizing friends! from how many is
withheld the genial aid of healing medicine! Left to their woes, to solitude
and sorrow, they pine in lonely distress, and heave the broken hearted sigh: --
forlaken and deprived of every earthly comfort! Yet, O ye children of distress!
yet even from you, divine consolation is not withheld; the religion of the
blessed JESUS, can and will shed rays of light upon your melancholy darkness.
His example can support; the everlasting blessedness of his promised mansions
can fill, with humble hope and joy, the most afflicted soul.

Thou, then, O mortal! complain not, whom sore disease and enseebling sickness
oppress. Thou, whose mind is yet free, and whose senses are perfect. The Soul
cannot be chained down by the fetters of the body; though imprisoned, it can soar
into the heaven of heavens, and, on the wings of meditation and prayer, present
itselt before the ALL-RULING and ALL-GRACIOUS GOD. Complain not thou, around
whose bed stand tender friends, heedful of all thy wants, and gently
administering to all thy necessities. Think of JESUS neglected in his last
extremity. -- Think of him, whom all his disciples forsook. Think of him who
suffered on the cross, unattended -- unpitied -- unrelieved -- and GLORIFY THY
GOD!

But, know thou not, O man! that thou must die? -- Know thou not that an
eternal future state is the consequence -- the certain consequence of thy
existence in the present? -- Will thou not then, with true piety and manly
resolution, welcome the messenger, which informs thee, that the day of thy
dismission approaches? -- O blessed Messenger! -- ever to be desired day!
which shall deliver the Soul from the prison of a corrupting Body, and give it
leave to range the boundless fields of light; -- which shall admit to the
enjoyment of all the freedoms and all the blessings of a glorious immortality;
-- which, at once, shall deliver from sin, from sorrow, from sickness,
disappointment, v^xation, and death! -- which shall introduce to perfect
holiness -- perfect health -- and perfect happiness: -- which shall introduce
to the sight and fruition of the tremendous and ever-adorable TRINITY; to the
converse and friendship of the wiseest and bust men of all ages -- and nations
-- to the innumerable Company of Angels -- Cherubim and Seraphin, of Patriarchs
Professors -- Martyrs and Confessors; -- which shall open every source of
pleasure on thy enraptured Soul; and fill it with pure and satisfying delights,
which never can satiate -- never can end.

Raise thy desponding, languid eyes, thou poor, dejected, sick, and suffering
Soul! O raise the eyes of thy faith to the unsupportable transports of this
blissful eternity; and thy heart will glow with comfort -- thy hopes will
soring ardent upward to the throne of God -- with these words in thy mouth, "IT
IS BEST TO DEPART AND TO BE WITH CHRIST!"

CHAP. FIFTH. CONSOLATION -- UNDER CALUMNY.
MORTAL! Thou have known adversity and distress: -- thou have suffered
shipwreck on the black rocks of calamity and misfortune: -- and do thou
wonder that the eyes of those who formerly smiled with rapture at thine
approach, humbly bowing themselves to the Earth before thee, in the day of thy
prosperity -- that those now behold thee with averted aspect, -- and deny thee
any tokens of superiority or respect? -- Do thou wonder that the tongues
which droped honey, and poured the soft oil of flattery into thine ears, now
roughly address, or severely condimn thee? Alas! the cause of their humiliation
before thee is withdrawn: the motive to their adulating softness ceased with
thy power to serve and assist. Nay, and further still: do thou wonder that
thy reputation is freely and rudely handled, and that obliquy dares to shed her
envenomed poison on thy character? -- which before, gilt with the bright rays
of prosperity, appeared dazzling in the eyes of men, and was honored with
universal applause? Ah! foolish and deceived! not thou, but thy condition was
honored? -- Ah! simple and unwise; not to thee, but to their own advantage, men
bowed the suppliant knee when thou was raised on the lofty but tottering
pinnacle of fortune.

Fallen -- thou art still thyself. Hear instruction, and be wise -- divested of
worldly wealth and worldly power -- despoiled by misfortune's unrelenting hand,
of riches and greatness; what says thine heart! What witnesses all-faithful
CONSCIENCE? -- Speaks that VICEGERENT of the ALMIGHTY in the language of
condemnation? Bears SHE testimony, that injustice and oppression were thy
constant companions in accumulating wealth, that servility and base compliances
led thee along the path of corruption to the seat of power? -- Bow thy neck,
trembling, to the keen stroke of censure: -- bear with patience the just
burden which the public voice lays upon thee: and in humble recollection,
adore the sovereign JEH VAH, who has given wings to thy pernicious treasures,
and struck from beneath thee the slippery seal of false greatness.

Doth^anh^ul CONSCIENCE, on the other hand, afford unblassed evidence to thy
integrity and truth? Does SHE depose, in the court of that JUDGE, whom nothing
shall deceive, that str^ct JUSTICE and FIDELITY have walked by thy side: that
bright VIRTUE has irradiated thy path: -- that COMPASSION and HUMANITY have
smiled beneath t^y aid? -- Then boldly bear aloft thy sted alt and u^shaken
countenance: scorn the public darts of invidious calumny; -- INTEGRITY will
hold up her adamantine shield before thee: -- CONSCIENCE will be thy perpetual
comforter, till IMMORTALITY, GLORY AND HONOR finally crown thee with unfading
laurels.

Disciplined in AFFLICTIONS school -- tried in the furnace of ADVERSITY, Homar
will at once be thy Instructor and thy Security: he has tasted deep of every
bitter dreg in sorrow's cup: despoiled of children, despoiled of fortune,
despoiled of health, how could it be otherways, than that he should be
despoiled of friends also? -- When the dread lightening of the ALMIGHTY with
forked glare, had shivered the stately cedar, which had for ages stood awful on
the mountain's top and afforded beneath it is spreading branches refreshing
shelter to innumerable beasts of the earth, quickly all it is aged honors are
lopped off from it, and every creature which once found shelter, fl^es from,
and regards it no more. See in that Cedar, the once flourishing HOMAR, in
adversity; How "can it be said by the voice of man, that he, whom the
ALMIGHTY'S vengeance has thus visited; -- that he, whose children GOD's hand
has levelled with the dust; -- that he, whose fortunes are vanished with the
winds; -- that he, whose body is afflicted with disease, should be otherways
than abominable in the sight of the JUST; who has made him a signal example to
detect his crimes and to admonish mankind!" --

O hold! my trembling heart! -- Let not the deep reflection pierce too deep! --
And ye my fellow-men, and fellow-sinners, reverence the afflicted; -- be less
severe to yourselves; for ye too are mortals, and liable to misery. And why,
will ye dare, feeble and erring as ye hourly are, to wrest from the hands of
Omnipotence his tremenduous judgments! CAN YE READ THE HEART? CAN YE ENTER INTO
THE SECRET SOUL? -- 'Till then, wait the decisions of an UNERRING JUDGE: -- and
pity the unfortunate, while you adore, with veneration, GOD'S INSCRUTABLE
JUDGMENTS.

Homar bows his head, covered with ashes and confusion, in humble
acknowledgement of his innumerable faults: with the lips of sincerity he
proclaims, "Thou, O GOD! art righteous, and of very faithfulness have thou
caused me to be troubled. HOMAR, conscious of his corruption from the womb of
his mother; -- conscious of ten thousand wanderings from the perfect, pure, and
spiritual LAW OF GOD; owns his vileness -- sues for mercy; -- nor doubts of
obtaining the inestimable blessing, through the infinitely precious BLOOD of
the holy JESUS, LAMB OF GOD -- appointed before the foundation, and in the
fullness of time appearing to take away the Sin of the World -- Yet, will HE
maintain his integrity; yet, O ye children of the slanderer! will HE avow his
right intentions, and his righteous dealings toward the Sons of men. FRAUD and
CIRCUMVENTION were ever odious, as the crested BASILISKI, to his soul. --
INHUMANITY and OPPRESSION were ever detestible as the GATES of hell. He heard
not, unmoved, the cries of the afflicted: his heart was soft to feel; -- his
hand were prompt to relieve. Hear it, and be MERCIFUL, O ye who refuse MERCY to
a Son of SORROW! --

But hark! as if an Angel spoke, I hear the consoliatory sound -- Blessed are
ye, "when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of
evil against you, FALSELY, for my sake: Rejoice, and be exceeding glad; for
great is your Reward in heaven. FALSELY, Omniscient and all benevolent CREATOR
-- Thou worthy JUDGE ETERNAL! To THEE who know all things gladly I appeal!
FALSELY has the tongue of persecution uttered her malevolence against me: Oh,
that I could say "for thy sake," and "for thy love!" Then not only with
patience, but with triumph, should I see the envenomed shafts of malice from
every quarter falling around me: and, armed, with the shield of FAITH, the
helmet of SALVATION, the breastplate of RIGHTEOU NESS and the sword of the
SPIRIT which is PRAYER, -- and shod with the preparation of the GOSPEL OF PEACE
-- undaunted and unhurt, I would bravely march amidst all the fiery darts of
the wicked, following the invincible LEADER of the Armies of Israel, conquering
and to conquer; -- even through the dark valley of the shadow of death, up to
ZION'S hill -- the celestial Kingdom, and thus through FAITH and PATIENCE enter
into the joy of my LORD and SAVIOR JESUS: -- who for the Glory that was set
before him, endured the "contradiction of sinners -- their bitterest revilings
-- their falsest accusations and calumni^s -- even the death of the "Cross, and
the extreme malediction due to man's transgression of the Law -- and therefore
GOD has highly exalted "HIM to be the HEAD of his Church, "giving him a NAME,
above every name" -- a NAME at the mention of which Good Angels adore -- evil
angels tremble -- and "every knee is commanded to bow -- and every tongue to
confess him LORD, to the glory of GOD the Father.

Listen then, to Homar, O ye sons of distress! Ye, who; to the weight of other
misfortunes feel that added, of disregarding friends and censuring tongues:
here behold, and mark your proper, consolation. UNJUSTLY censured, ye are
brought nearer to GOD. FALSELY calumniated, greater will be your felicity and
final recompense; -- conscience will speak mo^e peace and tenderness, and GOD
will vouchsafe you a more ample and particular reward. JUSTLY censured, -- you
have cause to be thankful even to the unfriendly voice, which marks out your
faults, and shows you yourself. Thus the rough voice of enmity may prove more
salutary to your soul, than the gentle blandshments of affectionate friendship:
for it may teach you wisdom -- correct your vices -- improve your morals -- and
make you humble, resigned, and holy. Thus, from poisonous herbs, medicines of
prime efficacy to health are extracted: and thus from the bitterest worldly
evil, the reflecting Soul may draw all the sweetness of celestial bliss.

SOLILOQUY OF THE DEVOUT SOUL AFTER READING THE CONSOLATION FROM HOMAR.
O MY Soul enter into the inmost recesses of meditation, and meekly prostrate
every power of thine to adore -- to bless and praise the GREAT PRESEVRER of
men, who has repeatedly crowned thee with tender mercies and loving kindness.
Glory be to the O ADORABLE the once SUFFERING but now GLORIFIED JESUS thou
PRINCE of Sufferers for that thou have not long ere now shut up thy loving
kindness to me a poor worthless ingrate, in thy displeasure: My Soul -- do thou
rejoice in the GOD of thy SALVATION who will not, for his mercies sake cast
thee off forever --

Prostrate my contrite Soul I rend,
My God, my Father, and my Friend,
Do not forsake me in my end.
O my Soul the darling attribute of the ALMIGHTY is MERCY! O let me humbly hope
in that MERCY -- that MERCY which has reunited GOD to MAN and MAN to
HAPPINESS, O the height, the depth and "the length and the breadth of the MERCY
of God it surpasses knowledge. -- Who would not fear thee, who would not love
and bless thee O LORD my GOD, for thou have magnified thy MERCY over thy
unworthy servant, in drawing him to thee by the cords of LOVE -- While I humbly
bow and adore -- I desire to acknowledge that thy "judgments are verily right"
and in faithfulness have thou caused "me to be troubled. -- How loving, O JESUS
art thou to thy servants -- thou have taught us to pray lead us not "into
temptation beyond our strength derived from thine OMNIPOTENCE, while at the
same time we have thy gracious promise in which we may at all times most
assuredly confide My grace shall be "sufficient for thee and I will perfect
strength in thy weakness. I bless thee O MY DEAR REDEEMER, for his thy most
gracious promise -- O how sweet are thy words to my mouth I verily GOD is
loving unto Israel -- his children he is pleased to train up in an education
suitable to their celestial birthright -- "he chasten^th every SON whom he
receives" -- "whomsoever he loves he chasteneth:" -- the chastisemen's of
heaven, O my Soul, sent as blessings in disguise from the GOD of our health,
shall always be welcome to me. O help me, thou dearly BELOVED of the FATHER,
full of grace and truth and plenteous in redemption to all that call upon thee,
-- help me, Oh help me to welcome every message that comes from INFINITE
WISDOM; learn me to prize every instance of this way of intercourse with
heaven. Though it may appear an evil to unregenerate flesh and blood -- to me let
it always appear an endearing token of regard. Think, O Soul, devoutly think --
what is MAN, what am I, a poor, miserable, blind and naked wretch, unworthy to
breath the common air! that GOD should take such notice of me, and visit me in
any manner of way whatever! Has GOD, at any time proved thee? O my Soul, has he
tried thee as Silver is tried? -- has he, as it were brought thee into a net,
and laid heavy affliction upon thee? -- This was not because he hated thee, but
because he loved thee, and could not endure to see thee cast away as dross; nay
he thereby meant to refine thee as silver is refined, -- and to try thee as
gold is tried. Count it therefore joy, O my Soul, when thou fallest into diverse
trials, -- knowing that the trying of thy faith works patience, and patience
experince, and experience hope. Blessed is he who endures trials, patiently
waiting GOD'S good time for his deliverance; for then, when he is tried, he
shall receive the Crown of life; blessed, I say, and O my Soul exult in the
happy thought, blessed is he who endures to the end, for he shall receive the
Crown of life, and be admitted with the gratulating songs of Angels,
accompanied ^th angelic symphony of Golden Lyres, to his mansion of GLORY in
the NEW JERUSALEM, where his feet shall stand in the COURTS of the ETERNAL
KING, and his voice unite with Cherubim and Seraphin and with the glorious
company of the Apostles -- with the goodly Fellowship of the Prophets -- with
the Noble Army of Martyrs, with the church of the first born among many
brethren, making one sound as from voices innumerable and incessant, to be
heard throughout the Heavenly Mansions -- HOLY, HOLY, HOLY, LORD GOD OF
SABBATH, heaven and earth are full of the Majesty of thy GLORY. --

Long -- earnestly long, my Soul, that GOD may hasten thy probation that thou
may unite with those -- but, "thy will be done O HEAVENLY FATHER!" -- I see
my iniquities are not yet sufficiently purged away, -- more trials will be
necessary -- something more to humble this proud heart -- to bring down every
lofty and towering imagination before I can rightly attain the stature of a
perfect man in thee O meek and lowly JESUS! -- My affections -- ah! how glued
to the world -- they must, by thy hand be torn from the world, -- for thy hand
only can do it; -- the pride of life must be mortified; and every opposing
principle must be nailed to my REDEEMER'S cross. And then, and not till then
shall I be crucified to the world and the world to me, through the bitter pangs
of thy crucifixion. -- That is the healing medicine sent forth into all lands
by the ministry of thy Servants, to cleanse from mortal sin -- but that
medicine cannot operate for thy health, O my Soul, unless applied by the hand
of FAITH and PATIENCE. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged -- and the
Sin of the house of Israel. It is enough for the servant that he be as his
Lord, and the disciple as his Master -- and if the Lord and Master entered into
Glory through patience in suffering for us -- can thou then O my Soul expect
to enter into the joy of thy Lord any other way, than patiently suffering the
due reward of thy deeds? -- No -- take comfort, under all the dispensations of
INFINITE WISDOM and GOODNESS -- "They that sow in tears -- shall reap in joy."
-- The Savior sowed in tears of blood, there being no other way to fertilize
the barren soil -- this MAN of the right hand of the MOST HIGH was the only MAN
that had power and inclination to till this stubborn and rocky ground; -- for
the moisture which arises from the earth and waters ascending up into the
atmosphere to fall again upon the earth in pearly dews, was insufficient; --
the necessary rain must come from heaven -- even tears of blood issuing from
the adopted fountain the holy BODY OF JESUS -- who thus goes forth, and
weepeth, bearing precious seed to be wafted into all lands -- and shall
certainly come again with rejoicing; -- he shall then be satisfied with the
travel of his Soul, in those bitter pangs it endured upon the Cross -- and the
generations of the faithful shall call him blessed, and every sheaf in the
field shall rise up to make obeisance to this SHEAF of JOSEPH, and acknowledge
him their SANCTIFIER and REDEEMER, the HOLY ONE OF ISRAEL.

And O my Soul -- let not selfishness wholly engross thee without thought for
the sufferings of the Spouse of Christ, who every where experiences tribulation
of some sort or other. -- Let her language always be, Come let us return (...)
"the Lord; he has torn and he will heal us; -- in just judgment he has
smitten, and he will bind us up.

And when through the frailty of human weakness, or by the designs of evil and
insidious men they have in any instances swerved from the God of their
Salvation -- in departing from the purity and simplicity of the Gospel of Jesus
-- in neglecting to copy after the pattern of the Apostles -- in debasing their
fine gold with the base alloy of illicit worldly compliances -- or by living
unmindful of the Ordinances of Jehovah, those garments, which as Origin says,
dropped from Jesus at his ascension, for the same end and purpose, as the Mantle
of Elijah bequeathed to his servant Elisha, to be the effectual and never
ceasing means of communicating a double portion of the Great Master's SPIRIT to
all his followers; and Oh! may that SPIRIT never forsake them -- Oh! may they
ever obey his holy admonitions -- May his enlivening influences enable them to
shake off the wintry sl^th of indifference toward heavenly things -- may their
hearts remain no longer frozen for want of CHARITY -- but, turned to the
enlivening rays of the SUN of RIGHTEOUSNESS, let their springtime commence --
let their winter be over and gone, let "the voice of the Turtle be heard in
their land," then shall the Chorus of Birds awake to celebrate the joyful
season, and every tree of righteousness burst forth into triumphant praises and
Halilujahs to the Almighty Source of Mercy and Love; who thus is graciously
pleased, for the honor of his Anointed, to endue our nature with a principle of
growth in Grace, trending toward heaven -- as stately trees and shrubs of
various leaf and fragrance wave their tops and send up their choicest odours in
honor of the Sovereign Planter; their Creator and ours. -- Copy their example,
O my Soul! and every one who bears the name of Jesus! --

Methinks, I hear thee saying, O Redeemed of the Lord; I will instantly "arise
in heart and mind -- awaked as out of deep sleep -- folly shall no more triumph
over me -- I hear my beloved's voice gently upbraiding my delay -- I have
called THEE by my thou art mine, wherefore have thou forsaken me? I have
redeemed thee to God by my blood -- that blood pleads thy excuse and will
prevail for thy pardon! Thy iniquities I will remember no more! -- If thy sins
were become as the strong and lofty mountain's yet shall they be made as the
humble valleys before me! I am thy Redeemer and thy Savior -- why tarriest
thou, cast thy burden upon me and I will bear it for thee! Thou know I love
thee -- by myself have I sworn that thou should be my spouse forever. --
Hark! I do hear thee courageously declare. I will remain "a slave no more -- I
will be free, I will burst my bonds and fetters -- and "will GO TO MY FIRST
HUSBAND FOR THEN WAS IT LETTER WITH ME THAN NOW -- Go Sister -- go -- and God
prosper thy way. -- And though evil men, who have not God before their eyes --
should hedge thee in on every side -- should lay thee even with the around --
should make merchandise of thee and sacriligiously apply to private use those
donations which the faithful from time to time have appropriated to God and his
worship and the maintenance of his ministers; -- and even though in some
countries thy civil existence should be withdrawn from thee. Yet O my MOTHER,
take comfort in Him who is thy Husband! He, though Creator of the ends of the
Earth, the Sun, the Moon and the twinkling Stars of light. -- He, had bitter
enmity from those very persons to whom he should have been the most endearing.
-- Wonder! -- and be exceedingly amazed, O my Soul! -- that designing men could
dare to make HIS path slippery, by endeavoring to ensnare under the pleasing
garb of harmless conversation, HIM, in whom centered -- and from whom always
has proceeded by divine emanation, the glorious light of TRUTH, for the
gracious purposes of heavenly wisdom and knowledge. Ah! how was HE, sold for a
contemptible sum, who is daily distributing gifts among all his creatures --
who gave to the Sun, that refulgent emblem of his Maker's glory, to shire so
bright and rule the day! -- who gave the Moon a right upon his radiance to
(...) borrowed light, with (...) majesty (...) the night -- and who studded the
wide -- extended Dome of heaven with brilliant gems innumerable! -- who makes
his Sun to shine on the evil as well as on the good -- his rain to fall on the
unthankful as well as the thankful, and not excluding the worst of us from
those manifold blessings freely proceeding from his bounty, to the least of
which the best of us could have no title! -- For this unbounded generosity, O
my Soul bless the Lord -- and O ye Sufferers join in the celestial employment!
-- He who was contemptuously sold for thirty pence has purchased you with the
inestimable price of his own blood! -- and with the robes of his own
righteousness, he was pleased to deck thee a chaste Virgin for himself -- he
has espoused thee to himself for ever. -- Do thou expect the world will
treat thee better than it treated thy husband? -- No! -- O Spouse of Christ,
the lower thine and the enemies of thy husband lay thee now, the higher thy
Husband, at the day of thy consummate espousals, will exalt thee hereafter. --
The more thou art despoiled of thy earthly robes by the hand of oppressive
fraud now -- the more ample thy celestial Crown, and thy white robes shall
finally shine so much the more resplendent. If thou art deprived of thy civil
liberty and as it were carried away into captivity -- fail not to pray for the
peace "of the city, whither the LORD has caused you to be carried away
captives; for in the peace thereof, shall ye have peace. -- Hearken, O my soul
-- the Angel of Comfort speaks -- "these are not captives -- they are the
redeemed of the Lord, enjoying the freedom of the SON -- and if the SON has
made them free -- they are eminently so indeed. Free, from the ensnaring
connection with worldly government -- their government is from heaven! --
Heaven's King is their King and Head -- and he is not ashamed to call them
brethren. -- He saw them perhaps too much cumbered about many things, which
ought not to have approached the Work he gave them to finish, -- lest they
should obstruct it -- he called them to arise -- leave their worldly
possessions, -- and the bewitching scenery or pomp and grandeur, and follow him
into the wilderness, -- where he has sed, and still is feeding them with the
true bread of God. -- Here they will not alawys remain, because their Leader
did not. -- He came forth, manifesting his ETERNAL POWER AND GODHEAD, and
instantly the generations of the faithful converts from darkness adore him, --
who thus coming into the world lights every man that delights to walk in his
light. -- They, by intimate communion with their exalted HEAD, will doubtless
receive repeated irradiations of light and love -- 'till having acquired
sufficient brightness -- the cloud dispersed, they will comply with his voice
in another instance, saying "Arise Shine" -- shake thyself "from the dust, --
"utter a song" -- "break forth into singing" -- and their voice will be heard
far and near -- and many who now know little or nothing at all of them shall
then say surely these "are the servants of the Most High ^^d who show unto us
the way of salvation. -- Blessed task -- thrice blessed employment! -- O my
soul -- and every faculty of mind and body aspire to act thy part aright in
this divine mandate. -- O may they never, never lay down their Christian
liberty and high heaven-born privileges before any temporal monarch's throne --
this were inglorious in the extreme: -- they themselves are a ROYAL PRIESTHOOD,
-- and wait in faith and patience for the joyful time when they shall appear
before God in Zion -- and accompany the four and twenty Elders, in humble
prostration before the ANCIENT OF DAYS "and worship HIM that lives forever and
ever;" and shall (...) cast their crowns before "the throne, saying, Thou art
worthy O Lord, to receive glory, and honor and power: for thou have created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. O my Soul it is good to
be here -- to behold the fair Glory of God in this act of Adoration in thy
servants. -- O how are thy servants blessed -- in preparing them or thyself by
suffering, a discipline of thine own appointment! -- How happy they who are
drawn from the breasts of worldly indulgence and from being dandled in the lap
of unthankful affluence, that they may be trained up in a School that teaches
them God, his Son Jesus -- the sanctifier of a better life; -- and finally fits
them for OFFICE in the presence of the ETERNAL KING. And O may every Spouse of
Christ more and more detach herself from any (...) in the government of
kingdoms -- remembering the words of Jesus -- Render to Caesar the "things that
are Caesar's and to God the things that are God's. -- Let not the government of
the Kingdom of Heaven the Church and that of the Kingdoms of this world be ever
blended; lest the painful separation, when it comes -- and it will come sooner
or later, -- very where -- lest the painful separation prove an occasion of the
"fall of many." O my Soul earnestly pray that those Churches who adhere to the
faith once given to the Sain^s, may be more and more strengthened with the
spirit of might from on high -- that they may wa^k with a good courage through
the thorny path of persecution -- for persecution is one capital shore of their
worldly inheritance. -- And, Oh! may those Churches who have sullied their
garments and left their first faith return to the fountain where they can be
washed -- and to the spring from whence they may draw abundance of living
water, to quench the thirst of their parched Souls. And, O my S^^l -- can
thou refrain indulging St, Paul's with, that thou could be a devoted Victim
to be offered up for thy brother the Jew; -- if that offering could avail ought
-- but I know it cannot, I know that no man can ransom his brother -- that can
only come from Him, who has said "I will ransom them from destruction" --
gladly I say would I offer myself to wrath in behalf of my Elder and Dear
Brother -- the child of the Friend of God, of whom, as concerning the flesh, my
adorable Savior Christ came to be a light to lighten me a poor Gentile worm,
as well as the tribes of Israel. -- O Descendant of Abraham, great have been
thy trials! Unparalleled have been thy sufferings! Thy own historians tell us,
that the calamities of thy kindered are far more numerous and greater than the
sum total of all the calamaties which ever befell the other nations upon
Earth!!! -- O my GOD how terrible art thou in thy judgments! -- And yet thou
love the Jew -- We bless thee therefore -- thy promises to our brother cannot
fail -- th^' thou have for upwards of seventeen hundred years, hedged up his
way with "thorns -- though thou have made his path slippery and many have
fallen -- though he be holden in cords of affliction, and pressed down as a cart
that is filled with sheaves" -- or scattered among the kindreds of the earth --
yet, O my Brother, be pleased to remember that thou and thy companions are
scattered, as seed is sown on the ground, in order to a more plentiful harvest,
than if the grain lay all in one heap. -- O hasten the time INCOMPREHENSIBLE
JEHOVAH, when thy afflicting dispensations concerning our Brother shall come to
an end! -- How long O LORD, HOLY, and TRUE, will thou chastise him? -- will thy
jealousy burn like fire for ever? -- where is ABRAHAM their father, and SARAH
that bear them? Stretch forth thine hand, O thou eternal and ever glorious I
AM, and gather them from among the Nations: they are thy people -- they are a
Nation on whose account thou have often made bare thy holy arm to work many and
great deliverances from the band of their enemy in the days of old. Thou art
their SAVIOR and their REDEEMER, O GOD -- make no long tarrying -- if it be
thy holy will! O wait in faith and patience Brother -- though the promise wait --
tarry for it -- it will be accomplished in due season: for sooner shall "day
and night, says JEHOVAH, cease before me, together with the appointed
ordinances of heaven, than the SEED of JACOB COME TO AN END. -- O my soul bow
down to adore thy GOD for this promise of providential care and love to
Abraham's seed. -- Receive comfort from God, then, O my Brother, for he only
can, and he certainly will comfort thine afflition and distress. -- Perhaps it
may not be the designs of his holy will to comfort thee with worldly comforts
-- we know not -- though we heartily wish thee to enjoy -- if it be the will of
our GOD -- the comforts of the life that now is -- as well as the inestimable
enjoyments of that life which is to come. -- "Refrain therefore, O Brother,"
thy voice from weeping and thine eyes "from tears, for thy labor and patient
enduring suffering shall in God's good time and way most certainly be rewarded:
-- "there is hope in the end" of the ages that thy children shall "come again
from the land of the enemy -- and return to their own border. -- For which
cause O my Soul bless the GOD of ABRAHAM, of ISAAC and JACOB, the ever adorable
ELOHIM -- TRINITY in UNITY and UNITY in TRINITY. He is a GOD of Judgments and
by him actions are weighed. -- I blend my prayers with thine O SON of ABRAHAM,
that the sufferings of thy brethren may be relaxed -- and that the hearts of
nations may now at length relent toward so many thousands of ISRAEL'S Sons who
are, as JOSEPH was, before his enlargement, fast bound in affliction and iron.
-- O my Soul look back, and on the wing of towering imagination, dart thyself
into ancient times -- and thou will be heard to exclaim, "What things" has God
done for his people of old!' -- He one time fed them as his household with the
finest of wheat four -- and with honey from the rock, did he amply satisfy
their desire; at other times, as being his more honored and immediate
servants, he sent them on embassies into remote and distant lands, to hold out
THE TORCH OF REVALATION -- the divine mandate of his will to all peoples,
nations, and languages, whethersoever (in the language of men) he carried them
captive. -- And at present, Brother, you are employed in such an embassy --
your service in this way GOD sees necessary -- O may be it be discharged so as
to be acceptable to that HOLY AND PURE EYE, who sees from the one end of heaven
to the other. -- To thee Dear Brother, we acknowledge our obligations for the
ancient writings of the Prophets those holy men who walked with GOD -- And O my
Soul be thou emulous to walk with them even though the path should lead thee
into the shadow of death. O my Brother let us pray for each other -- that the
promised REDEEMER may sanctify and save US BOTH from the power of the second
death. -- At the same time I should not be much surprised, were thou to refuse
joining with a christian in this or any other act of adoration, prayer or
praise; -- prejudiced as I must needs allow thee to be from the inhuman usage
many of thy lineage have met with from the professors of that denomination. --
They are not all alike -- GOD forbid they were! -- Our SAVIOR JESUS of your on
kindred and of DAVID'S line had but twelve Disciples -- and, deplorable the
thought! one of them a traitor -- a disgrace to man! -- wonder not then O
Brother if there has arisen since many Judases; -- and O my Soul pray that thou
as well as thy brother may always be preserved from such wicked and
unreasonable men; -- who put on the semblance of RELIGION'S unspotted Garment,
the more effectually to consummate their villainy. But believe me Brother, there
are thousands and ten thousands of Christians whose most ardent prayers for
THEE ascend up morning and evening to the GOD OF ABRAHAM, ISAAC AND JACOB;
imploring him to sanctify thy sufferings and expatriation for thy final good;
and shedding abundance of tears for that unhappy prejudice which has precluded
hitherto that much to be desired union, of the JEW and GENTILE into one great
and amiable family under HIM, who was predicted to bruise the Serpents head, --
who was repeatedly promised in the books of the prophets, -- celebrated in the
Psalms, the Expectation of all Nations, and who according to the prophecies was
to appear in the holy CITY OF JERUSALEM in the time of the Second Temple; with
irresistible power to cure diseases -- raise the dead, and work innumerable
other miracles, not for the aggrandisement of himself, or his followers in this
world, -- but for the Glory of Him that sent him and for the good of those to
whom he was sent, in the world to come. Reflect -- Brother, the Christian has
no promise of grandeur here -- but JESUS gave a promise, that PERSECUTION would
await his CHURCH -- and so it has in diverse times and ways -- insomuch that the
old adage is fully true -- Show me a "Church rich and great in this world --
and I will show thee a corrupted one; but show me one poor and despised and
persecuted and I will show thee a pure one. -- And now -- my Soulthy -- ardent
love to thy brother the JEW, hatch perhaps carried the further than he will
readily pardon -- thou will not think it very had if he should not -- but to
HIM who sees in secret, look up, and appeal to his OMNISCIECE, that all this
is in sincerity and singlness of heart, -- and proceeding purely from a heart
untutered in the school of dissimulation or prejudice.

O thrice holy LORD GOD, hear in heaven the contemplations of the meanest of
thy servants; -- hear, -- have mercy -- and bless! -- Be a Father to the
fatherless -- a Husband to the widow -- the Stay of the orphan -- the Comforter
and Supporter of all who suffer for conscience sake. Remember not, O Lord our
offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers -- neither take thou vengeance of
our sins -- spare us good Lord -- spare thy people whom thou have redeemed with
thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever. Preserve, O Father
of mercies, and commiserate all prisoners, exiles and cap^^^^ and relieve all
who are desolate and oppressed, -- and on all Nations -- Jewish, Christian and
Mohammedan, shed abroad thy divine light and love, -- guiding their feet into
the way of peace. God, forgive all our enemies -- persecutors and slanderers --
and turn their hearts to the enlivening principle of charity and love.

O Lord help -- and deliver thy servant, who puts his trust in thee -- holy,
holy, holy, GOD, FATHER and SON and SPIRIT -- have mercy, sanctify and bless. O
my Soul never cease to bless the LORD for all his benefits -- for his
chastisements as well as for his mercies of more agreeable aspect; -- and never
think thyself so well employed as when humbling thyself under the mighty hand
of God, and saying not my will be done but thine O "heavenly father -- Glory be
to thee O God, Father Eternal -- to thee O God, the Son Redeemer of the world
-- and to thee O God, Holy Ghost, Sanctifier of the Faithful: -- To thee, O
Incomprehensible Trinity in Unity and Unity in Trinity, I desire to offer those
praises adoration and thanks which are always due from Angels and Men. Amen.
Amen. --


