FARCE.

Occurrences of the Times. OR, THE TRANSACTIONS OF FOUR DAYS. [Viz. -- From
FRIDAY the 16th, to MONDAY the 19th January, 1789.

A FARCE. IN TWO ACTS.

" -- No longer by vain fear, or shame controlled
In guilty amors, grown securely bold,
Mocking rebuke, they brave it in our streets,
And ******, even at noon, his mistress meets.
So public in their crimes, so daring grown,
They almost take a pride to have them known."
PRINTED for the PURCHASERS.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
MEN.
MR. SIDNEY. QUAKER. DR. HARRANGUE. WORTHY. POSITIVE. FRIENDLY. PEEP. DUPE.
HARCOURT. TURNCOAT. STEADY and FIRM. IMPARTIALIST. DEBAUCHEE.
WOMEN.
MRS. SIDNEY. MRS. TURNCOAT. MARTHA. TIPSY.
SCENE -- BOSTON, and a neighboring Town.

A FARCE.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A Room in Sidney's House. Mrs. SIDNEY. BLESS me Mr. Sidney, why you are early
up: What takes you out so soon; the clock has but this moment struck six.


Mr. Sidney. Why I am to meet that damned puppy Harcourt. I believe he has
courage; but I Am determined to conduct in such a manner, as to prevent any
attack.


Mrs. Sidney. That is easily done: I Will send a note to Worthy: You protract the
meeting 'till you think Worthy is near the ground; and the matter is up.


Mr. Sidney. We must have an eye to appearances, or the finesse will take air.


Mrs. Sidney. Your address will secure you.


Mr. Sidney. But where is Dupe, he has promised to stand by me. Debauchee must
go too; he is a tried friend.


SCENE II.
A Room in Dr. Harrangue's House. Enter Quaker. Quak. Good morning Doctor.


Doct. Good morning, good morning, Sir, how do you do -- what news.


Quaker. News with a vengeance, faith -- Sidney and Harcourt have had a tilting
bout this morning: and poor Mrs. Sidney is in the horrors, through fear, that
it may become a serious matter: Not that I think there is the least danger of
that; for though Harcourt is a brave fellow, Sidney will find avenues enough to
escape through.


Dr. Harr. That is very true; but I am anxious to hear how it terminates.
Suppose we call on Mrs. Sidney. Pray, did you hear who he took with him.


Quak. Dupe and Debauchee were his escorts. I heard of it by accident; and flew
immediately to condole with Mrs. Sidney. I found her more calm than I expected.
She mentioned the ground on which she founded her hopes -- From thence I drew
the conclusion I mentioned.


Dr. Harr. And a very rational one: the gentlemen of the law have advantages
superior to their neighbors. There is Argue, for instance; why there is no
speaking a word for him in the house. But I am determined to oppose him with
all my power.


SCENE III.
A Scene in Sidney's house, at a kitchen fire. Tipsy drunk. Enter Martha. Mar.
Well Tipsy, how are you all: how is Mrs. Sidney.


Tip. How -- how are we -- all in confusion. The very de -- devil's to pay --
and -- and my head 's turned -- Don't you see how I talk. all 's in gumbustion
-- I cannot do any thing, I Am in such trouble.


Mar. Why, what now, any thing new.


Tip. No, but its -- I -- I shall come too presently -- but -- here is Debushe
-- he -- he will tell you.


Enter Debauchee. Debau. Ah -- Missy Marta. -- Here is terribe tings -- did you
eber see de like -- My massa and I went to fite.


Mar. What -- say -- what do you mean.


Deb. Ah! dat is -- we didn't fite -- Twixt you and I massa he no courage.
Misser Harcort he say -- shentlemen preas to measur; and my massa say --
shentlemen you no de law.


Tip. Well, if they do -- out, he does. For I say, he has la -- lawd us all out
of our senses, I think.


Mar. Do hold your tongue, Tipsy, I want to hear.


Deb. Well and so we didn't do any ting -- and so he was beat, I tink, and den
we come home.


Mar. Such devilish work, I don't believe was ever seen before. I wish they
were all safe in heaven; turning every body's head topsy turvy, with their
deviltry. I wish to the Lord Ophelia's ghost would come and scare them all to
death.


Deb. Do you tink it will.


Mar. Yes: and you black son of satan, will be sent neck and heels to the
lowest pit of misery; and your master too, for his deceit and duplicity. He
with his intriges has made me commit more sin than I can ever answer for -- and
if he is the guilty man, I hope he will be brought out.


Tip. Ah -- and so -- and so do I. And it will be soon; for he owes me; and I
cannot get my money; and if he cannot pay me, he cannot bribe any more.


Mar. Well I know he never bribed me. -- I knew nothing; and what I did know, I
declared. Why Tipsy you are asleep.


Tip. No -- no -- I an't.


Deb. And he made me clare more than what I know, for he made me clare I know
what an oaf was.


Tip. He -- he -- says its a parcel of words put together, to -- to I forgot
what -- I cannot talk as he does, for he talks high flowed.


Mar. Well; If Mrs. Sidney had softened matters a little with her mother,
things would never have come to this; but she has acted in this affair as she
does in all others, making the world believe she was an angel, when at the same
time, her heart was foreign to every virtuous action. -- Do you remember Tipsy
the piece of potry there was in the newspapers.


Tip. Ah, that I do, and I Will peat it.


Mar. No, no, let me; you an't fit Tipsy.


Tip. Yes, yes; I am fit; I tell you I Have been fected with the fate of the
famly --

"Where, where --

Mar. Hold, hold, I tell you.


Deb. Come Martha, do you try.


Mar. "Where is the father fled, with raptured breast;
"Where the fond mother, in her offspring blessed."

[ Sidney calls Debauchee] Deb. Comin masser -- Lordy what fine oration I lost.


Tip. Why its potry. Exit Deb.


Mar. I have forgot the other part of it -- But Lord, what will be done; they
have wore me to death among them*


Tip. I must cook my dinner.


Mar. What, at four o'clock.


Tip. Yes -- why we don't go to market till three.


Mar. O, mighty -- such doings -- this is living -- I Will go into the parlour,
and see Mrs. Sidney.


Tip. You better not, for she -- she has got Comfort with her now -- and there
-- therefore your company will be unwelcome.


Mar. Ah, who is it?


Tip. O the Quaker, to be sure.


Mar. Then she is happy -- But how comes it about that Mr Sidney will have that
black dog Deb. with him in all his frolics.


Tip. I don't know -- Why he was Mr. Sidney's second; and I Will tell you as how
too -- If Mr. Harcourt had shut Mr. Sidney's brains out, I -- I take it Deb.
would have shut out Mr. Harcourt's.


[ Re-enter Debauchee.] Deb. O, Lord -- O, Lord -- shuch work -- poor masser I
pity him -- He is swaring and taring, and says dam you madam to my miss, you
are calm -- and dare is, he says, a Nobel coming out nes week, called the
Trumpets of Nature, and he be damned if he don't blow ebery body's brains out.


Mar. I think he had better blow his own brains out.


Deb. And he says its a scrilous piece; and he will fascinate de man in de
dark, and be de death of him; and he says, them damned puppys Tedy and Firm, de
printers, have put a great in de papers; and so we shall see it nes week.


Mar. Well, every thing is beyond account, Ophelia, poor soul, has made bustle
enough in the great world; there is nothing but duels, and novels, and such
like nonsense.


Tip. You say, Deb. its the Trumpets of Nature.


Deb. Yes, or de Scrimtons -- I forgot which; but I mus go to Mr. Positive, for
my masser want him. Exit.


Mar. O, when I look round this house, and see the change in this family, I am
amazed -- and pity Sidney, tho I withhold my reasons.


Tip. For why, my dear.


Mar. Because I have reasons -- But I must see Mrs. Sidney.


SCENE IV.
The Street. Positive and Dupe meet. Dupe. Mr. Positive, well met; I have been
in pursuit of you*


Pos. So I hear. Debauchee informed me there was warm work at home, and that
Sidney wanted to see me.


Dupe. Yes, there is work enough cut out for him, and with all his faults I
pity him -- He must be more than man to sustain such a complicated load of
misfortunes.


Pos. And those damned scoundrels Steady and Firm, are printing a Novel, that
will brand him a villain centuries to come. -- It must not be, Sir; some
measures must be adopted to suppress the publication, and that immediately -- I
hear it is to come out next week.


Dupe. That Is the very thing I wanted to talk to you about; Sidney is impatient
to see you; money must be raised to suppress it -- but without his Satannick
Majesty should condescend to lend us a trifle, I believe we shall fall short
there


Pos. You was with Sidney in the mall, I am told; how was it; I have not been
able to come at the truth.


Dupe. I was present; but you must not expect information from me; as I
disliked the maneuvers, I must beg to be silent on the subject.


SCENE V.
A Room in Peep's house -- Peep discovered reading a Letter. -- This will do,
by Heavens; this is glorious news; a royal subject for defamation; What a
capital opportunity I shall have to gratify the idly curious -- to spread
dissension and discord -- draw a tear from the eye of sensibility -- or raise a
blush of indignation on the cheek of candor; For tho my friend enjoined the
strictest secrecy, and has informed me if the affair should transpire, an
amiable family would be involved in irretrievable misery and disgrace, yet I
can never conquer my propensity to scandal so far, as to conceal it entirely, I
can throw out a few insinuations -- give a significant shrug or two, and the
infection will fly like wild fire; I am impatient to get out.

[ As he goes out, he meets Debauchee.] Peep. What news Debauchee? your looks
are interesting.


Debau. Yes, Sir, me be in a great flury; my masser is in shuch a passion, dat
I run very hard to fine you, Sir, for I tink, may be, you will be able to pease
him.


Peep. Why, what is the matter, I cannot conceive; what has raised such a breeze
now; don't you know Debauchee, you was in his confidence; you have been
serviceable to him How is it with the disguises, the cakes, the milk, and some
other matters -- you understand me Debauchee.


Deb. Yes, Sir, I stand you; but masser made me take an oaf; I don't know what
that is; masser say " me don't know any ting;" now so I forget all bout it; but
I hope, Sir, you will go to our house; masser want to see you bery much.


Peep. Directly, but ca'nt you give me a hint what is the matter.


Deb. Yes, Sir, masser and me went and fite dis morning.


Peep. Your master and you fight, that is surprising indeed.


Deb. No, Sir, you don't stand me, misser Harcoat and my masser fite; I went to
stand by him, long masser Dupe; I shoud fite if masser wod begin; but masser
wont do noting; so misser Harcoat went away; but dat an't all, masser want to
see you, for Mr. Tedy and Fum has got a book, and dey going to public it --
and masser want you to help press it -- I tink he say.


Peep. Suppress it you mean, honest Debauchee; this is news indeed; I will be
with him in two minutes.


ACT II.
SCENE I.
Mr. Impartialist's House. Enter Sidney. Sid. Mr. Impartialist, good morning; I
am fortunate in finding you at home; I wish to consult you upon a damned
scurrilous Performance, that I hear is now in the booksellers hands; I would
fain suppress it, if possible; I have been to the Printers, and have given them
a damned warm dose; but for fear it should not take effect, I wish to solicit
your assistance, in tracing the author of this infernal book, and try what can
be done with him; for by my maker I swear, some of us must die; I cannot
support it Sir; only think of my situation; a family and connections that are
dear to me; carry your ideas a little farther, and behold my son reading a
book, where his father is branded with the opprobrious epithet of villain --
Horror is in the thought -- it is more than man can bear -- the cord is already
stretched to its utmost limits -- 'twill soon break -- and some victim must
bleed, to expiate the crime.


Imp. Well, Sir, I am willing to give you all the assistance in my power;
though I don't see any probability of suppressing the publication. Is there any
person in particular that you suspect for the author?


Sid. Yes, Sir, ***** -- I suspect him to be the author, but wish to be
convinced before I proceed to extremities; You can have no adequate
conceptions, Sir, of my sufferings; I am witheld, by extreme delicacy, from
investigating the whole affair, and proving my innocence; the world believes
the young lady in question to have been as pure as an angel; but their opinions
are most egregiously erroneous -- However, I shall wait until your return,
before I make up my mind upon this cursed business.


Exeunt. SCENE II.
Worthy's House. Enter Friendly. Friend. Mr. Worthy, I hope I see you well.


Worcester. Very well Sir; no bad news I hope has procured me the honor of a visit.


Friend. No, Sir, the affair seems to rest where you left it. I did myself the
honor to call on you, to satisfy myself of some circumstances that took place
this morning. There appeared some ambiguity in your traceing us. May I ask if
your interference was solicited?


Worcester. You may ask [ smiling significantly] but I presume you are not ignorant,
that it is not my office to betray a trust reposed in me, if that was the case.


Friend. True, Sir, I only wished to know for my own private satisfaction, as I
concluded ma^^^ had no hand in transporting you to the spot (...) for action.


Worcester. I shall ever esteem myself happy in having it in my power to prevent the
effusion of human blood; and I think Sidney's family and connections must be so
completely miserable, that it would be the utmost stretch of inhumanity to
augment it.


Friend. I think so too; and I exhausted all my rhetoric to divert Harcourt
from the attempt; but it was in vain -- for tho he is as worthy a fellow as
wears the King of England's livery, his passions are too quick to be controuled
by reason at all times; and in this case you may suppose he felt himself keenly
injured.


Worcester. Undoubtedly; but admitting the whole catalogue of crimes alleged to
Sidney to be true, Harcourt, nor the family, in my opinion, cannot inflict a
worse punishment on the wretched Sidney than his own reflections.


Friend. Well Sir, I have an appointment, and must take my leave. I know an
apology is necessary for the motive of this visit -- but your candor will speak
one for me, or fame is not just in the encomiums she pays you.


Worcester. Whatever may be the motive, I shall always be happy to see you: Mr.
Friendly's established character will ever secure him a welcome. Exit.


SCENE III.
Sidney's Kitchen -- Tipsy sitting. Enter Debauchee. Debau. Tipsy -- Tipsy --
where be you -- pray give me some ting to eat, for I Am most tarv'd -- run about
al day -- call misser Postiv -- call misser Peep -- call dis one -- call todder one
-- I hope if masser go for to cisnate de printer to night, he wont call me, for
I most dead now.


Tip. Well you ought to have some trouble: you have half the honor -- Who have
you been for now.


Debau. I ben for misser Peep; but he cant com now, he met shuch a luck littel
vile ago; I laf til I cry; you member de time he went to peep in foks windows,
and fall down in de sellar in de tub of shuds; jus so he look to day; he saucy
to one man dribing his sled, misser Peep run again him sled, and damnd de man;
de man dam him; by and by he saucy; de man put him down de gutter; poor misser
Peep shulk heself, and now gorn home to get clean tocking, for he cant get any
sasfactshon.


Tip. I am glad of it with all my soul, for he is always poking his nose in
every body's house, where they will let him tell lies, and talk about people;
for my part, I hate the sight of him; but you did not tell me the story about
his falling down cellar; I heard of it then, but never heard the petiklers.


Debau. Why de maid was geting soper, she had her head up de gimny gorner -- she
heard a deble of a noise -- some ting com splash down in de tub of suds; she
hollow and run -- de folks come, and dare dey find misser Peep -- He say he com
too close de cellar dor, so fall down, but somebody see him all de time he
shulk his self; de folks good to him for all dat; dey give him some vinnegar
and paper to dress his broken shins.


Tip. Hold your tongue; somebody calls.

Exit servants.
SCENE IV.
Turncoat's house. Mrs. Turncoat discovered heading her breakfast table. Enter
Turncoat. Turn. Have you waited for me, my dear.


Mrs. Turn. Waited, yes; I have waited till I am faint for my breakfast; but it
is nothing new, you always serve me so, when I am impatient to get things
cleared away, that I may see after my family; for somebody must see to it, or
we shall have nothing to eat; but that is the least of your concern; if you are
fed no matter who finds it.


Turn. Why what a touse you make about nothing; I only stepped in to neighbor
Whitmore's to hear if he brought any news from town last night; and I am glad I
went, notwithstanding the clamor you make about it; and I am a good mind not
tell you, since you have made such a fuss, tho I know you would give your ears
to hear it, because it relates to your friend Sidney.


Mrs. Turn. He my friend; yes, my friendship for him is so great, that I don't
care how soon he is hanged, to keep him out of mischief. I am sure my family
have lost thousands by his chicanery. But what do they say of him; they cannot
say any good of him, for if he ever did any thing that was praiseworthy, it
was so long since, that he has forgot it.


Turn. Why, they say Harcourt has called him to an account for some of the most
notorious parts of his conduct.


Mrs. Turn. Bless me, then they have fought a duel; well, that is good; I hope
he had his head shot off.


Turn. Not so quick, my dear, Sidney was too artful for him; he planned matters
so well, that Worthy interposed his authority and parted them. I am glad I was
not in the way. I should like to know which party gains the most applause; and
to tell you the truth, I am sorry I assisted him in any of his maneuvers.


Mrs. Turn. If you had taken my advice, you would have saved yourself a great
deal of trouble that you have had on his account; there was the jaunt you took
of five and twenty miles, in a snow storm, set out at midnight too, to bring a
poor infant, newborn from its mother -- Heavens defend us from such fathers --
monsters in human shape; but it seems gratitude was your motive; he had
screened you from the punishment which some of your libidinous conduct richly
merited, and you undertook to return the obligation in the same style.


Turn. Heavens! what a blast! I Will hear no more of it this time, however. Exit.


SCENE V.
Sidney's house. Mrs. Sidney Solus. Great heaven, what will come next; sure
Pandora's box has been empted on my devoted head; turn which way I will, I am
wretched.

Enter Dr. Harrangue and Quaker. Quak. My dear Mrs. Sidney; what alone -- I
expected to find Mr. Sidney here; you have seen him, I hope, since the morning.


Mrs. Sidney. Yes, he has been in, and I find the affair has ended better than
I expected; but now he is in a violent passion about a Novel, that Steady and
Firm have printed, and he is said to be the principal character in the Drama --
he says he will suppress the publication if possible; for my own part, I am
less solicitous about that, than I was about the duel: To have had my brother,
or my husband fallen by the sword of the other would have been insupportable.


Doc. Har. Make yourself easy, madam, you have nothing to fear from that
quarter; Mr. Sidney understands himself too well to trifle away his existence.


Quak. It would be the part of a madman, not to set the highest value on life,
when he has so fine a woman to enjoy it with. [Bowing.]


Enter Positive and Dupe. Pos. Mrs. Sidney, and gentlemen, your most obedient
-- Pray, madam, is Mr. Sidney within, I understand he wants to see me.


Mrs. Sidney. He is very earnest to see you, and will be here in a few minutes.


Enter Sidney. Sid. There never was a poor devil so harrass'd since the flood,
as I am: How do you do gentlemen, I am glad to see you, though I hardly know
where I am. Positive, you must set off for Planting Grove to morrow morning, to
see what can be done with the head of this damned company; by Heavens, if I can
find out the author, I Will blow his brains out.


Mrs. Sid. You had better let it alone, I think, you will only render yourself
more conspicuously infamous.


Mr. Sid. You have no feelings madam -- thus calmly to support such misery and
wretchedness.


Enter Peep. Peep. Mr. Sidney, I hope you will forgive my not coming sooner, I
assure you I have met with ill luck; a scoundrel of a truck man plumpt me into
the gutter, because I happened to stand in his way.


[Ha -- ha -- ha -- all laugh] Quak. Why Peep, you meet with trouble, it is not
long since you had a ducking in a tub of suds.


Pos. Oh, that is an old story; but I would advise you, Mr. Peep, to take more
care next time you attempt to look into people's windows.


Dr. Harr. And my young friend, look well about you, when next you borrow,
unsolicited, from your neighbor at the Franklin's head -- the story of the
black negro will not do.


Peep. Upon my word gentlemen, you are quite merry at my expense -- I little
thought of pleasantry in this place, at this particular moment -- Debauchee
informed me that Mr. Sidney was very unhappy, and I came to offer my services;
if there is any thing that I can do, I hope Mr. Sidney will command me.


Sid. I am much obliged to you, Sir, I shall have business for all my friends
at this rate; -- But Positive, you have not told me whether you will go.


Pos. You could not doubt my readiness to go, Sir; and I will bring them to
terms, or lose my arm in the attempt.


Sid. Take Dupe with you, my friend, you will find him very serviceable.


Pos. What time shall we go; to night or in the morning.


Sid. It Is too late now; you must get away by ten tomorrow, and exert
yourselves, my friends; try what you can do for me, for by heavens, if this
publication comes out, I shall go distracted: Don't you think the scoundrels
had the assurance to tell me, with the most provoking calmness, that when the
books were ready, I should have a set as soon as any gentleman in town. -- Damn
their impudence


Pos. You may depend on my exertions: Dupe, you will be ready, I hope.


Dupe. Certainly -- as soon as you please.


Pos. Madam your most obedient -- gentlemen your humble servant.


Exit Pos. Dupe and Peep. Dr. Harr. I would advice you Mr. Sidney, not to take
any more notice of the affair; the best of us, don't escape the lash; you may
talk to all eternity, and it will not alter the opinions of people, already
prejudiced against you.


Sid. I am surprised, Dr. to hear you so warmly recommend taciturnity, that
practice it so little when insulted.


Dr. Harr. I conceive a wide difference in passing by a personal attack, or one
levelled at the community at large -- the^^ it is impossible for a man to be
silent, who has the good of his country (...) men initiated into power, (...)
are unquestionably (...) purposes for which we are honored with the suffrages
of our grateful countrymen.


Sid. But there are some persons you never will concur with, let them propose
what they will.


Dr. Harr. Then let the persons you allude to, solicit my concurrence, when
they want it, or I never will hold up my hand for them, let the consequences be
what they may.


Quak. Mr. Sidney, you have not told us of yesterdays adventure; I was
exceedingly alarmed when I heard Harcourt had called you out: and though I knew
you had it in your power to extricate yourself if you thought proper; yet I was
fearful Harcourt's impetuosity would throw you off your guard.


Dr. Harr. He is an enterprising youth, I have heard, and don't want spirit; I
wonder how you managed to keep him at a proper distance.


Sid. O, admirably; he found I was determined to stand only on the defensive;
had he attacked me in that situation, he knew the consequences.


Qua. Well gentlemen; shall we call another subject; we have been out of tune
some time; let us banish such disagreeable topics; and endeavor to harmonize
each other, by more sprightly notes, -- Where is the little one, I have not
seen it to day.


Mrs. Sidney rings. Enter Servant. Mrs. Sid. Tell Tipsy to bring the child in.


Exit Servant. [ Enter Tipsy with the child.] Quak. Give it to me Tipsy -- Come
here you pretty creature -- Why its a fine child as ever I saw, and very
handsome too.


Tip. I do -- don't wonder you -- you think so, Sir, for it looks for all the
world like you -- It has got -- it has got a -- a -- a nose -- a mouth just
like yours, as two peace -- and sweet eyes, and red face -- its the image of you.


Mrs. Sid. What Is the matter with the creature; how she talks.


Mr. Sidney. Drunk as the devil -- Send her off. Exit Tipsy.


Dr. Harr. I have business, gentlemen, to attend to, and shall leave you for
the present. I congratulate you Madam, that your fears are hushed in peace for
this time.


Mrs. Sidney. I thank you Sir, I wish all my fears where as happily subsided,
as the one you allude to. Exit Dr. Harr.


Qua. Mr. Sidney, if there is any thing in my power that I can assist you in,
let me know -- you will find me ready to serve you.


Sid. I don't doubt it Sir, and I shall trouble you enough, I dare say, and all
my friends; but I cannot determine on any thing, till I hear from Planting
Grove.


Qua. Well, command me when you want -- You know where to find me, and will
find me ever ready and willing to befriend you -- I wish you both a very good
night. Exit Qua.


FINIS.

