A RHAPSODY. A POEM.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY HODGE, ALLEN, AND CAMPBELL. M, DCC, LXXXIX.

THE following POEM is selected from a variety of scraps, which were composed
in the fervor of imagination, as the different subjects presented themselves
to the Author. He has endeavored, as much as possible, to arrange them in some
dependence on each other; but a Work of this nature will necessarily be
imperfect and irregular. The Author has not the presumption to suppose, that an
insignificant Poem, so entirely destitute of incident, can ever be an object of
general regard: To the few, however, who are finely sensible of the beauties of
nature, who are pleased with something more than the music of poetry, he
dedicates his performance; and to those only he would recommend the perusal of
it.

A RHAPSODY.
OCTOBER.
NUNC FORMOSISSIMUS ANNUS. --
Virg.
SUBJECTS. -- A morning's walk -- Imperfect description of the country on the
coast of New Jersey -- Address to nature -- Shooting censured -- Change of
scene, with a description of a storm in autumn -- Succeeding serenity of
weather -- Apostrophe to the sun.

UPON the dewy landscape opening wide,
The joyous morn now issues; and I rise
Refreshen'd from repose, as the bright sun,
Ascending in his azure course, uplifts
My meditation to the farthest heaven.
The glist'ning meadows seem to breathe anew
In fragrant exhalations; while the fogs,
In their retreat collected, gather round
The distant hills, whose summits unobscur'd
In variegated foliage clad
Rise 'mid the luster of the autumnal sky.
-- And now the whole perspective bright'ning
Through its extent, discovers a serene
And boundless day. Through every sense inspired
With animation, in the pathless field
I stroll delighted; or, above the vale,
Pause on the rising hill to dwell at ease
On the rich profusion of its increase,
Where, in extended rows and ripening
To the beams of autumn, the tufted corn
Wave their dejected crests, and the orchard
Intermingled, eminent in its growth,
Bends beneath the golden fruit: -- And here too
Encircling woods, that with uneven bounds
Design the neighboring farms and circumscribe
The toils of husbandry, afford a range
For contemplation, where unmolested
By the gaze of rustic curiosity,
And in the windings of the leafy glade
I vent unheard the emotions of my breast.
-- In these blessed hours, when nature's placid charms
Reflect serene complacence over my soul,
Wisdom step forth, and with an energy
Impress thy strongest lessons on my heart --
Truths, which through all the turbulence of life,
The impulse of blind passions, and the wiles
Of vice alluring, or unmanly sloth,
May hold a firm unalterable sway.
Around me, with impervious intercourse
Of wood, the forest terminates in shade,
Or in a series of decreasing trunks
Above invested with promiscuous garbs;
Save where, apart, and in stately silence,
The sapless oak with majesty exalts
Its venerable limbs, leafless with years
And withering in the last decay -- or save
Where, in unfrequent interstice, amid
The broken foliage delicately tinged
With autumns mellow saffron, intervenes
A prospect of ethereal azure.
How often delighted with the wild attire
Of nature in her recesses, through scenes
Like these, in roving childhood have I strav'd,
Awed with the gloom and desert solitude
That environed me! or, musing on some tale
Of magic wonders, in the sunny heights
And sylvan hills have pictured to myself
The mansions of fantastic Genii.
What though I trace not in these happy climes
The famed luxuriance of Arcadian vales,
Spontaneous gardens or parterre's enriched
With lavish culture and the pride of taste;
There is a rude disorder in these wilds,
A native grandeur, that unaffected
By the touch of art, transcends its graces
And strikes some finer sense within the soul.
Nature -- sweet parent of unenvied bliss,
Constant, liberal benefactress, whose charms
For chaste and loveliest simplicity
Fill thy admirers with renewed delights
That never pall the taste. We need not boast
The smiles of partial fortune, or the rights
Of affluence to enjoy thy bounties --
They Are the common heritage of us all,
In thee the outcast of society
Will find a refuge from his miseries,
A soothing and unaltered friend; and the hand
That on the bosom of the adjacent hills
Guides his lone plough, eyeing as he proceeds,
With a glance of heartfelt satisfaction,
The cerulean bay that gently fluctuates
Mid the surrounding auburn woods, in thee
Unconscious feels a sweet'ner of (...) toil.
-- And is it not enough that bounteous heaven
Has strung our feeling to a harmony
So exquisite with nature, that we seek,
In merciless invasion on the lives
Of helpless brutes, a transport from their pangs.
How ardent! with what earnestness of hope
Yon sportsman takes the field! on every side
In studious survey, upon the haunts
Where crouch the timid quail intent, he starts
With eager trepidation at the flight,
Sudden and son'rous as the bevy springs --
Then aims the fatal instrument; and flies
In fiercest exultation to secure
The fallen victim, fluttering in the wound
And struggling with the agonies of death.
O sensibility! to whom the plaint
Of suffering innocence never sighed in vain,
Rise, with conviction, rise in its defense
And pluck this savage instinct from our breasts.
But, from such wanton cruelties averse,
Still let me linger on the happy smiles
Of autumn all benign, when tranquil most
With ceaseless pleasure then most inviting.
Here scent the morning fragrance of her gales,
The noon enjoy, and watch her parting beams,
That spread a mild effulgence in the west,
From the faint yellow blushing into red.
But soon the transitory scene is robbed
Of all its beauties and enlivening charms,
As from the east in threatening gloom involved
Ascends the gathered tempest -- the drear clouds
Lowering move onward, while beneath them
Flies a light mist precipitate and wild.
From the interrupted labors of the day
The swain retires; in sad society
The domestic broods assemble pensive;
And through the lonely fields no creature stirs,
Where in deep silence every voice is hushed,
Save the shrill gulls, that wasted from the coast
Soar in promiscuous circles over the land
And meet the terrors of the impending storm.
At first the wandering clouds emit a rare
Uncertain shower, or on the mountains side
Pour down in streams collected and oblique --
Wide and more wide the thick'ning deluge spreads,
Till the whole earth's overwhelmed and floats immense.
How changed the prospect, where I lately dwelt
With glowing admiration, seen dimly
Through the fleeting rain! the valleys hidden,
And the tall hills grown desolate and dun,
Seem mingled with the clouds in sullen forms,
A brooding vapor hangs before the sight,
And spreads its gloomy shadow on the mind.
-- Methinks within the center of yon wood,
Fearful and dark, while thrilling midnight reigns,
Some way-worn, solitary traveller
Wanders bewildered: around him beats
The drifting rain; the cheerless hollow blast
Moans among the trees; and the upland rocks,
That vent a hoarsely-sounding cataract,
Deepen the sadness of a double night.
But toward the morn, rising from a gale,
Comes on the fierce north-west -- it intermits,
As to collect new force; and then breaks forth
With more unbridled vengeance, its madness
Venting on the world. Shaken to its base
The firm mansion totters; the stately woods
Succumbing roar; and the wide ocean
Convulsed unto its profoundest caverns
Swells to tremendous heights, that hurried on
In dread contortion foam before the wind,
And burst with thundering torrents on the shore.
Now let me climb some mountains stormy cliffs
Sublime and black as the disordered face
Of heaven, envelop'd in an eddying cloud
Of foliage, torn by distracting whirlwinds
From the forest: and, while all nature round
Is agitated in tempestuous din,
Calm and undismayed let me give a loose
To fancy; eye the wild struggling prospect,
And listen to the uproar of the wind.
But soon over half the horizon looks forth
A lively day. The remnants of the storm,
Condensed into innumerable clouds,
Recede with swiftness from the aerial force
And cast a sweeping shadow as they pass,
Till the azure's left unchequer'd and serene.
Happy AMERICA, whose regions pure
Are never benighted in the sadd'ning gloom
Of dismal fogs and unremitting rains!
Thy days of mourning quickly pass away;
And soon thy native brightness is restored.
How grateful and reviving is the breath
Of the untainted atmosphere! how vast
And how sublime the majesty that reigns
In the cerulean, pure expanse! -- And thou,
O source incomprehensible of light,
Who unfoldest to our view the regions
Of this sphere, and giv'st the mind an insight
Into the grandeur of the universe;
How delightful to me is thy presence!
Even in the fairest moments of this life
Thou can inspire a cheerfulness of soul
And give a luster to my inmost joys.
Or, when embosom'd in profoundest grief,
One gracious ray from thee can animate
My sad desponding breast, uplift my views
To happier scenes and brighten every hope.
NOVEMBER.
MISCE ERCO ALIQUID NOSTRIS DE MORIBUS. --
Juv.
SUBJECTS. -- Winter -- View of the city -- Satirical sketch of fashionable
life -- Drunkenness reproved -- Funeral -- Pleasures of study -- Moonlight --
Aurora borealis -- emotions of love.

HAPPY are they, who from the inclemency
Of piercing winds and wintry solitude,
Within the bosom of a friendlier clime
And amid the city's gaily varied scenes,
Call forth to exercise each spring of joy;
While the stern year bids vegetation cease,
Or in a mantle of concreted snow
Involves the subject world, and to the eye
Presents a comfortless unbounded waste.
So too the muse, averting from the scene
That late with rapture tuned her song, amid
The circling pleasures and the splendid haunts
Of dissipation, may enjoy a theme
More animate -- But she disdains to sing
With praise unfelt, emotions not her own.
How many here unconscious of the fruits
Ripened and dignified, that wealth can yield,
Imprisoned within their habitations
Consume the day in revelries and sloth;
Or in a proud magnificence, but draw
A tasteless, uniform, voluptuous life!
To them the fragrance of the blushing morn
Has lost its inspiration -- but, wearied
With the drowsiness of midnight riot
Sickening and relaxed, their lengthened slumbers
Drown the better half of their existence.
Nature points out to man his earthly course:
It Is impious to invert her sacred laws;
And whose dares, -- errs to his destruction.
Sweeter and more enviable the meal
Of him who rises from his bed of straw
To early industry -- or even the hag's,
That near some windy corner shivering fits
In doleful contemplation on her wares,
And mouths by stealth the fare of penury --
More dainty than the choicest luxuries
That reek upon the tables of the great,
While oe'r their limbs a torpid langour reigns,
And the cloyed stomach sickens at the food.
-- They rise not to restore their weakened frame
And by the strengthening powers of exercise
Give a robust alacrity to life, --
But, midst a round of vacant visitants,
Pleased with the dignities of fortune, sit
To waste the noon in stately stiffness, vain
And pompous ceremony, the outside
Of society. -- A strict demeanor,
Reserve and deference to distinction,
Can never want an advocate to speak
Their need: But if the arrogance of pride
Will fetter me with those severe constraints,
Mere pedantry in breeding could impose,
I fly such awful majesty and seek
A refuge within an humbler circle,
Where ease and freedom yet maintain their worth,
Though heightened by the arts of polished life.
Nor rising from meridian fare, frugal
And simple, does my envy follow those,
Who, mounted in their sounding vehicles,
Are borne along the trembling streets, in all
The consequence of lordly indolence,
To taste the dainties of a rich repast
Where all the costliness of wealth's displayed;
Or perhaps an annual feast, profuse
And gaily decorated, a garden
Of florescent delicacies, invites
The powdered host, who with reflection grave
A while confer; then in due form arrayed
^vade the smiling board. --
-- Now the desires
^f coarser appetite removed, each breast
^ows with the charms of converse undisturbed;
And, as the bottle circles, by degrees
(...) ripens into friendliness, and spreads
^onvivial harmony. -- The crimson cheek
Now flushes with a finer warmth; the eye
Swims in delight; while the inspiring voice
With strains of merriment and toping tales
^alls forth the jocund sallies of applause;
Or, warbling some melodious elegy,
Awakes each tender, generous sentiment.
But as the summer's sun, that from the east,
Beams forth benign, and in his limpid course
Ascending, brightens into ardent day --
Then sits in thunder and a night of clouds.
So the infatuating charm, at first
Diffuses a sweet influence over the mind,
And, kindling into extacies, is lost,
Whelmed in the boiling phrenzy of the brain.
To calm discourse and animating wit
Succeeds a wild vociferous jargon;
And drowning every lay, the full chorus
Shouts in distracting clamorous discord.
-- Before their sight the glimmering objects wheel
In sickening rounds; and the head simp'ring nods
With liftless inclination, till by fits
Resigned to brooding impotence, it droops
A sullen, senseless, pitiable load.
-- Blush, ye deluded men, who in an age
So boasted and so wise as this, delight
In base intoxication; who barter
For the price of momentary transport
A series of your choicest hours; whose joys
Degrade the great faculties of the mind,
Corrupt the very springs of life, and throw
A loathsome curse upon posterity.
Rouse, rouse, COLUMBIANS, burst through the shackles
Of a Gothic custom, that would pervert
The noblest purpose of your existence.
It Is not the giddy transitory flight
Of borrowed transport and empoison'd bliss --
Nor all the high-season'd sweets of luxury,
That wisdom covets; but it is the enjoyment
Of ourselves, pure, permanent and perfect --
There is a treasure, far beyond the reach
Of grovelling taste, or the pride of affluence,
That costs you nothing to enjoy -- Temperance --
It Is not the studied work of art refined,
Nor idly splendid to entice the vain;
But chaste and simple as the joy it yields. --
It Is this, the loveliest offspring of want,
Sustains the balance with disdainful wealth;
That in the cottage of neglected worth,
With pitying consolation dwells,
Suffuses a mild sunshine over the breast,
(...), in the tranquil labor of the day,
(...) a night of undisturbed repose.
Temperance! ah! no. It is a phantom:
(...) such a picture elsewhere scarce subsists
(...) in the airy dreams of poetry.
(...) search it through all orders, to the wretch
(...) from his hungry, tattered family,
(...) their lean, weekly sustenance, the fruit
(...) many weary and repining hours --
(...) lavish it in one unfeeling draught,
(...) in inebriating consumes him.
Of this enough -- it is a growing theme;
(...), as the eye matures, in its increase,
(...) yield a plenteous and a baneful crop.
Now, while in the red'ning descent of day
(...) busy clangors of the world are sunk,
(...) thoughtful silence over the vacant streets,
^^pending beckons to congenial night;
(...) the sacred columns of yon church
With folded arms, and in a vision wrapped
(...) holy inspiration, let me muse --
(...) when the expanding portals, at the close
(...) weekly prayer, pour forth obstreperous
(...) gay, vivacious, hastening multitude;
(...) as the slow and lengthening procession,
With the death-like weeds of mourning blackened,
(...), with funeral pace, to the dread seat
(...) an eternal rest; and in the deep
Stillness of its approach, the frequent knell
Bursting from the sounding belfry, vibrates
On my thrilled ear at solemn intervals --
Ah me! it tolls Amelia's loss -- the sound
Slow swinging breathes a deploring dullness
Over the scene; and, as the last peal expires
Upon the gale, her native hills return
A lingering, melancholy echo.
Then welcome darkness, gloomy nourisher
Of despondence, whose kind dominion checks
The wandering thought, and by concealment swells
The pathetic tenderness of sorrow.
-- Far, from all the senseless vanities
Of ostentatious wealth, the noisy seats
Of its mistaken pleasures, sequestered
And by the world unnotic'd, let me taste
The sweets of science, and hold a converse
With sage instructors of mankind. Teach me
Immortal Fenelon, in the midlest
Language of thy Mentor, greatly to spurn
The splendid fallacies, the worthless fame
That weak ambition courts; and fix my hopes
On the firm base of rectitude and truth.
Filled with the greatness of thy precepts too
First of philosophers Socrates.
, whose mind secure
In immortality, serenely rose
Above the fears of death -- from the glories
Of thy example, let me catch one ray
(...) Grecian wisdom, and, at a distance,
^ollow thee with humble emulation.
With thee, great Newton, in sublimest thought,
Above the servile limits of this sphere,
Let me explore the infinite designs
^f Providence; systems of unknown worlds,
^ast harmonious, through the endless void
Ascending in stupendous series;
^ill lost in the unbounded range of being,
^iddy with amazement, my fluttered mind
^^rinks int' herself and trembles at the flight.
(...) But from the drowsy lassitude of thought
And irksome application, may I find
(...) refuge in the liveliest strains of Pope;
^raceful, yet familiar, and, though confined
To the close shackles of oppressive rhyme,
Flowing, precise and delicately smooth.
And often let Otway melt me with the voice
Of plaintive love: or let Shakespeare chill me
With the dread narrative of black designs
And midnight murder; rouse my indif'rent breast
To vengeance on some exulting tyrant;
And now touch the quickest sense of pity
In the despair of exquisite distress.
-- If such the wondrous, facinating powers
That fancy, even in fiction can display,
Oh! that the auspicious genius of this age
Would give a second Homer to the world.
Where verse, disdaining the ignoble tracks,
The futile, hackney'd themes of poetry,
Persuasive -- irresistible, would raise
His voice to the sublimest cause of truth,
And sing those virtues that a SAVIOR taught!
Inspiring angels should attune his lays
With melody celestial, should impart
The strongest energy of expression,
And swell the aspiring tumults of his soul.
But if the seats where levity presides
In dazzling pomp, or the convivial shouts
Of mirth never lure me from the pleasing calm
Of philosophic pleasures; ever charmed
With nature, be whatever her varied shape,
In heavenly contemplation let me gaze
Upon the silver orb of the full moon,
As she rides in her serenest zenith,
Amid the stately solitude of heaven,
And on the glossy snow reflects a soft
And silken luster -- or as from the north,
The gelid seat of winter's frozen throne,
A stream of dawning light ascending, wide
Diffuses over the painted firmament
Its crimson glories -- an untimely morn,
Beauteous, glowing and diversified,
High traverses the illumined vault, and hides
Its blooming course behind the eastern clouds.
And often to shun the vacant tediousness
Of evening, let me recline in converse sweet
(...) ever charming -- by thy side;
And, while I catch from sympathetic sighs
The fond emotions swelling in thy breast,
Feel through my veins transporting passion throb
With extacy tumultous, or melting
Into the fondest tenderness of love,
^^ose my enchanted soul in Paradise.
^h! no -- infatuating dream! the hand
^f rigid fortune rudely intervenes,
and wrests me from the fondest smiles of hope.
Thus, often the voyager by wintry winds,
^ost through the perils and tempestuous lengths
^f the Atlantic, with ardent rapture
Breathes the aromatic south, and, rising
Above the placid bosom of the deep,
Beholds the happy prospect of his home --
When, on a sudden, from the boisterous west,
Deceitfully serene, the latent storm
Precipitates with tremendous violence,
And every hope confounding, over his sight
Spreads the dark image of eternal night.
FINIS.

