THE PRESENT STATE OF AMERICA, etc.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, 1789.

THE PRESENT STATE OF AMERICA, With the mournful Complaints, and a glorious
Prospect of better Times: Including our noble General's excellent Character.
AMERICA, once happy place,
Blessed with religion, and true grace;
A generous people good, and kind
To help each other were inclined:
A happy people; blessed land!
Enjoyed a plenty at command.
Parents and Children did agree
Lived in sweet peace and unity:
And strangers too did kindly greet,
With their good hospitable treat.
The States flourished, truth in my word,
'Till Britain shook her iron rod.
Oh! Dreadful change, most sad to tell,
She is from her true glory fell.
One neighbor does another wrong,
With his cunning deceitful tongue.
"Shortly will I fail in my trade,
"My creditors cheat -- then I Am made.
Now whores and thieves do much abound,
Infest the town and country round:
And poverty throughout the States
Is the complaint in all her streets:
What is the cause of all her grief,
Which makes the poor, cry for relief?
Tradesmen and merchants they do fail,
And some confined in a jail. --
When Whitefield did the gospel sound,
Religion flourished in this town. --
Throughout these brave United States
A certain truth -- good men relate!
This faithful herald of the Lord,
Throughout the States, his voice was heard;
Crying to sinners, turn and live --
The Lord will all your sins forgive:
Thy life dear man, through every scene,
Has active, useful, lovely been;
Who ever devised more liberal things?
Or higher stretched devotion's wings?
Could friendship trade, at home, abroad,
Be sacred more to Christ thy God?
How far from fear! to Heaven how nigh!
Thus Whitefield lived, and loved to die.
A second Luther to declare,
God's gracious message, far and near:
He was no bigot in his mind,
But free and open to mankind --
All sects and parties did receive,
Who truly in the Lord believe: --
I wish my heart was just the same,
Like the blessed man who I do name.
Though wicked things was of him said,
The Lord himself they did upbraid.
Sometime ago an aged pious matron of this city, related as follows, respecting
a pious girl that lived with her and loved that which is good. But had heard an
evil report of the Rev. Mr. George Whitefield, that he was a false teacher and
imposed on the people, and knew nothing about the gospel, and never preached a
good sermon in his life. -- So it fell out one day, that she was requesting her
mistress to read some good book to her, but objected strongly against Mr.
Whitefield's writings, and did not like them at all. However her mistress
consented to read to her a sermon, and the girl approved of it exceedingly; and
said that she never heard a better sermon in her life. -- Then her mistress
informed her who the author was viz. Mr. Whitefield. The honest girl began to
weep and wring her hands and said, "that she was the vilest and most wicked
wretch on earth to despise and reject such a worthy and faithful servant of
Jesus Christ, by the influence of a false report, without any foundation."

The above gentlewoman informed me, that she had heard an ill report of Baron
Sweedenbourg's works, but not willing to depend upon mere hearsay, was
determined to send for the Baron's book: And having read a part of it, and
found it be a jargon of enthusiasm; now says the lady, "I judge for myself, and
am satisfied; the report which I heard is true. -- Therefore I advise all
carnal and ungodly people, who despise and ridicule the Rev. George Whitefield,
or his writings, to prove his works by the sacred scriptures, read and judge
for themselves -- I also request them seriously to consider that our blessed
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, was despised and ridiculed also, by the
hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees of his day, and the most notorious lies laid
to his charge viz. They said that "Jesus Christ was a glutton and a drunkard a
deceiver of the people, and possessed of the devil," etc.

I am also informed that a certain gentleman now living in this city: Who is
one of the first rate writers, and a very excellent poet; this gentleman
informed a friend of mine, that he peruses the Baron's works out of curiosity
to know what he had to say -- And looks on the Baron's performance in no other
light than a whimsical novel -- And I have it from good authority, therefore
can avouch it as an authentic truth, that every minister in this city, together
with hundreds of pious christians, who in fact disprove the Baron's works, and
the reason is obvious, because they are unscriptural, and have a great tendency
to dishonor God and poison men's souls. --


Now that good friend is gone to rest,
Man is now turned like a beast. --
Sweedenbourg's dreams are now received,
The Lord denied, the spirit grieved. --
Fools to the house of laughter go,
A sad presage of future woe. --
Shameless whoredom, does now appear,
Sin has so much bewitched the fair. --
Our streets have men in iron chains,
Sad emblem of those endless pains. --
What holy scriptures do foretell,
Is come to pass in Israel. --
Imposing teachers do appear,
And prove the last day does draw near.
The scoffers run to their own lust.
Despise and ridicule the just.
This does confirm the sacred page,
To this ungodly, wicked age. --
The man is bad, that does pervert,
Those sacred truths, with subtle art.
Man! by his power cannot get faith,
This is a truth the scripture says:
Though this vain author says, he can,
Is not the Lord more true then man?
Some sacred truths, he does avow,
Then what he said does overthrow:
Justice to truth, sometimes is paid,
Then contradicts, what he has said. --
His idle dreams are so refined,
To cheat the weak and feeble mind;
Sure the man must be insane,
To write such stuff, and sign his name;
No doubt some cursed wicked fiend,
Had taken possession of his mind;
He called himself the true Messiah,
Which proved he was a wicked liar;
Must be crucified for the Jews,
This people's long expected news;
Talked with angels, once and again,
Whimsies of a frantic brain;
The worst of all I do confess,
He slights the Lord, our right'ousness;
But those that add or, take therefrom,
Most dreadful sure, will be their doom;
God in his justice does declare,
He Will plunge them all in deep despair.
Unhappy war! I do deplore,
The States are brought so very poor;
And Britain too does feel the smart,
I wish both well, with all my heart;
I hope they will once more unite;
And put our Popish foes to flight;
Come in alliance, once again,
It Is time the BEAST that he was slain.
But independent we'll remain,
In spite of Britain, France or Spain.
Some say the curse of the Lord's hand,
Is turned against this wicked land.
Mankind so wicked and profane,
Their vices all I cannot name:
The Sabbath like a market day,
Thus fools do sport their time away.
In winter time, when weather's cold,
How very dreadful to behold,
Hundreds skaiting on the ice,
They are so given up to vice.
And there the traders do resort,
To sell good things and see the sport;
Righteousness does a nation bless,
But Sin does bring a heavy curse.
My heart would break to hold my peace,
To see these vices still increase.
I take my pen and I do write,
Expose my thoughts to public sight
Give a rough sketch, then silent stand,
And leave it to some abler hand.
You know the common certain lot,
Reprovers they must have a blot.
Some thousands they may take offense,
And say, this scribbler has no sense:
The learned, they will frown and say,
His jingle I will cast away,
He might have wrote in pleasing style,
And caused the world to have a smile.
"Pope and Fordyce, these are the men,
"To please the world with learned pen;
"Harvey too, in beauteous phrase,
"Set forth the riches of God's grace;
"But too particular in his mind,
"Too tight does our conscience bind;
"We are redeemed by a rich price,
"'It Is weakness for to be so nice;
"His fine language, I do approve,
"How pleasant is a flowery grove;
If my poor subject is too grave,
A proof I Am no designing knave
Was it avarice, I have in view,
I would another track pursue;
Scribble, satire and lampoon,
To please the sordid low bussoon;
I never knew a publication,
Gained every man's approbation;
If mine please none, I do confess,
My lines are single in their dress;
A faultless piece none e're did see,
There is no man can perfect be.
No poet am nor poet's son,
Don't claim the name of either one;
And yet to scribble I Am inclined,
Who is the man my hands can bind?
Who I am, and from whence I came?
I do refuse to sign my name;
Foolish things may confound the wise,
Believe the truth I do advise;
The lofty sleep, and will not bark,
The despised weak must do the work;
What God appoints shall come to pass,
Truth will remain while time does last;
Great men in power don't regard,
The honor of the blessed Lord;
But if men steal their property,
Then they are chained to slavery;
Zeal is lost for the Lord of Hosts,
Sad news in our great western coasts;
Our trade is dead, and money spent,
Which makes the workman to lament;
The faces of the poor are ground,
This has a mournful dreadful sound;
Deceivers they do lie in wait,
The simple for to captivate:
Thus sharpers are on every hand,
Oh, this corrupted wicked land!
But we do hope our lot is cast,
The worst of times, they now are past;
Our new government, make no doubt,
Will shortly bring our trade about;
Such righteous laws, will be made,
For the promotion of our trade;
Good manufactures of our own,
Will be set up in every town;
Our brave General, and good friend,
Proves true and faithful to the end;
Washington sounds through every land,
A man of courage and command;
Cruel tyrant much blood have spilt,
And on their heads have brought great guilt;
They ravaged States in thirst for blood,
Washington fought for the States good;
We hope to see more golden days,
And live to our CREATOR'S PRAISE;
But we must humble and implore,
God would again his grace restore;
This is the way for to arise,
Giving our hearts a sacrifice;
What can be given short of this,
Which will restore our wanted bliss.
THE END.

