LOUISA, BY MISS SEWARD. THE FIFTH EDITION.

LOUISA, A POETICAL NOVEL, IN FOUR EPISTLES.

BY MISS SEWARD.

THE FIFTH EDITION.

NEW HAVEN. PRINTED AND SOLD BY ABEL MORSE. M.DCC.LXXXIX.

PREFACE.
THE ensuing epistolary poems contain a description rather of passions than of
incidents. They resulted from an idea of it being possible to unite the
impassioned fondness of POPE'S ELOISA, with the chaster tenderness of PRIOR'S
EMMA; avoiding the voluptuousness of the first, and the too conceding softness
of the second. It is hoped the Reader will distinguish between the apprehended
possibility of exhibiting in verse a more faultless female Character than the
ELOISA of POPE, or the EMMA of PRIOR, and the rash and vain design of
equalling, much less of surpassing the transcendent poetic excellence of either
of those Compositions.

THE LOUISA of the following pages has all that enthusiasm which springs from
an heart warmly affectionate, joined to a glowing and picturesque imagination.
Her sensibilities, heightened, and refined in the bosom of Retirement, know no
bounds, except those which the dignity of conscious Worth, and a strong sense
of Religion prescribe. It is feared the modern young Ladies will have little
sympathy with her, since she is unfashionably enthusiastic, and unfashionably
tender.

AN ingenious Friend, after reading the first epistle, remarked, that LOUISA
might have described with more interesting particularity her Lover's
declaration of his passion, and the manner in which she received that
declaration; but the Author thought the present method of conveying that
circumstance to the mind of the Reader more poetic. POPE'S ELOISA is minute in
her description of the awful Scenery, formed by the rocks, the streams, and
mountains, of Paraclete, but by no means minute concerning the amorous
eclaircissement between herself and Abelard. LOUISA discriminates her Lover's
early attentions to her, though she leaves the manner of his declaring their
source very much to the Imagination. Her application of the beautiful scenic
objects, by which she was at that interval surrounded, to her own, and to her
Lover's situation; and the possing suddenly to their present altered
appearance, contrasts the charms, and bloom of the first, with the chill
drearness of the second. There it was that the Author had in view that striking
letter in the 3d Vol. of the Nouvelle-Heloise, which describes St. Preaux
accompanying Mrs. Wolmar to the rocks of Meillerie, then covered with the
richness of Summer-luxuriance; and painting to her the situation of that very
Scene, when he had visited it alone, amidst the horrors of Winter, and found
those horrors congenial to the temper of his Soul.

THIS Poem has little chance to be popular. A feeling Heart, and a fondness for
Verse must unite to render it interesting. A feeling Heart without a glowing
Imagination will be tired of the Landscape-painting, somewhat luxuriantly
interspersed. An Imagination that glows, while the Heart is frozen, has a
propensity to fancy every thing prosaic which is not imagery, and will probably
yawn over the reasoning of these Lovers, and sicken over their tenderness.

IF, however, this little Work has the honor to interest and please the Few, in
whom the kind and sweet affections are blended with poetic taste, the end for
which it is published will be obtained.

EXCEPT some slight alterations, which have been made since the two first
Editions, the hundred and fifty six lines, with which the poem opens, were
written when the Author was only nineteen. They had been mislaid during a long
interval, It is sixteen months since they were accidentally recovered. Some few
Friends, to whom the Fragment was shown, thought it worth being extended into a
regular Work The first, and third of these epistles are designed to be
descriptive, and sentimental; the second, and last, dramatic.

LOUISA TO EMMA, HER FRIEND IN THE EAST INDIES
OCTOBER 21, 1779.
THEE, EMMA, four slow-circling years have seen
Press, with thy pensive foot, Savannas green;
Seen thee, with fond Affection's moistened gaze,
And the low-warbled song of former days,
Wind round the shadowy Rock, and shelving Glade,
Where broad Bananas stretch their grateful shade;
Bend over the West thy longing eyes and chide
The tardy Breeze that fans the unfreighted Tide.
Now, as with filial care thy light step roves,
Through India's palmy plains, and spicy groves,
To bless thee, exiled thus in Youth's gay prime,
May sprightly Health resist the torrid clime,
Temper the sickly blast, the severed ray,
And Peace, and Pleasure, lead the shining Day!
Yet, when thou know for me, that Sorrow shrouds
Hope's crystal mirror with impervious clouds,
The sighs, and tears, that tenderest pity speak,
Shall swell thy breast, and chill thy glowing cheek;
Since one have been our pleasures, one our cares,
From the first dawn of those delicious years,
What time, inspired by joy's enlivening powers,
We chased the gilded infect through the bowers,
And oh! I fondly tell my anxious heart,
The dearest truth experience can impart,
That yet, to quench this sympathy of soul,
Time, and the world of waters, vainly roll.
Over this deep Glen, departing Autumn throws,
With kind reverted glance, a short repose,
Ever yet she leaves her ENGLAND's fading scene,
Where sickly yellow stains the vivid green,
And many an icy morn, and stormy gale
Embrown the pathway of the winding vale.
Now, while I seek the bosom of the Glade,
And the thin shelter of the impoverished Shade,
Unequal steps, and rising sighs, disclose
The thorny pressure of tyrannic woes;
And where the incumbant Rock, with awful face,
Bends over the fountain, gurgling from its base,
And marks the limit of the silent Dell,
Sadly I sit my bosomed griefs to tell;
Invoke thy Spirit, those fond griefs to sooth,
And bid, alas! their surging tide be smooth.
It will not be; -- since here, with yearning thought,
By weak, involuntary impulse brought,
Where Love and Memory bear resistless sway,
And all the weakness of the Soul betray!
O Ye known objects! -- how ye strike my heart!
And vain regrets, with keener force, impart!
Slow, through the faded grove, past Pleasures glide,
Or sadly linger by the fountain's side.
Dear, awful witness of a broken vow,
Steep Rock, how sternly frowns thy rugged brow!
But, if the frequent blast shall bend thy pines,
Clear at thy foot the crystal water shines!
Though drizzling Clouds the misty Mountains veil,
Yet the mild Sunbeam gilds the narrow Dale!
Though vernal flowers this bank no more adorn,
Nor Summer's wild rose blushes on its thorn,
Yet sheltered, mossy, dry, and warm, it draws
The heedless roving step to quiet pause.
Thus the pale Year, though Nature's edicts urge
Her step to Winter's desolating verge,
Sedately passes to the drear domain,
And breathes, even yet, soft comforts over the plain;
But oh! for me, in Youth's luxuriant glow,
Hope's lovely florets wither as they blow!
No grief my bosom at our parting knew,
But that of bidding thee a long adieu;
And the sweet tears, that such soft sorrows bring,
Fall, as light rain-drops in the sunny Spring;
For youthful Hope, subduing tender Fears,
Bounds over the gulf of interposing Years;
While, through their course, her airy hands avert
Misfortune's arrow from the Wanderer's heart.
Soon then did Cheerfulness the morn illume,
And Peace descend with Evening's grateful gloom;
They saw my breast in that clear spirit gay,
Which speeds the social hour so fast away.
Now Expectation's fervor rose, to hail
The youthful Master of this quiet Vale,
My blooming Brother -- from Oxonia's towers,
Who sought, with tender haste, his native bowers.
'Twas Noon, and ripened Summer's fervid ray
From cloudless Either shed oppressive day.
As on this shady bank I sat reclined,
My voice, that floated on the waving wind,
Taught the soft echos of the neighboring plains
Milton's sweet lays, in Handel's matchless strains.
Presaging notes my lips unconscious try,
And murmur -- " An enchanting Song of Handel's, from Milton's II Penseroso.
Hide me from Day's garish eye!
Ah! blessed, had Death beneath his sable shrine
Hid me from all the woes that since were mine!
Beneath my trembling fingers lightly rung
The Lute's sweet chords, responsive while I sung.
Faint in the yellow broom the Oxen lay,
And the mute Birds sat languid on the spray;
And naught was heard, around the noontide bower,
Save, that the mountain Be, from flower to flower,
Seemed to prolong, with her assiduous wing,
The soft vibration of the tuneful string;
While the fierce Skies flamed on the shrinking Rills,
And sultry Silenc brooded over the hills!
As on my lip the lingering cadence played,
My Brother gaily bounded down the glade,
And, while my looks the fire of gladness dart,
With ardor pressed me to his throbbing heart;
Then to a graceful Stranger turned, whose feet,
With steps less swift, my coyer welcome meet.
Over his fine form, and over his glowing face,
Youth's ripened bloom had shed its richest grace;
Tall as the Pine, amidst inferior Trees,
With all the bending Ozier's pliant ease.
Over his fair brow, the fairer for their shade,
Locks of the warmest brown luxurient played.
Blushing he bows! -- and gentle awe supplies
Each slattering meaning to his downcast eyes;
Sweet, Serious, tender, those blue eyes impart
A thousand dear sensations to the heart;
Mild as the Evening Star whose shining ray
Soft in the unruffled Water seems to play;
And when he speaks -- not Music's thrilling power,
No, not the vocal Mistress of the bower,
When slow she warbles from the blossomed spray,
In liquid blandishment, her evening lay,
Such soft insinuating sweetness knows,
As from that voice in melting accent flows!
Yet why, fond Memory! why, in tints so warm,
Paint'st thou each beauty of that faultless Form?
His specious virtues surely might impart
Excuse more just for this devoted heart.
Oh! how each noble passion's seeming trace,
Threw transient glories over his youthful face!
How rose, with sudden impulse, swift, and strong,
For every secret fraud, and open wrong
The Oppressor acts, the Helpless feel, or fear,
Disdain's quick throb, and Pity's melting tear!
So well its part each ductile feature played,
Of worth, such firm, though silent promise made,
That to have doubted its well painted truth,
Had been to want the primal grace of youth
Credulity, that scorns, with generous heat,
Alike to practice; or suspect deceit.
Cease, vain Regrets, excursive Fancy cease*
Ye only wound afresh my bleeding peace,
And keep from gentle EMMA's anxious ear
The event she longs, yet kindly dreads, to hear;
But ah! nor singular, nor strange the tale,
My Sister-Sufferers mourn in every vale;
For gold, and dazzling state, incessant prove,
In Man's hard heart, the Murderers of Love.
While many a Sun in summer-glory rose,
EUGENIO's lip no softer accent knows
Than Friendship dictates -- but disordered praise,
Scarce half expressed; the musing ardent gaze;
The varying cheek; the frequent smothered sigh,
Reveal the latent meaning of his eye;
Plain, and yet plainer every hour, declare
The shining secrecies, that languish there.
These are the days that fly on Rapture's wing,
Empurpling every flower that decks the Spring;
For when delicious Hope, with whisper bland,
Wakes the dear magic of her potent wand,
More vivid colors paint the rising Morn,
And clearer chrystial gems the silver thorn;
On more luxuriant shade the Noon-beam plays,
And richer gold the Evening-Sun arrays;
Stars seem to glitter with enamored fire,
And shadowy Hills in statelier grace aspire;
More subtle sweetness scents the passing gales,
And softer beauty decks the moonlight Vales;
All nature smiles! nor even the jocund Day,
When festal roses strew the bridal way,
Darts through the Virgin breast such keen delight,
As when soft Fears with gay Belief unite;
As Hope, sweet, warm, seducing Hope inspires,
Which somewhat questions, what it most desires;
Reads latent meaning in a Lover's eye,
Thrills at his glance, and trembles at his sigh;
As over the Frame disordered transport pours,
When only less than Certainty is ours.
At length, that rosy Certainty appears,
With faithless promises of golden years.
Here, by this fountain side, EUGENIO strove
To trace the tender progress of his love;
'Twas on the Evening of a splendid Day; --
Calm on the gilded grass the fountain lay!
But oh! when doubt, in that dear moment fled,
A calm more suny over my bosom spread!
As the gay Lark his last clear rarol sung,
And on a slanting Sunbeam warbling hung,
With sweeter music trill'd the vesper lay,
Than when he soared amid the blaze of Day;
But yet a thousand times more sweet the sound,
In which my Soul its dearest blessing found!
Slow on the Sun had stolen the sailing Cloud,
And drawn over his gay fires the purple shroud,
Then rolled away! -- till, by no shade represt,
Afar the setting Orb emblaz'd the West;
Lighted with arrowy beams the Ocean caves,
And sunk with splendour in the iliumin'd waves!
Thus often would Modesty her blush employ,
Coyly to veil the radiance of my joy;
But from these eyes the sun-bright gladness beamed,
And all the triumph of my bosom streamed!
'Twas here, -- even here! -- where now I sit reclined,
And Winter's sighs sound hollow in the Wind;
Loud, and more loud the blast of Evening raves,
And strips the Oaks of their last, lingering leaves;
The eddying foliage in the tempest flies,
And fills with duskier gloom the thickning Skies.
Red sinks the Sun, behind the howling Hill,
And rushes, with hoarse stream, the mountain Rill,
And now, with ruffling billow, cold, and pale,
Runs, swollen, and dashing, down the lonely Vale;
While, to these tear-ful eyes, Grief's faded form,
Sits on the Cloud, and sighs amid the Storm!
Yet, dreary Vale! detain thy pensive Guest,
Though drizzling sleet beats cold upon her breast!
To this sad Soul more welcome are thy glooms,
Than Spring's green bowers, or Summer's gaudy blooms;
Nor asks an Heart, that only breaths to sigh,
A warmer mansion, or a kinder Sky!
And still that destined Heart, so fond to mourn,
And dwell on scenes, which never can return,
Shrinks, even as guilty bosoms shrink from shame,
To join with perfidy EUGENIO's name;
Feels its soft streams in every pulse recede
From the pained mention of one barborous deed,
That kills my hopes, like Eurus' fierce career
On the bright foliage of the early year;
Which turns, while premature its buds disclose,
To livid yellowness the damask Rose.
Thou see, my EMMA with what fond delay
The unwilling Spirit loiters on her way;
Clings to past scenes that wore gay Summer's form;
Clings to the wildness of the wintry Storm,
To stop the sad narration, ever it throw,
Dark on my fate, the long, long night of Woe,
Yet, O my Soul! resume it; ever the power
Of wasting Sickness brings the fever'd Hour,
That stops the ill-guided pen in the weak hand,
And shakes from Life's dim glass the ebbing sand!
Thou, EMMA. wilt not blame my easy youth,
That soon this Heart declared its tenderest truth.
Ah! could I dream he feigned whose glances warm
With ceaseless ardor wandered over my form?
And as gay smiles, and youthful graces fair,
Shone in my eyes, and harmoniz'd my air,
Not one unheeded passed his eager gaze,
His fervent, yet discriminating praise;
Though often he swore, amid the fond survey,
The Mind they graced was lovelier far than they,
Protested often, that Mind was formed to share
Each high-soul'd purpose, and each virtuous care;
Catch every new idea, as it rose,
Partake his joys, and melt with all his woes;
False could I think that vow, whose starting tear
Sprung, the warm witness of a faith sincere?
Now dawned the appointed, but unwelcome Day,
That bore my dearest Brother far away,
Where foreign Climes might store his ripening Youth,
With Observation, Science, Taste and Truth.
The same sad Day my loved EUGENIO sighed
Adieus impassioned to his promised Bride;
Yet often urged, inspiring faithless ease,
That between us Fate spread no cruel Seas;
Alas! in his changed Heart my eyes explore,
Of Falsehood's waves, -- a Sea, -- without a Shore!
Where Thames expands with Freedom's wealthy pride,
Attractive Commerce calls him to her Tide;
As with firm step she runs along the Strand,
And points, to the tall Ship, the distant Land.
His rising interests on the call attend,
For with a Father's prosperous fate they blend.
Thus, with these interests, Duty's filial power
Unites to tear him from LOUISA's bower;
But parting Sorrows yield them to the force
Of strong Necessity's resistless course,
By generous Confidence when lulled to rest,
That broods, on dove-like pinion over the breast;
While, from kind letters, rays of joy pervade
The gloomy moments of the love sick Maid;
And oh! how warm, how bright those letters glowed,
What ardent Love, in melting language flowed,
My dearest EMMA, thou will never explore;
The brilliant Talismans are mine no more!
Pride, Virgin-Pride, pronounced the stern behest,
And tore the faithless Scriptures from my breast!
Through four sweet months, to my delighted eyes
These precious tablets of my bliss arise!
At length, dread Silence, -- torturing Doubt, and Fear,
Prompt the pang'd sigh -- but check the softer tear;
Through the lone Day, and lonelier Night, impaat
"The hope deferred, that makes sick the Heart."
Wished Morning comes! -- and Hour succeeds to Hour!
But still, Suspense, and Terror over me lower;
Chase each conjecture kind, with fierce control,
And send their cruel ice-bolt through my soul.
Three wretched weeks my throbbing bosom bears
The wounding conflict of its various fears.
While Rumour's voice inflames my grief, and pride,
And gives EUGENIO to a wealthier Bride.
My trembling hands, the sick suspense to ease,
From Day to Day the public records seize;
While glances, rapid as the meteor's ray,
Eager amidst the crowded columns stray;
Snatch at sad Certainty from busy Fame,
Yet dread to meet my dear EUGENIO's Name.
Now glooms on the stained page the barbarous Truth,
And blights each blooming promise of my youth!
EUGENIO married! -- Anguish, and Despair,
In every pompous killing letter glare!
Thy love, a Sacrifice to glut thy Pride!
Ah! what avail the riches of thy Bride!
Can they avail, remorseless as thou art,
To tear the wronged LOUISA from thy heart?
Gold, and y^ Gems, that lurk in Eastern Cave,
Or to the Sun your gay resplendence wave,
Can joys sincere, one heartfelt transport live
In aught ye purchase, or in aught ye give?
A Bliss, to rival those thy avarice lost,
Insolvent INDIA shall but vainley boast!
Was it for this my gentle Brother's heart
Bore in our growing loves so warm a part!
That soft Indulgence decked his open brows,
That Smiles fraternal hailed our mutual vows!
And, as he kindly breathed the parting sigh,
Love's crystal fluid rushing to his eye,
Was it for this our blooming Hopes he blessed,
Seized our twined hands, and clasped them to his breast
Ah! did he know his loved LOUISA's fate,
What Energy would nerve his rising Hate!
Haste, my LORENZO, to thy Sister's aid!
With thy swift vengeance be her wrongs repaid!
Ye rising Winds, his wandering Sails restore!
Ye refluent Waters, bear him to the Shore!
And thou, vain Bride! enjoy the Meteor ray,
The fancied sunbeam of thy nuptial Day!
Stern Fury waits, to quench its transient light,
In deep, ensanguin'd, everlasting Night!
Bleed, Faithless, bleed! -- LOUISA's Wrongs explored,
Shall frown relentless on her Brother's sword!
-- Rash, lost LOUISA! -- could thou bear the strife?
Throw on a fatal chance thy Brother's life?
Or stretch, a victim to thy proud disdain,
EUGENIO, pale, and bleeding, on the plain?
Endure that from a bosom, once so dear,
Convulsive pangs the trembling Life should tear?
Oh! should thou, certain of the cruel truth,
Behold, in Fancy's eye, the slaughtered Youth,
Could thou that loved, that lovely Form survey,
And see it faded to insensate Clay?
Eternal darkness on those eyelids hung?
Eternal silence stiffen on that tongue?
No! wildly, from the bare surmise, I start,
And treble fondness rushes through my heart;
Live! -- live EUGENIO! -- free from fierce alarms,
Blessed, if thou can, even in my Rival's arms!
O! safe, through lengthened years, may thou remain
From all the varied forms of deathful Pain!
From injured Honor's unrelenting ire,
The blast of Accident, the Fever's fire!
Soft may those dangerous graces melt away,
And gently sink in scarce perceived decay!
For this my breast its cureless woes shall hide,
Nor sting fraternal Love, nor generous Pride.
Yes, dear LORENZO! thou shall still believe,
Though much the thought thy gentle breast will grieve,
LOUISA, lost to tenderness, and truth,
In the vain levity of thoughtless Youth,
Proved to EUGENIO's love a cold Ingrate,
And lightly splenetic deserved her fate.
Cruel Remembrance! how shall I assuage
The yearning pangs of thy incessant rage?
What balmy comfort can the Heart pervade,
When bitter tears his broken faith upbraid,
Whose hand, we fondly hoped, should wipe away
Their flowing sorrows through each future Day?
Since in Reflection's grasp each Blessing dies,
When the forced struggling Spirit must despise
Him who, encircled with Perfection's zone,
Long in our sight scarce less than Angel shone.
For if Credulity her warmth impart,
With veils of Light she screens the selfish Heart;
But barbarous Perfidy's severe extreme,
In shades eternal, shrouds each gorgeous beam.
On the arched windows thus, that proudly grace
An high majestic Temple's awful face,
When pours the setting Sun its darting rays,
An hundred solar Orbs appear to blaze;
But when the incumbent shades of lowering Night
Curtain the source of this illusive light,
Its evanescent fires no more remain,
But Horrors gather round the darkened Fane;
The lofty Turrets, desolately grand,
In dreary state, and lonely silence stand;
Through the dim Ailes pale Specter seem to fleet,
And hollow groans the whispering Walls repeat.
So round EUGENIO's form, that rises yet,
'Mid Pride's cold frown, and Passion's warm regret,
Deprived of all the luster it retained,
When gay Belief with sunny hue remained
Incessant now the Fiend, of avarice glide,
With dark Ambition scowling at their side,
Detested impotence of flattered charms,
That could not bind my Wanderer to my arms!
Ah! what availed your beauties, but to lure
That fleeting Love, ye knew not to secure!
Like opening flowers, that deck the desert Glade,
Fair to no purpose, flattered Graces fade! --
One healing draught -- and all shall yet be well!
"Peace is the pale-ey'd Sister of the Cell,"
The cell of DEATH -- where Misery only knows
The soft exemption, -- and the long repose.
Ah no! -- a guardian Spirit seems to say,
"Stay thee, LOUISA, yet a little stay!
"Awake not righteous Heaven's avenging Hate
"By rashly plunging in the waves of Fate!
"Though Time, for woes like thine, admits no cure,
"Yet learn its hardest lesson, to endure!
"Not long shall life her torturing sense impart
"Of the barb'd shaft, that rankles in thy heart,
"Thou shall not need to stain thy spotless Soul,
"Nor want the ensanguin'd knife, the envenomed bowl;
"Thy Soul's Beloved, by vain ambition fired,
"Deaf, as the Grave, to all that once inspired,
"To Love's soft voice, -- to Honor's awful plea,
"Lives to another! -- and is lost to thee!"
EUGENIO married! -- Oh! -- yon Village-bell,
That flings on the cold Gale its mournful knell!
The solemn pause, -- the loud repeated toll,
Calling the pale Corse to its darksome goal,
Not plainer there the tale of Death relate,
Than these detested words pronounce my fate!
EUGENIO married, seals LOUISA's doom
Her sure, though lingering passport to the tomb?
And thou, soft Mourner over my bosom's smart!
Friend of my Soul, and Sister of my Heart!
A fallen Blossom while thy tears embalm,
Regrets that Fondness prompts, let Fondness calm;
Since though this mortal Frame, Affection's slave,
Wastes by the envenomed wound that Falsehood gave,
I still possess, thus withering in my youth,
The peace of Innocence, the pride of Truth;
My Soul is concious of its heavenly Sire,
The Cherub Faith has lent her wings of fire;
Man, the base object of my scorn, it leaves,
To join that gracious Power, that never deceives!
When Busy Rumors to thy ear disclose
The long enfranchisement of all my woes,
Oh! let thy Mind's pure eye behold me soar
Where Light, and Life from Springs unfailing pour!
Mark the bright circlets of the eternal Morn,
In radiant points, my smiling brows adorn!
By kindred Seraphs see thy Friend embraced,
Not one slight thought on false EUGENIO waste!
Yet, though from Pain, and Grief for ever free,
Throw back soft Pity's tender glance on thee!
Smile at the human weakness of thy tears.
And long to welcome thee to HAPPIER SPHERES!
END OF THE FIRST EPISTLE.
SECOND EPISTLE. EUGENIO TO EMMA, ON HER RETURN FROM THE EAST INDIES.
APRIL 15, 1781.
START not: dear EMMA, at an hapless name,
Veiled to thy sense in perfidy and shame!
Oh? deep indeed the mists, they long have spread,
To Fancy's eye, round this devoted head!
While deeper still the shades of anguish lower,
Drear as the Night upon the wintry bower,
When bitter Winds howl fearful over the plains,
And the bright Stars are quenched amid the rains!
So quenched each smiling Pleasures roseate ray,
That once illumin'n lost EUGENIO's way!
But, ever his tortured Soul,s incessant strife
Burst the dark consines of disastrous Life,
Given, or withheld, by EMMA's guardian hands,
As her Friend's peace hereafter best demands,
Will she receive EUGENIO's last request,
In faithful trust for her LOUISA's breast,
Hear his sad story -- that yet dares appear
To claim her justice, and implore her tear?
If so, let now thy gentle heart incline
To mourn the trials, and the pangs of mine!
No longer shall thou think I basely sold
My peace, my liberty, my love, for gold;
That gold did purchase them, we know too well,
But Oh! no sordid sacrifice they fell!
Learn then those dire Events, whose tyrant sway
Forced me to throw joy's vital root away,
Yield my LOUISA to their stern control,
Gem of my youth! and day star of my soul!
To thee, so long accustomed to disclose
Whatever on Life the strengthened color throws,
To thee LOUISA questionless appealed;
Revealed my vows, my broken faith revealed;
Taught thee, through scenes, now past and gone, to rove,
And hate the mean apostate to his love.
Veiled by her native Groves, I left the Maid,
And journied onward from that blooming Glade,
With eyes, full often reverted as I passed,
With many a look to Heaven in fervor cast,
To implore protection for LOUISA's peace,
Her health's dear safety, and our love's increase.
Ever yet I joined the animated Train,
Whose full-fraught vessels seek the ports of Gain,
To that domestic scene I bent my way,
Which far in The River Deva, celebrated by Milton, and other of our Poets,
rises in Merionethshire, and flows through mountainous and beautiful scenery,
still, as it is said, retaining its original name. In Cheshire it assumes that
of Dee, which led some of the commentators on the first Edition of this Poem to
suppose the villa of Ernesto in that country; but the author meant to place it
in Wales, on the banks of the Deva, before it changes its title for one so much
less harmonious, and waters a country more fertile, but much less lovely.
Deva's woodland mazes lay;
A rural kind Retreat from all the cares,
Which busy Commerce for her Sons prepares.
Translucent Deva the green Valley laves,
And darkling Alders screen her wandering waves,
Till slow she rises from o'er-hanging shades,
And, seen at distance, through the opening Glades,
With bank less veild'd, and streams that mildly shine,
Leads round the lonely Hills her silver line.
In that sweet Dale, and by a Mountain's side,
Whose sheltering heights the angry North deride,
Abode, so late, of Cheerfulness and Ease,
White gleams the Mansion through the waving Trees!
Tall are the Trees that whisper round its Walls,
And soft the pathway down the Valley falls!
Oh! how each charm, that decks the quiet scene,
Assumed new grace, and wore a softer mein,
From the blessed thought, that soon the nuptial Hour
Would lead LOUISA to my native bower!
'Twas there my gentle Parents often knew
The calm sweet Night, the Day that lightly flew;
And there the heartfelt pleasure gaily showed
EUGENIO's welcome to the green abode,
A father's elevating gladness proved
How dear the presence of the Son he loved.
My gentle Mother, archly smiling, pressed
The lovesick Wanderer to her honored breast;
For so she fondly called her darling Youth,
Yet loved his ardor, and approved his truth.
My Sisters, fair, ingenuous, graceful Maids,
The acknowledged pride of all the neighboring Shades,
Met me with bounding step, and joyous mein,
And rays of transport brightened all the scene
Nor will thou, mighty Love! upbraid my Heart,
For bearing in their joys so warm a part;
Since no ambition gloom'd my Father's brow,
No third of wealth reproached my plighted vow;
He scorned to name LOUISA's want of gold,
But gladly listened while her worth I told.
Pleased has he seen her in this melting eye,
Pleased with her name, half whispered in a sigh;
Then would I grasp his hand, and ardent say,
"Often shall my Parents bless our bridal Day,
"Since from that Soul of sweetness, they shall share
"A Daughter's tenderness, an Angel's care;
"For here is each virtue and each Grace refined,
"That breathe on Loveliness the glow of Mind,
"And, with assiduous Duty's cheering power,
"Strew Life's worn path with every filial flower."
One Eve, as on the shady bank I rode,
Where through new Dales the beauteous Deva slow'd,
Loitering I listen to the Red-breast clear,
The last, lone Songster of the waining Year.
Light over the leaves sweet Autumn breathes serene,
And tips with gold their yet unfaded green.
Now many a vapor gray the stream exhales,
And Twilight steals unheeded on the Vales;
Over the hill-top the lines of crimson run,
The glowing raiments of the vanished Sun;
Nor yet the deepning shades of Night impede
My roving course, which pensive musings lead,
What time the Moon of Ceres, the Harvest Moon.
Moon of Ceres mildly throws
Her shadowy grace, and breaths her soft repose
Over the dark Shrubs, that clothe the rocky Steeps,
Shelve from their tops, and fringe the crystal Deeps;
While, as around those Rocks the River glides,
White moon-beams tremble in the glancing tides.
Sudden, wild sound; are borne along the gales;
The piercing shriek my startled ear assails!
But scarce a moment, with checked rein, I stand,
The uplifted cane grasped sternly in my hand,
Ever bending forward over my eager Horse,
Urging, with needless spur, his rapid course,
And plunging through the deep, opposing flood,
I pierce the tangled mazes of the Wood.
On fibrous Oaks, that roughen all the ground,
My Steed's fleet hoofs, with hollow noise, resound;
And doubled by the echos from the caves,
Appal a guilty band of desperate Slaves;
For soon, in ruthless, felon-gripe, I found
A beauteous Female, screaming on the ground;
Dragged from her Horse, that grazed unconscious near,
Her tresses torn, and frantic with her fear.
Two livered Youths, attendant on the Maid,
At the first onset in that gloomy Glade,
Had, or seduced by Gold, or Wing' by dread,
From danger, and from duty, coward fled.
Alarmed, the Villains quit their struggling Prey,
And two, with terror struck, speed fast away.
Fiercer the third, the arm of blood extends;
The levelled tube, in dire direction, bends!
Yet no cold fear arrests my vengeful force,
And his winged death-ball flies with erring course:
But not descends my nervous blow in vain,
The hidden lead indents the Murderer's brain;
With one demoniac glance, as down he fell.
The Soul starts furious from its vital cell.
Then tender pity, and assiduous care,
Conduct me swiftly to the swooning Fair.
The light, cool, drops, scoop'd from the neighboring spring,
Over her pale brow solicitous I fling;
Till Life's warm tide, which long the Heart detains,
Returns, slow purpling the forsaken veins.
In one deep sigh, as Recollection came,
It wakens Gratitude's impetuous flame.
"For more than life," exclaims the trembling Maid,
"I stand indebted to thy generous aid."
'Cease, Fair-One, cease. -- well might this arm deserve
'That deadliest Palsies wither every nerve,
'Had it refused the aid to thee it gave,
'Or coward shunned the duty of the Brave*
'But let me now, since danger haunts delay,
'To safer scenes my lovely Charge convey.
'Deep in yon vale, ERNESTO's modest Dome
'Lifts its fair head -- my tranquil, happy home!
'There every welcome shall her steps receive,
'That hospitable affluence knows to give.'
This said, her trembling Form, with anxious haste,
My twining arms on her light Courser placed;
Then, as emerging from the darkling Wood,
Along the moon-bright Dales we slowly rode
Surprised his gorgeous trappings I behold,
The net of Silver, and the thongs of gold;
While all the vestments of the lovely Dame
The pride of elevated rank proclaim.
The costly lace had golden leaves impressed
Light on the borders of the pearly vest;
Her taper waist the broider'd zone entwines,
Clasped by a Gem, the boast of Orient Mines;
On as we pass, on every side it gleams,
And to the Moon, in trembling luster; streams*
Dear EMMA, that the splendid garb could gain,
Even in an hour exempt from grief and pain
The attentive gaze, proves my devoted heart
From eyes so bright met no resistless dart;
For when the Maid Love's potent cestus wears,
The jealous God no glance dividual bears.
Ah! in those haleyon days, a mind at ease
Empowered slight things to interest, and to please;
That Memory should their faded tints relume,
When Deprivation's deepest shadows gloom,
Perhaps seems strange? -- but now, that full, and free,
My long imprisoned Spirit springs to thee,
Friend of my Love? to whom I dare reveal
All that my Soul has felt, or knows to feel,
So softened seem the asperities of Grief,
My Senses anchor on the kind relief;
With trivial circumstance retard the pen,
Ever languid Solitude shall lower again
For oh! when lost in woes of lengthened date,
Alone we have leaned upon the thorn of Fate,
Seeking, at last, the kind assuasive rest,
Found only on Compassion's downy breast,
We feel, as soft the imparted Sorrows flow,
Almost discharged the bitterness of Woe.
Within ERNESTO's hospitable gates,
Alarmed at my delay, Affection waits;
But as I lead the bright distinguished Maid,
Explain her danger, and my prosperous aid,
The dear inhabitants around her move,
With deep respect, kind care, and generous love.
And soon we learn, our peaceful walls contain
The splendid Heiress of a vast Domain,
EMIRA, she, whose wealth, and charms inspire,
The crowd of titled YOUTH with amorous fire;
While Rumor paints her, 'midst the obsequious Train,
Though frolic, insolent; though haughty, vain.
But to our eyes, these wild and wandering fires
Are screen'd by rising Hopes, and gay Desires;
For still, the parting Hour with care delayed
EMIRA loiters in ERNESTO's shade;
The noontide Sun, the Evening's softer ray
Beholds the Fair-One through the Valley stray;
Thus. on EUGENIO's Sister.
MATILDA leaning, fondly own
Her Heart's new choice in Passion's warmest tone.
"Lost to the World, for ever could I dwell
"In the dear precincts of this sylvan Cell;
"Renounce each vain, though once adored delight.
"That dissipates the Day, or gilds the Night;
"That can each gay seducing art employ,
"To flatter Beauty, and inspirit Joy."
Thus the proud Maid, of all her scorn disarmed,
By strange, and partial preference strongly charmed,
Feels, a new Eden steal upon the bowers,
And chides with sighs the swiftly fleeting Hours:
Still at the cheerful Board, or as she roves
Along the Plain, or lingers in the Groves,
Each glowing wish, from newborn Passion sprung,
Each soft disorder, on her eyelids hung,
At my approach reveal, though much in vain,
What words are little wanted to explain,
Vain! had I never seen the matchless grace,
The touching sweetness of LOUISA's face;
Where from each feature beams, or mildly plays,
Refined intelligence, with varying rays;
Where native dignity, with air serene,
Conscious, not arrogant, adorns her mein;
While from those eyes, in scorn of artful wiles,
The tender spotless Soul looks out, and smiles. --
These unbeheld, yet still EMIRA's charms
Had never allured EUGENIO to her arms;
For oh! the fever'd languor of the eye,
The restless blushes, the voluptuous sigh,
The impatient haughtiness, but half concealed,
The rage of pleasure in each glance revealed,
Though in youth's fervid hours, perchance they fire
The kindling ardours of unawed Desire,
Quench, while the transient flames their force impart,
The torch of Passion, ever it reach the Heart.
'Twas thus the youthful Ithacan surveyed
The Goddess Nymph, beneath her magic Shade;
While Eucharis' mild beauties foiled the sway
Of charms, that decked the Daughter of the Day;
By Love protected, when the Princely Boy
Beheld the Dame her wonted lures employ;
Saw her fine Form, by all the Graces dressed,
The glowing purple of the floating vest,
And on her blooming cheek the tresses bright,
That played in wavy wreaths of golden light,
Or on her snowy bosom, shining fell,
Like a warm Sunbeam on a Lilly's bell.
Not more EMIRA's charms my Soul engage,
The fair Calypso of a sensual age;
And then licentious Beauty less, the stores
That splendid Fortune on EMMIKA pours;
Or the proud boast of lineal Blood, allied
To Rank, and Power, could wake that senseless Pride,
Which quenches the soft warmth that Love inspires,
And lights the nuptial torch with rayless fires.
To save the Fair-One from the thorny smart
Of hopeless Passion, rankling in her heart,
I urge my gentle Sisters to reveal
All my charmed senses for LOUISA feel;
The worth, the graces, which around her wait,
And all the smiling prospect of our fate.
EMIRA listens with impassioned scorn,
Of wounded Pride, and rival Anger born.
Unwish'd unwelcome, as the theme arose,
Her clouded cheek in deep suffusion glows,
Proudly exclaiming, -- "Can EUGENIO prove
"Cold, and obdurate to my lavish Love?
"Has Beauty's magic zone my bosom bound,
"Does Rank exalt me, and has Fortune crowned,
"That faint attractions in a Village Maid
"Should shield the Passions which these eyes invade?
"Impossible! -- but oh? thy lips impart
"The sting of jealousy, that goads my heart.
"MATILDA, all my waking dreams divine
"Thy charming Brother shall at length be mine*
"This grovelling flame was but ordained to prove
"Thy Friend's wished triumph at the shrine of Love,
"And by comparison of brighter charms,
"To light EUGENIO to EMIRA's arms."
Thus, while self-flatt'ring Pride her mind assures,
The artful Fair-One spreads her varied lures;
Sometimes, with archness laughing in her eyes,
Hangs on my arm, and ridicules my sighs;
And often with coyer tenderness appears,
While Love's warm glances steal through shining tears;
Now, with arched brow, and supercilious stare,
Affects the empress -- dignity of air;
And now, as reasoning with a wayward Heart,
In trances, broken by the frequent start,
With pausing step she wanders through the Grove,
A female Proteus in the wiles of Love!
To muse at leisure on my lovely Maid,
And woo her image in the lonely Glade,
Where no EMIRA by the rigid laws
Politeness dictates, my attention draws,
Far in the Wilds I wander through the Day,
And to a lowly Cot at midnight stray;
There taste the sweetness of that deep repose,
Which from applauding Conscience gently flows,
When Health, and Hope their downy pinions spread,
And scatter roses on the youthful bed.
Light with the Dawn disperse my tender dreams*
And now the Sun looks golden on the streams? --
O Morn! the last for me that gaily rose,
On Memory's tablet still thy beauty glows.
Charmed, as I wandered through the dewy Vale,
And drank the spirit of the Mountain-gale,
How little did my unconscious heart divine,
The joys thou gav'st should never again be mine!
On as I roved along the winding Glades,
A Youth in haste the sylvan Copse pervades!
Says, his commission instantly recalls
My devious step to the paternal walls.
Upon the rustic countenance appears
A fixed solemnity, that wakes my fears. --
"Oh! is all well?" -- with breathless haste I cry,
"Thy Friends are well," -- his faltering lips reply;
Then dread, lest sad intelligence invade
The precious quiet of my native Shade,
Sickens my heart; -- and swiftly as I go,
From my pale lip disordered accents flow;
Each moment, for LOUISA's Life, arise
Prayers, that implore the mercies of the Skies.
And now my quick, unequal steps are led,
A Day of gladness where they used to spread,
But ah! no silver tones EUGENIO call!
No bounding foot-step meets me in the hall!
Suspense, with all its heavy heart-ach, teems,
And palpable the solemn stillness seems!
So, when returning from the well-faught plain,
As near thy Castle-walls thou led'st thy Train,
O See the admired scotch fragment, HARDIKNUTE, in Percy's collection of
ancient poetry.
Hardiknute! such pangs as these oppressed,
In Hope's warm hour, thy brave and veteran breast.
Along the midnight glooms, that thick impend,
While howls the Storm, the beating Rains descend,
Thou see no Guard upon thy turrets height,
Whose streaming torches used to gild the night!
Black, as a mourning weed, they silent stand,
And daunt the stoutest heart in Scotia's Land!
Appalled, like him. I felt the stillness dire;
Eager to learn -- not daring to enquire,
As one transfixed, a few dread minutes wait,
While silent Horror shrouds impending Fate!
My Father entered -- with a cheek how pale!
And oh! that look! -- it told an awful tale!
'Twas mournful! -- supplicating! -- "Heavenly Powers!
"In that dim gaze how deep an anguish lowers!
"LOUISA! lives she?" -- dreading the reply,
My Soul hung trembling in my straining eye.
"My Son, the sweet LOUISA lives, -- and knows,
"I hope, the peace that Innocence bestows;
"Oh! may it long be here is! -- but now remains
"A task for me, replete with sharpest pains!
"EUGENIO! -- Penury's dire blasts assail,
"And Hope is frozen in the bitter gale!
"Yes, -- BELMOR has deceived my boundless trust,
To Friendship treacherous, and to Faith unjust!
"Unhappy Hour, when Confidence entire
"Lured me to follow that misleading fire,
"Those gay commercial visions, false and vain,
"The glittering meteors of his artful brain!
"Too well he knew no genuine light they gave,
"And now they sink in Ruin's whelming wave!
"Oh! great, and numberless the Ills, that spread
"Their mingled horrors round this aged head!
"The pang of seeing thy sweet Sisters, born
"To fairest hopes, from ease, and affluence torn!
"Exposed to all those guileful snares, that wait
"The beauteous Indigent's disastrous fate!
"Ills, whose bare dread a Father's bosom tears,
"And blends with agony his anxious cares.
"Thy dearer Mother!" -- Here he turned his head
And pausing wept; -- at length resuming, said,
"These hovering woes, that over our house impend,
"Thou, my dear Son, ever their dread weight descend,
"Thou can avert! -- but oh' at what a price!
"Persuasion shall not urge -- nor prayers entice.
"Two hours ever thy return, EMIRA found
"Thy Sisters eyes in streaming torrents drowned;
"Learned, from their trembling lips, the cruel Cause,
"Which the dark cloud of consternation draws
"Wide over my Roof -- that yesterday surveyed,
"Domestic Comfort's fair, and favorite shade.
"We know that Fortune on EMIRA pours
"Her golden treasures in unstinted showers. --
"EUGENIO' -- she stands ready to replace
"Thy Father's comforts on a lasting base!
"Rescue his falling fame' -- the numbers save,
"Whose hopes in his destruction find a grave;
"And light, while Woe's dark cloud her wealth removes,
"Joy's living spark in many an eye he loves!
"But at the price -- Great God! -- thy Father's fears
"Shrink from the sound, and whelm it with his tears!
"By sharp Distress at last to name it driven! --
"Thy hand to her, -- even at the ALTAR given! --
"Alas! the impossibility even now
"Glooms in the grief, the horror of thy brow! --
"Oh! for myself -- I could not with to gain
"Exemption from the sharpest earthly pain,
"By banishing each hope, his love had won*
"From the kind, duteous bosom of my Son!
"But for their dearer sakes who fall with me,
"Perhaps I dare -- to hope even this from thee.
"Thou know, when Peace, and Plenty's jocund Powers
"Hung their ripe clusters round our blooming bowers,
"The joys that Love, not those which Wealth impart,
"Formed the warm wish for thee, that filled my heart;
"But now -- EUGENIO listen! -- could thou bear
"LOUISA's breast this weight of woes should share!
"Would thou the blossoms of her youth transplant
"Into the blasting soil of worldly Want?
"Whose pangs, though never her soft complaints reveal,
"She will not therefore less severely feel,
"Since when a breast, far dearer than our own,
"Receives the darts by that fell Demon thrown,
"Fast wasting health, and spirits broke, will prove,
"Far from extracted, they are barb'd by Love."
"Here sighs, that seemed to shake his frame, betrayed
"How deep he felt the sorrows he portrayed;
"But yet, though still his heart with anguish bled,
"Failed speech recovering soon, again he said,
"It is not much my waining Life's remains
"Should shortened sink by Penury's cruel pains;
"Ah! rather could I bear their utmost strife,
"Than wish to quench the torch that gilds thy Life,
"Sweet Possibility! which yet appears,
"Borne on the eventful flight of days, and years,
"Whose chance propitious might each bar remove
"Or Industry restore the joys of Love;
"Though sharp the consciousness, that BELMOR's art
"Must to my Fame the deadliest wound impart!
"For oh' the Many, who their ruin owe
"To my rash hopes unhappy overthrow,
"Will, without scruple, think by fraud I won
"The confidence, which drew that ruin on.
"Hard to resign, for such opprobrious blame,
"The honest triumph of a spotless name;
"Even when the Heart dares to itself appeal
"From blind Injustice, and misguided Zeal
"Their torrent Reason strives to stem in vain,
"Truth pleads to Air, if Prejudice arraign.
"Her censures daily level with the Base
"A thousand names, no actual crimes disgrace;
"Pull down the same a Life of virtue built,
"And stamp imprudence with the brand of Guilt,
"And yet, I would not ask my Child to save
"From Pains, that seem to rob of rest the Grave,
"My hapless Spirit, at a price so great,
"To shade perchance with deeper gloom his fate!
"But oh! my loved EUGENIO! -- from a woe,
"Sharper, I trust, than thou will ever know,
"My Sense recoils! -- my Wife! my dearest Wife!
"The sweet Companion of my lengthened Life!
"Thy Mother! -- for whose peace, and health, my cares,
"My fond attention, my incessant prayers
"The Day, and Night beheld! -- Oh! must I see
"That dear One pine in helpless Poverty?
"While pale, and trembling, sinks the vital flame,
"Must her soft, delicate, and feeble Frame,
"To Charity's donation, cold, and scant,
"Owe its exemption from extremest want?
"Can I see this -- unable to obtain
"Those common comforts the Laborious gain,
"Conscious, my own infatuated rashness shed
"This bitter phial on her gentle head?
"My Son! -- my Son!" -- Then, on my shoulder thrown,
"Heart-smote, and wan, he heaved the bitter groan.
Oh! while these arms their honored Burden pressed,
As his sunk cheek felt cold upon my breast,
What words can point the deep distress I bore,
What Horror smote me, nnd what Anguish tore?
And could I see the Author of my birth
Thus bend in woe the hoary head to Earth;
Round his weak Frame such whelming anguish rage,
Nor snatch from the dread storm his failing age,
Because my hopes -- my Peace -- perhaps my Life
Were doomed to perish in the filial strife?
Impossible! -- the softer Passions fly,
Nor dare dissolve great Nature's primal tie.
"Be comforted, my Father! -- could thy Son,
"Oh! could he live to see thee thus undone,
"Endure the knowledge, that when Fortune gave
"The power to save thee, he refused to save?
"The torturing self-reproach must rend his brain,
"And wake to phrenzy the remorseful pain.
"But O my Love! -- yet pardon me! -- I go
"Alone to stem conflicting tides of woe!
"I go, to teach my Soul her arduous task,
"And gain by prayer the fortitude I ask!"
So saying, to his couch my Sire I led,
And smoothed the pillow for his languid head.
With softer tears his trembling eye balls shone,
And faltering accents ardent blessed his Son.
Then up the Mountain's steep, and craggy side,
With step precipitate, I wildly stride;
Now stung with tortures of the last despair;
Now sunk in grief; -- now energiz'd by prayer,
Nor yet in vain the heart rending efforts prove,
Warm Duty rises over bleeding Love!
The struggle past! -- my peace! -- my freedom given!
Thy anchor Hope, on shoreless oceans driven!
What then to justice or to Love remained,
But to restore the heart, my vows had gained;
Wrench from LOUISA's breast its cherished bone,
And nobly the last sacrifice sustain?
Renounce her pity, and inspire her hate,
In tenfold gloom, though it involve my fate?
Teach her to think the Villain-baseness mine,
That bows the venal Heart at Fortune's shrine?
So might the indignant sense of bartered Truth
Quench the disastrous Passion of her Youth;
Now doomed to darken every hope, that cheers,
With shining promises, the rising years!
Had I the dread necessity explained,
That with resistless force my freedom chained;
Tore the sweet bands, by virtuous Passion tied,
And stamped our Constancy with Paricide;
Then had LOUISA fortified my Soul,
And urged my lingering step to Duty's goal;
Had given me back, with Pity's softest brow,
Of Love so ruinous, the ill-starr'd vow;
A self-devoted Excile fled my arms,
But sorrowing fled them, and resigned her charms
To fruitless Constancy, and fond Regret;
Ordained to mourn -- unable to forget;
That pine in Solitude the live-long Day,
Feed on the heart, and steal the life away.
LOUISA's pity had my sufferings found,
Somewhat it sure had balm'd the embosom'd wound;
But since even her dear sympathy was weak,
Of Fate's dread shaft the envenomed point to break,
I strove to avert the slow-consuming pain,
And for the conflict, armed her with disdain;
That cruel conflict, which the Passions prove,
Ever high-soul'd Scorn subdues a rooted Love.
Still, to my Being's latest verge, be borne
The dear, mistaken Maid's unceasing scorn;
Oh! be they borne in this unhappy breast,
To the cold bed of its eternal rest!
Near seems that rest my wearied Life desires,
Pain breaks her springs, and Sickness dims her fires,
And Hope, who comes in sable vest arrayed,
Points, with pale hand, to Death's eternal shade!
But yet, -- when past the expiatory doom,
When Misery's shafts lie broken on my tomb,
The coloring gaze, sweet EMMA, kindly bend
On the dear bosom of thy beauteous Friend;
If thou shall mark, that cold contempt sustains
That seat of softness from assaulting Pains;
That no dim tears her cheek's warm roses pale,
No sighs of anguish swell the lonely gale,
Whose murmers over the grass-green sod shall rise,
Where, cold, and peaceful, lost EUGENIO lies,
Then, that thou name me not, my Soul implores,
Nor snatch the peace away Disdain restores;
The cruel change thy tenderness will fear,
Of pride's stern frown, for Pity's heart-wrung tear.
Oh! shall one selfish wish her peace invade
That Love so agoniz'd may sooth my shade?
No, EMMA, no! -- my Soul for here is shall wait,
Till soft it pass the everlasting Gate;
From those dear Eyes till Light Divine shall clear,
The film, that mortal Chance had darkened there;
Fond Memory's deep reproach for aye remove,
And pleading Seraphs reunite our Love!
But Oh! should Pity, with intrusive sway,
Range her sad Images in dire array.
And to LOUISA's mental sight disclose
The bed of Death -- the agonizing throes;
Oh! should she think she sees in struggles rise
That breath, which waked for her the fondest sighs!
Those Eyes, whose softness shall no more betray,
Throw their last glances on the final day! --
In such an hour, should Scorn, and Anger prove
Weak to dispel the grief-awaken'd Love;
Sorrowing for him, who could her hopes deceive,
Should she, in bitterness of Spirit, grieve
For Guilt, which, unextenuated, fears
Barriers to last beyond this Vale of tears;
Then, EMMA, then, the sad events relate,
That wove the sable texture of our fate.
My dear LOUISA! -- pardon him, who strove
By means, so seeming harsh, to quench thy Love*
Hard was the task, that kindness to resign,
Which my torn bosom could demand of thine;
Esteem, that might have borne eternal date,
Since placed, by Virtue, past the reach of Fate;
That blessed compassion, my sad lot had won,
A Wretch by Fortune, not by Crimes undone;
These to renounce! -- with my own hand to throw
In her dark chalice added dregs of woe;
To pierce my soul with voluntary pains,
A Suicide on Comfort's last remains,
Was hard! -- but generous Love the effort made,
Thy quiet asked; -- I trembled -- and obeyed!
When to that purer World our Souls are borne,
Where every veil from every breast is torn,
My willing Spirit, in the Realms above,
Shall meet thee searching Eye of wounded Love;
To thee LOUISA my past woes impart,
And hear thy Angel Voice ABSOLVE MY HEART.
END OF THE SECOND EPISTLE.
THIRD EPISTLE. LOUISA TO EMMA, WRITTEN THE DAY AFTER SHE HAD RECEIVED FROM
HER, EUGENIO's EXCULPATING LETTER.
APRIL 21st, 1781.
O! Thou soft Hope, that once with luster gay
Did gild the hours of Love's delicious day,
What, though no more the lively joy remains,
That traced thy light step, over those earthly plains,
Yet, piercing now Despair's incumbant shroud,
Soft Hope, thou lockest from you parting cloud;
And my loved EMMA's hand the vision shows,
That smiles my struggling Spirit to repose!
Bright in EUGENIO'S vindicated truth,
That vision lights anew my drooping youth;
For, in perspective beauteous, it displays
A long eternity of blissful days;
Of all those sacred joys our Souls shall prove
"When pleading Seraphs reunite our love."
It Is true, EUGENIO, through Life's thorny way,
In far divided path's our steps shall stray;
It is not given us, when rude blasts assail,
And pale Misfortune breaths the bitter gale,
It is not given, to temper, and assuage,
Each for the other's breast, its cruel rage;
Nor mutually to feel the cheering rays,
When Health, and Joy inspirit Summer-days.
Our little barks, their flattering Port in view,
Fate, on Life's billowy surge, asunder threw;
Friend of my soul! we are not doomed to gain
The sunny Isle of that tempestuous Main;
But O! thy Virtue, long imagined lost,
Has felt the wreck of no insiduous coast!
The deep and troubled floods, it knew to brave!
It rises buoyant on the stormy waves!
Vain are those Storms, by which its course is driven.
Since sure, though distant, is the port of Heaven.
My dear EUGENIO, the dread Voice will prove
Indulgent to the frail excess of Love,
Which to such sad extremes would blindly run,
Lavish of health, and sickening at the Sun;
Since, while an unaccusing Conscience threw
The eternal portals open to my view,
My Spirit sunk, a prey to fond Despair,
And coldly viewed that Heaven thou could not share;
Soiled with its griefs those amaranthine flowers,
Inwove by Faith in bright Religion's bowers
Angel of Mercy! thou will gently breathe
Exhaling sighs upon that sullied wreath;
And the dim stains of my impatient tears,
Impassioned yearnings, and desponding fears,
Shall vanish, as chill dews that Morning throws,
By summer Winds are wasted from the Rose!
O! how o'er-joyed my dazzled sight surveyed
These words, in EMMA's characters portrayed,
"He is not guilty!" -- rapid from my tongue
They, in exulting iteration, sprung.
"Read, dear LOUISA, and acquit the Heart,
"That bears in all thy griefs so large a Part."
Think thou, my EMMA, thy benign command
Met an unwilling eye, a tardy hand?
Heaven! with what force these hands these eyes, impelled
Sieze the known characters, so long withheld!
While every letter, ever examined, wears
The uninjur'd magic of the vanished years!
Disordered sounds my lips pronounce, nor spare
The useless question to the unconscious air.
"Does that dear hand yet trace LOUISA's name?
"Will it his Love, his Innocence proclaim?
"How may this be? -- yet EMMA says it is so."
Then did I read, and weep, and throb* and glow,
Approve, absolve, admire, and smile, and sigh,
Till pensive Peace shone mildly in my eye;
Back with that lost esteem, my heart deplored,
The Wanderer came, with half her rights restored.
So luckless CLAIRMONT's thorny path she smooths;
So his sharp sense of many an ill she sooths;
One dear recovered Hope his grief beguiles,
And, 'midst the wreck of all the rest, he smiles.
EMMA, thou knew'st him well; -- the jocund Youth,
Ambition's Votary, yet of taintless truth.
Lured by the wealth the glowing Andes hide,
He longed to pass the interposing tide.
Remembrance sees him on the Sea-beach stand,
His fair CLARISSA weeping on his hand.
With anxious smiles her varying cheek he dries,
And talks of prosperous Winds, and favoring Skies.
Clear was the Sky, and gentle were the Gales,
And wide and waving streamed the snowy Sails;
While, tossing the green sea-weed over, and over,
Crept the hushed billow on the shelly shore;
Soft as the autumnal breeze among the sheaves,
Or gently rustling in the fallen leaves;
And rolling in blue Light the watery Way
With frosted silver seemed bedropt, and gay.
Impatient CLAIRMONT led his pensive Bride,
As slow she scaled the Vessel's stately side.
So smooth the Seas, the tall Bark seemed to sleep,
While her gay Pennants tinged the glassy Deep.
Day after day mild Breezes freshen'd round,
Till Skies alone the mighty Waters bound.
But now, far distant from Britannia's shore,
Round craggy Steeps where angry billows roar,
Rise the dark Wind! -- and borne on flagging wing,
On the bent mast the screaming Fulmars cling!
And soon the fury of the wildest Storm
That could the vexed and swelling Sea deform,
With Death's shrill voice, shrieks in the rending shrouds,
As whirls the dizzy Vessel to the clouds;
Or prone shoots swiftly to the billowy vale,
While the wet Seaman's altering cheek is pale.
The Whirling Ship the guiding Rudder mocks,
It strikes! -- it bursts upon the bulging Rocks!
Unhappy CLAIRMONT, who had vainly tried
In the tossed Boat to place his beauteous Bride,
Sees, on the deck pale, trembling, as she stood,
The sudden Billow dash her to the Flood;
While on the riven plank himself conveyed,
With only Life, beneath a stranger Shade,
Wakes from the briny trance, and wakes to know,
Of Fate's dark stores, the most accomplished Woe!
Borne by a friendly Sail, that now he stands
A ruined Wanderer on his native Lands,
Seems little; -- Love's severer tortures reign
With force despotic, and exclusive pain.
This borne, from month to month, and year to yea
At length, unlooked for tidings charm his ear;
His fair CLARISA lives! -- on coasts unknown
Wrecked, like himself, unfriended and alone,
By destiny severe, an hapless Slave,
Pines on rude shores beyond the Atlantic wave;
Yet, that she lives is so unhoped a joy! --
Before it doubt, and Fear, and Anguish fly!
She lives! -- and Fate may aid the ardent strife,
And to his arms restore his long-lost Wife?
In that dear hope pale Misery's tortures cease,
And agony subsides almost to peace.
So I -- but to EUGENIO swift impart
How full the pardon of LOUISA's heart*
O! let him not repent he wrung her Mind
With fruitless woes, so generously desin'd;
Since, though they failed her freedom to restore,
Had she not long been destined to deplore
His Mind, as cruel, venal, false, and vain --
O but for that! -- the Soul -- distracting pain,
Whose unexpected flight makes other grief
Sink in the softness of that blessed relief,
Her Spirit never, as now, had risen above
The poignant woes of disappointed Love;
Of that disunion here, stern Fate commands,
Who throws her edicts with such ruthless hands!
But greater Ills removed the less remain
Shorn of their pointed stings, and lost their bane.
Say, in LOUISA's breast no longer glow
The inward fires of life consuming Woe;
Distant alike from Pain's incumbant gloom,
And sprightly Pleasure's gaily-kindling bloom,
The vital Powers effuse a softer flame,
And with serener beams pervade her Frame.
O bid him live! -- live, to fulfill each part
That makes such awful claims upon his heart;
And as an Husband, as a Father, prove
Virtuous, and great, as in his filial love!
I too shall live! -- Health's warmer currents break,
Yet unconfirm'd, upon my faded cheek,
Last Night their honied dews prolonged my rest,
As soft they sprung within my cherished breast.
O Night! the first exempt from wildest throes
Of fever'd Pain, that chased the short repose,
Since my EUGENIO's seeming coldness shove,
Alas! how much in vain! to quench my Love.
Yes, I shall live to expiate by a Mind
Bowed to its fate, and cheerfully resigned,
The dangerous rashness, which my peace had thrown
On human chance, and errors not my own.
Here, to my favorite bower, at rising Day,
With tranquil step, I bent my purposed way;
For here I first beheld the graceful Youth,
And here he promised everlasting truth;
And here to thee, my Friend, I used to grieve,
When Life could charm no more, nor Hope deceive;
And here, my long afflicted Spirit, freed
From that barb'd shaft, on which it wont to bleed,
Now bids its softened feelings gently flow,
To her, who draws the deadly sting of Woe.
Once more these eyes, with smiles of pleasure hail
The vernal beauties of my native Vale;
The plenteous dews, that in the early ray
Gem the light leaf, and tremble on the spray;
The fresh cool gales, that undulating pass,
With shadowy sweep, along the bending grass. --
Now throw the shrubs and trees the lengthened shade
On the smooth turf distinct! -- and now they fade,
As sinks the Sun, behind a cloud withdrawn,
That late unveiled shone yellow on the lawn.
Soft over the Vale, from this my favorite seat,
Serene I mark the vagrant beauties fleet;
In different lights the changing features trace,
Catch the bright form, and paint the shadowy grace.
Where the light Ash, and browner Oak extend,
And high in Air their mingled branches bend,
The mossy bank, beneath their trembling bowers,
Arises, fragrant with uncultur'd flowers,
That stoop the sweet head over the latent spring,
And bear the pendant Bees, that humming cling.
Just gleams the Fount -- for, curving over its brink,
The lengthened grass the shining Waters drink;
Their green arms half its glassy beauties hide,
As from beneath them steals the wandering tide,
And down the Valley careless winds away,
While in its streams the glancing Sunbeams play.
But where the Greenwood-hill, with arching shade,
Opes the light Vista up the winding Glade,
I see a venerable Form descend;
His slow steps falter as they hither bend.
Soft lifts the breeze the locks of silver gray,
And gentlest meanings his mild looks convey;
Stranger, whoever thou art, thy faded face
And bending form have many a touching grace.
He stops! -- I hasten to explore the cause
Of that fixed gaze! -- of that impassioned pause!
END OF THE THIRD EPISTLE.
NOTE, UPON reading this third Epistle to a Friend, he observed, that perhaps a
comparison of LOUISA's own situation with the harder fate of her Lover, and her
tender pity for the inevitable miseries of such a union, might have been
acceptable in the place of the episode of CLAIRMONT, and the description of the
bower; but it should be considered, that LOUISA wrote under the immediate
impression of her extacy to find EUGENIO guiltless; that her Mind was not
sober'd enough for reflection. To have investigated the unhappy lot of her
Lover must have been a melancholy employment. Eased of an oppressive weight of
misery, her exhilarated spirits admit not, so early, any painful ideas. She
does not discriminate, she felicitates her destiny. Her sympathy in the fate of
her Friends grows more lively -- she recollects the situation of CLAIRMONT --
Joy is naturally loquacious, and she is gratified in relating his story to her
EMMA. She awakens with new vivacity to the impressions of pleasure, which her
Mind was accustomed to receive from scenic objects. The propensity to dwell on
them prevailed even in the hours of her unhappiness. It is an habit which
compares and assimilates the smiling, or the gloomy views of Nature to the
internal feelings, and is common to people of a lively imagination. In the
exultation of her Heart to find her Lover yet estimable, LOUISA speeds to the
bower, so impressed with his image. Its beauties strike her more forcibly than
ever, and in this frame of Mind she naturally feels delight in painting them.

FOURTH EPISTLE, LOUISA TO EMMA
APRIL 25th, 1781.
OH! my loved EMMA, I have much to tell,
Since last I sent thee an abrupt farewell;
But be the chain of those events regained,
That led my steps, where awful Horrors reigned,
And through their gloom, the light of Joy revealed,
By Fate's eclipsing hand so long concealed.
Rising impatient from the mossy seat,
with asking eyes, the stranger Guest I meet;
He clasps my hand! -- Oh! in that look benign,
What rays of love, and angel-pity shine!
Sweet cordial confidence my bosom cheers,
Yet thrilling start the soft spontaneous tears.
'What chance, or generous impulse, may I bless,
'Thrice gentle Stranger, for this kind address;
'That thus thou visitest this lonely Grove,
'And gazest on me with paternal love?'
"Ah! sweet LOUISA," the mild Form replies,
His words slow mingling with the rising sighs,
"Behold in me, the source of all the woes,
"That paled on thy fair cheek the early rose,
"But thou art generous, and wilt kindly shed
"Forgiveness on ERNESTO's aged head;
"Yes, thou will much allow to sad extremes,
"For round thee, as a Light, Compassion beams"
With pleased surprise my beating heart expands;
My swifter tears fall copious on his hands;
My trembling knee involuntary bends
For deepest reverence with my transport blends.
'O Heaven! art thou that Being, so revered,
'In happier days to my charmed Soul endeared,
'Which often, unconscious of thy Form, surveyed
'Thy worth, by filial tenderness displayed.
'All, all is known! -- no selfish murmers rise,
'Nor groans arraign the mandate of the skies;
'Nobly EUGENIO their high call obeyed! --
'Oh! what a Wretch were I, should I upbraid,
'Because the exalted Youth, whose heart I won,
Deserves the blessing, to be born thy Son!
'Some vagrant drops may fall, some rebel sighs,
"Perchance, to our divided Loves arise;
'But vanished now is Misery's ruthless smart,
'Tho' sad, not wretched, my devoted Heart;
'And oh! since poor LOUISA thus obtains
'Thy generous love, thy soothing pity gains'
'On them each fond regret shall sink to rest,
'Nor Memory wisper, how she once was blessed.'
"Honored LOUISA! fair angelic Maid,
"With every blessing be thy worth repaid!
"But time flies rapidly! -- the least delay
"Ill suits the important message I convey;
"An hapless Penitent adjures thee fly,
"To pardon, and receive her dying sigh;
"O come with me, LOUISA! -- at thy gates,
"Lo! in the Glen, the expecting chariot waits!"
Silent -- astonished -- trembling -- faint -- and pale,
My hurried step he hastened to the Vale;
And soon, as seated by his side I rode,
Thus, from his lip, EMIRA's story slow'd.
'When to the Altar my unhappy Son
'Led the gay Bride, whom all unsought he won,
'Pensive his eye, and serious was his air;
'Tho', with attentive, and respectful care,
'He strove to hide the sorrows of his Soul,
'But could not often their bursting sigh control,
'Bright, and adorned, as came the highborn Maid,
'In every lavish elegance arrayed.
'Yet often I saw, that inauspicious Morn,
'From smothered consciousness, the transient scorn
'Cast lurid flames at times, amid the joy
'That glowed voluptuous in her ardent eye,
'When she perceived, no ray of fond desire
'Met her warm glance, or authorized its fire;
'saw deep-felt anguish in her Bridegroom prove
'The power supreme of violated Love;
'And often his notice, courteous, yet constrained,
'Eager she sought; receiving it, disdained;
'And still each day increased the vain chagrin,
'And waked new fallies of malicious spleen;
'The pensive homage of a wounded Mind,
'Tho' grateful, sad, and, without ardor, kind,
'Seem'd to reproach those eyes, as powerless grown,
'Whose glance, she deemed, might make the World her own.
'Unjust EMIRA! that could hope to gain
'Love's glowing homage from an Heart in pain;
'Thou should have soothed the involuntary smart,
'And with his friendship satisfied thy heart;
'Thus sweet, and gentle, thou had quickly won
'That grateful tribute from my generous Son;
'But well he knew, thy vain ill-govern'd Mind,
'Nor soft compassion knew, nor love refined;
'So ungrateful saw thy wasted hours
'Resign'd to Dissipation's restless powers;
'Yet wished those powers a kind relief might prove
'To the pained sense of disappointed Love;
'And sometimes hoped, the strong maternal claims
'Might lead her light desires to softer aims,
'When ^^eet Cherub-Daughter blessed her arms,
'Whose features promised all her Mother's charms;
'But no maternal tenderness she shares,
'The gay EMIRA scorns its gentle cares.
'And when to Pleasures, frivolous and vain,
'He saw succeed, a mad licentious train;
'Play, ruinously high, and dark Intrigue
'Prompt the wild wish, and form the baneful league,
'How often has he adjur'd her to reflect,
'What priceless peace her wild pursuits neglect!
'On me propitious Heaven the power bestowed
'To cancel the vast debt my fortunes owed
'To proud EMIRA, -- for my lucky Sails
'Return'd, rich freighted, from Hispania's vales;
'Those Sails, whose venture rash, and long delay,
'With all a bankrupt's misery crossed my way.
'Now many a smiling Chance combined to raise,
'Above the level of my fairest days,
'That Wealth, whose dreadful and impending fall
'In one wide ruin had involved us all,
'But that EMIRA, in that fateful hour,
'Snatch'd my devoted credit from its power;
'And duteous, noble dear EUGENIO stood,
'A youthful Victim to his Father's good.
'Yet when I saw, that mean unfeeling Pride
'Rul'd the vain bosom of the Worthless Bride,
'My Soul rejoiced, with interest to repay
'The heavy debt of that disastrous day;
'For what idea can more painful rise,
'Than much to owe, where owing we despise?
'One scene, alas! my heart can never forget,
'Nor memory paint it without keen regret
'That in the female breast, so formed to prove
'The sweet refinements of maternal Love,
'Disdain, and guilty Pleasure, should control,
'And to its yearnings indurate the Soul.
'Consummate from her toilette's anxious task,
'EMIRA, hastening to the midnight Mask,
'Th' Apartment entered, where EUGENIO stood,
'And near me leaned, in deeply musing mood.
'My folding arms their rosy Infant pressed
'To the fond throbings of a Grandfire's breast
'She, with the tones of petulant reproach,
'And neck averted, called her tardy coach.
'I marked EUGENIO's disapproving sigh,
'As the licentious vestment caught his eye;
'The lofty turban, from whose surface raised,
'Glitter'd the silver plume, the diamond blazed;
'The snowy veil, in soft disorder thrown,
'The bosom, rising from the loosened zone,
'And limbs, by golden muslin ill concealed,
'Whose clinging folds their perfect form revealed.
'With heartfelt pain the injured Husband saw
'The Fair thus scorn Decorum's guardian law;
'Saw all that decent dress, that modest pride,
'Which doubles every charm it seeks to hide,"
'Once the bright Dame of Britain's loveliest boast,
'In the Seraglio's wanton Inmate lost'
'Seizing her struggling hand EUGENIO tries
'To warn the fair Devoted, ever she flies,
'Where Infamy in silent ambush strays
'Amidst the antic Throng, the midnight blaze.
'Oh! is it thus, he said, a wedded Dame
'Lights the loose Prosligate's disgraceful flame?
'If against an Husband's claim thy heart is seared,
'By Heaven established, and by Man revered,
'To that, if thy high Spirit scorns to bend,
'Yet, O EMIRA' hear me as thy Friend!
'Snatch thy bright youth, and all its countless charms.
'From a dread ambush of o'er-whelming harms,
'Whose Demon-tribe, some evils shall impart,
'To reach and wring the most obdurate heart!
'How will that haughty, that aspiring Mind,
'Which claims the incessant homage of Mankind;
'Sees to those Graces, flattering Crowds avow,
'Proud Rank unbend, and rival Beauty bow;
'How will it bear to change this soft respect,
'For studied insolence, and rude neglect?
'The nod familiar of the Coxcomb Throng?
'Thy name the theme of their lascivious song;
'And from the high-bred Dames, that now excite,
'And share the revels of thy dangerous night,
'Who, when Detection's livid spots arise,
'Will studious shun, affecting to despise;
'Canst thou the unbending knee's cold insult bear,
'Their smile of malice, and their vacant stare?
'Shafts, which wronged Virtue only can sustain,
'And rise superior to the unjust disdain."
'Thus while he poured, to check this rash career,
'The startling questions on her wounded ear,
'Frowning she strove to disengage her hand,
'And fly the just reproach, the firm demand;
'While sullen brows, and slashes of disdain,
'Too plainly proved the awful challenge vain.
'Then striving, from a softer cause, to impart
'The virtuous wish to her misguided heart,
'A Father's fondness melting in his look,
'From my embrace the smiling Babe he took;
'Exclaiming, as in all its touching charms
'He gave it to her half-unwilling arms;'
'Alas! EMIRA, shall this infant live
'To feel the grief that consciousness must give,
'When a dishonored Mother's deep disgrace
'Pours the pained crimson over the youthful face?
'Or, lost to Virtue, thy example plead
'For the light manners, the licentious deed?
'Forbid it Heaven! -- O smile my Child, and lure,
'To the maternal transports, soft, and pure,
'That lovely bosom! -- let thy opening bloom
'Charm my EMIRA, ever she yet consume,
'In guilty Pleasure's false and baneful flames,
'A Wife's fair faith -- a Mother's tender claims!
'Oh! may she bid thee live to breathe her name
'Without the pause of fear, the blush of shame!"
'She sighed, and clasped the Infant to her breast,
'And milder looks the yielding Heart confessed;
'Then, as its eyes to here is are raised the while
'With all the pathos of the unconscious smile,
'Two crystal drops, that Natur'es influence speak,
'Steal from her lids, and wander down her cheek;
'Those stranger tear's, by that sweet thrill beguiled,
'Fall on the forehead of her beauteous Child.
'Pleas'd the maternal tribute to survey,
'EUGENIO kissed the lucid drops away.
'Earnest on him the Fair-One's moistened eyes
'Turn! -- and some rays benign of soft surprise
'Meet his kind gaze -- but ah! the transient dawn
'Of virtuous feeling, instant is withdrawn;
'And those mild beams, that Beauty best adorn,
'Sink in the clouds of recollected Scorn.
'Her arms extending, with imperious air,
'The smiling Babe again to my fond care
'Coldly she gives; -- and giving it exclaims,'
-- "Go little Wretch! -- of tender mutual flames
"Thou were not born! -- then why should I embrace,
"And live for thee, whose birth is my disgrace?"
'Now to her Husband, with contemptuous smiles,
'She bends -- and thus his guardian-care reviles.'
-- "LOUISA's Lover has a right to claim
"The stern protection of EMIRA's fame!
"Whose wealth, whose rank, whose youth, and far-famed charms,
"So madly given to thy incensate arms,
"Are weak to chase the despicable pains,
"That load thy heart, and ice thy torpid veins;
"Even now my Soul that mean regret espies
"Pale on thy cheek, and languid in thine eyes!
"For me, thy needless apprehension spare!
"My peace, my fame, abjure EUGENIO's care!
"And in my bosom female Pride shall prove
"An happier guard, than my weak, wasted love!
"Farewell Insensible! -- enjoy thy grief!
"Seek in inglorious shades, and sighs, relief
"For the hard doom relentless Fate ordained,
"Thy splendid fortunes to EMIRA's chained! --
"She goes to join, too great of Soul to mourn,
"The Circles she was destined to adorn,
"Till, seizing on her heart with demon-hold,
"Passion insane that Destiny controlled!"
'And thus the Fair, that one short minute saw
'Obey the sacred force of Nature's law;
'Now to its dictates more obdurate grown,
'To Danger's paths with double zest is flown.
'Then to the sameness of the Opera Throng,
'Where vocal tricks sustain the insipid song;
'Where, round the Dancer, echoing plaudits sound
'At each indecent and distorted bound,
'Each odious gesture that usurps the place
'Of easy Elegance and genuine Grace;
'To the pained hope, the secret dread presage,
'Th' ignoble triumph, and the smothered rage
'Of fatal Play; -- the Ball's fatiguing task,
'And the loose revel of the wanton mask;
'To these succeed the appointed guilty hour,
'That vests the Libertine with boundless power;
'Whose darling hope consists not in the joy
'He scarce has wished, and that shall instant cloy,
'But in the triumph his mean pride has won,
'When, public as the Air, and Noonday Sun,
'The dup'd unhappy Fair-One's crimes shall throw
'New fancied glories round the Boaster's brow.
'Behold EMIRA, lost to faith, and shame,
'Quench the last spark of her long faded fame
'For him, whose gay attentions to secure,
'Rash Beauty spreads the self-ensnaring lure;
'That haughty Lord, licentious, false, and vain,
'Whose grovelling heart, nor rank, nor charms obtain:
'A swarthy Opera Dancer triumphs there,
'And foils the attractions of the highborn Fair;
'For her he wears the abject, lasting chains;
'To her, of Fashion's drudgery complains,
'When in feigned transports veiling cold distaste,
'With dames of Quality his moments waste;
'Waste, to support his consequence, and prove
'His sway resistless in the realms of Love;
'While by her venal arts himself enslaved,
'Poor from her squandering, by her humors braved,
'He hugs the bonds, round which, to grace their power,
'Nor Youth, nor Beauty twine one blooming flower.
'On him EMIRA her unvalued charms,
'Scarce asked, bestows, to wake the wished alarms
'Of Sister beauties, and enjoy their pain,
'Their dangerous spleen, and rivalry insane.
'Too well the haughty Dames avenge the smart
'Her short-lived triumph cost their swelling heart,
'As her false Lover, with abandoned pride,
'Reveals the guilt, which Honor bids him hide!
'Nor tamely had an injured Husband borne
'Of her connubial faith this lavish scorn,
'But that his own remembered coldness brought
'Some palliation to his generous thought
'For guilty Beauty, in these sensual times,
'Where foreign fashions lead to foreign crimes;
'Then, that her wealth, when Fortune's storm arose,
'Saved his loved Parents from impending woes!
'Oh! 'twas a thought that would no mark allow
'Of just resentment for her broken vow,
'Save, that he leaves the violated bed,
'Where Peace no gentle poppy ever had shed,
'And studiously each day avoids the Dame,
'Who stains his honor with her bleeding fame.
'By Duty urged, by Friendship warned in vain,
'As gay EMIRA drives with loosened rein,
'Proud Dissipation's wearying labyrinths prove
'The bane of Health, as the disgrace of Love.
' 'Midst the light Throngs that crowd the garish Mart,
'Consuming Fever hurls her fiery dart;
'Deep in EMIRA's breast behold it stand'
'And Life's warm current shrink beneath the Brand!
' It Is now she wakens to the painful sense
'Of deep contrition for her past offense;
'And now, alas! her dying eyes survey
'The Form of guilty Pleasure pass away;
'Drop the gay mask, and throw the ghastly smile
'Back on the baffled Victim of her guile.
'Hapless EMIRA on her dying bed
'Shrinks from the Phantom with convulsive dread;
'While conscience roused, her former guilt recalls,
'And with EUGENIO's wrongs her heart appalls.
'Unfelt till this sad hour, the strong control
'Of genuine fondness rushes on her Soul!
'But with her native violence it reigns,
'Aids the Disease, and stimulates its pains.
'Her Husband's name, in tones of strange affright,
'Eager she breathes, nor bears him from her sight.
'In vain her calmness gently he entreats,
'The generous pardon vainly he repeats;
'For, starting from her couch, she still demands
'Pardon afresh, and wildly wrings his hands.
'You too, LOUISA, she invokes, to sign
'Her Passport blessed to Mercy's healing shrine.'
"0 dear ERNESTO," the shrill accents cry,
"If you have pity to LOUISA fly;
"Sweet, injured Excellence! would she impart
"Her pardon to this self-accusing Heart,
" 'Twould cheer my Spirit, hovering on its flight
"To the dark confines of ETERNAL NIGHT."
'She said -- and dear LOUISA will bestow
'Th' adjur'd forgiveness on repentant woe;
'Will feel its sufferings all her wrongs atone,
'And in EMIRA's pangs forget her own,'
ERNESTO ceased -- for Pity's throbs oppressed
With tender force his venerable breast.
Through the remaining way our mutual sighs,
From awe-struck thought, in solemn silence rise.
Shuddering we now draw near the house of Death,
And find yet stays the intermitting breath.
What agitated dread my bosom tears,
When pausing we ascend the silent stairs! --
As we approach the slowly opening door! --
As my pained Senses, horror-chill'd, explore
The dim Apartment, where the lessened light
Gives the pale Sufferer to my fearful sight!
The matchless grace of that consummate Frame
Withering beneath the Fever's scorching flame.
Outstrech'd and wan, with laboring breath she lies,
Closing in palsied lids her quivering eyes.
EUGENIO's hand locked in her clasping hands,
As hushed and mournful by her couch he stands! --
Horror, and Pity mingled traces flung,
Which over his Form, like wintry shadows, hung;
Yet on my entrance in that dreary Room,
A gleam of Joy darts through their awful gloom!
Oh! what a moment! -- my EUGENIO's face! --
Alas! -- how faded its once glowing grace!
Past hours of woe on his pale cheek I read,
In eyes whose beams, like waining stars, recede!
Faintly the sound of that known voice I hear,
"Oh my LOUISA!" scarce it meets my ear,
Lest the imperfect slumber should be found
Chased by the checked involuntary sound.
But clear the senses of the Dying seem
Like the expiring taper's flashing beam.
Scarce audibly though breathed LOUISA's name
EMIRA hears, and her enfeebled Frame,
With sudden powerless effort, strives to raise;
But, sinking back, her eyes, in eager gaze,
Are fixed on mine, -- what anguish in their beams!
O conscious Guilt! how dreadful thy extremes!
The chill numb hands, whence deadly dews had broke,
Snatched from her Lord's, when starting she awoke,
Now, as they seem unable to extend,
Softly I take, as over her couch I bend;
She turns away, oppressed by thought severe,
And steeps her pillow in the bitter tear.
Alas! be calm! be comforted! I cried,
"Do you too pardon?" -- shrilly she replied,
Bending again on me that burning ray,
Whose heat no contrite waters could allay.
"Then, dear LOUISA, peaceful shall I die,
"Since hallowed thus my last -- remorseful sigh;
"But Oh! it is dread -- when Memory displays
"The guilt-stain'd retrospect of vanished days!
"The secret -- selfish joy -- which hailed the blow,
"That laid ERNESTO's prosperous fortunes low;
"Severed those hands -- whose glowing hearts were joined,
"The sacred union of the kindred Mind. --
"Heaven reunites them! -- and the Wretch removes,
"That impious rose between their plighted Loves;
"Who not content to blast their sweet increase,
"And arm -- EUGENIO's Virtue -- against his Peace,
"Added" -- But now, from feebleness, or shame,
A deadly faintness sickens through her Frame.
Reviving shortly -- "I would fain," she cries.
"Ever everlasting darkness close these eyes,
"Entreat of that kind Spirit -- sweet, and mild,
"Its future -- generous goodness -- to my Child.
"Love her, LOUISA -- love her -- I implore,
"When lost EMIRA -- wounds thy peace no more!
"Oh! gently foster in her opening Youth,
"The seeds of Virtue -- Honor -- Faith -- and truth,
"For thy EUGENIO's sake! -- who gave her birth,
"And gave -- I trust -- the temper of his worth?
"And When -- on his loved knees -- my Infant climbs,
"Adjure him -- to forget her Mother's crimes!
"I know thou will! -- I feel thy heart expand,
"In the dear pressure -- of that gentle hand.
"O ye wronged pair! in the last awful Morn,
"When my stained Soul at the eternal Bourn
"Shall trembling stand -- her final doom to hear,
"She less shall dread -- to meet the injured there!
"Congenial Mercy -- she may hope to prove,
"From the offended Powers -- of Truth -- and Love!"
While yet these interrupted accents hung,
Faint on the rigid lip, and faltering tongue,
The stiffening spasm, the suffocating breath,
Gave dread presage of near approaching Death' --
Now roll the eyes in fierce and restless gaze!
Now on their wildness steals the ghastly glaze!
Till over her Form the shadowy horrors spread
The dim suffusion that involves the DEAD.
Thus Wealth, and Rank, and all their gorgeous Train,
The Proud that madden, and ensnare the Vain;
Youth's frolic grace, and Beauty's radiant bloom,
Sink, in the dreary silence of the Tomb;
But oh! rejoice with me, that Hope's blessed beam
Threw over the dark Abyss one trembling gleam!
For thy LOUISA -- Words can ill impart
How dear the comforts eddying round her heart!
How soft the Joy, by Sorrow's shading hand
Touched into charms more exquisitely bland!
Or paint EUGENIO's transports as they rise,
More sweet for generous Pity's mingled sighs;
Sweet above all, from the exulting pride
Of self-approving Virtue, strongly tried.
Applauding CONSCIENCE, yes! to thee it is given,
To inspire a Joy, that antedates our Heaven!
Thus, on Moriah's consecrated height,
Flowed the obedient Patriarch's fond delight,
When over the filial breast, his faith to seal,
On high had gleam'd the sacrificing Steel;
Thus flowed, when at the Voice, divinely mild,
His raptured hands unbound his only Child!
O come, my EMMA! -- yet thou never have seen
Embodied Virtue in EUGENIO's Mein;
Grace, grandeur, truth, and tenderness combined,
The liberal effluence of the polished Mind!
And for more generous pleasures than we prove,
The bliss surveying of the Friends we love,
Sure we must wait, til Angels shall impart
Their own perfection to the expanded Heart!
Haste then to share our blessings, as they glow
Through the receding shades of heaviest woe! --
As Spring's fair morn, with calm, and dewy light,
Breaks through the weary, long, and stormy Night,
So now, as through the Vale of Life we stray,
The STAR of JOY relumes, and leads us on our way
FINIS.
FEW HAPPY MATCHES.
I.
SAY, mighty Love, and teach my Song,
To whom my sweetest Joys belong,
And who the Happy Pairs
Whose yielding Hearts, and joining Hands,
Find Blessings twisted with their Bands,
To soften all their Cares.
II.
Not the wild Herd of Nymphs and Swains
That thoughtless fly into the Chains,
As custom leads the Way:
If their be Bliss without Design,
Ivies and Oaks may grow and twine,
And be as blessed as they.
III.
Not fordid Souls of earthly Mould
Who drawn by Kindred Charms of Gold
To dull Embraces move:
So two rich Mountains of Peru
May rush to wealthy Marriage too.
And make a World of Love.
IV.
Not the mad Tribe that Hell inspires
With wanton Flames; those raging Fires
The purer Bliss destroy:
On Aetna's Top let Furies wed,
And Sheets of Lightning dress the Bed
TO improve the burning Joy.
V.
Nor the dull Pairs whose marble Forms
None of the melting Passions warms.
Can mingle Hearts and Hands:
Logs of green Wood that quench the Coals
Are married just like Stoic Souls,
With Osiers for their Bands.
VI.
Not Minds of melancholy Strain,
Still silent, or that still complain,
Can the dear Bondage bless:
As well may heavenly Consorts spring
From two old Lutes with never a String,
Or none besides the Bass.
VII.
Nor can the soft Enchantments hold
Two jarring Souls of angry Mould,
The Rugged and the Keen:
Sampson's young Foxes might as well
In Bonds of cheerful Wedlock dwell,
With Firebrands tied between.
VIII.
Nor let the cruel Fetters bind
A gentle to a Savage Mind;
For Love abhors the Sight
Loose the fierce Tiger from the Deer,
For Native Rage and native Fear
Rise and forbid Delight.
IX.
Two kindest Souls alone must meet,
It Is Friendship makes the Bond^^^ sweet,
And feeds their mutual Loves:
Bright Venus on her rolling Throne
Is drawn by gentless Birds alone,
And Cupids yoke the Doves.
PRINTING AND BOOK-BINDING, In their various Branches are neatly executed by
ABEL MORSE, in State Street, NEW HAVEN:
WHO HAS FOR SALE, Doc. Gordons History of the American War, Pikes Arithmetic,
Gib on the Covenants. Newton's Religious Letters, Scotts Lessons in Elocution,
History of Sanford and Merton, Esops Fables, Fables for the Ladies,
Paradice-Lost, Economy of Human Life, Fathers Legacy, Psalm Books, Watts and
Hart's Hymns, Spelling Books of different kinds, A great variety of Children's
Books, with, A large Assortment of Superfine imported Writing Paper, Account
Books of all kinds, Blank Books, and Blanks of every kind, A variety of Latin
Books, etc.


N. B. Country produce, or clean Cotton and Linen Rags are taken in payment for
any of the above Articles.


