TWO DISCOURSES. ON THE KEEPING OF THE COMMANDMENTS OF ZION's KING, THE ONLY
EVIDENCE OF LOVE TO HIM: AND, ANANIAS's REPREHENSION AND EXHORTATION TO SAUL.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY T. DOBSON AND T. LANG, IN SECOND STREET, BETWEEN
MARKET AND CHESTNUT STREET. M.DCC.LXXXVIII.

TO THE CHURCH OF CHRIST ASSEMBLING AT HAMSTERLY, DURHAM, THESE TWO DISCOURSES,
PUBLISHED AT HER REQUEST, ARE INSCRIBED, BY HER AFFECTIONATE BRETHREN, AND
DEVOTED SERVANTS, IN THE GOSPEL OF CHRIST,

C. WHITFIELD. I. SLAY.


PREFACE.
THE Authors of the ensuing Discourses think proper to apprise the world, that
their appearance is in compliance with the desires of those, to whom they could
deny nothing of this nature. And as they contain nothing injurious to those
whose concerns lie in peace and truth, they are the more readily prevailed upon
to comply with their request. How they may be received, they cannot say. They
have no reason, however, considering the prejudices of mankind, to expect that
they will meet with general reception; much less, with general approbation.
Should any be offended at their contents, they wish them to remember, that not
the persons, but the ERRORS and INIQUITIES of men, are exposed. The Author of
the former could have said much more upon the subject, but he forbore, (Jude
9.) for he is persuaded more is said than will be well received. -- The
substance of both Discourses is here exhibited. The Authors, however, think
themselves justified, in sometimes changing the phraseology, and adding an
illustrative sentence; though this is but sparingly done, as those who heard
them attentively will find. -- Should any find themselves stimulated to take
public notice of them, they need not expect the Authors to make any reply,
except they advance something new upon the subject: for they are persuaded,
that the objections to these doctrines, that have hitherto transpired, have
been sufficiently refuted by learned and judicious pens. Conscious of the
purest motives -- unawed by the fear of being accounted singular, and prompted
by a generous zeal for the honor of their GREAT REDEEMER and the interests of
his spiritual kingdom, -- they cheerfully commit these Discourses to the
inspection of the Public.

HAMSTERLY, Sept. 2, 1779.
THE KEEPING OF THE COMMANDMENTS OF ZION's KING, THE ONLY GENUINE EVIDENCE OF
LOVE TO HIM: A FAREWELL-SERMON, DELIVERED IN PLUMPTON CHAPEL, CUMBERLAND, UPON
RESIGNING THE PERPETUAL CURACY OF THAT PLACE, AUGUST 1, 1779. BY THE REV. I.
SLAY, MASTER OF THE GRAMMAR SCHOOL, SALKELDGATE.

Here is the patience of the Saints; here are they that keep the Commandments
of God, and the Faith of Jesus. REV. xiv. 12. Wherefore, if ye be dead with
Christ from the rudiments of the world; why, as though living in the world, are
ye subject to ordinances -- which are all to perish with the using, after the
commandments and doctrines of men? COL. ii. 20, 22. A SERMON, etc.
JOHN xiv. 15. If ye love Me, keep my Commandments.
"GOD is love." 1 John iv. 8.
From this inexhaustible fountain, through the sacred channel of Emmanuel's
mediation, are all the blessings of our salvation derived. And, "unto the place
from whence the rivers" of sovereign mercy "come, thither they return," Eccl.
i. 7.
in all pure affections and holy obedience to the commandments of Zion's King.
To keep his commandments, we are here informed, is the only evidence of our
having partaken of his grace. To give this evidence, whatever difficulties may
lie in the way, the least of his saints are required. And in the performance of
it, whatever may be their inward weakness, and how formidable so ever their
external foes, yet are they not to be discouraged. "The bruised reed he will
not break, and the smoking flax (...) not quench." Matt. xii. 20.
For, when he sends trying dispensations to his dear children, he is pleased to
favor them with grace to sustain the load. Yea, more, he takes them and all
their concerns upon his Divine shoulders. "The eternal God is thy refuge, and
underneath thee are the everlasting arms." Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 27.
He is pleased, from time to time, to smile upon them, and embraces them with
his mercy and goodness on every side. And thus, whilst the God of their
salvation causes his face to shine upon them, unbosoms himself to them, and
opens unto them the inexhaustible treasures of his grace, as their afflictions
abound, their consolations do much more abound. Forever blessed be his glorious
Name, he never leaves his people wholly comfortless.

And, O how ineffably delightful and reviving is it, to the truly gracious
soul, to hear the sounding of his bowels, mercies, and mavelous loving
kindness! -- Then, O then, the heart is pliant and flexible like melted wax,
and its language is, "Speak, Lord, for thy servant hears." "If ye love me,"
says Christ, "keep my commandments." The gracious soul replies, 'Lord, thou
know all things, thou know that I love thee, and being, by rich, free,
and sovereign grace, one of those redeemed by thy most precious blood, and
plucked as a brand out of the fire, I desire to be found amongst those who keep
the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus.'

The text I have selected upon this occasion, is the words of King Jesus, our
adorable Redeemer, which are a part of his divine, incomparable, and
unparalleled Farewell-Sermon to his beloved disciples. What a holy flame of
love must have glowed in the hearts of this select company, when they were
hanging upon their dear Redeemer's lips, and attending, with great eagerness,
to the gracious accents, which sweetly dropped from the mouth of Him, "who
spoke as never man spoke!" -- and that at a period too, when he was going to
leave, as to his bodily presence, this little tender flock of his.

The Lord Jesus, the glorious King, set upon the holy hill of Zion, foreseeing,
I apprehend, (for known unto God are all things from eternity) the various
corruptions and innovations which would obtain, or take place in future times,
embraces this opportunity of inculcating a careful and universal observation
of his loving commands upon his disciples, as the only evidence of love to his
sacred person, as the distinguishing characteristic of true discipleship: That
they being now peculiarly affected with an account of his departure, might come
from under his divine discourse, like a sheet from the press, with all the
stamps and lively impressions of the truths they heard, and the commands
enjoined them, deeply and indelibly engraven upon their hearts. And, doubtless,
all those who love the Lord Jesus, in sincerity, will keep all his
commandments, according to the measure, not of gifts, but of grace received;
for his "love constrains us." And love is a very powerful principle.

The words before us, naturally, resolve themselves into two branches: I. A
supposition, or hypothesis, -- "If ye love Me." II. A loving command, or kind
exhortation, -- "Keep my commandments."


Whilst we are further meditating upon these words, pronounced by the gracious
King of Zion, may we, under the kind and powerful influences of his blessed
Spirit, experience our too contracted hearts expanding abundantly, in love to
Christ; the breadth and length, and depth and height, of whose amazing love to
the children of Zion, surpass their utmost knowledge; that we may be filled
with all the fullness of God, and, having our hearts enlarged, may run the way
of his commandments.

I. A supposition, -- "If ye love me." We are not, I presume, to understand our
Redeemer, as questioning whether, or not, his Apostles loved him. This he well
knew. But he speaks hypothetically here, in order to put them, and others, who
consider themselves as his disciples, upon self-examination* that being assured
of this matter, they may be stimulated to observe his precepts.

In order to perceive how far we are interested in this matter, it will be
necessary to consider, who they are that love the Redeemer, and in what
respects he is loved by them, and appears lovely in their eyes.

FIRST. Concerning those who love the Redeemer. The Apostle declares, "If any
man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha." 1 Cor. xvi.
22.
What awful words are these! And yet, however strange the assertion may appear
to some, it is an undeniable truth, that there is not, naturally, a single
spark of true love to Jesus Christ, in any soul born in (...) ^orld. For, in
consequence of Adam's transgression (...) whom we all sinned," every one comes
into this vale of tears, carnal, yea wholly so: "I was shapen in iniquity, and
in sin did my mother conceive me:" Psalm. li. 5.
so that "every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart is evil, only evil,
and that continually." Now, "the carnal mind is enmity against God," yea,
enmity itself against the Lord, and against his Anointed. Romans viii. 7. (...)
being an abstract, noun, is very emphatic.
An awful picture this, indeed! and yet, whosoever thou art, that read or
hear these words, "Thou art (by nature) the very man."

How then, is any soul brought to love the Lord Jesus Christ? The Apostle
solves the question at once. "We love him," says the beloved disciple, "because
he first loved us." 1 John iv. 19.
He loved his chosen ones, from everlasting, with a free and sovereign love;
not on account of foreseen faith, holiness, or good works, -- for these are the
effects, and not the cause, of his love: He pitched his love on whom he
pleased, and these he loved, because he would Deuteronomy. vii. 7,8.
love them. Before the foundation of the world, Jesus, our Lord and our God,
"was rejoicing in the habitable parts of the earth, and his delights were with
the sons of men." And, in the fullness of time, according to covenant
transactions in the everlasting council of peace, "having made peace by the
blood of his cross," and slain the law-enmity thereby; at the set time to
favor his chosen, by his word and Spirit, he slays the natural enmity of their
minds, by manifesting his love to them, and shedding it abroad in their hearts,
by the Holy Ghost given unto them. Romans v. 10.
He wins them over to himself, by the power of divine grace. He overcomes them,
as one beautifully expresses it, 'by a sweet omnipotence and an omnipotent
sweetness,' and makes them willing to come unto him, in the day of his power.
He draws and attracts them, magnet-like, in heart and affections, to his
blessed Self. Then the language of the heart is, "Draw me, O lovely Jesus, and
we (the affections) will run after thee." This divine change taking place in
the soul, in regeneration, Christ, who, before, seemed to have no form, beauty,
or comeliness, why he should be desired, becomes now the supreme desire of his
people's souls. "As the heart pants after the water brooks" so their souls
pant after Christ, and his reviving and sweetly refreshing waters of life, joy
(...) ^solation. Christ is "the chiefest among ten thousand, (...) esteem, "and
altogether lovely" and amiable in their (...) yea, he is not only sweet and
desirable unto them, but before all sweetnesses and desirablenesses Cant. v.
16. H^ICCO MAMETTAKKIM; VECULLO MAHHAMADDIM. It is almost impossible to express
the original construction, and strength of signification. The nouns are plural
abstract ones, with the sign of comparison, and which I know not how to
translate more accurately than in this manner -- The mouth of Him is before
sweetnesses; and all of Him before desirablenesses!
whatever. Of such souls as these it may be truly said, "The darkness is past,
and the true light now shines. For God, who commanded the light to shine out
of darkness, has shined in their hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of
the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ." The "DAYSPRING from on high
has visited them," and they are made "light in the Lord."

Hence it appears, that they who love the Redeemer, are such as are born again,
called by divine grace, and captivated with his sacred excellencies. -- They
are the objects of his love, the purchase of his blood, and the workmanship of
his Spirit. -- We come now,

SECONDLY. To enquire, in what point of view, and under what considerations,
this glorious object of the saints' esteem, is so lovely in their eyes. And

1. They admire, love, and delight (...) his sacred person. Here they behold
majesty, greatness, (...) splendor, in the closest conjunction with the most
attra^^^^* beauty and engaging sweetness. "And we beheld his glory, the glory
as of the only begotten of the Fathe^^ full of grace and truth." John i. 14.


2. Nor are they less entertained with his endearing relations, his fragrant
and savoury names. They love and delight in (...) Head and Husband, Father,
Friend, and Brother, of (...) people, whose sacred names are, "Wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace." Isa.
ix. 6.


3. Nor can they think lightly of him in those important offices which he
sustains for them. They are sweetly delighted with him as their Surety and
Savior -- their Prophet, Priest, and King -- their Shepherd, Advocate, and
Kinsman -- Redeemer. Deuteronomy. xviii.


4. They consider him as exceedingly beautiful in the order and ordinances of
his gospel. The reading and preaching of his word, ^^^ing praises, baptism, and
the Lord's supper, being (...) ^^inistered according to his commands, afford
them a (...) prospect of their blessed Emmanuel. Upon him, in there ordinances,
they wait, with a single eye to the glory of God, and the profit and
edification of their souls. Nor are they disappointed: In all the order of his
house he makes his paths drop fatness. In the Lord's supper, more especially,
the King of saints "is held in the galleries." -- and gives occasion for each
of his saints to say. "He brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner
over me was love." -- Then, O then, it is, that "his love is better than wine,
-- that goes down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak"
of their own vileness and of his goodness; while their hearts "rejoice in him
with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. How amiable are thy tabernacles, O
Lord of hosts! They have seen thy goings, O God; even the goings of my God, my
King, in the sanctuary." Psalm. xxvii. -- lxxxiv. 1. -- lxviii. 24.


5. They love him in his people, and esteem his saints as "the excellent in the
earth, in whom is all their delight." Psalm. xvi. 8.
These they love, whether rich, or poor, by whatsoever character or
denomination they are distinguished amongst men, provided they appear to have
received the grace of God in truth, bear the image and superscription of King
Jesus, and manifest his life in their firm adherence to his cause and interest.

6. And if, in these respects, he is lovely and beloved now, how unspeakably
amiable will he be, "when we shall see him as he is," on Mount Zion above, --
bear a full resemblance to him, -- be arrayed in white robes (...) bear palms
in our hands, as a token of everlasting vic^^ (...) ^ere shall we tune our
golden harps to the sublimest (...), in convert with the blood-bought throng,
sing that new song, which none can learn but those that are redeemed from the
earth! When, oh! when shall we drop those mortal bodies, leave this vale of
tears, and go up and take possession, entering into the joy of the Lord, in
"whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for
evermore."

Lift up then, O ye disciples of the Lord, the gates of your hearts, and be ye
lifted up, O ye everlasting doors of the soul, and this King of Glory, with all
his beauteous train of gifts, graces, and inestimable blessings, shall enter
(...) are not straitened in him, but in yourselves. He (...) and attend unto
"the voice of my Beloved that (...) saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my
dove, my undefiled: for my head is filled with dew, and my looks with the drops
of the night. Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any man hear my voice,
and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with
me." Cant. v. 2. -- Rev. iii. 20.


Having laid before you a little of the loveliness of Jesus, in that point of
view, in which he is loved by his disciples, I may, with singular propriety,
adopt the language of Sheba's queen, when she had been entertained with the
wisdom of Israel's sapient king; Behold, the one half of his greatness, beauty,
and loveliness* has not been told you; for he exceeds, yea, infinitely
transcendeth, all that ever has, or ever can be said upon this
soul-transporting subject. -- We now proceed,

II. To consider the import of this sacred injunction, which is built upon the
hypothesis of love to Jesus Christ, "Keep my commandments."

FIRST. By commandments in this place, I presume, we are not to understand the
commandments of the ceremonial law. All these, which were typical of good
things to his people, he was then about to abolish, and effectually did, when
he died, "the just for the unjust," and put an end to them all, "for the
weakness and unprofitableness thereof."

Nor are the ten words, or commandments which God gave by Moses to the children
of Israel, commonly called the moral (...) intended. These are so holy, pure,
and perfect, (...) can keep them in this imperfect state, so as to obtain
^^^^fication by them before God. "There is not a just man upon earth, that
does good and sins not." And the awful language of this law to
transgressors is, "Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, that
are written in the book of the law, to do them. The soul that sins, it shall
die. The wages of sin is death." But believers are delivered from the law as a
covenant of works, having fled through divine grace to Christ, "who is the
end,"* the fulfilling end "of the law for righteousness to every one that
^^lieveth." Gal. iii. 10. Ezekiel. xviii. 4. Romans vi. ult.
Yet still this law of God, which is holy, (...) ^ood, is unto them an
everlasting rule of walk and (...); in which view of it they delight in it
after the inward man. "Do we then make void the law through faith? God forbid:
yea, we establish the law." Rom x. 4. iii. 23.
For, though they are delivered from the law as a covenant of works, yet are
they "not without law to God, but under the law to Christ," 1 Cor. ix. 21.
which is to be kept from a principle of love to God, and Christ, and with a
view to his glory.

But, by commandments here, we are more especially to understand the
commandments of Christ, in a particular sense, not in opposition to the moral
law, nor to the exclusion of it, but in distinction from it. These are such
commandments, ordinances and institutions, as King Jesus gave unto his
disciples, to be kept by them, and all that came after them. For, as the
Lawgiver in his church, he has appointed and ordained special and peculiar
ordinances, to be observed by her, such as the new commandment of loving one
another, baptism, the Lord's supper, and the laws of government in his kingdom.
Of these he speaks, in the commission to his apostles, in the following words:
"Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you; and so,
I am with you always, even unto the end of the world." Matthew. xxviii. 20.
Of these the apostle says, "This is the love of God, that we keep his
commandments; and his commandments are not grievous." For, in the language of
Solomon, "his ways are ways of pleasantness, and all his paths are peace."

SECONDLY. These commandments are to be kept. -- "Keep my commandments." This
im^^^^ (...) we are to hold them fast, to keep them doctrina^^ (...) them pure
from all Antichristian innovations and (...) whatever. The King of Zion foresaw
how his followers, his pretended followers, at least, would transgress his law,
and change or metamorphose his ordinances, and therefore he charges his
disciples to preserve them as to the mode, subjects, and form of
administration. And whoever will be at the pains to compare the scripture form
and subjects of baptism and the Lord's Supper, with those of some large
communities in the present day, will have reason to conclude, that, excepting
the name, there is very little likeness between them. Hence, in the very
midnight of Antichristian (...), the followers of the Lamb are distinguished
from (...) ^owers of the beast, by being "(...), the keepers of the
commandments of God and the faith of Jesus." Rev. xiv. 12.


Also, to keep the commandments includes an observance of them, or a practical
subjection to them. This is the end of keeping them doctrinally, and without
which, that will be of no avail. All the disciples of Jesus are to show their
love to him, by following him in all his holy appointments and institutions.
Nor are we to let any oppositions, persecutions, or secular considerations,
deter us from our duty in this respect. "He that takes not up his cross, and
follows after me, is not worthy of me. He that finds his life shall lose
it: and he that loses his life for my sake, shall find it." Luke ix, 23, 24.
Those who now lay claim to the character of his disciples, and practically
keep not his commandments, will find themselves dreadfully deceived, when they
shall hear the Redeemer declare, with a frowning aspect, and a voice of
thunder, "And why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say: Not
every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven. And then
will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work
iniquity." Luke vi. 46. Matthew. viii. 21, 23.


Having offered what appears to me to be the mind of the Lord, from these
words: -- I shall now proceed to give you some account of my reasons for
resigning my office in the church of England, and then conclude with my last
advice to you, from this place.

FIRST. A conscientious regard to the laws and ordinances of my precious
Redeemer, so expressly enjoined in the text, constrain me to resign the
exercise of that sacred office in the church of England, which I have, for some
time, sustained amongst you. But, as I would be sorry that any should think
that I am offended at the "gold, silver, and precious stones," found therein,
so I must beg leave to be explicit upon this subject.

NEGATIVELY, My reasons are not on account of her maintaining the following
important doctrines:

(1). (...) ^^rine of the ever-blessed Trinity. "In the unity of (...) head
there be Three Persons of one substance, power, and eternity; the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost," Art. I.
This I firmly believe, being contained in the sacred scriptures. "There are
Three that bear record in heaven; the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and
these Three are One." 1 John v. 7.
Nor

(2.) Because she assert the true divinity of the incarnate word. "The Son,
which is the word of the Father, is (...) Christ, very God and very Man." Art.
II.
Hear the language of unerring inspiration. "My Lord and my God. The Word was
made Flesh and dwelt among us. God was made manifest in Flesh. This is the true
God and eternal Life." John xx. 28. i. 14 iii. 16. 1 John v. 20.
Nor,

(3.) Because she maintains the Divinity of the Holy Ghost. "The Holy Ghost is
very and eternal God." Art. V.
-- What ^aith the scripture? "Why has Satan filled thine heart, to lie to the
Holy Ghost? Why have thou conceived this thing in thine heart? Thou have not
lied unto men, but unto God." Nor,

(4.) Because she embraces the doctrine of eternal predestination, personal
and immutable election to grace and glory. "Predestination to life is the
everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before ^^e foundations of the world were
laid) he has constantly decreed by his counsel, secret to us, to deliver from
curse and damnation, those whom he has chosen in Christ out of mankind, and to
bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation, as vessels made to honor." Art.
XVII.
And, whatever some may think, "The godly consideration of predestination, and
of our election in Christ, (...) full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable
comfort to godly persons." This, I apprehend, is fully supported by these
scriptures. "For whom God did foreknow, he also did predestinate, to be
conformed to the image of his Son; moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he
also called, and whom he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified,
them he also glorified." What gigantic prowess can break this golden chain?
Again, "God has chosen us in Christ, before the foundation of the world, that
we should be holy, and without blame before him in love, having predestined
us," etc. But we are chosen to salvation through (...) sanctification of the
spirit and belief of the truth," and (...) in no other way. Romans viii. 29, 30.
Ephesians. i. 4, 5. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 13.
Nor,

(5.) Because she asserts the doctrine of original sin. -- "Original, or
birth-sin, is the fault and corruption of the nature of every man, who
naturally is engendered of the offspring of Adam, whereby man is very far gone
from original righteousness, and is of his own nature inclined to evil." Art.
IX.
All this is proven by the sacred scripture. "Behold, says the man after God's
own heart, I was shapen in iniquity and in sin did my brother conceive, or warm
me. And were by nature the children of wrath, even as others." Psalm. li. 5.
Ephesians. ii. 3.
Nor

(6.) Because she holds the impotence of free will. -- "The condition of man,
after the fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot turn and prepare himself, etc."
Art. X.
This is also the doctrine of the bible: "Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or
the leopard his spots? We are born (again) not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God," his spirit and grace. "Of his own
will begat he us with the word of truth." Jer xiii. 23. John i. 13. Jam. i 18.
Nor,

(7.) Because she holds Christ's satisfaction. "Christ came to be the Lamb
without spot, who, by the sacrifice of himself, once made, should take away the
sins of the world, and sin, as St John says, was not in him." Art. XV.
And thus speak the oracles of God; "He who knew no sin was made sin (a
sin-bearer, or a sin-offering) for us, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him. He gave himself (...) a (substitutionary) ransom for all." 2
Cor. v. 21. 1 Timothy ii. 6.
Nor,

(8.)Because she embraces the heart-reviving doctrine of justification by
Christ's imputed righteousness, the comfort of which is enjoyed by the precious
faith of God's elect, God's free grace gift, being applied by the Spirit of
consolation, the glorifier of Jesus. "We are accounted righteous before God,
only for the merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by faith, and not for
our own works or deservings." Art. XI.
See Romans iv. throughout, where this doctrine is fully proved. Again; "This is
his name, whereby he shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness." Jer. xxiii.
5.
Nor,

(9.) Because she espouses the doctrine of effectual vocation by omnipotent
grace. "Wherefore they that be endowed with so excellent a benefit of God, be
called, according to (...) purpose by his Spirit, working in due season," Art.
XVII.
"Thy people," says the Father to Christ, " shall be willing in the day of thy
power. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me," Psalm. ^x. 3. John vi.
37.
or, be made to believe in me, to the salvation of their souls, Nor,

(10.) Because she holds the sanctifying agency and constant indwelling of the
Holy Ghost. "Godly persons, ^eel in themselves the working of the Spirit of
Christ mortifyng the works of the flesh, and their earthly members, and drawing
up their minds to high and heavenly things." Art. XVII.
And this is fully expressed and clearly maintained by the Apostle: "If any man
have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his. -- The Holy Ghost which
dwells in us." Romans viii. 9. 2 Timothy (...). 14.
Nor,

(11.) Because she regards good works. "Good works, which (...) the fruits of
faith, and follow after justification, -- do spring out necessarily of a true
and lively faith; insomuch, that by them a lively faith may be as evidently
known as a tree discerned by the fruit." Art. XIII.
This is the very doctrine of the scriptures: Let those "who have believed in
God, be careful to maintain good works. And let ours also learn to maintain
good works for necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful." Tit. iii. 8, 14.
Nor,

(12.) Because she embraces the comfortable doctrine of the saints'
perseverance in grace to eternal glory. "Godly persons, by God's mercy, attain
to everlasting felicity." Art. XVII.
-- The language of the Holy Ghost upon this subject is: -- "Who are kept, by
the power of God, through faith unto salvation," 1 Pet. i. 5.
"I give unto my sheep eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any pluck them out of my hand. John x. 28.
I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me." Jer.
xxxii. 40.


These precious truths recited, I call the gold, silver, and precious stones, I
have found in the church of England. -- And I declare, it is not on account of
these I resign my place therein.

POSITIVELY, Because there appears to me to be much "wood, hay, and stubble"
blended therewith; and, "What is the chaff to the wheat? says the Lord," Jer.
xxiii. 29.
-- More particularly, among those things which are the ^^^sons of my
resignation, the following are the principal:

1. The constitution, or establishment of the Church of England. She is
established by human laws -- has a visible human, secular head; her courts of
discipline are of a civil nature, in which almost all things are performed by
secular persons: Art. XXXVII. We find fault, justly enough, with the Papists,
about the Pope being visible head of the church; but, if churches must have a
visible head, is not an ecclesiastical person more proper than a secular one?
Learned Episcopalians can be very merry about Pope Joan being at the head of
the Romish community; but is there not a similar absurdity in placing a woman
at the head of the English community?
Whereas the churches in the New Testament were all constituted by voluntary
confederation, according to the laws of Christ -- owned no head upon earth, had
all discipline transacted within themselves 2 Cor. viii. 5. Ephesians. iv. 5. Matt.
xxiii. 8 -- 10.
-- and knew nothing of spiritual courts and their various officers.

2. The church of England is of a national form, distributed by the magistrate
into metropolitan, diocesan, and parochial, comprehending all the impious,
erroneous, and profane, within her bowels: On the contrary, the New Testament
churches were all of them congregational, or independent, including those only,
who, professing ^aith in the Lord Jesus, walked worthy of ^he gospel, and were
in the judgment of charity, saints and brethren in the Lord. Romans i. 1 Cor. i.
2. Cor. i etc.


(3.) The clergy of the church of England, are not only, in general, irregular
in their lives, What an awful, worthless, profane character, is a swearing
drunken, clergyman? And are there none such in the church of England? How dare
such persons attempt the instruction of others? "Thou, therefore, that teach
another, teach thou not thyself? -- But unto the wicked God says, What have
thou to do to declare of my statutes, or that thou should take my covenant in
thy mouth?"
but most of them erroneous in their doctrines; and instead of explaining the
scriptures, and preaching the doctrines they have subscribed and sworn to in
the articles, pelagianism, arianism, arminianism, and socinianism, or a little
refined heathenism, or dry morality, are the only subjects with which many
parishes are entertained. And what communion can be enjoyed with such?

4. The ordinance of baptism, as it is used in the Church of England, is wholly
unscriptural. For -- 1. Nothwithstanding the rubric enjoins dipping, according
to the scripture, yet sprinkling, or pouring, is now universally practiced. And
though in my ignorance I have done it, yet now I dare no longer declare in the
presence of a heart-searching, lie-avenging God, that "I baptize, i. e. dip, or
immerse thee, etc." when I am only sprinkling, or pouring from a basin, a few
drops of water upon the face. -- 2. After the most accurate investigation of
the New Testament, I can find neither command, precedent, nor certain
consequence for baptizing infants: in that sacred book, I find none but those
who professed repentance for sin and faith in Jesus Christ, were admitted to
this holy ordinance. -- 3. I cannot, in conscience, after the performance of
this work, declare, that "the child is regenerate and grafted into the body of
Christ's church, nor declare unto God, that it has pleased him "to regenerate
this infant with his Holy Spirit:" -- all which implies that it confers grace,
ex opere operato; i. e. from the work done.
a sentiment justly detested by all true protestant.

That this is the real meaning of these words appears from the rubric, wherein
we read, "It is certain by God's word, that children which are baptized, dying
before they commit actual sin, are undoubtedly saved," -- and in the catechism
the child is taught to say, "in baptism -- I was made a member of Christ, the
child of God, and an inheritor of the kingdom of Heaven." Baptism, and Catech.
For any thing I know, all infants, dying such, are saved; but it is not
baptism that saves, makes children of God, and heirs of the kingdom of
Heaven, but the grace of God, in our Lord Jesus Christ. -- 1. As to the
substitution of sponsors, or as they are profanely called, Godfathers and
Godmothers, to answer for the child, with all its Whoever seriously reflects
upon the feasting, drinking, dancing, and other Bacchanalian merriments so
common at many christenings, will be persuaded that this is not looked upon as
a Divine Ordinance among the episcogal clergy and their people. Are the pomps
and vanities of this wicked world, and the Devil and his works, and all the
sinful lusts of the flesh renounced, -- the articles of the Christian faith
believed, and God's holy will and commandments kept, by these christening
guests? If so, by whom are the first indulged -- the next disbelieved -- and
the last broken.
appendages, it has appeared to me an odd affair, ever since I was, in any
measure, acquainted with the holy scriptures. Not the least shadow of such a
thing is to be found there.

5. The ordinance of the Lord's Supper, as administered in this community, is
liable to similar objections. For, 1. The persons admitted to the communion,
are all the parish, who are required to communicate three times a year. Rubric,
end of the Common Service.
And it is notorious to all sober people, that the far greater part of these
are incapable of discerning the Lord's body, and have neither part nor lot in
this matter. And, suppose a minister should deny the communion to a common
drunkard, or a profane swearer, he would find himself in a perilous case. Are
there not some churches, at which many receive the communion, on Easter Day,
who will be drunk on the same day, and, perhaps quarrelling too, before they
arrive at home? -- Monstrum! borrendum!
-- 2. It appears to be a shameful profanation of this ordinance, to make it a
test of obedience in civil things, and the receiving of it an indispensable
qualification for holding places under the government. -- 3. As it is an
ordinance of a public nature, it seems quite wroung to administer it in
private, to the sick, after the popish manner, as if it were a viaticum, i. e.
a passport for Heaven. -- 4. As I embrace the doctrine of particular
redemption, I cannot, in conscience, declare concerning every individual, that
may be present at this ordinance, "the body of our Lord Jesus Christ -- was
given for thee," etc. -- "The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, was given for
thee," etc. since many may come here, who are wholly destitute of true faith,
as well as licentious in their lives.

6. In the churching of women, as it is called, there is no sufficient ground,
in the lives of many, to consider them as the servants of the Lord, in a solemn
address to the Almighty; nor can I see how bearing a child can constitute a
woman a proper subject for the Lord's Supper, as the rubric directs; Thank, of
wom. etc. and Rubric, in ult. -- Credat Judaeus apella. Non ego. HORACE.
since many who are serving diverse lusts and pleasures, and remain strangers to
God and the gospel of his Son, both bear children, and, out of a piece of
custom, come to return thanks hereupon.

7. Once more: In the burial of the dead, I cannot see that Christian charity
will admit believing ministers and people, with pure consciences, to call every
man or woman, our dear brother, or our dear sister; since it is notorious that
many who have lived the most abandoned lives, die without any appearance of
repentance. Nor can I think myself justified in saying any longer, of every
individual, "we commit his body to the ground, in sure and certain hope of the
resurrection to eternal life. We meekly beseech thee, O Father, to raise us
from a death of sin unto a life of righteousness, that when we shall depart
this life, we may rest in him 'as our hope is this our brother does;" since I
am fully assured that there will be a resurrection of the wicked to eternal
damnation, as well as of the righteous to everlasting life: and, though I should
suspend my judgment, as becomes us, upon the final state of the vilest sinner,
that dies without any evidence of repentance, yet it is certainly very daring
presumption to tell the Almighty, that we have sure and certain hope of his
being gone to glory.

There are many other grievances in the church of England: The whole service
book being only a translation of the old Mass book, with the grosser errors
expunged. "As for the service in the English Tongue, has manifest reasons for
it. And yet perchance seems to you a new service, and indeed is no other but
the old. The self same words in English which were in Latin, saving a few
things taken out, are found, that it had been a shame to have heard them in
English, as all they can judge, which list to report." Edw. VI. to the Devon.
Rib. in Fox's Martyr. Vol. II. p. 1189. col. 1 Edit. 1610.
That there is a wretched deficiency in ecclesiastical discipline is generally
acknowledged; Commun ^erv Address, in the beginning of it.
pluralities, non-residences, and all their attending evils, are so common as
to be no longer thought shameful: These, with many other things, I forbear to
mention, I shall leave to the consideration of those concerned in them. The
things I have noticed have long been the burden of my soul. The example of some
persons whom I highly venerated for a considerable time, prevailed upon me to
continue in my place; though in performing some parts of my duty, I have, with a
trembling heart, adopted the converted Syrian's prayer: "In this thing the Lord
pardon thy servant, when I bow down myself in the house of Rimmon, the Lord
pardon thy servant in this things." 2 Kings v. 18.
But when the case of Nadab and Abihu, who "offered strange fire before the
Lord, which he commanded them not," Lev. x. 1,2.
struck my mind, and that awful interrogation of the Almighty, "who has
required this at your hands?" Isa. i. 12.
reached my heart, I was made to tremble in the divine presence, and
immediately to resolve upon my resignation. No human precedents, however
venerable, will be sufficient to justify us, in what the Lord has not
commanded; for "every one of us shall give an account of himself to God." Romans
xiv. 12.
This being my real case, I am constrained to resign. And it is both with
pleasure and concern, that I now say: "My soul is escaped as a bird out of the
snare of the fowlers. The snare is broken, and I am escaped." As a clergyman of
the church of England, you will see my face no more, neither in this place, nor
elsewhere. Having given you my reasons for this resignation, I shall now,

SECONDLY. Take my last farewell of you. It affords me pleasure in this my
departure from you, that I can say, I take you to record this day, that I am
pure from the blood of all men. For I have not shunned to declare the whole
counsel of God, Acts xx. 26, 27.
as far as I have been led into the knowledge of it. I have given you all
warning from the mouth of the Lord; and therefore, remember, that if any of you
perish everlastingly, your blood will be upon your own heads. For I have
preached the gospel to every creature that came within the sound of my voice;
and, without courting the smiles, or dreading the frowns of any man, declared
in the language of my divine Master, "He that believes and is baptized, shall
be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned." Mark xvi. 16.
It would have given me pleasure to have seen these solemn truths more
regarded. However, they will be a swift witness against you another day. For,
if you live and die in your sins, if you still neglect the great salvation of
the gospel, you cannot escape the wrath and vengeance of the Almighty. -- "The
wicked," all the wicked, not even the carnal, proud, self-righteous professors
excepted, "shall be turned into hell, with all the people that forget God."
Psalm. ix. 17


A few words to the much despised followers of a once crucified, but now
exalted Jesus, shall now close the subject, and, therewith, all my
ministrations in the church of England.

Ye sons and daughters of the Lord Almighty, who are princes in disguise,
though, in the esteem of carnal men, you are the filth and off scouring of all!
my soul is troubled for you, not knowing into whose hands you may now fall;
whether into theirs, who will feed you with the sincere milk of the word, or
into theirs, who will "care for none of these things." Suffer, therefore, I
beseech you, the word of exhortation, from one who can truly say with the
apostle, that he is less than the least of all saints, and the chief of
sinners; but who, through free, rich, and sovereign grace, has obtained mercy to
be faithful.

1. Flee from sin, every sin, as from the face of a serpent; for, however sweet
it may appear in the enjoyment, nevertheless, afterward, it bi^eth like a
serpent, and stingeth like an adder. O what has God wrought for you and in you
according to the riches of his grace! What manner of persons, then, ought we to
be in all holy conversation and godliness.

2. Be ever coming unto Jesus, "in whom it has pleased the Father that all
fullness should dwell," that you may receive, out of his fullness, grace for
grace, abundance of grace, grace for every ^^ne of need, which is every moment.
Let it by your constant study, under the influence of the divine Spirit, to
live near unto him. Rest not in any duties whatsoever. "There is a way (of
external duties) that seems right unto a man, but (O how awful!) the end
thereof are the ways of death." Content not yourselves with ordinances, without
enjoying the spiritual and gracious presence of the God of ordinances. True
believers have real fellowship and sensible communion with the Father and his
Son Jesus Christ, at which golden seasons they rejoice with joy unspeakable and
full of glory. Be often viewing, by the eye of faith, our dear Lord grovelling
in Gethsemene and bleeding on mount Calvary, and your souls shall prosper.

3. Whatever it cost you, never part with these sacred truths, "knowing of whom
you received them," and that they contain the salvation of your souls. Never
yield up your faith, nor part with a good conscience, at any rate. "For we are
made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our confidence, steadfast
unto the end." If you should be called to it, rather than part with it, take
"joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in yourselves that ye have in
heaven a better and enduring substance." And never repine, though you be "poor
in this world," whilst you are but "rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom,"
-- and of such a glorious kingdom too!

4. Be much employed in prayer and reading the holy scriptures. Pray for
yourselves, for one another, and for me also. Pray frequently and fervently;
"for the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much." Read the
sacred scriptures with care and attention, accompanied with fervent prayer and
ardent supplication. Inexhaustible treasures of divine wisdom are contained in
them. "They are more to be desired than gold, yea, than much fine gold: sweeter
also than honey, or the honeycomb." Here are the many "exceedingly great and
precious promises, which in christ are all yea, and in him amen, unto the glory
of God," and the comfort and everlasting salvation of his people.

5. Keep the commandments of your dear Redeemer. -- Enquire into the nature of
his positive institutions baptism and the Lord's supper. Follow the word of God
in this matter -- judge impartially -- and act faithfully. Love one another
with a pure heart fervently. True brotherly love is of a distinguishing,
disinterested nature. None but the regenerated have the least spark of it And,
whoever is a subject of it, "is passed from death unto life." Abound in (...)
more and more, that the envious world may be constrained (...) say, "See how
these Christians love one another!" Watch over one another with circumspection,
sympathy, and tenderness. Forbear one another, and forgive one another, even as
God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. Let each esteem another better than
himself. Seek the peace and prosperity of the Lord's gospel Zion; "for they
shall prosper that love her." And consider the trials, temptations, tempers,
and dispositions of one another, that ye may provoke one another unto love and
good works.

6. And, lastly, be looking for and hastening unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. For, yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not
tarry. He shall come to be glorified in his saints, and admired in all them
that believe. This will bear you up in every moment of adversity. And it is
your Lord's will that you should be comforted, in all your tribulations, with
this glorious event, Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer, says
the FIRST and the LAST. "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a
crown of life," Rev. ii. 10.
-- eternal life, in the kingdom of glory!

And thus, with this glorious prospect in view, and with the testimony of a
good conscience, being sprinkled and purged by the blood of Jesus, I shall now
bid you all -- Farewell. May the Lord have mercy upon you, lead you into all
the truth as it is in Jesus, and give us a happy meeting before his awful
throne. Henceforward I am resolved, through divine grace, to go forth unto him
without the camp, bearing his reproach, choosing rather to suffer affliction
with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season;
esteeming the reproach of Christ (or for Christ) greater riches than all the
treasures and temporalities of the church of England. -- FARE YE WELL!

Now, unto Him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and
has made us kings and priests unto God and his Father; to Him be glory and
dominion, forever and ever. AMEN.

ANANIAS'S REPREHENSION AND EXHORTATION TO SAUL. A SERMON, DELIVERED AT THE
BAPTISM OF THE REVEREND I. SLAY. WHEREIN THE NATURE AND ENDS OF THAT ORDINANCE
ARE EXPLAINED; THE MOST POPULAR OBJECTIONS AGAINST SUBMISSION TO IT REFUTED;
AND THE DANGER AND FOLLY OF NEGLECTING IT EXPOSED. By C. WHITFIELD.

But the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves,
not being baptized of him. LUKE vii. 30. -- To them shall leave in charge
To teach all nations what of him they learned,
And his salvation, them who shall believe,
Baptizing in the profluent stream, the sign
Of washing them from guilt of sin to life
Pure. --
PAR. LOST. B. xii. 440, etc. A SERMON. etc.
ACTS xxii. 16. And, now, why tarriest thou? Arise, and be baptized, and wash
away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord.
THIS part of sacred history, from whence my text is taken, contains, the
famous defense of the great apostle of the Gentiles, in the presence, and with
the license of Claudius Lysius, commander in chief of the Roman band, who had
rescued him from the hands of a furious populace. In this noble speech, replete
with true eloquence, divine wisdom, and fervent piety, he informs the assembly
of his birth, education, and zealous attachment to the Jewish religion, and of
his cruel hatred, and virulent, persecution, in the days of his ignorance, of
the Christian, religion and the professors of it; how the glorious Redeemer
appeared unto him graciously, and converted him effectually unto himself. -- In
particular, he relates the blessed message with which Ananias was sent unto him
from the Lord, to comfort him in his great distress; which is concluded with
this expostulatory reprehension, and pathetic exhortation: "And, now, why
tarriest thou? Arise, and be baptized," etc.

What an amazing change is here! what an illustrious display of omnipotent
power, of everlasting love, and sovereign grace! -- Behold the young Pharisee,
who thought himself blameless in the sight of God, yet filled with pride,
involved in gross ignorance, and in a state o^ the vilest enmity and rebellion
against the Lord and his Anointed! Behold him dragging the saints to prison,
compelling them to blaspheme, and persecuting them, even unto death! Nay, what
shall I say, this young man's breast boils with such anger, and his soul is
filled with such indignation, that he even breathes out threatenings and
slaughter against the disciples of the Lord! All the blood that had been shed
in Jerusalem, was so far from satisfying his lust, that it only makes him
thirst after blood more greedily. His heart is meditating fresh slaughter, and
his feet run swiftly to shed blood. His throat is an open sepulcher. He spreads
devastation wherever he comes. Commissioned from the high priest, he resolves
to visit Damascus. In his journey, he is suffered to proceed until he comes
near the city. But, oh! amazing grace! this poor sinner is a chosen vessel!
Electing love now displays her stores! Emmanuel claims the purchase of his
blood! The shining majesty and powerful voice of Jesus surrounds him, awakens
him, quickens and confounds him! He is humbled for his sins, obtains mercy, and
is filled with the graces, comforts and gifts of the Holy Ghost? He is
qualified for the service of the church, and called unto it; that he may feed
her whom he so lately hated; watch over, plant and build, what he so lately
made havoc of, and with such fury destroyed! From such a singular pattern, or
example of mercy and grace, let us be encouraged to pray for the conversion of
the vilest and most bloody persecutors of the church of God. And, since he
obtained mercy, let the vilest sinner, the most abandoned profligate, and the
proudest Pharisee, being humbled for sin, be encouraged to hope in, to depend
upon, and wait for the mercy of the Lord. At the same time, let no licentious
professor, nor abandoned backslider presume, but remember, that what he did was
in ignorance and unbelief.

But to return unto my text. It naturally divides itself into two parts.

1. An expostulatory reprehension, for the delaying of baptism; Why tarriest
thou? which is aggravated by the present discovery of mercy: and now why
tarriest thou? when thou have been so highly favored of thy much-injured Lord,
who has laid thee under such obligations to love and obedience, by the
illustrious displays of superabounding grace in thy favor? Delays are always
dangerous in every line of life; most of all in religion, because of all other
things it is of the greatest moment; and most inexcusable in those, whose peace
and comfort is connected with obedience, and who are indebted unto the rich
grace and sovereign mercy of God, for the whole of their salvation.

2. An exhortation is subjoined to this reprehension, which requires an
immediate submission to the institutions of the Lord: arise, and be baptized.
Unto this he is encouraged from the blessings of purification and forgiveness,
that in a certain sense are connected with this holy ordinance, and frequently
enjoyed in it, and by it: and wash away thy sins. -- And, since the enjoyment
of the gracious presence of the Lord, in the blessings of his love, is to be
sought for, by fervent prayer, in his institutions, it is further added,
calling upon the name of the Lord. Which words not only express the duty of
prayer in baptism, but also the proper Deity of the Lord Jesus, whom we are
here directed to worship and adore.

In attempting a further improvement of this sacred passage, I propose to lay
before you: I. A brief account of the nature and ends of this institution. II.
The proper subjects of it; who without delay are exhorted to submit unto it.
III. The sense in which sin is washed away by it. IV. The devotion required in
it. V. The most popular objections, and their futility, for the delaying of it.
VI. The danger and folly of persisting in such a conduct.


I. The sacred institution referred to in my text, to which the apostle is
exhorted to submit, is baptism. In order to obtain just notions concerning it,
we must enquire more particularly,

FIRST. Into the true nature of it. And, as it is an ordinance of divine
revelation, we must confine our enquiries purely to that sacred volume. For,
from whence can we obtain just ideas of an institution, but from the records
which enjoin it, and explain the nature of it? From hence

1. We learn that it is a positive institution. I do not mean to trouble you
with the various distinctions that have been made between things, or duties,
which are distinguished into natural, moral, and positive. By a positive
institution, I mean, one that is confined to certain subjects. Not to any
particular nation, or race of men: but unto such persons of every kindred,
tongue, and people, as fall under the character of those whom John the Baptist,
Christ and his apostles, baptized. They preached the word unto all; they
exhorted all men to repent and believe the gospel; -- to worship adore, and
call upon the true God, and to attend unto every branch of moral worship: but
never admitted any persons unto this ordinance, until they received the word;
at least professed so to do. They were careful to inform the persons, who
desired to be admitted unto this ordinance, that, 'if they believed with all
their hearts, they might'. -- Acts viii.

2. This institution is of divine original. The first administrator of this
ordinance, informs us, that he was sent or commissioned from God to baptize.
John i. 33.
I scarce need to remind you, into what a dilemma "the chief priests and elders
of the people" were involved, when they were interrogated by our Divine
Savior, concerning the original of John's baptism. -- "If we shall say from
Heaven," say they in their reasoning amongst themselves, "He will say unto us,
Why did ye not then believe him? But if we shall say of men, we fear the
people: for all hold John as a prophet." -- These people, you see, wanted to be
consistent with their former principles and conduct. -- They could not deny in
their hearts the divine original of John's baptism: but then they well foresaw
what a weighty objection to their unbelief would arise, if they publicly
admitted the truth. On the other hand, their consciences would have allowed
them to have assigned its origin to human invention; but the fear of popular
clamor constrained them. -- They, therefore, impiously answer, "We cannot
tell." Matt. xxii. 23 -- 27.
This answer, it must be owned, was entirely consistent with their preceding
conduct. But it is an awful thing to be consistent in a course of sin, of
pride, unbelief, hypocrisy, and falsehood, as these people were. But if the
baptism of John was from heaven, from whence was the baptism of Jesus? -- From
heaven also, without all doubt; though "Jesus himself baptized not, but his
disciples," John iv. 2.
who received their authority from their divine Master. And, when he renewed
their commission, after his resurrection from the dead, he particularly, but
solemnly commanded them to teach and to baptize the disciples, so made:
ordaining this as a divine institution, to be continued in the church unto the
end of the world. Matt. xxviii. 19
Wherefore, let us ever eye the divine original of this institution, that our
faith may be conversant with God in it; and then those glorious ends, worthy of
its author, will be answered by it. -- At the same time remember, that it will
be found in the end dangerous to trifle with it, despise and neglect it.

3. This institution is purely a gospel one, confined unto the last
dispensation; and, therefore, durable and abiding. -- The Jews had diverse
ceremonial purifications, which were performed by dipping of the whole body in
water; therefore the apostle calls them divine baptisms; That John the Baptist
and our Savior did not take up this ordinance from some human custom observed
by the Jews, in admitting proselytes into their community, is well known to the
learned; for whatever might be afterward, they had no such practice at that
time. Those who want information in this point, may consult Dr. Gale's
Reflections on Mr. Wall's Hist, p. 329, etc. Owen's Theologum, lib. 1. c. 9. p.
109. Dr. Jennings's 'Jewish Antiquities,' vol. i. c. 3. p. 138. And above, all
Dr. Gill's 'Dissert, on Jewish baptisms," at the end of his Body of Divinity,
vol. iii.
but they bear no relation to the institution in my text, except in the code of
dipping. This had no existence until God ordained it in the ministry of John
the Baptist. And, as the King of Zion in renewing the commission of his
apostles, joins this with the ministry of the word, to follow upon its being
received, it evidently shows that it is one of those things which remain. Heb.
xii. 27.
To say the baptism of the Holy Ghost put an end to this ordinance, or rendered
it useless, is, to say the least of it, weak and foolish. So far from this,
that Peter argues, the propriety of baptizing, or admitting to baptism the
house of Cornelius, because they had received the Holy Ghost. Acts x. 47.
The same divine authority which ordains an institution, is required to
disannul it. And, until it can be shown, that God has set it aside, it remains
in full force; and will be regarded by "them that fear God," yea, by all them
that truly "fear before him." Eccl. viii.


4. The only proper mode of administering the ordinance is, by immersion in
water. I well know that this is a tender subject, and that the far greater part
of that body of people, called Christians, both think and practice otherwise.
Nay, is it not lamentable, that in an age of refinement like ours, "he that
departs (from superstition and human invention herein) makes himself a
prey." Is. lix. 15.
not only to the licentious wit and profane scoffs of the multitude, but even
to the malevolent temper and speeches of those who profess a great regard for
the word and institutions of the Lord? But, to wave this for the present. There
are but two or three ways, whereby this controversy can be decided, and they
are all in our favor.

(1.) The radical meaning of the word baptize, must afford singular light in
this matter. It is, as all know, a Greek word, which our venerable translators,
for reasons best known to themselves, left untra^^^^^ed. The simple verb (...)
is, in the few places in which it is used in the New Testament, applied unto
i^^^sion and only capable of being understood of it: "^end Lazarus, that ^e may
dip the tip of his fing^^^ ^ate^." Luke xvi. 24.
"He it is, to whom I shall give to sop when ^^ave dipped it." John xiii. 26.
"And he was clothed in a vesture ^ipt in blood." Rev. xix.
And the various places in which its derivative (...) is used, require to be so
rendered, except when it is used for washing, in a secondary sense, which is
very rarely; and then the middle voice of this verb is so applied, because in
washing the hands, clothes, etc. there always is an immersion of them, in order
to this end. The lexicographers and the best expositors render it immersion or
dipping; and some of the best Greek writers use the word in this sense also.

(2.) The administrations of this ordinance, which are particularly recorded,
manifestly show this to be the proper mode. "And they were baptized of him (
dipped by him) in Jordan, confessing their sins." "And Jesus, when he was
baptized (dipped), went up straightway out of the water." Matthew. iii.
"And they went both down into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he
baptized him. And when they were come up out of the water," etc. Acts. viii.
Nothing but the pride of the flesh, and the carnal prejudices of education,
can resist and oppose such evidences as these.

(3.) The things alluded unto, and figured forth by this ordinance, will agree
with no other mode of administration. These are, a burial and a resurrection.
"Therefore, we are buried with him by baptism into death; that like as Christ
was raised up from the dead, by the glory of the Father, even so we also should
walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness
of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection." Romans vi.
And again: " Buried with him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him
through the faith of the operation of God, who raised him from the dead." Col.
ii.
The expositors all allow, that these passages allude unto the ancient manner
of baptizing, which was by immersion of the whole body in water. And, allow me
to ask, why ought it not still to be the mode? Certainly, it once was the mind
of the Lord, that it should be so administered? And when, or by who^ (...) he
signify he had changed his mind about it? Without this (...) one has a right to
recede from the original mode. The (...) the form and mode, etc. of divine
institution^, (...) be pointed forth in terms too strong, or language (...) --
Howsoever such persons may now face it out, (...) will certainly fall, when the
Redeemer (...) "Who has required these things at your (...)?"

5. This ordinance being an abiding one, is (...) on all Christ's disciples
unto the end of the world. In ^^at very commission, where he requires his
apostles to baptize those that are taught, we must consider a subjection (...)
required in those persons. No sooner did Peter's audience enquire about
salvation, than he exhorts them "to repent and be baptized." In one word, all
who believe in the Son of God for salvation, are indispensably obliged to
submit unto this ordinance. It is not a thing they may do, or not do, without
incurring the Redeemer's displeasure. They cannot neglect it, but at the
expense of their own peace and comfort, and at the risque of displeasing God.

SECONDLY. From this short, view of the nature of this ordinance, the ends of
it are easily gathered. -- They are supreme and subordinate.

1. The supreme end of this ordinance, is, the glory of God, Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit. 1 Cor. x. 11
It is a branch of the divine counsel, Luke vii. 30.
which displays the holiness and superabounding grace of the Father, in the
redemption and salvation of his chosen, by the death and resurrection of his
Son. Nor is the grace, wisdom, power, and majesty of his Son less conspicuous
herein. They shine forth in his regal power, who instituted it; they are
displayed in those last steps of his deep abasement, and first instance of his
high exaltation, which are shadowed forth hereby; and they are sweetly enjoyed,
and delightfully beheld by all the faithful herein. The same may be said of the
eternal Spirit. His glory appears in his fitting us for, disposing us unto,
blessing us in, and enabling us to pursue the ends of, this institution. The
glory, and power, greatness, grace, wisdom, mercy and majesty, of the Divine
Three, shine with resplendent rays, and inexpressible refulgence herein; and
the subjects of it are devoted, professedly devoted unto God, laid under the
greatest obligations to love, adore, delight in, (...) serve him; and to
promote his honor and glory in their day and generation.

2. The (...) ends of this ordinance, are,

(1.) (...) establishment, and edification. All these may (...) are, the
portion of the administrator, and other (...). But we speak of them now, as the
special privi^^^^ of the immediate believing subject of this ordinance. His
(...) is here favored with a heart-reviving view (...) the love, (...) and
grace, of God in his Son; of the dreadful sufferings of his adorable Savior,
over whom, when he stood as our representative, all the billows and tempestuous
waves of ^^^ine vengeance flowed. He is here led to see how Christ was baptized
in his bloody passion, to obtain the salvation of his people. He beholds him
not only brought into the dust of death, but raised from it, having put away
sin by the sacrifice of himself. And, while he thus has fellowship with his
dear Redeemer in his sufferings, the benign influence of his blessed Spirit
gives him a sweet discovery of pardon and justification, of peace and salvation
herein; and not only makes him to know the power of his resurrection, and
experience conformity unto his death, but often affords, or seals such a
knowledge of interest in him, and all divine blessings through him, as makes
him "rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory." Pardon of sin, an
increase of all grace, are blessing closely connected with this holy ordinance.
What a soul-comforting, what a faith-establishing, what an edifying ordinance,
then, must this be!

(2.) Another end hereof, is, that the subject may honor the Redeemer in a
confession of his name, own his kingly power, behold the obligations he is
under to obedience, claim a regular entrance into his church, enjoy the
privileges connected with it in an honorable way, and solemnly devote himself
unto his service. This is the initiating ordinance into the service of Jesus
Christ. He redeemed us by his blood, that "we might be holy, and serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him, all our days." Luke i.
74,75.
Herein a believer puts on Christ as his Lord and Master, professes a
separation from the world, and solemnly, in that awful name in which he is
baptized, devotes himself to the service, worship, and fear of the true God.
"For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.
Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that, like as Christ
was raised from the dead, by the glory of the Father, even so we also should
walk in newness of life." Romans vi. 4.
No person whatever has any right to claim the privileges of church
membership, until he be baptized. And remember, that, without newness of life,
the end of our baptism is frustrated. The church of God has in all ages been
troubled and disturbed, polluted and dishonored by a race of professors, who
have been "enemies to the cross of Christ; whose end is destruction, whose God
is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, -- who mind earthly things."
Phil. iii. 18, 19.
However, remember, that the Redeemer "has his fan in his hand, and will
thoroughly purge his floor," Matthew. iii. 12.
in a little time, when such persons will be clothed with shame, and banished
from his presence with everlasting confusion. I come,

II. To enquire into the character of the proper subjects of it. Carnal
prejudices respecting the kingdom or church of Christ, as to its external form
and subjects, have greatly obscured the light of truth in the minds of
Protestants, respecting the subjects of baptism. The sacred scriptures are,
however, very plain upon this head. The persons whom John the Baptist baptized
were only such as confessed their sins, and brought forth fruits meet for
repentance. Matthew. viii.
Those who were baptized by the disciples of Jesus, were first made disciples
by him, and then baptized. (...) iv. 1^
The persons who, on the day of Pentecost, and subsequent thereto, were
baptized, were such as "were pricked in their heart," and "received the word
gladly." Acts ii. 27, 41
The Samaritans, "when they believed Philip preaching the things concerning the
kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, were baptized, both men and
women." Acts viii.
Observe, here are no children mentioned. The eunuch was admitted into this
ordinance upon the profession of his faith. Acts v^^.
Saul was baptized after he believed in the Lord. Acts ix.
"Cornelius, who feared God with all his house," called them "all before God to
hear all things" which Peter was "commanded of God" to speak. And when the
"Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word," then the Apostle "commanded
them to be baptized in the name of the Lord." Acts x.
Lydia and her household, whom Saul and Barnabas baptized, were such persons, as
had their hearts opened by the Lord to receive his word, and to receive
comfort, under all their afflictions, from the ministry and conversation of the
apostles. Acts xvi. 14, 15 40.
The jailor and his household, baptized by the same persons, were such as heard
the word, "and rejoiced, believing in God." Acts xxxi. 34.
At Corinth, many of the Corinthians " hearing the word of God" preached by the
apostles, " believed and were baptized." Acts xviii. 8.
These are the principal baptisms we read of in the sacred history; and it
evidently appears, from hence, as also from the commission, that the only
proper subjects of baptism, are, persons confessing their sins, and professing
"repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ" I honestly
declare, I have carefully consulted the New Testament upon this head, and I am
fully convinced that there is neither command, example of, nor certain
consequence for, baptizing any other. Unprejudiced persons, conversant in the
scriptures, and ancient ecclesiastical history, will readily allow, that
'Primis duobus seculis nemo baptismum accipiebat, nisi qui, in ^ide instructus,
et doctrina Christi imbutus, testari possit, se credere: propter illa verba,
Qui credideret et baptizatus fuerit. Ergo prius erat credere; inde ordo
catechumenorum in ecclesia:' SUICERI The saur, Ec. sub voce (...).
i. e. "In the two first ages (i. e. centuries) no one received baptism, but
he, who, having been instructed in the faith, and imbued with the doctrines of
Christ, was able to testify, that he believed, because of these words, He that
believes and is baptized. Therefore it was first required to believe; hence
the order of catechumens in the church." This is a subject that has employed
the pens of many able persons. And I am persuaded, that little new can be
advanced upon it. It is no small consolation, however, amidst all the heat of
controversy, that our adversaries are constrained to acknowledge, that the
persons we baptize are proper subjects of this ordinance, and that our made of
administration is scriptural. -- We know there is but "one baptism," Ephesians. iv. 5.
as there is but "one Lord and one faith." Isaiah xxiv. 5.
And, therefore, if they can find peace in another mode, and other subjects of
baptism, we leave them in the peaceable possession of their practice. The
circumlocutory arguments from circumcision and the Abrahamic covenant, we are
persuaded, are utterly insufficient to support it. For their own welfare, we
wish them duly to consider this matter, -- lest it be found out another day,
"that they have transgressed the laws, and changed the ordinances" of the
Lord's house.

In the mean time we conclude from the preceding instances of baptism, and from
Christ's commission, wherein they who are taught, or made disciples by
teaching, are commanded to be baptized; that the only proper subjects of this
ordinance are such persons as profess "repentance toward God, and faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ." These ought to submit, without delay, to the
same. And the Lord requires it of such. -- The words of our text are express:
"Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins." This brings me,

III. To show, in what sense sin is washed away by baptism, or in it. For the
words do not suppose that sin is washed away by any virtue in the ordinance;
but only that purification from sin is enjoyed from God in and through it. But
more of this afterward. It is to be observed,

FIRST. That sin is a pollution or defilement. This, the very idea of washing
it away supposes and implies. The lusts of the flesh in their various
diversifications, idolatry, and profanation of the sabbaths and ordinances of
God, are more especially represented under the idea of pollution and
defilement, in the sacred scriptures; though it is applied unto all sin whatever.
It is all a defilement, and of a defiling nature. There is no touching the
accursed unhallowed thing, but it will stain and pollute us. Concerning sin,
under this idea, we may observe:

1. That it is a pollution of a moral nature. All natural defilements are the
dire effects of moral pollution. Sin is the very reverse of righteousness and
morality. And sinful pollution is the moral depravity of the heart, the
understanding will, affections, and all the powers of the mind. It is this
which makes sin, all sin, an abomination in the sight of God. He is "of purer
eyes than to behold evil, and cannot look on iniquity," but with great
abhorrence and detestation. Hab. i. 13.


2. Sin is a general, epidemical pollution. Neither age, nor sex, are exempted
from it. "All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God." Romans iii. 21.
Some are more polluted with the gross defilements of sin than others, yet all
are polluted with it; are estranged from God by it; and pollute all they engage
in with it. The dire ferment has leavened our whole nature. The animal desires
are deeply tinctured with it. Not only are their streams polluted, but in some
their very current is changed, and they, shocking to mention, because so
sinful, run even against nature! Romans i. 26, 27.
-- In others they are swelled to such a height as to break down all the
fences, which nature, reason, and all human and divine laws have erected, to
direct and keep them in proper bounds. Every power and passion of the soul is
defiled by sin The understanding is become the seat of darkness, error, and
deception. The will is in a state of open rebellion against the laws,
government, and grace of the Most High. The affections are a fountain of
impurity, enmity, and irregular desires. The conscience is even polluted and
defiled, and often becomes so seared as to be past all feeling. What an
epidemical defilement then must sin be!

3. This dreadful disorder is truly loathsome and disagreeable. Those who
labor under its power, and are subject unto its prevalence, are in love with
it. They take pleasure in "fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the
carnal mind, sporting themselves with their own deceivings" Ephesians. ii. 4. 2 Pet.
ii. 13.
Nay, some there are, "who knowing the judgment of God, that they who commit
such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in
them that do them." Romans i. ult.
But in the sight of God, it is loathsome and abominable. He invariably hates
it, and will never be reconciled unto the vile turpitude of it: in all its vast
extent, he is perfectly acquainted with, and therefore he loathes and detests
it, and will by no means let it go unpunished. And of every true penitent it
may be truly said, that iniquity is loathed by him. "My wounds stink and are
corrupt," says David, "because of my foolishness." Ps. xxxviii. 5.
If sin be not loathsome and disagreeable, we have just reason to conclude that
we have not the spirit of Christ. Nay, whatever we may esteem in religion, will
be of no account, if we have any fellowship with the throne of iniquity, which
frames mischief by a law.

4. This is a disease equally shameful and dishonorable. Of all our native
original rectitude and true honor, sin has bereaved us. Nor can there ever be
true honor enjoyed in connection with it. How many have had an honorable
character deeply stained by it? Neither prince nor peasant, priest nor people
can have honor by it. "Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a reproach
to any people." Prove. xiv. 34.
-- And tho there are some sinner hardy enough to glory in their shame, yet all
who have believed through grace are greatly ashamed of it. "What fruit then had
you in these things whereof you are now ashamed." Romans vi. 21.
God established his covenant with, and grants all the blessings of it unto his
chosen for this end: "That thou may remember and be confounded," says he to
Jerusalem, "and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame, when I am
pacified toward thee, after all that thou have done, says the LORD GOD." Exek.
xvi. ult.
And as for those enemies of the Lord, who live without fear, and die without
shame or remorse for sin, he "will clothe them with shame," and everlasting
confusion. Ps cxxxii. ult.
Sin is the source of shame, and where that is not, you need fear no shame.

5. It is a pollution of a dangerous and deadly nature. It is dangerous to a
man's best interests. It exposes him to the wrath of God Almighty. And
therefore, of every sinner, who willingly persists in, and labors under this
dreadful defilement, it may be truly said, "Destruction and misery are in his
ways. Romans iii.
For lust, when it is conceived, brings forth sin, and sin, when it is
finished, brings forth death." James i. 15.
In vain have some distinguished between venial and mortal sin. For all sin is
of a deadly nature. "The wages of sin is death" Romans vi. ult.
Neither is there any forgiveness of it, but through the blood of Christ. And
therefore,

6. It is a pollution, which none but God can cleanse from, and a defilement
which nothing but the blood of Christ can purge away. Every other expedient
applied unto it has failed. "For though thou wash thee with nitre and take thee
much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, says the Lord God." Jer. ii
22. But many are they who have enjoyed healing and salvation from it, in the
atonement and righteousness of the Lord Jesus. "Neither is there salvation in
any other: for there is no other name under Heaven given among men whereby we
may be saved" from the deadly stains of this direful pollution, Acts iv. 12.
The faithful in all ages have experienced, and have been enabled to say, "If we
walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another,
and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. Unto him that
loved us and washed us from our sins in his own blood." 1 John. 1. 7. Rev. i. 5.
But,

SECONDLY. The apostle is commanded to "arise and be baptized, and wash away
his sins." And as it is the blood of Christ, which alone has procured pardon,
and cleanses the guilty conscience, and the influence of the Holy Ghost, which
applies this to the believer, leads him to it, and cleanses him by it; so
baptism cannot be said to cleanse us from sin, either meritoriously or
influentially. Therefore, some other sense or senses, must be sought for; and
which I apprehend are the following:

1. In baptism there is a figurative washing away of sin. -- The apostle Peter
says that baptism saves us, as it is the (...) antitype or corresponding
figure of the salvation of Noah and his family in the ark, by the waters of the
flood. The ark, and not the waters, being a type of Christ, was the principal
mean in the salvation of Noah and his family. And so, in like manner, not the
waters of baptism, but Christ, the ark of the covenant, the author of baptism,
is the salvation of believers. 1 Pet. iii. 21.
His death, burial, and resurrection, are figured forth in a very lively manner
in this ordinance. The waters represent the free grace and love of God, from
whence salvation springs, frequently compared to water in the sacred
scriptures; as also, the tempestuous waves and flowing billows of divine wrath
and displeasure, into which our glorious Redeemer was plunged, when he obtained
eternal redemption for us. Psalm lxix. 15. -- xlii. 7.


In going down into the water, being overwhelmed in it, and coming up out of
it, we have a figurative view of Christ's voluntary sufferings and deep
abasement; of his burying our sins in oblivion, and sweetening the grave for
us; of his rising from the dead, and triumphing over all the powers of
darkness; and of our communion and fellowship with him herein, and conformity
unto him, in consequence thereof. In respect of all which we behold in baptism
a figure of our cleansing from sin in different ways.

2. Baptism washes away the defilements of sin professionally. Every subject
of this ordinance professes faith in Christ, as his Savior and Redeemer,
whose blood cleanses from all sin, and by whose obedience the church is
redeemed. He professes to forsake sin, to cleanse himself from all filthiness
of the flesh and spirit, and to pursue perfect holiness in the fear of the
Lord. Hence we are said to be "buried with him by baptism unto death: that,
like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so
we would walk in newness of life." Hence many of the ancients were wont to
speak of being cleansed from sins in this ordinance: "We go down into the
water," says St. Barnabas, BARNAB. Epist. Cap. 2. Edit. 1724. Amstel.
who lived in the first century, "full of sins and defilements, and come up out
of it, bringing forth fruit in our hearts, and having fear and hope in Jesus in
our spirits." -- And in the vision of St. Hermas, those persons who heard the
word of God, and were willing to be baptized, until they were informed that
baptism requires a person to part with and forsake all his sins, are thus
spoken of: -- "But what are the rest which fell nigh to the waters, and could
not be rolled into the waters? They are such as have heard the word, and were
willing to be baptized in the name of the Lord, but when it comes into their
minds what sanctity the profession of truth requires, they withdraw
themselves, and walk again according to their own wicked desires." "Caeteri
vero qui cadebant juxta aquas, et non poterant volvi in aquas, qui sunt? ii
sunt, qui verbum audierunt, volentes baptizari in nomine Domini, quibus cum
venit in memoriam sanctitas veritatis, retrah^nt se, ambulantque rursus post
desideria sua scelesta." -- SANCT. HERM. Lib. i. Sec. 7. Edit. Amstel. 1724.


3. Above all, baptizing may be said to wash away sin, instrumentally, or
sacramentally, as some persons speak, it being a mean of directing our souls to
look by faith unto the person, blood, and righteousness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, for peace, pardon, and purity; and an ordinance, in which the influence
of the Holy Ghost, with an increase of his gifts, graces, and consolations, are
enjoyed: hence the apostle Peter commanded his newly awakened hearers, who were
crying out for salvation, to "repent and be baptized for the remission of sins,
and ye shall receive," says he, "the gift of the Holy Ghost." Many poor
spirited disciples have been sweetly comforted in this ordinance, and have had
gracious discoveries, of pardoning mercy, increase of grace and consolation,
with the blessed sealings of the Holy Ghost, whereby their doubts have been
removed, and their interest in all divine things, graciously evidenced. And
therefore, such as are seeking these blessings, ought not to be discouraged,
but confess their sins, profess their little faith, and wait upon God herein.
Nor can I doubt but Ananias had a special respect to this washing away of sin
in my text. The apostle was but newly converted. His eyes were opened, and some
rays of comfort, spread through his mind. But he wanted spiritual strength and
clearer discoveries of purification from sin. And what mean could be more
proper to direct him thereto than this; wherein the Redeemer and his grace are
so fully represented? "Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins." q. d.
'The Lord has graciously met with thee, appeared for thee, and designs thee
for his service; and though thou labor under much weakness and many fearful
apprehensions, yet as he has opened thine eyes, and sent me to inform thee of
his gracious designs, follow him without delay in all his appointed
institutions; especially be baptized in his name, for the remission of sins,
expecting his presence and the application of pardoning mercy, while thou
viewest him by faith in the sufferings of his death, and the triumphs of his
resurrection.' This brings me to observe,

IV. That devotion is required in this ordinance, and really must take place,
if we enjoy and purification from sin by it. The apostle is required to "call
upon the name of the Lord."

FIRST. The object of this devotion is THE LORD. This phrase, (...), the name
of the Lord, is evidently expressive of the person of our Lord Jesus, in which
sense the term ((...)) the name So in the Old Testament, SHEM JEHOVAH, i. e.
THE NAME OF JEHOVAH, i. e. Is. xxx. 27. and other places; and sometimes only
SHEM ^ev. xxiv. 11, 16. is a title of our blessed Redeemer. Hence, with
submission, when it is said, as huchal likero be Shem Jehovah, Gen, iv. ult.
"Then men began to call in the name of Jehovah," does it not imply, that Seth,
Enos, and their posterity, publicly invoked the divine Redeemer, the promised
seed, and, in him, all that in worshipped and called God? See Exodus xxiii. 21.
is often used, particularly in Matt. vi. 9. where it is applied to the
Almighty. His divinity, in the strongest terms, is hereby expressed; for he
certainly must be the true God, as our Redeemer is elsewhere called, 1 John v.
20.
, whom Ananias directed this young convert to worship and adore. At the same
time it is evident, that all that which is called DIVINE, is included in the
glorious object: for whoever worshippeth the Lord Jesus aright, draws near the
triune God through his mediation, worshippeth and adoreth his sacred Majesty in
this Blessed Mediator. "I AM in THE FATHER and THE FATHER in ME." "I and THE
FATHER are ONE John xiv. 2 -- x. 30.
."

SECONDLY. The subject of this devotion is the subject of the ordinance. The
administrator of it, and those who are spectators thereof, are to unite in
pious addresses unto God; but the immediate subject is here required, in a
special manner, to call upon the name of the Lord. Howsoever exact, as to the
external form of an institution we may be, yet without true devotion in it,
neither the glory of God, nor our own comfort and consolation can be promoted
by it. If we expect our souls to enjoy purification from sin, in baptism, we
must, after the glorious example of the Lord Jesus, Luke iii. 21.
and in obedience to my text, be engaged, fervently engaged, in spiritual
devotion.

THIRDLY. The subject matter of this devotion, or the devotion itself, is
prayer, "calling upon the name of the Lord." Prayer is not only an ordinance
itself, but an attendant upon all others, and is that which in a special manner
denotes them to be religious and divine. This duty being required, includes the
whole of inward devotion, faith, hope, love, and all those holy affections,
which ought ever to accompany this, and all divine ordinances. And it supposes
the proper subjects of baptism to be believers in Christ. For, "How shall they
call on him in whom they have not believed Romans x. 14.
"? as without faith, no acceptable prayer can be made to God, so the person who
lives without prayer, has no reason to conclude himself possessed of true
faith. But Saul was now possessed of the spirit of prayer. The Lord said to
Ananias when he sent him to Saul, "Behold he prays: Acts ix. 11.
" which expresses the merciful regard, which the Lord had to his cries, and the
spirituality and fervency of his prayers, in contradistinction to his former
Pharisaical legal services, which were no prayers in God's account; as also,
the efficacious power of sovereign grace, in enabling, teaching, and
constraining such a person to pray. Grace is not more illustriously displayed,
in bringing an abandoned profligate to pray, than in bringing a formal
devotionist to the throne of grace. Upon the whole, it evidently appears, that
devotion in the subject of this ordinance is required by the Lord, which is
another, though collateral proof, that not infants, but professing believers, are
the only proper subjects of it. I come now,

V. To show the weakness and insufficiency of the most popular objections that
are made, against submission to this institution. Under this head, however, I
must recede from the method preceding; and instead of taking our account from
the Bible, attend unto the most common arguments, under which I have heard
pious persons sheltering themselves from conviction of their duty.

FIRST. I have known some, who have acknowledged baptism to be a divine
ordinance, binding on all Christ's disciples to the end of the world, and yet
have lived in the neglect of it, though they professed to believe in Jesus
Christ; and gave this, as a reason of their conduct, that they did not see it
to be their duty in particular. The foundation of this objection, if I am not
far deceived, arises from a very dreadful mistake in the very fundamental of
true godliness, namely, that we ought, by the sudden suggestion, or powerful
application of some passage of scripture, to be particularly persuaded, that it
is our particular duty to be baptized, etc. Whatever others may do, I freely
own that it is with uneasiness I expose the enthusiasm and delusion of the
human mind; of which I take this to be a real instance. That the divine spirit
does open the scriptures to believers, bring them to their remembrance, show to
them the things of Christ thereby, and produce salutary effects in their souls
through these means, is an undoubted soul-refreshing truth: but to say, that
when we are brought to place all our hope and dependence upon the Redeemer for
salvation, -- we ought still to wait for such impulses as the above, to point
out our duty in this ordinance, is certainly to speak deceitfully in the
matters of the Lord. Can you expect your duty more clearly stated than in the
sacred page? What other authority would you have than these words of the Lord,
"Repent and be baptized; he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved"?
What other, what better encouragement would you have than this, "If thou
believe with all thy heart, thou may?" If you are of those who tremble at
the word of God, you will duly regard the sacred text and obey it, without
expecting to be thunderstruck from heaven upon the occasion. As the devil is
capable of bringing passages of scripture to the mind, as well as the Holy
Spirit, ought we not to fear, lest we slight the authority of King Jesus in the
sacred records, and follow the delusions of that lying spirit, who ever lies
in wait to deceive? and instead of obeying the Prince of Life, be honoring his
greatest foe? As you tender your soul's welfare and the honor of our Lord
Jesus, let me beseech you to beware of such delusions as these. Trifle no
longer with matters of this moment. But, without further delay, "Arise and be
baptized, and wash away your sins, calling upon the name of the Lord."

SECONDLY. Others there are who neglect this holy ordinance, and church
communion, on account of their doubts and ^ears concerning their state and
condition before God. These are the doubtful, who are afraid lest they presume.
They are ready to think it would be daring boldness in them, under all their
unworthiness, so attended with doubts and oppressed with fears, to confess
Christ, and follow him in this and other sacred institutions. Had they but such
comforts, and so many promises as they have heard of some persons enjoying,
they could take encouragement. But alas! as for them, it is quite otherwise.
They are weak and feeble; have had no promise, at least abiding ones, and
conclude that their profession would only terminate in the dishonor of the
Redeemer's cause. But how weak and futile are such objections as these? How are
we to expect a removal of our doubts and fears but by an augmentation of our
spiritual light and strength in the ways of obedience, according to his
promise? "They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength. Isa. ix. ult.
" In this way did the apostle Paul enjoy strength and comfort. In this way did
Peter direct his newly-awakened, sin-convinced, soul-converted, hearers, to
look for it Acts ix. and ii.
Though I would suspect that faith which is never combated with doubts and
fears, yet remember they are directly opposite unto true faith, and, if
encouraged, destructive of all true peace. Therefore, oppose them continually,
and give no place to them. "Fear not, only believe Lu. viii. 50.
" With regard unto your comfort from the promises of God, give me leave to warn
you against a common, but dangerous mistake. Think not, that your right to the
promises, and comfort from them, depend in any wise on the manner in which they
are brought into your minds. Your right to them depends upon the free grace of
God -- your liberty to apply them, on his free declaration, and your firm
belief of them -- and your comfort from them lies in the glorious grace
contained in them in conjunction with the veracity, faithfulness, and power of
God to fulfill them. If you understand this subject aright, and firmly believe
the sacred promises of the Lord, whatever doubts and fears you labor under, or
are attended with, you never will have occasion to say, "I have no promise --
once I had a promise, but now it is taken away -- does his promise fail for
evermore Ps. lxxvii.
?" As to your fears, lest a profession of the Redeemer should terminate in the
dishonor of his name, howsoever plausible they may appear, they are no better
founded than the other. -- True it is, that many have dishonored Christ by
their apostasy, error, and licentiousness who have made a profession of him.
But instances like these are not to discourage, but to caution you. You know
who has promised, "As the day is, so shall thy strength be Deuteronomy. xxx. 25.
." Is he not able to keep and preserve you under a religious profession, and at
last present you faultless before the throne? And without he keep you, though you
should not profess his name, into what shame and dishonor would you be daily
plunged? -- Let me beseech you no more to take shelter beneath such a covering
as this, lest you repent it in the end. The only way to be delivered from your
fears, to obtain evidence of interest in Christ, and to be preserved from
dishonouring his name, is to cast your care, and roll all your burdens upon the
Lord -- to receive his word, and to follow him in this and all other Divine
ordinances. "Repent and be baptized for the remission of sins. and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost."

THIRDLY. Another objection I have met with, is, that baptism, not being
essential to salvation, may be dispensed with on that account. This objection
is big with absurdity. We are far from asserting that it is any way
meritorious, or procurative of the blessings of salvation. Yet, we have shown
how the enjoyment of the blessings of salvation stand closely connected with a
proper submission to it. It is essential to a holy profession of Christ, and a
regular admission into Zion. And, I must own, that to me it appears charging
God with folly, to say, that any thing he had revealed, or any ordinance he has
instituted, is not essential. Though not essential to the salvation of sinners,
which is obtained by the blood of his Son; yet every truth he has thought
proper to reveal, and every ordinance his wisdom has ordained, are all
essential to some great and glorious end, worthy of their divine Author.
Besides, the very same objection lies with equal strength against every other
divine ordinance, and against every branch of moral conversation. It
discovers no small degree of ingratitude against the Redeemer, when we can
neglect his institutions, because we are saved by grace. And it manifests a
legal, unfilial spirit, to intimate that any ordinance is procurative of
salvation. And I will venture to assert, that those slothful servants, who
never perform the duties of religion but with an eye to their being saved by
them, will find themselves, notwithstanding their mercenary, finister doings,
exposed to everlasting condemnation for their folly. Matthew. vii. 22, 23. --
xxiii. 5, 14.
Let us hear no more of such an absurd objection as this. But, on the contrary,
be stimulated to observe this divine ordinance, as well as all others, not
because we are saved by it, but by the sovereign mercy and grace of God in his
dear Son, have a promise of enjoying the blessings of salvation in it, and are
informed of its being essential to our comfort, reputable and orderly admission
into Zion, and to the glory of God. "He that believes and is baptized, shall
be saved: he that believes not, shall be damned."

FOURTHLY. Another very formidable objection in some people's esteem, is that
by being baptized, they must break their religious connections, and so prevent
their greater service and utility in the kingdom of Christ. To this I answer,
that it appears at first view, that there is a great defection in such
connections as cannot be reconciled to the obedience of faith. And though no one
more regards the external order of the kingdom of Christ than myself, yet I
am certain that a practical submission to a divine institution, can never be
subversive of it: though it may break our rank in the worldly sanctuary, it is
the only way to render us orderly in the Redeemer's spiritual kingdom. Though it
may divest us of that popularity, which a popular connection has invested us
with, yet it will be the way to clothe us with that applause which is truly
honorable in the sight of God. And, as to a supposition of its preventing our
greater usefulness, it bespeaketh a considerable degree of pride, vanity, and
self-sufficiency. No doubt, but the God of wisdom will make his chosen saints
and servants useful, more or less, in every connection: but to think, or say,
that in these connections in which they cannot keep his commandments, but must
often offend against their consciences, they are like to be more useful, is to
establish that dangerous, antinomian, damnable position, so greatly detested by
the apostle, that we may do evil and neglect to do good, that good may come.
Romans iii. 8.
-- Does not all our real usefulness, in every connection, depend upon the
blessing of God? Are we of such consideration, that his work cannot be done
without us? Are we likely to do more for him, where we choose to stand, or to
bow, than in the good old way, in which he bids us go? Jer. vi. 16.
Are we more likely to have his blessing in walking after the traditions of
men, than in the sacred institutions of his word? Surely we must be highly
elevated in our own esteem, if after the consideration of these things, we can
be prevailed upon to offend our consciences and neglect the institutions of the
Lord, in order to preserve popular connections, and be more useful in the
kingdom of Christ. Obedience to his revealed will is infinitely preferable in
the divine esteem, to all the sacrifices of interest, human tradition, and
popular applause that you can offer him; and to hearken with a filial ear to
his counsels, is more acceptable than the fat of rams, than the most delectable
of human inventions that you can reserve from the fire of his word, as a
sacrifice unto the Lord. 1 Samuel xv. 12.
Therefore, break through every opposition to follow your Redeemer. Devote
yourselves to serve him in the way of obedience, and leave your usefulness to
him, who only can make us of real use in his service. "Wherefore, come out from
among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean
thing; and I will receive you, and I will be a fat^^^ unto you, and ye shall be
my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty."

FIFTHLY. The fear of offending their friends and relations, is a stumbling
block to some, and an objection to their submission to this ordinance. This is
so weak and trifling, that one would think such are either not serious in
religion, or that they have never read these awful words of the Lord: "If any
man come to me, and hate not father and mother, and wife and children, and
brethren and sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple."
Luke xiv. 26.
If therefore, we can prefer the pleasing of any relation upon earth unto our
duty toward God, we have no evidence of being Christ's disciples: may, he
declares expressly, that we cannot be his disciples. Consider this matter well,
ye who are obstructed in your duty by these fears. Will your relations answer
for you at the judgment seat of Christ? Will they be able to excuse you in the
day of the Lord? Are they the Lords of your consciences? Have they redeemed
your souls? Alas! Alas! you know the contrary full well. Therefore, comply with
your duty. Their hearts, their hands, and all they have, are in the hands of
the Lord, and he can turn them as he will, and into what channel is best for
you too. Be not therefore dismayed. If father and mother forsake you, reject,
and disinherit yo^, for discharging a good conscience, yet the Lord will take
you up." Psalm. xxviii. 10.
"Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken to them more than unto
God, judge ye."

SIXTHLY. Others are kept back and overawed from their duty in this matter, on
account of the shame and reproach that attend it. Few, indeed, care to express
themselves explicitly on this head, because it is so exceedingly weak and
cowardly; yet from the tenor of their conduct, it evidently appears, that
they are afraid of bearing the reproach. But what are ye afraid of? The
reproaches and revilings of men? The sinful breath of those vile wretches who
blaspheme their Maker's name from day to day? Why, do you not know that the
spotless immaculate Savior, was not only reproached, made the drunkard's song,
and scornfully treated, as a madman, and a devil, by the proud, self-righteous
pharisees; but that he cheerfully endured all the sufferings of the cross, and
(...) despised the shame, which our sins exposed him unto, in order to obtain
our salvation? Why are you afraid of suffering reproach, since that is your
greatest honor? -- And why should you be ashamed of the best of all interests?
You can suffer neither shame nor reproach for Christ's sake, but he suffers
with you. In his cause you can sustain no losses, but he will repay them.
"There is no man that has left house, or parents, or brethren, or wife, or
children, for the kingdom of God's sake, who shall not receive manifold more in
this present life, and in the world to come life everlasting." -- And how will
ye be able to face him another day? Have ye not just reason to fear, that he
will then be ashamed of you, and reject you? Trifle no longer, I beseech you,
with flesh and blood. "Fear ye not the reproaches of men, neither be afraid of
their revilings. Let us go forth therefore unto him, without the camp, bearing
his reproach."

SEVENTHLY. The only remaining objection deserving any notice, that I have
heard of, is, that some persons, not having any prospect of church fellowship,
at least such as is orderly, think themselves justified in neglecting it, on
this account. But how trifling and weak is such an objection as this? -- Are we
justified in neglecting one branch of the divine will, because we have not an
opportunity of regarding another? Certainly we are not: but, on the contrary,
ought with all readiness, to make the best use of such ordinances as we have
the privilege of observing. The eunuch, treasurer of Candace, the Ethiopian
queen, had no prospect of church fellowship in his own country, whither he was
going; and yet he never made the least hesitation upon this head. He submitted
unto baptism the very first opportunity. For when Philip and he were in the
chariot discoursing upon divine subjects, "as they went on their way, they came
unto a certain water. And the eunuch said, See, here is water; what does hinder
me to be baptized?" No sooner had he professed himself a believer in the Son of
God, than "they went both down into the water, both Philip and the eunuch, and
he baptized him." Here is a blessed example, worthy of our imitation! This
eunuch is said to have spread the gospel in several parts. And how do you know
but your submission to the Redeemer may be a mean of spreading the knowledge of
his name? Besides, this objection has less weight in it, when we remember, that
there are few counties in England, in which there is not an opportunity for
such to join with persons of their own persuasion. All these things considered,
I hope none that fear the Lord will any longer be prevailed upon to neglect
their duty, and live short of their privileges. "And now, why tarriest thou?
Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling upon the name of the
Lord." I come now,

VI. To point forth the folly and danger of neglecting this institution, that
none may remain ignorant of the dangerous consequences of their conduct.

FIRST. The folly of such a conduct is very conspicuous in every point of
light, more especially if we consider, -- 1. That it is our interest and real
welfare which we are neglecting herein. To neglect the Redeemer's positive
institution, is to disregard his authority, and to sin against him. And he
assures us, that such persons really injure themselves: "He that sins
against me, wrongeth his own soul." What ^olly is it to wrong our own souls, to
deprive them of the benefit, comfort, and consolation administered in the
ordinances of God's house! -- 2. The folly of such a conduct is most of all
declared, inasmuch as such persons reject the counsel of God. "But the scribes
and pharisees rejected the counsel of God against themselves, not being
baptized of him." What folly to reject the counsel of God, of which baptism is
a part? to despise, or treat with contempt, the wisdom, power, majesty, and
holiness of God, which shine forth herein? All sinners act a foolish part, in
their wild rebellion against the Lord and his Anointed; and certain it is, that
the neglecters of the Redeemer's institutions, fall under the same predicament.
-- Nor is this folly of a simple nature. It is big with mischiefs of a perilous
kind. This brings me,

SECONDLY. To point forth the danger of it. I scarce need remind you, that all
disobedience whatever, the neglect of positive institutions not excepted, is
surrounded with danger. On whatsoever side we turn our eyes, perils encompass
it around. But, in particular --

(1.) The danger of delaying baptism appears in our slighting the communion
of saints, in order to which, this ordinance is to be previously embraced. In
these days of coldness, error, and lukewarmness, the communion of saints, is
but little esteemed. It is, however, the greatest privilege of a social nature,
that we can enjoy here on earth. "One day in thy courts, is better than a
thousand" elsewhere. Of what a dangerous consequence may it be to neglect these
things? It will be well if such persons be not debarred the fellowship of the
saints in glory, who neglect it in the militant state. They who are not
numbered with them, now, have no just grounds to expect they will associate
with them hereafter. --

(2.) The danger of this delay appears, in exposing us to the painful
reflections of our own consciences. No wise man would choose to feel the
bitter, the painful stings of an accusing conscience, in his last stage. And
yet there are some who have felt it. A multitude of other things, carnal
reasonings, and an encouraged indifference hereto, may stifle conviction now;
but depend upon it, your consciences will speak our another day. What pain and
anguish must it occasion then, to be reminded, that when health and opportunity
were present, these duties and privileges were foolishly neglected, which we
shall have no more opportunity to regard! Surely, if you have ever felt the
auguish of a wounded conscience, you will dread the danger of being exposed to
her accusations again. --

(3.) Is it not a dangerous thing to live without practical evidence of our
being related to Jesus Christ? Certainly it is: But if in baptism there be a
putting on of Jesus Christ, Gal. iii. 27.
as there really is, then it undoubtedly follows, that where baptism is not
regarded, there is no professional, practical evidence or relation to him. It
will be an awful thing another day not to be found in Christ; and I must own,
that we appear to have a deceitful confidence about this important subject, if
we do not practically and professionally put him on. --

(4.) It is certainly a dangerous thing to sin against the Savior of sinners.
If they who despised the law of Moses, escaped not without punishment, shall
the neglecters of the Redeemer's holy institutions pass with impunity? Heb. x.
28.
How then will you account for your conduct, or how can you think yourselves
secure from his frowns, in the daily neglect of his ordinances? -- You have no
reason to expect the gracious protection of this glorious King, who are not
found in the observation of his commandments; nor to expect his sacred presence
and his sweet consolations, who neglect to appear among his saints, before him,
in Zion. On the contrary, you certainly have just cause for fear, lest, knowing
the will of the Lord, and not performing it, ye be beaten with many stripes.
Luke xii. 47.
--

(5.) The danger of neglecting this, and other divine ordinances, appears in
this, that it is grieving the Holy Spirit. Of old, "Israel rebelled against the
Lord," among other things, by forsaking the Lord's institutions, and going in
the ways of the heathen, whereby they vexed "his holy spirit." But what did
they get by it? Why, the Spirit, instead of conforting, leading, and supporting
them, "was turned to be their enemy, and fought against them. Is. lxiii. 10.
" It is awful enough to have the painful reflections of an accusing conscience;
but to have the Holy Ghost to be our enemy, is awful indeed! Do we not
continually stand in need of his benign influence and gracious leadings? How
then do we expect to bear his frown? -- There are several who have labored
under these, and it is to be feared that many still do. The decrease of
spiritual gifts, the bondage of mind, and the leanness of soul, under which
many labor, ministers perhaps as well as people, are palpable evidences of the
Spirit being grieved. It is a dangerous case. Beware of continuing in it. Take
heed, lest by trifling thus in divine things, you provoke the Lord to give you
up to a mind void of judgment. Be honest, and, without any hesitation, act
according to the light you have. "Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye
are sealed unto the day of redemption."

(6.) The only thing I shall further notice in this affair, is, that by
persisting in such a conduct, we shall expose ourselves to the force of these
words, in the day of judgment: "For whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my
words, of him the Son of Man shall be ashamed, when he shall come in his own
glory, and in his Father's, and of the holy angels Luke ix. 26.
. But whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I deny before my Father who
is in Heaven Matt. x. 33.
." From the force of these words we may now defend ourselves; but in the day of
judgment, those artful turns, those flimsy shields, will be of no avail. From
the Redeemer's two-edged sword, brandished with a holy indignation, they cannot
preserve us. His words will then be explained in their proper sense, appear in
all their majesty, power, and importance, and be directed against their proper
objects with that irresistible force, and demonstration, which will spread
horror, dismay, and confusion, around all that fall under their condemnation.
What a dangerous, what an awful thing then must it be to neglect his
institutions, and expose ourselves to the sword of the Spirit, which is the
word of God? Surely, no person that regards the words of our Lord Jesus, will
any longer persist in a line of conduct so foolish, so dangerous, so fatal, to
their peace, comfort, and prosperity, -- so grieving to the Spirit, -- and so
offensive to the Redeemer!

Having gone through the plan proposed, though I have already trespassed upon
your time, yet I cannot conclude without a reflection or two in the method of
improvement.

1. Let those of you who are wallowing in sin, and lying under the guilt and
pollution of it, remember what an awful state you are in. You are enemies to
God, and exposed to his wrath and displeasure. If you die in that state, you
must be as surely damned, as you stand or ^it there today. Let me beseech you
to forsake sin, to repent of it, and to turn to God. -- "Repent ye, therefore,
and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. Except ye repent, ye shall
all likewise perish." O then, "labor, not for the bread that perishes, but
for that which endures to everlasting life." You have the privilege of hearing
the word of God, almost daily; how great will your condemnation be, if in the
end you are found unbelievers! Nor will any thing short of an entire change
serve to secure you from eternal misery. Sin must not only be left in practice,
but your hearts formed anew to hate it. An inward reformation, as well as an
outward one, must have place, or you cannot be saved. Your sins must be
pardoned, your persons justified and your souls sanctified, or you can never
enter into kingdom of God. These are things that none but Jehovah can do. This
ought to make you tremble, sinners, when you hear it. Salvation is not a work
within the compass of human power. O then I beseech you, no m^^^ trifle with
this matter. The Lord Jesus, in all his fullness, grace, and glory, is preached
unto you. Receive this blessed message. Search into the inspired volume. Vile
and ignorant as you are, he is able to save you. But if you continue to despise
and reject him, you must perish in your folly. "How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation?"

2. Let all penitent transgressors, howsoever burdened, roll all their burdens
upon the Lord, and follow him in the obedience of faith. Your weaknesses,
doubts and fears, are no sufficient objection. Take heed that, by poring upon
these, you are not losing sight of the Savior of sinners. Is he not able to
save you? Is he not willing to save you? He is. Why then are you discouraged in
following him? How do you expect comfort and peace, but in so doing? The
penitent in my text delayed but a little, a very little, in comparison of what
you have done, and yet he met with a cutting rebuke: -- "And now why tarriest
thou?" With how much greater propriety, if so I may speak, may this be applied
to many now? No longer indulge yourselves in neglecting his commands. -- "Arise
and be baptized, and wash away your sins, calling upon the name of the Lord."
Give yourselves up to him and his people, to walk with them in all the order of
his gospel, "in a perpetual covenant, never to be forgotten." Isaiah i. 5.


3. Let all who have been baptized, remember the ends of this institution, and
show them forth. You have professed repentance toward God, and faith in our
Lord Jesus Christ. Does it appear that your repentance is genuine, your faith
unfeigned? You have been buried with Christ; but, what will this avail any of
you, if you are now alive to this world, in love with it, sunk in the lusts and
pleasures of it, and walking again according to the course of it? -- Alas!
alas! how often has it happened, in every age of the church, unto a race of
licentious professors, "The dog is turned to his vomit again, and the sow that
was washed, to her wallowing in the mire?" If any such backsliders hears me
today, I entreat you to remember from whence you are fallen, to repent and do
your first works. "Awake to righteousness and sin not." You may attempt to
cover your folly, but God will not suffer it long to remain hid. You may
attempt the reconciliation of your estate with a state of ^^^ce; but without
repentance, it will be all in vain. Without repentance for your folly and
backsliding you will prove hypocrites and deceivers in the end, who shall
receive the greater damnation. "Return, return, thou backsliding Israel, faith
the Lord; and I will not cause my anger to fall upon you; for I am merciful,
faith the Lord, and I will not keep anger forever." Jer. ii. 12.


As for you who have bravely withstood, hitherto, the allurements of the world,
see that ye continue so to do. Walk close with your dear Redeemer. Fill up your
place in the house of God with reputation and usefulness. Set your affections
on things above. Remember what obligation your baptism lays you under, to walk
in newness of life. O! that you a few names even in Sardis, which have not
defiled their garments; and they shall walk with me in white, for they are
worthy." Rev. iii. 4.


4. A few words to you, my dear brother, the immediate subject of this
ordinance, shall close my discourse at this time. you have resigned a place in
a popular connection, merely from a conscientious regard to the order and
institutions of the Lord's house. You have known that neither a liberal
education nor a sacred office, with the prospects of preferments, in a worldly
sanctuary, are sufficient to excuse us in acting contrary to the will of God
and our own consciences. Your conduct in this affair will be condemned by all
the worshippers of mammon; nor will the sober evangelical part of the clergy,
in general, look upon your proceeding in any very favorable light; for this
very reason, that by your doing so, they are reproached. However, all those who
make the Bible the sole rule of their faith, will applaud you. And, what is
infinitely more, I believe the MOST HIGH will approve of it. Such a singular
event as this, generally excites popular admiration. But, with all due respect
to you, Sir, give me leave to observe, that it is your future conduct, which
will reflect the greatest honor upon this day's transactions; and your present
devotion, which will render it most honorable to your heavenly Father, and,
through his grace, comfortable to yourself. The solemn profession that you are
now making, will engage the attention of many, and their opposition to it, will
prompt them to scrutinize every branch of your conduct, with more abundant
exactness, than otherwise they would have done. Nor will the grand enemy of our
salvation be less vigilant in tempting and sifting you, so far as he is
permitted. Peculiar watchfulness and circumspection are therefore highly
needful, with a humble dependence upon the keeper and preserver of Israel. Be
firm and immovable in adhering unto the truths of the gospel. To that
considerable acquisition of classical learning, which you have already
obtained, be daily making some addition, more especially in divine science, and
her kindred ones; but at the same time be humble, depending upon your Redeemer,
and looking unto him for divine strength, all needful gifts for his service,
and grace to make a proper use of them. In this line of conduct a man will
become great in the sight of the Lord and his people, but low and mean in his
own; he will be honorable and useful; -- but whatever seize in the
sciences he may acquire, if he be puffed up with them, become less dependent on
the Redeemer and his grace, and indifferent about the gifts and influences of
the Blessed Spirit, he may be assured that his acquirements are a snare to him,
that he is entangled therein, and, without speedy repentance, will become, in
the end, contemptible, both in the eyes of God, and of all good men. To these
things, I hope, dear sir, you will ever have a due regard, since the glory of
our God and King, your usefulness and reputation, as well as the credit of the
interest you now espouse, are involved therein. -- In order to your present
comfort in this blessed institution, you are now immediately going to submit
to, have your eyes unto the Holy One of Israel. In fervent addresses unto the
God of mercy, I now expect your concurrence. In the ordinance itself, properly
so called, be meditating upon the doings, sufferings, death, burial, and
resurrection, of our dear Redeemer, accompanied with calling upon his name. In
going down into the water, reflect upon his voluntary engagements, his
wonderful incarnation, and his deep abasement. In passing through it, call to
mind what amazing sufferings he underwent; how he was baptized in blood, that
we might be saved from the fire: look to him as your Surety and Savior, your
Justifier and Sanctifier, -- through whose obedience unto death the waters of
divine grace issue forth in rich abundance unto the everlasting salvation of
all true believers -- With a humble recumbency upon him, you will then emerge
from the water, viewing your dear Redemer, as having buried your sins, overcome
death, worsted the devil, sweetened the grave, brought life and immortality to
light, and go on your way triumphing in his glorious resurrection. In every
branch of your conduct pursue the grand ends of this institution, mentioned
already, and you may be assured that "the Lord of all peace himself" will "give
you peace always by all means," -- in life, in death, and to all eternity.

Now unto Him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you
faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy --

To the only wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power,
both now and ever. AMEN.

A HYMN, COMPOSED BY THE REVEREND I. SLAY; AND SUNG AT HIS BAPTISM.
I.
HOW marv'lous Lord, are all thy ways,
And how surprising is thy grace!
Accept us, Father, in thy Son,
In faith and love this work be done:
II.
In faith of Him, who once did lie
In Jordan's stream, to sanctify
This Heavenly ordinance divine,
Wherein the Lord's perfections shine. --
III.
Long time I was in doubt, O Lord,
Till lightened by thy glorious word;
With trembling steps I went along,
And sprinkled. Or Poured.
-- with a fault'ring tongue.
IV.
Hum in inventions kept me blind,
And darkness hovered over my mind,
Till Heavenly rays shone from above,
And Jesus cried, -- "Do thou me love?"
V.
I trembled at the dreadful ire,
Which smote two off'rers in the fire;
Bold NADAB and ABIHU's fate
Upon my mind, with horror, sat. Lev. x.

VI.
Pardon, O Lord, what I have done,
Forgive me, Father, in thy Son:
Grant me thy pard'ning grace to prove,
And sing the trumphs of thy love.
VII.
O JESU, thou have died for me, Gal. ii. 20.

And shall not I baptized be?
Have left my sins all in the grave,
From death and hell my soul to save; --
VIII.
Have sprung victorious up to Heaven,
Whereby good hope's to sinners given;
Have washed my soul white in thy blood,
And, glorified, now art with God.
IX.
In faith and love then me baptize
In this pure fount, and may I rise,
To live by faith and walk in love,
Till I shall tread thy courts above!
FINIS.
IN THE PRESS, And will be Published in a few Days, by T. DOBSON, at the STONE
HOUSE, in Second street, between Market ^and Chestnut street, Philadelphia --

AN Apology for the BAPTISTS; IN WHICH THEY ARE VINDICATED FROM THE IMPUTATION
OF LAYING AN UNWARRANTABLE STRESS ON THE ORDINANCE OF BAPTISM; AND AGAINST THE
CHARGE OF BIGOTRY, IN ^^^USING COMMUNION AT THE LORD's TABLE TO PAEDOBAPTISTS.

By ABRAHAM BOOTH.

There is -- one Baptism. EPHESIANS. iv. They who are not rightly baptized, are,
doubtless, not baptized at all. TERTULLIAN. No unbaptized Person communicates
at the Lord's Table. THEOPHYLACT.
