THE Subscriber, being engaged in continuing the HISTORY of NEW HAMPSHIRE, and
intending to give a topographical description of the Country, and a particular
account of every occurrence, which may deserve the public notice, takes this
method of applying to the Ministers and other Gentlemen of note, in the State,
and begs the favor of them to collect and transmit to him, such information as
can be obtained on the following heads.

1. The time when each township was granted; whether there were any interfering
grants; when and how accommodations were made; when the settlement began;
whether it was interrupted, and by what means.

2. The sufferings of the people by French and Indian wars; the number and
names of the killed, wounded and captived; their treatment by the enemy; their
death or redemption, with particular dates.

3. The names of the several Ministers of every denomination; the time of each
one's settlement, death or removal, and age.

4. Singular instances of Longevity and Fecundity; and such observations on the
diseases, deaths and ages of the Inhabitants, as may elucidate the influence of
the climate on the human body.

5. Observations on the weather; on mountains, rivers, lakes, falls, caverns,
minerals, stones, fossils, pigments, medicinal and poisonous vegetables, and
any other natural productions.

6. A particular account of any monuments or relics of the ancient Indians.

7. Observations on soil, cultivation, fertility, and particularly on the
several kinds of grass, grain, fruits, and esculent vegetables which have been
cultivated, with and without success.

8. An account of the manufactures and fisheries.

9. The number of persons lost out of each town by means of the late war.

10. Whether schools are kept, and whether supported privately or publicly.

And generally any other matter worthy of historical (...).

Your attention, Sir, to these desiderata is humbly requested; your answer will
be gratefully received and it is wished that it may be sent, free of expense,
by the first of October next, to

Your Humble Servant, Jeremy Belknap.
Summer Street, BOSTON. March 1, 1790.

