THE ELEMENTS OF MEDICINE; OR, A TRANSLATION OF THE ELEMENTA MEDICINAE BRUNONIS.

WITH LARGE NOTES, ILLUSTRATIONS, AND COMMENTS.

BY THE AUTHOR OF THE ORIGINAL WORK.

A NEW EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY T. DOBSON, AT THE STONE-HOUSE, NO. 41, SECOND-STREET;

M DCC XC.

PREFACE TO THE ORIGINAL WORK.
BY the Author of this work more than twenty years were wasted in learning,
teaching, and diligently scrutinizing every part of medicine. The first five
past away in hearing others, studying what he had heard, implicitly believing
it, and entering upon the possession as a rich and valuable inhertance. His
mode of employment the next five years, was to explain more clearly the several
particulars, to refine and give them a nicer polish. During the next equal
space of time, because no part of it had succeeded to his mind, he became cold
upon the subject, and, with many eminent men, even with the vulgar themselves,
to deplore the healing art as altogether uncertain and incomprehensible. All
this time passed away without the acquisition of any advantage, and of that,
which of all things is the most agreeable to the mind, the light of truth; and
so great, so precious, a portion of the fading and short-lived age of man was
lost. It was only betwixt the fifteenth and twentieth year of his studies,
that, like a traveller in an unknown country, wandering in the shade of night,
after lo^ing every trace of his road, a very obscure gleam of light, like that
of the first break of day, dawned upon him.

Thirteen years ago Four years must be added now, it being that time since the
second volume of the Elementa was published, that is, seventeen years since the
author's first fit of the gout. At this very time from hard walking in very hot
weather, to inspect the beauties and majesty of Hampton Court, he had a slight
attack, which gave him no sort of trouble, never hindered him from business,
and which he repelled in less than thirty-six hours.
, when he was going in the thirty-sixth year of his age, he fell into his first
fit of the gout. For many years before he had lived well, with the exception of
having confined himself to a diet more sparing than usual a few months before
the arrival of the disease It was about six months.
. In about six weeks the disease finished its course, and did not return till
six years after, and not even then, but in consequence of unusual low living
for several months Between five and six.
. He was in the vigor of his age, and, excepting the taint of the gout, and
some debility, brought on by his unusual abstinence, his habit was good. The
disease, according to an old theory among physicians, was said to depend upon
plethora and excessive vigor; vegetable aliment was enjoined, w^ne was
forbidden, and the careful execution of that plan of cure was promised to be
rewarded with no return of the disease. A whole year past in a strict adherence
to this regimen. In the course of that space of time, instead of never having a
return of the disease, he experienced no less than four fits, most violent,
most painful, and of a very great duration: In short, the whole year, except
fourteen days, was divided between limping and excruciating pain.

If an over-proportion of blood and excess of vigor was the cause of the
disease, according to the general theory just now mentioned, it became next
with him a subject of enquiry, how such distressing symptoms were to be
explained; his reflections were, why the disease had not made its first
appearance twelve or fifteen years before, at a time when there was in reality
more blood and vigor in the system The blood is made from the food, and is in
proportion to the quantity, quality, and completeness of its digestion. Now,
before each of his last fits for the time specified in the text, as well as
during the whole course of the attacks of the second year, his food had been
almost solely vegetable, and, therefore, was not suited to produce enough, much
less an excessive quantity, of blood, and the digestion was also more imperfect.
, and why it only came on after an abatement of diet both considerable in
degree and duration; why so great an interval of time, during which he had
returned to his usual full diet, had intervened betwixt the first fit and the
recent ones; and, why the disease had twice, almost instantaneously, come on
after the change of full nourishing diet into a sparing one. At last the
solution of this question was made out by the interposition of one of greater
magnitude, in the following interrogatories: What is the effect of food, drink,
and similar supports of life? They produce strength. What is their effect
afterward? Always less and less. What is it toward the end of life? They are
so far from giving any more strength, that they evidently prove weakening. Nay,
the very same powers, by which life was at first supported, at last put an end
to it, commonly through the intervention of disease.

As diseases first, and death after, in general happen in the way that has been
just now explained, not from want, but an over-abundance of the supports of
life, he found, however, that the cause was debility, and saw that it was not
debilitating according to the common practice of evacuation and starving;
, but strengthening, powers that were to be thought upon as remedies. To this
sort of debility he thought proper to give the name of indirect. Such for two
years was the success of his invigorating plan which he immediately after the
last mentioned reflections and queries carried into execution;
, that at the end of that space of time he only underwent a a very slight fit,
which did not amount to a fourth part of any of the former ones the fit that
happened at the thirty-sixth year of his age, and the four severe ones, that
attacked him about six years after, all within the course of the same year.
. Now, no physician will deny, that the recurrence of such a disease as the
gout, which had made four attacks in one year, would have been more frequent
than in that proportion the next two years, had the same method of cure been
continued; nor will any one think the addition of two fits every year too much.
The mild fit was four times less in degree than the more violent ones.
Multiply, therefore, twelve by four, and, according to that computation, the
proportion of alleviation of the disease will amount to a reduction of eight
and forty to one. As, during the first year, he made use of vegetable food
alone, so, during these two years, his only food was of the land animal kind,
and of the most nutrient quality. Of the latter, his choice was directed to the
best in kind, without any other precaution than being sparing in the quantity
he used He found most kinds of fish, whether from the sea or fresh water,
nearly as debilitating as vegetable matter, when solely or chiefly relied upon
for a meal.
. A young gentleman, who lived with him and had labored under a very severe
asthma, in consequenee of submitting to the same treatment, suffered only one
fit at the end of the same two years, instead of experiencing one every day, as
he had done upon the common treatment.

Afterward, to remove an opinion, that had been often insisted on, of the gout
not depending upon debility, because inflammation accompanied it; little
doubting that the inflammation itself depended on debility, he subjected the
question to experiment. He invited some friends to dinner, and by the use of
certain stimulants used in their presence These are mentioned in Dr. Jones's
Enquiry.
, recovered the most perfect use of that foot, with which, before dinner, he
could not touch the floor for pain. By this fact he saw, that not only the gout
itself, but the inflammation accompanying it, was asthenic that is, depending
on debility.
. And he found, afterward, such inflammations affecting the throat in the
putrid, in the gangrenous sore throat, and the joints in rheumatalgia, or that
rheumatism which depends upon debility, and is improperly denominated chronic
rheumatism The word rheumatism, as implying a similarity of the disease to the
true acute rheumatism, should be rejected, and this term, taken from Sauvage,
substituted in its place.
, and supposed, if there be any truth in that supposition to attack the brain
in the end of typhus, to be also asthenic.

As the gout affects the alimentary canal, and especially the stomach, and
proceeds in its course with distressing circumstances similar to those that
happen in dyspepsia or indigestion;
; being desirous to know if there was any affinity betwixt it and them, he
observed that they, as well as it, depended on debility, and yielded to
stimulant remedies. Nay, he afterward found for certain, that all the
spasmodic, all the convulsive, diseases of the same canal or, first passages,
comprehending the passage to the stomach, that organ itself, and the intestines
below it;
, and nearly all the diseases of children, were of the same stamp.

Continuing his investigation of the same spasmodic and convulsive diseases,
when they occupy the organs of voluntary motion; he discovered that their
nature was also the same in kind, but only greater in degree; as they are
exemplified in the spasms and pains, that occur in various parts of the
external surface of the body, and in epilepsy or the falling sickness,
, and in tetanus themselves. And by that means he discerned, that a vast number
of affections, in which, upon the supposition of their being inflammatory, no
limits had been set to the use of the lancet, instead of arising from an
over-proportion of blood and excessive vigor, or any other such cause,
depended upon an under-proportion of that fluid, and other causes of debility,
and were to be cured, not by bleeding, nor any other evacuations such as
vomiting, purging, sweating, blistering, glistering, etc.
, but by filling the vessels, and restoring the strength of the whole system.

At first, for the purpose of removing fits of the gout, he went no farther
than the use of wine, and other strong drink, of a similar operation, and
nourishing food, that is seasoned meat, and kept the use of the more powerful
remedies in reserve. But, of late that is, now, for many years past.
, his surprising success in the use of the latter, has enabled him to find in
opium, and certain other stimuli, the secret of repelling the fits of the gout
as often as they returned, and, at the same time, re-establishing the ^ound
healthy state, a secret that has hitherto been so much wanted and despaired of.
This he has often effected both in himself and in other persons. It is now
going the third year, and near the end of it now the seventh,
, since he has always been able to prevent all return of the disease.

Taught by similar instances of actual practice, he found for certain that
bleeding discharges, which are called haemorrhages, do not depend on plethora
and vigor, but upon penury of blood and debility arising from any other
source, and therefore did he reject them from the number of sthenic diseases
Sthenic diseases, as will be afterward explained, are such as depend upon an
excessive application of the several powers that otherwise produce health.
, among which they had been arranged in the first edition of the text book,
reserving a place for them among the asthenic diseases in the second volume of
that work. For he saw, that bleeding, various other evacuations, abstinence,
cold, and sedatives, as they are called, proved hurtful; and that the stimulant
plan of cure alone, was salutary. Even wine and brandy, which had been thought
so hurtful in those diseases, he found the most powerful of all other remedies
in removing them. Upon finding that a certain fact; he learned, that in all the
diseases, in which others had thought there was abundance of blood, there was a
deficiency of it, and that from the defect of that and of other stimulants the
real cause of the diseases was debility; and stimulants, given in proportion to
the degree of the cause, the proper remedies.

In consequence of the light that thus beamed in from the practice, he found,
that the cause and cure of fevers, both intermittent and continued, was the
same as those already mentioned.

Gradually led, as it were by the hand of nature, around the whole circle of
asthenic diseases diseases of debility.
, he thoroughly perceived, that they all depended upon the same cause, that is,
debility, that they were all to be removed by the same kind of remedies, to
wit, stimulant^ Wherever the word stimulant is used without a particular
qualification of its degree, the degree is understood to be greater then that
required in the healthy state, as will afterward more fully be explained.
, and that neither their cause nor their cure differed but in degree.

With respect to sthenic diseases, the nature of either the cause or cure of
which nobody had observed; he had long ago understood that inflammation in
them, as well as the other symptoms, were not, as had been universally believed
by Systematics, the cause, but the effect: and that the inflammation arose from
the cause, i. e. the diathesis or habit.
, and not even from it, unless very violent. In fine, he experienced in his own
person, that catarrh was not produced by cold according to the common opinion,
but by heat, and the other known stimuli, and was removed by cold and other
debilitating powers. By which discovery he was led to form a proper judgment of
the catarrhal symptoms in the measles: In which he found, that a very great man
who had improved the cure of sthenic diseases, but never attained to any
knowledge of the asthenic, had been misled, by the alexipharmic physicians.
And, as these symptoms are the most dangerous part of the disease, he was right
in supposing, that the proper cure of them very much interested that of the
whole disease. The consequence of which was that it came out a demonstrated
fact, that the refrigerating antiphlogistic plan of cure was of equal service
in the measles and smallpox.

In sthenic diseases he illustrated the cause, enlarged the plan of cure,
enriched the knowledge of both, explained and reduced the whole to a certain
principle; he distributed all general diseases into two forms, a sthenic and an
asthenic one Sthenic signifies an excess, asthenic a defect, of invigorating
power.
. He demonstrated that the former depended upon excess, the latter upon
deficiency of exciting power; that the former were to be removed by
debilitating, the latter by stimulant, remedies; that the hurtful powers which
excited either were the remedies of the other, and the contrary; and that they
acted by the same operation with the powers which produce the most perfect
health, differing from them only in degree. He extended the same doctrine to
plants. He laid down a principle which is illustrated and confirmed by all the
parts of the detail, and itself reflects illustration and confirmation upon
every one of them. Lastly, he put the question, whether the medical art,
hitherto conjectural, incoherent, and in the great body of it false, was not at
last, reduced to a demonstrated science, which might be called the science of
life That question has been answered in the affirmative by every one who had
been at due pains to understand the doctrine.
.

PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION.
A PRESSING, and very general, demand for an English translation of the
Elementa Medicinae, made several years before the publication of the second
edition of that work, and successively repeated with an increasing importunity
ever since; a desire of spreading the knowledge of a doctrine, which had
exhibited so many indubitable proofs of its importance and utility to mankind:
an ambition, not quite extinguished by advancing years, domestic cares, and a
declining state of health, to get the better of the keenest, and most
universal, persecution, that ever was raised against an useful and extensive
discovery; the necessity for a translation in the present decaying state of the
knowledge of the Latin language; the danger of the doctrine coming before the
public from adventurers unequal to the task; and some other circumstances,
partly of a private, partly of a domestic, nature, with which it would be
impertinent to trouble the reader; all these at last prevailed with the author
to submit, for once, to a task, otherwise not desirable, that of translating
his own work. Such a task seemed more naturally calculated to lay the
foundation of the commencing same of an ingenious pupil. But, as no one of
many, whose literature and knowledge of the subject completely qualified them
for the undertaking, wished to supersede the occasion for his engaging in it
himself; and as the courage of several persons of a different description kept
not pace with their affectation or interestedness; it is to be hoped the public
will not be displeased to receive the work from the author himself. This
performance is intended for the use of three sets of readers; those who do not
readily enter into a thought conveyed in pure Latin, and who, therefore, might
wish to be possessed of a translation for the sake of comparing it with the
original, and, thereby, of acquiring, renewing, or improving their knowledge of
the latter; those, who are only acquainted with such Latin, as has prevailed in
modern times; and, lastly, those, who either cannot, or will not be subjected
to the trouble of reading Latin at all, and who, surely, may, often be better
employed.

Both this, and the original work, are intended not for the exclusive use of
medical readers, but also for that of the public at large, it being evident,
that, without even the exception of the professional knowledge of each
individual, that of his own health is preferable to all others. And such ana
^quisition becomes valuable in proportion to its justness and solidity. The
public are presented with a work, that claims the merit of having reduced the
doctrine and practice of medicine to scientific certainty and exactness. With
respect to the form, in which it is delivered, it is stripped of that jargon of
numerous, unmeaning or misleading terms, and all that mystery either in style
or matter, that has hitherto rendered the pretended healing art impenetrable to
the most intelligent and discerning, and locked it fast up in the schools. No
terms are admitted but the few that necessity imposed, and these are every
where defined. The style is simple, and suited to the simplicity of the
subject. In the language and composition, as far as the thoughts, which are new
throughout, and that restraint, which is inseparable from exactness of
translation, permit, clearness is every where preferred to elegance, and
diffusion to brevity.

The author, in prefixing his name to both forms of his work, has thrown the
gauntlet to its numerous, but anonymous, opposers. They are, therefore, called
upon, now or never, to disprove it, and the judicious and candid part of
mankind to judge between the parties.

INCITABILITATIS ET INCITATIONIS SERIES.
Incitabilitas Mors Incitatio ADVERSA VALETUDO VEL MORBI. CAUSAE. MORBORUM
CURATIO. NOXAE. JUSTA. 0 -- -- -- 80 4 Maxima Asthenic^ Indirecta debilitas
Apoplexia. Paralysis. Pestis. Febris Malign. Cynanche Typhoides. Variola
confluens. Hydrothorax. Phthisis. Dysenteria contagiosa, etc.
Nimia magnorum stimulorum vis, ut calor, exercitatio, victus, sanguinis
abundantia, gravis animi adfectus, contagio, et similia. Indirecta debilitas.
Medendi consilium est incitationem sustentare. Remedia sunt vehementes stimuli,
ut electricitas, opium, ether, spiritus Gallicus, vinum, moschus, cortex
peruvianus, serpentaria, camphora, juscula lauta, et similia. -- -- -- -- -- --
-- -- 5 -- -- -- 75 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 10 -- -- -- 70 2 Magna Sthenica
Sthenica vel Phlogistica Diathexis Synocha. Phrenitis. Cynanche inflammat.
Variola. Rubeola. Peripneumonia. Dysenteria. Mania, etc.
Eaedem, ac supra dictae, sed pon ea vi incumbentes, qua indirectam debilitatem
creent, sed majore quam infra. Aucta vel magna incitatio. Medendi consilium
incitationem imminuere; quod fit, magnos stimulos subducendo, exiguis vel
deficientibus utendo; scilicet, frigido cubiculo, animo tranquilitate,
sanguinis missione, alvi purgatione, parco victu, et similibus. -- -- -- -- --
-- -- -- 15 -- -- -- 65 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 20 -- -- -- 60 1 Lenis Sthenica
Synochus. Rheumatismus. Catarrhus. Scarlatina. Militaria. Varicella.
Ophthalmia, etc.
Eaedem, ac supra dictae, sed non ea vi incumbentes qua magnam sthenicam
creent, sed majore quam in secunda valetudine. Aucta minus incitatio. Hic
consilium incitationem, ita ut supra, sed modice magis, minuere. -- -- -- -- --
-- -- -- 25 -- -- -- 55 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- ad Sthenicos Morbos
Opportunitas 30 -- -- -- 50 Secunda Valetude Secundae Valetudinis Species Ad 30
ad 50 in ferie secundae valetudinis species jure notatur, quia, nisi in 40,
absoluta valetudo non contingit: In magna enim stimulorum, quotidie
incumbentium, varietate; cujusmodi cibus et potio et adfectuum animi vis, paulo
gravius agentia sunt, raro medium punctum attingitur, plerumque intra 30 et 50
variat incitatio. -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 35 -- -- -- 45 -- -- -- -- -- -- --
-- 40 -- -- -- 40 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 45 -- -- -- 35 -- -- -- -- -- -- --
-- ad Asthenicos Merbos Opportunitus 50 -- -- -- 30 1 Lenis Asthenica Asthenica
Vel. Antiphlogistica ^inthesis Recta debilitas Febres intermittentes. Colica
simplex. Dyspepsia. Hypocondriasis. Hysteria. Epistaxis. Menorrhoea.
Amenorrhoea, etc.
Hae noxae sunt stimulorum, secundae valetudini necessariorum, subductio, et
potestatum, quae, licet stimulent, non satis id faciunt, abusus. Imminuta
incitatio vel recta debilitas. Medendi consilium est incitationem augere;
remedia vehementes stimuli, quales ad indirectam debilitatem medendam
adhibentur, hoc tantum differentes, quod a parva eorum hic vi incipiendum, et
paulatim ad majorum adscendendum. -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 55 -- -- -- 25 -- --
-- -- -- -- -- -- 60 -- -- -- 20 2 Magna Asth^^ica Rheumatalgia. Cholera.
Epilepsia. Chorea. Rachitis. Haemoptysis. Scrophula,,etc.
Sant stimuli de^cientes soli, ut ^rigus, parcus cibus, nec ex bona materia,
metus, et similia. Imminuta incitatio vel recta debilitas. Consilium his idem,
ac modo dictum, cautiore stimulorum usu. -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 65 -- -- -- 15
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 70 -- -- -- 10 3 Maxima Asth^^^^^ Typhus. Colica
Pictonum. Podagra. Tetanus. Scorbutus. Diabetes. Hydrops. Icterus, etc.
Sant stimuli deficientes soli. Imminuta incitatio vel recta debilitas. Idem
etiam consilium, scilicet augere incitationem, et iisdem quoque stimulis, sed
etiam cautius administrandis. -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 75 -- -- -- 5 -- -- -- --
-- -- -- -- 80 -- -- -- 0

JOANNI BRUNONI, M. D. HANC TABULAM, UT SUAE IN PRAECE^TOREM REVERENTIAE
MONUMENTUM DICAT ILLIUS AMICUS ET DISCIPULUS, SAMUEL LYNCH.

THE ELEMENTS OF MEDICINE. THE FIRST AND REASONING PART.
CHAP. I.
I. MEDICINE is the science of preserving the good, and of preventing and
curing the bad, health of animals.

II. The application of the same profession to vegetables, should be named
Agriculture.

III. Good health consists in a pleasant, easy, and exact use of all the
functions.

IV. Bad health consists in an uneasy, difficult, or disturbed exercise of all
or any of the functions. The latter respects diseases.

V. Diseases are either extended over the whole system, or confined to a part;
the former merit the appellation of Universal, the latter that of Local.

VI. The former are always universal from their first commencement, the latter
in their course, and that but seldom. The former are always, the latter never,
preceded by predisposition. The originality of the former proceeds from an
affection of the principle of life, of the latter from local injury. The cure
of those is applied to the whole body, of these to the injured part.

VII. To the province of the Physician belong all the universal, and as many of
the local, as first affect a part, and, in consequence of that, at last injure
the rest of the body with some resemblance to the universal ones.

VIII. Predisposition to disease is that state of the body, that recedes from
health, and approaches to disease in such a manner, as to seem still within the
boundaries of the former, of which, however, it is only an insiduous and
deceiving resemblance.

IX. These three states Of health, disease, and predisposition.
constitute the life Or living state.
of animals; to which that of vegetables is not dissimilar, but more imperfect.

CHAP. II.
X. IN all the states of life, man and other animals differ from themselves in
their dead state, or from any other inanimate matter in this property alone;
that they can be affected by external agents, as well as by certain functions
peculiar to themselves, in such a manner, that the phenomenon peculiar to their
living state, that is, their own functions, can be produced. This proposition
comprehends every thing that is vital in nature, and therefore, at least,
applies to vegetables.

XI. The external agents in general, are reducible to heat, diet, Consisting of
food, drink, and condiment.
, other matters taken into the stomach, the blood, the fluids secreted from the
blood, and air. How poisons and contagions come under the same view shall
afterward be mentioned.

XII. The functions of the system itself, producing the same effect, are
muscular contraction, sense, and the energy of the brain in thinking, and in
exciting passion and emotion. "While these affect the system in the same manner
as the other agents; so, with respect to their origin, they arise both from the
other and from themselves."

XIII. The result of withholding either the property distinguishing living from
dead matter, or the operation of either of the two sets of powers, is the
nonexistence of life. Nothing else is necessary to life.

XIV. The property, by which both sets of powers act, should be named
Excitability; and the powers themselves, Exciting powers. By the word "body" is
meant both the body simply so called, and also as endued with an intellectual
part, a part appropriated to passion and emotion, or to the soul; the
appellation commonly given to it in medical writings is system No disquisition
is here meant to be entered into, as religion is no where interfered with, but
left to its proper guardians.
.

XV. The common effect, produced by the exciting powers, is sense, motion,
mental action, and the passions. Which effect being one and the same, it must,
therefore, be granted, that the operation of all the powers is also one and the
same That is, since sense, motion, mental functions, and the passions are the
only, and a constant, effect of the exciting powers, acting upon the
excitability; and since that happens, whether one, or more, or all the powers,
or which soever of them, act, the irresistible conclusion, that arises in the
mind, is, that the effect of the powers being the same, the mode of operation
of them al^ must be the same. This mode of reasoning, which is certainly as
just as it is new in medicine, will often occur, and, we trust, will stand the
test of the most scrupulous scrutiny.
.

XVI. The effect of the exciting powers, acting upon the excitability, is to be
denominated Excitement.

XVII. Since, of the same exciting powers, some act by evident impulses, and
the identity of the effect of others infers the ^ame mode Or ratio.
of operation; and since they have all a certain activity in them, they ought
to be denominated stimulant, or stimuli.

a. S^muli are either universal or local.

^. The universal stimuli are the exciting powers, so acting upon the
excitability, as always to produce some excitement over the whole system. And
their appellation of universal is convenient to distinguish them from the local.

g. The local stimuli act only on the part to which they are applied; and do
not, without previously producing an affection in it, affect the rest of the
body.

CHAP. III.
XVIII. WE know not what excitability is, or in what manner it is affected by
the exciting powers. But, whatever it be, either a certain quantity, or a
certain energy of it, is assigned to every being upon the commencement of its
living state. The quantity, or energy, is different in different animals, and
in the same animal at different times. It is partly owing to the uncertain
nature of the subject, partly to the poverty of common language, and likewise
to the novelty of this doctrine, that the phrases of the excitability being
abundant, increased, accumulated, superfluous; or weak, not well enough
sustained, not well enough exercised, or deficient in energy, when enough of
stimulus has not been applied; sometimes tired, fatigued, worn out, languid,
exhausted or consumed, when the stimulus has operated in a violent degree; or
being at other times in vigor, or reduced to one half, when the stimulus has
neither been applied in excess nor defect, will be employed in different parts
of this ensuing work. Both upon this, and every other subject we must abide by
facts; and carefully avoid the slippery question about causes, as being in
general incomprehensible, and as having ever proved a venomous snake to
philosophy.

XIX. As there is always some excitability, however small, while life remains,
and the action of the exciting powers in one degree or another is never
wanting; the conclusion from that fact is, that they are all endowed with more
or less of stimulant power, and that this must be either excessive, in due
proportion, or deficient. A great quantity of blood stimulates in excess, and,
therefore, produces the diseases that depend upon too much stimulus; but an
under proportion of blood, though debilitating in its effect, and inducing the
diseases that depend upon debility as their cause, must still be understood to
be stimulant; but only so much more weakly stimulant, as the penury is more
considerable: The same conclusion applies to all the other exciting powers,
unless that poisons, contagions, and some few other powers, might to some seem
exceptions. But,

XX. Poisons either do not produce the universal diseases, which make our
present subject; or, if they do, by operating the same effect as the ordinary
exciting powers, their mode of operation must also be allowed to be the same
This proposition of frequent occurrence in this work, that identity of known
effect, always produces identity of cause though unknown, will be found to be a
mode of reasoning of equal service in guarding our reader from the
deceitfulness of abstract reasoning, and in leading him into a proper mode of
investigating solid and useful truth.
.

XXI. Some contagions accompany diseases depending on too much stimulus As the
small pox and measles.
; others those that consist in debility As the petechial typhus ^ever, the
plague.
. If both these are the product, not of contagion alone, but, by a conjoint
operation, also of the hurtful powers that usually depend upon stimulus, which
is a fact ascertained: the effect, therefore, in this case being the same, the
conclusion is unavoidable, that their cause is also the same, and the mode of
operation of both the same. It must, therefore, be admitted that the operation
of contagions is stimulant This is all that is contended for at present; the
degree of their stimulus will be afterward considered.
. It makes for the same conclusion, that no remedies, but those that cure
diseases, depending upon the operation of the usual hurtful powers, remove
those that have been supposed to be induced by contagions. Finally, the great
debilitating energy, observable in certain contagions, does not more prove a
diversity of action in them, than it d^es in the case of an equal or greater
degree of debility, arising from cold At the freezing point, or below it, man,
and similar animals of w^rm blood, could not live a second in a dense medium,
such as that of water; but the animals of cold blood can.
.

d. It might appear to some, that a certain matter of food, not sufficiently
nourishing, and therefore, of hurtful tendency; as also that emetics, and
purgatives, and sedative passions, as they are called, might be thought to
belong to the number of powers, the operation of which might seem so many
exceptions from the ordinary stimulant operation.

e. In general all vegetable matter, when depended upon alone for nourishment,
is hurtful, at least, to those who have been accustomed to better, and that by
a debilitating operation; and yet even it, since it supports life, however
incommodiously, longer than a total want of food, must, of course, be
stimulant. But, if asthenic diseases arise from vegetable food, and not, to a
certain degree, from want; that circumstance must be owing to a certain change
produced in the system, by which the sum total of stimuli is rendered less fit
to act upon the excitability. That such is the case, is proved by the most
stimulant matter of food losing part of its stimulus by continued use, and
requiring the substitution of another in its place.

z. In the same manner is the operation of emetics and purgatives to be
explained, as diminishing the sum total of excitement; which depends partly on
an agreeable relation that the exciting power hears to the excitability, or on
an agreeable sensation. That it is sometimes the relation, sometimes the
sensation, that acts in this case, is evident from the hurtful effect of things
most grateful to the sense, as in the examples of the legumina, and other
articles of vegetable food; and by the salutary effect of disagreeable things,
as the several forms and preparations of opium: Both which produce their
effect, the former by a debilitating, that is, an insufficiently stimulant, the
latter by a considerably stimulant, operation Suppose a certain power, as 40,
to mark the degree, in which the sum total of proper stimulant operation
consists, and the excitement, produced to that degree, to arise from different
exciting powers, all of them conducing to the same effect, by the operation of
each bearing an agreeable relation to the excitability, or producing an
agreeable sensation on it; the inference to be drawn from that fact is, that a
certain suitableness in the mixture of the whole to the excitability, as well
as the degree of stimulus, produces the effect. Again, suppose certain
ingredients, which cannot be denied to be stimulant, added to this given
mixture, the effect of the added article will be one of two: it will either
increase the excitement first produced, without altering the agreeable state
which that had induced; or it will, still without any reason for supposing it
not stimulant, diminish the excitement that had arisen from the combination of
the agreeable articles. And this will happen merely from the effect of a
discordant combination of exciting powers, while that, which diminishes the
exciting effect of the others, as well as these others, that constituted its
given sum, are both stimulant; but the former in a higher, the latter in a
lower degree* and therefore acting over all as debilitating powers. Mustard
taken with meat, or onions with beef-stakes, are agreeable to most tastes; but
they are, though still stimulant, disagreeable to others, and debilitating.
Peas-soup and peas-pudding, though, independent of the animal juice infused
into them, they are far from being salutary, will be bor^e by many; while in
others, especially those who have been accustomed to more stimulant meals, and
in persons who are gouty, and liable to complaints of the first passages, they
will produce morbid affection. The same thing is to be said of beef-steaks with
onions, which agree with the sound state, and disagree with that of the first
passages just now mentioned. With regard to all these enfeebling matters, there
is no question about their being stimulant; the whole effect is to be referred
to their rendering a mixture, stimulant in a certain degree, less so.
.

^. The sedative affections, as they are called, are only a lesser degree of
the exciting ones. Thus fear and grief are only diminutions Not passions
different in kind.
, or lower degrees, of confidence and joy. The news of money gained produces
joy, and grief arises from the loss of it. Here then no operation of a nature
contrary to stimulant takes place; it is nothing but a diminution, or inferior
degree, of stimulant operation. The subject of the passions admits of the same
reasoning in every respect as that of heat The doctrine of cold as an active
power, and, opposite to heat, is now aniversal^y rejected, and considered as
only a diminution of heat.
; and in the the same manner all the bodies in nature, that seem to be
sedative, are debilitating, that is, weakly stimulant; owing their debility to
a degree of stimulus greatly inferior to the proper one.

XXII. Since the general powers produce all the phenomenon of life, and the
only operation, by which they do so, is stimulant; it, therefore, follows, that
the whole phenomenon of life, every state and degree of health and disease,
also consist in stimulus, and are owing to no other cause.

XXIII. Excitement, the effect of the exciting powers, the true cause of life,
is, within certain boundaries, produced in a degree proportioned to the degree
of stimulus. The degree of stimulus, when moderate Of a middle kind.
, produces health; in a higher degree it gives occasion to diseases of
excessive stimulus; in a lower degree, or ultimately low, it induces those that
depend upon a deficiency of stimulus, or debility. And, as what has been
mentioned, is the cause both of diseases and perfect health; so that which
restores the morbid to the healthy state, is a diminution of excitement in the
case of diseases of excessive stimulus, and an increase of the same excitement
for the removal of diseases of debility. Both which intentions are called
Indications of Cure.

XXIV. This mutual relation obtains betwixt excitability and excitement, that
the more weakly the powers have acted, or the less the stimulus has been, the
more abundant the excitability becomes; the more powerful the stimulus of the
agents has been, the excitability becomes the more exhausted.

XXV. A mean stimulus, affecting also a mean or half consumed excitability,
produces the highest excitement. And the excitement becomes less and less, in
proportion as either the stimulus is applied in a higher degree, or the
excitability more accumulated. Hence the vigor of youth, and the weakness of
childhood and old age. Hence, within a more moderate space of time, a middle
diet gives vigor, and debility is the effect of its being either too full or
too sparing.

XXVI. While that is the case, every age, every habit, if the excitement be
properly directed has its due degree of vigor accommodated to it. Childhood,
and that weakness, which an abundant excitability produces, admits of little
stimulus, but, upon less than the middle proportion becomes languid, upon more
is oppressed. Old age, and that frailty, which is occasioned by a deficiency of
excitability, requires a great deal of stimulus, becomes enfeebled by less, and
overset by more. The reason for the latter is, that the excitability, without
which no vital action is produced, does not exist in that degree, by which
vigor of the functions is produced; while the former is to be explained from
the exciting or stimulant power, without which the excitability is of no
effect, not being applied in that degree, which is requisite to the vigor that
it should give. The impotency of stimulus may rise to such a degree, as to
produce death from its extreme under proportion. On the contrary, the
exhaustion of excitability may go so far, as to extinguish life by the extreme
excess of stimulus.

XXVII. The circumstances, under which excitement is produced, have two
confining boundaries.

XXVIII. The one of these circumstances is, exhaustion of the excitability from
violence of stimulus. For all the stimulant powers may carry their stimulant
energy to that degree, under which no excitement will arise. The reason for
which is, that the body becomes no longer fit to receive the operation of
stimulus; another expression for which is, that the excitability is consumed.

XXIX. The termination Or cessation, or extinction.
of excitement, from the exhaustion of the excitability by stimulus, may be
either temporary or irreparable, and may arise either from a short continuance
of a high degree of stimulus, or a long application of one the excess of which
is more moderate. Both circumstances come to the same thing; the high degree of
stimulus compensating for the shortness of its application, and the shortness
of its application for its greater moderation in degree A force of stimulus as
six, operating for a^space of time as one; and a force of stimulus as one,
operating for a space of time as ^ix, will produce the same effect in wearing
out the excitability.
. The effect of the former is sudden death; of the latter a more gradual death
preceded by diseases. And though a most exact measure of excitement were kept
up, yet death at last, however late, supervenes.

XXX. Ebriety, debauch in eating and drinking, sweat, languor, heat either
operating alone, or overcoming the effect of cold, dullness in mental exertion
from excessive thinking, or sinking of the spirits in consequence of violence
of passion, finally, sleep; all these are the consequences of a short
application of a high degree of stimulus, operating an exhaustion of
excitability. The long continuance of a more moderate excess in the force of
stimulus, is followed by the frailty of old age, predisposition to diseases of
debility, as well as those diseases themselves. The ultimate termination of
both is death.

XXXI. When the excitability is wasted by any one stimulus, there is still a
reserve of it, capable of being acted upon by any other. Thus a person, who has
dined fully; or is either ^atigued in body, or tired with intellectual
exertion, and therefore under a great disposition to sleep, will be recruited
by strong drink; and, when the last has produced the same sleepiness, the more
diffusible stimulus of opium will arouse him A gentleman, engaged in a literary
composition, which required an uninterrupted exertion of his mental faculties
for more than forty hours, was enabled to go through it with alacrity, by
supporting himself in this manner. After dining well and setting to business,
he took a g^a^s of wine every hour. Ten hours after he ate something
nourishing* but spa^ing in quantity, and for some hours kept himself up with
punch not too strong. And, when he ^ound himself at last like to be evercome by
an inclination to sleep, he changed all his stimuli for an op^ate; and finished
his business in forty hours. What he had wrote was n^w to be put to the press.
He had next to watch and correct the proofs, which cost him four or five hours
further continuance of vigilance and activity. To effect this he took a glass
with the Master Printer, while his men were going on with their part of the
work. The succession of stimuli in this case was first food, next the stimulus
of the intellectual function, then wine, then the food varied, then punch, then
opium, then punch and conversation.
. Even after opium fails, and leaves him heavy and oppressed by the same
propensity, a stimulus still higher and more diffusible, if there be any such,
will have the same effect. A person fatigued with a journey will be roused by
music to dance and skip; and he will be enabled to run after a flying beauty,
if her flight encourages him with the hope of overtaking her.

XXXII. The waste of excitability, first exhausted by stimuli, and then
recruited by new ones, is most difficultly repaired, because the more a
stimulant operation has been employed, that is the more the stimuli have been
applied; there remains the less access to fresh stimuli, by the operation of
which the failure of excitement may be removed.

XXXIII. The reason of the difficulty is, that no means of reproducing the
healthy state, that is, the proper degree of excitement, is left; but the very
circumstance that occasioned the waste, that is, already an excess of stimulant
operation, not admitting of more stimulus.

XXXIV. Such, in fine, is the nature of the same loss of excitement, that it
rushes to instant death, unless proper measures be taken to preserve life by a
great stimulus, but less than that which occasioned it, and then by a still
less, till by means of the moderate stimulus, that is suitable to nature, or a
somewhat greater, life may at last be preserved. The difficult cure of
drunkards and gluttons, already affected with diseases, sufficiently evinces,
that the same consideration applies to all the exciting powers that stimulate
in excess This proposition applies to the most difficult part of the practice
for the cure of diseases, that is, those that depend upon a certain species of
debility, which in the very next paragraph will be denominated indirect.
.

XXXV. The excitability, thus exhausted by stimulus is debility, which should
be denominated indirect, because it does not arise from defect, but excess of
stimulus Like another debility, by and by to be spoken of.


XXXVI. Through the whole progress to indirect debility, the second impression
of every stimulus has less effect than the first, the third less than the
second, and so forth to the last* which gives no more excitement and the effect
takes place in proportion to the degree or duration of the several impressions,
though every one always adds some excitement. The inference from this
proposition is, that, before the establishment of indirect debility* and, when
it is now upon the eve of being established, the stimulus which produces it,
should be withdrawn; a debilitating power should be applied, as in giving over
drinking wine at the end of an entertainment, an substituting water in its
place, and applying refrigeration to a person who has been exposed to an
excessive degree of heat A convalescent, from a disease of debility, was
prescribed wine, but not to carry it to excess. A hiccup was the signal, by
which he was to understand, that he had carried that stimulus too far. He
desisted, and ended his jollity with two or three tumbler glasses of water;
which prevented the establishment of the indirect debility into which he was
about to fall.


XXXVII. The same progress to indirect debility is retarded by diminishing the
excitement from time to time, and proportionally increasing the excitability,
and thereby giving more force to the action of the stimuli. Take for example,
cold bathing from time to time, lowering the diet from time to time, and a
similar abatement of all the other stimulant powers.

th. If cold sometimes seems to stimulate, it produces that effect, not as
actual cold, but either by diminishing excessive heat, and reducing it to its
proper stimulant temperature The principle upon which the operation of the cold
bath depends has never been understood, and therefore all reasoning, as well as
practice, with respect to it, has been conducted in quite a vague and random
manner. Suppose a range of excitement, the middle and healthy point of which is
40 degrees of excitement, the ultimate degree of its excess 70. It is,
therefore, the intermediate degrees between these extremes, to which the
practice of cold bathing is applicable. From 80 to 70, the former of which is
the head of the scale, and constitutes the range of indirect debility; and
likewise through all the intermediate degrees from 40 down to 0, the cold bath,
which is a weakening power, as well as every other, is improper. It is a
mistake prevalent among systematic writers and lecturers, that cold is of
service in the ^evers and other diseases of the Torrid Zone. The truth is,
that, in that country, there is no access to the use of actual cold. All, that
can be done there, is, by various means, to diminish the excess of heat, which
is constantly rushing from those degrees of it which stimulate and excite, to
those, in which its ultimate stimulant power destroys excitement, and leaves
nothing but indirect debility.
, or by rendering the body accessible to air, or by accumulating the
excitability diminished by excessive stimulus, and communicating energy to the
stimulus of the exciting powers, now acting too languidly. An instance of this
operation of cold occurs in the Torrid Zone, where actual cold is scarcely to
be procured, in the use of refrigerants, as they are called, in fevers, and in
the contraction, by means of cold, of a scrotum previously relaxed by heat.
Nay, the effect goes so far, that sthenic diseases may arise more certainly
from cold, alternating with heat, and either preceding or following it, than
from pure heat.

XXXVIII. The other condition or circumstance, limiting excitement, is, an
energy of the exciting powers too small, and therefore insufficient to produce
excitement. As this case arises from a deficiency of stimulus, and an abundant
excitability, it ought to be distinguished from the other, which supposes an
abundance of the former, and deficiency of the latter. The same distinction is
required also for the purpose of practice, All the exciting powers may fall so
short of stimulant force, as to produce that effect. They all, therefore,
equally serve to illustrate and confirm this proposition.

XXXIX. In this case, the excitability is abundant, because, in consequence of
the stimuli being withheld, it is not exhausted. Thus, in the cold bath, the
excitement is diminished, because the stimulus of heat, and, therefore, the sum
of all the stimuli, is deficient; and the excitability, as being less exhausted
by stimulus, is increased This is altogether a negative circumstance. The
accumulation, increase, or abundance or excitability, take any term you please,
is not occasioned by any action or operation, but by the want of action, the
want of operation. To form an adequate idea of it, suppose a scale of
excitability of 80 degrees, as in the line here drawn.

EXCITING POWER.

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80

EXCITABILITY.

80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0

At the commencement of life, the sum total assigned is understood to be 80,
because no part, as yet, is wasted by the action of stimuli. Next it is wasted
in proportion as these are applied from the beginning to the end of the scale.
Its wasting is, therefore, owing to action and operation, but its accumulation
to the reverse, the want of the action or operation of the exciting powers, as
is expressed by the numbers placed above those first mentioned. Thus one degree
of exciting power applied takes off one degree of excitability, and every
subsequent degree impairs the excitability in a proportion exactly equal to its
degree of force. Thus a degree of stimulant or exciting power equal to 10,
reduces the excitability to 70; 20 to 60; 30 to 50; 40 to 40; 50 to 30; 60 to
20; ^0 to 10; 80 to 0. And on the contrary, the subtraction of stimulant power
allows the excitability to accumulate. Thus, when the excitement is at 79,
constituting only one degree of life, take off one degree of exciting power,
and 2 degrees of excitability will arise. As 80 degrees of exciting power leave
no excitability, so 70 degrees of exciting power leave 10; 60 20; 50 30; 40 40;
30 50; 20 60; 10 70; 0 80. Hence death takes place from nothing positive, but
from the negation of the only means by which life is supported; which are the
several exciting or stimulant powers, now fully explained.


. The same conclusion applies to famished persons, to water drinkers, to those
who are in a state of refrigeration from other causes, to those who have
suffered evacuations of any kind, to those who have neglected the stimulus of
exercise, and given themselves up to indolence, to those who have neglected the
use of that stimulus, which exercise of the mind affords, and to persons in low
spirits. The effect of withdrawing any stimulus is the more liable to produce
direct debility, the more any person has been accustomed to a higher operation
of it For instance, persons accustomed to drink wine, and eat wellseasoned
nourishing animal food, will be more hurt by a water and vegetable regimen,
than those who have not lived so high in that respect. The inhabitants of
Britain could not live long upon the diet of the Gentoos. Persons in genteel
life could never undergo the work of day laborers upon their fare.
. Take, for an example, the gout* and many other diseases, under the same
circumstances, affecting some, and sparing others Vegetable aliment, and fruits
and cold roots as cucumbers, melons, acid drinks, and many other things not
sufficiently stimulant, will bring on a fit of the gout, all or any of them, at
any time; while there are other persons free from the taint which distinguishes
that disease, who can use them with impunity, or, at least, with much more
freedom and less harm. Something similar to this observation applies to most
diseases.
.

XL. As, during the increase of excitability, the excitement decreases, and in
proportion to the increase of the former; so that that process may go all the
way to death, is a fact from which nature exhibits no exception. It is
confirmed by the effect of all the debilitating powers mentioned above; every
individual of which, as often as it proves urgent, has a rapid tendency to
death.

XLI. The defect of any one stimulus, and the proportional abundance of
excitability, is, for the time, compensated by any other, and often with great
advantage to the system. So a person, who has dined insufficiently, and
therefore not well enough stimulated, is recruited by a piece of good news. Or,
if during the course of the day, he has not been sufficiently invigorated by
the stimulant operation of corporeal or mental exercise, and consequently
likely to pass a sleepless night, he will be laid asleep by a dose of strong
liquor. When the latter is not at hand, opium will supply its place. The want
of the venereal gratification is relieved by wine, and the want of the latter
is made amends for by the use of the former, each banishing the languor
occasioned by the want of the other. The same conclusion applies to the use of
stimuli, for which we have an artificial, rather than a natural, craving. The
longing for snuff, when it cannot be got, is gratified by the practice of
chewing tobacco; and, when any one is languid for want of tobacco, smoking
supplies the place of it. Nay, when the functions, as they often are, have
undergone a temporary lesion, and on account of that, there is no access to the
use of certain accustomary and natural stimuli; the substitution of others,
less accustomary, and less natural, supports life, till the desire for the
natural stimuli is restored, and these are now in a condition to support the
natural vigor as usual, and the health finally established This proposition is
of the utmost importance, as holding out the true principle, upon which so many
actions and feelings of human life, both in health and disease, are to be
explained, and particularly as laying down an indication, which applies to
19/^^;ths of all the sebrile diseases, and includes our artificial as well as
our natural desires and appetites.
.

XLII. As, in this manner, the superabundance of excitability, proportioned to
the deficiency of stimulus, may through all the degrees from its smallest to
its greatest quantity, be worn out to a certain extent, by one stimulus, and
then another, and the danger of its morbid accumulation awarded, till the sum
of it be brought down to that, which is suitable to health; so, the more
abundant the same excitabilty is, that is the more stimuli are withdrawn, or
the greater penury of the most powerful stimuli is; the less recourse can be
had to that mediocrity of excitability on which the vigor of life depends; and
the weakness may go to that pitch, the excitability arrive at that degree of
abundance, that the loss of excitement may at last become irreparable. This
proposition is both illustrated and confirmed by the use of every debilitating
power; as is exemplified by cold, famine, thirst, and the progress of fevers.

XLIII. This superabundant excitability proceeds with such rapidity to death,
that the only means of restoring health, is first to encounter it with a very
small dose of diffusible stimulus, a dose scarcely exceeding the scanty Or
under-proportioned.
porportion of stimulus, that occasioned it; then, after wasting a part of the
superabundance, to proceed to somewhat a stronger dose of the stimulus; and in
that manner to be constantly taking off whatever superfluity still remains,
till at last the salutary mediocrity is regained. This state is the converse of
that debility, which arises from a worn-out excitability An instance of a
worn-out excitability is that debility which arises from intoxication; one of
an accumulated excitability is that which dram-drinkers experience the day
after a debauch, in consequence of which their hands shake till they are
re-excited by their favorite cordial.
, and the danger of death occasioned by it. To give examples, a famished person
is not immediately to be gratified with a full meal; a person afflicted with a
long duration or high degree of thirst, is not immediately indulged with a
large draught: but the former should be given bit by bit, the latter drop by
drop, then both of them gradually more plentifully. A person benumbed with cold
should gradually receive the cherishment of heat. Every person, thoroughly
penetrated with grief, sorrow, or any high dejection of mind, should have good
news gradually communicated to him. The news of the safety of the Roman
soldier, who survived the disaster of his countrymen at Cannae, should have
been communicated to the mother in a round-about way, at first as having no
better foundation than doubtful report, then as being somewhat more to be
depended on, afterward as having still a greater appearance of certainty,
finally, as not admitting a shadow of doubt: and last of all, before her son
was introduced to her, the woman should have been at the same time fortified
Had a part of her abundant excitability taken off.
both by other stimuli, and a glass of Falernian wine.

XLIV. Since all life consists in stimulus, and both the over-abundance and
deficiency of it is productive of diseases, and in exact proportion to the
over-abundance or deficiency; it follows, that the remedies of both these
deviations from the proper standard should be accommodated to their degree; and
that a high sum total of stimulus, through the course of the disease, should be
applied to a high degree of debility, or, what comes to the same thing, to a
very abundant excitability; but, that the quantity to be applied at any
particular time should be in the same proportion small that the excitability is
abundant.

XLV. The debility arising from defect of stimulus, merits the appellation of
DIRECT; because it happens in consequence of no positive hurtful power, but
from a subduction of the necessary supports of life.

XLVI. Through the whole course of direct debility, every deficiency of
stimulus is increased by a second, the second by a third, the third by a
fourth, till the effect at last comes to be a cessation of any further
excitement. This last, therefore, is never to be lessened and the debility
increased, with the view, forsooth, that in consequence of increasing the
excitability, the addition of a new stimulus may act more strongly. For, as
often as that is put in practice, the morbid state is increased; and, if the
debility should happen to be great, any further increase of it may induce
death, but never increase the strength. For, while great debility, and, indeed,
at pleasure, may, in that way, be produced; any excitement to be obtained from
a stimulus to come after, is confined within narrow boundaries Suppose, that in
place of an excitement of 40 degrees, the excitement is gone down to XXX, and
the excitability mounted up to L, and a debilitating power, such as the cold
bath, or any of those that are just now to be mentioned in the text, has been
superadded, reducing the excitement to XXV, and accumulating the excitability
to LV. Suppose also, that any stimulus is next employed, with a view to raise
the excitement, and sink or reduce the excitability; what will be the result?
As an accumulated excitability admits of a very small degree of stimulus at any
given time, while the accumulation of excitability, and sinking of excitement,
even to death itself, can be effected in the shortest space of time, and by any
one of the debilitating powers; consequently, the loss of vigor by the first
practice, and the reparation of it by the last, will bear no proportion to one
another; there will be no possibility of regaining the vigor thrown away, much
less any hope of procuring more than existed before it was lowered.
. Take for an example, cold bathing in dropsy, in the gout, in fevers By fevers
here are meant those diseases, so named, which depend on evident debility, and
not any of those, which, though most injudiciously so named, depend upon an
opposite cause. Instances of the former we have in all the fevers of the
intermittent or remittent kind, in synochus, typhus, and the plague itself,
with others that have never been considered as fevers. Examples of the latter
occur in synocha, or the common inflammatory fever, in the several diseases of
the same stamp accompanied with inflammation in a part, as in the throat,
lungs, various parts of the external surface.
, in persons who, previous to this, have undergone refrigeration, and in every
sort of debility. And who would treat the cases of famine, of deep sorrow, of
weakness of the mental function, of languor from inactivity, of penury of
blood, which are all cases of direct debility; who would treat them by
superinducing more direct debility, with a view to his gaining some advantage
from the very scanty stimulus, that can be admitted? The accumulation of
excitability, applies only to the predisposition, to indirect debility, or
sthenic diathesis.

XLVII. With respect to every sort of debility, it is to be observed, from all
that has been said upon both f^rms of debility, that, as indirect debility is
never to be cured by direct, so neither is the latter by the former, nor either
by the other, in the vain hope of obtaining benefit from the after employment
of any stimulus Indirect debility appears in the range of scale from 70 up to
80; the direct, in all the degrees below 40 to 0. The only cases, that admit of
debilitating operation, are those of excessive excitement from 40 up to 70. For
the cure of diseases within this latter range, all the directly debilitating
powers are proper, and, for the most part, they only; because there is no
access to the use of the indirectly debilitating powers, till they have run
their full course of stimulant operation from 40 to 70, at which last only they
become debilitating; and, though sometimes, and under certain circumstances,
they may be employed, the safest general rule is to avoid them.
.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Seat and Effects of Excitability.
XLVIII. THE seat of excitability in the living body Called system by medical
writers.
, is medullary nervous matter, and muscular solid; to which the appellation of
nervous system may be given. The excitability is inherent in it, but not
different in different parts of its seat. This fact is proved by the production
of sense, motion, the mental function, and passion That is, all the functions
which distinguish living animal systems.
, immediately, instantaneously, and not in a series of successive operation If
a small quantity of an opiate, a large one of any strong spirit, taken into the
stomach, can instantly alleviate an excruciating pain in a Part the most
distant from that to which the remedy is applied, and, in a short time after,
remove it altogether, as is now well known, how is that to be explained but by
the above proposition; it being impossible to pretend that it is carried in the
vessels? Nor is any other of the many hypotheses, that have been thought of for
the solution of this fact, more admissible. Should it be imagined, that it
moves along the nerves according to the last opinion, we demand proof of that
assertion; which has not yet, and will not easily be produced; while the fact
just now assigned carries its own demonstration in its bosom. The question
resolves itself wholely into the following solution; Why does opium at once
relieve the gout in the stomach, on the external surface, and in the remotest
extremity of that surface? Because the property in the living system, upon
which and by which it acts, is one and the same over all.
.

^. Different exciting powers are applied to different parts of the nervous
system, one at once to them all; but the mode of their application is such,
that, wherever they are applied, every one immediately affects the whole
excitability.

XLIX. Every one of the same powers always affects some part more than any
other, in which respect one power affects one part more than any other, another
another, with the same inequality. The affected part is generally that to which
any of the powers is directly applied.

^. And besides that, the more excitability has been assigned to any part from
the beginning of the living state, that is, the more vivid and sensible it is,
the operation upon it of each exciting power, whether acting with due force, or
in excess, or in defect, and through all the interminate degrees of its action,
becomes more powerful That is to say, if the exciting power acts with that
force which produces health, the degree of its action is greater upon the given
than any other part; as also when its action is either greater or less than
that of the middle salutary degree.
. Thus the brain and alimentary canal possesses more vivid excitability, that
is, more propensity to life, than other internal parts; and the parts below the
nails, than other external parts. Again, while the fact just now related is
such, a sit has been stated, the affection of the part bears no proportion to
that diffused over the whole body.

L. An estimate may be formed of the degree of affection in the part more
affected than any other, and of that which is diffused over the whole body, by
comparing the affection of the former with as many lesser affections, taken
together, as equal the number of parts in all the rest of the body. Suppose the
greater affection of a part As the inflammation of the lungs in peripneumony,
the inflammation of the foot in the gout, the effusion of water into a general
or particular cavity in dropsy.
to be as 6, and the lesser affection of every other part to be 3* and the
number of the parts less affected to amount to 1000 Which is keeping greatly
within the truth.
; then it will follow, that the ratio of affection, confined to the part, to
the affection of all the rest of the body, will be as 6 to 3000. This estimate,
or something very like to it, is proved by the effect of the exciting hurtful
powers, which always act upon the whole body The hurtful powers which produce
peripneumony, in common English, the inflammation of the lungs, are excess in
eating, drinking, exposure to heat, or to the alternation of heat with cold, an
over proportion of blood from inactivity, or an increased velocity of its
motion from violent labor, etc. the effect of any or all which must fall as
much upon every other part of the system as upon a small portion of extreme
vessels in the lungs, and therefore the morbid affection produced cannot be
confined to the latter, but must be extended to the former. The whole body must
partake of the morbid change; it must be one common affection pervading the
whole. If this is not probation, let any thing left on record by authors, or
any living physician, produce a single hurtful power, that, without affecting
the system over all, can penetrate into the the inmost recesses of the lungs,
and there produce an inflammation. I shall be content with one such hurtful
power, and in exchange for it, when produced, give up my whole doctrine.
; and by that of the remedies, which always remove the effect of the hurtful
powers from the whole body Here too I throw the gauntlet. Find a single remedy
which removes the disease by an operation confined to the lungs. There is not
one.
, in every general disease A wound in the lungs, among other effects of it, may
produce an inflammation. But that is not a peripneumony, or a general disease
at all. It is, on the contrary, a local one, arising from a local cause, and to
be removed by local remedies, if access could be had to them. And though
nothing has been more common than blending such cases of local and general
diseas^, at the same time no error that has hitherto crept into the art, needs
more to be corrected. Such an accident is as much a peripneumony, as an
inflammation from a contusion in the foot is a gout, or the swelled legs of
women heavy with child is dropsy. But of all this more hereafter.


LI. In this way temperature affects the surface of the body; diet the stomach,
and the rest of the same cannal; the blood and other fluids their respective
vessels; labor and rest the vessels again, and fibers of the muscles: passion
and exertion in thinking, the brain; all these affect the part mentioned, each
that upon which its action is exerted, more than any other equal part.

LII. Instances of a greater excitement of a part then of the rest of the body,
are found in sweat in a person in health, flowing first from the brow under
exercise, in checked perspiration, in inflammation or an affection analagous to
it in diseases, in headache and delirium. Proofs of a lesser excitement in a
part, are excessive perspiration and sweat not occ^sioned by labor or heat,
especially when it is cold and clammy, profusion of the other excretions,
spasm, convulsion, partial palsy, weakness or confusion of intellect, and again
delirium.

LIII. As the operation of the general powers, whether exciting in excess, in
due proportion, or in defect, is directed to some one part a little more, than
to any other equal part; it is next to be observed, that it must be of the same
kind in that part as in the rest, and as well as the general operation, be
either in excess, or in just proportion or deficient, but never of an opposite
nature. For as the exciting powers are the same, and the excitability every
where the same, it is impossible that the effect should not be the same. The
excitement, therefore, is never increased in a part, while it is diminished in
the general system -- nor diminished, while the general excitement is
increased. There is no difference (...), but one of degree; nor can different
effects flow from one and the same cause.

l* For though, an account of the great sensibility of certain parts, (for
instance, the stomach For the same reason, i. e. the sensibility of the genital
system, wine and other strong liquors, as well as (...), operate indirect
debility sooner upon these (...) than other^.
, and the forcible energy of the exciting powers, either in stimulating or
debilitating, exerted on them, these parts run sooner than most others either
into direct or indirect debility, or into a great increase of excitement; that
however is only a matter of short duration, and it is not long before the rest
of the functions are hurried into the same estate. Thus, nausea, vomiting,
diarrhoea, and other similar symptoms, produced by strong drink and opiates; as
well as the same affections apparently, and the gout, colic, gripes, and other
similar symptoms, occasioned by abstinence and water drinking; likewise good
appetite, and the removal of the turbulent symptoms of the stomach and
intestines, which we have mentioned, taking place in the convalescent state, in
consequence of a proper administration of food, drink, and diffusible
stimulants: all these are shortly followed by a similar state of the rest of
the body, and the establishment of indirect debility is the consequence of the
first case; that of direct debility succeeds to the second, and health over all
is the termination of the last.

LIVE. A part, therefore, is the seat of no general affection; the whole body is
the seat of them all; because, with the inequality above related, the whole
excitability is effected in them all.

LV. Neither is the affection of the more suffering part the first, and
afterward propagated over the system; for this good reason, that, as soon as
the excitability is affected any where, it is also and immediately affected
every where. Both facts are confirmed by the operation of every exciting power,
affecting the whole body as quickly as any one part; by general morbid
affections appearing equally soon over all the system as in any part, and for
the most part sooner The pain of the thorax in peripneumony, which is the sign
of the inflammation within, never appears so soon as the general affection, and
in more than in one-half of many hundred cases, where this fact has been
painfully scrutinized, it did not appear till one, two, or three days after the
commencement of the general affection. Likewise the pain of the gout is not the
first of the phenomenon of that disease. But all these, and many more
particulars, will be brought in with more advantage in their proper places
afterward.
. Therefore,

LVI. Every affection of a part, however formidable, occurring in general
diseases, is to be considered as only a part of the affection inherent in the
whole body, and the remedies are not to be directed to a part, as if the whole
disease lurked there, and was thence to be taken off only, but to the whole
body, to all which it belongs When the affection of a part is external, and,
therefore, accessible, the application of a remedy over it, in conjunction with
the internal remedies, is of service, in consequence of their mutually
assisting each other. A rag drenched in a liquid opiate, helps the operation of
that remedy taken internally; but that is still by operating upon the
excitability over all.


CHAP. V.
Of Contraction and its Effects.
LVII. THE entire and vigorous contraction with which muscular fibers are
endowed, is in proportion to the degree of excitement upon which it depends It
has already been proved, that all the functions depend upon excitement, and
therefore contraction among the rest.
. This is proved by all the phenomenon of health and disease, and by the
operations of all the ex^^iting powers and of all remedies. Force and
propensity to motion are the same. We must judge from facts, not from
appearances. Consequently, tremor, convulsion, and every affection comprehended
under it, are to be imputed to debility as their cause. The hurtful exciting
power is a stimulus uncommonly irritating to the part.

LVIII. The degree of contraction, that constitutes spasm, is not an exception
from this proposition. It is a continued and deficient function, rather than a
great and exact one; and in so far as it is a great contraction, it depends
upon the local stimulus of distention, or of something resembling distention,
it consists in diminished excitement, is devoid of force, and removed by
stimulant remedies. The appearance of symptoms, which is ever misleading, is
never to be trusted in forming any judgment. Take now both the fact and the
explanation of it.

LIX. As the degree of contraction, in so far as it is a sound function, is
connected with force; from that we are to hold it as a certain and demonstrated
fact, that the density of muscular fibers considered as simple solids, is
proportioned to the degree of their contraction.

LX. It must therefore be admitted, that excitement is the cause of density.
And the density is rendered greater and greater by the excitement in proportion
to the degree of the latter: Which it is easy to perceive through all the
intermediate degrees of strength, from the highest, or that which takes place
in madness, and the density corresponding to it, to the lowest, or that
debility which is discerned in the article of death, in death itself, and after
death, with a laxity corrresponding to it. That this is the fact, is proved by
the weakness of the same fibers in their dead, and their strength in their
living state; the only cause of which difference, we know for certain, is
excitement Experiments have been made by Baron Haller and others, to ascertain
the comparative strength of muscular fibers, and the criterion of judgment was
their greater or lesser disposition to break by appended weights; but the power
by which any body resists stretching, is the density of that body. Those
experiments show that the fibers in the living body are prodigiously stronger
than the dead.
.

LXI. Hence the cavities of the vessels, through their whole tracts, over the
whole body, are diminished in a state of strength, and increased in weakness.
This is the true cause of diminished perspitation and not any of the
hypothetical ones, as constriction from cold, or spasm, which are to be
considered afterward.
.

CHAP. VI.
The forms of Diseases and Predisposition.
LXII. EXCITEMENT, the effect of the exciting powers, when of a proper degree,
constitutes health; when either excessive or deficient, it proves the occasion
of disease, and, of predisposition previous to the arrival of disease. The
state both of the simple solids and fluids follows that of health as
constituted by the excitement, and a given state This proposition overturns the
principal systems that have ever appeared in the profession of medicine. But
more of it after.
.

m. The first cause of the formation of simple solids, and the sole one of
their preservation after, is the excitement. Under the direction of the
excitement, the living solids produce the blood from an external matter taken
into the system, keep it in motion, form its mixture, secret from it various
fluids, excrete them; absord others, and circulate and expel them from the
body. It is the excitement alone, through its varying degrees, that produces
either health, diseases, or the return of the found state. It alone governs
both universal and local diseases. Neither of which ever arise from faults of
the solids or fluids, but always either from increased or diminished
excitement. The cure of neither is to be directed to the state of the solids or
fluids, and only diminution or the increase of excitement. But,

LXIII. Affections peculiar to parts, or organic maladies, being foreign from
this place of the work, in which the treatment of the general state of the body
is only considered, must be passed over at present.

LXIV. That the excitement governs all life is proved by the exciting powers,
acting always by stimulating, and thereby producing excitement; it is proved by
the greater or smaller activity of the functions being proportioned to the
force of the exciting powers; it is proved by the effect of the remedies, which
always oppose deficient, to excessive, and excessive, to deficient excitement,
in effecting the cure of diseases.

LXV. The notion of health and disease being different states, is disproved by
the operation of the powers which produce them, and those that remove them,
being one and the same.

LXVI. The general diseases, arising from excessive excitement, are called
sthenic Their old name is phlogistic; but as that word is absurdly metaphorical
from an old notion of that sort of diseases depending upon fire or flame; and
because it was not a proper contrast to the term here to be opposed to it; as
also because it is still more ridiculous when applied to plants, which are
comprehended in this doctrine; for these reasons it has been thought proper to
reject it, and substitute the other in its place.
; those that originate from a deficient excitement, asthenic. Hence there are
two forms of diseases, and both are always preceded by predisposition.

LXVII. That the origin of diseases, and predisposition just now mentioned, is
the only one and true, is proved by the same powers which produce any disease,
or predisposition, also producing the whole form of diseases to which it
belongs; and by the same remedies, which cure any disease, or predisposition,
also curing all the diseases and predispositions of its respective form The
same hurtful powers produce, and the same remedies remove, both Catarrh and
Peripneumony, only differing in degree. The powers producing them are excess in
the use of stimulants, and the remedies whatever moderates that excess.
Evacuation, cold, and starving, are the means. All the difference is, that more
of the means are employed for the cure of Peripneumony than for that of
Catarrh. The hurtful powers producing indigestion and fevers, are also the
same, to wit, debilitating; and the remedies the same, to wit stimulant. Only a
small degree of the remedies, proportioned to the slightness of the degree of
the cause, is sufficient for the cure of indigestion; while the most diffusible
stimuli are required to effect the cure of fevers. Stimulants, in one degree or
other, make the cure of all asthenic diseases; evacuants and other weakening
means in different degrees, form the whole cure of the sthenic form of
diseases. Might not this have been known long since?
. Betwixt these ^pposite sets of disease and predisposition, perfect health is
the mean, leaning to neither extreme.

LXVIII. The exciting powers, which produce predisposition to diseases, or
those diseases themselves, should be denominated sthenic, or strictly
stimulant. Those that pave the way to asthenic diseases, or produce the latter,
should be called asthenic, or debilitating. The state of the body producing the
former or the predisposition to them, is to be called Sthenic Diathesis; that
which occasions the latter, with the predisposition peculiar to it, receives
the new term of Asthenic Diathesis. Each of these diathesis are a state of the
body, the same with predisposition and disease, varying only in degree.
Distinguish the powers that raise both the diatheses to the degree or full (...)
of disease, by the term exciting hurtful powers. The sthenic diseases, in
which the pulse is turbulently affected, should not be denominated fevers or
febrile diseases, but, for the sake of distinguishing them from the asthenic
diseases that disturb the pulse, to which fever is a proper name, they should
be called Pyrexies.

CHAP. VII.
The Effect of both the Diatheses, and of the most perfect Health itself.
LXIX. THE common effect of the sthenic hurtful powers upon the functions, is,
first to increase the functions, then partly t^ impair them, but never by a
debilitating operation The inability to perform motion in peripneumony, arises
not from debility, for two good reasons; first, no powers but those that
produce all the other symptoms produce it; and the same remedies, that remove
the other symptoms, are equally effectual for the removal of it.
. The effect, in common to the asthenic hurtful powers, upon the same
functions, is to diminish them, in such a manner, a^ sometimes to exhibit an
appearance, but a false one Spasm and convulsion, supposed to arise from
increased influx of the nervous power, are both occasioned, and cured, by the
same powers, as all the other symptoms.
, of increasing them.

LXX. If the just degree of excitement could be constantly kept up, mankind
would enjoy eternal health. But two circumstances prevent that. Such is the
nature of the sthenic diathesis, that it wastes the sum total of excitability
assigned to every being upon the commencement of its living state, and, thereby
shortening life often by the interposition of diseases, sooner or later induces
death. Which is one cause of mortality.

LXXI. The asthenic diathesis is hurtful by not supplying that degree of
excitement, which is necessary to life, and thereby allowing the state of life
to approach more nearly to that in which death consists. Which opens another
gate of death to mankind.

n. Further diseases and death are the consequences of the change of either
diathesis into the other. Either diathesis, by means of the hurtful powers
producing the other, when these are employed as remedies Stimulants are the
proper remedies for curing the gout; but they may be carried so far as to
produce so much sthenic diathesis as to border upon indirect debility. A
consequence of which is vomiting, purging, a feeling of burning in the
intestines, intermission of the pulse, and strangury; which are only to be
cured by substituting watery drink and low diet in place of those opposite
remedies: Nay, the stimulants may be carried so far, as to effect the
establishment of indirect debility. Hence, will arise paralytic affection,
anasarca, dropsy, etc. The evacuants and other debilitating remedies, by which
the diseases of sthenic diathesis are removed, may, by being pushed to excess,
produce the last mentioned diseases, as depending on direct debility.
, may, either from accident, inadvertence, or design, be completely converted
into the other; and when that has been done, and opposite remedies to those,
that in this manner proved hurtful, are employed; it may, by a contrary excess,
be turned back to the same state from which it set out Pushing the remedies of
sthenic diseases too far, may reduce the patient to an incipient dropsy; and
the remedies of the latter may be urged to such excess, as to pass the range of
sthenic diathesis, and terminate in indirect debility. A is affected with a
disease of debility, where the excitement has gone down to 10, the excitability
mounted up to 70, degrees in the scale. What is to be done? By a proper use of
high stimulants the 30 degrees of lost excitement may be restored, and as many
of superfluous excitability discharged, and the excitement and excitability
made to meet again at the middle point of 40. If the remedies are carried up to
any degree betwixt 40 and 55, they have gone too far, and produced
predisposition to sthenic diseases; if still farther, but not exceeding 70,
they will have produced one or other of these diseases. But carried beyond 70,
the diseases, which their operation produces, are those of indirect debility.
Any disease of this sort, when treated according to a rule lately delivered,
will be cured. But if the stimulants adapted to this purpose be urged further;
the sthenic diathesis will again be produced; and the debilitating power,
suited to the removal of it, may carry down the excitement below 40 into the
range of predisposition betwixt 40 and 25; and then, by a further abuse of
remedies, which should only be used in the range betwixt 40 and 70 the
excitement may return to the same point from which it set out, to wit, the
point of 10, and the excitability rise to its original point, that of 70
. This observation will be found of the greatest consequence in the cure of
both predispositions and diseases It must never be forgot, that we are nothing
in ourselves, but, while we have any excitability remaining in proper capacity
to be acted upon, we entirely depend on the exciting powers acting on it.
. What is wanting to a further illustration of it shall be given afterward. An
illustration of the change of sthenic diathesis into asthenic is found in
hydrothorax succeeding peripneumony. Again, the immoderate use of stimulants
may convert any asthenic affection into a sthenic one; as when a violent cough,
a catarrh, or an inflammatory ^ore throat, are induced in consequence of the
cure of the gout, though proper in kind, being carried to excess in degree.

x. Though excitement governs all the phenomena of life; yet the symptoms of
diseases, which either its excess or deficiency produces, do not of themselves
lead to any proper judgment respecting it; on the contrary, their deceiving
appearance has proved a source of infinite error.

LXXII. From all that has hitherto been said, it is a certain and demonstrated
fact, that, life is a not a natural, but,
forced state, that the tendency of animals every moment is to dissolution;
that they are kept from it not by any powers in themselves, but
, by foreign powers, and even by these with difficulty and only for a little;
and then, from the necessity of their fate, give way to death.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Predisposition.
LXXIII. Predisposition is a middle state betwixt perfect health and disease.
The powers, producing it, are the same with those which produce disease.

LXXIV. The period of predisposition will be shorter or longer, according to
the greater or lesser force of the hurtful powers that have induced it; and the
interval between health and actual disease will be more quickly or slowly got
over.

LXXV. That predisposition necessarily precedes diseases, is evident from the
fact of its arising from the same exciting powers, acting upon the same
excitability, from which both health and disease arise, and of its being an
intermediate state betwixt them both. And, as the excitement of health differs
much from that of disease; it is not, therefore, to be supposed, that the
former immediately mounts up to the latter, and skips over the boundaries of
predisposition: nay, the contrary is certain and beyond a doubt.

LXXVI. Contagious diseases are not an exception from this observation;
because, whether the matter of contagion act by a stimulant or a debilitating
operation, its operation is the same with that of the ordinary powers, that is
to say, its cause is the same The smallpox and measles are cured by the same
means as peripneumony or any other sthenic disease; and, excepting the
contagious matter, arise from the same stimulant urtful powers; they must,
therefore, with the same exception, be the same. The only difference is, that
they are accompanied with a contagious matter, and the other sthenic diseases
are not. The amount of which is altogether unimportant. For, if the ordinary
powers have not operated, the affection does not come under the definition of
general disease; none of the functions reading from their natural state, and
the eruption amounting to no more than a slight local complaint. It is,
therefore, only of use to regard the general circumstances of these diseases,
making no more account of the local part, than to consider, arrange, and treat
it as such. It is well known, that, when by the means used for the cure of
sthenic diseases without contagion and their sequel, eruption, the sthenic
diathesis is prevented or removed, the local part gives no trouble; and that
the disease is never dangerous but from the neglect of that management. But the
management is nothing else but the ordinary one in any sthenic case. If it
should be contented, that, all that being granted, still the eruption may
contribute a little: Be that so, and it can be but very little; what is the
effect? The cure shows it; which is exactly the same as in sthenic diseases
without eruption. The disease, therefore, being the same (for its mere local
part is out of the question, as only requiring a peculiar exposure to cold,
which is equally proper in every sthenic disease); every part of reasoning
respecting it, and, consequently, that affecting the question about
predisposition, must also be the same. If, therefore, other general diseases
have their predisposition, so must the smallpox, the measles, and the plague
itself. If it should still be said, that the eruptive diseases, though in other
respects the same with the non-eruptive* differ, in so far as predisposition is
required as a common circumstance between them; the answer is, that that
difference only respects their local part, which, without the powers producing
the disease, is insignificant and a mere local complaint. As general sthenic
diseases, the smallpox and measles, and as general asthenic ones, contagious
fever and the plague, to the full extent of their generality, have their period
of predisposition; we may have occasion afterward to establish the question
about predisposition to them even as local diseases, but this is not the place
for it; all that was required here being to settle the question about
predisposition to them as general diseases. In the same point of view all that
has been said of contagious diseases, will apply to diseases in which poisons
may have been concerned.
. If, as it sometimes happens, no general affection follows the application of
contagion, if no undue excess or defect of excitement is the consequence; in
that case, the affection is altogether local and foreign from this place.

LXXVII. If poisons communicate any sort of morbid affection without
predisposition, such an affection, for that very reason, is not to be
considered as a general disease, as also for this additional reason, that the
affection is neither removed nor relieved by the usual cure of general
disease;s and the diversity of the effect proves, that both the cause and
exciting hurtful power are different from the general ones. In one word, since
predisposition and disease are the same, varying only in degree, the
unavoidable conclusion is, that whatever, with a given force, produces the
latter, the (...) with a lesser force, will produce the former. The only cure
of most poisons is their early discharge from the system. And if, as often
happens, others, by wounding an organ necessary to life, are not curable, but
fatal; the effect of both is foreign from our present subject, and to be
referred to local diseases.

LXXVIII. The only thing to be regarded in the powers producing either
predisposition to general diseases, or those diseases in their full force, is
the degree of the former those that produce the predisposition,
compared with that of the latter those that produce the disease,
, or of the individual powers compared with one another; for the purpose of
discerning the degree of hurtful power that each possesses, and the degree of
curative means to be employed in order to remove the hurtful effect The
distinctions of the powers producing predisposition, and of those that excite
disease, under the general appellation of predisponent or occasional causes
have been multiplied and refined upon without end. But the whole system of
remote causes, as they have been called, is false in its first idea. The
hurtful powers, whatever they be called, that produce diseases, also produce
the predisposition to them. Which being once admitted, as it henceforth must,
the whole fabric of aitiology or of the doctrine of remote causes must fall to
the ground: Consequently, simply remote causes, not divisible into predisponent
and occasional; relative remote causes, or such as are so divisible; internal
and external predisponent, internal and external occasional, causes;
approaching causes, or causae propriories proximate causes, of which, not only
one, but often several, are assigned to every disease, must cease in medical
language, and the student's attention be turned away from the endless pursuit
of distinctions without a difference, to the study of the solid and useful
facts that nature holds up to his contemplation in great abundance, when once
his eyes are fairly opened to behold them.
.

LXXIX. The knowledge of predisposition is of great importance: as enabling the
physician to prevent diseases from his acquaintance with the powers that lead
to them.
, comprehend the true cause of them founded in predisposition, and to
distinguish them from local affections, which are widely different from them
Such is the simplicity to which medicine is now reduced, that when a physician
comes to the bedside of a patient, he has only three things to settle in his
mind. First, whether the disease be general or local; secondly, if general,
whether it be sthenic or asthenic; thirdly, what is its degree? When once he
has satisfied himself in these points, all that remains for him to do, is to
form his indication or general view of the plan of cure, and carry that into
execution by the administration of proper remedies.
.

LXXX. As the predisposition, to diseases, and the diseases themselves, are the
same state; a great criterion, by which general diseases may be distinguished
from local ones, will be found in this single circumstance, that general
diseases are always, local never, preceded by predisposition An inflammation in
some part of the stomach, or as it has been commonly called, "the Inflammation
of the Stomach," as if it were always of the same kind, produces many symptoms,
that bear so great a resemblance to general sthenic diseases, such as
peripneumony, that by systematics and nosologists, it, as well as many other
inflammations of internal cavities, have been united into an order of diseases,
supposed all to partake of one common nature. The Gastritis, however, which is
its nosological name, is essentially different, both from Peripneumony and all
the other general diseases of the order with which it is associated, both in
other respects, and in that of which we are speaking. As arising from certain
local hurtful powers, it is not preceded by predisposition. So when I come to
the bedside of a patient under these circumstances, though I had no previous
knowledge of the nature of his disorder, whenever I hear that he has swallowed
ground glass, small fishbones, or, perhaps, a great quantity of Caien pepper, I
can be at no loss to discern the nature of the disease, and to find, that it is
altogether local; and that for two of the best of all reasons; first, the
person having been in perfect health immediately before that accident; and,
secondly, that the substances which he had swallowed were such as would
naturally divide a ^ound part, or, in the language of our profession, produce a
solution of continuity in it. From this, again, inflammation is an inseparable
consequence. And it is equally an universa fact in the animal economy, that,
when any part, whether internal or external, which possesses great sensibility,
is wounded or otherwise injured in its substance, the pain arising from the
inflammation superinduced, spreads symptoms of disorder over the whole system,
which are liable to mislead those, who are not in possession of the criterion
we here point out. As such a case, then, it not preceded by predisposition, so
peripneumony as well as every other sthenic, every asthenic, disease must, from
the proofs of the universality of the fact, be allowed to be, it must be local.
And here again we throw the gaunlet.
.

LXXXI. As the affection of a part is always the original source of local
diseases, and as the distinctions, we have related, are established upon the
solid basis of truth; it follows, that the following disorders must be rejected
from the number of general diseases, how great soever their resemblance to them
may be, and however much they may conceal their own nature. Whatever
affections, then, arise, from any state of a part, from stimuli, from
debilitating circumstances (neither of which last produce any commotion in the
whole body, or only do so in consequence of the force of the local cause), from
compression of a part, from obstruction, from other diseases whether general or
local,
, and not from the exciting powers which produce general disease Let it here be
added, that the powers producing general diseases, are those that act upon the
excitability, and are, thereby, quickly communicated over the whole system;
while those, that act upon the solid texture of a part, so as to cut, prick,
bruise, or con^use it, etc. are the powers productive of local disease.
; all these must be rejected from the number of general diseases: and that for
the most solid reasons; to wit, their differing from them in the hurtful powers
that produce them in their true cause The cause of the inflammation of the
stomach has been mentioned. To concentrate it into a definition; it is a
solution of the continuity of a solid part in the stomach, by mechanical or
acrid means, followed by inflammation and pain, and, in consequence of the
great sensibility of the part, propagating symptoms of disorder over all the
system. The cause of the general diseases here alluded to is an increase of
excitement, and the inflammation accompanying those diseases arises from that
increase.
, in their cure The cure of Gastritis, or the inflammation of the stomach, is
to contrive means to keep the hurtful, and all rude matters, from coming into
contract with the inflamed part, and leave that part to heal; taking care,
neither to increase the local affection by too sthenic a diet, nor to produce a
tendency in the inflammation to run into gangrene, by the abuse of evacuations
and other debilitating powers; and if, than which nothing is more likely, the
acuteness or continuance of pain should at last bring on a state of general
debility, then to use the palliative means of preventing that bad consequence.
The c^re of Peripneumony is to weaken the system, from the very commencement of
the disease, by diminishing the energy of all the exciting powers; that of the
abundance of the blood by bleeding, that of the over-proportion of the other
fluids by purging, starving; that arising from the stimulus of heat and other
excessive stimuli by cold, etc.
, and in every essential respect, agreeing with them in nothing, but in a
deceitful and deceiving superficial appearance.

CHAP. IX.
The general Diagnosis.
LXXXII. THE violence and danger of universal diseases is in proportion to the
degree of excessive excitement The excess is contained between 40, the point of
health in the table, and 70.
or its indirect or direct deficiency The cases of indirect deficiency or
debility are comprehended betwixt 70 and 80. The direct are all the degrees
below 40. Betwixt 40 and 55 consists predisposition to sthenic; betwixt 40 and
25 the predisposition to asthenic diseases.
; as is proved by all that has been said above: consequently, their principal
variety turns upon this variation of the degree of excitement.

LXXXIII. The only diagnosis Diagnosis is the doctrine of distinguishing
diseases from one another. It was naturally thought to be of the greatest
importance, when diseases were supposed very numerous, and as different from
each other as their names and the various appearances of their ^^^^ptoms. That,
however, has been found to be altogether a mistake in this work, in which the
endless variety of general diseases is reduced to two forms, a sthenic and an
asthenic one, without any other difference but what consists merely in degree.
The huge volumes of diagnostics are then in this chapter superceded; and much
labor, not only irksome to the artist, but worse than useless, often
pernicious to patients, is proved to be superfluous.
of any importance is that, by which general diseases are distinguished from
local, or symptomatic affections, throwing the whole system into disorder, with
a certain resemblance to universal diseases. To execute which, the following
marks are to be understood to suffice for the detection of every general
disease; first, its being preceded by a diathesis, and this followed by one
similar to it, and removed by an operation of the remedies of an opposite
nature to that which occasioned the disease: while on the contrary, local
affection is distinguished, first, by the affection of a part, and the disorder
of the system not arising from any change in the excitement, but
being such as may be traced back to that affection; and by the absence of the
diathesis of the disease which the local affections resemble, or only its
accidental presence.

LXXXIV. In order to attain to this useful knowledge learn what is necessary
from anatomy; waste no time in superfluous study in it; peruse the works of the
illustrious Morgagni; dissect subjects; distinguish remaining effects from
causes that have passed away; examine diligently very many bodies of persons
who have been hanged, or have died of wounds, and are otherwise sound; compare
these diligently with the bodies of those who have died by lingering and often
repeated disease; compare every particular with the whole; guard against the
rashness of forming opinions, and, if you can, you will be among a very few,
who have ever been able to do so; never expect to discover the cause of disease
(...) dead bodies; be circumspect in forming a judgment.

LXXXV. As internal local affections are often a certain taint that remains
after general diseases have passed aaway, it is therefore a matter of ^ound
judgment to understand, that there is less or more reason to suspect the
former, in proportion as the latter have seldome^ or oftener preceded them.

CHAP. X.
The general Prognosis, or general Judgment of the Event.
LXXXVI. SINCE the powers producing sthenic and asthenic diathesis, always act
upon a part with more force than any other equal part; it follows, therefore,
that the danger of disease during the predisposition, and of death during the
disease, arises in proportion to the degree of diathesis, or to the importance
of the part especially affected. But, its degree being given, the more equal
the diathesis is, the more safe it is. Nor does it ever fall heavy upon an
organ necessary to life, without instant danger. And hence it is, that
peripneumony, apoplexy, phrenitis, erysipelas, and the gout, when the two
latter affect the head with violence, are chiefly formidable.

LXXXVII. Local and symptomatic affections ought to be distinguished from
general diseases, and the remarks made in the LXXXIII. LXXXV. transferred to
this place.

CHAP. XI.
LXXXVIII. THE indication for the cure of sthenic diathesis is to diminish,
that for the cure of the asthenic diathesis, is to increase the excitement, and
to continue to increase it, till that degree of it, which constitutes the mean
betwixt its extremes, and which is suited to good health, be replaced. This is
the only indication of cure that universal diseases admit of.

LXXXIX. As both diatheses arise from an operation of the exciting powers, the
same in kind, but varying in degree; so they are both prevented and removed by
an action of the remedies, also the same in kind, but opposite in degree, to
that which produced them. As their cause, so is also their plan of cure,
confirmed by an induction of proof not one or two, but
, drawn from the whole course of facts and phenomenon Suppose the sthenic
diathesis mounted up to 60 in the scale; to reduce it to 40 it is evident, that
the 20 degrees of superfluous excitement must be taken off, and, therefore,
that remedies operating with a stimulus, weak enough to produce that effect,
must be employed: they are still, however, stimulant, and of consequence,
though they remove it, still the same in kind, as the powers that produced the
diathesis; it having been proved, that they are not to be supposed sedative,
both for the reasons already given, and for this addtional one, that proof has
not been yet brought of a single sedative in nature. As their stimulus,
however, is less than that which is required to support the ordinary state of
health, they are understood to be debilitating, and, therefore, proper remedies
of sthenic diathesis.
. The same debilitating remedies, which remove any one sthenic disease, remove
that whole form of diseases: and the same stimulant means, which cure any one
asthenic disease, remove all the rest Suppose the asthenic diathesis to have
sunk down to 20; to raise it up to the standard of health, it is plain, from
all the propositions hitherto laid down, that the 20 degrees of deficient
stimulus must be restored, and, therefore, that remedies operating with a
degree of stimulus adequate to the production of that effect, must be used. All
the difference betwixt this force of stimulus and that of the other, is only a
difference of 40 degrees. As, therefore, the debilitating powers, though
stimulant, employed in the first, removed the morbid superfluity; so the
stimulant powers used in this case, called stimulant by way of eminence, remove
the morbid deficiency, and thereby, restore the degree of excitement, that
constitutes the standard of health.
. Are not palsy, in so far as it is curable When the prevalence of debility,
and that to such a degree, as to destroy the connection that subsists betwixt
the fibers of muscles, and that function of the brain which we call will, takes
place in parts of the system, not only remote from the center of activity, but
beyond the circulation, it must be of difficult cure; because the most powerful
means of effecting that operation, act most powerfully when taken internally,
and much more feebly when applied to the skin.
, and dropsy, in so far as it is a general affection What is called dropsy
consists of a case which is a general disease, and a number of others, which
are only symptoms of local internal diseases, and to be treated in the last
part of this work. These arise from ossifications in the large vessels next the
heart, from tumors, whether schirrous or steatomatous, impeding by their
pressure the return of the blood by the veins to the heart. It is the general
case that is here alluded to, and the public may depend upon it, that it is to
be cured, but not by evacuant means, and, on the contrary, by the high
diffusible stimuli, necessary to the cure of diseases of high debility, such as
the extremity of typhus fever, and an expiring gout. All these are cured by
high stimulants.
, as well as the gout, and fevers, both relieved and removed by the same
remedies? And are not peripneumony, the smallpox, the measles, rheumatism, and
catarrh, removed by the same remedies to wit, evacuants, cold, and starving.
? But all these remedies in the asthenic case increase, in the sthenic
diminish, the energy of life. In both cases the operation is a common one over
all, nor is there any diversity but in degree.

XC. The remedies, therefore of sthenic diathesis are powers, exciting by a
weaker stimulus, than that which is suited to health; and are in this work to
be denominated, for the sake of brevity, Debilitating or Antisthenic Remedies.

XCI. The remedies of asthenic diathesis are powers, exciting with more force,
than suits the best health; to be named here in the practice stimulants or
sthenic, for the more convenient distinction of them from the other remedies.

XCII. These are to be employed with more or less freedom in proportion to the
higher or lower degree of each diathesis, and of the local affection depending
upon it. And such a choice of each should be made in such a way as that the
most powerful may be adapted to the most violent case. But the cure of any
disease of considerable violence, and scarce of any at all, is never to be
entrusted to any one remedy* The use of several remedies is preferable to that
of one; because, thereby, their direct energy is applied to the system to a
greater extent, and the excitability is more completely and more equally
affected. The person, who means that his remedies should go to a particular
part and there, from a local operation, and not by an affection of the
excitability, serve the purpose,
, is equally wise, as any one would be, who, by cropping a twig, expects to
eradicate a tree. What remedies are of general, what of local operation, shall
next be mentioned.

XCIII. General remedies are those, which, acting upon the excitability, by an
operation diffused over the whole body, reproduce the state of health.

XCIV. Local remedies are those, which act by a similar operation on a part,
and, by an operation confined to that, restore the sound state.

XCV. Since every universal disease, every predisposition, depends upon
increased or diminished excitement, and is removed by the conversion of that
into the degree which constitutes the mean betwixt both; for that reason in
order both to prevent and cure disease we must always use the indication
proposed, and stimulate or debilitate; never lay by, nor trust to the supposed
powers of nature, which have no real existence.

XCVI. In the indication of cure, the only regard to be had to morbific matter,
is to allow time for its passing out of the body. For whether it acts, like all
other exciting powers, sometimes by a stimulating as in the smallpox and
measles,
, sometimes by a debilitating operation as in contagious ^evers and the plauge,
, or whether its action consist in only giving the peculiar form of its
respective disease, and, thereby, adding a local affection to a general one; in
either case there is no room for a new indication.

XCVII. For if the disease, as a general one, be properly managed, every
eruption, and its consequences, every species of inflammation, every species of
ulceration, give way to the happy effect of the general plan of cure. And, when
a contrary event takes place in consequence of a bad method of cure, the local
symptoms are proportionally aggravated. This is proved in the smallpox long
ago, and in the measles lately After the discovery of the nature of the
catarrh, the catarrhal symptoms in the measles came naturally to be enquired
into. A full trial was given to the refrigerant debilitating plan, in the
author's own family, as well as among several patients, and lastly among near
an hundred patients in England, treated by the father of one of the author's
pupils; who all did well, while others, who ware kept warm, according to a
practice that Dr. Sydenham had left as he found it among his Alexipharmac
cotemporaries, many died, and all had a bad recovery. The Author's own son and
name-son, a boy about six years of age, was stripped half naked and allowed to go
out and play as he pleased. The only check upon him was, his being allowed
nothing but fluid vegetable matter, when he returned home with a keen appetite.
This matter will be further explained, and in a more proper place, afterward.
But, what has been said, was in illustration of the hint in the text.
, but, with equal certainty; it is proved by the plague, at least, as often as
it has been treated with any judgment, and by remedies proper in kind and
administered in due proportion; it is proved by the malignant, or gangrenous
sore throat This case of disease has been considered, as wholly and solely
seated in the throat, and therefore conjoined with other diseases, where that
local affection was understood to be the essential symptom, and a ^ymptom that
connected all the cases. But the other cases are sthenic or to be cured in the
ordinary way of bleeding and evacuation; while such a practice is certain death
in it, as being not only an asthenic case, that is a case of debility, but one
of the highest; and, instead of depending upon the affection of the throat, the
affection of the throat depends on it. Give stimulants to the patients
laboring under the inflammatory sore throat, and you kill them; bleed, purge,
vomit, and starve, in the gangrenous case, and you ensure the same ^ate. Such,
however, are the diseases, that systematics, nosologists, and other strangers
in the city of nature, have, from their ignorance of the place, in spite of
their natural distance, brought all together. (See Dr. Cullen's Genera
Morborum, all the three editions, genus VII.) As soon will Mile-end and
Knightsbridge meet; as soon will London place itself on the Calton-hill, and
become an elevated suburb of Edinburgh.
, and by other cases of typhus, with a similar affection of a part. In the two
last, the danger to life depends upon the degree of the general affection,
without which there is no occasion for any apprehension from the local. And the
same proposition is so true, with respect to the three former, that, though the
contagious matter has been applied, yet, without the general hurtful powers
preceding, no true general disease arises, the danger increases in proportion
to their violence, and the whole cure depends upon the general remedies. These
are so many facts, that show, that no matter, whether of a contagious nature or
not, contributes toward the cause of the general disease, which it accompanies
or distinguishes, or, if it contributes any thing, that in that it differs not
from any usual hurtful powers.

XCVIII. As, both in overabundant and deficient excitement, the ^ound
perspiration is diminished during the predisposition, and suppressed in the
course of the disease (which has been already hinted, and will more fully be
demonstrated afterward); it is, therefore, proper that it should be carefully
supported and kept up, for the purpose of discharging every hurtful matter from
the body. But neither does that suggest a new indication of cure; since the
only means of effecting it are those, which otherwise remove both the diatheses
in proportion to their force, and which are not serviceable as local, but as
general remedies The discovery of the support of perspiration upon a principle,
which extends to all phenomena of the subject, was reserved for this work. The
heating remedies of the Alexipharmac physicians were intented to support
perspiration, and thereby, throw out a morbific matter: Which was a very
unlucky thought in the sthenic diseases, the principal of which were
peripneumony, of which we have already so often spoken; phrenitis, in which the
brain was supposed to be inflamed; and the smallpox and measles; because the
nature of those diseases, and the tendency of all the powers producing them,
was to check perspiration, (see No. LXI.) from the excess of their stimulus;
consequently, the addition of more stimuli, by way of cure, was to check it
still more. But those diseases are only three out of the hundred of general
diseases: whereas the followers of a great man, who corrected that abuse
through a fiery persecution, (...), against himself, went all into a much worse
extreme. Their imitation of their master transported them into a rage to carry
on the plan of promoting perspiration, by the same means, through the remaining
97 of the hundred. And they succeeded with a vengeance. For, as it is the
nature of those diseases to transmit too great a quantity of fluids through the
perspiratory pores, in consequence of the debility which constitutes their
cause; certainly the increase of that debility, that is to say, the increase of
the cause, should increase the effect. Which it most certainly did, through all
the systems that have appeared for more than a century past. This is intended
only as a hint, to enable our intelligent readers to understand the ^uller
explanation of perspiration, which will soon follow.
.

XCIX. When any one, who during the former part of his life had lived
luxuriously, has now, at an advanced age, either from intention or compulsion,
abated a good deal of his usual indulgence, and yet preserves some appearance
of an abundance of fluids and of vigor; he must not, therefore, as is commonly
done, be supposed to labor under plethora or an over proportion of blood,
and excessive vigor; but, on the contrary, unless there be a recent and
evident cause for it, which is possible, he must be held for one who labors
under indirect debility; and so much the more, if, to hurtful powers already
too invigorating, in the number of which are all those which fill the vessels,
directly debilitating powers have succeeded: And it is not a debilitating or
asthenic plan of cure, which would increase the direct debility, nor one too
sthenic or stimulant*
, which would increase the indirect debility, the principal part of the cause,
and, consequently, increase the force of the disease: But it is a middle
method, which is commonly called tonic, that should be pursued The blood is
made from the food, and elaborated by the powers of digestion; that is, the
more nourishing food is taken in, and the more strength there is in the system
to convert it into real blood, the more, and also better, blood will be
produced. The quantity of blood, so produced, may go to excess, as well as
every other exciting power, the principal of which it is. But the question is,
when, in whom, and under what circumstances, is an over-proportion of blood
generated? Common sense would say, not at the beginning or the end of life,
when the degree of nutriment used is far from being so considerable, as at the
middle and vigorous period of life. Again, which of the two sexes are supposed
most liable to generate this morbid redundancy of the vital fluid? A simple
creature, aided by nothing but natural sagacity, would be apt to say, the men;
both because they eat more, and, from the greater variety of the modes of
promoting digestion to which they are addicted, digest better. How medical
systematics would laugh at such simplicity! How contrary that would seem to
mystery, their Lydian stone, under which they think all wisdom so safely
lodged, as to fear it would be dangerous to turn it up, and examine what was
under it! What ^ort of habits are most liable to it? Not those, who have the
greatest bulk of simple solids, whether they eat or not, much less those, who
are liable to bleeding discharges, who can neither eat nor digest; but all
those who eat and digest well.
.

C. Since to the degree of diseases (under which, to make few words, let
predisposition also be comprehended), the degree of curative force should be
accommodated; in the indication, therefore, of cure, regard should be had to
age, sex, habit, constitution, climate, soil, in fine, to the operations of all
the exciting powers in general, of all the hurtful ones in particular, of all
the remedies, whether they have previously been administered properly, or
improperly,

CI. The subjects of direct debility are women, under inanition or an empty
state of the vessels,
, those who have had an insufficient share of stimulus; those who have a
delicate set of solids; those who have been accustomed to moisture, whether
from the climate or soil; finally, all persons in a languid state, without a
preceding vigorous one, either from the powers that produced their diseases, or
from the mode of cure employed to remove these.

CII. On the contrary, the persons in whom indirect debility is prevalent are
adult males; those who are full and over stimulated, and so much the more, the
longer the latter has been the case; those who have formerly had vigorous
habits; those who have been overheated, whether with moisture, without it, or
from whatever source; in one word, all, whose former vigor, either from the
ordinary hurtful powers, or improper methods of cure, is now converted into a
state of languor.

CIII. In the cure of indirect debility, whatever be its degree, from whatever
^ort of excessive stimulus it has arisen; of the stimulus, which is to be
employed as the chief remedy, not much less than that, which produced the
disease, should, at first, be used; and then less and less, till the disease is
cured.

CIV. When the first part of the cure is completed, and the convalescent now
can use the more permanent and natural stimuli, he should gradually be confined
to them, and drop the use of the more diffusible; with this distinction, that
if he has been in the habit of using a considerable deal of stimulus, he may be
indulged in something extraordinary in that way for some time This indulgence
is chiefly intended for those, who have gone to some excess in the use of the
stimulus of drink, and who still, without it altogether, are not capable of
taking enough of food and other durable stimuli for their support. The aim,
however, of all such persons (with the exception only of those who are of an
advanced age, or of those whose debility threatens to run a certain course),
should be to lay aside the daily use of drink altogether, and to indulge in
occasional approaches to excess as seldom as possible. Some persons, even
beyond the fiftieth year of their age, when they found they could eat and
perform all their other functions with vigor, have had the resolution to
abstain from all sort of strong drink, not only with impunity, but with a most
wonderful improvement of their health and vigor. Another advantage, arising
from this management, is, that, whenever any disease, to which a person may be
liable, (such as the gout, various affections of debility, chiefly prevalent in
the alimentary canal; in a word, the diseases of either form of debility),
either returns, or threatens to return; a return to the use of wine and other
strong drink will then become an excellent remedy, and even supercede the use
of the high diffusible ones. That practice would be attended with this further
advantage, that, when the occasion that called for it was over, and the disease
prevented or removed, the person might again lay aside the use of drink, with
all the good consequences he had formerly experienced from the practice, and
thereby both prolong his life, improve his health, and enjoy the proper and
vigorous use of all his functions.
.

CV. The cure of the hurtful effect of any stimulus should first be set about
by changing it for a lesser one, this for a still lesser; and the intention of
cure should be always to pass from the use of the more violent and diffusible,
which nature in her sound state rejects, to that of the more durable, and more
suitable to nature when unoppressed, till the healthy state can at last be
unheld by the usual supports In many diseases of debility arising from a former
excess, the stimulant effects of which have passed away, the use of cold water,
though in gratification of the patients craving, and of other thin potions, as
well as of vegetable aliment in a fluid form, and of evacuation of every kind,
is most hurtful.
.

CVI. In the case of indirect debility, when the view is to restore vigor, a
debilitating plan of cure should be avoided; because no sort of debility is to
be cured by another, nor any degree of it by any degree of another. It is only
in the progress to indirect debility Betwixt 40 and 70.
, that directly debilitating powers are suitable for the purpose of supporting
the vigor, in that case, in danger of being worn out At 65 there are only 5
degrees of vigor left, which, either by a continuance of the same excessive
stimuli that produced them, or, by the addition of a degree proportioned to
that effect, would be worn out. Remove some of the stimulant powers, the excess
of excitement will be diminished, suppose to 60; remove more of the former, and
the excess of the latter will be further diminished, till the excitement is
reduced to its natural healthy standard of 40. The state of excitement, then,
within this range, that is, between 40 and 70, especially in proportion to the
approach of the excess to 70, is that, to which only directly debilitating
powers should be applied. In all cases above 70 where the excitement is gone,
and below 40 where it constantly decreases all the way, till it is lost at 0*
directly debilitating powers are pernicious. How had then must the only
practice be, that we find in books and lectures, a practice transmitted from
the first accounts of our profession, and which deals in the use of no other
means but directly debilitating ones? Bad, indeed, must it be!
: such as cold bathing, lowering the diet, weak drink, and a similar abatement
in the use of the other stimuli.

CVII. For the cure of direct debility, we should begin with the smallest
degree of stimulus, and then rise to the use of a greater and greater, till the
morbid abundance of excitability be gradually worn off, and the health at last
restored.

CVIII. When the disease arises from the want of any one stimulus, the return
to its use should be gradual, and facilitated by other stimulants more powerful
than itself.

CIX. Also in this part of the general method of cure, debilitating, either
directly or indirectly should be abstained from; both for the reason formerly
given, and also, because the stimulant plan of cure, which is the only proper
one, when carried to excess, converts the sthenic diathesis that between 40 and
70,
into the asthenic between 70 and 80,
and the latter into death at 80.
For which reason, while, on the one hand, the debilitating powers, mentioned
before, are to be avoided; it must, on the other, not be forgot, that the force
employed in the cure should be accommodated to the degree of morbid state. The
thirst, which is occasioned by debility, is increased by draughts of cold
water, is hurried on to the higher symptoms of
nausea and vomiting; is quenched by pure wine, or spirit, which prevent the
troublesome symptoms that would otherwise follow. Pure wine which is one of its
principal causes,
increases the thirst, which proceeds from a sthenic cause, and excites the
same troublesome symptoms, which cold water does in the other case; cold water
^ates it, and prevents the future tumult.

CX. Since, therefore, the same powers excite all the phenomenon of life, and
produce sometimes an excess, sometimes a just proportion, sometimes a
deficiency, of life, according to the various degrees in which they are
applied; and since the same observation extends to the same powers, when they
are applied as remedies of diseases; let it, therefore, be an universal rule,
never unguardedly to convert either diathesis into the other. And, as every
disease, that debilitating powers remove, is sthenic, every one, that is cured
by stimulant means, asthenic; the knowledge of that may furnish the proper
means of caution against mistake.

THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I.
Of the hurtful Powers, which produce either Diathesis, Sthenic, and Asthenic.
CXI. THE powers producing the state of the body, upon which the
predispositions, to sthenic or asthenic diseases, or those diseases themselves,
depend, that is, that produce the sthenic or asthenic diathesis, are those
which were mentioned before XI. XII.
.

The hurtful powers producing both Diathesis.
CXII. Heat, which is necessary to the production, the growth, and the vigor
of animals and vegetables, as also to the form of the elements In a certain
degree of diminished heat water freezes; but if such a diminution of it could
be found as to freeze air, the whole fabric of the universe would rush into
dissolution.
from its action upon the surface of the animal body, directly stimulates the
whole; an effect which it also exerts upon vegetables. From this action of heat
there is no exception when it keeps within a certain range of scale: but when
it is either deficient, where it takes the name of cold, or excessive, its
effect varies as shall be shown by and by.
. This stimulus, in a moderate degree, produces its effect in due proportion,
in a degree above that the excess of its action is such as to produce more or
less of sthenic diathesis.

CXIII. Because the action of heat is increased somewhat more upon the surface
than in the internal parts, where the temperature is nearly stationary, it,
therefore stimulates more in the former than in the latter. Hence, in the
phlegmasiae diseases with inflammation of a part,
, the inflammation is always external, The same agent increases the tone of the
muscular fibers every where, and consequently their density See Chap. V. Which
produces a suppression of perspiration by some imputed to constriction from
cold, by others to constriction from spasms; both erroneously.
. Hence, as the diameters of all the vessels are diminished, so those of the
extreme vessels every where, and especially in the skin, where a greater force
of the cause is exerted, are often entirely effaced. But actual suppression of
the perspiration is incompatable with predisposition, and arises only from the
diathesis, when it arises to the just measure of disease The perspiration is
diminished during the predisposition; but the condensing power is not
sufficient to suppress it, till it attains the degree of producing the disease.
.

CXIV. Hence in the measles and small pox, the irritating matter, together with
the perspirable, is detained. And not only in these, but all other sthenic
diseases, the perspiration is suppressed, the excitement both upon the surface
and in the rest of the body is increased, and catarrh particularly induced
Cale^acients, or heating things, were one of the means that the Alexipharmic
physicians employed to force perspiration; but the principle is now laid down,
that shows they produce the opposite effect. Hence the merit of Dr. Sydenham in
recommending cold both in the smallpox and in peripneumony, in which disease
he took his patients out of bed, and placed them in an easy chair. Happy had it
been for the profession, and happier for the sick, had he extended his
improvement to the measles and catarrh, and all the rest of the few asthenic
diseases, and stopped there; but by extending his antiphlogistic and refrigerant
doctrine to the whole form of asthenic deseases, the harm and good he did were
in the proportion of 97 of the former to three of the latter.
.

CXV. Heat, in extreme excess, whether it it acts hurtfully by its duration or
intensity, constantly debilitates by diminishing the tone, and producing laxity
instead of density. Which effect is somewhat greater upon the skin, to which
the direct energy of heat is applied, than in the interior parts, in which
there is little change of temperature. Hence arises sweating as in the torrid
zone; hence the diameters of all the vessels, and particularly of the
perspiratory vessels are enlarged. Hence proceed the colliquative sweats in
fevers, and a similar state of the belly. Hence, also, corruption of the
fluids, and not from a state of them directly produced by corrupting powers The
idea of certain powers of a tendency to corrupt our fluids, and of certain
others to correct that effect, and take off the degeneracy, long prevailed in
the minds of systematics, and is not among many of their followers yet laid
aside. Heat was one of the number; but that it acts so, is disproved not only
by the explanation here given, but by the certainty of the fact, that the same
effect is produced by cold, as well as every other debilitating power.
.

CXVI. The same power in the violent measles, in the confluent smallpox, in
fevers, and in every kind of asthenic or disease of debility,
disease, in which the perspiration is deficient, does not lesson the
deficiency that is, does not increase the perspiration,
, though it expands and enlarges the vessels, but, on the contrary, increases
it i. e. diminishes perspiration.
.

CXVII. Cold, inimical to animals, vegetables, and the elements, weakens the
rest of the system, and still more the surface, the temperature of which it
almost only diminishes, and it produces that effect always by a direct
operation, always in proportion to its degree. Cold equally as excessive heat,
produces atony and laxity of the vessels, gangrene, and the other effects of
excessive heat In Siberia the phenomenon of cold on the human body very much
resemble those of heat.
.

CXVIII. that these effects of the extremes of temperature arise from
debilitating not generating putrefaction, from an affection of the excitement,
not of the fluids, plainly appears from this; that other exciting hurtful
powers, such as a famine, an overabundance of blood, as in the case of those
who die of peripneumony, and similar hurtful powers, which neither have been,
nor can be, believed to affect the fluids by any direct operation upon them
Famine, acids, and cold, have all the same effects upon the fluids that the
putrefying substances were supposed to have; but surely acids produce no
putrefactive process; neither can want act as positive matter; nor cold be
supposed to produce any such effect. In a word, any corruption that is
produced, arises only from the weakness of the heart and arteries, predominant
in their extremities. They cease to act; the fluids within stagnate, and, under
the heat of the body, degenerate. This is the true cause of the corruption. And
the remedies are not correctors of the corrupted mass; but whatever invigorates
the whole body, and consequently the heart and arteries. Nothing can be more
absurd than to suppose that a glass or two of wine and water, a little bark,
and so on, after being blended in the whole mass of fluids, should go to a
portion of fluids in the extreme vessels, even without the circulation, and, by
mixing with it, change its qualities.
, produce not the symptom of corruption, and all the rest of the symptoms, and
the same stimulants, which remove the latter, remove the former. Nay, the
supposed antiseptics, such as wine, Peruvian bark, acids, and other things of
that kind, are either entirely destitute of that operation, or they neither are
given, nor can be given, in that quantity, by which they can have any tendency
to affect the mixture of the fluids: In fine the effects of inanimate matters
upon one another are never, with any propriety, transferred to living systems.
Though, then, the fluids are frequently corrupted, the corruption is the effect
of weak vessels not giving a sufficient mixture or diffusion to them, but is
never the cause.

CXIX. The disagreeable sensation both of cold and of heat in extreme, is also
hurtful, by diminishing the sum total of stimulant operation, which, in so far
as it is agreeable, is serviceable by stimulating See note ( g) in par. XXI.
.

CXX. As cold is naturally so debilitating, and all debilitating powers
diminish excitement, it is therefore, never of service but in sthenic diseases,
that is, in those which are in their progress toward indirect debility See CVI.
; because the excitability, already too abundant, can never be rendered more
abundant, nor, when too much wasted, rendered more accumulated, without an
aggravation of the disease XLVI. XLVII.
; excitability admitting of less stimulus in proportion as it is either more
abundant, or more ultimately wasted. When the debility is moderate, a mistake
of this kind is less evident: but in a high degree of debility of either sort,
a violent disease, or even death itself, may be the consequence of the smallest
increase of debility When the debility of the direct kind is very moderate,
that is, the excitement has not sunk much below XL. in the scale, the short
suspension of a few degrees more would not do much mischief. Suppose the
excitement at 30 instead of 40, and a dip in cold water has brought it down to
25, the effect even of that is not of a trifling nature; the debility by this
means has passed the whole range of predisposition, and arrived at the degreee
where disease commences. It is true the excitement will rise the moment the
person is taken out of the bath; but still something is lost. The very
accumulation implies a reduced disposition in it to be acted upon by stimuli. A
person, who has abstained from any one stimulus for a given time, when it is
again applied, will not bear near so much of it as he did formerly. If he
abstains longer, he will bear still less, till, at last, he will be sit to bear
none at all. If, on the other hand, the excitement should have fallen to 10, an
addition of debilitating power would be attended with the utmost danger, not
only of increasing the disease, but of inducing death.
.

CXXI. As cold as well as excessive heat relaxes, a fact that is seen in the
cure of the small pox, and of every sthenic disease, from that we are to
understand, that the property of cold in constricting or condensing,
inanimate matter does not extend to living matter It has been alleged, that
the diminution of the bulk of the body by cold, furnished an argument in favor
of its being an astringent to it, as it certainly is a condensor of dead matter.
. The diminution of the bulk of the surface or shrivelling of the skin,
arises from debility of the vessels, not sufficiently propelling the fluids,
and filling the vessels. In this way does cold produce asthenic diathesis.

CXII. But, as always less and less excitement arises in proportion as
stimulant operation has been applied, till at last no more at all is added;
cold on that footing of action,
, as well as any other directly debilitating power, may, according to various
degrees of it, produce health, and all the degrees of sthenic diathesis from
the highest to the lowest, from that degree of it, which, under the
circumstances here mentioned, produces a moderate catarrh, to that, where the
modification of its action rises to the degree of being adequate to the effect
of producing a peripneumony.
; in the following way, however, only. It stops the waste of excitability,
makes the body more susceptible of stimulant operation, checks the progress to
indirect debility, and stems the latter. But it only effects that by checking
the career of heat and other stimuli, which accelerate indirect debility, and
by keeping the excitement within the boundaries of vigor. And hence vigor in
cold countries, when the body is defended by clothes, the shelter of a house,
the warmth of a fire, as well as by its own proper motion. Hence also the
bracing, by cold, of parts that have been relaxed by excessive heat. Lastly,
hence a remedy for the corruption of the fluids, which consists in invigorating
the vessels, not correcting the degeneracy of their contents. This effect of
cold upon the surface, which is nearly the only part of the system subject to
refrigeration, is somewhat greater than in the internal parts.

CXXIII. the debilitating effect of temperature, and therefore also its hurtful
tendency, is increased by moisture.

CXXIV. Of the articles of diet, the only food in danger of being too
stimulant, is flesh and land-animal food, used in great quantity. Meat too
salt, and hardened, especially when it has now begun to spoil, is an exception.

CXXV. The same thing is to be said of condiment; of which a very small
portion, upon account of its high degree of stimulus, is sufficient.

CXXVI. Spirituous or vinous drink, in which the alkahol is always dilated,
stimulates, more quickly, and more readily, than seasoned food, and its
stimulus is in proportion to the quantity of alkahol that it contains.

^. But there are stimuli, which possess an operation as much quicker, and more
powerful than that of the articles of diet.
, than these just now mentioned, and which are the agreeable and proper ones in
health, as their (...) is of shorter duration. To these the name of diffusible
is to be given. They rank above strong drink in the following order:

p. Next to strong drink, and immediately above it, stands musk; above it
volatile alkali; higher than this a^ther; and the highest of all, as far as
experiments have yet reflected light upon the subject, is opium We are pretty
certain of the exactness of that place in the scale which we have assigned to
opium. Nor is our arrangement of the others uncountenanced by the same kind of
criterion; but having not yet made all the trial necessary to establish the
proposition, we defer any final decision of this point to an after opportunity.
.

r. These according to their degree, possess the property of converting the
asthenic diathesis into a cessation of all diathesis in health; this into
sthenic diathesis, the sthenic diathesis into direct debility, and the last
into death: all which they accomplish with as much more ease and promptitude,
as they are more powerful than the rest of the stimuli In the use of the
diffusible stimuli great care should be taken to apply them only to the cases
that require them; which are only the diseases of the highest debility, or of
which the intolerable pain, besides tormenting the patient, threatens the worst
consequences. All from the end of the CXXVI. is an addition in the MS. this
most valuable part of the exciting powers, whether considered as a part of
diet, as the chief of them are among the Turks, or as used for the prevention
of diseases, to which there may be a strong bias in the habit, or as remedies
of these diseases when they have come on, or as hurtful powers when improperly
employed, having been left out in both the editions of the Latin work that have
yet been presented to the public.
.

CXXVII. The stimulus of the articles of diet, not exclusive of the diffusible
stimuli, should be denominated direct, because it acts directly and immediately
upon the excitability of the part to which it is applied. The direct stimulus,
at least in so far as it regards the food, is assisted by another, depending
upon a distention of muscular fibers, on which account, for the sake of
distinction, the latter should be called Indirect. As the latter is afforded by
the bulk of animal and vegetable food, so the former is produced by a relation
of the stimulus to the excitability. The indirect acts upon the living solids
in so far as they are to be considered as simple; the direct acts upon them as
living only. From a long and habitual excess in food and drink, at last
indirect debility arises and the group of diseases depending upon it When I
make a meal of animal food, much less bulk is requisite to give the same
nourishment, than when vegetable matter is the only one made use of. What makes
the difference is, that there is something in the animal matter which affords a
nourishing stimulus independent of its bulk; and though the vegetable matter is
not altogether devoid of that kind of stimulus, it, however, possesses it in a
much smaller degree. Both stimuli are necessary, but chiefly the direct, by
which animal food chiefly acts; and therefore is the vegetable the worst and
weakest sort of aliment, because it chiefly acts by its bulk of matter. A small
portion of the indirect stimulus is necessary; hence the very general use of
bread. But our vigor of mind and body depends upon the direct.
.

^. All these stimuli have also a tendency to produce asthenic diathesis.

CXXVIII. All vegetable food taken in any quantity,
, and too sparing an use of animal, as also meat too salt, and deprived of its
native juices by keeping, when better nourishing matter is withheld, constantly
weaken, and thereby produces asthenic diathesis through all its degrees. Hence
arises that remarkable imbecility both of body and mind, which distinguishes
the Gentoos, who follow the Brahminan ceremonial of religion. Hence the
diseases of the poor every where The nourishment of animal food needs only a
little support of tension from a moderate quantity of bread; but that vegetable
food, even when supported by strong condiments, in no quantity whatever, ever
gives due support, appears plainly from the instance brought in the text. Of
the poor laboring people in Scotland, who chiefly live on vegetable matter, it
would take three to go through the work that one Yorkshire man, nourished by
bolting fat pork, can easily execute. And among the Gentoo servants a dozen is
not able to perform as much work as a single English servant. A year's
experience of vegetable food, and its pernicious consequences (vide the
Preface) has now put the question, about the supposed salutary effects of low
living, and the pretended virtue of a rigid observance of it, beyond all doubt,
and brought irrefragable proof of its weakening effect.
; hence scrofula Scrofula, though supposed hereditary, produces its worst
effects, not from that circumstance, but the method of management, both for the
prevention and cure.
, fevers Various particular, and sometimes specific causes, have been assigned
for the production of fevers; but it shall be proved, that, whatever
debilitates in a high degree, is adequate to that effect.
, epilepsy, cough with profuse expectoration and hemorrhage, and the whole band
of asthenic diseases. The direct debility flowing from this hurtful power,
affects the stomach somewhat more than any other equal part Chap. IV.
; the consequences of which affection are loss of appetite, stomach sickness,
vomiting, very loose belly, and similar disturbances of the first passages.

t. But while improper aliment produces such effects, these will also be
induced by an ultimate excess in the use of food consisting of the proper
material; which must b^^n^erred from the universal effect of all the other
stimulant powers, when their operation has been pushed to the same excess It
will now appear how far an assertion of the opposers of this doctrine is just
or calumnious: low living and starving are condemned for the facts and reasons
assigned; but can it now be said, that the doctrine is friendly to
intemperance? On the contrary, it has reduced the fact to its proper standard,
reprobating the extremes, and establishing the mean under which virtue takes
her post. It is certainly as immoral, or irreligious, if you will, to hurt
health, and hasten death by abstinence, as by a luxurious excess. There is a
gloomy luxury in superstition, a cheerful one in sensuality; both bad.
. The mean betwixt the extremes of the hurtful powers, in so far as diet is
concerned, is abstinence At least it stands at the foot of the scale of
directly debilitating powers, if they are to have the rank of standing
uppermost, as being most hurtful, and to be followed by the enumeration of the
indirectly debilitating powers, as being next so, which by the way, is the rank
that nature seems to point out for both.
.

CXXXIX. The withholding also of the use of condiments, which, without animal
food as in the case of the Gentoos, who make use of a great deal o^ condiment
with their vegetable aliment.
, are not suffici^nt to give strength, gives an additional weakness.

CXXX. Strong drink, and the diffusible stimuli, are never necessary to young
and strong people, upon account of their rapid tendency to indirect debility,
from their high stimulant power; nor are they even safe. But, in persons who
have been accustomed to them, in the case of those who are advanced in age, and
of those who are weak from that or any other circumstance, cold, watery, acid,
or fermenting drink, has a great influence directly, and excess in the use of
strong drink indirectly, in producing asthenic diathesis.

u If the diffusible stimuli, after they have been employed, are too quickly
withdrawn, they, in the same manner as the more durable, allow the excitability
to accumulate, and direct debility to come on, and consequently may be said to
produce asthenic diathesis. But asthenic diathesis is never the consequence of
withdrawing their operation at least worth speaking of, but when that has been
habitual. And all the hurtful effects which they have most untruly, to the
great detriment of mankind, been said rather, than are now said, to occasion,
arise not from themselves, but from the want of knowledge how to manage them.
And as this operation of diffusible stimulus ought to be supported by that of a
durable; at the same time, it must not be confounded with debilitating powers.
What disturbances, during the operation of opium, will not a breath of cold
air, affecting the body, create? And how easily, as well as quickly, are they
all removed, by carefully covering up the body? As there are cases of indirect
debility from an habitual abuse of strong drink, there are also others from a
mistaken or intemperate use of the diffusible stimulus, particularly opium.
Both of them require nicety and skill in the management of them for their cure;
for which consult Chap. XI. from par. CIII. to CX. The management is out of our
present question; but what affects that is, that, from this observation, we can
clearly find, as it was to be expected from the analogous operation of the
other exciting powers, that the diffusible stimuli, when their operation is
carried to excess, will also produce an asthenic diathesis of the indirect kind.
.

ph. Both the other diffusible stimuli, as well as opium, and the more durable
one of strong drink, by an indirectly debilitating operation, produce asthenic
diathesis.

CXXXI. A further stimulus is an abundance of chyl^ and blood; by this the
excitement is increased every where, and particularly in the blood vessels, and
increased in degrees proportioned to its degree of abundance. The quality of
the blood, at least, as a cause, is of no effect, it is the quantity only that
is. The quantity, by its action of distending the muscular fibers of the
vessels, acts with a constant impulse The blood by its quantity distends the
muscular fibers of the vessels; that distention stimulates the excitability in
the fibers, and produces excitement, commonly called their irritability; thus
excited, the fibers contract; the contraction of each portion sends the wave
onward to another portion: when the wave has passed any given portion of
vessel, its fibers again relax, and make way for the next, which is pushed
along in the same manner. In this way the circulation goes on in all cases
while life remains; contraction and relaxation constantly alternate; the former
propelling the wave before the latter opens to receive the next. But the vessel
may be in different states with respect to its power of either contracting or
relaxing. When it is weak, which every part of the vascular system is as often
as all the rest of the system is weak, both the contraction and relaxation of
each portion of vessel is imperfect. The contraction from its smallness, and
the relaxation from its being more owing to the passive state of the simple,
than the active state of the living, fibers, leave betwixt them a large
diameter upon the whole. But, in a vigorous, or sthenic, state of the whole
system in general, and of that of the vessels in particular, the contractions
are strong and forcible, and the relaxations active and in consent with the
contractions. Hence the diameter of each portion of vessel is diminished upon
the whole, and while the quantity of the blood is at the same time increased,
the action and re-action are great; the blood distends with mechanical, the
vessels resist with vital energy; the mutual effect of both upon the
excitability is considerable; all is activity, all is force, and these are in
exact proportion to their cause over all the sthenic diathesis. This state of
the vessel, in so far as it respects the muscular fibers, is its tone; in so
far as it respects them as simple solids, its density. It is a sthenic state of
the vessel, opposed to the asthenic first described, which is distinguished by
the epithets of atony and laxity; which, however, opposed to tone and density
are only relative terms, employed for convenience, not absolute: like the term
cold, used for diminished heat, they only signify a diminution of tone and
density.
. The doctrine of plethora, so noted in the medical schools, is only applicable
to sthenic diathesis, and takes place in proportion to its degree It is a
curious fact, that, while the truth of this proposition is demonstrated, the
plethora of the schools is only understood of a state of the vessels
diametrically opposite to a just idea of plethora.
.

CXXXII. The effect of distention that we have been describing,
is increased by the velocity of the blood, both as arising from other sources,
and especially from that motion of the body which its own muscles perform, a
motion, which, by compressing the veins, carries the blood more quickly back to
the heart.

CXXXIII. Nothing is more effectual than these two last mentioned stimuli, in
producing sthenic diathesis, and the diseases depending upon it. Those diseases
are violent in proportion to the over proportion of the blood, and the rapidity
of the force with which it flows; a fact, that is proved by all the exciting
powers, all the symptoms of those diseases, and, especially, the pulse of the
arteries; it is also proved by the great efficacy of bleeding, purging,
abstinence from food, and rest, in the cure of the disease Relief from bleeding
and other evacuations is certainly a good argument for the cause of the disease
being so far owing to an over-proportion of blood; and rest is as good for the
proof of agitation of the vessels being concerned in the cause: besides,
exercise is otherwise a noted cause of quickness of the pulse: and the hurtful
powers and symptoms are equally decisive.
.

CXXXIV. While an over-proportion and velocity of blood is a chief cause of
sthenic diathesis; there is nothing more powerful in producing the asthenic,
than that penury of blood which the greatest celerity of motion accompanies.
Hence, the smallness, weakness, and quickness of the pulse: Hence the
excitement is diminished every where, and in preference to other equal parts,
in the whole sangui^erous system, and that in exact proportion to the penury.

chapter From this state of the vessels arises the discharge of blood from the
lungs, from the uterus, from the anus, or around the anus, from the urinary
passages, and through the perspiratory pores. Hence arise disturbances of the
stomach, want of appetite, loathing of food, and, therefore, upon account of
want of norishment, and the languor of the digestive organs, always less and
less blood arises in the system. So great a penury of blood is the principal
origin of bleeding diseases; which never happen but in the asthenic state. The
same penury of blood acts in such a manner, and chiefly affects its own
vessels, because, according to a law so often mentioned, its debilitating
energy chiefly falls upon them. In sthenic diseases, that have advanced to
their height, or a little beyond it, a few drops of blood from the nose, or a
dropping of blood from the same, or any other part, demonstrate only a
predisposition to indirect debility, but not an establishment of it, and that
the matter still remains within the operation of excessive stimulus who ever
heard of a flood of blood coming from the lungs in a peripneumony? Or, who has
not heard of it in consumptive cases; which are the diseases depending upon the
laxity of vessels of which we are speaking. What vigorous woman, ^ound in all
her functions, as a woman, ever fell into perpetual floodings? What had been
the state of these women before the disease? Did they eat and digest so
completely, as that there was any reason for supposing their vessels were
filled with blood? No; long before the arrival of the disease their eating was
puny, and considering the kind of matter they made use of, to wit, vegetable,
it was not to be supposed more beneficial from its quality than its quantity.
What was the idea to be gathered from their symptoms, and particularly the
pulse? The pulse had all the marks of an asthenic one; being weak, small, and
quick, like that of a newborn infant. What was the state of their habit? Was
it vigorous and robust? It was the reverse; soft, delicate; the habit lax; a
falling off in flesh, with weakness over the whole system, and total loss of
appetite. What were the remedies employed to remove this supposed offspring of
plethora? Bleedings, repeated without end; other evacuations with the same
freedom, and vegetable food in a fluid form, and a horizontal posture, with
their head lower than their body and under-extremities. Miserable are the
resources of ignorance, and contemptible their execution! Fill a rigid tube
full of water, open at both ends, and the fluid, no doubt, will run out at the
end which is most below an exact horizontal position. But that is not the case
with the fluids in living vessels. The excitement, distinguishing them from all
rigid inanimate tubes, counteracts the effect of gravity, while its living
state remains: In proportion to the degree of which, the sides of the vessel
will embrace their column of fluids, and prevent the flowing out of the fluids,
in proportion to the degree of excitement; and before the gravity can act, the
excitement must be extinguished, and the living system reduced to a lumpish
mass of dead matter. It is the latter, that enables them to produce that
effect. And, therefore, bleeding discharges can never happen, either in health
or sthenic diathesis, unless in that very high degree of it that approaches to
indirect debility, and even then, only in the forced, scanty, manner described
in the text; whereas, after the establishment of indirect debility, or in the
case of direct, the great discharges only can happen, and that without force,
in great plenty, but still short of what would (...) if no excitement
restrained it.
.

ps. Thus it is not an excess in the quantity of blood, but laxity and atony
from its defiency, that upholds the affair of bleeding discharges; which
proceed in their course, not with any effort or active impulse,
, but a diminution of tone: They are all asthenic, and the asthenic diathesis,
as far as it depends upon them, consists in direct debility.

o. But, as every other exciting hurtful power may be converted into indirect
debility, so, also may an overproportion of blood. For the vessels, ultimately
distended, and beyond all bounds, may under the high sthenic diathesis,
, by the excess of that stimulus, exhaust their own excitability, and, thereby,
put an end to their excitement. Upon which the forcible contractions are
converted into languid ones, or such as could scarce he called contractions at
all; the diameters formerly effaced, are converted into an extremely patulous
state. The finer parts of the fluids flow through the patulous extremities of
the arteries, wherever they find an outlet, and carry with them, sometimes
serum, sometimes, red blood.

In the asthenic, diathesis as well as the sthenic, it is not the quality of
the blood, but its quantity, which is to be found fault with, and the fault in
quantity here is deficiency. The deficient quantity produces the symptoms of
the pulse, that have been mentioned above, by not sufficiently distending the
vessels, and giving them sufficient excitement. Plethora, which has been
thought to belong to this form of diseases only, has absolutely no existence in
it The state of the vessels, with respect to the quantity of blood in them,
that is pleasant and suitable to health, is the mean betwixt the extremes that
have been spoken of.

CXXXV. This state of the blood and vessels, that we have been describing, that
is, penury of blood, and atony and laxity of the vessels, chiefly from direct,
sometimes from indirect debility; though the latter case is exceedingly rare.
is the chief origin of asthenic diseases, of which the so very hurtful effects
of evacuation, especially bleeding, as well as vomiting, purging the belly, and
every other mode of diminishing the bulk and quantity of fluids, give full
proof. This proof has of late received a further confirmation, in the singular
success of the cure by other stimulants first, and then by every mode of
filling the system Systematics allow that there are many diseases, which are a
reproach to their art, from their never yielding to their method of cure, but,
on the contrary, becoming worse and worse in proportion to the time and pains
taken about it. Of these opprobria medicinae(it would be better, I believe, to
call them opprobria medicorum) few are more so than the bleeding diseases;
which seem uniformly to have proceeded from evil to worse under the evacuant
debilitating plan; while it has now been found, that the high stimulant plan
removes them with the greatest success.
.

CXXXVI. The different fluids secreted from the blood in different ways, are,
by the distention which they give to their respective vessels, also understood
to stimulate. In that respective the milk and ^eed, by the abundance of each in
its respective vessels, and likewise the perspirable fluid, have the chief
effect, the commotion of the secretory organ It has been said above, in chap.
IV. that the excitability is one uniform undivided property over the whole
living system; and that, wherever it is acted upon in any part of its seat, it
is affected over all. This fact, which is strictly true and universal over
every part of living matter in nature, with the utmost ease explains many
things, that were confessedly inexplicable upon every other medical doctrine;
and, among the rest, the several affections of the secretory system.
, by means of excitabilty, which is one and the same undivided property over
all, is easily diffused over the whole body, and, when it rises to excess, is
capable, with other powers that communicate an excess of excitement, to produce
sthenic diathesis.

CXXXVII. The same secreted fluids, when they do not sufficiently distend their
respective vessels, when they communicate enough of excitement, make no
inconsiderable part of the hurtful powers, that constitute asthenic diathesis.

A. For which reason vomiting, purging, and every other evacuation, are
powerful inducers of asthenic diathesis, which they effect in proportion to the
debility that attends their operation. The same thing is to be said of excess
in venery, which is partly an indirect, partly a direct, always a great,
debilitating power Nothing is more effectual in hastening of death than a love
marriage betwixt an old man of worn out excitability, and a young beautiful
virgin: I need not explain to any reader on which side, that of the man or the
wife, either the love or the danger lies.
.

, Sometimes the secretory vessels seem so crammed with a colluvies of fluids,
that indirect debility may possibly arise from that source, as is exemplified
in that overflowing of bile, which distinguishes the yellow fever of the Torrid
zone. I have been so often, and by persons of good enough sense to make just
observations, informed of the necessity of purging off the redundancy of that
fluid, which not only fills the intestines, but diffuses itself over the whole
alimentary canal; and, then, of following out the cure of the disease by the
use of wine, spirits, and the diffusible stimuli, that I have, though at first
with some reluctance, admitted the fact. The reason of the slowness of my
assent to it was, that, upon every other occasion of any accumulation of matter
in the first passages, even in the colic itself, I had always ^ound the pactice
of invigorating the peristaltic motion, by stimulants, sufficient to clear away
all such extraneous matter; while vomiting and purging, by their relaxing
effect upon the vessels, served to generate more, and increase the cause of the
disease, which is always debility. This I ^ound not an exception to that
general principle, but an instance of a sort of local disease, from an
over-repletion of the exhalant mucous and biliary vessels.
. Here too the debilitating effect, by means of the excitability, tends to
diffuse the diathesis over all.

From this source, arise, a languid action of the extreme vessels These are the
exhalants that pour out the saline, watery part of the blood unchanged; the
mucous glands that change, by their secretory operation, the fluid they receive
from the blood; the pori biliari^ that change the fluid that they receive from
the extremities of the veins of the gate, and of the hepatic artery, or artery
of the liver; the little ducts which these form by the union of numbers into
single vessels; the hepatic duct or great biliary vessel of the liver, which
receives the bile from all ducts; and, lastly, the ductus communis cholidochus,
or the duct that may be denominated in English, the general receiver of all the
bile, whether from the great duct of the liver, or that which sends to the
gallbladder a part of the bile that returns in the same vessel to the general
receiver. These, and besides them, the inhalants or absorbents as they are
called, to wit, the small vessels that take up from the exhalants and other
arterial terminations of vessels, the fluid, called lymph, which is once more
to be returned into the circulation; are the vessels that suffer the concourse
of symptoms described in the text.
, a ^low, then, no motion of the fluids, a stagnation and corruption of them. A
diminution, or temporary destruction of excitement, over this large space in
the system How great the space in the whole system is that these vessels
occupy, may be easily imagined, when it is considered, that every evanescent
artery, over the whole body, terminates in one or more of these colorless
vessels that have been described.
, by means of the same excitability, communicates debility to the rest of the
body; and, in conjunction with other hurtful powers that give not enough of
excitement, produces asthenic diathesis.

G. The various sorts of gestation as riding on horseback, going in a carriage,
using an hobby, ^ailing.
, and of exercise and labor, by rousing the muscles into contraction, and
thereby accelerating the motion of the blood in the veins toward the heart,
while the valves prevent its taking a contrary direction, greatly promote
excitement in all the vessels, and, therefore, over the whole system; and the
effect may go so far as to produce sthenic diathesis.

D. As nothing contributes more to health than moderate and frequently repeated
exercise, and its excess acts in the manner that has just now been described;
at the same time a degree of it, either greater or less, than the salutary
degree, by its weakening effect, the former in wasting the excitability, the
latter in withholding a necessary stimulus; that is the one by debilitating
indirectly, the other directly, produces asthenic diathesis.

CXXXVIII. Thinking, which acts more upon the brain, to which it is immediately
applied than upon any other equal part of the system Vide Chap. IV. Part I.
, increases excitement over the whole body None of the exciting powers have
more influence upon our activity than the two which are just going to be
mentioned, the exercise of our intellectual function, and that of passion or
emotion. With respect to the former, Homer observes of the hero, whom he gives
for a pattern of eloquence, that upon his first address, that is while he was
under some agitation, and had not yet got into his train of thought, he was
awkward in every motion, and in his whole attitude; he looked down to the
ground, his hands hung strait along his sides as if powerless; his whole
appearance was torpid. But when he once entered upon his subject, his eyes were
all fire, his limbs all motion, with force, grace and energy. Upon commencing a
lecture, the pupils have often observed the same torpor in the lecturer, and a
similar vivacity and life in a few minutes, when he had now got fairly into his
subject: the report which a lecturers daughter, upon looking through the hole
of a door, while the lecture was going on, made to the family and some company
then present, was, that her father looked, in his lecture, as if he would look
through his hearers. A Mr. Donaldson is one of (...) few great masters, in the
art of ^^^ting, who never ^ail, with a most exact likeness, to display the
whole influence of the mind upon the features A miniature of ^he, done by him,
a^ a present, is reckoned the greatest master(...) respects, that ever came
from the hands of a painter.
. S^^aining and thinking, whether in a high degree for once, or often repeated
in a lesser degree, or habitual may alone prove hurtful; but, in conjunction
with other powers also hurtful from their ^xc^^s of stimulus, may become more
so, and amount to a degree equivalent to the production of (...) diathesis.

CXXXIX. An evident cause of asthenic diathesis is that state of the
intellectual function, in which excess in thinking, by wasting the
excitability, ends in indirect debility; or that deficient, weak, vacant state
of mind, incapable of keeping up a train, which produces the same hurtful
effect by direct debility. This faulty state of the mind contributes greatly to
weaken the system It may often be remarked by physicians, that their patients,
after every other proper part of cure has been executed, are never completely
restored to their healthy state, till they are again engaged in their usual
occupations both of mind and body.
.

CXL. Violent passions of mind, as great anger, keen grief, unbridled joy,
going to such a pitch as to destroy excitability, have the same effect as
excessive thinking, and admit of all the same reasoning.

CXLI. A force of passion rising to the height of exhausting the excitability,
induces that asthenic diathesis, which is occasioned by indirect debility, and
diseases of that stamp. Hence epilepsy or the falling sickness,
, hence apoplexy, and that when, the mind has been screwed up to the height of
passion, often fatal.

CXLII. On the contrary, when there is a deficiency of passion, as in
melancholy, grief, fear, terror, despair, which are only lower degrees of joy,
assurance, and hope, and imply no more than a diminution of exciting passions,
not emotions of a nature opposite to those, and positive; their tendency is to
produce the asthenic diathesis, which depends upon direct debility. The
immediate production of this is loss of appetite, loathing of food, sickness at
stomach, vomiting, pain of the stomach called cardialgia by systematics
, loose belly without pain, the same with pain, indigestion called dyspepsi^,
, cholic, the the gout, and fevers.

CXLIII. The exercise of the senses, when it is agreeable, has a very great
effect in exciting the whole body, and in producing emotions, which, together
with the hurtful powers mentioned above, may easily contribute to the
production of sthenic diathesis. Those emotions are exemplified in drinking,
dancing, in agreeable entertainments where the eye is dazzled with the
splendor of the dishes, of the company, and of all the objects around.

CXLIV. The energy of the same exercise of the senses, when it is excessive,
and carries the effects, just now mentioned, too far, produces indirect
debility. On the contrary, when the senses are either in part destroyed, or in
part dulled, or disagreeably affected Nothing is more clearly disagreeable than
an obscure light, as when one reads with a small or un^^ussed candle. Hence the
luxury of more candles than one, or of wax or spermaceti candles. This is often
experienced at Ranelagh, and may be seen in children exquisitely amused.
, the mind is dejected, and the whole body thrown into a state of languor and
direct debility. And, in both cases, especially when there is a concurrence of
other debilitating hurtful powers the asthenic diathesis arises.

CXLV. The effect of the air upon the human body,
, independent of its qualities, as they are called, or its properties, and its
use in supporting respiration, is less obvious to observation than the other
powers that have been spoken of,
; at the same time it cannot be doubted, that its application to the whole
surface of the body is a stimulus not to be dispensed with. The air is seldom
applied in a pure state: it is commonly blended with foreign matters that
diminish its force of stimulus; and, while its salutary stimulus depends upon
its purity, at the same time it is uncertain whether ever its purity goes so
far as to stimulate in excess, and thereby produce sthenic diathesis. The
baloons, lately invented, by which men get above the clouds, would serve
excellently to throw light upon that matter, if it were not for the cold that
accompanies this progress. Be that as it may; since we never live in the purest
air, and yet live commodiously enough, it is, therefore, credible, that too
pure an air has a tendency to stimulate in excess, and, therefore, produce
sthenic diathesis.

CXLVI. But, as nothing is more usual than impurity of air, and every impurity
diminishes its stimulus, a very impure air, or air blended with impure matters,
without doubt debilitates, and produces asthenic diathesis. Accordingly, impure
air is a frequent cause of typhus, as is evident from the ^ate of those who
died in the black hole of Calcutta. Whether ever the air, from an excess of
purity, produces asthenic diathesis, is the more doubtful, that, as has been
said, it is as yet undecided whether it produces sthenic diathesis or now.

E. Contagious matter, in so far as it may have any tendency to produce general
diseases, in one form produces sthenic, in another asthenic diseases, and,
therefore, acts like the ordinary hurtful powers of either sort, and admits of
all the same reasoning. But, in so far as it only occasions the eruption,
without making any change in the excitement, it is to be referred to the local
diseases.

. To poisons, if they act as general stimulants, all the reasoning that has
been employed with respect to the other hurtful powers, will apply. It is not,
however, likely that they are general stimulants.

CXLVII. It is seldom from the separate, almost always from the united
operation of all the powers, that both the diathesis, whether as remaining
within the range of predisposition, or rising to the degree of actual morbid
state are produced, and from no inherent power in the system.

CHAP. II.
The Cause of each Diathesis.
CXLVIII. The cause of sthenic diathesis, produce in the way that has now been
explained, is, in consequence of the operation of the powers that have been
mentioned, too great an excitement of the living system every where, with the
effect of first increasing all the functions, then of producing a disturbance
in some, and impairing others, but never by a debilitating operation.

CXLIX. The cause of the asthenic diathesis arising from the same source, is,
in consequence of the debilitating hurtful powers, too little excitement of the
living system every where, with the effect of impairing all the functions,
disturbing some, giving a false appearance of increasing others, but always
debilitating It must now appear to the reader, to what simplicity the hitherto
conjectural, incoherent, erroneous, mysterious, and enigmatical art of physic,
is now reduced. It has been demonstrated, that there are only two forms of
diseases, that the deviation from the state of health, in which the morbid
state consists, is not either repletion or inanition, or changes in the
qualities of the fluids, whether of an acid or alkaline nature, or the
introduction of foreign matters into the system, or a change of figure of the
extreme particles, or a disproportion in the distribution of the blood, or an
increase or decrease of the power of the heart and vessels as regulating the
circulation, or a rational principle governing the actions of the body, or an
alternation in the extreme particles as being of too large or too small a size,
or an alteration of the pores, as being too narrow or too capacious, or a
constriction of the superficial vessels from cold, or a spasm of them producing
a reaction, as it is called, of the heart and interior vessels, or any thing
that any person has yet thought of respecting the cause and nature of morbid
state. On the contrary, it has been proved that health and disease are the same
state depending upon the same cause, that is, excitement, varying only in
degree; and that the powers producing both are the same, sometimes acting with
proper degree of force, at other times either with too much or too little; that
the whole and sole province of a physician, is not to look for morbid states
and remedies which have no existence, but to consider the deviation of
excitement from the healthy standard, in order to remove it by the proper
means. The reasoning part of this doctrine, it is expected, the reader will
find irreprehensible and unanswerable; and the practical part, from the
astonishing cures that have upon innumerable occasions been effected, will ever
stand in support of the truth and utility, as well as simplicity of the whole.
.

CHAP. III.
The sthenic Diathesis.
CLI. PREVIOUS to the disturbance of the functions, which, it has just now been
said, the hurtful effects of both sets of powers produce,
which never happens till after the arrival of the disease During the
predisposition to peripneumony, as well as to every other disease, neither the
symptoms of disturbance, nor any other symptoms at all appear. And in mild
cases, such as catarrh, the symptoms of disturbance occur not through the whole
course of the disease: But, when a disease is, like the peripneumony or the
gout, of a violent nature, then the system is commonly disturbed, and in a most
conspicuous degree. The affection of the lungs in the former, from the
inflammation within, and of one of the feet, or some other part in the latter,
from an external inflammation, give extreme disturbance to the affected parts,
while there is a disease of the same nature as the gout, that is dyspepsia, or
indigestion, in which the inflammation never appears.
, and even then only in a violent attack of it, all the senses are acute, the
motions both voluntary and involuntary The voluntary motions are those that are
performed under the influence of the will, such as the motion of the limbs in
walking, or in any sort of exercise. The organs, by which they are moved,
consist of bundles of moving fibers called muscles. The involuntary motions are
those of the interior parts of the system, such as those of the heart and
vessels connected with it; the peristaltic motion in the first passages, which
are the passage to the stomach, the stomach itself, and the whole convolutions
of the intestines; as also those of the womb, of the bladder, of urine, and so
^orth. None of the latter are under the influence of the will.
, are vigorous, there is an acuteness of genius, and a great force of
sensibility as well as of passion and emotion. The several parts of the body
are perceived to be in a state of vigor from the following marks of it; the
heart and arteries from the pulse; the extreme vessels on the surface of the
body from the complexion; all the muscles from the strength that they exert;
the internal secretions from the great quantity of milk and semen; the
digestive organs from the appetite, the digestion, the vigor of the body, and
the manifest abundance of blood.

CLII. How far the intellectual faculty, and the force of passion, are
increased, will be learned from a comparison of them in this diathesis, in good
health, in the second form of diseases and predisposition to it. In this way it
is that the functions are first increased.

CHAP. IV.
The Sthenic Diathesis illustrated by an explanation of its Symptoms.
CLIII. The increase of the force of the senses, of the motions, of the
intellectual faculty, and of the passions, depends upon the increase of
excitement in every one of their organs, among other actions, quickening the
motion of the blood through them.

CLIV. The coming on of every sthenic disease is announced by a shivering. It
depends upon a diminished perspiration, by means of the diathesis being
exquisitely strong in the extreme vessels of the skin. The same is the
explanation to be given of the sense of cold, which commonly accompanies the
shivering; and the same is the explanation of the dryness of the skin.

CLV. In the same diseases, the pulse is stronger, harder, and fuller, and
somewhat more frequent, than in its sound state. Its fullness and hardness is
owing to the taking animal food plentifully during the predisposition. The
force and frequency is occasioned by the same and any other stimulus, as that
of strong drink; that of the diffusible kind, and that of exercise, whether
corporeal or mental: Nay all the stimulant hurtful powers are participant of
the same effect.

CLVI. If, in the progress of the disease, the pulse sometimes becomes weaker,
softer, and quicker, that is a bad sign, and occasioned either by the
debilitating plan of cure being pushed beyond the proper bounds: or, in
consequence of a neglect of that sort of cure, it may be owing to some debility
induced by the excess of excitement. The former of these is direct, the latter
indirect debility; both to be avoided.

CLVII. The complexion in the vessels, which is often a consequence of a
previous appearance of paleness, and great quantity of secreted fluids, is
occasioned by an overproportion of blood, in consequence of an excessive
sthenic diathesis obstructing the perspiration. The same is the cause of the
headache and pains in different parts. For, as the headache so quickly and
easily yields to bleeding, it is, therefore, seldom to be suspected of being
owing to inflammation within the head. And the reason for so thinking is
strengthened by this further circumstance, that the inflammation arising in
general diseases always affects an external part, as far as that fact has been
enquired into Vide above, CXIII.
.

CLVIII. The delirium also, that sometimes arises in a violent state of
disease, is not to be imputed to inflammation, and for the same reason; for it
yields so much to bleeding and other evacuations, that there is no reason for
suspecting inflammation within the head. That abundance of blood in the
vessels, distending these to excess, is the cause of the whole affair, is
proved on the one hand by the redness of the face, implying such abundance, and
on the other by bleeding, removing the disease at once.

CLIX. Thirst and heat, which are also remarkable symptoms in sthenic diseases,
depend upon the sthenic diathesis in the extreme vessels of the fauces and
skin; the diathesis so obstructing the vessels as not to allow a return of
perspiration, but to suffer, however, the blood to pass into the very
neighborhood of the ends of the vessels, and, by means of the suppression of
the perspiration, to accumulate, under the cuticle, the heat generated in the
system. Thus, in the throat, from an affection of the ends of the vessels, the
saliva and other fluids, by the ^ree ^low of which the throat is lubricated,
and freed from that sense of dryness, which is called thirst, are now confined
and prevented to flow out,
, and thereby produce thirst.

CLX. Hoarseness, cough, and expectoration, which are sometimes observed in
sthenic diseases, commonly proceed, and succeed to each other in the following
order. There is first often a hoarseness, then a dry cough, then a cough with
expectoration. The cause of the hoarseness and dry cough is an obstruction of
the exhalents and mucous vessels, which terminate in the bronchia, still
occasioned by a violent sthenic diathesis, and prevented from transmitting
their contents to lubicrate the air-vessels The bronchia are the divisions of
the windpipe running through the substance of the lungs, and blended with the
blood vessels. In the substance of the lungs, besides these two sets of
vessels, the air-vessels and blood vessels, there are likewise exhalants, small
arteries, and mucous glands, coming off from the extremities of the red
arteries. The windpipe is covered with the latter; and the great quantity of
mucus thrown up from the lungs, often in perfect health, and in innumerable
cases, both of sthenic and asthenic general disease, sufficiently proves the
existence of the source from which they flow.
, so as that hoarseness may be removed, and the expectoration proceed with
freedom. Again, the expectoration is next freely made, because the diathesis,
being now diminished, and allowing the ends of the vessels to be relaxed, and
the fluids to be poured out in abundance upon the air-vessels, is the occasion
of the fluids producing a commotion of the excitability over this whole organ,
and by the convulsive motion, which is called cough, of being themselves thrown
out.

CLXI. As the greater freedom of expectoration now implies an abatement of the
diathesis; so too great a flow and too long a continuance of it shows, that the
diathesis is now rushing in the asthenic state, either from indirect debility,
as when the disease, in its progress, has much exhausted the excitability, or
from direct debility as when the plan of cure, proper in kind, has been pushed
beyond the bounds.

CLXII. Those same symptoms mentioned just now,
, while they stop short of the range of direct debility, or are not yet changed
into the indirect, are occasioned by heat, and whatever stimulates in excess,
and removed by cold and whatever acts as a weakening power.

CLXIII. Paleness, shriveling of the skin, clearness of the urine, and bound
belly, which chiefly happen about the beginning of the disease, arise from a
degree of the diathesis, shutting up the ends of the vessels in such a manner,
that either nothing is excreted, or the thiner part, as in the urine, only
escapes. The cure of the affection of the urine, of the obstructed perspiration
and costiveness, shows that the diathesis is now gradually abating, the disease
becoming mild, and now upon the eve of being thoroughly removed by emetics,
purgatives, and sudorifics, and the use of other debilitating remedies.

CLXIV. In sthenic diseases, when they are gentle, the appetite is often not
much diminished, and oftener more food can be taken than is serviceable. But,
unless the lightest vegetable matter only, and that in the form of watery
potion, or in a fluid form, be given, every morsel of it will do harm.

CLXV. But, when either from indulgence in food of a rich nature, or from
employing a stimulant plan of cure, or from the disease having, from the
beginning, arisen from very violent, hurtful powers, and now attained its
highest degree of violence; in any, or all these circumstances, both the other
bad symptoms, mentioned above, break out directly, and the violent disorders of
the stomach, or an accute pain of the thorax, show themselves indirectly.

CLXVI. In a violent diathesis, therefore, where there is little appetite for
food, but a very great desire for drink; with the latter the patient is by all
means to be gratified; but the former should be avoided, as producing loathing,
sickness at stomach, and vomiting, Those symptoms are not usually of long
duration, unless when the diathesis is now going, or actually gone, into the
asthenic state by the means that have been mentioned above Vide last paragraph
and a few immediately preceding it.
, and, by removing the other symptoms by the proper debilitating plan of cure,
they go off; but when the stomach sickness and vomiting are urgent, and begin
now to be a little more obstinate, and of a little more duration, one may know
that they still remain short of the change into indirect debility, by the
following marks: if the pulse still maintains moderation in its frequency, and
does not much abate of its fullness and force; if artificial vomiting and
purging diminish the morbid vomiting, and, in one word, if the debilitating
plan of cure still succeeds. But, it will then at last be understood that the
disease is altogether changed, and its cause converted into the opposite, when
those symptoms every day increase; when the pulse becomes weaker and weaker;
when gripes in the intestines, and liquid stools, are superadded to the
symptoms that disturb the stomach, and when the antisthenic or debilitating
plan of cure is now of evident detriment See above, CIX.
.

CLXVII. While the same symptoms of the stomach and intestines,
still stop short of indirect debility, the excessive excitement in the stomach
being of quicker tendency to indirect debility there than any where else, upon
account of the stomach's great sensibility, and the force of the more powerful
stimuli being chiefly exerted upon it, produces symptoms of disturbance See
above, LIVE.
; for the most powerful stimuli, and those that are signally powerful in
producing sthenic diathesis as high seasoned animal food, wine, spirituous
drink, cordials, and the whole train of high diffusible stimuli, some of these,
as meat and wine, have no effect upon the external surface, or any other part:
others, as some of the condiments, such as mustard and strong spirits, and
above all the diffusible stimulants, as ether, camphor, and opium in a liquid
form, do act upon the second, and by their application to it support their own
internal use. Thus, to prevent or remove the gout, anasarca, sprains, and so
forth, the application of any of those high diffusible remedies, just now
mentioned, will greatly contribute, along with their use as taken into the
stomach, to support the general operation. These, and innumerable others, are
so many facts that have been suggested by observations and trials made in the
prosecution of this doctrine.
are first applied there, and exert a greater force upon the excitability in
that than any other part. Those stimuli are the several preparations of animal
food, the several concentrated strong drinks, the several condiments with which
they are seasoned, the various diffusible stimuli, as the different
preparations of opium, volatile alkali, camphor, musk, and ether; and they all
act upon the stomach with that force which they exert not upon any other part;
they do not upon the intestines below, because they undergo a change from the
first digestion before they pass over into the first portion of the intestinal
canal; not upon the lacteal vessels, because they are not received into them
till they are further diluted, and undergo another change from the digestive
operation, and when so changed, they are next carried to be mixed with the
blood; not upon the heart and arteries, upon account of the same dilution
meeting them also in those vessels, and of a constant change of mixture
occurring through the whole course of the circulation; not upon the
terminations of the arteries, whether exhalant or glandular, and whether these
excrete from the body a matter already corrupted, or carry back by the
lymphatic vessels, an useful matter to the blood: and that both for the reasons
that have been given, and particularly because some great change is made in the
exhalants and glands; not upon the lymphatic vessels, where a new fluid is
constantly flowing in upon the old in these parts by means of anastomosing
branches, and chiefly in the thoracic duct; not upon the other blood vessels,
upon account of the great change that a repetition of the circulation produces;
not upon the muscular fibers, whether voluntary or involuntary, because the
stimuli by no means come in contact with these; not upon the brain or medullary
substance for the same reason to wit, that they do not come into contact with
them,
, as well as for the great distance of these parts from the part that received
the first contact of the stimuli. In one word, as all the exciting powers,
whether salutary or hurtful, or curative, act somewhat more powerfully upon
certain parts than upon others, as these parts are generally those which they
first affect, and with which they come into direct contact; those, therefore,
in preference to others, are most liable to pass either from sthenic diathesis
into asthenic, or from the latter to the former: which, however, happens in
such a manner, that, because the excitability is one uniform, undivided
property over the whole body; whether the excitement has been increased in a
peculiar part, or diminished; and, whether its diminution has been owing to
direct or indirect debility, and in either way the asthenic diathesis (...);
all the rest of the body soon follows the kind of change that has taken place;
and, since the powers that have acted have been, and are the same, that is,
either excessively in so far as they produced sthenic diathesis,
or insufficiently stimulant that is, debilitating, in so far as they produce
the asthenic diathesis, that depends on direct debility, or in so far as they
produce the asthenic diathesis that depends upon indirect debility,
, or so to an ultimate excess; and as the excitability upon which they have
acted, and still act, is the same, that is, the whole consideration of the
cause is the same, the effect must also be the same, that is, the same sort of
actions, whether in excess or de^ect whether sthenic or asthenic,
, must be established over the whole body.

CLXVIII. The inflammation, which accompanies the phlegmasiae diseases that are
sthenic and accompanied with an inflammation of a part, as a portion of the
lungs, the throat, some of the joints, and in which, as has been formerly said,
the inflammation is like any other symptom, an effect of the cause of the
disease, not itself the cause,
, occupies an external part, as far as its nature has been yet ascertained. And
the reason of that is, that heat, which is the most powerful hurtful agent in
those diseases, either alone, or alternating with cold, or succeeding to it,
has much more power externally, where it is directly applied, than internally,
where the temperature is nearly stationary, in stimulating, and, therefore,
raising the general diathesis, to the degree of actual inflammation in a part.
Hence the throat, hence the different joints, hence the face, where the form of
inflammation is different as when the inflammation of erysipelas appears there;
, hence the lungs, which are to be considered as an external part, because the
air has direct access to them, all these are affected with inflammation in
preference to other parts. And, besides the energy of the exciting hurtful
power, just now mentioned, there is in the part, that is to undergo the
inflammation, a greater sensibility See above, LIII. l.
than in others, or a more accumulated excitability; by means of which it
happens, that, of the parts that have been mentioned, sometimes one, sometimes
another is affected, more than the rest In the inflammatory sore-throat the
inflammation affects the throat, which is also sometimes the seat of an
erysipelatus inflammation. In erysipelas, sometimes the face, sometimes one of
the legs, sometimes the ear, sometimes the temples are inflamed. I have
frequently been affected with an erysipelas, that begins with an acute
inflammation and pain in one ear, which is thickened to four times its usual
dimension; from that it spreads over the whole hairy-scalp till it reaches the
neighborhood of the ear in the opposite side, never, however, affecting that
ear; this progress has been sometimes from the right to the left, sometimes
from the latter to the former, in proportion as either had been more exposed
than the other to heat, or the alternation of heat with cold, or their
succession to each other. This disease is sthenic, but in a mild degree, and to
be removed by coolness, cold water, low vegetable fluid diet, and a slight
purge. It was once greatly aggravated by wine, spirituous drink, and the high
diffusible stimuli. In rheumatism, the inflammation attacks a large joint,
sometimes shifting from one to another, sometimes several at a time, and, in
contradistinction to cry-^^pelatus, is deep seated, extending to the interior
part of the true skin, which is the case with every such inflammation, called
therefore, phlegmonic; while its ^eat in erysipelatus is betwixt the scarf-skin
and outer part of the true skin upon the corpus mu^osum. To these phlegmasiae,
accompanied with an inflammation of a part, depending upon the general cause of
the disease, and especially upon the effect of temperature, may be added that
which an inflammation in one of the ears accompanies, though this case is
seldom admitted into the number of the phlegmasiae. It is, indeed, sometimes
local, arising from local injuries, but is as certainly at others, a general
disease, and to all intents and purposes a phlegmasia.
. To this consideration of the cause, it is to be added, that which ever of the
parts we have mentioned has been injured, in whatever manner it may have
undergone the inflammation peculiar to the phlegmasiae, that part, in every
after attack of a new phlegmasia, is in more danger of being inflamed than the
rest. This is the true cause of the recurrence of some of the phlegmasiae, as
the inflammatory sore throat, and rheumatism Those two diseases, in young
vigorous persons, are very liable to be exceedingly troublesome by the
frequency of their occurrence. In the younger part of my life the violence in
degree, and frequency of recurrence, of the sthenic inflammatory sore throat,
was very distressing, as the least variation of the external temperature,
superadded to a full nourishing diet, not without the stimulus of a cheerful
glass, was ready to renew, not only the inflammation, but the whole phenomenon
of the disease. The same thing I have often observed in the frequent recurrence
of rheumatism in persons of the same age and habit, perhaps, with some
difference of temperament. But it is to be observed, that, in proportion to the
advance of life, and diminution of vigor, both these diseases become much less
frequent, and much less violent. Nor is any thing more common than their giving
way at this time to a very opposite disease, the gout, which depends upon a
superaddition of direct debility to the indirect, that laid the foundation of
it. I am pretty certain my inflammatory fore throat, or erysipelas, never
happened spontaneously, nor without an addition of stimulant power, to those
that produce that disease, in consequence of carrying to some excess the plan
of cure suited to the removal or prevention of the gout.
. Peripneumony is a disease less frequent than any of the rest of this form,
because "the seat of its inflammation" is exempted from many stimuli, liable to
produce sthenic diathesis with its accompanying inflammation

. As the inflammatory fever, catarrh, the gentle smallpox, are unattended by
inflammation (unless that in the last a local inflammation from a local cause,
quite different from that which makes our present subject, takes place), and as
the inflammation in peripneumony, violent erysipelas, and similar other cases
of great violence, is found the highest in degree; for that reason the
conclusion is, that the degree of inflammation, which is a symptom of general
sthenic diseases, is proportioned to the degree of the sthenic diathesis It
shall by and by be showed, that this sort of inflammation is only a part of the
general diathesis, somewhat higher in degree than any other part, but far short
of the degree constituted by the whole general affection.
.

CLXIX. The inflammation, in this case, is nothing else, but a state of the
inflamed part of a common nature with that in the rest of the body. And as the
inflammation is produced by a greater degree of excitement in the inflamed,
than in any other equal part; so, before the disease comes on, of which the
inflammation is only a part or symptom, the excitement of that part is
understood to be proportionally greater than in any other part See above, par.
L. and LI. Suppose the excitement in every part of the system to be 45 at some
point in the period of the predisposition, and 54 in the part to be inflamed;
after the coming on of the disease the same proportion will hold; when the
excitement has now mounted up to 60, the excitement of a part will be
understood to have gone to 69; keeping up still the same proportion. But this 9
degrees of greater excitement in a part, comes far short of the sum total of
excitement in all the parts affected with the general sthenic diathesis; that
you may suppose 3000: and then the conclusion will be, that the general sthenic
diathesis consists in a sum total of morbid affection, as 3000; while the
inflammation of the part is only an affection of 3 degrees of excitement.
.

CLXX. This inflammation, which for the sake of distinction is to be called
general sthenic inflammation, should be distinguished from another, which is a
local affection, arising from local hurtful powers, and depending upon a fault
in the organ, or a solution of continuity Solution of continuity in all its
forms, whether as being the effect of puncturing, cutting, bruising,
compression, erosion from acrid matter, or from heat, or cold, is always
followed by an inflammation, which, when it goes on briskly, and needs to have
its violence restrained, should be called as is expressed in the next paragraph.
.

CLXXI. To this the term of sthenic local inflammation applies. The general
always depends upon sthenic diathesis, is a symptom or part of it, never
precedes it, always succeeds to it sooner or later, arises from the same
hurtful powers which produce the other symptoms,
, and is reduced by the same remedies. In contradistinction to which, the local
affection, as it arises from local injury, producing a solution of continuity
or deranging the texture of the part; so, if the laboring part is not very
sensible, the affection extends no further. In the case of a part being endued
with a high degree of sensibility, suppose the stomach, the intestines, among
the internal parts; among the external, the tender substance under the nails;
in these cases, the effect of the inflammation is propagated over the whole
system, and in consequence of an affection of all the vessels, excites a tumult
every where. The same local sthenic inflammation, whether it be fixed in the
part, or from its propagation, gives more general disturbance, yields to no
remedies, but those that act upon the affected part first, and heal the
solution of continuity or reparation of united substance,
. Let it suffice to have said so much at present upon these inflammations, for
the sake of establishing necessary distinctions as more is afterward to be
said upon the local, in its proper place. There are as many inflammations still
remaining, universal and local, to be more fully explained in that part of our
work where the proper order requires it.

CLXXII. Inflammation, also, as often as it affects a vital part, produces
symptoms of disturbance. Whether ever the general sthenic inflammation affects
the brain and its membranes, is hitherto not ascertained Phrenitis has been
thought, and commonly even defined, an inflammation of the brain; an opinion
that, however universal, seems to be liable to much doubt: nay, there are many
reasons for adopting an apposite one, as will appear from the reasoning in this
paragraph of the text.
. And it is more probable, that the commotion of the head, and other disturbing
symptoms of phrenitis, do not depend upon inflammation, as the following
phenomenon seem to show: The first of those is, the case by which the cure is
affected, the whole tumult of symptoms readily yielding to bleeding, purging,
and other asthenic what are commonly called antiphlogistic, we call
debilitating.
remedies; and, it not being very credible, that the effect of actual
inflammation in a part so (...), and so necessary to life, could be so easily
effaced. Then another argument against the same opinion is, that there ^s no
certain proof, after recovery, of the existence of inflammation during the
disease. Next, analogy makes for the same conclusion which we are disposed to
draw; for, as it has been said above, general inflammation does not arise
internally in any general sthenic diseases See above, par. CXIII.
; on the contrary, as often as it occurs, it is always in an external part It
was long an opinion, that the inflammation in rheumatism might be transferred
to an internal part, as the stomach; but that, also, is now laid aside, and all
the cases where there could be the least appearance of any such transference,
have been found to be cases of the gout, or some analagous disease of debility.
. Hay, all the symptoms are such as arise from the general sthenic hurt^^^
powers, and that, also, yield to the general antisthenic remedies, and in
proportion to their degree.

CLXXIII. The same that we have assigned as the case of phrenitic affection also
is the cause of headache, redness of the eye, as well as of delirium.

CLXXIV. There is, however, no reason to doubt, but that inflammation is the
cause of that disturbance, which happens to the lungs in peripneumony. To the
part where the pain is felt externally, whatever part of the thorax it is, an
actual inflammation is opposed internally. And, as the inflammation is
proportioned to the degree of general sthenic diathesis, and never happens but
in a high degree of that diathesis; so that the pain is proportioned to the
degree of inflammation The inflammation was supposed a chief and primary
circumstance, and its cause and seat, the cause and seat of the whole disease;
while the general sthenic diathesis, and all the symptoms depending on it, was
supposed the offspring of the inflammation. But the truth is, in every respect,
the reverse of this account. The general sthenic diathesis is the effect of the
general exciting hurtful powers. As the effect of these, in a lesser degree, it
exists during the predisposition, and before the arrival of the disease; and,
after the disease is come on, it subsists, as certainly as such, for, one, two,
or three days, as afterward, when the sign of the inflammation, the pain,
makes its appearance. It is only an increase of it, that induces the latter:
and it is not to be cured by any contrivance of throwing any thing into the
inflamed part, there being no such thing to be found in nature, but by the
several means of removing the common cause, that is, evacuant and other
debilitating remedies. Those, while, at the same time, they remove the other
symptoms, by also removing the disease, prove that the common cause of the
whole is the general diathesis. The inflammation, therefore, like every other
the cause of the general disorder, is a consequence, instead of being symptom.
; and the state of the pulse must be estimated by paying a due regard to its
cause. In the case of an high diathesis, and high degree of inflammation, its
effect, the pain, seated in some part of the thorax, sometimes about the
sternum, sometimes nigh the nipples, sometimes farther back on either side,
sometimes in the back between or above the shoulders, is acute and pungent, and
the pulse very hard and strong. When the diathesis, and the part of it we call
inflammation, is less, the pain is less acute, more dull, and easier to be
borne; the pulse is not soft and yielding, according to the common notion, but
still hard and strong, though less so than in the other case. Afterward, in
the progress of the disease, the pain abases, becomes dull, the respiration
which had been much disturbed by it, becomes more easy and free. The pulse now,
which formerly was only less hard becomes truly positively soft, and that in
proportion to the degree of indirect debility, occasioned by a neglect of the
proper plan of cure; or in proportion to the production of direct debility from
the antisthenic or debilitating plan of cure having been pushed too far. But
the hardness of the pulse, and increase of pain, is never to be imputed to the
inflammation being seated in the membrane; nor is the softness of the former,
and dullness of the latter, to be attributed to its occupying the soft
parenchymatous substance Such, however, and many other distinctions, equally
false, frivolous, and misleading in the practice, have been at all times
universally received by systematic, and lately by nosological writers.
, it being impossible that an inflammation, if it occupied either of those
parts, should not affect the next points of the vessels in the other. The
cause, therefore, of those symptoms that has here been assigned, must be
admitted.

CLXXV. The pustles, which accompany certain stehenic diseases, arise from a
contagion, taken into the body, diffused over the whole, and, in passing out of
it, detained along with the perspirable fluid, under the scarf-skin. The cause
of the distention, and, therefore, of the great number of pustles, is the
sthenic diathesis, taking place in a high degree over the whole body, but in a
still higher in the vessels of the skin, for the reasons formerly See above,
par. CXIII. and CXIV.
assigned. In which operation the muscular fibers of the vessel, becauses they
are as much increased in density, in so far as they are considered as simple
solids, as they receive an increase of tone, in so far as they are considered
as living See Chap. V.
, are, on that account, so shortened, as not sufficiently to transmit the
imperceptible vapor of the perspirable fluid. All the sthenic hurtful powers
have a tendency to produce this effect, but heat, in a degree within its
stimulant range and short of indirect debility, more than any of them. The same
is the cause of costiveness.

TH Sthenic diseases are often followed by debility, sometimes direct, at other
times indirect, as is exemplified in the change of peripneumony into
hydrothorax, the explanation of which is evident from what has formerly been
said.

CHAP. V.
The Asthenic Diathesis.
CLXXVI. Before the symptoms of disturbance appear, which only supervene upon a
violent degree of morbid state, all the senses are dull; the motions, both
voluntary and involuntary, are torpid; the acuteness of genius is impaired; the
sensibility and passions become languid. The following functions are all in a
state of languor, which is discoverable by the annexed marks: The languor of
the heart and arteries is discernible in the pulse; as is also that of the
extreme vessels on the surface, which is evident from the paleness, the dryness
of the skin, and the shrinking of tumors, and drying up of ulcers These
symptoms have lately been construed into so many marks amounting to a proof of
the existence of spasm upon the extreme vessels; but we shall, by and by, find
a much better explanation of them.
, and the manifest absence of sthenic diathesis, to produce any resemblance to
those symptoms. That the muscles are in a state of torpor is demonstrable by
their weakened action; and that the internal secretions are deficient, is
equally certain from the penury of semen and milk, and the redundance of fluids
in a state of degeneracy. The languor of the digestive organs is manifested by
want of appetite, loathing of food, sometimes thirst, sickness of stomach,
vomiting, weakness of the system, and evident penury of blood.

CLXXVII. In the same diathesis, whether as not having attained to the height
of disease, and only remaining within the latitude of predisposition, or as
raised to the measure of actual disease, the intellectual faculties and the
passions are impaired. In this way are the functions impaired.

CHAP. VI.
The Asthenic Diathesis illustrated by an Explanation of its Symptoms.
CLXXVIII. SHIVERING is not unusual at the commencement of asthenic diseases of
any considerable severity; and that, as often as its cause, a very deficient
perspiration takes place. In this case the cause of the deficiency is, from the
weakness of the whole system, that weakness of the heart and arteries, in
consequence of which they propel their fluids every where with difficulty, and
in their extremities with still more difficulty, or scarce at all. Hence the
perspiration ceases. The same is the explanation to be given of the sense of
cold, when it accompanies the shivering.

CLXXIX. In asthenic affections the pulse is weak, soft, small, and very quick.
The softness, when it can be perceived for the smallness, as well as the
smallness, is occasioned by an under-proportion of blood, arising, during the
period of predisposition, from a scantiness of animal food, and an excess in
the use of vegetable; or from a deficiency of aliment upon the whole, whether
from the one or other source. The cause of the weakness and very great
quickness of the pulse is the same deficiency of nourishment, as well as of all
the stimuli, such as that of strong drink, that of mental or corporeal
exercise, and an under-proportion of blood.

CLXXX. Since the excitability can only be gradually worn down See above, par.
XXVI. XLIII.
and the strength, thereby, repared; if, at any time, therefore, the pulse
becomes full and hard too soon, and without a proportional relief of the
symptoms, that is a bad sign, and happens because the stimulant plan of cure
otherwise the proper one,
has been pushed beyond the proper rule See above, par. XLIX.
; and it is a case of indirect debility superadded to the direct See above,
par. CLVI.
.

CLXXXI. The same is the cause of the paleness and dryness of the skin, as that
of a check^ed perspiration; that is, the weakness of the heart and arteries.
Hence the blood is not sufficiently propelled to the surface of the body.

CLXXXII. Headache, which is a most frequent symptom of asthenic affections,
and pains in the joints, which are more rare, are occasioned by a scantiness of
blood: for such is the effect of the blood in distending the vessels, that a
moderate distention, such as takes place in health, excites an agreeable
sensation; and every thing, either above or below that standard, occasions an
ungrateful one, and, therefore, when it rises to a certain degree,
, pain. But, we are much less in this case, than in that of sthenic pain See
above, par. CLVII.
, to suspect inflammation for the cause of the pain; because, not only the pain
here, but even delirium, yields so easily to the stimulant method of cure;
which would not readily happen, if so delicate and sensible an organ, and one
so necessary to life, labored under an affection so liable to destroy the
texture of the affected part.

CLXXXIII. Neither in general, is delirium, and for the same reason, that has
been just now mentioned,
to be imputed to inflammation. It is, on the contrary, to be attributed to a
scantiness of blood, and a deficiency of other stimuli. Nor is that by any
means to be doubted; since stimulant remedies, which have no effect in filling
the vessels, successfully and quickly cure every delirium depending on debility
This is a fact as new, and of as much importance as any in this whole work.
Physicians, hitherto, had no distinct notion of a variety of inflammations; and
had scarce any idea of any inflammation, but such a one as was to be treated
with bleeding and evacuation; nay, often, when they had no reason to suspect
inflammation at all, the mere circumstance of pain was, in their estimation of
it, sufficient to warrant a profusion of bleeding without end. But, the truth
is, that pain may not not only arise from an inflammation, which they had no
idea of, and which was to be cured by stimulants, but it arises from spasms,
convulsions, and even from emptiness.
.

And, when, in consequence of the removal of the disease, and of the
re-production and establishment of the healthy state, enough of nourishment is
taken in and digested, then it is that, at last, the mental function receives a
complete and solid re-establishment.

CLXXXIV. Thirst and heat, which do not less distinguish asthenic, than sthenic
diseases, and are not less frequent symptoms, arise from the asthenic diathesis
in the throat, and on the surface of the body, checking, in the latter case,
the perspiration; in the former, the excretion of the saliva, the exhalable
fluid, and the mucus, and that from the atony and relaxation of the extreme
vessels. In consequence of the former, the throat being not sufficiently
lubricated with a due quantity of its respective fluids, is scorched with
thirst. The effect of the latter is, that, the perspirable fluid being detained
under the cuticle, together with it the heat, which in a free perspiration
usually goes off in waste into the air, and remains nearly of the same degree,
is accumulated and increases. But the increase of heat depends not on the state
of excitement, or, as it is commonly called, the principle of life, since it
happens both in the sthenic diathesis, and, likewise in indirect, as well as
direct, debility. But the weakness of the vessels on the surface of the body,
under which the throat, and whatever part is accessible to air, is
comprehended, is a part of the debility of the heart and arteries; the latter a
part of that of the whole system.

CLXXXV. This asthenic thirst, which is a much more frequent and more violent
affection than the sthenic, is preceded by loss of appetite; the loss of
appetite by loathing of food; it is succeeded by sickness at stomach, vomiting,
often an acute pain of the stomach, and other troublesome symptoms; the
explanation of which we next proceed to.

CLXXXVI. Want of appetite, loathing of food These symptoms of want of
appetite, loathing of food, thirst, sickness at stomach, vomiting, and acute
pain of the stomach, as well as those that follow to the CXCV. and from that to
the CXCVIII. form a chain of symptoms depending upon increasing debility,
which, instead of being different in kind, are all connected by an uniform
operation of nature. And they furnish an instructive instance of the erroneous
mode of judging of the nature of symptoms, and morbid affections, which has
been so prevalent in all systems of physic, that we are yet acquainted with.
However different in appearance, they are not only similar, but all unite in
forming one and the same kind of disease, one and the same morbid affection:
which is proved by their arising all from one and the same set of hurtful
powers, to wit, debilitating; and by their being cured by one and the same set
of remedies, to wit, stimulant. The former powers may vary in degree, but they
are all debilitating; and the latter may also act with different degrees of
force, but they are all stimulant. And the state of the system, from which the
former constitute a deviation, as well as that, to which the latter produce a
return, is health, which is always the same.
, depend upon a debility of the whole body; as is proved by all the
debilitating antecedent powers that produce them, always acting by
debilitating; and by all the remedies, which both prevent and cure them, always
acting by a stimulant and strengthening operation. The cause of appetite is a
strong and ^ound contraction of the fibers of the stomach, by which digestion
is supported The fibers of the stomach are muscular, and partly longitudinal,
partly oblique, or approaching to circular. When the food is taken in, the
former are contracted and shortened, by which they raise the under part of the
stomach, which is unfixt upwards. These gradually relax as the food, (...)
digestion in this organ, and its conversion into a more fluid ^orm, in the same
gradual manner, passes out of the pylorus, or under orifice of the stomach This
operation takes off the distending weight in the direction from above downward;
and, as the food, in proportion to its conversion from a more solid to a more
fluid form, is more and more collected into the under part of the cavity of the
stomach, this gives a pressure in the lateral way, and, therefore, throws the
other fibers into contraction, by which the sides of the stomach are squeezed
together, and, thereby, perform the office of throwing out, by the pylorus, the
remaining part of the alimentary matter. Besides these successive actions, the
muscular substance of the stomach is so constructed as to be provided with
fibers, the motion of which, when the stomach is full, is upward and downward;
when empty downward only. All these motions give the alimentary matter the
mechanical agitation necessary to promote its mixture.
, and the excretion of a fluid, such as the gastric or fluid peculiarly
secreted and excreted in the stomach.
liquor, such as the saliva The gastric fluid, poured into the cavity of the
stomach, as well as the saliva that follows it from the palate, and the watery
or other drink taken in by the mouth, contribute to change the food more and
more into a fluid consistence, which is a change only of its form; but, by
certain means, a change also of its nature, called in chemistry proper mixture,
takes place. This change is chiefly effected by the gastric fluid, to which,
perhaps, a certain relation that the other fluids bear to the alimentary matter
in this living organ, contributes. Another means of promoting the solution that
goes on in this process is the heat of the stomach.
and to the effect of both a certain emptiness of the stomach is necessary. But
none of these circumstances can take place in a state of debility. The fibers
do not contract with force; the extreme vessels do not pour out their fluids;
the matter of food, formerly taken in, is not dissolved, and properly mixed,
and in that state thrown out of the stomach; but continues in a great measure
unchanged and indissolved. Hence it is, that there is no appetite for food, and
in a higher degree of it, that a loathing takes place.

CLXXXVII. In the same manner has thirst been explained See par. CLXXXIV.
; and in the same manner is the sickness at stomach, which is a higher degree
of affection from the same cause; for when there is strength and vigor,
sensation is most agreeable in every part of the system, as well as in
thestomach and neighboring parts.

CLXXXVIII. With respect to vomiting; it is the chief of all these affections,
that we have been speaking of: for to such a height has the atony and laxity of
the fibers in the stomach gone, when it comes on; to such a degree has the
collection of crude nasty matters proceeded, and the distention of the stomach
from these last, and air let loose is become so exquisite, that the fibers are
oppressed, and cannot perform their motion from the upper to the lower part,
which is commonly called the peristaltic motion. And, as in every case, both of
health and disease, the tendency of that motion is always from the stimulus in
an opposite direction; downward when the stimulus proceeds from the mouth, and
upwards when it comes from the stomach; in that way it is that the crudities,
and air let loose, of which mention has been made, acting as a local stimulus,
direct all the motion, that they excite, toward the upper parts of the canal.
This inverted motion, being contrary to nature, can never be agreeable; and
hence, before the arrival of the vomiting, stomach-sickness, arises; which when
it continues for any time, must be violent, because the local stimulus rouses
the muscular fibers into violent and irregular motions.

CLXXXIX. The cause of pain in the stomach and intestines, and other parts,
both internal and external, under a sthenic diathesis, is spasm. Spasm in any
internal cavity, that is, in the organs of involuntary motion, is, by means of
the debility in common to its seat with the whole body, a relaxation and atony
of the fibers, and together with that a distending matter; what constitutes
that matter in the stomach is the ^ordes or ^oul crudities, in the intestines;
hardened excrement; in both air let loose. The effect of this matter in the
distention that it gives, does not so much depend upon itself as upon the lax
state of the fibers distended by it; for the fibers, when strong and vigorous,
easily repel the distending power, which overpowers them in this state: but the
relaxed fibers, of which we are speaking, yield more and more, and that in
proportion to the urgent force exerted on them, till losing all power of
re^i^ition or contraction, all power of relaxation, they continue immoveably
contracted. All which happens according to the nature of that property in
muscular fibers, by which, when they are stretched, they do not, like common
elastic matter, only contract when the distending power is removed, but even
while it remains. During such action and suffering, the sensible fibers undergo
a certain violence; and hence the pain. But, that more is to be ^ttributed to
their own laxity, than the distending matter, is proved by stimulants restoring
the tone and density, which are exactly in proportion to each other, as
depending upon the same cause; by which means contracting in the manner of
sound fibers, and powerfully reacting, they, without any assistance, as has
lately been ascertained, restore the peristaltic motion, and drive downward
before them the matter still remaining, and still continuing to distend The
prevailing notion with respect to this kind of affection has been, and still
is, that its cause is the matter here spoken of, which is only an effect of the
cause, and that its cure, when the affection is in the stomach, is vomiting to
carry off the supposed cause. But its true cause is the laxity of the fibers,
and their atony from the general debility, yielding to the distending force of
the matter, and thereby losing their tone and density more and more; while
vomiting therefore increases, stimulating removes the disease.
. In this way wine, aromatics, and volatile alkali, and, above all the rest,
the various forms of opium, dislodge from its seat all such hurtful matter
without either vomiting or purging, and that without any difficulty, and in a
very short space of time.

CXC. The pain, which is so often troublesome in the external parts of the
body, also depends upon spasm, but not with the conjunction of a distending
matter. And a power takes the place of it, which is not to be referred to any
matter, but to a certain effort of the will in moving a limb See LVIII,
. By means of that the spasm is excited in the same manner as in the other
case, by distention, and often with the most exquisite pain, where, as the
effect is the same, that is, a spasm, arising from debility, and to be removed
by restoring the strength; for that reason the cause also must be the same, and
be reducible to debility, together with something that altogether resembles
debility, and possess a power equal to it. In this way of reasoning a way of
reasoning never made use of in medicine before, but which runs through, and
influences most of the propositions in this work. It is further to be observed,
that, upon no occasion, can we ever arrive at an adequate knowledge of abstract
causes; that the eagerness of mankind to rush into wild and fanciful
explanations of them, without any regard to real phenomenon of nature, has been
the cause of all the false phenomenon that ever appeared in the world, and that
the only sure and faithful guide to the study of causes is a cautious and
painful investigation of the effects and phenomenon of nature that proceed from
them. See more upon this important subject, and, indeed, a complete discussion
of it, in my book, entitled, "Observations on the old Systems of Physic."
we (...) may often safely rise from the contemplation of known effect to that
of unknown cause. The pain we speak of at present is that which respects the
spasms of the muscles.

CXCI. There is another pain, less confined to the same part, more diffused,
and equally troublesome, which is not supported by distention but by another
local stimulus, equally arising from debility, of equal tendency to increase
the debility, and, by its debilitating operation, together with the other
symptoms of debility, hastening on death. This pain arises from a concentrated
acid, which is sometimes predominent in the alimentary canal, when under the
influence of great debility, of which cholera chiefly is a clear example; but,
besides that, all the affections of the alimentary canal, that are accompained
with vomiting and a loose belly, are more or less examples of it.

CXCII. This acid is not the primary cause, but only a symptom supervening upon
the disease, already formed in consequence of the debility, its proper cause,
and now fully established, arising from the same source as the other symptoms,
and to be removed by the same remedies. When the same acid has arisen, it
continues to increase all debility that happens to be predominant, either in
the first passages, or in the rest of the body: And, while it exerts that
operation over the whole body, its influence is in the part where it exists,
and where the diminution of the force of the disease is most wanted.

CXCIII. But, though it be itself in that way the offspring of debility, and of
a tendency to create further debility, in the same manner as spasm has been
said to be; still there is not, either for the sake of changing, or throwit out
of the body, occasion for any other indication of cure: For, as it has its rise
at first from a general cause, so upon that it all along depends; whatever has
the effect of overcoming the other symptoms, has also that of overcoming this.
For that purpose it is, that, as in the case of spasm, stimulants, not emetics,
nor purgatives, nor any other debilitating powers, are required.

CXCIV. As the acid, which has been mentioned, produces the pain in the
internal parts, or in the organs of involuntary motion; so in the external
parts, or organs of voluntary motion, it is occasioned by something that
produces the same effect as the acid, that depends upon the will, and acts in
conjuction with the convulsive state; and, as in the case of spasm, there is no
matter that corresponds with the distending, so in this there is none to
correspond with that which produces the pain. Nay, as the spasmodic case is
represented by any cramp of the muscles, so is the convulsive by any
convulsion, but, above all, by epilepsy. Finally, as in the former, the same
reasoning from known effect to unknown cause proves the sameness of the
external and internal case, it equally proves their sameness in the latter All
this reasoning with respect to spasm and convulsion, showing them to be the
same, and only a part in the whole, a link in the chain of the other asthenic
affections, which have been mentioned, as well as the facts and arguments next
to be brought, which will serve to prove all that follow to be also the same,
is, of itself, of the highest importance to mankind. In a particular manner,
the whole tribe of diseases of the alimentary canal, and almost all those of
children, all, indeed, but the contagious eruptive ones, are both explained,
and their principle of cure ascertained, with geometrical exactness, Here,
then, at once is a discovery, upon scientific principles, of the true nature,
and certain cure, of more than one-half of the diseases of the human race; the
method of cure arising from this doctrine having never failed in any of them,
and never succeeded upon a contrary plan, the debilitating and evacuant, so
universally recommended by the authority of the schools. The spasms and
convulsions of the external parts, unless when immoderate in degree, are
equally certainly removed by the new method, and even epilepsy and tetanus
yield to it.
.

CXCV. The simple course of morbid affection from its slightest to its most
violent degree (to take a review of the subjects from the place where we set
out), is, that begins with loss of appetite, and is brought on by want of the
supports of food and of other stimli, or by an overproportion of stimuli, and
proceeds through all the intermediate degrees to spasmodic or convulsive pain.
For the reasons lately assigned, there is first no appetite for food, and if
the patient perseveres in the debilitating process of cure, and food is not
administered, such, suppose, as can be taken in the form of soups, a loathing
of it follows. By-and-by, if still nothing is used to produce stimulant effect,
thirst will come on; there will be the most keen desire for the most
debilitating power, cold water, which will be preferred to the greatest
dainties, and will be greedily swallowed When this asthenic thirst comes on, it
is the highest luxury in nature to be allowed a free indulgence in the use of
cold water, which is always hurtful in proportion to the degree of its coldness.
. To this stomach sickness immediately succeeds, which, unless prevented by a
diffusible stimulus, such as a glass of the most pure and strong spirit, or,
failing that, another, perhaps, in some cases a third, rushes instantly on to
vomiting. When the affection rises a little higher, during the vomiting a
violent pain arises in the stomach, giving a sensation as if there were a bar
of iron in it, forcibly stretching and tearing it across A lady, after nursing
her twelfth child for seven months, was found by her husband, a physician well
acquainted with the new doctrine, very low spirited one evening. She was of a
delicate, thin, exhausted habit, and had been subject often before, toward the
end of her periods of nursing, to loss of appetite, colic, dejection of spirit,
and as often cured by removing the child from her breast, and putting her upon
a rich stimulant regimen. Her friend and physician perceiving the cause of her
dejection, ordered two of their daughters, who happened to be grown up, to sit
up and rock the child in the cradle all night, and also watch their mother to
administer to her the things he had ordered. They themselves went to bed. The
reader should have been informed, that such was this lady's lowness of spirits,
that tears bursted from her eyes upon hearing the sudden order for the weaning
of the infant. He fell asleep; but in an hour's time was wakened by the noise
of a most violent vomiting she had fallen into. She had a pain in her stomach
at the same time, from her account of which the description above was taken.
All this had been occasioned by her applying the child's mouth to her nipple.
. When the affection becomes still more severe, and the cause of the disease
still higher in degree, every kind of torture is undergone; an headache comes
on with a feeling of strokes like those given by an hammer. These symptoms of
disturbance are communicated to the alimentary canal, for the most part not
immediately, but in consequence of the disease remaining, and lurking, with an
intervention of intervals of deceitful respite. The belly is often affected
with gripes and great pains, and exceedingly loose; but, which will not be
wondered at in an inverted state of the peristaltic motion, it is oftener
constipated, and, from time to time, undergoes all the vicissitudes of
alternate vomiting and purging. Among the troublesome symptoms, that have been
mentioned, are comprehended dyspepsia, called in common English Indigestion,
the gout, diarrhoea, or lose-belly, dysentery, or the bloody flux, cholera or
that disease, the urgent symptom of which is alternate vomiting and purging,
the effect of which, while their cause is a general weakness over all, but
prevalent in the first passages, is to increase the weakness, from which they
proceed to such a degree, as to hurry on the patient's death, with every
symptom of expiring debility, in the short space of sixteen hours. This happens
in the warm countries, as the southern parts of Europe, and especially in the
torrid zone, whether in Asia, Africa, or America.
, the colic The colic has been commonly treated by purging and bleeding, and
low diet; but in no instance has that treatment of it been successful. Opiates
were particularly forbidden upon the supposition of their constipating the
belly; but the truth is, that the colic, as well as diarrhoea (which has been
supposed a disease of an opposite nature, from the seeming contrariety of
looseness of the belly, and costiveness to each other), are the same kind of
affection, only differing in degree. And the colic is to be removed by no other
means than those that remove the simple looseness; that is by durable and
diffusible stimulants.
, the iliac which is that higher degree of colic where vomiting comes on, and
the peristaltic motion is so inverted as to occasion the rejection of
stercoraceous matter by the mouth. Sometimes in the progress of the same
disease, especially when treated only by evacuation and bleeding, a portion of
gut is insinuated into the cavity of the next portion. This is called in the
art Volvulus, or Intus Susceptio. The quick and effectual cure of colic before
the symptoms of volvulus make their appearance, is a good proof that the latter
is induced by the purgative medicines, employed to clear away the obstructing
cause, acting with such relaxing effect, and urgent violence, as to turn back
the inverted motion in one part, while it continues inverted in all the rest,
and particularly in the portion next to it. The ordinary evacuant plan,
therefore, is a cause of the violence of the disease in all its stages; and
lastly, of the last, which becomes a local and immovable affection. Nothing
could be more absurd than the reasoning that has directed the practice of
physicians. In which, besides the general rules of bleeding to cure bleeding,
vomiting to cure vomiting* and purging to cure purging, and besides the
contradiction of employing purging in colic, which by the last rule only
applies to diarrhoea; they have taken in into their head, that a good means of
removing the obstructing matter in colic, was to throw in a large quantity of
heavy substance with the intention of forcibly displacing it; reasoning in that
way not so well as a soldier would do in clearing away any soul matter from his
fir^lock; for it should have been remembered, that whatever effect such
substances, as quicksilver, might have by their weight in pushing downward any
obstructing matter, they must operate with a contrary effect, as often as in
the convoluted state of the intestinal canal, the course of any portion was
upward. Neither did it ever strike them, upon any one occasion, what they
should never have le^t out of view upon every occasion, that the idea of the
action of dead matter upon dead matter, whether mechanical or chemical, that
is, perceptibly or imperceptibly mechanical, is never to be transferred, in
^ound reasoning, to the mode of action of the same dead matter on living
matter; the excitement in no case whatever admitting of any such analogy.
passion, the green purging of infants, the worms, that wasting of the body
called Tabes, or Consumption, and atrophia These two diseases, according to a
theory that has at all times prevailed in the schools, and has pervaded all
medical systems, are supposed to originate from an obstruction in the mesentric
glands, through which the chyl^, or alimentary matter, after undergoing a
double preparation, one in the stomach, and another in the first convolutions
of the intestines, has to pass before it arrives at its common receptacle, the
thoracic duct, in order to be thrown into the venous mass of blood; and to
remove it, still upon the same idea, as if all the cavities of the animal
economy, whether great or small, were to be cleansed, like the soldier's
firelock, no limits were s^t to the use of gentle aperients, and particularly
the use of mineral waters. And they used gravely to tell us, that with the help
of a course of time, suppose the arrival of the infant, or child, at the
seventh year of his age, that would carry off the disease by its detergent
operation, provided the obstruction were not so great as to induce death before
the lapse of that period. That all this is ^illy theory devoid of all
foundation in truth, is proved by the completion of hundreds of cures in the
shortest spaces of time, by means of durable stimuli, which act upon their
delicate frames with such efficacy as to supercede, unless in the most violent
cases, all use of the diffusible. This remark applies likewise to worms, for
the cure of which no bounds were set to the use of purgatives, upon the idea of
clearing away the stuff in which this vermin nestled; a practice not so
judicious as that of some foolish boys, who place their success in
bird-catching upon the chance of bringing down the nests from the top of high
trees, by throwing sticks and stones at them; while other boys, both more
sensible and alert, climb up and seize every one of them. The cause of worms is
the same as that of all the other diseases we have spoken of, differing in
nothing but in what they all differ from each other, mere degree. Debility over
all, but prevalent in the alimentary canal, occasions a weakness both in all
the other functions, and particularly in that of the peristaltic motion. This
state implies a similar weakness in the vessels that pour their fluids into
that cavity; their weakness implies an enlargement of their diameters, and that
enlargement an increase of the quantity of fluids thrown in, without any
increased impulse behind. Hence arises a colluvies of matter, which the
increased peristaltic motion is not able to throw off. The colluvies is
increased by the use of vegetable matter and fruit taken into the stomach, and
depositing their feculent parts on the intestines. The indication of cure is
not to increase either the general, or particular part of the cause, by
purging, and the use of other debilitating powers, but to strengthen the whole
living system; and especially the intestinal canal, by the whole round of
stimulant remedies diffusible or durable. To this treatment the tabes and
atrophia will yield in a few days, or even hours; the worms in as many weeks.
And they are all increased by the common plan of cure, as universal experience
has proved to a demonstration.
, both of them diseases chiefly of children, and by far the greatest part of
the diseases of that age.

CXCVI. As the cause of the disease proceeds, and the exciting hurtful powers
prove more urgent; the external parts are drawn into consent, and now the
organs of voluntary motion are affected. Sometimes the legs, sometimes the
arms, and other parts, differently upon different occasions, are tortured with
cramps; sometimes the thorax variously all round; sometimes the shoulders,
sometimes the sides, sometimes the back, sometimes the neck, are affected with
pain, from which pains no part of the human body is exempted, and the region of
the lungs, of the liver, and of the stomach, are especially liable to them. The
smart pains that affect those parts, and are supposed to proceed from internal
inflammation, are, in reality, owing to spasmodic or convulsive affection
Endless have been the bleedings and other evacuations employed to remove those
painful affections, and as dismal has been the effect of that method of cure.
The universal rule, suggested by the principles, and confirmed by the practice
of this new doctrine, is to invigorate the whole system, and apply any
diffusible stimulus, particularly laudanum, to the pained parts. By that
practice I know not one cure, of some hundreds, that either I or my pupils have
performed, that has failed. The gout will sometimes make its attack in this
way. But whatever be the particular force of disease, with which they may seem
to have any connection, the only diagnosis here necessary is to be sure that
the true peripneumony is not the morbid state. When that is out of the
question, and whether the painful complaint be denominated bastard peripneumony
or not, the only indication of cure is what has been just now mentioned. A
young lady, with whom I am nearly and tenderly connected, has been often
affected with an acute pain in her right side, mostly fixed and solitary,
sometimes accompanied with a certain numbness and senselessness in her
extremeties, commonly with l^ss of appetite, and some degree of headache. The
effectual method of cure is to apply rags dipped in ladanum, volatile alkali,
or ether, and renew them as often as they become dry, and to support her
internally with durable and diffusible stimuli, proportioned in kind and
quantity to the exigenc^ of the case. This method of cure of a morbid
affection, that upon the contrary debilitating evacuant plan would be readily
and quickly converted into an incurable asthenic disease, has always proved
infallible in removing the attacks, which never after return but when she has
enfeebled herself by keeping the house too much, and neglecting air, exercise,
and the use of the other diffusible stimuli. Friction used over all the
affected parts, is also found useful in supporting the stimulant operation of
all the other remedies. There is in the fens of Lincoln, where an eminent
physician, and follower of this doctrine, practices, a disease called a bastard
peripneumony; in which, though it had always baffled all the efforts of the
common evacuant practice, he never lost a patient, by exercising the contrary
one.
. That this is their true origin is proved by the renewal of stimuli, removing
the affections, often immediately, always in a short time, and reproducing the
healthy state. It is proved by the unsuccessfulness of the contrary method of
cure, which proceeds upon bleeding, the various modes of purgation and
abstinence. Nay, what even makes more for the same conclusion, is, that, while
abstinence almost alone is often sufficient to produce the pains, rich diet
also alone has been sufficient to remove them This I have often experienced in
the case of the gout. Before dinner, when my stomach was empty, I have limped
in going abroad to dine. But after having made that meal heartily, and taken a
glass or two of wine, have returned with a perfect firm step, and free from all
feeling of pain and uneasiness.
.

CXCVII. The same pains, sometimes combined with enormous motion as in the
convulsive kind so lately spoke of, where the enormity of motion is sometimes
external and in the organs of voluntary motion, sometimes internal, as in
cholera and so forth.
sometimes without it as in the spasmodic pains, headache, pains in the legs
and soies, where there is an inability to perform the due motion.
, are absolutely free from inflammation. To distinguish them, then from the
pains that flow from inflammation or a similar origin, the concourse of
accompanying symptoms must be attended to. Sthenic diathesis points out that
whatever pains occur are sthenic; and the information received from the
asthenic diathesis is, that the pains appearing in it are participant of its
nature and as certainly asthenic. This remark is of deep application to
diseases of daily occurrence, and overturns the common practice. Even headache,
which is so frequent an affection, is ten times to be removed by the stimulant
plan, for once that the contrary answers The true reason for all this, and
innumerable errors in the practice, is that the leaders in the profession never
understood any diathesis but a sthenic one, or any indication of cure but an
asthenic, to which they gave the name of an antiphlogistic, as they did that of
phlogistic to the diathesis. By his reformation of the erroneous plan of cure,
that his cotemporaries, the Alexipharmacs, had introduced, in the smallpox and
the ^ew other sthenic diseases that ever occur, in all the rest of the general
diseases, Dr Sydenham's authority confirmed the error. He left also the measles
as he had found that disease, and all other general diseases, which are much
more in frequency than 97 out of the 100, or 97 to 3 of the sthenic. Great men
had need to be cautious, as the least inadvertency in them, not to say
essential mistakes, never fails to lead their followers, who are commonly
servile imitators, and implicit believers, into capital error. If ever they
attempt any thing of themselves it is commonly to raise a crazy superstructure
upon a false foundation, it is commonly to refine upon error ad infinitum.
.

CXCVIII. Symptoms of disturbance occur also in asthenic diseases as well as
the sthenic. Such a state of disturbance takes place in the alimentary canal in
the cases of hysteria, colic, dyspepsy, and the gout. Thus in the alimentary
canal, besides the pains, mentioned above, a certain sense of burning, anguish,
contortion and direful torture, exhibit a set of appearances, formidable in the
highest degree, both to the patient and bystanders, and which beget a
suspicion of their proceeding from inflammation as their cause. But those
affections have nothing to do with inflammation as their cause, and that they
depend upon a state of the part quite the reverse, has been proved by the the
stimulant method of curing them turning out successful in every instance in
which it has been tried Till this doctrine appeared, it was impossible to erase
from the minds of physicians an impression that had been deeply made there,
that, nothing but the only inflammation, that they were acquainted with, could
be the cause of such pain and torture, as is described in the text. I have more
than once experienced the whole concourse, here mentioned, and have always
found them to yield to the most stimulant method of cure, that I could
contrive. I once labored under this modification of asthenic disease for no
less than ten days, and was always able to overcome it in two hours, and
procure an interval of complete ease and relief for the rest of the day. The
remedies employed were the whole round of diffusible stimuli, as opiates in all
their forms, camphor, musk, volatile alkali, and ether, etc. By these the
functions for the time were completely restored. But their stimulant effect was
no sooner perfectly gone off, that is, after the interposition of a long sleep,
through the night, than the symptoms returned with a violence little short of
what it had been the day before. This was proof positive, that their nature was
asthenic, or consisting in debility; since they yielded to stimulant remedies;
and that the debility was exquisitely great, since it required so high a degree
of stimulant operation to remove it. While that is the undoubted fact, there is
a nicety with respect to proportion to be attended to in this case. It is a
rule, that the degree of curative means, whether in the cure of sthenic or
asthenic diseases, should be accommodated to the degree of the diseased state
or degree of the cause. If (...) little of the curative means is employed a
proportional part of the disease will remain: if too much, the disease will be
more than removed, that is, another state which may be morbid in another
extreme, may take place. Too much was once employed in this affection, and the
effect was, that the disease was not eradicated till the tenth day of its
course from the beginning.
. The same fact is confirmed by the use of wine, opium and other diffusible
stimuli. After that, and still in conjunction with their use, animal soups, and
next solid meat, and the usual way of living, and guarding against debility,
effectually re-establish the healthy state The rule here is, if indirect
debility be the cause, to begin with a high degree of stimulant cure, and
gradually reduce it to the ordinay degree that is sufficient for the healthy
state. And the caution is to be sure of this gradual reduction, otherwise the
indirect debility will be liable to return the moment the effect of the stimuli
is gone off. By an attention of this kind a disease depending upon indirect
debility may be cured in in the sixth part of the time, that would be taken up
by the cure, when the remedies are every day carried beyond the due bounds. For
example, if the indirect debility be in the table the effect of an application
of 71 degrees of exciting power instead of 40, that is to say, the excitement
is worn down to 9 instead of being up at 40; it is evident, that an application
of 71 degrees by way of remedies, will leave the disease where it was. Suppose
only 65 degrees of stimulant power administered; the excitement will fall to 66
and the wasted excitability rise to 15. Next day let only a degree of exciting
power as 60 be applied; then the degree of excitement will be that number, and
that of excitability 20. Five degrees of exciting power still less will reduce
the morbid excitement to 55, and raise the excitability to 25. And so on may
the matter go, till the excitability is raised to 40 and the excitement reduced
to the same number. But, if the reduction be much less by the day, the cure
will be proportionally ^lower. Nay, such an error may be committed as to
increase the disease instead of reducing it, which will happen, as often as a
degree of stimulant power is applied, which is more than equivalent to that
which produced the disease. All this attention and caution is necessary in the
cure of asthenic diseases of indirect debility; while that of those of direct
debility is easy and simple, to wit, to give the stimulants in small proportion
and often repeated, till the disease is removed, unless, which may happen, you
can guess the proportion, which may suffice to remove the disease at once, or,
at least, twice.
. This plan of cure proves to a demonstration, that those affections are most
foreign both from sthenic inflammation and every degree of sthenic diathesis;
and, besides the general sthenic inflammation, not appearing to affect internal
parts, it affords another argument against inflammation in this case being the
cause See CLXXXII. and CLXXXIII. par. above.
.

CXCIX. The asthenic pulmonary disturbance distresses the patient with so
intolerable a fixed pain, that no bounds have been set to bleedings for the
cure of it. But all such bleedings have not only been useless, but detrimental,
and often fatal* whereas, on the contrary, the stimulant plan of cure has
always succeeded A young lady afflicted with these symptoms was in the course
of a month bleeded thirty times, always with a temporary relief, but with a
return of the disease more violent than ever. She was then put upon a stimulant
plan, and in less than a month restored to her perfect health. That was among
the most early cures taken from this doctrine.
. By it the respiration is interrupted, and nearly all the symptoms that
accompany an actual peripneumony, distress the patient, and to such a-degree,
that it has been suspected, there was an inflammation in the case, or rather it
has confidently been believed that there was. Or, if any difference was
discerned betwixt this affection and that phlegmasia, or sthenic general
affection with inflammation; that was only a shadow of distinction, and led not
to the rejection of the notion of inflammation being the cause, but only gave
occasion to a question about its seat. But truly, that there is no inflammation
at all here, at least as a cause, and that the disease depends upon pure
debility, is sufficiently proved by the arguments that have been brought
before. The disease is increased by the antiphlogistic, and diminished, and
removed, by the stimulant plan of cure.

CC. The formidable symptoms of disturbance, that accompany epilepsy, apoplexy,
and fevers, such as stupor, a disposition to sleep, in them all; in fevers
often that false watching, that is called typhomania, and sometimes coma or an
insuperable proneness to sleep,
; in the latter,(or fevers), starting of the tendons, in the former,(or
epilepsy and apoplexy), convulsion or a diminution of the voluntary motions;
which by most physicians have been partly imputed to irritation No diseases are
more opposite to each other than high sthenic diseases, such as the common
inflammatory fever, or peripneumony, and proper fevers; the former, in the
table, standing at the head of the scale of increased excitement, and the
latter at the bottom of the scale of diminished excitement. And the same method
for the cure of both has been pursued, to wit, the evacuant, debilitating. If,
in peripneumony, large quantities of blood were taken at a time, the difference
has been made up in the c^re of fevers by repeating it the oftener; while all
the other evacuations were carried on with the same profusion in both. When
they talked of the respective causes of those diseases, phlogistic diathesis
was the word for the high sthenic diseases, and irritation for the high
asthenic. But these were words only, while in fact the method of treatment of
both was the same, at least, in kind; and scarcely different in degree. To
whatever part of any system of physic we turn our attention, we constantly see
one mode of practice running through the whole, and that too, notwithstanding
of the supposed great number of diseases, very limited. It turns all upon
bleeding, other evacuations, starving, and some other trifling directions under
the title of regimen. It was all antiphlogistic to use their own language; and
whatever other language they held, the nature of the disease, if we are to
judge from their treatment, was phlogistic.
, as typhomania and the starting of the tendons; partly to plethora, either
alone and pure, or together with it mobility: All these without distinction are
evidently owing to the same cause, upon which all asthenic diseases depend,
that is debility. Which is proved by the debilitating hurtful powers, whether
acting directly or indirectly, alone producing those diseases; and by the
remedies, the whole action of which depends on stimulus, alone relieving or
removing them. But it is in vain to impute apoplexy to plethora or an over
proportion of blood, see above, CXXXI.
; as if at that time of life, when the body is nearly worn out and almost
bloodless, that is, when the usual degree of aliment is neither desired, nor
taken in nor digested, more blood could be produced than in the flower and
vigor of human life. On the contrary, at the time when apoplexy comes on, in
consequence of indirect debility, induced by old age and excessive excitement
in the mode of living, the solids are languid, the quantity of fluids
deficient, as also their fountain, the blood. Epilepsy depends upon the same
debility, and the same scantiness of fluids, only that its debility is oftener
of the direct kind. Fevers may depend upon indirect debility, as in the
confluent smallpox The confluent smallpox, as depending upon a very high
degree of debility, is ranked among the high fevers in the after part of this
work, because the scale is not regulated by the appellations given by
physicians, or by any of their erroneous distinctions, but by strict regard to
the degree of excitement. And for the same reason is the violent cholera marked
nearly in the same place; because the debility, taking place in it, is nearly
equal in degree to the most sinking febrile debility; in a word, because the
same degree of debilitating power produces, and the same degree of stimulant
operation, removes the diseases so assorted
, or where drunkenness has been the principal hurtful power producing them, but
at the same time their most frequent cause is direct debility. And in all the
cases, that have been just now mentioned, debility is the primary cause and
final termination both of all the rest of the symptoms and of those of
disturbance.

CCI. To the symptoms of disturbance sometimes also belong the following that
affect the head; great headache in fevers, imbecility of the intellectual
function, confusion of thought, and delirium, the last often sufficiently
fierce, though occuring in the highest degrees of debility, and leading to
efforts beyond the strength. This state often happens toward the end of a
nervous fever, eve^ when violent. Inflammation is apprehended, blood is let,
but directly from the head; blisters, which are extreme unction in the art, are
clapped on, silence and darkness are prescribed, even the most gentle
stimulants are forbid. In consequence of the emptiness of the stomach, as well
as of the vessels of the whole body, and of the highest degree of languor from
the want of many stimuli, vertigo is superadded to delirium, and the patient,
deprived of strength, sense and intellect, breaths out his last.

CCII. But in this case there is either no inflammation, or, if there be, it is
altogether of a different nature from the general sthenic one. That it is not
the latter, the unsuccessfulness of the debilitating plan of cure, and the
incredible success of that which first stimulates, and after fills the vessels,
afford certain proof: And that it is not any other inflammation is evinced by
the so sudden restitution of health. Now, as an impaired use, or confusion of
the intellectual faculty is, in a certain degree, always the consequence of
debility, whether arising from any other source, or from emptiness, or a
general inanition of the vessels, and that too even in those, who are otherwise
sound; where is the wonder if, in the highest degree of inanition, compatible
with life, in the highest degree of diminution of excitement, scarcely leaving
a shadow of life, also the highest degree of failure in the intellectual
function, that is, delirium, among other instances of impaired function, should
take place. Nay this very fact is certain, and proved to a demonstration. Thus
famine, thus drinking water contrary to custom, after a course of drinking to
excess, or both eating and drinking with intemperance, a gloomy state of the
animal spirits, grief, terror, despair, not only induce a temporary delirium,
but frequently bring on downright madness. The same conclusion applies to any
considerable loss of blood. For how many persons, after being wounded either in
line of battle or on the highway, have never after, and often during a long
life time, come to the right use of their senses. To say nothing of contusions,
wounds and other injuries, by which the texture of the brain is injured, as
belonging to local diseases, of which we are to treat afterward; how does cold
induce death? Is it not, amidst a diminution of all the other fuctions, by a
delirium preceding death? From these facts, of such weight, both from their
number and validity, and that bring forward all the powers in support of the
argument, it must be admitted, that both headache, and every failure of the
intellectual function, in every degree, and that highest degree of such
failure, delirium, depend not at all upon general sthenic inflammation, the
only inflammation hitherto known; but arise from the highest deficiency, both
of other stimuli, and of that, which depends upon a proper fullness in the
vessels, that is, debility. Debility then is the most frequent cause of the
symptoms, that have been mentioned, as is proved by the restoration of health
so quickly upon the new plan of cure.

CCIII. But if ever the asthenic inflammation, mentioned See above, paragraph
CLXXI. and CCII. It is to be defined in the next paragraph.
before, excited the tumult of symptoms, which rae our present subject; it
produces that effect in the same manner precisely, that debility produces it,
by means of a penury of blood and deficiency of other stimuli. For,

CCIV. The general asthenic inflammation is nothing else but asthenic
diathesis, somewhat more violent in a part than in any other equal part See
above, paragraph XLIX.
; and upon this footing, that the degree of asthenic diathesis constituting the
inflammation is by no means to be compared with the degree of diathesis in all
the rest of the system; because the affection diffused over the whole body is
far greater than that confined to a part See above, XLVIII. XLIX. L. LI.
.

CCV. Inflammation, in this case, is nothing else, but a state of the inflamed
part, of the same kind with that of all the rest of the body. And, as the
inflammation is constituted by a lesser excitement in a part, than in any other
equal part; so, before the arrival of the disease See above, par. CLXIX. and
compare it with this. The meaning in both is, that, as certain parts of the
system have more excitability than other (LI.), so those parts, which in the
diseased state are more affected than any other, that is, are either more
excited, as in sthenic inflammation, or less, as in asthenic, than any other,
keep up the same proportion of disparity before the arrival of the disease,
before the appearance of any of the symptoms, and while, as yet, nothing but
mere predisposition has taken place. The truth of this proposition is
established by that of another so comprehensive as to extend to the whole
subject of life; which is, that over the whole living creation, throughout the
universe, health, predisposition to disease, and disease itself, are the same
state, only differing in degree, (vid. par. XXIII. and LXV.) Health, therefore,
is also comprehended under this same proposition.
, of which the inflammation is a part, a symptom, or sequel, the excitement of
that part is understood to be proportionally less, than that of any other part.

CCVI. This inflammation mentioned in the two last paragraph (...)
should be distinguished from another, which is local: It is general, and
depends upon a general diathesis and only happens when the diathesis has
attained to a certain degree; while the local arises from some hurtful power,
that produces a solution or vitiation of the texture of the part, without
regard either to diathesis or degree: The general inflammation is brought on by
the same hurtful exciting powers, which produce the general diathesis, only
applied in a higher degree; and the same remedies remove both the diathesis and
the inflammation: The local inflammation depends upon hurtful powers, that only
harm a part, and is removed by remedies that change the state of the part; but
is not affected either by general hurtful powers, or general remedies. Examples
of the universal are these inflammations, which accompany the gout, the putrid
sore throat, the gangrenous sore throat, and that inflammation which produces
sore eyes: The local inflammation will be illustrated by examples, to be
produced in their proper places as in the inflammation, that is produced by a
wounding instrument when a person, previous to such an accident, is in health,
and continues to be so after the accident. Or it may still be local, though a
person is in bad health when it happens, but so, however, as that the general
state of the health is understood to have no concern in it. A wound in a very
tender part may induce disorder over the general system; but still all the
symptoms can be traced to the wound, and not to the ordinary cause of general
disease.
: The general inflammation is attended by debility over the whole system; which
debility is only a sequel of the local, and not always. To remove the former
the general method of cure See par. LXXXVIII.
is adapted; but the cure of the latter turns upon healing up the part. In this
way, then, there are four sets of inflammation, two universal, a sthenic, and
an asthenic, and two local; one of which is sthenic, and the other asthenic.
The former often ends in suppuration, often in solution; the latter in
gangrene, and sometimes sphacelus, sometimes at the last in death. If, in the
end of a typhus fever or a low-nervous fever, which is a disease of the highest
debility, next to the plague, and often not inferior to that disease in
malignity, and, therefore, to be arranged in the scale, as next to that
disease, which stands at the bottom of diminished excitement. Physicians have
constantly confounded the different degrees of this disease with sthenic ones,
affecting the pulse. But they are diametrically opposite as shall be pointed
out when we come to the proper place for such distinctions.
inflammation affects the brain or its membranes, which though strongly
asserted. A professor in his lectures gives a case of a typhus fever, where,
upon account of delirium and some other symptoms, thought to announce an
inflammation in or near the brain, the patient was so freely bleeded, that the
state of the pulse (which is said to have been, in his words, a pulsus vacivus,
if ever there was such a pulse,) forbid any further bleeding. The patient was
given up, and the extraordinary physicians withdrew, leaving the ordinary one
of the family, only, about him. This gentleman, from some impression on his
mind, began to think, that another bleeding might be tried with advantage. He
bleeded him and the patient recovered. This is an account of a case that I
pretend not to understand, and I believe it will be no less puzzling to my
readers, and the more puzzling the more sense they have. It is, however brought
as an example, that in a seeming exspiring debility, the highest degree of
asthenic diathesis, there may be an universal sthenic debility, that requires
bleeding. I have mentioned it, not for the sake of information, but of caution,
to the reader. Any person may see the frivolity and lightness of the theories
of our profession, but it requires knowledge and discernment to guard against
the seduction of facts.
is neither yet proved, nor a very likely fact, it will serve for an instance
of an asthenic general inflammation.

CCVII. As the general sthenic inflammation is occasioned by a quantity of
blood, excessively distending the vessels, which are its ^eat, by that
distention stimulating them, by stimulating increasing their excitement, by the
last producing more forcible and more frequent contracctions, by these
increasing the tone of the fibers as living, and their density as simple
solids, and thereby diminishing their diameters See LXI. above, and CXXXI.
; and, consequently, making the blood flow with great effort through the
contracted (...), and, during its flow, produce pain from the high force of the
contractions, and the narrowness of the space through which it has to pass; and
as the same, though in a lesser degree, is the cause of sthenic diathesis over
the whole vascular system, whether red or colorless: So.

CCVIII. The cause of general asthenic inflammation is also abundance of blood
in the inflamed vessels, producing the same effects in the inflamed portion as
in the sthenic inflammation; and, notwithstanding of the penury of blood in
every part of the vascular system besides, flowing abundantly into the inflamed
vessels, upon accoun^ of a greater atony and laxity in them, than in the
others, distending them and producing the phenomenon peculiar to any
inflammation These definitions, apply to all the four inflammations (par.
CCVI.) with respect to the state of the inflamed vessels; their differences
only depending upon the general state of all the rest of the vessels, which in
the local, may be quite the healthy state of these, while, in sthenic general
inflammation, it is the sthenic, and in this the asthenic, diathesis, that are
conjoined with the inflammatory state. Further, as their cause is influenced by
these general circumstances, so also is their cure; the sthenic and asthenic
general inflammations requiring the remedies of the diathesis to which they
respectively belong, and the local only the remedies suited to heal up the part.
.

CCIX. As the indication of cure for the former is, to diminish the quantity of
blood, which is the first cause of the struggle, and, thereby, to reduce the
excessive excitement to the degree that suits the healthy state, and the
excessive contractions, which constitute the struggle, to the moderate ones,
which are pleasant and agreeable to health See above, CXXXIV.
: So

CCX. The indication of cure for the latter is, first, by powerful stimuli, to
drive on the quantity of blood which there is in every part of the system, that
the portion which loiters in the languid vessels of the inflamed part, may be
thereby propelled, and the vessels relieved of their burden; and then by the
gradual administration of seasoned animal food, in the form of soups, and, soon
after, and when now the strength is recruited, in a solid form, to fill the
whole system of vessels.

CCXI. The two other inflammations, both local, will be treated of afterward,
each in its proper place.

CCXII. That inflammation of the throat, which ends in what they call a putrid
The disease, here mentioned, is neither described nor, seemingly, understood,
in medical books and lectures. In this work it is taken, as every thing else
is, from nature, at the bedside of the sick, and deserves so much the more
^^^^ntion, that, though it is a disease of the utmost malignity (...) have been
altogether overlooked. Its appearances are mild (...) without both skill and
attention, will end fatally.
, sore throat, is singularly insidious. During the first days it differs little
in its appearance from the sthenic sore throat. The general symptoms are also
similar. The pulse scarce exceeds the measure of the sthenic pulse in its
frequency and other characteristics. For some time the whole disease proceeds
with gentleness and tranquillity, excepting, that a constant rejection by
spitting of a tough mucous matter is troublesome. At last, when head is not
made against it by means of the most powerful stimuli, a period arrives, when
all the symptoms are suddenly precipitated into a bad state; when the pulse
becomes very quick, very weak, and remarkably small; when the strength, over
the whole system, sinks; and now it is not a moderate portion of diffusible
stimulus, not before administered, that will stop the much to be lamented death
of the greatest ornament of human (...) ture All this refers (...) in Scotland,
of singular worth and amiability, who died, but not in consequence of the plan
of cure, which this doctrine enjoins, having been followed; especially at the
period of the disease when it was most wanted.
. The best plan of curing this disease, is to prevent the mortal period by
employing the most powerful stimuli.

CCXIII. The diffusible stimuli are so powerful in removing the inflammation of
the gout, that, sometimes, strong drink, undiluted, as wine, and spirits, or
the latter diluted with water, as warm as can be borne, have in a few hours
removed the most violent fit, and restored the use of the affected foot. And
the same remedies, as have been mentioned before, are of equal efficacy in
removing the general symptoms Treated in the way, here and formerly (vid. the
pref.) mentioned, the most violent degree of the disease always gave way in a
few days, and milder cases in as many hours. I never found a single case baffle
me but one, where the patient, who, with his valet, had quacked himself into
the gout as well as other complaints, and particularly an habitual costiveness,
by forcing every passage by the belly, for the space of seventeen years. I was
dismissed, without having my directions complied with; and without being
allowed to accommodate the remedies to his practice of purging and throwing up
injections, so as to endeavor, at least, to prevent or mitigate their hurtful
effect. For, it must be observed here, that, as every directly debilitating
power is an exciting hurtful means of bringing on any asthenic disease, so the
effect of every evacuation, and particularly that by the belly, is well known
to be a (...) means of bringing on a fit of the gout. Among many ^^her means of
inducing that disease, a single (...) of Glauber's (...), though that be but
(...) mild (...) will bring (...) at (...).
.

CCXIV. The inflammation of the throat, in the gangrenous sore throat, is not,
according to the common opinion, a primary affection; but, like every other
general asthenic inflammation, depends upon the general diathesis, which, in
this case, is manifestly asthenic, being a part or symptom of the diathesis,
when that has attained a certain high degree.

This inflammation has nothing in common with the sthenic general inflammation,
which distinguishes the sthenic inflammatory sore throat, Yet in their systems
of no^ology, which are labored volumes of distinctions without differences,
begun, within this half century, to be superadded to the former modes of
systematizing* which, without this new one, had sufficiently disgraced the art,
and needed no more than the most absurd of the whole, or that the m^sled fancy
of men could invent, to complete, in all its copartments, the vast fabric of
error, and particularly in the last of these, that published in Edinburgh, the
putrid sore throat, as described (above CCXII) was left out, and the
gangrenous, which is that just now alluded to in the text, conjoined with the
common sthenic sore throat, though diametrically in its nature opposite to it.
or with the two local inflammations.

CCXV. The crowded pustles, in the smallpox, when it is now converted into the
confluent disease of that name, that is, into an asthenic general disease,
become partakers of the new diathesis, and, instead of sthenic, which was their
first state, become asthenic; and, as by their local stimulus before, they
quickly changed the sthenic into the asthenic diathesis, by means of indirect
debility; so they, now, by the debilitating influence of their asthenic nature,
confirm asthenia, or a state of debility, over the whole system; they increase
it, and carry it quickly on to death There cannot be a more exquisite stimulus
in living nature, than that universal cake of inflamed pustles* which covers
the whole surface in a crowded smallpox* It is no wonder then, that, when it
is superadded to the ordinary stimulant hurtful powers, to which this disease
first owes it violence, and afterward, that very eruption, the united effect
of both should soon pass the whole range of excessive stimulus, and quickly run
into the state of indirect debility (see par. CC). Such is the nature and
progress of the smallpox, in passing from the sthenic into the asthenic state,
that is, from one disease into another of a most opposite nature.
.

CCXVI. To throw light and illustration upon them, by comparing their
respective methods of cure; it is to be observed that the cure; in the one case
is quite different from that of the other The cure of the distinct smallpox is
the debilitating; that of the confluent, the stimulant plan. The cause of the
former is sthenic diathesis, that of the latter the asthenic, occasioned by
indirect debility; which is a distinction unattended to in general, and with
very bad effect upon the practice. For, when the confluent smallpox is
established, the pustles (...), and signs of mortification coming on, the
covering the patient with a single sheet is as common as in the distinct small
pox.
. The remedies of the distinct smallpox, and of its accompanying eruption, are
cold, and whatever, by evacuation or otherwise, debilitates. The remedies of
the confluent disease, as well as of its accompanying eruption, are heat,
remaining within the indirectly debilitating degree, and all the powers, which
stimulate as quickly, and as powerfully as possible, and consequently, the most
diffusible.

CCXVII. They differ besides in this, that all the hurtful powers in the
distinct case are sthenic; all in the confluent asthenic. And this difference
equally applies to both diseases, and both eruptions.

CCXVIII. And as the sthenic or distinct pustles have a direct tendency to
produce asthenic inflammation, and sthenic eruption; so the tendency of the
asthenic or confluent, is as directly to gangrene, sphacelus, and death.

CCXIX. The boils, carbuncles, and buboes, which often accompany the plague and
sometimes the typhus fever See above, the note ( c), under par. CCVII.
arise from a contagious matter, taken into the body, and then detained with
the perspiratory fluid, under the cuticle, and in the glands. The case of the
detention, and, therefore, of this eruption, is a total cessation of motion in
the extreme arteries, especially the glands and perspiratory terminations, upon
acount of the universal debility, and the very great langour of the heart and
arteries. That this is the case, is proved by their being no eruption during
the period of predisposition, when some vigor still remains; and, therefore,
the perspiration goes on in a certain degree; none in the cases of sudden death
from the violence of the disease; neither eruption nor disease in all the
cases, whether these are early prevented by the use of the more powerful
stimulants; by the disease being always gentle, and the eruption always
sparing, in proportion to the proper management of the stimulant plant of cure.
For, whether the suppression of perspiration be the consequences of a very
great degree of sthenic diathesis, or of an equal degree of sthenic as in the
present case; all the foreign matter, that should be thrown out of the system
along with the perspirable, is, together with it, detained, and so detained
below the cuticle, by stagnating, and acquiring a more acrid nature, it
produces local inflammation, either of a sthenic or asthenic nature, in
proportion to the different nature of each, or rather of the habit of the body.

CCXX. In the same manner is that eruption which diversifies the skin in the
gangrenous sore throat to be explained; as well as another, which supervenes
upon that state of the smallpox, which by reason of the debility of the
system, would otherwise turn out well; but if the new eruption be not opposed
by the most powerful stimuli, is sure to end in death. Both these eruptions A
young child of mine, who had been long weakly, and often, in consequence of
that, snatched from the jaws of death by being properly supported, according to
the principles of the new doctrine, had been prepared to receive the smallpox,
and inoculated. After the eruption was completed, and it was now certain it
would be exceedingly moderate, one morning he was brought before me covered
over with the appearance of the eruption described in the text.
are spotted both of them red: but the former or that in the gangrenous
sore-throat.
is marked by smaller, the latter by larger spots; in the latter the color is
a fine scarlet, far exc^eding all art, and almost the power of nature herself
in other respects The beautiful colors sometimes painted in the clouds are
often not to be copied by art.
. Both of them are owing to a suppression of the perspiration by the debility
that has been mentioned: the former is removed, in practice, by the stimulant
plan of cure, which removes all the other symptoms; in the latter, or uncommon
eruption, the debility produced of purpose in the preparatory plan of
management, to render the smallpox mild, must be opposed, as soon as the
eruption appears, and the strength must be restored by the use of the most
diffusible stimuli: The pustles which are both few, and of no consequence, and
do not even attain to the measure of actual general disease, and are,
therefore, free from all danger, are not to be regarded. If this practice is
executed, the recovery is both certain and quick; but, if it be neglected, or
if a contrary plan of cure be set on foot, death is inevitable It is certain,
that the safe conduct of the smallpox depends upon debilitating the habit
which is to receive the infection; and it is as little doubtful that we may
carry that operation a great way, by lowering the diet, purging the belly, and
applying intense cold to the surface, and, by all means, guarding against all
alternation with heat. By this means the phlogistic diathesis, chiefly arising
from the ordinary powers, and in part, as it would seem, from the contagious
matter, is prevented or removed; the great flow of the fluids to the surface
checked; and the diameters of the perspiratory, as well as of all the other
vessels, kept open and patulous. But it had been long a question with me,
whether this debilitating operation might not be carried to far. If it be
certain, as it is, that extreme debility suppresses perspiration, surely the
process pushed near to that degree must endanger that event. This phenomenon
happening to my child, solved the doubt that I had not yet decided, and it
seemed to be in perfect conformity to the principles of this doctrine, to
understand, that, as this child had been formerly weak, and, perhaps, still
retained some degree of that state, the further weakening him by the
preparatory management, for the better regulating this disease, had been
carried too far. A surgeon happened to be by when the child was under
examination; I asked him if he had ever seen such a case, for I had neither
seen, nor heard, nor read, any thing like it. His answer was, that he had seen
three, and all of them fatal. I knew how that would happen, that is, that they
would continue the debilitating practice they had been following. On the
contrary, I ordered the child spirit and water, and a little of an opiate, then
restored the meals that had been taken from him, and brought him about to his
perfect health (for the smallpox gave no trouble) in twelve or sixteen hours.
.

CCXXI. Heat is not peculiar to sthenic pyrexiae Pyrexia is the word for
sthenic diseases affecting the pulse, called febrile, or fevers, very
improperly, while the ^erm fever is reserved for the high asthenic diseases
that have been confounded with the pyrexiae.
, but belongs also to other diseases of the same stamp. Nor is it so confined
to those, as not also to arise in all the degrees of predisposition to those
diseases, and in proportion to each degree That heat takes place in
predisposition, is a matter of daily observation. Thus, when a person has no
other symptom of disease, it is often remarked, sometimes by himself, sometimes
by another, who may have happened to feel his hands, that he is certainly not
quite well as his hands are hot. When this heat happens, either in the hands or
feet, without any cause to account for it consistently with health, it is a
sure prelude of disease, that is, a sure mark of a considerable predisposition
to to discase: and the kind of disease, of which it is the harbinger, is
oftener asthenic than sthenic.
. But the matter does not end here. The same heat distinguishes all asthenic
diseases, whether febrile, which is a distinction without any good meaning, or
not febrile, and also the predispositions to them all, and that in proportion
to the degree of debility. There is not a more certain mark of a departing
disease, whether sthenic or asthenic, that a return of that temperature, which
is commonly called cool, to distinguish it from morbid heat.

CCXXII. The heat is then only natural, when neither diathesis is present. From
that point it increases, through all the degrees of increased excitement, till
indirect debility, from excess of stimulus, is established; and it increases in
proportion to the degree of excitement, rendering the perspiratory vessels
always less and less patulous. It also increases through all the degrees of
diminished excitement to certain boundaries, which are fixed by a cause
by-and-by to be explained, and increases in proportion to the degree of
decreasing excitement, though the latter all along renders the perspiratory
vessels more patulous; and, thereby, among other effects, diminishes the
motion, both of all the vessels, and particularly of the perspiratory.

CCXXIII. When the heat has now been the greatest it can be, and the debility
increased in proportion, at last in the extremities, and afterward gradually
in the rest of the body, cold, which is always a bad sign, succeeds to it. In
the progress of the debility motion begins to be very languid, first in the
extreme vessels of the extremities of the limbs, and then to be destroyed
altogether. Hence, as heat, whether in due proportion, or in excess, depends
upon the motion of the blood and other fluids, being performed in due
proportion, in excess, or to a certain extent, in a deficient degree; if,
therefore, the heat is either nothing, or next to nothing, as in the present
case, the effect, together with the cause, by an universal law in nature,
ceases. The same thing happens in both extremes of excitability, that is, of
excessive abundance in direct, and of nearly a cessation of it, in indirect
debility; and so much more readily will this happen, because, whatever be its
source, debility is always the same.

CCXXIV. Because the excitement in sthenic diseases is for the most part much
and equally increased over the whole body; the heat, on that account, is also
equally diffused over the whole. From which fact no cases are excepted, but
those, in which, in certain parts, as the stomach, under a strong disposition
to vomiting, and, therefore in danger of falling into indirect debility,
indirect debility either actually takes place, from the disease proceeding with
an excessive force of stimulus; or direct debility comes on, when the
debilitating plan of cure has been pushed beyond the rule. But, so long as the
sthenic diathesis is vigorous, and supports a high force of excitement the
(...) will almost always be equal.

CCXXV. The same thing happens in moderate debility. Accordingly, through the
whole course of predisposition, and in those diseases, where the matter has not
gone so far as almost a (...) cessation of motion, the heat is pretty equal.
The effect of cessation of motion has been explained See above, CCXXIII.
, But, before that happens, if any inequality of heat occurs in diseases of
moderate debility, as (...) frequently the case in the hands and feet; the
reason of that is, that a greater degree of debility as in cold, labor, and
sweat from these, or any other source, and that sweat cold and clammy, has been
applied to those parts, than to others. Not only in the gout, but also in other
affections both of direct and indirect debility, a burning heat, chiefly
distressing to the soles of the feet, torments the patient, especially in
walking. That that arises from debility, checking perspiration, is proved by
fatigue, cold, and other debilitating powers proving hurtful to it; and heat,
rest, and other stimulant powers, giving it ease.

CCXXVI. It remains now, that it be explained, how too great excitement, in
high sthenic diseases, impairs some functions, but never, by debilitating
operation; and how too small an excitement in violent asthenic diseases, gives
an appearance of increasing some functions, but always a false one.

CCXXVII. If, in peripneumony, sy^ocha or the inflammatory fever.
, and violent rheumatism, the voluntary motion^ are impaired, and to such a
degree, that a person can neither use his hands nor his feet, more than a
paralytic person; that that is not owing to debility, that is, diminished
excitement whether directly or indirectly When the excitement is at 40 all the
functions are performed in the best and completest manner. Above that there is
more force through all the steps of predisposition, but with less durability
and steadiness; which is exemplified by the comparison of hard laborers, who
at the same time are well supported, and gentlemen, who live well, without
using a proportionable degree of labor or exercise to prevent a luxuriant
state of vigor. When two such persons are subjected to a comparative trial of
their vigor in any exertion, the former will be found to go through the
exertion with more steadiness, and to hold out longer and better than the
other; even though his first efforts may have been inferior in force to those
of his antagonist. And the reason is evident; a moderate and proper degree of
vigor, will bear an addition of stimulant operation longer than a higher
degree of it approaching to morbid state; because the distance of the
excitement from indirect debility, which puts an end to excitement, is greater
in the former than in the latter case. The difference in the well-supported
labourer is 30 before he can reach an increase that leads up to 70; whereas
that of the gentleman is perhaps not more than 20. The exertion in the struggle
adds stimulus; which will be better borne by him who has least and yet enough,
than by him who has more, but of a superfluous degree, and more liable to run
into the extreme of a cessation of excitement. The effect of the exertion in
the labourer will be (...) carry him soon up, by its stimulant operation, to
the degree of excitement where the gentleman began, suppose that to be 50, and
perhaps by and by to 60. But the same stimulus of exertion in the gentleman
will have the effect of first mounting up to 60, and by and by to 70, where the
excitement begins to cease.
, is evident from this double proof; that, if the apparent debility were real,
stimulants would be of service, and debilitating remedies of disservice Who
would administer wine, opium, and the other high stimuli, whether durable or
diffusible, to cure the inability to perform motion in either peripneumony or
that rheumatism which is highly sthenic? Or rather who would think of any other
means of removing that symptom, than the debilita^ing powers, so effectual in
removing all the rest, and not less so in removing it?
. But the re^^^se is the truth. For the same debilitating powers, which cure
the other symptoms of confessed excessive excitement, also remove this
indisposition to the performance of motion; and the contrary increase the
affection.

CCXXVIII. Again, in spasms and convulsions, either of the involuntary motions,
in the internal parts, as in dyspepsia in English indigestion.
, in colic, in dysentery in English the bloody flux.
, in cholera or that disease the urgent symptom of which is vomiting and
purging.
, in hysteria, in any violent attack either of vomiting or looseness of belly,
(great numbers of which affections happen every day, without being
distinguished by names); or in the burning affection of the alimentary canal
See above, CXCVIII. and the annexed notes.
, which is considered by physicians as a^ inflammatory affection; or in
affections of the voluntary motions externally, as in the lock-jaw, in tetanus
Tetanus i^ a violent spasmodic motion of the muscles of the head, neck, and
upper part of the thorax, whereby the head is kept immovable in the same
position, in which it had been ^ound upon the coming on of the spasm. The teeth
also, from the affection occupying the muscles of the under jaw, are kept
immoveably locked, and hence the name of lock-jaw. Besides the affection of the
muscles, that has been mentioned, there is scarce one muscle in the whole body,
free from one degree or other of the affection. Further, there is a most
painful feeling over all, but especially in the parts most affected. This
disease sometimes happens in cold countries, such as this, in consequence of a
wound in any sensible part, or when small bones, as the ossa spongiosa, are
bruised, crashed and dashed into the softer parts. The part of it called
lock-jaw is frequently a symptom in fevers. But the disease is more frequent in
warmer countries than this, as in the south of Europe, where the excess of heat
is liable to run into indirect debility. It is most frequent of all in the
Torrid Zone, where indirect debility is the most constant attendant on heat. As
a violent and permanent contraction of the muscles was the most striking
symptom of it, and systematic physicians supposed every such contraction the
effect of an increase of excitement, or, to use their own words, an increased
influx of the nervous fluid or nervous power into the parts affected;
consequently their indication of cure was to relax the rigid contracted parts.
Hence no bounds were set to their emolient relaxing measures. Such were
bleeding, other evacuations, and warm bathing. But experience soon taught, that
all these increased, instead of removing the disease. Of late opium, because it
was thought a sedative, was tried. The trial succeeded. But immense quantities
of that medicine were found necessary to effect the complete cure. Laudanum
used to be thrown in without measure, or any other rule, but to give it on till
the disease ceased.
, and in many spasms of other parts; or in convulsion, epilipsy or the
falling sickness in English,
, and many other convulsive affections; if these functions ^eem very much
increased; that that is not owing to increase of strength, that is, en-encrease
of excitement, shall also be proved to any unprejudiced judge by the following
twofold fact; that, if this were a case of really increased strength,
debilitating powers, or the remedies of sthenic diathesis, would remove it; and
stimulants keeping within their stimulant range, and
not proceeding to their ultimate effect of inducing indirect debility, but
remaining within that range, in which they remove asthenia or affections of
debility,
would increase it. But to such a fact also is the truth in diametrical
opposition Who does not now know, that bleeding, evacuations of other kinds,
are hurtful, and that stimulants proportioned to the degree of the cause, are
the only successful remedies?
. For stimulants alone, which remove the other signs of acknowledged debility,
also remove those spasms and convulsions; and debilitating powers increase
them, or change the disease into a worse A certain gentleman in his desk,
speaking of the method of curing epilepsy or the falling sickness, and
recommending, among other evacuant and otherwise debilitating means, small but
frequently repeated bleedings, unguardedly contradicts himself in his very next
sentence. "However," says he, we regular practitioners are liable to be too
cautious and even timid sometimes. For I have known a bold practitioner in the
country, who cured an epilepsy by very profuse bleeding. In a few months after
the patient died of an universal dropsy, but the epilepsy never returned. I
would ask this gentleman, what sort of a cure that was, that converted a
disease, which may come and go for many years, nay even for a long lifetime,
into one that, in a very short time, proved fatal? What reason would a podagric
have to thank any one, who should convert the gout in him upon any violent
attack, into a fatal dropsy? That sort of treatment is not curing a disease but
increasing it, and even that to death. The convulsive symptoms of an asthenic
may pass away; but the asthenic remains. You may cease to call it epilepsy; but
dropsy still shows that the cause of the disease remains, nay is prodigiously
increased. This fatal mistake of an increase of the disease upon the whole, for
the cure of an inferior degree of it, proceeds from an improper use of directly
debilitating powers in place of the proper stimulant ones. But there are cases,
where the last, by being carried too far, produce the same fatal mistake. This
in peripneumony, to get rid of the hard pulse, and the acute pungent pain (see
above, CLXXIV. and the notes), the bleedings are carried so far as to produce a
fatal hydrothorax, or dropsy of the chest.
.

CCXXIX. Because we know not what contraction is, or almost any function of
living systems This is, perhaps, the first philosophical performance in which
care has been taken to keep clear of abstract causes. The prosecution of them
has contaminated almost every department of knowledge that had been treated
scientifically. See the introduction to my Observations on the several
erroneous Systems of Physic, etc. where it will appear, that even the great Sir
Isaac Newton did not altogether avoid this error, especially in the questions
he put, however modestly, with respect to an all-pervading ether; the wanton
and aerial theoretical fabrics that have been raised upon which, have, in spite
of Lord Bacon's better directions, disgraced the philosophy of the middle of
the eighteenth century. Compare what you will find in that book with the III.
Chap. paragraph XVIII. in this.
; we shall not, therefore, wrangle about whether it be an increased or
diminished function See above, Chap. V. throughout.
; but we will by no means give up the point of those spasmodic and convulsive
motions being an impaired function I know not what the abstract state of
muscular fibers is, either when they contract and relax with rapid, violent,
and morbid force, or when they remain immoveably fixed in one forcible
permanent contraction: But I know, that nothing but debilitating powers produce
them, and nothing but invigorating ones remove them, which is enough for me,
who mean to prove myself a sure and cautious observer of the phenomenon of
nature; and in my practice as a physician, to avoid, after the example of many
others, groping in the dark under the guidance of abstract reasoning, but to
view every subject of observation, by nature's clearest light.
; for, if, within certain boundaries, See above, par. XXIV.
excitement, when increased, produces more strength, and less when it is either
diminished without limitation, or ultimately increased; and if every function
so arising is properly defined to be either a function increased in proportion
to the increase of excitement as contained within its boundaries, or as a
function diminished in proportion to the deficiency of the same excitement,
without any boundary, or to the ultimate increase of exciting power beyond the
stimulant range; consequently, in the last of these cases it is a most proper
definition to say, that the function is diminished; and in the first, that it
is increased In the spasmodic and convulsive state of the function of motion,
when compared with the vigor of the same function in its healthy state, who
would say that the former is greater than the latter? The healthy and vigorous
state of motion consists not in the degree of contraction, but within certain
degree of that, in the well proportioned alternation between contraction and
relaxation; of which we have proof indisputable in this mode of motion being
best performed in that middle state of vigor, that intervenes betwixt the
extreme of the healthy, or moderately increased vigor, and the other extreme
of direct and indirect debility. The increase of vigor and excitement keep
pace to a certain extent, even through some degrees of morbid excess of the
latter: but a period, and that short of indirect debility, arrives, as in
peripneumony, where the excitement is increased beyond the healthy state, and
must be reduced in order to restore the due healthy vigor. There are other
cases, as that of mania, or sthenic insanity, where the conjoined increase of
vigor and excitement will still go further. But in every case the increase of
vigor, still judging of it from its effects in the healthy state, ceases
before that of excitement; and, perhaps, we may make a step toward finding the
boundary, by observing, that the greater the sum total of excess of exciting
power is, the sooner does the point arrive, beyond which the vigor does not
proceed. In peripneumony it ceases at a certain period of the disease, where
the salutary effect of bleeding and other debilitating means shows that the
increase of excitement is still going on. But here the sum total of excitement,
considering the state of all the other functions, is greater than in mania,
where the function chiefly increased in vigor is only that of voluntary
motion, while all the functions of involuntary motion are very little affected.
From this investigation we can clearly discern, that every increase of
excitement leads to a morbid increase of vigor, and that there is, somewhere
or other, a point in the scale of increasing excitement, and below the point of
indirect debility, where the vigor is no further increased; and this inference
arises with respect to the practice, that we should be very observant of both
facts, as pointing out a very material distinction in the indications of cure;
that in indirect debility being to stimulate, while that at the cessation of
vigor is to continue to debilitate till the sum total of excessive vigor be
reduced to the proper and healthy. The inability to the performance of motion
in peripneumony is an instance of the latter; that of the conversion of the
same disease from excess of debilitating cure is an instance of the former.


CCXXX. The notion, therefore, hitherto received with respect to these motions
is false. It proceeds upon a supposition Indeed they have talked so confidently
of it, that they may more justly be arraigned of going upon a petitio
princip^l, or that error in logic, where a point, chiefly required to be
proved, is taken for granted, and made a ground work of other reasoning.
as if the motions proceeded from an excessive influx of the nervous fluid,
according to a mode of style which they first held From a microscopical
observation of Leuenhoeck, where he once thought he saw a hollow cavity in the
nerves (but could never see it again, nor any body after him, though that
instrument has been infinitely improved since his time), the celebrated Dr.
Boerhaave took his noted intertexture of vessels, making the whole mass of
living bodies consist of such. The functions were, at that time, supposed to
depend upon an inelastic fluid secreted in the brain, and distributed in the
cavities of the nerves, to every part of the system. Much reasoning has been
employed (...) refutation of that beautiful, though fanciful, system. But the
only reason, that should have been employed against it, was to deny the truth
of the hypothesis upon which it was built; and that negative argument might
have been supported by this positive one, that it is now known, that the nerves
are solid substances, and not hollow tubes. The next theory that was taken up
was, that though the nerves were solid substances, yet they were porous, and,
therefore, sitted to receive into their pores an elastic fluid, like the
electrical, the magnetical, and, like, or rather a modification of, the
supposed ether of Newton; that this inelastic fluid also floated upon the
surface of the nerves, and formed an atmosphere around them, and by it all the
functions of living systems, even those of the most perfect, the human, were
explained. For a full account of it see the Preface to the Observations on the
Principles of the old Systems of Physic, from page 19 to page 58. Among other
applications of the ether, under the denomination now of nervous power, one
was to make its influx into the muscular fibers affected with spasm, or
convulsion, the cause of these morbid motions; as its influx, as an inelastic
fluid, into the hollow cavities of the nerves, had been before supposed to
afford the same explanation.
or of the nervous power That was their word, after an ingenious philosopher in
Edinburgh, whose dissertation upon this subject is given at full length in the
place of the Observation referred to, had ridiculed them out of their ether.
which is now the common language, that is, if it has any meaning, from an
excessive excitement in the fibers that have been mentioned It is here to be
observed, that the change of the theory here has led into a vagueness of terms.
It might have been proper, had the notion of either an inelastic, or elastic,
fluid been retained, to have called the supposed cause of the function a fluid,
and to have talked of its influx as such; but now that we know nothing about
it, or whether it has any existence at all, to call it a power, and yet to talk
of its influx or efflux, its flowing in or out, is surely vague and incoherent.
and, as according to the phraseology of the logicians, "error draws on error;"
so this notion of the abstract cause led to another that is, they supposed the
most powerful stimulus, opium a sedative.
with respect to the operation of opium. And as they senselesly enough supposed
excessive motions to be occasioned by an excess in the principle of life, at
least in the laboring parts, so they either thought, or taught, that opium
possessed the virtue of checking or allaying, as a sedative, those motions, and
that contrary to the whole analogy of nature, and the certain proof afforded by
all the exciting powers, every one of which has been proved to be stimulant,
not one sedative See above, par. XIX. to XXII. with the additions and notes.
but if it were in any respect doubtful, that nothing in nature, at least in
those powers, that are commonly applied to animal bodies, is sedative, how can
there be any uncertainty of that point as to opium, much less, that the
contrary conclusion should be held for the truth? Has not it the same effect
upon the Turks, that wine has upon us? Or, are we to suppose, that the troops
of that people, on their march to the onset of battle, chew opium, with the
intention of checking their natural alacrity and propensity to action, and of
blunting and depressing their high spirits and courage? If fevers, if the gout,
if indigestion, if the colic, if asthma, and the whole train of spasmodic and
convulsive diseases, in fine all asthenic diseases, have lately, to the
conviction of every person who gave the subject a due consideration, and,
contrary to the expectation and opinion of all men hitherto, been proved to
yield to the various forms of opium without difficulty; and if all these
diseases, in which it is serviceable, have been demonstrated to be affections
depending on debility, are we to agree, that opium proves of service, by an
operation that is further debilitating, or rather that extinguishes the
miserable remains of nature's motions? If the various forms of wine, and other
strong drinks, have a very great effect in removing the same diseases, which
has likewise been discovered by late experiments, and are, therefore,
understood to be beneficial by the same mode of operation as opium, are we to
agree, that that similitude of operation argues a diversity, nay a diametrical
opposition in the nature of the powers that unite, with such harmony, in
producing the same effect? Lastly, of it cures diseases, that depend upon a
confessed deficiency of motion In one fit of the gout, when its paroxisms were
allowed to return, in consequence of a disrelish that I had taken for a certain
stimulus of the drink kind, and, therefore, all at once abstaining from
stimulus, I fell into a state of perfect inaction, and, though without feeling
of pain or uneasiness, so devoid of muscular force, or capability of producing
any motion or exertion, that even the slight degree of muscular contraction
necessary to support my posture in bed failed. In that state, when my eyes were
glazed, the whole dangerous paroxism was removed by changing my drink into a
more agreeable one; any strong drink would have answered, and opium best of all.
equally as those, the motions in which, though seemingly increased, are in
reality diminished; what can any person say in objection to so strong an
argument, added to so many and so powerful ones already advanced? In faith,
opium is not a sedative; on the contrary, as it is the most powerful of all the
agents that support life, and that restore health, and a truly blessed remedy,
to the divine virtue of which the lives of so many mortals has been owing, and,
in future, will be owing; so it must be acknowledged, that spasms and
convulsions, over which it has so great power, do not consist in increased, but
diminished excitement, and that opium cures them by the same operation by which
it cures any of the diseases depending upon debility.

CCXXXI. Sometimes in diseases there is a preternatural flow of blood. Thus in
sthenic diseases blood drops from the nose: it is sparingly expectorated from
the lungs, and tinges the urine. The first and last of these three are
considered as critical signs; but they have no other meaning than an abatement
of sthenic diathesis, and a disposition to indirect debility. This is an
effect, that, for the most part, soon goes off, leaving behind it a state of
convalescence or of recovery,
and soon after a restoration of health, seldom passing into an establishment
of indirect debility.

CCXXXII. Great and continued bleeding discharges, whether from the womb, from
the anus, or from around the latter, or by the nose, depend upon pure debility
These are the several hemorrhages of systematic and nosological authors. They
have hitherto been supposed to depend upon sthenic, what they call phlogistic
diathesis, and the particular discharge to be supported by an activity, an
effort, what they call a molimen haemorrhagicum, in the vessels pouring out the
blood and the parts of the vessels immediately behind. Their continuance was
accounted for upon the supposition of there being an over-proportion of blood
in the system, or what is commonly called a plethora; that they are all
asthenic diseases, depending upon relaxation and atony both of all the rest of
the vascular system, and particularly of the bleeding vessels. (See above,
CXXXIV-(...)) and, instead of a plethora, there is a penury of blood; all which
is proved by the phenomena during the predisposition, when little food is taken
in, and less, upon account of the weakness of the digestive organs, is
digested; these circumstances are increased after the arrival of the disease.
The pulse witha^^^ weak, small and frequent; and the patient puny and
emaciated. The diseases is increased by bleeding and other evacuations, and
both relieved and removed by wine, spirits, and diffusible stimuli; a method of
cure which, till with^^ these fifteen years, would have startled all the
physicians upon earth
An over-proportion of blood, distending the vessels beyond bounds, and
establishing indirect debility, may sometimes be the primary cause. But, in
this case, if no other debilitating power, and particularly directly
debililitating has acceded to the cause; if the discharge be stopped by a
stimulant plan of cure; if the body is strengthened, and the laxity of the
vessels taken off, the whole affection will soon disappear, and the health be
restored. On the contrary, when indirect debility has not preceded, and other
directly debilitating powers have been applied; such as those are which have
been spoken of; and more especially, if the diseases are treated by bleedings
and other evacuations, by abstinence, or by vegetable food and watery drink; in
such a case the diseases become chronic of long duration,
troublesome, at last direful and fatal. That they depend upon debility, is
proved by the failure of the cure just now mentioned, and by the great success
of the stimulant plan. The true cause of bleeding discharge is not plethora,
which cannot happen in the case of persons ill nourished, in water drinking,
and under the application of other hurtful powers, that equally destroy the
tone and density of the vessels See above, CXXIV. and x.
For as food is nearly the only material, from which blood is formed; how, when
it is withheld, in the absence of the cause, can the effect remain? and, if,
upon account of the debilitating effect of other hurtful powers, any food that
is taken is not digested how can there be an overproportion, and not a manifest
scantiness of blood? But it may be alleged, that loss of blood, and every sort
of debilitating power, diminish perspiration, and that from that circumstance
the quantity of blood is increased. How can that happen? The matter, from which
the blood is made, it may be added, is taken into the stomach, and a smaller
quantity of fluid passes off by perspiration. But, to that it is to be
answered, that in the first place it is not taken in; and next the little that
is, is not digested No idea in medical writings seems ever to have been formed
of the body as a whole. On the contrary, nothing has been more common, than to
talk of the functions as operating in a great measure, each from a cause
existing within itself, or but slightly and arbitrarily connected with some
other. This false notion was carried to its most ridiculous pitch in the
doctrine of sympathy, and not rendered much more decent, after the word consent
of parts came to be substituted in its place. Thus, the common expressions were
the sympathy or consent of the stomach with the head, of the stomach with the
face, of the stomach with the external surface, of the latter with the
internal, and particularly with the intestines, of the excretions with each
other, of the feet with the kidneys, and so ^orth. It was never dreamed, that
there was one overruling principle throughout upon which all the functions
depended. The stomach, for instance, cannot be strong while the perspiratory
organs are weak, and therefore take in and digest too much while they cannot
throw out their fluid.
then after the serous part has been separated from the red, will it, if
detained and thrown back into the blood, again become blood? If these
questions, to which there is no possibility of returning any answer, should
seem in any degree ambiguous; are we to believe that one part of the body is in
such a state of vigor, as to produce an over proportion of blood, and another
in so languid a state, as not to be able to carry off by the due outlets its
corrupted matter? And must we, giving up our fundamental principle after so
complete an establishment of it, allow, that the excitability over the whole
body is not the same uniform, undivided property over all the system; that the
powers acting upon it are not the same, finally that matter can be created out
of nothing It has been proved in the IVth chapter, Part. I. that the
excitability is one uniform, undivided property over all, and that, in whatever
part of its seat it is acted upon, that action extends instantaneously over
all; that though some parts, differently upon different occasions, may be more
acted upon than any other, equal in size and nervous importance, that that is
only in so insignificant a proportion as to have no effect in constituting an
inequality of action in the system. Again the force of the powers that act is a
given force, being either weak, in due proportion, or excessive, or weak again
from ultimate excess. Their effect then upon the system, which receives their
action in every degree in which it is communicated, and that with the utmost
exactness, must always be the same, that is, either direct debility, health,
sthenic diathesis or indirect debility. To apply this to the present case, the
stomach cannot be healthy, or under a predisposition to sthenic state, and
there by take in and digest, with the help of the other digestive organs, too
much of the matter, from which blood is made; while the perspiratory vessels
are too weak to perform their function of throwing off their excrementitious
matter. On the contrary, the state of the stomach must run through the whole
living system. If it can perform its functions properly, or in whatever degree
it performs it, all the other organs of digestion, the upper part of the
intestines, biliary vessels, the lacteals, the veins betwixt their common trunk
and the heart, the heart through all its cavities, the whole arterial system,
and the colorless terminations of that system, whether exhalant of glandular,
and the excretory orifices of these, the inhalants, and all the venous blood
returned by the arteries; lastly, all the excretories upon the external and
internal surface, all these will perform their functions in the same degree as
the stomach whether properly or imperfectly. To promote the most perfect health
all the exciting powers must be applied, each in its due proportion. And the
want of any one or more many make some odds, which is insignificant to this
point. If a person has not had his usual exercise a cheerful glass will prepare
him for sleep. For want of the same exercise the appetite will be impaired, but
so is the function of perspiration. Too much exercise under heat will impair
the appetite, but it also impairs the perspiration after a person gets into a
state of rest. In short, any slight inequality from want of any one or more
stimuli can be made up by others. See above, par. XLI.
? It is in vain to talk of the fattening of chickens and cattle by keeping them
from exercise and in a state of rest. The condition of health and disease is
very different. In the former there is a certain latitude of the strength of
the stomach; in the latter, and especially when debility is the cause, there is
a prostration of strength. In fine, it is an universal and constant effect of
all debility, to produce a deficiency of the fluids in the internal parts of
the system with a relaxation of the vessels over all, especially about their
excretory terminations, and a discharge of the fluids by some out-lets. The
death, that happens, during the time of an entertainment, is not to be imputed
to an over proportion of blood, which cannot happen in so short a space of
time. The drink has no effect in filling the vessels. Nor do any persons, but
those who are under direct or indirect debility, meet with such an end, never
those, who have an over-proportion of blood; which, as the appetite is gone,
and the digestive powers destroyed, cannot be produced. In what diseases was it
that plethora was supposed to take place? Not in those, in which the digestive
organs, and those that produce blood, in fine, in which the whole system, are
in a state of vigor, where the appetite is very keen, and the digestion most
perfectly performed, and the digested matter most completely converted in to
blood; but in those, in which upon account of the debility propagated over the
whole body, all the functions are in a state of langour, and in which the only
matter, suited to make blood, is either not applied, or not assimilated. In
this way, the gout, apoplexy, epilepsy, palsy, asthma and hysteria, the
indigestions of persons, who have been formerly addicted to luxury, in since,
those very diseases, which make our present subject, the hemorrhages, as they
are called and falsely defined by that term, lastly; the far greatest part of
asthenic diseases, have been thought, at all times and by all physicians, to
depend upon plethora with vigor, or plethora with mobility. But in fact and
truth that both all the rest of those diseases, and those accompanied with
bleeding discharge, depend upon a penury of blood and other debilitating powers
is proved, by the constant failure of the antisthenic plan of cure to the great
disgrace of the profession, and by the incredible success of the new stimulant
plan. And with respect to the bleeding discharges, consider the persons,
affected with them in the hurtful powers, that precede them, and in the
symptoms that attend them. During the whole period of predisposition, quite
delicate and weakly, they have very little appetite for food, and take very
little, and what they take, is not digested, and often rejected by vomiting. In
their weak state they are not supported by the stimulant operation of
corporeal, or mental exercise, nor by that of the animal spirits, which are
quite puny and dejected, nor by that of pure air which they are not able to go
out to take, nor by that of agreeable sensation, nor by that of strong drink,
which, from the misleading advice of their physicians, they look upon as
poison, nor by that of the distention of the vessels, which are not
sufficiently filled with blood, nor by that of the secretory small vessels,
upon account of their stuggish motion, and stagnation of their degenerated
fluids every where, and the direct debility constantly arising from that.

What sort of pulse have they? Such, as it is in all diseases of manifest
debility, for instance, fevers, (in which last, which is surprising their
favorite plethora, was seldom suspected by them), small, weak and very quick
and almost empty. Upon the whole, what like are their intellectual functions,
those of passion and emotion, and their corporeal functions, either in sense,
or motion whether of the voluntary or involuntary kind? All weak, all frail,
all such, as show that they have not a third part of life to support them.
What, on the contrary, is the state of those, who abound in blood, and yet
never experience discharges of it? They are strong and full of vigor in all
their functions, with redness of countenance, sparkling eyes, strong, hard and
moderately frequent pulse. Their appetite for food is keen, the quantity they
take is great and well digested. As those persons, may experience droopings of
blood of no consequence, and yet not often so they fall into no discharges of
blood. And it is in perfect consistency with all that has been said, to add,
that the various forms of strong drink, and these particularly, which are the
strongest, such as are called spirits, are surprisingly successful remedies of
bleeding discharges, in spite of every thing that has hitherto been thought to
the contrary, in spite of rooted prejudices: But the preparations of opium
Opium, though much used in the cure of certain symptoms of diseases, was never
understood by those physicians, who, in books and lectures assumed to
themselves the province of directing the profession of physic. Every property
they assigned to it was the reverse of the truth. Instead of allowing it to be
the strongest stimulant in nature, they made it a sedative; and, though they
found great difficulty in finding a single sedative more, to help to make out
their catalogue of a class of such bodies in nature, they were confident that
it was one (see above, CCXXX. and the notes). Another property they ascribed to
it was that of bringing on sleep; whereas, it is the most powerful body of all
others in producing and keeping up the watching state (see above, XXX. XXXI.
and of the other diffusible stimuli are still more successful. This is a fact,
that proves to a demonstration, that in the bleeding discharges there is no
excessive activity, no hemorrhagic effort as it is called, and on the contrary
that there is only a falling off of the natural moving energy. The hemorrhages,
then, that have been the subject of so much false explanation, and false
denomination, must be rejected from the number of sthenic diseases, and
transferred to the asthenic diseases, under the title of Haemorrha^ae.

CCXXXIII. If any person be seized with a cough at first rather dry and bound,
then more moist and free, and after that accompanied with a large
expectoration, if the Hoarseness at first is deep, and afterward slighter and
freer, in proportion as the cough becomes more and more moist; if the chest all
round, over the whole region of the lungs, is distressed with a degree of
diffusive pain; if there is either no vomiting, or what of it there is, seems
forced up by the convulsive motion of the cough ending in expectoration, and in
such a manner, as either not to return, or to have no spontaneous tendency to a
return; if the strength is otherwise good, and the pulse strong, full, and more
or less hard, and not much exceeding the frequency of a healthy pulse: Such a
case will be found to be sthenic, and to depend upon heat and every other
stimulus See above the following paragraphs CXIII. CXIV. CXXII. CXXIV.
, to be cured by cold and every other debilitating remedy and also CXVII.
CXXVIII. CXXXIV. and all the debilitating powers throughout the whole chapter;
while all the stimulant ones in it will be found to be such as contribute
according to their degree of stimulus toward the production of the morbid
effect, which makes our present subject.
The cause of these symptoms is a high degree of sthenic diathesis or stimulant
operation or excessive excitement, or wa^ted excitability.
over the whole body, higher on the externalsurface of the body, and especially
in the throat, which is a part of that surface See above, par. CXIII.
The same symptoms in whatever morbid case they occur, are to be explained in
the same manner. Consequently, the catarrhal symptoms, which are an inseparable
part from the measles, admit precisely of the same conclusion; and, as well as
the whole disease, are to be understood to arise from excessive excitement, and
to be cured by the debilitating plan. The same is the judgment to be formed of
the influenza. In all which cases it is easy to make trial of the truth. Give a
glass of wine or brandy, give a little opium; the hoarseness will increase, the
cough will be more hard and bound, the expectoration will suffer a temporary
suppression. Give a large draught of cold water, and all the symptoms will be
relieved. Often does it happen that a person troubled with a cough when he sits
down to drink wine, is freed from it in the course of the circulation of the
glass Whenever his cough is cured he should stop; as the carrying the stimulus
too far will endanger the return of the cough from a very opposite cause. The
cough at first suppose, to be from an excitement as 26; its cure to be brought
about by an excitement at or above 40; the return to an excitement at or above
60, will bring on a sthenic cough.
. The reason of which is, that asthenic diathesis was the cause, which was
converted by the drink into a cessation of all diathesis, or into a temporary
sthenic diathesis. Often at the end of a debauch in drinking, the cough, and
that very violent, returns for this reasons, that the sthenic diathesis has
made considerable advances. It will be cured by drinking a tumbler or two of
cold water, and drinking no more wine; which precautions operate by stopping
the excess of excitement.

CCXXXIV. From the description just now given of the nature and cure of the
symptoms we have been speaking of compared with that which is next to be given.
it appears, that symptoms, commonly supposed to be the same, are however of a
diametrically opposite nature This mistake of symptoms in consequence of
judging of their interior nature from the similarity or dissimilarity of their
appearance is the false idea, upon which the whole fabric of a department,
lately introduced into the art of medicine, has been reared. It is to be
observed, that symptoms the most similar to each other in their appearance are,
in reality, the most different, and those, that have the least resemblance in
their appearance, have the nearest affinity in their interior nature, and
indeed are one and the same, with (...) other difference, but a difference of
degree, and even that often very slight sometimes next to none at all. The
great variety of symptoms that distinguish the whole form of asthenic diseases
affords as many proofs of the truth of this proposition, as the instances of
dissimilarity or difference in opinion are numerous. What is seemingly more
opposite than diarrh^ea and cholic, and typhomania and coma, than epilepsy and
general dropsy, than the cold and hot fit of agues than spasmodic and
convulsive affections compared with those in which there is no fault in the
motions either as to excess or regularity, than the several degrees of morbid
diminution of menstruation down to the actual suppression, and the several
degrees of the morbid increase of that natural discharge till their slow, at
last, attains its ultimate excess both in degree and duration? And, with
respect to sebrile and non-sebrile diseases, what is more similar than a ^light
synocha or inflammatory fever and a typhus in the same degree, which, yet, are
diametrically opposite both in their cause and cure? What is more dissimilar
than the various phoenomena of fevers of the intermittent kind through all
their degrees of intermitting and remitting and those of the more continued
kind? And yet they all arise from causes highly debilitating, and are
effectually removed by remedies equal in their degree of stimulus. In one word,
to show the insignificancy of the distinction of diseases into febrile and
non-febrile, and, when the degree of debility constituting the cause in. both,
is considered and compared; is there any reason for separating the high drop^,
the high dysentery, and sinking cholera from their place betwixt inter^^ittent
and remittent fevers and the most continued kind? Lastly what two things can be
liker one another, than a crowded distinct and confluent smallpox, or than the
common inflammatory ^ore throat and that which was lately described (see above,
par. CCXII.) Such have been the ideas, that have guided the directors of the
art of medicine in their inquiries into the natures, causes and cures of
diseases. If botanists and natural historians, by all their artificial methods
of arrangement, have made little progress in exploring the true nature of their
subject, and on the contrary, with scarce a single exception, have confounded
it; if it was ridiculous to unite into one genus a man, a monkey and a bat, how
much more abusurd was the attempt to arrange the more qualities of matter in
the ^ame way. Yet upon this hopeful employment has John Bull expended vast sums
of money, while he left the most solid and important departments of, science
neglected and covered by the dirt among his feet. We have too little useful
science yet, it is time to improve our scanty store(see the Introduction to
Observation, etc.)
which will be evinced by a fuller explanation. If, therefore, any one has a
very great cough, a very great expectoration, either at first with hoarseness,
and afterward, through the whole course of the disease, without the
hoarseness; if he is of a very advanced age, or arrived at the last stage of
life; if he is of a weak habit; if his pulse is neither strong, nor full, and
withal very quick; if this concourse of symptoms has been preceded by either
direct or indirect debility, as usually happens in the case of famine, of
water-drinking, of a long course of ebriety, and of having led a life of
luxury; one may be certain, that all these symptoms are asthenic or depend upon
debility,
, and to be removed by stimulant remedies.

CCXXXV. The explanation of the dry cough is easy, and such as was formerly
given See above, par. CLX.
. The origin of the cough and expectoration is quite the reverse CXXVIII. in
the M. S. addition CLXI, and particularly CXXXIV.
. For, whether the system has been weakened directly or indirectly, as the
excitement over the whole body is diminished in the highest degree, as the
debility in every part is exquisite; the consequence is, that in the vascular
system the tone, and in proportion the density, every where diminished; and the
diminution chiefly takes place in the extreme terminations of the arteries,
that are most remote from the center of activity, and above all other parts of
the vascular system, in the perspiratory vessels LIX. LX. LXI.
. When all this has taken place: the quantity of fluid that is thrown up by
expectoration is incredible. Indeed though it has never been attended to,
it is great enough, not to be inferior in its degree to the greatest profusion
that ever takes place in consumption, and even to exceed it.

CCXXXVI. The cure of it, however, in all the cases that depend upon direct
debility, is by no means difficult I have experienced such a case more than
once, and have seen and treated it in great numbers. It is sometimes a part of
the concourse of symptoms, that form that asthenic case of disease, which is
commonly called fever. A gentleman, under or about the thirtieth year of his
age, had been ten days in a typhus fever, occasioned by extreme cold,
succeeding to the debilitating effects left upon his habit by too great
moderation in his diet, and, certainly, not a good choice of the different
articles of it. To aid the debilitating effects arising from these, he had
experienced all the extremes of the heat and fatigue, that fall to a soldier's
lot, in very warm countries. He was, over and above, of a small size, slender
and emaciated. He had also, from his infancy, been affected with a short cough,
sometimes dry, and sometimes with a little expectoration. During the course of
his cure, he had been more than once bleeded, though his disease had ushered
itself in by a great profusion of bleeding, which suddenly took him as he was
on a journey in a cold day of about 44 miles in a carriage. He was vomitted,
purged, blistered prodigiously, and glistered. The whole force of the old plan
of cure was exhausted upon him, and he so exhausted by it, as to be given up
for an incurable of two diseases, a bad fever and rotten lungs. His face was
hippocratic, he had the dead rattle, and his cough and expectoration were
assiduous. By the stimulant new plan of cure he was put out of danger in ten
days, and set upon his feet in as many more.
, unless the disease has proceeded beyond the boundary of admitting a cure, and
life is now approaching to its end. The cure, however, is a good deal more
difficult in the case of indirect debility, and for this good reason, that
there is no other plan of cure but stimulating, to remove a disease occasioned
by an excess of stimulant operation See above, CIII.
Nay, the same debility, as shall afterward be observed, produces the same
relaxation both of the bronchia and of the rest of the body, but it does not
always produce consumption. With this profusion of expectoration appearing
sometimes in the form of fever See the last note (p).
, sometimes in that of the gout, the physician has often a long struggle, while
he employs his diffusible stimulants, the event of which is such, as to produce
a complete restoration of health, and thereby to leave not the least suspicion,
of there being any local affection in the lungs, which is so much the object
both of the faith and fear of physicians A description of this disease, in
which the lungs are supposed to be affected with ulcers or tubercles, has been
given in the note under this paragraph at ( p). But, as the subject is both as
new and interesting as any in this work, it may be proper to give a further
illustration of it by the exposition of another set of facts. Both in persons
liable to the gout, and other asthenic diseases, sometimes of direct and at
other times of indirect debility, and especially in those who have been much
exposed to cold, without the debilitating effect of the cold being overcome
(vide par. CXXII), by an alternation with, or succession of, heat, and in very
many old people, especially among the poorer sort, who have been, and naturally
are, much exposed to various debilitating powers, there is often, especially in
winter, a very great cough and expectoration. This sometimes goes to such a
height as to give suspicion of the affection of the lungs just now spoken of.
But the completeness of its cure, which when it arises from indirect debility,
is effected by the use of animal food, avoiding vegetable, and fish, and by
good wine and diluted spirits in moderate proportion at a time, but frequently
repeated, avoiding claret and other French wines and all four and all
beer-drink, unless perhaps a little warm porter in cold weather, and a very
moderate use of diffusible stimuli, keeping the feet and the body in general
moderately warm; shows sufficiently, that there had been no local affection in
the lungs. When the debility of the disease is of the indirect kind, in which
the cure is more difficult, there is, still, as little reason to be
apprehensive of the pulmonary or any other local affection. For the cure of it
also proves the contrary. In it the means of cure are to change the forms of
stimulus, and to proceed from the use of the stronger to that of the weaker,
till at length the patient can do without much of the very strong ones. (See
above, par. XCIX. and those that follow). When the disease cannot be overcome
in that way, the excitability must be understood to be worn out, and life come
to its end; but still from general debility, not local disease. For, if ever
any local affection does appear, it is always the last effect, not the primary
cause. In this way I lost two gentlemen, after having been able to support them
for many weeks, when the prognosis upon the common practice did not allow them
as many hours. The cause of their indirect debility had been hard drinking. But
even in those, who die of a confirmed consumption, there is not often reason
for the suspicion of tubercles in the lungs. Their bodies have been opened
after death and the lungs sound quite sound. And in the dissections, where the
tubercles have been found, still they were only an effect.


I. When, in all the vessels, the fluids are not agitated by a sufficient
action, they are proportionally more imperfectly mixed, and therefore in a
vitiated state. But in the extreme terminations of the vessels, as being at a
greater distance from the center of motion, they often, from a total cessation
of motion, stagnate, and degenerate into a foreign nature. This is an effect
not produced by heat alone See above, paragraph CXV.
but by cold See also paragraph XVII.
, nor only by this, but by all the powers that debilitate in an equal degree
See also CXIX which compare with par. XXVIII. Nay all the power mentioned in
par. XI. and XII. and fully explained in Part Second, Chap. I. throughout.
.

CHAP. VII.
Of Sleep and Watching, whether salutary or morbid.
CCXXXVII. AS death finishes the operations of all life, so sleep finishes
those of every day: and as the former is the consequence of a perfect
extinction of the excitement, from, either a complete exhaustion or ultimate
abundance of excitability; so the latter or sleep,
succeeds to a diminished excitement, while the excitability is either
diminished, but in such sort that it can be accumulated again, or abundant, in
such sort that the abundance can be wasted, and the excitement, in both cases,
renewed.

CCXXXVIII. Such is the nature of the excitability, of animals, that it can
neither be deficient nor over-abundant, without detriment? a deficiency
producing indirect, and a superabundance, direct debility. And, as any exciting
power, carried beyond its boundary See par. XXVIII.
, can produce the former, and the with holding of any, give occasion to the
latter See par. XXXVIII.
; so the same proposition holds good of the excessive or too sparing use of
several of them, or of them all This is completely illustrated through the
whole first chapter of the second part, from par. CXI. to par. CLXVII.
inclusive. Nay, the proposition is constantly alluded to through the whole that
has yet been said, and will be in what remains to be said.
. Sleep, then, is the effect of the actions of the day, at first giving always
more and more excitement, but less and less in proportion to the continuance of
their operation See par. XXXVI.
, but in such sort as always to add some excitement, till the matter at last
comes to a point, where the degree of excitement, necessary to constitute the
waking state, no longer exists. Of this we have the most certain proof in every
day's experience, and in the confirmation of it, which the complete induction
of the effects of all the exciting powers affords. To illustrate this, let us
take the exciting powers one by one, and begin with wine. When a person is
insufficiently excited with respect to that stimulus, and rises not, suppose,
above 30 in his excitement, a glass carries him up 2, another 2 more, and so
forth, till after five glasses, and their effect in carrying him up to 40, he
finds himself well and vigorous in all his functions. But, still, we are not so
flimsily made, as not to bear a little of what is either too much or too
little. Suppose him then to take five glasses more, and, consequently, to be
raised to 50, or 10 above the standard. As his spirits, his intellectual, and
all his other, functions, were low, while his excitement remained below 40, so
they are all proportionably exalted by the time that his excitement is elevated
to 50. Let him still go on, and his intellectual function will rise still
higher; he will now display the full extent of his genius: his passions and
emotions, of whatever kind, will rise in the same proportion; he will, in one
word, be an example of the effects of Alexander's feast. Suppose, to bring him
to all this he has swallowed, besides those he had before, other five glasses.
Let him go on, till he has taken five glasses more, and we shall see the
effect: In the course of time, employed in taking these, he gradually falls off
in his spirits, in his intellectual, and in his corporeal, functions; his
tongue, his feet, his eyes, his memory, his judgment, all, fail him; he, at
last, becomes drowsy, and then falls fast a-sleep. The same is the progress of
excitement as it arises from labor or exercise through the day, whether of
mind or body. The same is the effect of the stimulus of eating, especially
nourishing stimulant things, and in great plenty. Before dinner, the
occupations of the former part of the day, are not yet sufficient to prepare
one for sleep; which, however, after a heavy dinner, will, unless the
interference of some other stimulus prevent it, very readily happen to most
people, especially to those, whose frailty, from age or any other cause,
renders them more liable to be fatigued by the past operations of the day than
others. The younger and more vigorous will be able to hold out to the end of
the day; when they too, after having undergone the degree of stimulus necessary
to give that waste of excitability that disposes to sleep, will be overcome by
it. The very flow of the blood in the vessels, and the exercise of the
involuntary motions, that keep it up, tend at last to the same effect. The same
thing applies to the motion constantly going on in the stomach and intestines,
as well as the motions that occur in all the secretory and excretory small
vessels. Light, stimulating the eyes, and ^ound, the ears, and the several
substances that act upon the organs of the other three senses, all, tend, by
wasting the excitability, to wear down the excitement to that point in the
scale where sleep commences. And the process, in every case, is, first a low,
then a higher and higher, then the highest, vigor of all the functions; which,
again, gradually falls till its termination in sleep. We have, therefore, after
viewing their effects singly, to suppose them, in one degree or in another,
united, and sleep the finishing effect of their united operations,
.

Thus, heat not ultimately excessive, or reduced, by cold, from that excess to
its stimulant degree See above, par. CXXII.
, and food, and drink, and labor, either of body or mind, and the exercise of
passion and emotion, when their stimulus neither stops short of the proper
point, nor goes beyond it, all give a disposition to sleep. This is the most
salutary state of sleep.

K. Premature, unseasonable, or morbid sleep, is produced by either indirect or
direct debility.

L. With respect to the effect of the former, an excessive energy of any one or
more of the stimuli Of indirect debility in producing premature sleep, see par.
CCXXXVIII.
produces it; accordingly, any one or more of those that have been mentioned,
by acting in excess, and wasting the excitability, such as hurried drinking,
produce that effect.

. Of the directly debilitating powers, which produce the same effect, the want,
or sparing application, of the powers, which, by a due degree of stimulus,
produce sleep, will surprise into a bad kind of it; accordingly, when a person
is in that state, that he wants excitement in order to be in health, the defect
of light, of sound, and of the various contacts of the bodies that excite the
other senses, the defect of both sets of motions, the voluntary and
involuntary, as well as of the exercise of the mind, of the exercise of
passion, of heat, acting in its stimulant degree, and too long continued sleep
itself, all these produce hurtful sleep Coma, or an insuperable disposition to
sleep, is most commonly owing to the want of most of the stimuli mentioned in
the text, as that of food, of wine, at least in the ordinary practice of cure,
of good animal spirits, of the power of thinking in a pleasant exciting train,
of a due quantity of blood in the vessels, of pure open air, of corporeal
exercise, and of the absence of certain stimuli, that otherwise irritate in the
weakened state, and produce watchfulness.
,

CCXXXIX. On the contrary, sound watching is the effect of the suspense of the
same diurnal actions during the period of sleep, taking off more and more
excitement, most a first, and less and less after, but always adding to the sum
of diminution of excitement, and accumulation of excitability; that is, always
continuing to take off stimulus, till the matter comes to the degree of
diminished excitement, and increasing excitability necessary to the watching
state. In this way does sleep prepare the system for the watching state: which
is afterward kept up, for the due length of time, by the several exciting
powers, acting through the day, till at last, by a certain failure of their
action, sleep is produced again See last par. CCXXXVIII.
.

N. Too long or morbid watching is also brought on in a twofold way, by
indirect and direct debility. Thus, intense thinking See above, CXXXVIII.
, violence of passion in extreme See CXL.
, ultimate excess in corporeal labor See CXXXVII. ^.
, unusual and high relaxing heat, debauch in eating and drinking, a great
excess in the use of the diffusible stimuli See CXXIV. CXXV. CXXVI. ^.^.
, a great abundance and velocity of blood; all, or any of these, rising to
indirect debility by an ultimate excess in their operation, are notorious for
their effect of repelling sleep. Again, cold, not in that extreme degree which
immediately precedes death; abstinence from food, or that sort of it that is
not sufficiently nourishing, or of sufficient indirect stimulus to produce the
requisite distention; weak drink, as tea, coffee, or watery drink, especially
when a person has been accustomed to more generous; intermission of usual
labor or exercise, whether of body or mind; a sense of shame from disgrace,
and fear, and grief; all these, by their operation not sufficiently approaching
to indirect debility, produce an undue or morbid state of watchfulness.

CCXL. As debility, therefore, whether indirect or direct, or in part a mixture
of both See par. XLVII. and the note belonging to it.
, is the cause of sleep, the first of sound sleep, the two latter of an
improper or morbid state of that function; so an excess of the same debility,
whether indirect or direct, is also a cause of improper proper or morbid
vigilance. The only salutary sleep is that which is produced by a proper degree
of excitement, occasioned by a proper action of the exciting powers upon the
excitability; all the extremes of either excessive sleep, or excessive
vigilance, are either so many tendencies to disease, or actual disease Too
much, or too long continued, sleep, is hurtful, because it implies a suspension
of that excitement, to which proper health and due vigor is owing, it is,
consequently, a state of direct debility. Too little sleep, or of too short
duration, is of equal detriment, as implying a degree of excitability, not
sufficiently accumulated to receive a sufficient impression from a renewal of
the exciting powers. From the former arise most of the complaints of the rich
and indolent; from the latter, many of the diseases of the poor and laborious.
As the action of the exciting powers should be adapted to the strength, a
little indulgence in sleep is the safest extreme to the weak, as in the case of
children, and persons laboring under debility.


A person, fatigued with his usual exercise, is immediately composed to sleep;
which, equally, flies from him who has had either less, or more, than that
middle degree When a boy, I valued myself much for enduring the fatigue of
walking: About the fifteenth year of my age I walked, in a summer day, from
Berwick on Tweed to Morpeth, which, with two miles wandering out of the high
road, I found to be a journey of fifty miles. But I got not a wink of sleep the
whole night, from the excess of the exe^^tion; and the next day, so pained and
enfeebled were all my joints, that it was with the utmost difficulty I made out
the single stage from Morpeth to Newcastle, which was only a walk of fourteen
miles. Some years after that, when I was now arrived at my full strength, and
my joints perfectly knit, I walked and wandered in all ^orts of ground, in
roads and out of them, over smooth and plain, and heathy and mountainous
tracts, from four o'clock P. M. to two a clock, P. M. next day, with only an
hour's rest, and one hearty meal at betwixt ten and eleven o'clock in the
forenoon, when I was now within six miles of my destination. The hills over
which I wandered in the course of the night are those called Lammer-muir,
situated betwixt East Lothian and the Mers: the places I traveled between in
this rout were Edinburgh and Duns, the place of the nativity of the celebrated
schoolman and metaphysician, John Duns Scotus, and that of my grammar
education. In this great exertion I was sustained by a great stimulus, high
animal spirits, and love. At the end of my journey, and finding myself among my
friends, and the object of my affection, I had vigor enough to dance with the
latter. This time I slept well, and was perfectly recruited next day.
,

CCXLI. As the effect of both indirect and direct debility is sometimes sleep,
sometimes watching, both of them unsound, both hurtful; so the cause of bad
sleep is either sort of debility; without a stimulus acting upon the system in
a weakened state, and, thereby, throwing the system into a state of
disturbance. The same debility of either kind, with such a stimulus, produces
the morbid watching; in which case it is a small stimulus that acts as an
irritating power Volumes have been filled with the doctrine of irritation as a
cause of morbid state, and the indications of cure and remedies to remove it
have been equally tedious and labored. In sthenic diseases, phlogistic
diathesis, instead of plethora and vigor (for the belief in which two last
there might have been some foundation in that form of diseases, see above from
CXXXI. to CXXXIV.) has been the universal pathology; and bleeding, other
evacuations, and cold, the universal idea, or, as it is called, indication of
cure; and while they thought of no other method or means of cure for the
asthenic form of diseases, the pathology, applied to them, was plethora with
vigor or with mobility in other cases, and, in the febrile, irritation. By
irritation they explained the startings of the tendons, the restlessness, the
frequency of the pulse, the typhomania or constant working, of so frequent
occurrence and so noted a symptom in those diseases. But as we have proved,
that the reverse of plethora and vigor is the true state of the system in
every disease of debility; so we assert with the same solidity of argument, and
the same weight of proof, that irritation, as being considered, either as the
cause of morbid watchfulness or of any other symptom, is nothing that
rerequires either evacuant, or any other debilitating remedies, to remove it.
It is merely a weakened state of the system, thrown into flutterings from the
slightest exertion of the ordinary functions, as when a person falls into
tremors from noise, or into a sweat from walking a step or two.
.

^. Instances of morbid sleep occur in the predispositions to diseases, and the
actual diseases, that depend upon sthenic diathesis, and in the ordinary state
of intoxication from drinking. But all the exciting powers, when converted into
hurtful ones of excessive stimulus, each in proportion to its degree of excess,
have the same tendency A heavy dinner, excessive fatigue from either corporeal
or mental labor, a high fit of passion, and heat, are, each of them, noted for
giving a disposition to sleep; which is an effect, arising from their high
degree of stimulus, hurrying the excitement to that degree of waste in which
the sleep-inviting point consists; and it will the more readily take place,
that no exciting power, by still finding excitability to act upon, continues,
therefore, to act, and prevent the sleep.
But, when the exciting power proceeds beyond the sleep-inviting point; or when
any stimulus, still finding unwasted excitability to act upon, continues to
act; in that case the watching will be continued with bad effect as in the
harrowing watel^fulness, which is liable to accompany the phlegmasiae, or the
several sthenic diseases with inflammation of a part.


CCXLII. Instances of morbid sleep occur in all the diseases of indirect
debility, and in pains that have advanced to the same degree of exhausted
excitability in the scale That happens in the phlegmasiae, where the effect,
not only, of the inflammatory pain, but of the whole diathesis, and of every
other symptom, as well as that of pain, is to run up into indirect debility.
The last part of debility, that ushers in a fit of the gout, is commonly of the
direct kind; but the effect of the continuance of the pain is often sleep, the
origin of which is indirect debility, its conseqence an increase of the
disease, and its remedy an interruption of the morbid sleep for the purpose of
administering such diffusible, and other stimuli, as have the effect of
removing the debility which occasions both the sleep, and other symptoms of the
disease.
; as in the several cases of the phlegmasiae, that arise from the violent
progress of the morbid state, or the improper administration of stimulants for
the cure; which is particularly exemplified in the dropsy of the breast, that
often arises from peripneumony under such management. With respect to sleep
from direct debility, women, who have had many deliveries, who have often
suckled, as well as all lazy persons, and those, of both sexes, who are
addicted to luxury, and whose custom it is to sleep too much, are all liable to
fall into this sort of morbid sleep.

CCXLIII. When either direct or indirect debility, sometimes produces sleep
that gives no refreshment which often happens in fevers and many other cases of
debility, besides those mentioned in the text (CCXLII.), and ought never to be
encouraged, but repelled by every means of exciting the patient.
, sometimes an ungentle, turbulent waking state, neither of them accommodated
to health; as the debility, productive of either effect, exceeds that in which
sound sleep consists: the use of that degree of stimulus which may repel the
former, and convert the latter into sleep, will remove the complaints, and
serve for an illustration of the nature of both Let the point of indirect
debility, in which sleep consists, be as 15 degrees in a particular scale, and
the greater debility, than that which either constitutes morbid sleep or morbid
watching, by 20 degrees or upwards in the case of its being indirect, or 10 or
downward in the case of its being direct debility. It is evident, that, to
bring on salutary watching on the one hand, or salutary sleep on the other, or
to convert both into salutary sleep, if that be required by the circumstances,
the deficient degree of stimulus must be administered; that is five degrees to
bring up the excitement from 10 to 15 degrees, and as many for the purpose of
renewing the worn-out excitement by means of a new exciting power which may
still find a portion of excitability to act upon, or to remove certain stimuli,
which, however slight and mild, are fatiguing and disturbing to the system in
its weakened state. Accordingly in fever, when the patient, amidst every sort
of directly debilitating powers, had, besides, wanted sleep for ten days, a
small portion of an opiate given him every quarter of an hour, in 3 hours time
laid him asleep, which, in spite of an urgent cough and profuse expectoration,
lasted for 16 hours, and was followed by the most surprising relief. The
continuance of this practice, with only an increase of the doses in proportion
as the abundant excitability was gradually worn off, and alternating them with
wine and beef soup, in ten days removed all danger. A child of three months had
had no sound sleep for ten days, but had cried night and day from a complaint
in his belly, which the ordinary practitioners would have called an obstruction
in the mesenteric glands. A large dose of the tinctura thebaica, for the
patient's age, was administered, which laid him in a profound sleep, that
continued near 36 hours, and at once removed the disease. Numberless are the
cases of a kind similar to this where the morbid watchfulness was partly from
direct, partly from indirect debility, that have been constantly removed by the
same practice. A child of 7 years of age, in a fever of great direct debility,
in consequence of a most rapid growth happening during the disease, which was
not completely removed till near the end of seven weeks, after having been
under the disease near a fortnight, was affected with the most constant
disposition to sleep, so sound that no noise or shaking of his body could
awaken him. The administration of the opiate repeated in small doses till the
effect took place, kept him awake. Some time after, in the course of the same
lingering disease, when he had not yet acquired any permanent strength, but was
only better supported by the diffusible and other stimuli, than he had been
till I was called in, his predominant symptom came to be great watchfulness,
which was partly the effect of a certain, though not a great, degree of
excitement that the tincture and other cordial powers had given him. It,
however, induced too great a degree of indirectly debilitating exertion for his
still very weak state, and it, therefore, became necessary to give him an
addition of excitement to bring him to the state of salutary and recruiting
sleep, and thereby to suspend the action of a number of exciting powers,
however slight their operation was, which were too much for the enfeebled state
of his system, In the cases of children whose diseases are almost all asthenic,
and in other diseases of high debility, instances of such effects of the
diffusible stimuli, (for more than one was employed upon this as well as many
other occasions) are equally numerous and surprising. In a very large practice
I am sure I never, in the very worst cases, lost three patients.
In asthenic diseases the watching state for the most part is the consequence
of direct debility, with some power acting with slight stimulant effect; the
reason of which is, that the disease depends upon more debility than that which
constitutes sleep. Hence it comes about, that every thing that stimulates,
every thing that raises the excitement as it were to that point, which composes
the system to sleep, produces that effect by a stimulant, not a sedative,
virtue. In a small degree of debility, where the excitement has fallen only a
little below the point of sleep, a very small degree of stimulus, such as a
little animal food; if the weakness had been owing to vegetable food, such as
wine, or any drink of equal power, after a water regimen; such as consolation
in affliction of mind; heat, when cold has been the debilitating power; gentle
exercise or gestation; or the stimulus of a pleasant train of thought, when one
has been deprived of the stimulus of corporeal or mental exercise, is
sufficient. In higher degree of debility (for the curative force should always
be adapted to the degree of the disease See above, par. XLIV. and XCII.
: either a proportional higher degree of the stimuli which have been mentioned,
or some more powerful one, such as those, which are called diffusible, should
be employed.

CCXLIV. In both which cases, the virtue, of opium is great; its virtue,
however, is not peculiar to it, or any other than what it possesses in common
with all the other stimulant powers, differing only from the rest in the higher
degree of its The notion of some powerful remedies, as opium, mercury, the
Jesuits' bark, etc. acting by an operation peculiar to each, and different from
every other power in nature, was long prevalent in the schools of medicine.
Those they called specifics; an idea, which, like many other of their vague
conceptions, was altogether contrary to ^ound philosophy; since the more
careful our enquiries into nature's operations are, the more and more reason
have we to be convinced, that simplicity and uniformity pervade the whole
phenomena of the universe. Accordingly, in the exciting powers that act upon
the excitability of our bodies, we find only one action, that of stimulating,
varying only in its degree, to take place in all animal as well as vegetable
bodies, nay in every thing that we know to possess life in the universe. We
also find, to the same extent, only one property in living systems upon which
it acts, that is, the excitability; and one effect produced by the mutual
relation betwixt them in that respect, to wit, the excitement. Instead of the
distracted notion of vortices, or atmospheres in rapid motion, governing the
motion of the planets, Sir Isaac Newton found the whole planetary systems of
the universe governed in their motions by one single principle. Instead of the
infinite difference of habits and temperaments, I have found every individual
precisely the same as every other. Whatever produces the gout in one, will
produce it in another, prepared to receive its influence. And whatever cures it
in any one, cures it also in every other; and so forth with respect to every
other disease. The deeper we explore the works of nature, the more will we be
convinced of this wonderful simplicity, so that, to a philosopher, all nature
would appear the effect of one single instrument in the hand of the all-wise
all-powerful creator.
virtue. Thus in great debility, as in fevers, as in a violent fit of the gout,
disturbing with tumultuary disorder the internal parts, and in other similar
diseases of debility, in which the violence of the disease keeps off sleep;
opium often, after the watchful state has remained many days, brings on
profound and sound sleep; in which case, because the excitability is very
abundant, and, therefore, can bear but a very small force of stimulus, we
should, on that account, begin with the smallest degree of stimulus, and
proceed gradually to more and more See above, par. CVII.
; till at last we arrive at the point of sleep, which will soon happen, as it
is placed much within the range of direct debility: And with respect to coma,
or that sleep which is not recruiting: such is the effect both of other
diffusible stimuli and of opium, that it converts morbid sleep into vigilance;
vigilance, after a certain space of time, into refreshing sleep, and, in that
way, conducts the patient safely, gently, and pleasantly, to health. But as the
influence of the stimulant operation, that supports excitement, is of so great
importance, and as sleep of longer duration than to prove refreshing may arise
even from good remedies, the rule to be observed when that happens is, whenever
any attack of sleep, upon account of too long a suspension of stimulant action,
has been of less service than was expected, to shorten its next attack, and
renew the operation of the stimulus.

CCXLV. In asthenic diseases, and those arising from indirect debility, in
which sleep is also kept off; in order both to restore it, and remove the other
symptoms, and bring about the healthy state, both other stimuli should be
employed according to the degree of debility requiring their use, and, when the
degree of debility is very considerable, the diffusible stimuli, and among the
rest opium, should not be omitted.

CCXLVI. These are the times and circumstances of the body in which opium
produces sleep. In all the other states either of health or disease, it excites
the functions both of body and mind, as well as of passion and emotion; among
others it banishes sleep and produces great activity and vigilance, Thus if any
one is under the pressure of sleep without an evident cause, he will by opium
be rendered surprisingly sprightly, lively, and vigilant; it banishes
melancholy, begets confidence, converts fear into boldness, makes the silent
eloquent, and dastards brave. Nobody, in desperate circumstances, and sinking
under a disrelish for life, ever laid violent hands on himself after taking a
dose of opium, or ever will. In one word, through all the intermediate degrees
of excitement from direct to indirect debility, opium is by far the most
powerful of all the agents, and as such must be most hurtful in sthenic
diathesis, because, when added to the other stimulant powers, it not only
banishes sleep, but is liable to precipitate those diseases from the sthenic
state to indirect debility, and from this last to death.

CCXLVII. That the debility, upon which coma depends, is less than that which
supports morbid vigilance, is proved, from the former being less dangerous, and
more easily removed; yet, when its duration is in any degree considerable, or
when it resembles profound sleep, care should be taken to prevent the hurtful
effect it may produce from direct debility See above, par. CCXLI. and the note
under it, as well as this whole chapter.
; in which case recourse should be had to the different forms of wine and
opium, with the intention of raising the excitement to that degree, which
repels the sleepy state, produces more strength, and facilitates the return of
health Physicians have had a more favorable idea of coma, or the sleeping
state in fevers, than it merited. Instead of deserving to be looked upon as a
positively good sign, ensuring a safe return of the disease, as they did; it
was at best but a negative mark, implying that the slight stimuli acting upon
the system in a state of high debility, and, therefore, by their operation,
slight as it was, increasing the direct debility by the addition of the
indirect to it, were kept off and hindered from producing that hurtful effect.
Their authority in giving that judgment of it is overthrown by their extreme
ignorance of its nature.
.

CCXLVIII. In the gout, in indigestion, of which examples have already been
adduced, in diarrhoea and the colic, and many other asthenic diseases,
particularly disturbing the alimentary canal, and chiefly affecting those women
who are exhausted with frequent child bearing, and long and repeated nursing;
it often happens, that there is a strong propensity to sleep, contrary to what
happens to the same persons in health, and the period of sleeping attack is
prolonged, without the indulgence in it bringing any alleviation of the
disease. The same thing happens to those who have fallen into indirect debility
from drunkenness or any other cause. That this desire for sleep depends upon
direct or indirect debility is evident from every thing that gives further
debilily increasing the disease, and every thing that strengthens, removing it.
Among those all strong drink, and the preparations of opium, are peculiarly
effectual, and that in proportion to their greater and more diffusible
stimulant power, than that which others possess.

CCXLIX. Nor is it unconnected with this explanation of the nature of sleep and
watching, and of both of them being sometime repelled, sometimes induced, by a
certain degree of stimulus See above, par. CCXLI. where this proposition is
reduced to its exact principle.
; that excessive motions, and convulsive, which have been mentioned See above,
par. CCXXX.
, such as the quick pulse in fevers See par. CLXXIX.
and other motions, are removed by an equal force of stimuli, to that which is
required to remove morbid affection without any motions. Hence it is plain,
that irregular motions are not only not increased functions See above, CCXXIX.
, independent upon debility, but that they are impaired functions, and consist
nearly in the same degree of debility.

CCL. From what has been said, the analogy between watching and life, and sleep
and death, and their dependence upon the same laws of nature, that govern all
the other functions, clearly appears; and the most solid probation has been
adduced, that the most vigorous vigilance consists in the highest degree of
salutary excitement; that the middle and deep period of sleep depends on the
highest debility that is consistent with the healthy state; that true sleep
depends on a middle degree of indirect debility, and that both morbid sleep and
morbid watching are the offspring of great debility, whether of the indirect or
direct kind.

CHAP. VIII.
The Cure of both the Diatheses.
CCLI. As the cause of both the diatheses is that which has been formerly See
above, par. CXLVIII.
related; the indication of cure, therefore, to be taken from that is, in the
sthenic diathesis to diminish excessive excitement over the whole system; in
the asthenic to increase deficient excitement likewise over all the system,
till it be brought to that degree, which proves the cause of health.

CCLII. The remedies that produce that effect in the cure of sthenic diathesis,
are the powers, which, when their stimulant operation is excessive, produce
that very diathesis, in this case, acting with that slight and reduced force of
stimulus, by which they produce less excitement than health requires, or by
which they prove debilitating.

CCLIII. The powers which produce the same effect in the asthenic diathesis,
are those that, when their stimulus is small, produce that diathesis, in this
case, exciting with that high degree of stimulus, by means of which they give
more excitement, than suits the healthy state, or by means of which they
stimulate.

CCLIV. In the sthenic diathesis that temperature The same order is followed
here, that has all along been observed, to wit, that of the enumeration of the
powers in par. XI. and XIII. and that of the explanation of them, when viewed
as the hurtful powers producing either diathesis in Chap. I. Part II. and it
will be kept to throughout the whole work. Nothing can be more simple and
natural, and better suit the simplicity of the subject, while nothing is more
artificial and arbitrary than the arrangements either of Systematics or
Nosologists. Just order could never be expected from an erroneous and confused
view of the subject to be treated of; while a clear conception of the subject
as a whole, infallibly leads to a distinct distributi^^ of the several parts
that compose it; so that what Horace says of language, equally applies to
order, and the same thing applies here as to his Verba and lucidus ordo. Rite
paratam rem verba baud invita sequentur.
which is called heat, must by all means be avoided; and for this very good
reason, that the only degree of it which proves debilitating, that is the
excessive to an extreme, cannot be carried to that height, in which it
debilitates, without the risk of hurtful or pernicious consequence from the
excess of stimulus See above, par. CXV. Though very intense heat relaxes the
simple and induces atony on the living solids, who, in a peripneumony, would
think of using it with that view? That disease from its own violence, often
mounts up so high in the scale of increased stimulus, as nearly to approach the
point of indirect debility, and it sometimes actually gains that point. The
addition, therefore, of more stimulus from the application of heat, would
ensure that effect, and thereby occasion the conversion of the disease into a
much worse one, such as hydrothorax, or the dropsy of the breast.
.

CCLV. But, when the diathesis, and its cause the increased stimulus, is gentle
in the actual diseased state, there is no occasion for forbidding that degree
of heat, which accompanies the operation of sweating and pediluvium Pediluvium
is the warm bath of the legs and feet.
; because the waste of fluids in the former, and the agreeable sensation in the
latter, promise somewhat more advantage, than the moderate degree of heat
employed in this case threatens disadvantage.

CCLVI. In a particular manner, after the application of cold in an intense
degree, must the application of heat be avoided, because its operation, from
the increase of the excitability by cold, becomes more effective See above,
par. XXXVII. (...) and note (d).
. And the consequence is the more to be dreaded, that, at the same time, other
stimuli are usually urgent.

CCLVII. Cold is the beneficial degree of temperature in the cure of this
diathesis, but it must be cold not followed by any considerable degree of heat.
That mistake, therefore, in medical practice, of thinking cold hurtful in
sthenic diathesis by a stimulant operation, should be corrected; and its
benefit in the smallpox is not to be understood to arise so much from its mere
debilitating degree, as from avoiding the stimulus of heat after its operation.
When the same precaution is employed, the same cold either alone, or in
conjunction with other debilitating powers, has lately been found the most
effectual remedy of catarrh or the common cold in English, a name stamped upon
it by the very blunder we have been speaking of.
.

CCLVIII. From which circumstance, and because a cap of fresh dug up earth put
upon the head, has been of service in phrenitis; and that degree of cold, which
produces frost and snow, when applied to the naked body, has removed a synocha
accompanied with delirium It is called the common inflammatory fever, very
improperly, as being no fever, but a general pyrexia, or affection of the whole
system, without inflammation or local affection, and producing heat over all
and tumultuous effect upon the pulse. Its proper generic name is pyrexia. See
above par. LXVIII. where that appellation is assigned to it: an appellation to
avoid mistaking its nature, that should be accurately attended to. Great
mischief has been occasioned by this vague term. Thus when a person is said to
be affected with a disease; when it is asked what disease it is, and the answer
given, that it is a fever, immediately bleeding is thought of, though that, and
every, evacuation is as hurtful in proper fever as it may be serviceable in the
pyrexia. To give an example of this pyrexia, the particular appellation for
which is synocha, or sthenic pyrexial disease; many years ago, a person in the
old town of Edinburgh, laboring under it, escaped the vigilance of his nurse;
flew naked out of the house in a very keen frost with snow upon the ground,
across the streets, passed over into the new town, and from that to the fields
beyond it. He soon became sensible of his state, stole into a house next to
him, got some clothes thrown about him, and was carried home in a chair,
perfectly cured of his disease. From which, and a prodigious number of facts to
the same purpose, all concuring in the proof of the debilitating operation of
cold, there can hardly arise a doubt in the mind, that in a certain high
degree, if it could be conveniently used, or if there were occasion to have
recourse to it for want of efficacious remedies, it would at once remove the
highest degree of sthenic state that ever occurs in disease, and reduce the
excitement from the nearest approach to 70 down to 40. Nay it might run into
the opposite extreme and go all the way to death. But we shall, by and by, have
occasion to observe, that we are so well provided with effectual remedies as
not to be under any temptation of straining this to its height. And we shall
also find that a number of remedies in a moderate degree are preferable to any
one, or to a smaller number in a higher degree. The discovery of the principle
upon which the cure of sthenic diseases turns, has enabled us to render the
cure both more complete and exact, than it could have been without principle.


; and because cold is so efficacious a remedy in the smallpox; it clearly
follows, that the use of cold should be extended to the whole range of (...),
the whole circle of diseases, depending upon sthenic diathesis.

CCLIX. That no hurtful effect arises from the supposed astringent power of
cold in the sthenic diathesis I remember, when I was a young student, of
hearing the old physicians in Edinburgh very gravely forbid a draught of cold
water in an inflammatory pyrexia and even in a common catarrh, for fear it
should produce an inflammation in the stomach.


, is proved by its very high influence, when applied to the surface of the body
in the smallpox, in keeping up a freedom of perspiration in proportion to the
degree of its application. And its influence in producing atony with
proportional laxity of the fibers of the vessels, is in conformity to the same
observation The fibers being relaxed describe a greater cavity, and hence the
check given to the perspiration by the contrary effect of the sthenic diathesis
in increasing their density and diminishing their diameters, is taken off.


.

CCLX. For the removal of asthenic diathesis the stimulus of heat is signally
useful, and chiefly for the following reason; that it must be as useful in this
diathesis, where the excitement is too low, as it is hurtful in the sthenic, by
giving a further increase of the excitement, too much increased already. Hence
in fevers, in the gout, in dyspepsia, in the cholic, in rheumatalgia or what is
improperly, as it has been said before, called the chronic rheumatism.
, and in all asthenic diseases, the system is very much cherished by heat, and
debilitated by cold: Which, by its debilitating effect, is ranked among the
powers that produce the disease No gouty person can bear the operation of much
cold, and every one can endure more heat, than most other persons. And the
reason is evident: So debilitating a power must, in proportion to its degree,
be peculiarly hurtful in all diseases, in which the debility constituting their
cause, runs high, as it naturally does in the gout, where it is increased by
the advance of age and other causes, and much more so in fevers.


, and is destructive in fevers.

CCLXI. As cold is hurtful in asthenic diathesis in the proportion in which it
is serviceable in the sthenic See par. CCLVIII.
; it is accordingly, for this further reason, to be avoided in diseases of the
highest debility, that, like intense heat, it relaxes the extreme vessels, and
produces a putrefaction in the fluids See above, CXVII.
.

CCLXII. The more certainly to moderate the sthenic diathesis while as yet it
remains within the range of predisposition, a sparing use should be made of
flesh and the preparations from it, and vegetable dishes used with greater
freedom. But, when the same diathesis is increased to the degree, that
constitutes disease, abstinence from animal food, especially in a solid form,
and a free, but still not excessive, use of vegetable matter, especially in a
fluid form, are the best means of removing it, as far as the management of diet
goes.

CCLXIII. In that degree of this diathesis, which does not exceed
predisposition, it is proper to avoid seasoning, which is destructive in
diseases.

CCLXIV. Watery drink is very suitable to it, and all pure and strong drink
hurtful, and that in proportion to the quantity of alkahol that it contains.
The latter ^ort of drink, unless taken very weak, is destructive in diseases.
In the number of which pure water, especially with an addition of something to
acidulate it, is preferable to smallbeer, which a great authority admitted. But
the diffusible stimuli in this diathesis are above all others hurtful.

CCLXV. Since the indirect stimulus of food assists the direct, that is,
propagates itself over the whole body; for that reason bounds should be set to
the bulk even of the suitable matter See above, par. CXXVII.
.

CCLXVI. In every degree of asthenic diathsis, vegetable food should be
avoided, and recourse had as soon as possible to that, which consists of meat
and animal matter. And, as that can seldom be executed immediately upon account
of the weakness of the stomach; the diffusible stimuli should, therefore, be
used; such as the different forms of wine when the debility is moderate, and
opiates when it is greater. And at the same time, from the very beginning rich
soups should be given in great quantity upon the whole, and a gradual
transition made to the use of more solid matter.

CCLXVII. As it is animal matter in this case, that is of service, so the
degree of stimulus, that seasoning adds to it, improves its effect See above,
par. CXXV.
.

CCLXVIII. During the predisposition to asthenic diseases, watery, cold, acid,
fermenting drink is hurtful, and that proportion of pure strong liquor, that
the degree of debility requires, is beneficial. But after the diseases have
actually taken place, and have now attained a high degree of vehemence, the
same strong drink becomes so indispensably necessary, that excepting the soups,
and the still more diffusible stimuli, it is the only support required for a
long time. There is no occasion for any dread of the indirect stimulus of food,
when the matter, which chiefly affords it, that is, vegetable matter, is
guarded against Compare this with what was lately said in paragraph CCLXV.
.

CCLXIX. For the purpose of diminishing the stimulus, which an over proportion
of chyle and blood The chyle is the alimentary matter, that has undergone a
preparation in the stomach, and an after one in the upper part of the
intestinal canal, and, which so prepared, or in part digested, is taken up by
the months of a number of small vessels that open into the intestines; these
carry it to a great trunk, in which all these vessels, called lacteal, unite,
and through that trunk, to be afterward mixed, first with the venous, and then
with all the other blood in succession. Such is the nourishing matter of
animals.


, directly applied to a great extent of the body, produces; the over
proportion, when it is very great, should be removed by abstinence, bleeding,
and purging: when it is more moderate, but yet adequate to the effect of
producing diseases, the directions lately given See above, par. CCLV.
, respecting a moderate diathesis, ought to be observed; that is, we should
adhere to the practice of vomiting and purging from time to time, and to a
sparingness in diet. But blood should not be let. And, if upon any occasion,
the patient shall give way to a little fullness in his use of food, he should
use vegetable matter, abstinence, gentle and frequent exercise, and sweating,
and, thereby, keep up a full perspiration.

CCLXX. The same are the means of cure for an excess in the velocity of the
blood See above, par. CXXXI. to CXXXIV.
, in so far as it depends upon an over proportion: when the velocity depends
upon violent motion of the body, the means of lessening it, when the diathesis
is so moderate, as only to produce predisposition, or a gentle degree of actual
disease, are an abatement of exercise, more indulgence in rest, and a reduction
of other stimuli. In the very great diathesis, that which occasions severe
diseases, in order to retard the motion of the blood, a point must be made to
avoid the stimulus of all the exciting powers, and blood must be taken
profusely. Here it is superfluous to lay down a rule for the observance of
keeping the body in a state of rest, as rest, even in spite of the patients, in
unavoidable It would be ridiculous to require of a patient in the rage of
peripneumony not to run a race, when his real state is, that he cannot move or
turn himself in the bed without pain.
.

CCLXXI. Withdrawing the powers that occasion an over-proportion of the
secreted fluids in the excretory ducts, is the best method of removing the
stimulus, which that over-proportion, by its distending energy, produces In
par. CXXXVI. you will find, that the secreted fluids, here alluded to, are the
milk, the semen, and the perspirable fluid. As the distention occasioned by the
over-abundance produces the morbid stimulus, so the subduction of the fluids
must, of course, take it off, and give the desired relief.
. The cure, therefore, consists in more frequent coition, drawing off the milk,
taking in food of a less nourishing nature, and in restoring the perspiration
by removing the sthenic diathesis upon the external surface.

CCLXXII. To remove the debility, or atony and laxity, of the vessels, which is
occasioned by a penury of chyle and blood over a very great extent of the
system How great the space of extent of the system is, that, in the sthenic
diathesis, receives the stimulus of an over-abundance of blood; and, in the
asthenic diathesis is subjected to the debilitating power of an
under-proportion of the the same fluid, may easily be conceived from the well
known fact, that there is not a soft part in the whole system, into which the
insertion of the point of the finest needle will not draw blood; consequently,
the stimulus arising from (...) over-abundance of blood, as well as the
debility arising from too small a quantity, must be the most considerable of
all others. Every circumstance here concurs to render the one the greatest
sthenic, and the other an equal asthenic, hurtful power. If the force of every
stimulus, of every exciting power, be in proportion, first, to the degree of it
applied; secondly, to the sensibility of the part on which it acts; and,
thirdly, to the extent of that part, it will be no wonder, that these two
powers should prove the most formidable of all others. Hence it is, that, in
the curative part, bleeding is the most powerful remedy of sthenic, and filling
the vessels an equal one, of asthenic diathesis.
, first, the strength must be gradually brought back by diffusible stimuli
which act by giving vigor to the whole system, and more especially to the
stomach, with which they come into actual contact. Hence digestion, and the
conversion of the matter taken in into good chyle, and blood; and hence, at
last, the fullness of the vessels first indicated. The process of emptying the
vessels in the cure of sthenic diathesis has the advantage of being the first
in order; and hence is it that the cure of sthenic disease is more quickly
effected than that of the asthenic; it being, over all nature, much more easy
to take away than replace. See and compare par. CXXVI. and CXXX. and subjoined
notes, and a little above, par. CCLXVI.
and soups; next, we should gradually use the latter more sparingly, and solid
matter more plentifully: lastly, to give the whole system still more strength,
it should be fortified by exercise, and the rest of the durable stimuli; but no
further use should be made of the diffusible, than to employ them so long as
considerable debility remains The sole use, and a great one, of the diffusible
stimuli is, in great weakness, where they are only required, to support the
system, while it cannot be supported by the ordinary durable stimuli; and,
after the excitement is so far restored, that the ordinary supports are now
sufficient, to lay aside the extraordinary; the continuance of which would now
be hurtful, and to manage the convalescent, and restored, state of health by
the powers employed in health. When the diffusible are continued longer, they
are equally hurtful, and a cause of disease, as they are serviceable when
disease requires their support; analogous to wine, they bring about the system
in a weakened state to be sustained by its natural and ordinary supports; but,
analogous to it in another respect, when the strength of the system requires
not their additional stimulus, they carry it up into indirect debility, and
prove the ca^se of diseases and death. In one word, whatever has been said
against the propriety of the use of excessive, and ultimately excessive
stimulant powers, the former producing sthenic diathesis, and the latter
indirect debility, all that applies, with propriety, for the discontinuance of
the use of diffusible stimuli, when the durable are now sufficient for the
purposes of the system. And another argument that still remains against the
superfluous use of both the diffusibles and strong drink, when debility
requires not their use; is, that, independent of death, or even diseases, being
their immediate consequence, predisposition to diseases must; consequently, as
the system must at last be worn by stimuli, all the unnecessary, that is, all
that do not contribute to that middle vigor, in which sound health consists,
should be avoided.
.

CCLXXIII. In a weak state both of the vessels and of the rest of the body,
every motion of the body, any way considerable, and all other stimuli, which
quicken the motion of the blood, and bring on an indirect temporary debility,
should be withheld. But, in a case of slighter debility, such motion as does
not prove fatiguing, but acts as an agreeable stimulus, and gives recruit,
should not be avoided. When a person is recovering from a disease, he should be
gradually brought back to his usual plan of life; nor should it be forgot,
that, till that is done, the health is never completely restored.

CCLXXIV. The debility which an under-proportion of secreted fluids, or a
degenerate, though plentiful state of them, produces in the excretory ducts, is
removed by the stimulant plan of cure which has just now been spoken of See
above, CCLXXII.
, not by an antiseptic one See above, CXVII. and CXVI^^.
.

CCLXXV. The suitable remedy of that sort of stimulus, which arises from either
violence or assiduity of thinking, is an abatement in the degree of thinking,
or that high stretch of the intellectual function, whether its degree or
frequent repetition be regarded, that, by wasting the excitability, proves, at
last, indirectly debilitating: Which is a rule, however it may suit the state
of predisposition, that is by no means safe, after the disease has once made
its appearance, and especially if it is a violent one; because there is no
access to any benefit from it, but through the intermediate degrees of that
stimulant range, which, by increasing the excitement, already too great, would
do mischief See above, CCLIV.
.

CCLXXVI. In order to cure a slight sthenic diathesis, such as occurs in
predisposition, and to prevent disease, habitual passion should be avoided; but
the removal of actual disease requires, that every first gust of passion should
be prevented. The ultimate excess of passion, upon account of the intermediate
danger of stimulating too much, is by no means to be thought of.

CCLXXVII. In so far as debility depends upon excess in mental exertion, or
upon a languid state of that faculty, the excess should be diminished, and the
languor removed, and an agreeable train of thinking set on foot; without which
latter, however much all the other stimulant powers may have been employed, it
may be depended upon, that perfect health, in every respect, will not be
brought about The state of the intellectual function has a great influence upon
that of excitement; and, often, when all other stimuli have been applied in due
proportion, the deficiency of that single stimulus will point out a want in the
proper measure of excitement. There is not a finer stimulus than the
pleasurable feeling arising from a happy train or ^low of thinking; hence the
high delight, that arises from a flight of wit, or from a pleasant vein of
humor; hence all the fine feelings of the belles letters; hence, in youth, the
ardent keenness to be acquainted with the learning, wisdom, and elegant
productions of the ancients, as well as of those, who have made a distinguished
figure in later times; hence the enthusiasm, so natural to the human feelings,
to outstrip others in every mental excellency: The arts, the sciences, every
department of human knowledge, are all the effects of that intellectual
propensity. How happy would it be for mankind were this noble stimulus duly
cherished! What benefits, which society is deprived of, would not accrue from a
proper cultivation of it! How fine was that feeling in Julius Caesar Scaliger,
when he declared he would rather be the author of Horace's few stanzas of Lydia
and Telephus, than accept of the crown of Arragon! What must have been the
delight of Pythagoras, when he found out the XLVIIth proposition of the first
book of the mathematical elements, commonly called Euclid's? He jumped about in
an ecstacy, crying out (...), and was so much more substantial than some of his
few brother discoverers, as to possess the means of offering a sacrifice of an
hundred fat bullocks to the gods. See Observations on the principles of the old
Systems of Physic, from page ix. to xv. of the Introduction. How delightful
must the feelings of Horace have been, in whose works every Ode is an effort of
the most beautiful, and, frequently, of the most sublime, conceptions of human
genius! What must have been the fire and force of Milton's soul, in the
description that he gives of the appearance of the Son of God in his celestial
panoply, " his countenance too severe to be behold!" How towering that soul,
how exalted that intellect, which the great Marquis of Montrose displayed in a
stratagem, which coverted into a glorious victory a blunder in one of his
officers, that might have proved fatal to both his cause and his glory. When it
was whispered to him, standing in the center of his army, that one of his wings
was overpowered, he shouts out to the commander in the other: "My Lord Aboyn,
shall you and I stand here doing nothing, and M'Donald carry off all the honor
of the day!"
.

CCLXXVIII. In every degree of debility that high force of the passions, that
produces indirect debility, must be avoided; and it must not be forgot, that a
very small degree of them is sufficient for that effect: we are not to give
loose reins to agreeable passions See above, par. XLIII. and CXLI. Recollect
the method prescribed in the XLIII. paragraph of this work for preventing the
fatal catastrophe of the Roman woman, when her son, whom she had counted upon,
for certain, in the number of the dead, was, contrary to every expectation,
presented to her in perfect health. The danger and fatality of her state was,
that her excitability was too accumulated, with respect to the stimulus of
exciting passion, to bear such a strong impression as that which the presence
of her son, in life and health, had made. She was in the state of a famished
person, whose accumulated excitability is overpowered by a single morsel of
food, or of a person, who had been long affected with thirst, where the
smallest indulgence in drink may prove fatal; or of a person, near starved to
death by cold, in whom a rash approach to heat, might induce the same fatal
effect; all which are precisely upon the same footing, and equal instances of
an excitability too accumulated to bear any degree of stimulus.
.

CCLXXIX. When there is a deficiency in the force of any of the passions, as in
sadness, grief, fear, terror, and despair, which are only lesser degrees of
gladness, confidence, and hope, and imply only a diminution of exciting
passions; such deficiency or diminution must be expelled, and the exciting
degree of passion recalled; hope and assurance must be infused, and the patient
gradually carried up to feelings of joy.

P. For there is only a sum total of the passions, which act in the same manner
as all the other stimuli, that is, by stimulating, either in excess, or in due,
or in deficient, proportion; nay, like the rest, as often as any one is
deficient, it, by accumulating the excitability, has the effect of making the
other stimuli act more powerfully See above, par. XXXVII. and the note annexed
to it,
. Take, for instances, the terror of an army before the sound of trumpet for
the onset of battle, and the courage with which they are afterward inspired,
from the consciousness of their bravery, the General's speech to animate them,
or, perhaps, his commemoration of their former brave deeds.

P. An ultimately excessive voluptuousness in the exercise of the senses, as
well as the effect of disagreeable objects, presented to them, in asthenic
diathesis, should equally be avoided; and, in the sthenic diathesis, their
turbulent force should be guarded against See par. CXLIII. and CXLIV.
.

S. Nothing is better accommodated to the asthenic state than purity of air:
which, either alone, or conjoined with exercise, must, consequently, be of the
grea^est benefit to convalescents.

T. Since the matter of contagion, in so far as it has any tendency to produce
general disease, produces either sthenic as in the smallpox and measles,
, or asthenic, diathesis as the contagious typhus, the gangrenous sore threat,
dy^entery, and the plague
, and acts by an operation similar to that of the general hurtful powers; the
inference to be drawn from that is, that in the cure, general remedies should
be employed; and debilitating ones opposed to sthenic, stimulant ones to
asthenic, diathesis Par. CXLVII. and CLXXV.
.

CCLXXX. These powers, the same in kind with those that produce the diatheses,
differing only in degree, and in that respect diametrically opposite, remove
the diathesis seldomer, and less successfully, one by one; oftener, and more
effectually, when several cooperate, but, best of all, if all of them be taken
together, especially when there is occasion for great assistance.

CHAP. IX.
A Comparison of the different Parts of the Sthenic Plan of Cure with each
other.
CCLXXXI. AS, in the sthenic diathesis, bleeding is the most powerful remedy of
all others, being that, which completely carries off a stimulus, as much more
powerful than any other, as it is directly applied to a greater extent over the
system; consequently, as often as the diathesis is very high, it should be
freely used; but never risked during predisposition, and sparingly, or not at
all, ventured upon in diseases of a gentle nature; in which other remedies
should be preferred See above, par. CCLXIX. With the exception of peripneumony,
phrenitis, and violent and mismanaged cases of the small pox and measles, and
rheumatism; in the last in their mild state, as well as the other sthenic
cases, the lancet should never be unsheathed. That is to say, in seven cases
out of ten even of the sthenic diseases, which are the only ones that either
require or bear any degree of it, the practice must be laid aside, and never
thought of in any asthenic affections whatever. Consequently, the cases, where
it is in any degree allowable, are exceedingly few.
.

CCLXXXII. The next place of importance to bleeding, when heat and other
stimuli are guarded against, is claimed by cold. Heat is always hurtful, and
still more so after a previous application of cold; but it is most hurtful,
when it is also combined with other excessive stimulant powers. Cold is always
of service, and in proportion to its degree; provided foreign stimuli, blended
with it, and overcoming its debilitating effect, be cautiously shunned.

CCLXXXIII. The third place in rank after these remedies is claimed by vomiting
and purging and sweating. These evacuations have a powerful effect in removing
sthenic diathesis, and therefore do they, with great advantage, supersede the
oftener imaginary than real, necessity of profuse bleeding. They are often
alone sufficient to restore the healthy state.

CCLXXXIV. Together with all these, the articles of diet, the stimulant
operation of which prevents the benefits to be received from them, should be
sparingly used, and that in exact proportion to the degree of the diathesis.
This precaution alone is adequate to the removal of predisposition, and often
to that of diseases, especially those that depend upon a small and gentle
diathesis.

CCLXXXV. Also with all the remedies yet mentioned we must conjoin rest, when
the diseased state has taken place, and moderation in motion during the period
of predisposition So considerable a stimulus is exercise, that, if in such a
degree of sthenic diathesis, as that, which forms only predisposition to the
diseases depending on it, exercise may of itself be sufficient to effect the
conversion of the predisposition into the actual diseased state. Often has the
highest of these diseases, and even peripneumony itself, been brought on by
violent exertion in exercise.
.

CCLXXXVI. The practice of the common run of physicians is very bad, in going
too much upon any one of the remedies that have been mentioned, and overlooking
all the rest, or enjoining them carelessly. We are not to depend upon bleeding
alone, not even in peripneumony itself; but employ all the rest either in
concourse or succession.

CCLXXXVII. The disturbed functions, or those that are impaired See above, par.
CXLVII. CLI. CLXXII.
not from a debilitating cause, admit of the general plan of cure, and no other.

CCLXXXVIII. The symptoms of debility, which are the consequences of the
violence of the sthenic diathesis, in the progress of the disease, and that
threaten death by indirect debility, ought to be prevented by an early
interposition of the remedies.

CCLXXXIX. The same early cure serves to prevent suppuration, effusion, and
gangrene, which arise from ultimately excessive excitement, passing into
indirect debility.

u. If sthenic diathesis should happen to be conjoined with a local disease,
the former, to prevent it from aggravating the latter, should be removed by its
own respective remedies.

CHAP. X.
The same Comparison of the different Parts of the Asthenic Plan of Cure with
one another.
CCXC. IN asthenic diathesis, and the diseases depending upon it, reproducing
the lost quantity of blood, is the most powerful remedy, when we, at last, find
access to it, as being the only means of restoring a stimulus of so much more
power and efficacy, that its direct application is made to so great an extent
of the system Compare this with par. CCLXXXI. above, and with all the
paragraphs from CXXXI. to an CXXXVI.
. For which reason, as, in every degree of debility, the quantity of food, from
which only blood is made, that is taken and digested, is always in an inverse,
proportion to the degree of debility Or in a direct proportion to the degree of
excitement.
; so much, and of such a form, as can be taken and digested, should
immediately, and without loss of time, be administered; on which account, if
the debility be moderate, giving solid animal food sparingly each time, but
often repeated, is proper and suitable. When the debility is greater, and solid
animal food can neither be taken, nor if taken, digested, broth made from it,
as rich as possible, and as free of fatty matter, should be carefully
administered Compare this with par. CCLXXII.
, With this view to excite the stomach, and render it more fit for receiving
and digesting the food just now mentioned; the diffusible stimuli, such as
different kinds of wine, and more particularly still opiates and other remedies
of similar powerfulness, ought to be constantly employed; sparingly at first,
and afterward more fully, if the debility be direct: after which, the use of
the diffusible should be gradually laid aside, and, in the same gradual way,
recourse be had to a larger and larger use of the more durable and natural
stimuli See last note ( e), and compare it with this.
. In the case of indirect debility, we should also gradually proceed from the
highest to the lowest force of stimulus, as has been mentioned formerly Par.
CIII.
, and, in an inverse manner, go on from the smallest force of durable stimulus
to the greatest. Lastly, in that moderate debility, which constitutes the
predisposition to asthenic diseases, it must always be kept in mind, that an
abundance of blood is the greatest support of health How widely different is
that maxim from any that have hitherto ^ver been received in the profession of
physic; in which flying to the use of the lancet, was the first thought that
arose in the mind, with respect to the idea of cure of every disease; and
bleeding and evacuations, through the course of each disease, the only remedies.
, and that we are not to give way to weakened appetite This is equally the
reverse of the general practice of inanition in almost every disease, without a
single exception.
.

C^^CI. To the vital fluid, and the several means of increasing its quantity,
which have just now been mentioned, the next remedy in the cure of asthenic
diathesis is heat; as being the power by which animals And we may add
vegetables.
, in their first formation, in their growth, and most especially in their
decay, are brought forth into exstence, are nourished, and acquire vigor, and
afterward, through the several degrees of their declining state, are to some
extent upheld, till their excitement is all extinguished Compare this with par.
CXII. and CCLIV. and CCLX.
. By heat, understand that point of external temperature, which intervenes as a
mean betwixt cold, as it is called, and high heat The Latins have a single word
for this which we want* the word (...) ardor.
; under which our sense of temperature is agreeable and pleasant; under which
the body is neither weakened by that relaxation which produces sweat, nor by
that torpor Or benumbed state.
which cold begets, where the debility is, in this case, direct, and in the
former indirect; under which the functions of the whole body are excited,
called forth, and, as it were, cherished in the sun beams; without which all
other stimuli are of no effect It is plain, that though all the other powers
should be in full action upon our bodies, and that with the effect of keeping
up in them a due degree of excitement over all; yet plunging any person naked
into a dense medium, suppose that of water, in a degree of cold at or under the
freezing point, will most certainly, in an instant, put an end to life.
.

CCXCII. Such a temperature as that is suited to every state of the body, but
still more to its different states of debility; because, in the latter case, as
the excitement is deficient from other sources, there is so much more occasion
for this stimulus, which is much easier come at than many others, to supply
such deficiency. Hence, both in other diseases of great and direct debility,
and particularly in fevers, heat is ^ound to be of the greatest benefit, and
above all others in all such complaints of that kind, as cold has had any share
in producing See again, par. CCLX.
. In the same diseases cold must be most carefully avoided, as it is always of
a directly debilitating operation, and never of service but in sthenic
diseases, and those that are in a progress to indirect debility The operation
of cold has been so widely mistaken by all physicians, that it comes to be of
the greatest consequence to understand the several propositions stated in this
work with regard to it. For that purpose consult par. XXXVII. and the note upon
it marked (...), as well as par. CCLX* and all that has been said upon the
subjects of either heat or cold in Chap. 1. of the second Part, from CXII. to
CXXIII. as also par. CXX.
. We must be equally on our guard, in every degree of asthenic diathesis,
against excessive heat; which is equally debilitating as cold, and equally
productive of atony, laxity, and gangrene of the vessels, as well as stagnation
and corruption of the fluids, in consequence of the inactive state of the
vessels With this proposition compare par. CXV. CXVII. and CXVIII.
.

CCXCIII. As refilling the vessels is the greatest remedy, because its direct
stimulus is applied over such an extent of the system; for that reason heat,
which is immediately applied to the whole surface of the body, and directly
affects the body to that extent, should be next in virtue to it.

CCXCIV. Since vomiting, purging See par. CCLXXXIII.
and sweating See par. CCLV.
are so powerful in debilitating, as to claim the third place of rank in the
sthenic cure: they must, for that reason, by the same debilitating operation,
be equally hurtful in asthenic diathesis, and the stimuli that stop their
operation, and, consequently, both the other stimuli, and particularly the
diffusible ones, equally serviceable.

CCXCV. To run over the list of stimuli, that answer this purpose, we must
begin with the cure of that slighter loss of fluids that occur in those
diseases, and proceed to the more violent kinds of them.

In a slight looseness of belly, such as happens in predisposition to asthenic
diseases, or in the slighter degrees of the latter; it will be commonly
sufficient to abstain from vegetable food, and from weak, watery drink, or that
kind of it that ferments in the first passages, such as the several drinks made
from barley, called beers; to use animal food, as well seasoned and as rich as
possible, and free of all fatty matter; to drink pure wine, or spirit, in
different degrees of strength; and to take such exercise as is gentle in
degree, and often repeated See and compare, for the more clear understanding of
this paragraph, the CCLXVI. CCLXVIII. CCLXXIII.
.

CCXCVI. When the belly is still, looser and with that affected with gripes and
pains, as happens in the violent diarrhaea, and in the dysentery in which the
loose stools are accompanied with vomiting: or when, without these troublesome
symptoms affecting the belly, distressing vomiting is an urgent symptom; or,
when the vomiting is conjoined with a moisture upon the surface, or macerating
sweat; or when sweat is the only urgent symptom, and as such wastes the
strength, exhausts the body, and dissipates the fluids: in all these cases, we
must have immediate recourse to the most diffusible stimuli, and check such an
impoverishment of the fluids of the system.

CCXCVII. In which case, the use of stimuli will be so much the more necessary,
that other symptoms usually accompany those increased excretions. Their great
effcacy, and stimulant power, is proved by their singular virtue in removing
those and other symptoms, in fevers and other most violent sthenic diseases,
nay, in the article of death itself, from ultimate debility.

CCXCVIII. Accordingly, in spasms and convulsions in the internal, in the
external, parts See par. CXCV. and CXCVI.
, in bleeding discharges See par. CXXXIV. (...). 4. and CCXXXII. and the
subjoined notes.
, in the direful delirium of fevers, and other very violent diseases See par.
CXCVIII. CC. CCI.
, in sthenic inflammation See par. CCIV. to CCXII.
; when those stimuli, which have a more permanent influence fail, or act to no
good purpose; the virtue of the diffusible stimulants, the principal of which
is opium, is eminent.

CCXCIX. As, therefore, the energy of that stimulant virtue serves to check
looseness of the belly, and vomiting, or even sweating, when these symptoms are
gentle, and depend upon a less violent degree of the cause; so that degree of
its power, which is fitted to check these affections in the greatest height of
their violence, and to re-establish the state of health, is by far the greatest
of all the powers, which are ever applied to the human body; which may be known
from this proof, that when the action of all the other powers by which life is
supported is of no effect, they turn aside the instant stroke of death.

CCC. The most weak degree of the diffusible stimuli See above par. CXXVI. o.
p. r.
are the white wines, except madeira, canary, good sherry and the red wines,
except port and spirits procured by distillation, so diluted, as to equal the
strength of the wines, or exceed it a little. Still higher than these are the
latter taken pure, and higher still, those that have undergone many
rectifications. The strength of which is in proportion to the quantity of water
expelled, and of the alkali retained.

CCCI. A higher place in the scale is claimed by musk, volatile alkali,
camphor; our trials of which are not yet so complete, as to ascertain its force
exactly: next comes ether, and, last of all, opium. Of all which, however,
unless, when, as they sometimes do, they have lost their effect by a
continuance of their application, and are, therefore, substituted in place of
each other for the sake of a renewal of the operation of each; and when, in
that way we make the complete round of them, for the sake of repelling extreme
debility; in every respect, the preparations of opium are sufficient for most
purposes of high stimulating

CCCII. Together with all these They are animal soups, and solid meat (CCXC.)
heat, (CCXCI.) stimulants (CCXCV.) diffusible stimulants CCXCIX.)
, regard must be had to the articles of diet See par. CCLXXXIV.


And, as in great debility, and the diseases depending upon it, of the only
suitable matter, that is meat, nothing solid can be taken; for that reason, the
matter to be used must be fluid, but strong. Animal soups should be given
sparingly at a time, but repeatedly, in proportion to the degree of debility,
and jellies both along with the diffusible stimuli. After that, when, chiefly
by means of the diffusive stimuli, the strength is in part restored; at first
solid meat, likewise in sparing quantities, but often repeated; then given more
plentifully, and at greater intervals, should be taken. In which progress the
patient should gradually recede from the use of the diffusible stimuli.

CCCIII. When now the diffusible stimuli are altogether laid aside, and the
convalescent is given up to his usual manner of living, and that management,
which persons in health commonly observe, (only that more care is taken than in
perfect health, to avoid any thing that might prove hurtful); then it is, that
every attempt of the physician should be directed to the consideration of the
strength of his patient, as returning, but not yet quite established See above
par. CV. and CIX.
. In his movements he should first use gestation, and then gentle but frequent
exercise, and the latter should always end in some, but not an high, degree of
fatigue. His sleep should neither be too long, nor too short, lest the former
produce direct, the latter indirect debility See par. CCXLII. and sequent.
: the most nourishing food should be taken, but not in too great a quantity,
lest the excitability of the stomach be worn off, without the attainment of a
due degree of vigor, but it should be often taken, in order to reduce the
excitability gradually, which only serves to produce proper vigor, and reduce
it to its half wasted state See above the XXIV. XXV. and XXVI.
; that degree of heat, which stimulates, should be employed See par. CXII.
, and both excess of it, as well as cold, as they are equally debilitating,
should be avoided; the patient should breathe pure air, and avoid impure; he
should keep his mind in gentle action, observe moderation in his passions, and
court agreeable objects of sense; he should have no companions around him, but
agreeable ones, and be in frequent gay entertainments; he should travel through
a pleasant country, and be moderate in love. Neither is the management of the
senses, and any return of contagious matter to be neglected.

CHAP. XI.
How the Remedies should be varied.
CCCIV. AS the hurtful powers, that produce predisposition to diseases, or
diseases themselves, act some on one part, some on another, with somewhat more
force than on any other equal part; and as such a part is commonly that which
they directly affect Par. XLIX.
; so the powers, which are employed as remedies, in order that their general
effect may reach the whole body with the more certainty, should be, in the same
manner, differently applied to different parts.

CCCV. The cure of any sthenic disease whatever, is improperly entrusted to
bleeding alone, though that is one of the most powerful of the debilitating
remedies. And the reason is, that, though the excitability is sufficiently
reduced by that remedy in the greater blood vessels, perhaps too much, yet in
the extremities of these, as well as in the rest of the body, it is not
sufficiently reduced The action of every exciting power, whether salutary or
hurtful, or curative, always extends over the whole body, the whole ^eat of
excitability, but still with the inequality mentioned in the fourth Chapter of
Part First. This is the basis of the distinction with respect to the present
subject: which is, that, as every power acts most effectually on the part where
its action is immediately exerted, it is better to trust to a number, every one
of which possesses that advantage, than rely on any one, however powerful
otherwise; as by that means, whatever be the indication, whether it be to
increase or diminish excitement, the effect will be more equally produced over
all in consequence of there being a number of parts that have had a strong
action exerted upon them.
. Nor is the alternation of bleeding with purging a perfect sort of cure;
because, though the excessive excitement be sufficiently, and more than
sufficiently, removed in the greater blood vessels, and in the innumerable
small arteries, whether exhalant or mucous, which discharge their fluids into
the intestines; yet, neither on the perspiratory terminations of the arteries,
nor on the rest of the body, is an equal debilitating energy exerted: for
instance, the small vessels which open into the stomach, are not sufficiently
relieved of their distending and therefore stimulating load, the stimulus in
any vessel being the quantity of its fluid.
load. And although vomiting See par. CCLXIX.
, which has been improperly left out of the cure of sthenic diseases, and still
more improperly employed in every one of the asthenic, should be conjoined with
the two remedies just now mentioned, even that would not be enough to produce
an equality of diminished excitement; as there would still remain in the
perspiratory vessels, the same state of the excitement, which has been
mentioned, as in the rest of the body, that is not vascular. In violent sthenic
diseases, therefore, after diminishing the diathesis, and in the slighter from
the beginning of the disease, the addition of the operation of sweat to the
evacuations that have been spoken of, will produce a more equal diminution of
excitement, a more perfect solution of the disease. For by means of this
evacuation, not only from the larger blood vessels, in the interior parts of
the body, but from an infinity of outlets both of the external, and internal
surface of the body, an immense quantity of fluids, every where distending,
and, thereby, producing a very great sun of excitement, is withdrawn. But the
matter stops not even here. For, since in slight sthenic affections much
nourishing food, and in them all, too much, can be taken; the consequence of
that must be, that, however much the quantity of the blood and other fluids has
been diminished, if the food, which is the only power that can produce blood,
continues to be taken, all the vessels, in proportion to the quantity that has
been taken, will again go on to be filled, and to be fired with the fuel of
excessive excitement. To prevent which inconvenience, and to diminish
excitement, still with greater equality over the system; abstinence, or an
allowance of vegetable matter in a fluid form, and watery drink, will have a
very great effect. But neither does the matter end here. For, if, after taking
all the precautions and securities that have been recommended, the degree of
heat, that proves hurtful from its stimulus, be allowed to approach the
external surface of the body; it will produce another inequality of excitement,
however much that may have been properly and equally diminished by the other
means of cure. Wherefore, as the sthenic diathesis depends so much upon the
stimulus of heat, directly affecting the skin See par. CXIII.
, and is, on that account, prevalent in the skin in preference to other parts;
to make sure of rendering the diminution of excitement as equal as possible,
the debilitating effect of cold should be opposed to the high degree of
excitement, which the heat has produced. When, at last, all the directions,
which have been so fully pointed out, have been executed, still to reproduce
the equality of excitement, suited to good health; it remains, that we be on
our guard against the stimuli that arise from the intellectual functions and
passions. For, as they have a great effect in producing sthenic diathesis See
par. CXXXVIIII. CXL.
, so the guarding against them, or prevention of them, must be equally
effectual in removing that diathesis, and in reproducing that equality of
excitement, upon which health depends As the most healthy state of man is
occasioned not by the operation of any one, or of a few exciting powers, but by
the united operation of them all; so neither is its re-establishment to be
effected, but by the same united operation of all the remedies, the last of
which come to be the ordinary means of the support of the healthy state.
.

CCCVI. If the cure of sthenic diseases hitherto has consisted in bleeding,
purging of the belly, and in the use of refrigeration in a few cases; and, if
the other objects of attention, which have now been so fully treated of, have
either been totally neglected, or mentioned in a slight way, by the by, and as
if they had been of no consequence, and, in the cures which were prescribed in
that way, not reduced to any principle; it will easily now appear, from what
has been said above, and in other parts of this work, how much the knowledge of
those diseases has been improved, both in the practical and reasoning part: and
it will now, at last, be found a certain and established fact, that both the
nature and true theory of sthenic diseases, as well as the practice of the cure
of them, considered either as an art and imitative, or as rational and
scientific, has been discovered and demonstrated.

CCCVII. As the debilitating or antisthenic See par. XC.
remedies are the same with the asthenic hurtful powers See par. CCCIV. to
CCCVII. the present one.
; so the sthenic remedies See par. XCI.
are also the same as the sthenic hurtful powers.

^. And as the remedies of asthenic diathesis, to whatever part they are
applied, also stimulate that part more than any other; some of them one, others
another part, and increase the excitement:

CCCVIII. So, in asthenic diseases, if we want to rouse the excitement with
more equality, and restore the lost strength, we must not depend upon the most
diffusible stimuli alone See par. CCCI.
. For, while they indeed increase the excitement over the whole body, at the
same time, they produce that effect in the stomach with greater force than any
where else. Hence, even from the beginning of the cure, when almost no food can
be taken, and other durable and more natural stimuli as that of pure air,
exercise, the stimulus of the motion of the blood and other fluids in their
respective vessels.
are most imperfectly applied; yet, together with the diffusibles, soups See
par. CCCII.
should be given, and as much haste as possible should be made to bring the
patient to take solid meat, while care, at the same time, should be taken to
apply a proper degree of heat. For, by this method, we most properly secure
both the internal and external surface. Nay, in the same way, we move that
inanition of the vessels which takes place in asthenic diseases in an exact
proportion to their degree. For, as in that abundance of blood, which is the
most powerful means of bringing on sthenic diseases, there is an opportunity of
making a quick cure by immediate taking of blood; so it is only by insensible,
gradual, imperceptible, and obscure successive steps, that we open the access
to the removal of that penury of blood, which proves the most hurtful power in
asthenic diseases, and effect the filling of the vessels again.

CCCIX. After this management of both surfaces of the body, and this partial
filling of the vessels; still the excitement is not, equally enough increased.
To effect this further in part; at the same time some most diffusible stimulus,
suppose any preparation of opium, should be administered, and the little animal
food, or meat, that there is any appetite for, and that can be taken and
digested, should be added. The idea of giving food is evident from the latter
explanation given about soups See par. CCCVIII.
. But, the use of the more durable, and less diffusible, stimulus depends on
this, "that when the excitability is worn out by any one stimulus, any new
stimulus finds excitability, and draws it forth, and thereby produces a further
variation of the effect.

CCCX. Hitherto the stimulus of the motion, by which all the muscles, which,
from their situation on the surface of the body, by their contractions propel
the blood along the veins to the heart, are thrown into action, has not been
supplied See par CVXXXII. a. b. g. d. CCLXXIII. CCCIII.
; and, therefore, both upon account of the emptiness of the vessels, and the
^low circulation from the want of that impulse, the excitement is not
sufficiently aroused over all that tract. After the strength has, then, been so
recruited, that rich food can now be taken, the body can now be roused, first
by foreign, then by its own organs, of which the former is called gestation,
the latter exercise, and also refreshed by air; when all that has happened,
then it is, that the excitement is further raised in several points, and
becomes more equal upon the whole.

CCCXI. The last stimuli to be mentioned, which, along with those already
mentioned, have a natural tendency to produce an equalization of excitement
over the whole system, arise from the action of the mind, the energy of passion
or emotion, and a still greater purity of air, than is attainable by persons
shut up in a room See and compare with these last mentioned stimuli the
following paragraphs CCLXXV. CCCLXXVIII. CCLXXIX. p.
. In this state of convalescence, the same management, which was formerly
mentioned upon the going off of sthenic diseases, perfectly applies The
convalescent state from either of the two general forms of diseases, or from
local ones, the effect of which had drawn the whole system into consent, is
much the same; being a state of some remaining debility in all; in the sthenic
from the excitement either going too low, by the remedies being pushed to some
excess, or not equally diffused over all the parts in consequence of the
natural supports only beginning to be brought fully into play; in the asthenic
from the perfect point of health being not quite gained, either from the
stimulant remedies not having been carried exactly up to 40, or from some of
them having been carried further than the wasted excitability could receive
them with invigorating effect, and thereby an inequality left upon the whole.
The convalescence, from the general effects upon the constitution sometimes
arising from local diseases, is to be explained upon the principles laid down,
with respect to the two other cases of convalescence.
.

CCCXII. The stimulant plan of cure, in all its parts, is new, whether the
reasoning part, or the merely practical be regarded; and, whether the cause and
the exciciting hurtful powers, or the indication of cure and the remedies, be
considered. May it, therefore, be put as a question, whether the whole
doctrine, which has hitherto been delivered, has, at last, brought forward
clear proof, that the art of medicine, hitherto conjectural Celsus says, ars
nostra conjecturalis est. And every man of sense, whether of the profession, or
out of it, has held the same sentiments of it. Nothing is more glaring than the
contractions in medical writings and reasoning of every kind, nothing ever
could be more incoherent. If a piece of knowledge, that sets out with a fixed
principle, which applies to all the parts of the detail, while they reflect on
it, both illustration and confirmation, be entitled to be considered as a
science, the reader is desired to consider, how far that criterion will apply
to this doctrine. The pedantry of mathematicians has contributed as much to
bring their science into disgrace, as any other circumstance, particularly in
allowing no sort of probation, but that which is made out by lines and
diagrams; while, except the elements of that science, every application of that
department of knowledge has led to as many false conclusions as any other. If
they will not allow the proof, that arises from our feelings, compared with
those of all men, whose organs of sense are not deranged, what will they make
of their own axioms? They must admit of other probation; while human reason
holds its reign, truth and falsehood will be discriminated, without regard to
such empty and useless prepossessions.
, inconsistent with itself, altogether incoherent, is now reduced to an exact
science, proved not by mathematical principles, which is only one kind of
probation, but by physical ones, and established by the certain testimony of
our senses, nay, and by the very axioms of the mathematical elements?

CHAP. XII.
As the Action of all the other P^wers, that act upon living Bodies, is the
same, that that of the Remedies is also the same.
CCCXII. AS it is sound certain, and proved, that the common effect of all the
exciting powers is precisely the same, to wit, the production of the phoenomena
peculiar to life, that is, that sense, motion, intellectual operation, and
passion and emotion, are the same; for what else is the effect of heat, of
food, of seasoned food, of drink, of the blood, of the colorless fluids
secreted from it, and of the air, among external bodies; what else in the
functions of the living body itself, is the effect of muscular contraction, of
thought, of the passions, and of sensation, but to excite, preserve, and
continue as the sustaining cause of those functions in common to animals? And,
as it is from that evident, that the operation of all the same powers is also
the same; (for it must be granted, that the same cause by an universal law in
nature, tends to the same effect See par. XX. with the annexed note.
: and further, as the operation betwixt cause and effect depends upon
stimulating See XIX. and XXII.
, and that stimulus produces all the phoenomena of life, health, disease, and
those intermediate degrees between both, which are called predispositions See
XXIII.
; from those certain and demonstrated facts it follows, and must be admitted,
that the operation of the remedies, both in sthenic and asthenic diseases is
the same. For, if there is no difference betwixt health and sthenic diseases,
except an excess of excitement in the latter, and none betwixt the former and
asthenic diseases, but deficient excitement in these last, what else can the
operation of the remedies, to remove sthenic diseases be, but to diminish, and
of those that remove the asthenic, but to increase the excitement See LXXXVIII.
.

CCCXIII. Whatever thing produces the same effect as another, or several
things, it must be the same thing as each of them, each of them the same thing
as it, and every individual of them the same thing as every other individual.

z. In sthenic diseases, bleeding See CCLXXXI.
, vomiting, and purging See CCLXXXIII.
, sweating abstinence See CCLXXXIV
, rest of body and mind See CCLXXXV.
tranquillity with respect to passion, all th^se restore health by nothing else
but a diminution of excitement.

CCCXIV. In asthenic diseases, the administration first of diffusible
stimulants, for the purposes of gradually bringing back the appetite for the
greatest remedy, food, as well as keeping the food upon the stomach, and of
assisting in the digestion of it See CCCXIV. (...).
, then the application of heat See CCCII.
, then the use of the less diffusible and more durable stimulants, as animal
food, without and with seasoning, wine, gestation, gentle exercise See CCCII.
CCCIII.
, moderate sleep, pure air, exertion of mind, exertion in passion and emotion,
an agreeable exercise of the senses, all those reproduce health, by no other
operation, but that of only increasing excitement.

CHAP. XIII.
That all the Powers, which support any Sort of Life, are the same, or the
fundamental Principle of Agriculture,
CCCXV. AGAIN, are not the powers, which produce perfect health, the same as
those, which, by an excess of force, produce sthenic diseases; by a deficiency
of force, asthenic, as well as the predispositions to both, are they not the
same, with no other variation but that of degree See XXIII. LXXIII.
?

CCCXVI. Further, as we learn from the whole doctrine delivered above, the
hurtful exciting powers, which produce sthenic diseases, are the remedies of
asthenic; and those which produce the latter, are the remedies of the former
See LXXXIX. XC. XCI. XCII. XCIV.
.

CCCXVII. All the powers, therefore, that support any state of life, are the
same in kind, only varying in degree; and the proposition is true, of every
^ort of life, to its full extent over the animal creation.

Such is the life of animals See from X. to XIII. inclusive.
. Concerning which, all that has been said applies to the life of vegetables.

CCCXVIII. Accordingly, as animals, in every state of life, have their exciting
powers See LXII. LXVII. LXVIII. LXIX. LXXIII. CXII. to an CXLVII.
in predispositions and diseases, their hurtful exciting powers See the same.
in the cure of both those, their indications, and remedies adapted to each See
LXXXVIII. LXXXIX. XC. XCI.
; all that, in every respect, is precisely the case in plants.

CCCXIX. The powers that support plants, in every state of life, are heat, air,
moisture, light, some motion, and their internal juices.

CCCXX. The action of plants also consists in stimulus See XVII XIX. and notes.
; by means of which, the phoenomena peculiar to that sort of life, sense, some
motion, and verdure, are excited: and the cause of this state is excitement, an
effect in common to all exciting powers See Part I. Chap. II.
.

CCCXXI. Nay, in this case too the exciting powers, when applied in due
proportion, produce health; but their too great or too sparing action occasions
diseases, or predisposition to diseases; of which the former depend on an
excessive, the latter upon a deficiency of stimulus. Accordingly, excess or
scantiness of moisture, excessive heat or cold, by an equality of hurtful
operation, lead to disease and death, indirectly or directly. And, as the rays
of the sun or darkness, when their operation is either too great, or too long
continued, prove debilitating, the former indirectly, the latter directly; so
the alternate succession of night to day, of darkness to night, seems to be the
effect of an intention in nature, to prevent too great an effulgence of the
light of day, or too long a continuance of it, from stimulating either in
excess or in ultimate excess, and thereby inducing sthenic diseases, or those
of indirect debility; or to prevent an excess, or long continuance of darkness
from producing direct debility, and the diseases peculiar to it Chap. IV. We
have no less proof, than that of the universal feeling of mankind, of the truth
of what has been advanced, with respect to the stimulus of light and the
debilitating effect of darkness.
.

CCCXXII. Nor do plants want their excitability, which, equally as in animals,
is not different in different parts of its seat; nor is made up of parts, but
one uniform, undivided, property over the whole system See Part I Chap. IV.
. The effect of which is, that, to whatever part of a plant any exciting power
is applied, its operation, whether in excess, in due proportion, or in
under-proportion, immediately affects the excitability over the whole.

CCCXXIII. This effect is also produced with the same inequality as in animals,
being, for instance, greater in any part to which its exciting power is
directly applied, than in any other equal part. And, as there are two reasons
for that fact in animals, the direct impression of the power upon the part more
affected, and a greater energy of the excitability of a part or relation to
which it is so applied, than on that of any other equal part See XLIX. and
addition L. LI.
; the very same is the fact with respect to plants. Further, as the
excitability bears a greater relation to the impression of the exciting powers,
on the brain, the stomach, and intestines, than on any of most of the other
parts; so the part in plants, that corresponds to these parts, is the root,
which is affected in the highest degree by the exciting powers. It is the root
of plants, in preference to any of their other parts, to which the conflux of
moisture is made. The heat there is the best, which is neither excessive, and
therefore liable to produce sthenic affection, nor ultimately excessive, and
therefore ready to induce indirect debility (both which disadvantages are
prevented by the depth of the ground); nor deficient, or what is called cold,
which would bring on direct debility Hence it would appear, that it should be a
general rule in ploughing and harrowing to adapt the depth, where the seed is
to be laid, to the state of the surrounding temperature. It would seem, when
other circumstances are equal, that the seeds of plants may more safely lie
superficially in warm than in cold countries. The same fact seems to be
favored by the difference of perfection that planted and natural woods attain
in cold countries; the former, the seeds of which are lodged in a certain
depth, t^rning to better account than the latter, which rise from seeds that
have randomly been scattered upon the surface. Might not the hills in the west
of Scotland, upon some such principle, be made useful oak forests?
.

CCCXXIV. But the only use of the soil, through the pores of which the powers
that have been mentioned penetrate, is to furnish that sort of a strainer, by
which the powers may neither, from the pores being too patulous, go down in too
great quantity, and produce first a sthenic, or too luxuriant a state of the
plant, and then indirect debility; nor, from the contractedness of the pores,
be insufficiently admitted to the root, and occasion indirect debility, or the
decaying state of a plant But that the soil is not otherwise necessary to the
production of some degree of vegetable life, is proved by plants often living,
to a certain degree, in pure water. That, however, it is useful as a filter, is
proved by the good effect of ploughing, of braking the clods, of dividing the
tough clay by lime and other absorbent earths, and by these means relaxing the
pores: On the other hand, we have proof of the same thing in the success of
contracting the pores by making ground, naturally too friable, more tenacious
with dung, and covering light ground with rags and stones, and thereby keeping
in both heat and moisture.

CCCXXV. From this view of the facts, the reason is evident, why every sandy as
well as clay soil, when the former has not received, and the latter parted with
its toughness, is barren and unfruitful. Hence it is, that very hot summers and
countries are hurtful to clay grounds, by shutting up the pores; and
serviceable to friable and lean grounds, by diminishing their porosity. Hence,
dry seasons are suitable to low-lying rich grounds, which, from all quarters,
conduct a quantity of moisture around the roots of the plants; while rainy
seasons are those that answer in grounds that are high and of a thin soil.
Declivities facing the north, which are commonly of a thin and poor soil, are
cherished and protected by hedges and clumps of trees, and a great number of
bare stones, covering every thing, which some persons, of more industry than
sense, often remove with hurtful effect; their good effect being to give heat
and keep in moisture. But in those places, the declivity of which looks toward
the south, there is not equal occasion for such protection from cold and
dryness, as they, from their more happy situation, are cherished by the sun,
de^ended from the cold winds, and exposed to those which blow from the southern
points that are seldom too dry While the northern winds, that is, the wind due
north, and all the intermediate ones in every point of the compass from due
east to due west, are cold and dry, and commonly of a tendency to bring snow;
the southern, or the winds that blow from any point of the compass toward the
south, from the same points of due east to due west, are as commonly warm and
moist, and often productive of mild fertilizing rains.
.

CCCXXVI. To return, from this digression on agriculture, to our proper
subject; from what has been said upon cultivation and nature of plants, we
learn, that their life is similar to that of animals; that every thing vital in
nature is governed by excitement, which the exciting powers only afford; that
there is in no living, system, whether of the animal or vegetable kind, any
inherent power necessary to the preservation of life; that the same powers
which form life at first, and afterward support it, have at last a tendency to
produce its dissolution; that life, the prolongation of life, its decay and
death, are all states equally natural; that every living system lives in that
which procreates; that the generations of animals and vegetables are in that
way renewed, that the system of nature remains, and maintains an eternal
vigor; in one word, that all the phoenomena of nature are fabricated by one
single organ No discovery, of any importance or extent over nature, has yet
been made, that does not warrant, as far as the smallness of the number of such
discoveries go, the truth of this assertion. See the Introduction (...)
Observations.
.

There are many circumstances that give reason to believe, that this globe has
undergone great changes, and that whatever is now sea, has been land; whatever
is land at present, has been sea; and that the fossil kingdom of nature has not
been more retentive of the respective form of each of its individuals. But
whether the last, like animals and plants, have a sort life, so as, after their
manner, to be produced into living existence, to grow, to run through a period
equally without growth and diminution of bulk, to decay, to die, and, in death
lose their proper form; the great duration of their age, and the shortness of
ours, deprive us of any possibility of learning.

CCCXXVII. As all the motions of the planets, which latter were formed to
remain and continue their courses for ever, depend upon this one principle, to
proceed straight onward, according to the manner in which all projectiles move,
and then by the influence of gravity, which affects them all, to be pulled
downwards, and thereby, upon the whole, thrown into circular motions; so, in
the lesser and living bodies with which those greater bodies are filled, that
is, animals and plants, of which the whole species remain though the
individuals of each species die; whatever is the cause of their functions,
whatever gives commencement and perfection to these, the same weakens, and, at
last, extinguishes them. It is not, therefore, true, that some powers are
contrived by nature for the preservation of life and health, others to bring on
diseases and death. The tendency of them all is indeed to support life, but in
a forced way, and then to bring on death, but by a spontaneous operation.

PART THE THIRD.
OF GENERAL DISEASES. THE FIRST FORM, OR STHENIC DISEASES.
CHAP. XV.
CCCXXVIII. IN every sthenia, in all sthenic diseases, in the whole first form
of diseases See above par. LXIX. LXXXVIII. CXLVIII. CLI. CCLI. Chap. IX.
, an universal criterion is increased excitement over the whole system,
evidenced, during the predisposition, by an increase of the functions of body
and mind See par. CLI. throughout.
, and demonstrable, after the arrival of disease, by an increase of some of the
functions, a disturbance of others, and a diminution of others; in such sort,
that the two latter are easily perceived to arise from the hurtful powers that
produce the former, and to depend upon their cause. As by that common bond of
union the diseases of this form are connected together; so

CCCXXIX. There are certain circumstances, by which they are distinguished by a
difference of their degree: for, there are some sthenic diseases, accompanied
with pyrexia See par. LXVIII. and the subjoined note, for the meaning of
pyrexia, which will be just now repeated.
and the inflammation of some external part; there are others without the
latter of these, and others without both.

CCCXXX. The general sthenic diseases, without pyrexia and inflammation, are
some of them called phlegmasiae, others exanthemata. But they will all, without
distinction, be treated here according to their rank in excitement, from the
highest to the lowest degree of excitement.

CCCXXXI. The phlemasiae and exanthematic diseases have the following symptoms
in common to them. The first of these is that degree of sthenic diathesis, that
distinguishes predisposition From the first deviation from perfect health to
the commencement of actual sthenic disease, the sthenic diathesis takes place
in an increasing scale from 40 to 55.
. This diathesis upon the formation of the disease, is succeeded by shivering,
a sense of cold, languor, and a certain feeling like that which we have in
fatigue from labor, called by physicians, lassitude. The pulse at first, in
every case, and in mild ones through their whole course is moderately frequent,
and, at the same time, strong and hard; the skin is dry, and there is a
retention of other excretions Such as that by the belly, and that which pours
out the saliva and mucus, and forms the matter of expectoration.
: The urine is red; there is great heat and often thirst.

CCCXXXII. The symptoms peculiar to phlegmasiae The phlegmasiae are sthenic
diseases, accompanied with inflammation in an external part, as has been said
somewhere before, according to the definition of nosologists. But, as there is
no difference betwixt them and synocha or the catarrh, which latter are
unaccompanied with inflammation, we therefore pay no regard to the distinction;
and shall regard nothing either in these or any other diseases, but what is
constituted by a real difference of excitement. It is the excitement by which
we are to be guided through our whole distribution of diseases.
, are an inflammation of an external part, or an affection nearly allied to it;
while the general affection, for the most part, precedes this local one, and
never succeeds to it Long before any part of this doctrine was discovered, when
I was in search of certain facts respecting peripneumony and pleuritis, I
discovered one which I was not looking for, of more importance than all the
rest put together. It had been asserted, by most systematics and all the
nosologists, that the primary symptom in the phlegmasiae was the inflammation
of a part, I saw that was not true with respect to rheumatism, in which the
general affection or pyrexia often rages one, two, or three days before the
sign of inflammation, pain, is perceived in any of the joints. I could also
discern, that from the moment the pain and inflammation appeared in erysipelas,
or the rose, there was also the general affection equally conspicuous. In
short, in no one of that set of diseases, did the fact appear that the
inflammation was primary, and the pyrexia, or affection of the whole system
dependent upon it. But as peripneumony was said in Edinburgh to be an
exception, the detection I made equally disproved that. In all the works of
Morgagni, where perineumony and erysipelas are treated, and in all those of
Trillerus, a professed writer on that subject, and in a thesis in Sandiforth's
Thesaurus, taken from no less than 400 cases of that disease (for they are now
by others, as well as me, considered as one), I found that in somewhat more
than one-half of the given n^mber, which was very respectable, the general
affection appeared from one to three days before the pain came on, and in all
the rest of the cases, though for any thing these authors said to the contrary,
they might sometimes have come on together, yet, that there was not one, in
which it could be fairly alleged, that the pain was the first and primary
appearance. Hence I found, that all the theories raised upon that hypothesis of
course fell to the ground. Indeed the fact is quite consistent with every one
here.
. This general affection, for the greater convenience of distinguishing it from
fevers, is to be denominated pyrexia Of this designation warning has been given
more than once. See, note at CCCXXIX.
. In the exanthematic sthenic diseases, an eruption of spots or pustles, more
or less crowded, according to the degree of the diathesis, covers and
diversifies the skin. The eruption appears upon the occasion of a foreign,
contagious matter, having been taken into the body, and detained below the
cuticle.

CCCXXXIII. The explanation of all those symptoms easily flows from the
doctrine delivered above. The sthenic diathesis in the manner, that has been so
fully explained See above all the paragraphs, where the operation of the powers
producing sthenic diathesis, are accounted for.
precedes. The characteristics of the pulse are never to be referred to the
affection of a part, having been demonstrated to arise from the diathesis See
also par. CLV. and CLVI. and particularly CLXXIV.
.

CCCXXXIV. The frequency of the pulse in sthenic diseases is moderate, because,
while the stimulus in the system cannot fail to produce some frequency, the
quantity of blood, to be thrown into quick motion, sets bounds to it and
prevents its rising into quickness. But, at the same time, it is evident, that
a quantity so great cannot be transmitted with the same celerity, as an under
proportion In, fevers and other asthenic diseases of great debility, from the
weakness of the stomach and other digestive organs, and the small quantity of
nutrient matter taken in, the quantity of blood which is diminished in every
one of those diseases, cannot be more than one-third less than that which
overfills the vessels in sthenic diseases. Consequently, by a given power, it
may be propelled in the same proportion, that is, one-third faster than in the
sthenic diseases, which also appears in fact; for while 100 beats in a minute
is a frequent pulse in sthenic diseases, till their approach or actual
conversion to indirect debility, the common frequency in fevers and the other
high asthenic diseases, is 150 beats in the same time.
. The strength of the pulse is occasioned by the degree of excitement in the
moving fibers of the vessels, which is commonly called their tone, and by that
of their density considered as simple solids See above LIX. LX. and LXI.
. The hardness of the sthenic pulse is nothing else, than the continuance for
some time of each strong contraction, closely embracing a great column of
blood, and, thereby, as it were, resembling a stretched rope See par. CLV. If
it should be alleged, that, though in fevers and the other cases mentioned
just now in the note ( a), the deficient quantity of blood to be put in motion
will account for the greater celerity of motion, than in the diseases which
make the present subject; still the great weakness of the heart, for want of
the stimulus of a due quantity of blood, as well as of many others, should
overbalance the effect arising from the small quantity to be moved. But the
answer to that objection is easy. It arises from the explanation of the
strength and hardness of the pulse just now mentioned in the text. The febrile
pulse is indeed one-third quicker than the sthenic pyrexial, but it is weak,
and small, and soft, while the other is strong, and full, and hard. An equal
force then of the heart to that in the sthenic case is not required to account
for the difference of the effect. A third less of blood, with an equal force
behind, will be driven not only one-third faster, but with strength and
hardness. The want of these two (...) is to be set to the account of the
heart's greater weakness. Though the blood then be driven one-third quicker,
yet the impulse communicated upon the whole is one-third less, as the
characteristics of both (...) of pulse readily explain to us.
.

CCCXXXV. That this is the exact state of the arteries is proved by the great
quantity of food taken with a good appetite, before the arrival of the disease,
and during the period of predisposition; it is proved by the same and other
powers, giving an unusually great excitement over the whole system See the
whole of the first Chapter of Part II, upon the powers producing sthenic
diathesis.
, and, therefore, among their other effects increasing the digestive energy;
and it is proved by evacuant, with other debilitating remedies, both preventing
and removing the diseases. The confounding, therefore, this state with one
diametrically opposite Which authors and too many practitioners have
universally done, in jumbling proper ^evers with the present diseases, under
the vague and false denominations of febrile or feverish diseases. In nosology
the synoc^us is conjoined with typhus, the gangrenous sore-throat, which is a
typhus fever, with the common sthenic inflammatory pyrexia.
, which has hitherto been an universal practice, was a very capital blunder,
and could not miss of producing the worst consequences, by equally perverting
the theories and actual practice of the art.

CCCXXXVI. The (...) and (...) of cold depend for th^^r cause upon the dryness
of the skin. The languor and feeling of lassitude point out a higher degree of
excitement in the brain and fibers of the muscles, than can be conveniently
borne by the excitability, confined within certain boundaries See above CLIV.
. They are therefore functions impaired from a stimulant, not from a
debilitating cause See above par. CLXVI.
.

CCCXXXVII. The dryness of the skin is occasioned by the great excitement and
density of the fibers that encircle the extreme vessels, diminishing their
diameters to such a degree, that the imperceptible vapor of perspiration
cannot be taken into them, or, if taken in, cannot be transmitted See LXIX. and
CXIII.
. This state is not spasm, is not constriction from cold, but a sthenic
diathesis, somewhat greater on the surface, than in any other part. The
stimulant energy of heat, especially after the application of cold, which is
otherwise a powerful exciting cause of sthenic diseases, is applied to this
part with more force than to any of the interior parts, and increases the sum
total of stimulant operation See XXXVII. (...). and CXIII. just now quoted.
.

CCCXXXVIII. The same, in general, is the cause of the temporary retention of
the other excretions See CCCXXXI. and note ( d); and also the par. CLIX. CLX.
CLXIII.
; only that the operation of heat, just now mentioned in the CCCXXXVII. and the
reason is, that heat being stationary in the interior parts, has not that force
which it has upon the external surface. See above par. CXIII.
, is foreign from the persent explanation; and on that account, the diathesis,
that affects the interior vessels, is more gentle. Th^se vessels, for that
reason, and because they are naturally of a larger diameter, are sooner relaxed
in these diseases, than the pores upon the skin It is reasonable to think, that
vessels, which pour out a watery fluid, have a larger diameter th^n th^se
which, like the perspiratory, even in their healthy state, only transmit an
imperceptible vapor.
.

CCCXXXIX. The redness of the urine is owing to the general diathesis affecting
the vessels that secret it, and proving an obstacle to the secretion See par.
CLXIII.
. Hence arises the straining of the fluid to be secreted to distend the small
vessels Or tubuli uri^i^eri.
, and the counter straining of the moving fibers, by their contractions, to
diminish the cavities which the distention increases; and, in so far as they
perform the function of simple fibers, to resist the distention. But, as, in
this forcible action of the vessels, the cohesive force of all the simple
solids yields somewhat, the effect comes to be the transmission of some
particles of blood. This transmission happens not at first, because the
distention does not suddenly, but after some time, overpower the cohesion of
the mass of simple solids.

CCCXL. The cause of the great heat is the interruption of the perspiration,
preventing the heat generated in the inner parts of the system to pass off by
the skin.

CCCXLI. The thirst is occasioned by the sthenic diathesis, closing up the
excretory vessels of the throat, and there opposing the excretion of the
peculiar fluid See par. CLIX.
. And the (...), by dissipating what fluid is excreted, contributes to the
effect.

CCCXLII. The inflammation and affection nearly allied to it mentioned above in
par. CCCXXXII.
, whether of a catarrhal or of any other nature, is a part of the sthenic
diathesis, greater in the affected, than any other equal, part of the system
CLXVIII. CLXIX. CLXX. CLXXI.
: Which is manifested by the exciting powers, also in this case acting upon the
whole system, by the symptoms of the diseases showing an affection in common to
the whole, and by the remedies driving that affection, not from the inflamed
part only, but from the whole system LXXXIX. See also part first, Chap. IV.
.

CCCXLIII. The general affection, for the most part, precedes that confined to
one part, or is sunchronous with it, never comes after it, because its cause,
the excessive excitement See LXII. LXIX.
, producing the diathesis, exists before the disease itself See CLXXIV.
; and, though it forms the rudiments of the affection of the part during the
predisposition See above CLXIX.
, yet it does not, at that time, form that affection itself, and not always
even during the disease, but only in a certain high degree both of the disease
and of the particular affection itself See above CLXVIII. (...).
. Hence, when the diathesis is great, the affection of the part is in
proportion as in peripneumony and rheumatism, inflammatory sore throat, and
mild erysipelas, sore throat.
and slight under a lesser degree of the diathesis as in the sthenic.
; while in a moderate and gentle diathesis it does not happen at all As in
synocha, or the common inflammatory fever and catarrh.
, and for this reason, that a high degree of diathesis is necessary to the
formation of it. Thus in peripneumony, where the diathesis is the greatest, and
in rheumatism, where it is next in greatness, the inflammation is found
proportionably great This proposition does not go so far as to assert, that
there may not be a sthenic disease, without any actual inflammation, but with
an affection of a part nearly allied to it, which depends upon an equally high
diathesis as either peripneumony or rheumatism, and even higher than the
latter. Such we find, as I have formerly said (CLVII. and CLVIII.) in
phrenitis. But the meaning is, that the inflammation, when it does, happen, is
always in proportion to the degree of diathesis.
. And even in the measles, the danger of which turns entirely upon the degree
of sthenic diathesis, the danger of inflammation is equal, by which, and often
in a high degree, the lungs themselves are affected. Synocha is never
phrenitic, but when a great diathesis occurs, threatening the brain with
inflammation, or the danger of it. Nor is there any danger to be apprehended in
erysipelas or the rose, or St Antony's ^ire.
, even when its inflammation affects the face, but when the pyrexia is violent.
And the mildness of the diathesis ensures a good termination. Simple synocha is
nothing else but a phlegmasia, consisting of a pyrexia and diathesis,
inadequate, upon account of their small degree, to the production of
inflammation. Yet, as all the hurtful powers producing it, and all its remedies
are precisely the same, with those of any phlegmasia; the separating it from
them, and uniting it with fevers, which are diseases o^ extreme debility, was
an unpardonable blunder This has been more than once hinted at, and once a
little above. The Nosologists have excluded synocha from their order of
phlegmasiae, because forsooth, though it was in every other respect the same,
it wanted the inflammation of a part, and they united it with proper fevers,
though in the powers producing it, in its proper cause, and in the remedies
that remove it, it was in every respect diametrically opposite to those
diseases. But their rule of judging was different from ours.
; and so much the more so, that inflammation, which was falsely supposed
essential to the nature of the phlegmasiae, does take place in it, as often as
the diathesis, necessary to produce it, is present What is a peripneumony, a
rheumatism, or any phlegmasia, but a synocha, with a diathesis sufficient to
produce inflammation?
. Yet this fact, upon account of another blunder, neither of a slighter nature,
nor of less hurful consequence, that of supposing inflammation the cause of the
phlegmasiae, could not be discerned. In fine, to remove all doubt of
inflammation being compatible with the nature of catarrh, but commonly not
taking place in it, upon account of the moderate general diathesis, upon which
it usually depends; even in it, as often as the diathesis rises high, which
sometimes happens, when the proper plan of cure for it has been neglected, and
the effect of the exciting hurtful powers has been carried to excess, an
inflammation, and a formidable one indeed, arises, often affecting the throat
When that happens it is still commonly a mild disease, as will be shown by and
by.
, and sometimes the lungs, and producing there an affection rising to all the
rage of a peripneumony.

CCCXLIV. It is in vain to talk of a thorn thrust under the nail, wounding it,
superinducing inflammation upon the wound, and spreading a similar affection
along the arm to the shoulder, and a pyrexia ^ver the whole body, as an
illustration and proof of the manner, in which the phlegmasiae arise from
inflammation. For nothing like a phlegmasia follows this, or any similar
affection of a part, unless the sthenic diathesis previously happens to have
taken place, and is now upon the eve of spontaneously breaking out into some
one or other of its respective diseases. But, without that diathesis, no
general affection takes place, and if an opposite diathesis be pr^^^^t when
such an accident happens, an opposite general affection will be the
consequence, to wit, a typhus fever, arising as a symptom of gangrene It is
with much regret, that I should have had occasion to observe the bad, and too
often ^atal, consequence (...) such l^^al affections, without discrimination of
the habit with which they may (...) The disease is treated by evacuation and
^^ar^ing, even in (...) the most weakened, and drink is with^ld from (...) even
the most accustomed to it. The disease increases, and, as if that were for want
of more such treatment, the same treatment is (...) in (...) closes the scene.
, and dangerous to life.

CCCXLV. That the affection of the part depends upon the general affection is
proved by the frequent occurrence of inflammation, without being followed by
any phlegmasia. Which happens, as in the case just now mentioned, as often as
the general diathesis is absent, or the inflamed part is not an internal one
and of high sensibility See above CLXXI.
Accordingly, all the examples of phlegmone, all those of ^ryth^ma or
erysipelas, without general diathesis See also par. LXXXI. The Nosologists,
under their genus of phlegmone which in one of them is divided into two
species, proper phlegmone, and erythma, have racked together a number of local,
and most of them insignificant affections, which they have considered as laying
the foundation of their phlegmasi^e, or general sthenic diseases with an
inflammation in a part. But will any man in his senses see any connection
betwixt chill-^la^^s, which is one of them, or anthrax, which is a local
symptom of the plague, or the slight inflammation upon the eye, called a stie,
or the inflammation in the groins of children from their being sealded by their
urine, or the bites of insects, the effects of which are confined to the bit
part; will he see any connection betwixt these and a peripneumony; which arises
from hurtful powers affecting the whole system, and no part in particular; and
is cured by remedies that affect the whole system, and the inflamed part not
more, nor even so much as many others? All these, however, have been made the
prototypes of inflammation, by which they meant their phlegmasiae; as if there
were nothing to be regarded in them but the inflammation, which, in fact, is
their most insignificant part, bearing no higher proportion to the sum of
morbid state over the system than that of 6 to 3000, or even less. See above
Part first, Chap. IV. and particularly par. L.
, are foreign from the phlegmasiae, absurdly conjoined with them, and more
absurdly still considered as their prototypes; being in fact all only local
affections, or symptoms of other diseases. This conclusion is not weakened by a
certain resemblance of diseases with inflammation in an internal part to the
phlegmasiae; th^se diseases being neither pr^^eded by the usual hurtful powers,
that produce either the phlegmasiae, or any general disease whatever, nor cured
by the usual remedies of the latter. It was, therefore, a very bad mistake, and
of most hurtful consequence to the practice of cure, to enumerate among the
phlegmasiae those diseases, that arise from stimulants, acrids, and
compression, and are only curable by removing their local cause, which is
seldom effected by art See above par. LXXXI. Take for an example gastritis,
which the Nosologists have made one of their phlegmasiae, and put upon the same
footing with the peripneumony and the other diseases that may be admitted as
phlegmasiae. That affection is an inflammation in a portion of the stomach, in
consequence of a solution of continuity from the previous swallowing of ground
glass, small fish bones, a quantity of Cayen pepper; or symptomatic of a
schirrous obstruction and tumor. These, not the ordinary hurtful ones that
operate upon the whole system, as in the true phlegmasiae, are the powers that
induce that affection. It has no connection with the excitement, the affection
of which is only an effect of the locally stimulating power, and of the
sensibility of the stomach; its true cause being the solution of continuity or
obstruction, keeping up the inflammation; and its remedies such, as are adapted
to the removal of that local state. It may happen to a sound habit, where there
is no diathesis in any degree; in which case it is purely local; or it may
accidentally coincide with either diathesis; in which case it is a combination.
When the combination is with sthenic diathesis, debilitating evacuant remedies
can only palliate, but they bring life into danger when the asthenic diathesis
is present, which is 17 times out of 20 for the other.
.

CCCXLVI. It is not without good reason, that the appellation of pyrexia has
been given to the general affection, which appears in the phlegmasiae and
exanthemata; they being by it most advantageously distinguished on the one hand
from fevers, which are diseases of debility in extreme, and on the other from a
similar, but altogether different, affection, which is a symptom of local
diseases The general affection arising in the system from the effect of a thorn
pushed under the nail (see par. CCCXLIV. and note), and that occurring in the
gastritis, mentioned in the last paragraph of the text (see the note on that
paragraph) are good examples of cases, to which the term symptomatic pyrexia
should be applied.
, and may be called a symptomatic pyrexia.

CCCXLVII. The true sthenic diseases See above CCCXXIX.
accompanied, except one, with pyrexia See par. CCCXXXII.
and external inflammation See CLXVIII.
, are peripneumony, phrenitis, the small pox, the measles, as often as th^se
two last are violent, the severe erysipelas, rheumatism, the mild erysipelas,
and the cy^anche tonsillaris. Those free of inflammation are catarrh, simple
synocha, the scarlet fever, the small pox, the measles; when in the two latter
cases, the eruption consists only in a few pustules,

The Description of Peripneumony.
CCCXLVIII. The symptoms peculiar to peripneumony The symptoms in common to it
and the other diseases of the same form, ^^^^^erated in the last paragraph,
have been described in par. CCCXXXI. These peculiarly distinguishing the
phlegmasiae and exanthemata, that is the diseases either accompanied with
inflammation, or an approach to it, are (...) par. CCCXXXII.
(under which pleurisy, and, as far as it is a general disease, carditis, are
comprehended), are pain somewhere in the region of the chest, often changing
its seat; difficult breathing; cough, for the most part bringing up an
expectoration, and sometimes a mixture of blood in the matter of expectoration.

CCCXLIX. The seat of the disease is the whole body, the whole nervous system
See par. XLVII. XI. VIII. XLIX. LIVE. LV. and not the inflamed portion in the
lungs, according to the common opinion.
; which is proved by the disease being produced by an increase of the
diathesis, which took place in the predisposition, and by no new circumstance
See above LXXV. LXXVI.
by the inflammation within the chest, for the most part following the pyrexia
at a considerable interval of time, and never preceding it See above CCCXXXII.
and the note ( b).
, and by bleeding and other remedies of similar operation, which affect not the
inflamed part, more than any other equally distant from the ce^^er of activity,
removing the disease. The proper seat of the inflammation, which is only a part
of the general diathesis, is the substance of the lungs, and a production of
the pleura, covering their surface, or any part of that membrane, whether the
part lining the ribs, or that containing, within the external surface of it,
the thoracic viscera, different in different cases, and in the same case at
different times.

CCCL. Pain, in some part of the chest, depends upon an inflammation of the
corresponding internal parts just now mentioned See above par. CLXXIV.
, which is proved by dissection; only that it is oftener occasioned by an
adhesion of the lungs to the pleura costalis, seldom to an inflammation of that
membrane, as we learn from the same evidence

CCCLI. When the inflammation takes place on the surface of the lungs, it is
impossible it can be confined either to the substance of the lungs, or the
membrane covering their surface. For how can any person suppose, that the
points of the same vessels, either as distributed upon the membrane, or
plunging into the substance of the lungs, or emerging from it, can alone be
inflamed without a communication of the affection to the next points Yet one
Nosologist, upon that very supposition, makes two orders of phlegmasiae, one
seated on the membrane, the other in the interior surface of each viscus. Into
this error, he had been led, by observing, that, after death, the interior
substance of the liver exhibited signs of previous inflammation. And, as other
dissections showed the membrane upon other occasions to have been in a state of
inflammation, he thence drew his rash conclusion. But it is to be observed,
that the first mentioned state of the liver was not a phlegmasiae at all, as it
had not during life exhibited any of the symptoms of that disease, or even
given any sign of the presence of inflammation. It is a case, then, we have
nothing to do with upon this subject, even so far as it applies to the liver.
But the extending the application to all the viscera, which he was pleased to
make the seats of some phlegmasiae or other, was looseness of reasoning, and
carelessness of matter of fact, in extreme. A gentleman, whose works have
lately been buried, without any struggle or signs of life, but that of a feeble
unintelligible sound from within the tomb, which no living reason could make
any sense of in their life time, took it into his head to maintain (for the
sake of seeming to differ with men of name and reputation, his highest
ambition), that the inflammation in the phlegmasiae was always seated in the
membrane: The answer to which is given in the text.
. The distinction, therefore, of the inflammation accompanying the phlegmasiae
into peren^hyma^ose, or that affecting the substance (...) the viscus, and into
membranous; as well as the notion which makes the latter case universal, is
equally remote from the truth. The reason of neither the membrane contiguous to
the lungs, nor the substance of the latter, being always inflamed, but of the
inflammation being sometimes communicated to some part of the neighboring
membrane, is explained by the vicinity of the part inflamed in the last case to
that which receives the air, therefore, varies in its temperature. So far is it
from being true, that this sort of inflammation can be confined to a few points
of the affected vessels (see the note here at ( h), that in fact we find it,
though not so often as has been supposed, sometimes in the mediastin^m,
sometimes in the external membrane of the pericardium, sometimes in the
superior membrane of the diaphragm. Boerhaave's notion of the translation of
inflammation from one viscus to another, was an error in the opposite extreme.


CCCLII. The pain often shifts its seat See above CCCXLVIII.
in the course of the disease, because its immediate cause, the inflammation,
is equally liable to change, being disposed to leave its first seat, or in part
to remain in it, while in its greatest part it rushes into another. Which is a
fact proved by the comparison of the known change of the pain with the traces
of inflammation in the corresponding parts, discovered after death Many such
are to be found in Morgagni, Bonnetus, and Liutad.


CCCLIII. This fact, added to those already produced, brings another solid
argument See all that has been said.
in refutation of the opinion of the disease being produced or kept up by
inflammation, or in any shape depending upon it; confirms that here advanced,
and proves that the inflammation is regulated by a strong general diathesis,
and directed by it sometimes to one part, sometimes to another; that, as
depending on that cause, it increases and is in a manner multiplied. And the
same conclusion is confirmed by the inflammation abating, becoming more simple,
and at last receding from every part it had occupied, in proportion to the
progress of the cure in relieving or removing the diathesis. The same fact is
confirmed by the nature of rheumatism, the pains of which are severer and
greater in number, in proportion as the diathesis runs higher; and milder and
fewer in proportion to its gentleness. These pains, that have their dependence
upon the general diathesis, and are a part of the general disease, ought to be
distinguished from local ones, which often occur, and may accidentally precede
this disease Stitches, as they are called, frequently happen from slight
accidents, and may appear before the arrival of rheumatism, but they should be
distinguished from the pains that arise from the diathesis, constituting that
disease; a distinction, that has seldom been attended to, for want of a right
principle to lead to such attention.


CCCLIV. The difficult breathing is owing to no fault in the lungs, as an
organ, to no defect of excitement in them, but to the air alone in inspiration,
by filling and distending its own, compressing the inflamed vessels.

CCCLV. The cause of the cough is a large secretion and excretion of the
exhalable fluid, and mucus, irritating the air vessels, increasing their
excitement, as well as that of all the powers, that enlarge the cavity of the
thorax^ then suddenly suspending it, and thus performing a full inspiration,
and a full expiration, partly in conjunction with the operation of the will See
above CLX. and CLXI.
.

CCCLVI. The cough is less or none at all at first; because, on account of a
strong diathesis occupying the extremities of the vessels, the same fluids flow
on in the form of an insensible vapor, are less irritating in that form, and
dismissed with less effort.

CCCLVII. Again, the cough is afterward followed by expectoration; because the
accumulated fluids, with their effect, the effort of coughing, are carried
forward in the rapid action of the air rushing out, as it were, in a torrent
See above par. CCXXXIX.
. And the mixture of blood with them points out the force of secretion formerly
explained.

CCCLVIII. The softness of the pulse, commonly taken into the definition of the
disease at least, when they called it peripneumony,
, has been here rejected, because the characteristics of the pulse do not
follow the inflammation, but the general diathesis See above CLV. CLXXIV.
. With respect to the diathesis, the proper language is, that the pulse,
instead of soft, is less hard; and when the effect, that the cure has produced
upon the pulse, is considered, it may then be said to be soft (...) universal
effect of sthenic diathesis to render the pulse hard in one degree or (...).
And peripneumony is not an exception from that fact. But the distinction arose
from the mistake of inflammation being the all, instead of an unimportant part
of, the disease.
.

CCCLIX. Nor is the varying feeling of pain, which is described as sometimes
acute, and pungent, sometimes obtuse, gravitative, and rather to be considered
as an uneasiness than pain, though immediately dependent upon the inflammation,
to be considered as of any consequence in pointing out the state or seat of the
inflammation: because, however great the inflammation is, wherever it is
seated, whatever danger it denounces, the only means of removing it, and of
averting the danger, is to remove the general diathesis. The notion, therefore,
of the membrane being inflamed, when the pain is acute, and the interior
substance, when it is obtuse, must be rejected as good for nothing, must be
guarded against as destructive See par CCCL^. and the note under it a^ ((...)).
. For often, when the disease has arrived at an advanced stage, a sudden
abatement of the pain taking place, without a proportional relief of the
breathing, to an unskilful person gives an appearance of a return of health.
But the cause of that, while it has nothing to do with the seat or sort of
inflammation, is that degree of excitement, which shows, that the excitability
is exhausted, the excitement come to an end, and that the vigor, before
excessive, is now converted into direct or indirect debility The direct
debility may be owing to the proper cure, which is directly debilitating (...)
too (...) to the indirect debility arising in the (...) of the disease, seldom
^ow to ^^^^^pharmac treatment. See above par. XLVII. and the subjoined notes.
. Hence arises in the vessels, especially the laboring vessels, in place of
the excessive excitement, with which they were before affected, no excitement
at all; and extreme laxity takes place of their former density. Hence, instead
of an excretion increased by violence, an immense discharge takes place without
force, without effort, and merely by the watery part of the fluid, from the
inert state of the vessels, leaving the more consistent; and a sudden
suffocation takes place, in consequence of an effusion of fluids from all
quarters into the air vessels.

CCCLX. The carditis, or inflammation of the heart, is a disease of rare
occurrence, is ill understood, and for the most part a local affection. When
the latter is the case, there is no use for the interference of a physician.
And, if ever it be a general disease, it admits of no other definition or cure
but those of peripneumony. From peripneumony then, as it arises from the same
antecedent hurtful powers, and is removed by the same remedies, it is not to be
separated.

The Description of Phrenitis.
CCCLXI. Phrenitis is one of the phlegmasiae See above par. CCCXLV^^.
, with a slight inflammatory or catarrhal affection of some one, or more
joints, or of the f^uces, with headache, redness of the face and eyes,
impatience of light and sound, watchfulness, and delirium.

CCCLXII. Inflammation, in its proper form, appears not in this case. And yet
there is an approach to inflammatory state in the joints, in the muscles, and
especially over the spine, or about the chest, or in the bottom of the throat;
or there is a catarrhal state, which is an affection depending, however, upon
the same cause, as inflammation, and only differing from it in being less.

CCCLXIII. The headache, and redness of the face and eyes, arise from an
excessive quantity of blood in the vessels of the brain and its membranes,
distending, stimulating in excess, exciting in excess, and contracting the
vessels, to a degree that gives pain See above CLVII. and CLVIII.
. To the production of which last inflammation is not necessary: independent of
which, this excessive action is painful, because it exceeds that mediocrity in
which agreeable sensation takes place See par. C^XXXII. CLXXXIII.
. The redness both points out and explains the over-proportion of blood. And
that the over-proportion gives pain by its distending operation, is shown by
the relief that bleeding and every thing that diminishes the quantity, and
moderates the impetus of the blood, administers.

CCCLXIV. It is the overabundance also that produces the impatience of light
and sound. For, as a certain impulse of the blood is necessary to the exercise
of every sense, by whe^ing the organ of sensation There is commonly in the
organ where any nicety of sense is to be exercised an extraordinary apparatus
of blood vessels. Blood flowing into these, increases, by its heat and the
stimulus of its motion, the sense, to which it is subservient.
; so, when the cause rises to excess, an equal increase of the effect must be
the consequence. But these very symptoms, with pain, arise in an opposite state
of excitement, to wit, the asthenic.

CCCLXV. The vigilance and delirium are occasioned by the same excess of
excitement, produced by the excessive stimulus of the abundance of blood and of
the other powers. Other hurtful powers, contributing their effect, are intense
thinking, and a high commotion of passion. Excited by those, no body, even in
health, sleeps; and, therefore, the wonder is the less, that a high degree of
them, and under the influence of a violent disease, should repel sleep. Both
increased watching and delirium are symptoms of disturbance.

An Explanation of the Sthenic Exanthemata.
CCCLXVI. The sthenic exanthemata, after the application of a contagious
matter, and of the usual hurtful powers which produce sthenic diathesis, appear
first in the form of a sthenic pyrexia, or synocha, and then after a space of
time, not certain to a nicety, are followed with small or larger spots.

CCCLXVII. That the exanthematic sthenic diseases differ not from the other
sthenic diseases not exanthematic, in any circumstance of consequence, is
proved by this strong argument; that, except the eruption and the phoenomena
peculiar to it, there is nothing in the symptoms, and except the contagion,
there is nothing in the hurtful exciting powers, but what happens in any
sthenic disease; and the preventatives, as well as the remedies, are the same
in all. While that is the state of the fact, it was the height of absurdity,
merely for the sake of the eruption and its peculiar phoenomena, to separate
the exanthematic from their kindred diseases, and to unite them with the most
opposite diseases both to them and to one another The nosologists have
separated the exanthematic diseases, real or imaginary, into a class or order
by themselves, which they have filled up with diseases, of which there is not
two, but the smallpox and measles, that have any other connection, than their
m^r^ eruptive appearance, while they are separated from others, with which, in
every respect, they have the most essential connection. Thus the smallpox and
measles are taken from the natural place to which they are here restored. And
it is unaccountable, that we should have it to say, that even erysipelas, which
has surely no right even to the slim distinction of eruptive, has also been
placed among them. Again, the plague, which is to all in^ents and purposes a
typhus fever, its eruptive part not always disjoining it from that, is
separated from it, though it is so nearly the same, scarcely excepting degree,
and conjoined with sthenic diseases of a diametrically opposite nature. And the
gangrenous sore-throat, which is also a typhus, has neither been placed among
^evers, in its proper place, nor among the exanthemata; to which the (...),
that it produces on the external surface according to their own rules of
arrangement, seemed better to entitle it than some others, especially the
erysipelas. And it again for there is no end of the confusion of this pretended
order of some physicians^, is conjoined not only as a genus with sthenic
diseases, but even as a species of one of those genera. The truth is, that
systemati^^, who were otherwise no nosologists, have made too much work about
eruptive and contagious diseases, and have never dived into the interior nature
either o^ them or almost of any other. They have all followed each other from
their first leader, and never once deigned to turn a glance of their eye upon
the phoenomena of nature as these arose before them. Hippocrates misled his
followers, they misled theirs from age to age, and they all misled the poor
nosologists. Who have laid on the cap-stone of the absurdity of the art, and,
having finished the fabric of folly, left mankind, if they are not pleased with
it, to look out at their leisure for a better and more solid.


. For how, when the usual plan of cure removes the effect of the eruption,
whatever that be, and thereby shows it to be the same, can any one imagine,
that the cause should be different and not precisely the same? unless we must
again have to do with those who maintain, that the same effect may flow from
different causes. Truly, the operation of contagion, in so far as it affects
general disease, is not of an opposite nature to the general sthenic operation,
but precisely the same.

CCCLXVIII. Contagion is a certain matter, imperceptible, of an unknown nature,
and like most of the phoenomena of nature, only in any measure open to our
enquiry in its evident effects. Taken from the body of one affected with it, or
from any gross matter (such as clothes or furniture, where it happens to have
been lurking), and received into a sound body, it ferments without any change
of the solids or fluids, it fills all the vessels, and then is gradually
ejected by the pores.

CCCLXIX. And, as no effect, except sthenic diathesis, follows it, and the
hurtful powers, that otherwise usually produce that diathesis, always precede
it, and an asthenic or debilitating plan of cure always, and only, succeeds in
removing it, and consequently its effect no ways differs from the diseases
hitherto mentioned; it is, therefore, with justice, that the diseases arising
from it, are conjoined with those others, as belonging to the same form.

CCCLXX. Betwixt them there is only this difference, that in the exanthematic
cases of sthenic disease, the matter requires some time to pass out of the
body, which time is different in different cases: and it passes out more
copiously or scantily, the more free or impeded the perspiration is See above
par. XXI. and LXXVI.
. But it is impeded by no spasm, by no constriction from cold, and only by the
prevalence of sthenic diathesis upon the surface of the body; as is evident
from this fact that cold, by its debilitating operation, procuring a free issue
for the matter, clearly promotes the perspiration See par. CXVII. CXVIII. CXX.
CXXI.
. And that it produces this effect, by diminishing the diathesis, not by
removing a spasm, has been demonstrated formerly. As the issue of the matter is
in this way promoted by inducing a free perspiration; so

CCCLXXI. Whatever part of it is detained below the cuticle, by that delay, it
acquires a certain acrimony, produces little inflammation, and conducts them,
when produced, to suppuration. Th^se, by irritating the affected part, create a
symptomatic pyrexia symptomatic sthenic diathesis, which should be
distinguished from the general pyrexia and general sthenic diathesis See above
par. CLXXV. and CCLCXVI.
.

CCCLXXII. The period of eruption is more or less certain, because the
operation of fermentation, being in some measure certain and uniform, to that
extent requires a certain uniform space of time, for being finished, diffused
over the system, and reaching the surface of it, as is attested by the effect.
Again, it is not exactly certain, because the perspiration, in the varying
state of vigor, that must occur, must, at different times, and under different
circumstances, be more vigorous or more languid.

CCCLXXIII. The pyrexia, symptomatic of the eruption, sometimes takes on the
form of an actual fever: The reason of which is, that the high degree of
stimulus, which the eruption throws upon the whole surface, produces ultimately
excessive excitement, and therefore, pu^s an end to it in the establishment of
indirect debility See par. CCXV. CCXVI.
.

The Description of the violent Smallpox.
CCCLXXIV. The violent smallpox is a sthenic exanthema, on the third or fourth
day of which, sometimes latter, small spots or points, inflamed, and by and by
to be transformed into exact pustules, break out; containing a liquor which,
generally on the eighth day after the eruption, often latter, is changed into
pus, and dwindles away in the form of crusts. The eruption, the degree of which
is always in proportion to that of the sthenic diathesis, in this case is the
greatest that ever occurs.

CCCLXXV. All these phoenomena are governed by the laws of fermentation, lately
mentioned See above par. CCCLXVIII.
. The number of pustules, being proportioned to the degree of diathesis, shows
that, without the hurtful powers, that otherwise, and without any cooperation
of contagious matter, produce that diathesis, the contagion has not much effect
in producing the real morbid s^ate, and that it chiefly regulates the exterior
form the disease Which, without diathesis, is of no consequence, and does not
amount to general morbid s^ate.
.

CCCLXXVI. But a violent smallpox is distinguished by the following symptoms:
Before the eruption there is a very severe pyrexia; this is succeeded by an
universal crust of pustules over the whole body. Antecedent to which the
hurtful powers are very violent sthenic ones, and particularly heat; the
remedies that remove it are very asthenic, and in preference to any of them
cold.

The Description of the violent Measles.
CCCLXXVII. The violent measles is a sthenic exanthematic disease See above
par. CCCLXVI.
, beginning with sneezing, watery eyes, dry cough, and hoarseness; on the
fourth day of which, or later, there appears an eruption of small numerous
papulae or little points; that on the third day, or later, terminate in an
appearance o^ branny scales. This disease, when preceded with a high degree of
sthenic diathesis, is proportionally violent.

CCCLXXVIII. The sneezing, watery eyes, dry cough, and hoarseness, are
catarrhal symptoms, and, therefore, depend upon sthenic diathesis See above
par. CLXXV.
. And, since they appear, four days or more, before the eruption, that is,
before the matter might seem to have reached the affected parts, and are
constant and universal; hence are we to suppose, that the sthenic diathesis
follows the hurtful powers, that usually produce it, and not entirely the
peculiar matter in this case, and that it is indispensably necessary to the
measles. But though that supposition should be rejected, and it should be
contended, that those symptoms arise from the contagious matter; it still must
be granted, that this disease differs, however, in nothing from the other
sthenic diseases, but equally depends upon sthenic diathesis, and yields to
antisthenic or debilitating remedies. And it must be allowed, that, since the
matter produces the same affect as the usual hurtful powers, its operation must
be absolutely the same, and the cause of the disease the same. Consequently, we
find nothing in the indication of cure, but what is in common to this disease
with other sthenic exanthematic ones, which is, that time must be given to the
matter to pass out of the body, and the perspiration be conducted in the same
manner, as the sthenic diathesis is usually treated upon other occasions See
above par. XCVI.
.

CCCLXXIX. The eruption admits of the same reasoning that has been delivered
See above par. CCCLXXV.
. The circumstance of its being a violent disease when preceded by a violent
sthenic diathesis, and mild in a degree of that diathesis, is a further
instance of the little difference that there is betwixt the operation of
contagion, and that of the ordinary powers producing sthenic diathesis.

CCCLXXX. When the diathesis runs so high as to suppress the perspiration, the
eruption often disappears for a time, as if it went into the interior parts of
the body: Which is a danger, that is chiefly threatened at the end of the
disease; and shows, that this matter, in the same manner as the variolous,
kindles up a symptomatic inflammation over the surface of the body, and then,
by a further increase of the diathesis, suppresses the perspiration. Hence,
with other viscera, the lungs That the lungs should be inflamed in a violent
state of the diathesis in the measles is not to be wondered at; as the common
catarrh, when its diathesis runs high, is liable to produce the same effect.
(See par. CCCXLIII* toward the end.) But, considering how many facts in
medical writings I have found false, the effect of that on my mind, is to
render the weight of testimony in favor of the various internal viscera being
so liable to be inflamed, from this supposed striking in of the measly
eruption, very light, and to dispose me to doubt of the fact altogether: Which
I am the more inclined to do, from the analogy of a broad fact in direct
contradiction to it: Which is, that the inflammation, depending upon the
general diathesis in sthenic diseases, never, as I have yet found, affects an
interior part. (See par. CXIII. CLXVIII.) Neither is inflammation, from any
other source, near so frequent in internal parts as vulgar opinion has taught
us. Dissection has shown inflammation in the intestinal canal in dysentery, or
what is called in English the bloody flux. But that only happened under the
evacuant, debilitating, vegetable, plan of cure: and, even in that case, seems
to have been an ultimate, not an early, effect, much less a cause. And it has
been shown, that what has been considered as a burning inflammation in the
first passages, is not an inflammation at all. (See above par. CXCVIII.) Nay,
even when inflammation does happen internally, it is never of the sthenic, but
always of the general, or local, asthenic kind, and, when quickly cured, cannot
be inflammation. If there be any truth in the frequency of inflammation toward
the end of the measles, it must be of the asthenic kind: Which is the more
likely from its late appearance, and from a circumstance that, though no where
taken notice of, has great weight with me; which is, that as the distinct small
pox passes into the confluent, peripneumony into dropsy of the chest, and any
sthenic disease with its diathesis, into any asthenic disease, and the
diathesis on which it depends; there is nothing in the nature of the animal
economy and of the powers acting on it, to prevent the same conversion of
sthenic into asthenic state in the measles. And if, which is most probable from
the alexipharmac practice, that was then used in this disease, indirect
debility can induce such a change, no disease has a fuller chance for it than
the measles. But I am sure, were the debilitating plan used from the beginning,
no such consequence would happen.
are often inflamed.

CCCLXXXI. The violent state of the smallpox, often from the great stimulus of
the eruption, converts both the sthenic diathesis and eruption into the
asthenic ones, and thereby produces the confluent smallpox, of which we are
afterward to treat. Whether any thing like that is the consequence of the
measles, is not yet ascertained: But, as every excess of excitement, as in the
conversion of peripneumony into a dropsy of the chest, is liable to run into
indirect debility, it is, therefore, scarce to be doubted, but that the same
thing happens to this disease, which is inferior to none in violence.

The Description of the violent Erysipelas.
CCCLXXXII. The violent Erysipelas is a phlegmasia, always beginning with
pyrexia, and followed by inflammation. The inflammation is seated in some
external part of the body, oftenest in the face, sometimes in the throat, with
redness, of an unequal edge, somewhat raised, creeping from one place to
another, and attended with a sense of burning.

CCCLXXXIII. It is peculiar to this inflammation, and foreign from the other
general ones, to invade the corpus mucosum. To assign a reason for which is of
no consequence; since this inflammation does not differ from the others either
in the operation of the exciting powers producing it, or in that of the
remedies which remove it.

CCCLXXXIV. The cause of the redness of the inflammation, in this as well as in
every case, is an excessive quantity of blood in the inflamed vessels; for the
question about the degree of redness is of no importance. There is less
swelling in the inflamed part, than in other sthenic inflammations, because
there is here a free space betwixt the scarf-skin and true skin, allowing the
effused humor room to spread and diffuse itself. The same is the cause of the
slow motion of the inflammation, and of the inequality of its edges. The sense
of burning is owing to an acrimony of the contained fluid, acquired by
stagnation.

CCCLXXXV. The attack of the inflammation upon the face is not more dangerous
than upon any other place, except when the diathesis, upon which it depends, is
great, rendering the inflammation proportionally great See par. LXXXV. CCCXLIII.
. In which latter case, whatever part is inflamed, the disease must be held for
a severe one; but still severer, if the inflammation seizes the face; in which
case a great tumult of affection internally accompanies the disease.

CCCLXXXVI. When such a sthenic diathesis, and affection of the head depending
on it, happens, no disease is more dangerous, none more rapid in its race to
death; while in a mild diathesis no disease is milder.

A Description of Rheumatism.
CCCLXXXVII. Rheumatism is a phlegmasia, especially in that temperament, which
inclines to the sanguine. It is a conseqence of ^eat succeeding to cold, or so
alternating with it as to prove the more stimulant: It is accompanied with pain
nigh, or between, the joints, chiefly the greater ones, and proportioned to the
degree of the diathesis CCCXLIII.
: And the inflammation always comes after the pyrexia.

CCCLXXXVIII. External temperature is hurtful in this disease in the same way,
as it has been often now explained CXIII. ^t passim.
.

CCCLXXXIX. The rage of the pain is in the parts that have been mentioned
CLXVIII.
, because it is in these parts that the inflammation, or more increased part of
the general diathesis ^bid.
, chiefly acts. Which again happens, for this reason, that the nearly most
powerful of the exciting hurtful causes, the temperature, that has been
mentioned CXIII.
, is only directed thither. There is no translation of the inflammation to the
internal parts, for this reason, that these parts, which preserve nearly an
equal temperature amidst every change of it externally, are not acted upon by
the same hurtful power which annoys the external parts.

CCCXC. Cold, according to the common opinion, is not hurtful in this disease;
because the rage of the disease is greatest under the operation of heat, which
has an effect quite opposite to that of constriction ^b^d
. This fact is confirmed by stimulant diet, in all its articles, proving always
hurtful, and by abstinence being always serviceable, and often alone making out
the cure. And it brings a sufficient refutation of that mistaken notion,
according to which, temperature is alleged to be more hurtful, and sweating
more serviceable, than is consistent with the truth; as if there were no other
hurtful powers but the former, no other remedies but the latter. In this, as
well as in all other general sthenic diseases, it is the general sthenic
diathesis alone that produces, and the solution of it alone, that removes the
disease. Which is a clear fact, and supported by the evidence of every part of
this doctrine that has yet been delivered. The pains of parts, which sometimes
precede this disease, oftener happen without being followed by it, and that, in
both cases, have nothing to do with sthenic diathesis, upon which this disease
entirely hinges, are a local affection, or belong to a very different general
disease, rheumatalgia, of which more afterward CCCLIII.
.

CCCXCI. The reason of the greater joints being affected in this disease, and
the lesser ones in the gout, is the following: In rheumatism, because both the
rest of the disease and the pains depend upon a violent sthenic diathesis:
therefore it is, that the greater joints, which, for the reasons assigned,
undergo more of the diathesis, have also a greater share of the disease. But,
as the gout consists in debility, its influence will be greatest, where there
is naturally the greatest debility, and therefore in the extreme parts, and
those most remote from the center of activity To make this subject simple to
any apprehension. A person has been exposed to intense cold a whole day. He
comes home at night, is set by a warm fire, receives hot meat and warm cordial
drink. He is next covered up in his bed with an addition of clothes, receives
more warm strong drink. He falls asleep, and next morning feels a pain in some
part or other of his upper extremities, nigh, or between, the great joints;
and, previous to that, a high state of heat and bouncing pulse, with a certain
feeling of uneasiness in different parts of his trunk. The pains increase in
the bed next night in proportion to the increase of the general affection; and
cold, evacuation, and abstinence from ^ood, from alternation of temperature,
cure him.
.

A Description of the mild Erysipelas.
CCCXCII. Both the definition and explanation of the violent erypesilas From
CCCLXXXII. to CCCLXXXVII.
, delivered before, suffice for those of the mild; but in such sort, that the
latter, both in its antecedent hurtful powers and symptoms, and in the whole
nature of its cause, must be understood to be much milder than the former, and
not only so, but a remarkably mild disease.

CCCXCIII. It is often not so much a sequel of the sthenic cynanche, which is
commonly called tonsillar, or the common inflammatory sore-throat, as a
supervention upon it before it has finished its course. It often appears alone
and unaccompanied with the cynanche, arising from a similar lenity of the
hurtful powers, and manifesting a similar mildness of symptoms through its
whole course.

CCCXCIV. Nay, in the same persons, in the same state of the hurtful powers,
sometimes this erysipelas, sometimes cynanche, sometimes catarrh, promiscuously
arise, and are all removed by the same gentleness in the method of cure I have
often experienced them all, sometimes singly, sometimes all three, in the
course of the same disease, oftener a combination of inflammatory sore-throat,
and the mild erysipelas, and, as far as I could observe, could discern, that
the degree of phlogistic state that produced them, and of remedies that removed
them, were both gentle, the former as stimulants, and the latter as
debilitating powers; and both so nearly of the same degree, that, in arranging
them, I was at a los^ which to place over the other in the scale.
.

A Description of the Cynanche Sthenica.
CCCXCV. The sthenic cynanche is a phlegmasia, with an inflammation taking
place in the throat, and especially the tonsils, never preceding the pyrexia.
It is accompanied with swelling and redness, and an aggravation of pain in
swallowing, especially any thing fluid.

CCCXCVI. The reason for the inflammation occupying the place mentioned here,
has been given before See CXIII. CCCXXII.
. And, when it has once taken place, it is afterward liliable to frequent
recurrence, because its seat being in the way of the most hurtful power Heat
and alternation of temperature. See XXXVI. with addition.
, and less covered than other parts See par. CLXVIII. If one is walking in the
evening, when a sudden fog comes on, with cold and chilliness, he may cover his
throat externally, but it is impossible to defend it internally.
, is exposed: And the vessels first distended by the inflammation, and then
afterward relaxed, take in an over-proportion of blood upon every increase of
its impetus This is so liable to happen, when any person has once experienced
this disease, that the increased motion of the blood in walking in a warm day,
and then sitting down in a cool place, has sometimes produced ophthalmia,
sometimes this sore-throat.
.

CCCXCVII. As the inflammation, like that of the other phlegmasia never
precedes the pyrexia See the definitions of them all, etc.
, for the reason assigned See par. CLXVIII. CCCXLIII.
; so, if an unskilful person should think it did, the reason of that is the
gradual degeneracy of the general sthenic inflammation into a local disease,
from its frequent recurrence, and always leaving a taint behind it in the
affected part. This latter inflammation may happen, without a general sthenic
diathesis, and therefore, without being followed by a sthenic cynanche; and it
may accidentally coincide with the former, or sthenic diathesis, and,
therefore, precede the latter or sthenic cynanche: But, in both cases, it ought
to be distinguished from the pure general case, for the sake of guarding
against the commission of a hurtful mistake in the cure This might happen to a
person under an asthenic diathesis, which would be increased by the
debilitating plan of cure, and would be useless in the absence of diathesis.
. In an asthenic habit, whether succeeding to the former or not, there is again
another general inflammation, to be refered to asthenic diseases.

CCCXCVIII. If any person can explain why the pain is aggravated in swallowing,
he may communicate his knowledge; if he cannot, it is no matter.

CCCXCIX. The cynanche oesophagaea has been here omitted, because it is a rare
affection, and admits of the same reasoning and cure as the tonsillar, from
which it differs not but in the inflammation being farther down, and in some
redness only coming within view. But, as a suspicion that it may be local, as
when the aesophagus happens to be eroded or burnt, by a stimulus, or some acrid
matter; the distinctions, therefore, should be attended to See above LXXXI.
LXXXIII. CLXX.
, and made use of for the sake of practice.

CCCC. There is likewise a rare disease, sometimes happening in certain
countries, never in others, called the croup by nosologists cynanche stridula.
. In it the respiration is laborious, the inspiration sonorous, with
hoarseness, a ringing cough, and a swelling scarce ^o be discerned It is
perceived upon dissection of the dead subject.
. It is a disease that infests very young children almost only. And in all
other particulars it is of a doubtful nature I never saw this disease, but when
I was so young a student, that any observations I could make, can be of no use
to me now. There have been many battles of words about, whether it be
inflammatory or spasmodic, without any adequate meaning of the differences
betwixt these two words, at least so far as to influence the practice; which
remained much the same betwixt the parties, and probably the right one missed
by both.
.

CCCCI. Concerning which, when it happens to occur in practice, use the
following marks of judgment. As the sthenic diathesis, in the degree requisite
to the formation of actual disease, which depends upon a high degree of
diathesis, happens less, either in the beginning, or toward the end of life;
because the high degree of excitability in the former, and the low degree of it
in the latter, admit a smaller degree of the effect of the exciting power, that
is, a smaller force of excitement See par. XXV. and XXVI.
, than the long period of human age betwixt these two extremes; yet it is not
altogether foreign from either Though it is seldom that either a child, or very
old man, will be so sthenic as to need bleeding and much evacuation, yet they
will sometimes.
. In childhood, the high degree of excitability compensates for the slightness
of the stimulus; while, in old age, the high degree and force of the latter may
compensate for the deficiency of the former, and suffice to induce some sthenic
diathesis, even to that degree which constitutes disease. In this way infants
undergo wonderful vicissitudes of excitement, and within the shortest spaces of
time. This day they will show every sign of extreme debility, next day every
one of restored vigor; because the operation of any stimulus given them soon
rises to its highest, upon account of their high degree of excitability, and
sinks as soon to its lowest, upon account of its own small degree A child of
mine was given over for death by his nurse: His mother gave him some of the
diffusible stimulus. He slept two hours, and when he waked made signs, for he
could not yet speak, to have a little pie, most of which he ate.
. Hence every sthenic diathesis, that happens to them, is short, acute, and
soon removed A single gentle purge will do it.
; nor is their asthenic state of long continuance, or difficult to be removed;
provided there is no local affection which very seldom, indeed, happens,
, and a proper method of cure is employed Which, till of late, has been very
rare: The antiphlogistic cure has made away with three-fourths of mankind,
before they arrived at the seventh year of their age.
.

CCCCII. The marks of sthenic diathesis at this age are, great frequency of
pulse, when compared with that of adults, more frequent than their own in
health, distinctly meeting the finger upon feeling it; a boundishness of belly
at first, which becomes more free in the progress of the disease; dryness of
the skin; burning heat, thirst, watching, strong crying.

CCCCIII. The signs of the asthenic diathesis at the same age are, a pulse not
to be reckoned from its frequency, small, falling softly like snow upon the
finger of him who reckons it, so that he is uncertain if he touch it at all; a
very loose scouring belly, with green matter; frequent vomiting; dryness of the
skin, heat greater than natural, and greater in some parts than others;
interrupted sleep, never refreshing: (...) voice in crying, fit to excite
compassion.

CCCCIV. The former diathesis, besides other hurtful powers, is preceded by the
use of found milk, animal food, an abuse of opium or strong drink; excessive
heat after cold and moisture, which latter increases the debilitating effect of
the former; a strong set of simple solids.

CCCCV. The latter, together with the known hurtful powers, is preceded by the
use of milk from a weak, sickly nurse; that of vegetable food, with ^ug^^ in
it; watery diet; watery drink; habitual vomiting, habitual purging, both by
other means used for the latter, and particularly by magnesia, given with the
intention of absorbing an acid; cold not followed by heat; a weak mass of
simple solids.

CCCCVI. Consider which of these sets of signs precede or accompany the croup,
and whether its pyrexia be sthenic or asthenic. Weigh the different sentiments
of authors upon the subject. Suspect their theories, but their facts still
more. Be on guard not to be misled by the vanity, emptiness, and rashness of
young physicians; as well as by the obstinacy and bigotry of the older sort,
that increases with their age and practice, to be bent by no force of
reasoning, no weight of truth, scarce by the power of God: Regard their minds
as bound in the ^etters of prejudice: Remember, that a whole age of physicians
were in the wrong, except one man The improvement that Dr. Sydenham made was
good for the length it went, which was, to use cool and gentle evacuants for
the cure of the smallpox, peripneumony, and one or two more of the sthenic
diseases. The biass, in favor of the alexipharmac practice, for the cure of
catarrh and measles, he never got over. His theories were vague, but with
respect to the practice in the diseases among which his reformation lay, they
were innocent. He attained not any idea of the nature of diseases depending on
debility: And his practice was hurtful in them: He fell a victim to his gout,
which could not have happened had he been acquainted with but one disease of
the debility. His practice, even when right, was destitute of principle: He had
no sort of comprehension of the doctrine of life as a whole, and as a
department of knowledge distinct from all others. It would have been lucky,
however, for posterity, had his successors done as much in asthenic, as he did
in sthenic diseases. From that beginning, the ingenuity of some, at last under
a right direction, might have brought out more information, and, by gradual and
sure steps, at last attained a comprehension of their whole subject. But
professors of universities ruin every thing: For while they find out nothing
themselves, they throw into false lights the useful hints of others. This was
the effect first of the Boerhaavian, then of the Hoffmanian and Stahlian
doctrines. See our Observations, Outlines, p. lxxxiv. to clix.
, and persisted obstinately in their error, in the case of the Alexipharmac
physicians: And, reflect within yourself, good reader! whether the present
physicians, who follow the doctrines delivered in the schools, judge better
than their predecessors, and do not run into the contrary extreme of madness,
doing as much mischief in fevers, and diseases of pure debility, as they did in
sthenic diseases, and in fact take a wide range of spreading destruction among
mankind. Thus secured against mistake, consider the cures of this disease that
have appeared. If in those, or in any trial that you may make, you shall find
that either bleeding and purging, or antispasmodics, as they are called, that
is, stimulants succeed; then be assured, that, in the former case, the disease
is sthenic, in the latter asthenic; of which you will be still more certain, if
you shall find that the exciting hurtful powers and symptoms, which have been
enumerated, at the same time agree with the other marks of judgment.

A Description of Catarrh.
CCCCVII. Catarrh is a phlegmasia, in which, to the general symptoms mentioned
before CCCXXXI.
, are added cough; hoarseness; and first a suppression, or slight increase of
the excretion from the nose, sauces, and bronchia, followed afterward by a
further increase; arising from stimulant powers, often heat alone, but chiefly
after a previous application of cold; and to be removed by debilitating powers,
often by cold alone, guarding against heat See par. CXII. CXIV. CXVII. CXXII.
and all the stimulant powers, from CXII. to CXLVII.
.

CCCCVIII. The explanation of the cough is the same as that given before. But
it is freer, than in peripneumony, and not avoided, because there is no
inflammation in the neighborhood to aggravate it, and raise pain See par. CLX.
CCCLV.
.

CCCCIX. That the hoarseness is owing to a suppression of the vapor that
should be exhaled into the bronchia, may be known from this; that, when the
hoarseness has remained long, almost without expectoration and cough, or with a
moderate degree of them, while the sthenic diathesis continued in full force,
and did not abate in the bronchia; upon the diathesis giving way, and the
expectoration and cough becoming more free, the hoarseness abates, or goes off.
That this can be effected by a stimulus of that kind and degree, that
constitutes sthenic diathesis, is shown by the effect of strained speaking
producing temporary hoarseness, by silence removing the hoarseness, and cold
drink relieving it.

CCCCX. The suppression of excretion is that of the mucus and exhalable fluid,
related before See par. CCCCVIII.
, and it admits of the same explanation that was formerly given.

CCCCXI. That stimulants produce catarrh is evident from this, that heat alone,
fullness in food, strong drink, and moderate exercise, for certain produce it;
cold, cold drink, spare diet, and rest, as certainly and effectually remove it.
It was, therefore, a very unlucky mistake, to think it arose from cold alone,
and was to be cured by heat. On the contrary, cold is never hurtful in it, but
when its action is succeeded by that of heat, to be explained as before See
CXXII.
. The occurrence of catarrh so often in summer, where its action can be a
thousand times traced back to heat, but not to cold; the influenza never
needing the assistance of cold, which catarrh often does, in the manner just
now said; its never succeeding to pure cold, but immediately to heat, facts
known to old women, to shoemakers and tailors, to sore-eyed persons and
barbers, unknown to medical authors and professors, all confirm the same fact.

A Description of the simple Synocha.
CCCCXII. The definition of simple synocha is the same with that of phrenitis
See par. CCCLXI.
, excepting the symptoms affecting the head. It is a slight disease, ending in
health, often in one, always in a few days, unless when new hurtful powers,
either accidentally, or from the use of a stimulant plan of cure, have been
superadded.

A Description of the Scarlet Pyrexia.
CCCCXIII. The scarlet pyrexia is an exanthema See CCCXXX.
; about the fourth day of which, or later, the face swells somewhat, and at the
same time the skin is here and there affected with a red efflorescence, and
then checquered with large spots; which are afterward to unite, and in three
days to end in little scales, as if branny ones. This erup-does not arise, but
in consequence of sthenic diathesis produced from another source. And there is
another similar to this, which accompanies an opposite disease, afterward to
be mentioned.

CCCCXIV. The eruption, appearing at a certain time, and remaining for some
time, must be imputed to the fermentation, requiring a certain time, different
in different diseases, and is to be explained in a similar manner as before See
par. CCCLXVII. and CCCLXXVIII.
.

CCCCXV. The swelling of the face depends upon a greater degree of sthenic
diathesis there, than any other equal part. And we are to imagine, that,
besides the hurtful powers that usually produce it, it is increased by the
contagious matter, now approaching the surface.

CCCCXVI. This matter of itself produces no morbid state, only giving the
exterior and exanthematic form See par. CCCLXXV.
, and following the nature of the sthenic or asthenic diathesis. Hence, after
its application, the disease that arises is sometimes sthenic, as this is, of
which we have given a definition, sometimes asthenic, as that disease which we
are afterward to mention in its proper place. This view of it serves to
reconcile the jarring and contradictory explanations, and methods of cure of
authors, who have gone into such controversies to settle its nature.

A Description of the mild Smallpox.
CCCCXVII. The definition of the mild and violent smallpox is the same;
excepting that there are often veryfew pustules, never exceeding one or two
hundred in number: Sometimes the place only, which was inoculated, is beset
with pustules, without any other in the rest of the body; and besides, these
there may be only one.

CCCCXVIII. The number of pustules and crowded eruption is occasioned not by
the nature of the contagious matter, nor by its quantity, but by the sthenic
diathesis, in so far as it is induced by the sthenic hurtful powers, in which
the matter has very little participation See par. CCCLXX. CCCLXXII. CCCLXXV.
. If, therefore, that diathesis be prevented, and especially upon the surface,
the eruption will never be crowded; and, after it has appeared, if it be
immediately removed, the eruption will never be dangerous.

CCCCXIX. As the contagious matter does not contribute much toward sthenic
diathesis, for the reasons alleged From CCCCXVII. to CCCCXIX.
; so, that it does contribute something, is proved by a crowded eruption both
appearing and increasing, when the diathesis, after the reception of the
contagion, was not increased by the ordinary hurtful powers This indeed, is a
clear proof, that the matter contributes something, and that there may be a
degree of diathesis, compatible with health, unless when it is increased, and
the perspiration diminished, by such contagious matter.
.

CCCCXX. And, therefore, while the excitement should be reduced below that
degree which suits perfect health; there are, however, certain boundaries,
beyond which we should not proceed in the debilitating process.

CCCCXXI For, when, the sthenic diathesis is very much reduced, and the
excitement immoderately diminished, there appears over the whole body, an
eruption quite unlike the variolous, of a high scarlet color, and in its
progress proceeding constantly from a spotted appearance into a continued sheet
of efflorescence from the top of the head to the ancles. See above par. CCXX.
and two notes.
; which, unless treated upon a stimulant plan, would prove fatal.

A Description of the Mild Measles.
CCCCXXII. The definition of the mild measles is the same with that of the
violent. To which all the reasoning that has been employed about the small pox
will apply. If, immediately upon the arrival of the catarrhal symptoms, the
asthenic diathesis contrary to every mode of curing this disease hitherto
thought of, be removed; often no disease of that kind which affects the whole
body, follows. And the disease always proceeds with the same gentleness as the
small pox treated in the same way All this has been well proved by every one of
my children, and by an 100 patients at once.
.

CCCCXXIII. The catarrhal symptoms are of the same nature as in the catarrh,
and admit of the same cure, that is, asthenic (k).

CCCCXXIV. Catarrh, and simple synocha, are free from all inflammation, whether
general or local. The scarlet fever, and the mild small pox and measles, are
free from the general, and exhibit upon the surface a local, inflammation of no
consequence See par. CLXX. and CCXI.
.

A Description of the Sthenic Apyrexiae.
CCCCXXV. The sthenic apyrexiae which are equally, free of pyrexia See par.
CCCXXIX.
and every degree of inflammation, arise from a sthenic diathesis, that has
less effect upon the vascular system, than the other sthenic diseases. So much
so, as never to have been thought in any sort connected with that affection we
call pyrexia.
.

A Description of Mania.
CCCCXXVI. Mania is a sthenic apyrexia; in which the mind is disordered, and
forms false ideas of every thing.

CCCCXXVII. In so far as mania does not arise from a fault of the substance of
the brain, which is a local case that sometimes happens: the powers that have
the chief share in producing it, are excessive exercise of the mental function,
and a high exuberance of passion. These, however, while they act more upon the
brain than any other part, at the same time do act more or less also upon the
whole body, though not to the degree of drawing pyrexia after them Compare this
par. XLIX. L. LI. LII. LIII. and indeed with that whole chapter, as the
severest trial of the truth of it; nothing being more natural, than the
supposition that a mad man is only affected in his head, but we shall find that
not true.
. Which is proved by the disease being cured by a debilitating plan, and by
other stimuli, as well as those just now mentioned, not immediately applied to
the brain, but to a distant part of the system from it.

CCCCXXVIII. The most powerful of those stimuli are, spirituous or vinous
drink, and opium, and, perhaps, some other things, taken into the stomach, and
first acting there. Of the other asthenic hurtful powers, some of themselves,
and operating alone, have less effect in inducing mania, and yet, even they, by
their stimulant operation increase the force of those, that have that hurtful
effect; as is proved by the effect of removing them in relieving the disease.

CCCCXXIX. If poisons sometimes produce mania, without hurting the substance of
any solid part, their operation must be supposed the same, as that of the
general stimulants, their effect the same, and the disease a general one, and
the same See par. XX.
. But if these very poisons act by destroying the texture of a part, they must
be considered as the origin of a local disease See par. V. VI. XX.
.

CCCCXXX. The heart and arteries are less affected in mania, than in any of the
pyrexial diseases; because, the hurtful power, which chiefly affects the
vessels, too much food, has less concern in the number of the hurtful powers
here. And yet that the food, superadded to the other hurtful powers, does prove
hurtful even in this disease, is evident from a contrary power, abstinence,
being, among other remedies, found of very great efficacy in restoring the
healthy state. Which, with what has been said above, proves that mania is not a
disease confined to a part, but extended to the whole system.

CCCCXXXI. Although, in the diseases that have just now been mentioned from
CCCCXXV. to CCCCXXXII.
, the pulse is commonly said, and believed, to be not at all affected, that,
however is not exactly the truth; for in mania, so long as it continues to be a
sthenic disease that is, so long as it is really mania,
, more or less of sthenic state can be perceived The characteristic of hardness
of the pulse is never wanting, and therefore also fullness. (See CCCXXXIV.)
.

The Description of Morbid Watchfulness.
CCCCXXXII. Pervigilium, or morbid watchfulness, is a sthenic apyrexia See par.
CCCCXXV.
; in which there is no sleep, or no sound sleep, and the mind, in a startled
state, is agitated with vivid, strong, or uneasy impressions.

CCCCXXXIII. The hurtful powers, that produce perviligium, are the same with
those, that produce mania, but inferior in force. It is evidently produced by
hard thinking, commotion, or disturbance of mind, in preference to other
hurtful powers. The degree of thought, that has that effect, is not ultimately
excessive; for, if it were, by effecting a temporary waste of the excitability,
it would produce sound sleep; or if it repelled sleep, it could only act so, by
means of indirect debility, the consideration of which is foreign from this
place See CXLI.
. And the same is the degree of disturbance of feeling, that proves hurtful, in
so far as it produces this disease: Every ultimate excess of which See CXLI.
, either ends in sleep, or induces that vigilance, of which indirect debility
is the cause. But it is not a single operation of the intellectual faculty, or
of the state of any passion, or one that happens but rarely, that proves
adequate to the effect. For the effect, in that case, would be either too
slight, or of too short continuance; to merit the title of disease. It is an
often returning, or deeply affecting, irritation upon the brain, and,
therefore; one that leaves a lasting impression, which has any considerable
force in producing this disease. In this last way, an eager, inordinate, and
vast desire for the attainment of high objects of pursuit, the impulse that
hurries on to the revenge of a great injury, and the horror that arises upon
the perpetration of it, the fear of future punishment for crimes, are held up
to us as productive of high commotion of mind, in the examples of Cataline,
Orestes, and Francis Spira. As often, therefore, as the mind is so excited in
its ideas and passions, as not to be capable of being composed to rest and
sound sleep, after a certain short continuance of those, or other stimuli; so
often are we to conclude, that this disease takes place.

CCCCXXXIV. As the hurtful powers just now mentioned See the par. CCCCXXX. and
CCCCXXXIII.
, produce this disease; so there are others, which belong not to this place,
but are to be mentioned, that also repel sleep.

CCCCXXXV. To pervigilium belong all the hurtful powers that have been already
mentioned in mania See from CCCCXXVI. to CCCCXXXII.
, whether acting within or without the brain, but acting with less force, and
which yield to the asthenic plan of cure.

CCCCXXXVI. As the powers stimulating vigoursly in this way See CCCCXXXIII.
, and without any diminution of their sum of stimulating, produce pervigilium;
from that we learn that the cause of this disease is the same with that of the
rest of the sthenic form of diseases from CXLI to CXLVIII.
, and that the same is the state of body in which every one of those diseases
consist: Nor is it understood, that different hurtful powers, but precisely the
same, with only a variation in the proportion of their force, which often
happens to other sthenic diseases precede this disease.

CCCCXXXVII. The same fact is also discovered from the functions, of which,
though th^se diseases are called apyrexiae, or without pyrexial state, the
pulse, however, is not altogether free of disease See CCCCXXX and CCCCXXXI. and
the note to the latter.
. On the contrary, it is as much stronger than in health, or in the
predisposition to asthenic diseases, or in those diseases themselves, as there
is more vigor, and more excitement upholding that vigor, in the system For a
proof of their vigor maniacs have often four times the strength, they used to
have in health.
. And the state of the other functions, except those of the brain, that are
chiefly affected, is truly the same as in the milder sthenic affections, or in
the predisposition to these. But, if the brain in this disease, and in mania,
is much more affected than the rest of the body; there is nothing unusual in
that circumstance; it being an universal fact with respect to both diseases and
the predisposition to them, that some part is more affected than any other part
See part first, Chap. IV. and in it XLIX. and LII. CLIX. CCV.
.

A Description of Obesity.
CCCCXXXVIII. Obesity is a sthenic apyrexia See CCCCXXV.
; in which in consequence of an excess of health, rich living, especially in
the article of food, and an easy sedentary way of life, the sat rises to the
degree of incommoding the functions.

CCCCXXXIX. That obesity, so defined, is a disease, is understood from the
definition of disease See IV.
; and that it is a sthenic disease, appears from the certain signs of sthenic
diathesis in it. Of which, the strong action of the stomach, whether the
apetite or the digestion be considered See par. CCLXII.
, and the strength of the other digestive organs, are a glaring proof.

CCCCXL. And as in this disease, the stimulus of the exciting powers, raises
the excitement above that degree of it which suits good health, to that in
which sthenic diathesis consists, without which last there could not be such
force in the action of the stomach, and of the organs that form chyle and
blood; so, it is in common to this with the other diseases called sthenic
apyrexiae that the sum of all the stimuli is much less than in the other
diseases of the same form, that is, those with pyrexia and inflammation; that
it never rises to the extreme height at which indirect debility is produced,
and is never indeed so great as to be sufficient to have any considerable
effect on the heart and vessels.

CCCCXLI. But it happens to all those diseases, that both these last and all
the other functions, get somewhat above the standard of the sound functions,
and a great deal above asthenic diathesis. And the sthenic apyrexiae differ
from the other sthenic diseases chiefly in this, that the exciting powers keep
much within that degree of force, that wastes the excitability much; as is
perceived from the proof of the effect; for they are diseases of much longer
standing than any other asthenic diseases.

CCCCXLII. From which fact, however, much the brain may be affected by its own
proper stimuli; however great the quantity of blood in its vessels may be;
unless to the excitement arising from these, that excitement, which the other
stimulant powers produce, be added, it is certain, that the general effect will
be much less, and that the united energy of all the powers has far more effect,
than the separate force of any.

CCCCXLIII. The diathesis, then, in these diseases, is, upon the whole, less
than in the rest of the sthenic diseases; that of a part, as of the brain in
mania and pervigilium, and of the blood vessels in obesity, is pretty
considerable. The whole is in general as great as that in the predisposition to
the other diseases, and exceeding its force in the laboring part. Hence it
comes out, that, contrary to the nature of those other diseases, and similar to
the predisposition to them, they are usually of long standing and duration, and
for this reason, that the mediocrity of the sum of stimulant operation never
consumes the excitability, and always produces too much excitement. The great
tumult of symptoms in the brain and blood vessels in these diseases does not
imply a great sum of excitement, for this reason, that the affection of a part,
however formidable, compared with the affection of all the rest of the body, is
infinitely inferior in its degree See par. XLIX. to LIII.
. However much, then, any stimulus presses upon a part, and from that spreads
at large over the rest of the body; unless, however, other stimuli, applied to
other parts, sustain its operation, so as that the sum of the operation of them
all may deeply affect the whole body: the effect of the solitary stimulus,
making a figure in a part, will be less considerable in the rest of the body:
In fine, it must be kept in mind, that every violent disease always arises from
the excitement which the united force of several stimuli has produced.

CCCCXLIV. In these sthenic apyrexiae, as a certain part, the brain in the two
first, and the blood vessels in the last See par. CCCCXLIII.
, is much more affected, and in greater proportion, than in the other sthenic
diseases, because the affection of the part is much less supported by stimuli
acting upon the other parts; so the stimuli, acting in that way upon the
laboring parts, are, however, understood to affect the rest of the body,
though less considerably. That this is the fact, is proved by there being in
this case, no asthenic diathesis, and evidently such a sthenic one, as upholds
the predisposition to other diseases of the sthenic form; by the remedies,
which affect other parts, as it will by and by appear, being aiding in the cure
here, and by powers of a contrary nature, always proving hurtful. Whence, it is
an evident and certain truth, even here, where it might have been least
expected, that every stimulus that affects a part, affects the whole body, upon
account of the excitability being one uniform, undivided, property over the
whole.

CCCCXLV. With respect to obesity in particular; that the other hurtful powers,
as well as food, have more or less effect, one may know from the certain fact
of the digestive powers, which depend upon the influence of these powers, being
of such force and vigor, as to perform their function^ more perfectly in fat
persons, than in others, who are, nevertheless, not by any means weak. Yet
these hurtful powers are applied in a degree short of that, which being
ultimately excessive, or approaching nearly to that, puts an end to excitement
by wasting the excitability, or which tends, by a high degree of disturbance,
to exhaust the body.

CCCCXLVI. Thus passions are not with such persons too stimulant; a
circumstance known to the generality of mankind, among whom it is an adage,
that fat persons are commonly good natured This must be taken with more than
grains of allowance; since such is the effect of the different motives to human
action received from example and education, that the passions themselves are
drawn into a subserviency to every person's predominant pursuit. I have known a
person in Edinburgh get great credit for his integrity, though that was not
extraordinary, from roughness of manners and an affectation of passionateness,
while the dissimulation of that real disposition is the more general engine
among men of promoting their interest. At any rate, so much more than mere
appearance of temper, which may be so much overruled, is necessary to the
establishment of maxim^; that I should think my life or property upon an
insecure footing, if it depended on the good nature of a person, for which the
only security was his fatness.
, while morose persons are for the most part lean. Thus it is observable, that
fat persons are averse to thinking, which is a great stimulus The most poring
persons are the atrabilarians, who, though they are not calculated for the
elevation of mind that discovery requires, have, by their assiduity,
contributed much to the improvement of many of the arts. They are commonly very
meagre, indeed, and indefatigable in any pursuit, to which they give themselves
up.
. They are averse to bodily motion, by which all the functions, and
particularly that of the vessels, are much excited, and the perspiration
proportionally promoted; and they have so far reason for it, that all motion is
more fatiguing to them than to others. Hence, that quantity of fluids, which
under motion is usually thrown off by the pores on the surface, and turned out
of the course to the adipose cells, has a great opportunity of quitting the
direction to the former, and of turning aside, in a state of rest, to the
latter.

CCCCXLVII. After explaining the peculiarities of these diseases; it is now to
be observed, that, since the affection of a part in general disease, depends
upon the general affection, is of the same kind, arises from the same exciting
powers, and is removed by the same remedies See part first, Chap. IV. and
particularly par. ^^^^
; it is from that reasonable to believe, that the affection of a part, whether
it be inflammation, or a greater affection of the brain or vessels, than of any
other part, is not different in different cases, but altogether the same in
all; that it only differs in some trifling circumstances of no signification,
and by no means requires a different plan of cure, or affords fundamental
distinctions; and that a mistake, which has had the most ruinous effect upon
the art, must be done away. It is with propriety, then, that all the diseases
that have been treated of, have been reduced not first to two genera, and after
to species, but, without regard either to genera or species, only to two forms.

CCCCXLVIII. Further, as in all those diseases the whole morbid state, either
in so far as it is universal in the system, or confined to a part, proves
hurtful by giving too much excitement; and as the remedies, that remove the
general morbid state, also remove the portion of it confined to a part, and are
never to be directed to a part See par. LVI. and XCII.
with the view of removing, by their action upon it, the disease, as if all
locked up in it; the meaning of all that is, to lay a sure foundation for the
establishment of a certain series, or scale, of increasing strength from
perfect health to the most sthenic disease. In that scale peripneumony holds
about the highest, and obesity the lowest, degree.

CCCCXLIX. Peripneumony and phrenitis in the upper end are followed by two
diseases, that sometimes equal them; the violent smallpox and measles. These
two are succeeded by a disease, that sometimes vies with them, the erysipelas,
when accompanied with a most severe affection of the head. Equal to this, not
in danger, but for the most part in the degree of diathesis; rheumatism comes
next. Next to rheumatism is marked the mild and gentle erysipelas, far short of
those above it in violence, and claiming nearly an equal place to the sthenic
cynanche, being much more nearly allied to the latter than any of the former.
Those are the diseases accompanied with pyrexia and inflammation.

CCCCL. Of these two which stand lowest, the mild erysipelas and the sthenic
cynanche, or common inflammatory sore throat, are of so doubtful a rank with
respect to each other and catarrh See CCCXCIV. and the note to it.
, a disease without the accompaniment of inflammation; that it is doubtful
which of them all should be set above the others. Below them, however, the
simple synocha and scarlet fever, in so far as the latter is an asthenic
disease, and in so far as the usual state of them both is considered, are to be
placed without any hesitation The simple synocha is so similar to a gentle
typhus, that it requires great judgment to distinguish them at first. The
safest way, when the doubt cannot be determined, is to keep the patient in a
moderate temperature, and in a state of rest; as any debilitating power, in
case the disease should turn out a typhus, would be dangerous; and, though it
should afterward manifest itself a synocha, still its mildness renders the
omission of any thing that might have been done, innocent; and it is always
easy to take down sthenic diathesis.
. The lowest part of the scale of sthenic diseases with pyrexia, is assigned to
the smallpox and measles, in their mild state.

CCCCLI. Through this whole scale it is not so much the titles and names, that
have been made use of, bu morbid energy, that is regarded; it being the
certainty derived from the cause, not the uncertain and perfectly deceitful
consideration of symptoms, that was to be considered See par. LVIII.
. The investigation of symptoms, which has hitherto been devoid of all benefit,
has been of the highest detriment to the art; and as much in medicine the most
productive source of fundamental blunders, as the question about abstract
causes had been in the other departments of philophy See par. XVIII. and look
into Observations on the different systems of physic, and in it the
introduction throughout.
must be laid aside, and Nosology damned.

CCCCLII. Below the last mentioned diseases, mania, pervigilium, and obesity
are set. Betwixt which, and the diseases mentioned above, is the point of
perfect health to be fixed It will be easy for the reader with the directions
above to make out the table for himself.
.

The Cure of the Sthenic Form of Diseases.
CCCCLIII. To apply the indication of the cure of the sthenic form of diseases
to practice; that mentioned before See par. LXXXVIII.
will be accommodated first to a violent degree of the diathesis and danger of
parts, in such a manner, as that regard only will be had to the degree of force
in the remedies See also par. XCII.
.

CCCCLIV. When, therefore, a violent diathesis is discerned, as in
peripneumony, phrenitis, the smallpox, the measles, and erysipelas, in the
highest degree of these three last, immedate recourse must be had to the most
powerful and quickly effectual remedy; and so much blood should not be taken,
as many who entrust nearly the whole cure of the disease to it, think which is
the common practice;
, but more, however, than others are of opinion, should be taken away The most
early among the Alexipharmac practitioners, after once making his escape from
peripneumony without bleeding, f^ll a victim to the folly of his theory in the
next attack. The Alexipharmacs in general were too moderate in their bleedings
in the true, though few, sthenic diseases that require it, and all in the wrong
in their use of heating stimulant prescriptions in them.


CCCCLV. No measure suits all cases; the quantity to be taken being different
in different cases, as those differ in age, sex, strength, and in the degree of
force applied by the exciting hurtful powers. In childhood, which, excepting
the measles, and smallpox See par. CCCCI.
, is seldom affected with the diseases we have mentioned, and in a very
advanced age, which is also in less danger than that at the flower of human
life; sparing bleeding succeeds for this reason, that, at both those ages, it
is a lesser degree of excitement that upholds the disease as a cause; while in
the former, the high degree of excitability, in the latter the necessity for
more stimulus or exciting power, than formerly, set bounds to the measure of
the remedy.

CCCCLVI. A better rule for limiting the degree of bleeding is the relief, or
temporary solution, of the urgent symptoms. If, therefore, after blood has been
taken, the great heat, the hardness of the pulse, the affection of the head or
of the lungs, and dryness of the surface, shall have gone off, or been much
abated; and now the temperature is discerned to be much more moderate, the
pulse more soft, and less frequent, and the surface of the body more moist, at
least less dry; if the pain is every where quieted, the breathing relieved, and
the delirium removed The references for facts are CLIX. CLV. CCCXXXIV. CLVII.
CLXXIV. CCCXLIX. to CCCLV. CLIV. CLIX. CLXXXIV. CCCXXXIII. to CCCXXXVI. CLV.
CCCXLIII. CCCLIV. CLVIII.
; then it may be looked upon as certain, that enough of the vital fluid has
been shed for the time.

CCCCLVII. To obtain that benefit, in the most vigorous adult state 10 or 12
ounces, and much less either before or after that period of life, will for the
most part be found sufficient. As this rule will not answer in every case, when
it fails, recourse must be had to that, which recommends the abatement of the
symptoms as a direction more to be depended upon See CCCCVI.
.

CCCCLVIII. Since the local affection depends upon the degree of the the
general See above LVI. and CCCXLII. to CCCXLVI.
diathesis, remember, therefore that there is no occasion for any particular
direction with regard to it, any farther, than to take advantage of its being
accessible to help the general remedy by an application of it to the part Ibid.
an instance of such assistance may be the local bleedings over the pained part
in rheumatism and the gout, and some other asthenic remedies are aided by local
stimuli.
.

CCCCLIX. When that has been done, and the first violence of the disease is
no^^ broken; we must next have recourse to purging the b^^^y, as a great remedy
in point of efficacy See CCLXXXIII.
. To effect which, we should not employ violent means, such as many formerly
employed the Alexipharmacs particularly,
; the stimulus accompanying the first operation of which being liable to be
hurtful; but it is the gentle cathartics that should be depended upon, such as
Glauber's salts, which are highly debilitating, and carry a great quantity of
fluids out of the vessels. Though a man of good sense in the last century used
these day about with bleeding; yet, if the violence of the disease should be
urgent, there is nothing to hinder the use of them the same day that the blood
has been taken.

CCCCLX. Purging, after a sparing bleeding, has more effect in overcoming
sthenic diathesis, than any bleeding without it; because, as it has been
mentioned above, in that way the debilitating power (which has always more
debilitating effect in the place to which it is first applied than in any
other,) is applied to more parts; and not only to the greater blood vessels,
but also to a prodigious number of their terminations; and the excitability is
more extensive, and therefore, with more equality diminished See par.
CCCCLXXXIII. CCCCLXXXVI. also CCCV.
.

^, Vomiting, which, in asthenic diseases, where it is pernicious, has hitherto
never been admitted in the common practice, and in sthenic ones, where it is of
the greatest benefit, ever neglected, comes in here as a proper part of cure;
being of the same evacuant nature, and in another part of the same canal, and
admitting of all the reasoning that has been applied to purging.

CCCCLXI. At the same time that the excessive, and therefore hurtful, use of
the lancet is superseded by those two last mentioned evacuations; its use,
however, is not altogether to be laid aside in the the diseases of excessive
excitement; and for this reason, that the excitement, by its stimulating
operation often rises to that high degree, that, from the consumption of
excitability which puts an end to it existence, threatens instant death See
par. CCLXXXI. and CCLXXXIII. CCLXXXIV.
.

CCCCLXII. Besides, those remedies From CCCCLIV to CCCCLXII.
, the patient should always be required to abstain from every sort of food but
vegetable, and in a fluid form, as well as from all strong drink, and indeed
all but watery drink, accidulated See CCLXXXIV.
. This direction does not seem to have been so much neglected in words by
former writers and authors, as in fact and actual application to the practice;
it having been delivered slightly, by the by, and as if it had been thought of
no consequence with such effect, that its force made no impression upon the
mind of the reader or hearer. No stimulus is more powerful, and, therefore, in
this part of the practice, more hurtful, than that of the articles of diet:
Consequently, whatever quantity of blood is taken from its vessels, whatever
quantity of serous fluid is carried off by the mouth and anus, if that stimulus
is not roundly guarded against, all this evacuation may easily be frustrated.
While that is the case, still fluid vegetable matter is not to be discharged,
and for this good reason, that watery matter is not kept in the vessels; but,
easily entering the smallest of them, flows out in all directions by their
various outlets; and, at the same time, supports the efficacy of another remedy
sweat.
, by and by to be mentioned.

CCCCLXIII. Conjointly with the use of the first bleeding, of the first
vomiting and purging, and that of abstinence and watery drink, it must not be
forgot, that particular regard must be paid to temperature See par. CCLXXXII.
: For, if cold always debilitates, and if that is its proper operation See par.
CCVII.
, if it only seemingly acts otherwise, because heat succeeding to its action,
or alternating with it See XXXVII.
, converts it into a stimulant one, if it alone is adequate to the cure of the
smallpox See par. CXXI.
, and prevents the violence of that disease, if it is the best remedy for
catarrh See CCCCVII.
, and, when heat is avoided, of the greatest assistence in every sthenic
disease; it is not to be doubted, but that it is of the greatest benefit in the
diseases of the highest sthenic diathesis.

CCCCLXIV. Its operation in the smallpox, and in the rest of the sthenic
diseases, is not different, but altogether the same. Nay, in all the diseases
of this form, as cold alone is sufficient to effect the cure; so, whenever the
diathesis, which is the case in the diseases that make our present subject,
rising to its greatest rage, demands instant relief; because, in that case,
every moment's delay brings instant danger; because the remedies, which we have
mentioned, are sufficient for the solution of the disease, of which we have the
direct proof in the practice; because that degree of cold, which could produce
that effect, is neither always within our reach, nor can be managed by every
person; and many persons might not be disposed to believe its effects so
beneficial: For those reasons we should not desist from the plan of cure here
laid down From CCCCLIV. to CCCCLXV.
, and do our best for our patient, by taking off the blankets, and other
clothes, by cooling the room, and, instead of laying him on a couch or bed,
putting him into a chair.

CCCCLXV. This plan of cure should, for the most part, be preferred to that of
the most intense cold, for this further reason, that the shortness of the time
in which any one could possibly remain in it, would oblige him immediately to
return to higher temperature, which would produce a greater stimulus of
excitement, than that he had been under before his exposure, at least too great
a stimulus See XXVI.
.

CCCCLXVI. Since such is the operation of cold Look back from CCCCLXIII to
CCCCLXVI.
, the power falsely imputed to it of occasioning the striking in of the
measles, is to be imputed not to cold alone, but to heat and other stimuli;
giving, as has been explained, more excitement See XXVII. and CCCLXXX.
, than if it had not preceded. And why not? If cold does not interrupt the
eruption in the smallpox; but, on the contrary, by an enlargement of of the
diameters of the perspiratory vessels, which are shut up by sthenic diathesis,
highly promotes the discharge of that matter See CCCLXXVI.
: Why, in a most similar case, should its operation be supposed different, not
to say, diametrically opposite? Must we again have the trouble to refute the
false notion of thinking a cause precisely the same should produce contrary
effects? Cold diminishes the eruption in the smallpox: It makes it disappear
in the measles. What then? Take a nearer view of the fact: Is its effect in
both these cases to be supposed the same, or different? How comes any person to
know, that the matter, which has disappeared, is driven into the interior
parts? What proof will you bring of that? Confess the truth: And be candid
enough to acknowledge, that this is another relic of the alexipharmac doctrine,
handed down to us, which supposed, that the stimulus of heat as well as other
stimuli promoted, and that cold impeded, perspiration. And after a great man
had shown the error of that doctrine, both in the smallpox and other diseases
In peripne^mony he took his patients out of bed, and set them in a chair, for
the fal^e of cooling them, and avoiding the hurtful effect of heat.
, because he did not carry the application so far as the measles, neither has
any one of his followers, who never could step a nail's breadth beyond his
words. But it might have been observed, if observation had been any part of
their employment, that the measles was a sthenic disease as well as the
smallpox. Are not all the successful remedies in both of the debilitating
kind? And as it was manifest, that in the smallpox also cold debilitated, or
in the common language, acted as a sedative; might no^ some suspicion have,
from that very circumstance, occurred to their mind, that cold, in the measles,
did not stimulate, or act as an astringent; and in that way, repel the
eruption, but performed the same operation as in the smallpox? Is it, to such
a degree, difficult and up-hill work, to think and use one's own good sense,
that, a great part of mankind, even those who take upon them the business of
teaching and taking the lead of others, in no case, ever think of exercising a
moment's reflection of their own? But, in this case, it may be contended, that
the action of cold is peculiar, because, after the eruption, which it is
supposed to check, has disappeared, all the symptoms increase in rage and
violence. Consider what that circumstance makes for the argument, or whether it
makes any thing, and not absolutely against it? Was the action of cold, that is
supposed, followed by that of stimulant or debilitating powers? If it was by
the former, the cause of the mischief must be imputed to them; which, as has
been said just now in the last paragraph but one.
, produce excessive excitement after a previous application of cold, and more
than without it; if the latter, or debilitating powers were used, then there
would not be wanting a suspicion, that cold had a concern in the effect. But it
is not so: And, in every case, in which the action of cold has been followed by
sthenic diathesis, the true cause of that effect is not sufficiently guarding
against the stimulus of heat, as well as that of other noxious powers. And this
is most clearly proved by the use of heat being positively ordered, instead of
being forbid, in the common practice. Nor is that to be wondered at: For if the
cause of catarrh See from CCCCVII. to CCCCXII.
deceived physicians so much, the catarrhal symptoms in the measles could not
fail to deceive them. And, if doctrines, discarded in words, are often kept up
in fact; what was there to hinder this part of the alexipharmac doctrine from
meeting with a similar fate?

CCCCLXVII. If cold, therefore, can scarce be so manage^, as that the effect
occasioned by the accompaniment, the succession, or the alternation, of
stimulants with it, may be prevented, whether that be the fault of the
physician, or owing to the difficulty of the nature of the thing Turn back to
CCCCLXV. and CCCCLXVI.
; it is, notwithstanding, a rule in common to the measles and other exanthemata
of the same stamp, to avoid heat, and compensate for the degree by the greater
duration of cold, and to guard with all possible care against every stimulant
power. It is now then most evident, that the opinion of cold being peculiarly
hurtful in the measles, both in that and every other disease of the same form,
falls to the ground.

A Repetition of the Cure.
CCCCLXVIII. After using the remedies which have been mentioned from CCCCLIV.
to CCCCI. XVIII.
, when the symptoms are renewed, the same train of medicines must be again gone
through: Blood must be again taken, emetics and purgatives again administered;
nor must we desist from the use of the refrigerant and attenuant plan: And all
these particulars must be executed, till the tumult of the symptoms be allayed,
and the healthy state, at least for the time, be restored; and perhaps the
repetition may be required a third time or oftener: After doing which:

CCCCLXIX. If the diathesis seems now nearly removed, if the affection of the
head, of the lungs, or any internal one, seems alleviated or repelled; and yet
there is some apprehension of a likelihood of the return of the disease: in
that case, recourse must be had to more gentle debilitating powers. Sweating,
the stimulus accompanying the first operation of which, the body, as the
diathesis is now rendered mild or ended, will be able to bear, must be
preferred to bleeding, vomiting, and purging. But before proceeding to speak of
it, it seems proper to say a few things upon the sum total of blood that should
be taken during the course of the disease.

CCCCLXX. As in single bleedings, so also in the whole quantity of blood to be
taken, the sum should be a mean betwixt those, which the common run of
physicians approve, while some think too much, some too little, should be
taken. The reason for this recommendation is strengthened, by the consideration
of there being now less occasion for shedding a great deal of the vital fluid,
since the cure is now more divided among the other remedies that have been
spoken of. The age must be regarded, as was formerly recommended See CCCCLV.
, the former mode of life must be looked to, the quantity of stimulus, that may
lately have preceded the morbid state, must be considered, and the state of the
body compared with the degree of the symptoms and the effect of the cure. From
those circumstances a judgment should be formed of bleeding and other
evacuations; and it should be estimated, what further of the same sort may seem
proper to be put in practice, or what difference of management may be required.
Upon the whole, it will be found, that there will be the less occasion for any
one medicine, the more freely others have been brought into use; and it will be
understood, that the danger of too great evacuation will be thereby avoided,
and the health better secured See CCLXXXVI. and CCCV.
.

CCCCLXXI. With respect to the kind of bleeding, it should always be made from
a very large vein; because the cutting a lesser one, or opening an artery, does
not afford a sufficient quantity for the relief of the vessels, and art^riotomy
is further attended with certain inconveniences The blood is ready to break out
again after the tying up; and if, as some advise, the arterial twig should be
cut through, it diminishes the number of the few accesses to this mode of
bleeding; neither does there seem to be any use in destroying such vessels,
especially as no good purpose can be shown for doing so.
. As far as any certain rule, in an affair of such varie^y, can be established,
two pounds of blood in three or four days, with the assistance of the other
remedies, will, for the most part, be sufficient at the middle age of life, and
less at a more early or later period.

CCCCLXXII. All bleeding should be followed by vomiting and purging, so long as
any considerable part of the sthenic diathesis remains; nor should the other
parts of cure, that have been pointed out, be neglected. But purging, a single
dose of which can at any time, bring back a fit of the gout; which cures the
sthenic cynanche or common inflammatory sore throat, and the mild erysipelas,
when even the face or head is affected; which is of manifest detriment in
fevers; which, in dyspepsia, in asthma, and every sort of diseases depending
upon debility, whether direct or indirect, does very great and conspicuous
mischief; and is a great part of the very bad, common method of cure over the
whole form of asthenic diseases; in proportion as it ought to be avoided in all
those diseases, should be as certainly laid hold of in sthenic diseases, and
not omitted in any considerable one, such as those are that require bleeding,
but be managed according to the directions given See CCCCLXI.
lately, and as it was directed to be managed before See CCLXXXIII.
. And we must, above all things, be on our guard against that diffidence in the
use of this remedy, as well as in that of vomiting, where they are seviceable,
and that confidence in them when of disservice, both introduduced by the
spasmodic doctrine; and know that they were both admitted upon a false and
absurd principle. The principle, at least with respect to purging, was, that it
diminished perspiration, and, therefore, was understood not to act as an
antispasmodic. A balance betwixt the excretion by the belly and that on the
surface was talked of, and they were held for opposite operations. In such
theoretical nonsense they deserted their only good leader, at least in those
diseases, who alternated his bleedings and purgings, and, as I have found upon
the best foundation.
.

CCCCLXXIII. As nothing in asthenic diseases has been more used than these two
modes of evacuation, nothing with more hurt, and often with instantaneous
destruction; so, for that very reason, nothing is more happy and successful
than their use in the cure of sthenic diseases.

CCCCLXXIV. It is scarce credible to say, how far the aversion to the
alexipharmac method of cure has had the effect of branding the very best
medicines, what a depraved use of them it has suggested, and to what a degree
it has perverted their proper use. Not to repeat what has been formerly said of
that kind in other instances; sweating, which is of the highest service, and a
most efficacious means of cure, in every moderate sthenic diathesis, in every
degree of it, that is not the highest, or where it presses not upon any organ
of importance to life; that is, in all the diseases of this form, except in the
beginning of those of which we are here treating, has, however, of late been
completely banished from the cure of every one of them, but one, not only, as
useless, but as hurtful; which has chiefly happened since the spasmodic
doctrine began to be received into this country, and, for a few years only,
gradually to gain ground Turn back to CCCCLXIX.
.

CCCCLXXV. But, in truth and fact, except rheumatism (which, at least as
produced by one form of a medicine, it is allowed to cure), if it most
certainly either relieves or removes the sthenic cynanche, erysipelas itself,
and catarrh, and the simple synocha, in proportion to the more free or sparing
use of it; if that be known to the very vulgar, and most certainly to
physicians, of any other than the spasmodic practice; what reason, what certain
and well proved fact, will any one bring, to show why sweating should not be
used, after the most violent diathesis is much diminished by the other
medicines, and is now reduced to that small degree, to which that remedy is
adapted; what eloquence would be requisite to bring any man of sense into such
a persuasion?

CCCCLXXVI. They will say, that the heat, which accompanies the first part of
the operation of sweating, may be hurtful; for as he never made trial of it, he
has it not in his power to say, that for certain it will be hurtful It is
laughable to hear such persons talk of their practice, from which they never
can receive information; it being not the effect of any thing they know
themselves, but what they have been told by others. In that way, without any
exercise of judgment, without a single observation, that they can call their
own in the course of a long life, do they jog on, like the blind beggar led by
his more faithful dog, or, like children in the play of blind Harry, groping
about with their eyes tied up, through the whole course of a practice boasted
of, God knows, by no body who knows it but themselves.
. As that effect will readily be admitted in an high rage of diathesis,
threatening indirect debility If the diathesis should rise within two or three
degrees of indirect debility, in that case the heat of the first part of a
sweat, by exhausting the little excitement that remains, may have a most
hurtful effect. But if the diathesis be any where below that high point, the
addition of stimulus can be borne for the short time of its continuance; and be
afterward much more than compensated by the large and continued flow over all.
; it will not also be granted, that in a moderate degree of the diathesis,
either from the beginning, or effected by (...) other remedies, and,
consequently, after the plan of cure, that we have laid down, has been
executed, that such heat will not be compensated by the great profusion of
fluids taken away over the whole body; and that, when this part of the vascular
system has been freed from a violent stimulus, the diminution of excitement
will not be more equal in all the vessels, and over the whole nervous system.
If the numerous vessels, that open into the intestines and into the stomach,
are so powerful in diminishing sthenic diathesis, how should a similar
evacuation in the similar perspiratory vessels have no tendency to produce the
same effect? With which reasoning, if the facts just now related be further
conjoined, what will any person have to say against the use of sweating, when a
degree of heat, not greater than what cannot be avoided, attending the
operation of the sweat, can no longer be hurtful, and the sweat itself
certainly to be of great service In an excitement of sixty-seven, within three
degrees of indirect debility, the heat in the first part of the sweat, by
adding these, might kill the patient, if you will, without leaving any chance
of relief from its evacuant effect. But, if the excitement be no higher than
60, the addition of the three degrees will keep greatly within the point of
indirect debility, and, therefore, be safe* while the succeeding evacuation may
reduce the excitement perhaps 10, and bring it within the range of
predisposition; and a new course, or a little prolongation of this, carry it
down to the point of health, and finish the cure.
. Let the spasmodic caviller against the use of that remedy, in the cases of
sthenic affection where it is admissable, mus^er up all his facts and all his
theories, let him turn himself into all shapes, he will never produce a solid
argument against this remedy. But what, again, is all this about? Will there
never be an end of running from one extreme of error into the opposite? Shall
no mean be found betwixt the Alexipharmac plan of cure, and an equally bad or
worse one? If that doctrine hesitated not to prescribe sweating in the rage of
a peripneumony, and that too by means of the most heating stimulant powers;
does it therefore follow that a plan of cure must be admitted, which rejects
the certain and safe use of that remedy, when conducted by the most gentle
means? If it was the opinion of Dr. Sydenham, that heat should be avoided in
the cure of sthenic diseases, which was quite right, as heat certainly
increases the excitement; are we, for that reason, to avoid that tolerable
degree of heat, which accompanies a remedy the most powerful in restoring the
healthy state, and, thereby, deprive ourselves of great benefit upon the whole?
If such persons did not know, that several remedies diminished excitement more
powerfully than any one; and, if they were to be forgiven for that; were they
also to be excused for not seeing, what any empiric might have seen, that is,
that some things were of service, and others of disservice; was that want not
of genius, which is not required of them, but of common sense, also to be
pardoned? If thinking without a leader, and making any sort of discovery, was
too much, and not to be expected from them; is it not somewhat surprising, that
out of a thousand persons, who had treated of every part of medicine, and
entertained different sentiments from one another, in some measure right, and,
no doubt, wrong too, they could squeeze no information, but always trod in the
footsteps of one single man?

CCCCLXXVII. Sweat, therefore, after the management that has been mentioned, is
to be excited, and so much the more determinedly, if there should seem
something still wanting to the complete return of health, some degree of
sthenic diathesis still remaining, and a spontaneous tendency to it should
appear.

CCCCLXXVIII. When the signs of a spontaneous sweat arising are perceived,
nothing more is to be done, but first to lay the clothes about the patient,
remove the sheets, put the blankets next to his body, guard against the
approach of air, and keep up the discharge for a sufficient length of time, at
least ten or twelve hours. If, by this management, there shall ensue a copious
and universal flow of sweat, there will be no occasion for giving a medicine.
After it has succeeded, and increased the relief formerly procured; if it
should sink in toward the end it, should at last be supported by Dover's
powder, or by laudanum alone, covering the body, so as that it may get as
quickly as possible to the surface, till the expected benefit be obtained. And
to this management it must be added, that, if a draught of cold water be
sometimes given, and then the body well covered up and properly managed, the
business often succeeds to our wish. But, as in the other cases, that belong to
this part of our indication, the sweating must then only be set on foot, when
the mediocrity of the diathesis, procured by the other remedies, will permit;
so in the smallpox and measles, because there is occasion for a certain time
to allow the matter to pass away, we must also keep that in our eye, and never
be too early in making trial of this remedy. Lastly, if the heat should happen
to prove hurtful, if at any time the flow of the sweat should be attended with
less relief, or with some inconvenience, it should be immediately stopped: For
it was not for no purpose, but for that of making the remedies supply the
defects of one another, and of reducing the excitement more equally over the
whole body, that a number was recommended.

CCCCLXXIX. In all the cases of a violent diathesis, all the remedies that have
been mentioned, are more or less, and differently on different occasions, in
proportion as the remaining part of diathesis may require, each in a larger or
smaller quantity, to be brought into play, and the curative circle enlarged:
And besides them,

CCCCLXXX. Some of slighter consequence, such as acids and nitre; some of
uncertain use, such as leeching, cupping, and blistering, are mentioned, as of
the first consequence. Of these, the acids, in so far as they render the drink
more agreeable, and, in an affection of the lungs do not produce cough, and
prove, in a certain measure, refrigerant, are to be permitted; and more
certainly, if there should be a desire for them. Every body should know, that
the refrigerant power of nitre is less than is commonly thought. In rheumatism,
and the sthenic cynanche if the latter should be unusually severe, blisters,
leeches, and cupping-glasses, applied in the neighborhood of the inflamed
parts, may, in some measure, be of service. Nor does there seem to be any
reasonable objection to the clapping a cap of recently dug-up earth upon the
head in the case of phrenitis.

The other Part of the Indication of Cure.
CCCCLXXXI. To pass over to the other part of the Indication of cure CCCC^L
: When there is a gentler diathesis in the habit, as in the other phlegmasiae,
and sthenic affections, that have not been yet named in the cure; as in the
mildest state of erysipelas, of the sthenic cynanche, catarrh, simple synocha,
the scarlet fever, and the mild smallpox and measles; a smaller force of
debilitating power is required; and, therefore, neither all the remedies that
have been mentioned, nor in general so much of each, as in the other part are
demanded.

CCCCLXXXII. In all these cases, not even with the exception of rheumatism,
which depends upon a very great diathesis, bleeding is not necessary; and with
the exception of that disease, bleeding, with any degree of freedom, is
hurtful: For, when the excitement is not the greatest, and, on the contrary, is
moderate, scarce exceeding that degree that produces the predisposition to
other diseases; in that case it is absurd to make use of a most debilitating
power, by way of a remedy, as if we had to combat a very violent disease. And,
since the intention in bleeding is to prevent an ultimate excess of exciting
power from producing a cessation of excitement in death, an event of which
there is not the least danger, in a moderate diathesis, such as that, which is
the cause of the diseases here in question; for that reason, the cure must be
adapted to the cause, and bleeding must be either abstained from altogether, or
very sparingly used.

CCCCLXXXIII. It is not, therefore, only in diseases of debility, which belong
to the other form (in most of which it has, nevertheless, been, and still is,
the custom, to spill more or less of the vital fluid); but also in all the
diseases of this form, except the very violent ones, that the lancet is to be
restrained.

CCCCLXXXIV. Though in rheumatism the diathesis often runs considerably high,
the usual profuse bleeding, is not, however, required. For, as every diathesis
is always greater in some parts than in any other equal one, so it is with the
sthenic diathesis in this case; which is ^ound much greater upon the surface of
the body, than in any other equal space within. And the reason is, that the
most powerful noxious agent, heat, succeeding to cold, or so alternating with
it, that its own stimulus is increased by its effect See XXXVII.
, directs its principal energy to the surface of the body. Hence, after
excessive bleeding, the disease, notwithstanding, often obstinately recurs. The
cause of which fact, if the principles of this doctrine be well understood,
cannot be obscure. Bleeding diminishes the sthenic diathesis chiefly in the red
vessels, less in any of their extremities, least of all in the perspiratory
vessels, and those disposed of in the tract of the muscles; and still less in
the last, because the operation of the bleeding is counteracted by that of
heat: Which is an explanation confirmed by the certain testimony of physicians;
who often complain that their favorite remedy sails them.

CCCCLXXXV. Upon which account, sweating, which we spoke of so lately, is
remarkably adapted to she cure of this disease: To it, therefore, after a
previous bleeding to twelve ounces, and observing the rule of temperature and
diet before directed, must we have immediate recourse, if the diathesis happens
to be considerably violent, and is signalized by heat of the body, by pains
raging most in the night time, and by a strong and hard pulse. In order to
render the sweat universal, and of sufficient duration, it should be brought
out by Dover's powder, or laudanum, as before hinted, and kept up for twelve
hours in full ^low, and then some hours longer, or till the abatement of the
symptoms, in the form of a moisture or free perspiration, and repeated when the
symptoms return. The rest of the cure must be entrusted to low diet and an
exact temperature.

CCCCLXXXVI. In this case, after the sweating course, and also in that of a
simple synocha, of the scarlet ^ever, of the sthenic sore-throat, of catarrh,
erysipelas, and the gentle smallpox and measles, when the diathesis is
somewhat considerable, but far short of that rage which constitutes the case of
cure first taken notice off; we should use either a very small bleeding, and
then chiefly the evacuations beforementioned See CCCV.
; then a slight and short sweat ought to be kept up not longer than eight or
ten hours; and, during the whole time of the cure, we should go on with
abstinence, weak drink, rest of body and mind, and cold, unless in the time of
sweating, and even then, with as little heat as possible; and, finally, with
tranquillity of mind, as these were formerly enjoined: The united use of which
is perfectly equal to the removal of any of these diseases; but there will not
always be occasion for them all.

CCCCLXXXVII. Often so gentle a diathesis occurs, that one or two of them, once
or twice employed, is sufficient for the cure: So slight a diathesis that is,
in which, unless for a little at first, the shivering, langour, and then heat,
is very moderate, pointing out a proportional slightness of diathesis upon the
surface; in which there is scarce any lassitude, showing the same moderation of
diathesis in the organs of voluntary motion; in which the vigor of the stomach
remains, manifesting a moderate excess of excitement in it; in which, in fine,
the other functions, over the whole body are sufficiently calm, and only suffer
conspicuously in the laboring part: In these cases, often a single purge with
glauber's salt, often, without that, cold, rest, and abstinence, have conducted
the morbid excitement to its salutary degree. A thousand times has the sthenic
cynanche, a thousand times has catarrh and the simple synocha, nay erysipelas
itself with affection of the face, been in that way removed. And the scarlet
fever is often so gentle as to yield to the same management.

CCCCLXXXVIII. In this way must a constant regard be had to the degree of
excitement and diathesis in the method of cure, and often terms must be
disregarded. For, as it was with this view, that the simple synocha was before
distinguished from the phrenitic, and the gentle erysipelas from the violent;
so, it often happens, that catarrh rises to that magnitude that threatens or
brings on a peripneumony, and that the latter proceeds with much more
gentleness than usual. In which circumstances, it is the degree of excitement
alone, that ought to govern the physician, without respect to names.

CCCCLXXXIX. Another useful caution here is, to judge of the state of the
pulse, of the temperature upon the skin, and of the skin in other respects,
with good sense, and due reflection upon these principles. The frequency of the
pulse in all sthenic diseases is moderate: With that there is conjoined some
hardness and ^ulness. Whenever, therefore, the pulse is very quick, it is to be
suspected, that the sthenic diathesis has passed into the asthenic, the
excessive excitement into a cessation of excitement, or that the disease has
been sthenic from the beginning. To remove which doubt and ascertain the truth,
the habit of body, the age, must be considered, and an enquiry be made to know,
whether the disease has been preceded, or not, by contagion. Heat of the skin
is in common to these diseases and fevers, which are diseases of an oppsite
stamp, and therefore a doubtful mark. Which, as it depends upon an interruption
of perspiration, from whatever source, is never to be strained into a proof of
the state of excitement. And, since dryness of the skin, which is in common to
the same diseases however different from each other, in the asthenic diseases
depends upon debility; in order to know the amount of what that symptom means,
the other symptoms and the exciting hurtful powers, should be considered. In
fine, the only enquiry should be, whether the excitement is abundant or
deficient, and all the signs should be consulted with that view; nor are we to
judge rashly of any peculiar form.

CCCCXC. When, therefore, the signs, that have been related, are compared with
all the rest and with the diathesis, we are then to set about the antisthenic
or stimulant plan of cure. The violent sthenic diseases, which we first
considered can scarce be confounded with the contrary ones; the more gentle are
daily confounded. But, while it is easy to distinguish them from the asthenic
diseases resembling them; if, however, any person should think the marks of
distinction ambiguous, let him know, that, upon account of that gentleness,
though the disease under examination should be asthenic, blood is not even to
be let, much less under the apprehension that they may turn out asthenic to
which last so debilitating a power is destructive, as it has so often already
been said upon former occasions; and, with that information, let him
understand, that his method of cure conducted in that way, will be fenced and
secured from all mistake. For, if the diathesis, though sthenic, be slight,
bleeding will often precipitate it into the opposite, and will at the best be
useless Suppose the diathesis be two degrees above the highest of the points of
predisposition, at 57; and bleeding to the degree of producing 35 of
debilitating influence be employed; it is evident, the excitement will go down
not only the 17 necessary to bring it to to the point of health, but sink to
22, that is, 3 below the range of predisposition to asthenic disease, and
therefore complete the conversion of the sthenic into an asthenic disease.
. If, on the contrary, the disease that passes for a sthenic one, should, in
its progress, show itself an evident asthenic one; in that case every drop of
blood that may have been taken will go to the increase of the disease See
CCLXIX. CCLXXXI. CCXC.
. Yet this pernicious and daily practice sends more men out of this world, than
all the curses of human life See par. CCCCVI. toward the end.
.

CCCCXCI. As abstinence, cold, and the management of the belly are sufficient
to prevent a gentle state of the smallpox; so when that proper preparatory
plan has been neglected, and now a crowded eruption appears; besides those,
trial must be made also of the other remedies CCCCLIII. to CCCCLXVIII.
, except sweat. But sweat must be avoided, because the tendency of the stimulus
accompanying it, by increasing the sthenic diathesis on the surface, would be
to check the perspirable fluid, and detain the contagious matter under the
scarf-skin, and produce that pyrexia, symptomatic of the inflammation, which is
called the secondary fever. This particularity of cure is taken from the
particularity of the symptom just now mentioned, and forms no objection to the
principles of this work. In perfect consistency with which, though there is all
the proof that can be derived from sure practice, that the remedies we have
mentioned are sufficient; yet, before the eruption comes on, there is nothing
can be objected either to sweating or bleeding, as remedies in common to this
with every other sthenic disease The smallpox is, in one word, to be treated
as any sthenic disease, according to its degree of morbid state, and the
eruption is only to be regarded during the period of its existence, either with
respect to the exception of sweating then, or of any thing else.
. In fine, as the success of low diet, cold and purging, in this manner, is
certain; at the same time, the other remedies, that remove sthenic diathesis,
in this case likewise operate to the same effect It is not, that low diet,
cold, and purging, operate by any peculiarity, but because they debilitate to
the degree, and in the manner required, of the other remedies.
. It was proper to say so much for the sake of showing the unexceptional
steadiness and universality of the principles of this work. Nor are we to
think, that the smallpox and measles, differ from other sthenic diseases
attended with pyrexia, but in the particularity of their eruption in running a
certain course, and not admitting of an accelerated cure.

CCCCXCII. We are not to wait the arrival of the symptoms of debility, that
follow a violence of diathesis, and threaten certain death by indirect
debility, with the view, forsooth, that, when they have happened, we may cure
them: On the contrary, they ought to be prevented by the early administration
of the remedies, now so fully commented upon. If that should be omitted, the
consideration of the diseases that will be the consequence, and which is
altogether an asthenic consideration, must be referred to the asthenic form.

CCCCXCIII. As often as sthenic diathesis happens to be conjoined with the
pyrexia, which is induced by the operation of stimulants, of acrid substances,
of compression, of obstruction, and similar hurtful powers acting upon a
sensible part, of which we have examples in gastritis, enteritis, nephritis,
cystitis, hysteritis, hepatitis, or the inflammations of the stomach, of the
intestines, of the kidneys, of the bladder of urine, of the womb, of the liver
See LXXXI. LXXXIII. LXXXV. LXXXVII.
; the diathesis, because it aggravates the pyrexia, should be removed by its
respective remedies, to wit, the debilitating ones. And, when neither it nor
the asthenic diathesis is present, nothing should be attempted: But, if the
asthenic diathesis should be present, which very readily may happen; the
stimulant plan should be proceeded upon, to prevent a very bad disease As
asthenic diseases to sthenic ones are in the proportion of ninety-seven to
three of the hundred; such also must be the frequency of predisposition to
them: The inference from which is, that as we are seldom in the most perfect
state of health, and consequently, for the most part, under some degree of
predisposition, all the chances are greatly in favor of that predisposition
being the asthenic one. Hence, the impropriety of treating all local diseases
in the same way, and as if they were general sthenic ones. Death has been too
often the consequence of that practice, when the local fault, for which it was
intended, was no m^re, perhaps, than a thorn pushed under a nail, a cut, or
contusion of a finger. In such circumstances, however fully the person may have
lived, wine is withheld, fluid vegetable matter prescribed, and the routine of
every species of evacuation gone through. Dismal are the consequences of
gunshot wounds on this plan of cure. Turn back to the paragraphs LXXX. and
LXXXI. and the notes subjoined to them.
. Nor, when that is as much as possibly attended to, are we to forget, that, in
so doing, the principle affection is not touched; that, on the contrary, it is
its effect, not its cause, that is tampered with; and that the full
consideration of such cases belongs to the local diseases, afterward to be
taken notice of.

CCCCXCIV. Besides all the remedies now mentioned, it is of advantage in every
degree of diathesis to keep the mind easy and unruffled with passion or
emotion; a practice that in the very high degrees of the diathesis is
indispensibly necessary. Our attention will especially be directed to this
particular, when we observe, that the stimulus of thinking and of any passion,
carried to a great height, has had a share in the production of the disease.

CCCCXCV. In mania, therefore and pervigilium, this direction must be
particularly, and as much as possible, attended to. In the latter of which
diseases, thinking, and every state of commotion, and more certainly an
habitual practice in them, must be shunned, especially before going to bed.
When the patient is resting there, he should have stupid books read to him, all
inordinate desire, the propensity to revenge, the remembrance of every degree
of criminality, of which he may have been guilty, should be diverted from his
recollection See above CCCCXXXIII.
.

CCCCXCVI. That fact of great consequence, to give corroboration to this whole
doctrine, is confirmed by this other, that the same things, which are
serviceable in pervigilium, or the morbid watchful state, are also serviceable
in mania, or madness, only administered in a higher degree, as that is a
disease of a higher degree of excitement. Thus, it is not ease and tranquillity
of mind that are to be prescribed here, both of which are quite gone, but a
state opposite to that high commotion of spirits and irregular vigor in the
exercise of the intellectual function: And, as an excessive energy of the
intellectual powers, or of the animal spirits, or both, are the most noxious
powers in this case; for that reason, the patient should be struck with fear
and terror, and driven, in his state of insanity, to despair: As a remedy
against the great excitement of the organs of voluntary motion, the labor of
draft-cattle should be imposed on him, and assiduously continued; his diet
should be the poorest possible, and his drink only water See CCCXXVIII.
CCCCXXX. CCCCXXXV. CCCCXXXVI.
: In water as cold as possible, the patient should be immersed, and kept under
it, covered all over, for a long time, till ^e is near killed.

CCCCXCVII. If, in phrenitis the brain, in peripneumony the lungs, in
rheumatism the external joints, possess more diathesis than any other part; why
may not mania and pervigilium consist more in an affection of the brain, upon
which the principal noxious powers act, than of the other parts, over which the
influence of those powers is less considerable? Lastly, since remedies, the
first action of which falls upon other parts, are of service in those diseases
Part I. Chap. II.
, that proves, that not even in them, where you might most be disposed to
believe it, the whole morbid affection depends upon the part conspicuously
affected; but that the whole body is concerned in it, that the excitability is
one uniform undivided property over all; that the force both of the exciting
hurtful powers and of the remedies is directed to the whole, with the
inequality so often mentioned Part I. Chap. IV.
; and that the foundations of this doctrine are sure and stable.

CCCCXCVIII. As these are the principal hurtful powers in mania and
pervigilium, and the brain principally affected; so in obesity, the hurtful
powers most considerable are animal food Because no effect can arise without a
cause, the exciting powers, therefore, must here have operated with more force,
than in the other case; and if it should be objected, that the circumstances in
both cases were equal, the difference then must be set to the account of the
greater vigor of the excitability in the case of obesity.
and rest, or sedentary life; in consequence of which last, the stimulus of
exercise, which, by wearying and fatiguing the body, tends to indirect
debility, is understood to be wanting. But, since, in consequence of using the
same food, both in quality and quantity, and the same indulgence in rest and
case, some persons become fat, others continue lean; from thence it is
ascertained, that all the digestive powers have more force in the former, than
in the latter, and consequently, that the other exciting hurtful powers have
contributed to the effect, and that a proportional excitement follows. Of the
hurtful powers, that belong to this place, an easy exercise of the intellectual
faculty, and tranquillity of mind, which are moderate stimuli, favor obesity;
over strained thinking, and habitual indulgence in passion, such as that of
anger, the repetition of which constitutes ill nature, oppose it. Corporeal
motion, which diminishes the quantity of fluids in the system, and, as often as
it is considerable, proves fatiguing and debilitating, opposes it. Equally
unfavourable to it is hard drinking; which, in a similar manner, wears out the
excitement, by constantly wasting the excitability from the high degree or long
continuance of its stimulus. On the contrary, the powers that favor it, are
those that act gently, and with some excess: but never attain that high degree
of activity, that inclines to indirect debility: They are powers that go on
softly and pleasantly, that particularly keep up moderation in the
perspiration, and thereby fill the vessels with blood; but, because motion is
avoided, they do not very much increase the excitement of the vessels, and by
means of the tranquillity of motion kept up in the latter, allow a fluid, that
would otherwise pass off by the external pores of the surface, to turn aside
into the cells of ^at. Hence, though, as it has been said before, an abundance
of blood is indeed a very great stimulus; yet, without other stimuli, and that
most powerful one, which muscular motion affords; it is evident, that a
considerable degree of stimulus can be borne without any considerable disease,
and that it always produces a predisposition to sthenic diseases, but does not
immediately bring them on. Hence, it is understood what place in the scale of
excessive excitement, or of sthenic diathesis, obesity holds; what the degree
of stimulant power is, and what the stimuli in particular, are that produce it.

CCCCXCIX. As the degree of curative force must be accommodated to the degree
of force in the cause See CIX.
; hence it must be observed, that for the cure also of this disease the common
indication is sufficient XLVIII. CCCCLIII.
; that is, that the excess of excitement must be reduced to the salutary
degree, and a remedy opposed to every hurtful power, equal to the removal of it.

D. In this case, therefore, as food is the principal hurtful power, less of it
should be given, and more exercise engaged in. These are sufficient for the
cure CCCCXCVIII.
.

DI. But, for the sake of bringing both further confirmation, as well as
illustration of this doctrine; it is to be observed, that all the powers, which
very much affect the excitement, and in a greater degree, than the hurtful
power of this disease mentioned above, and that have a tendency, by their
stimulant operation, to indirect debility, have the same effect; that they
either prevent or cure obesity, and continue productive of that effect, till
they induce that degree of meagerness which is connected with debility.

DII. The best method of lowering the diet, is to combine a quantity of
vegetable matter with a moderate portion animal. The next rule to that, is to
refrain from the latter, and use the former in greater abundance. The first of
these is suitable to all such persons as are liable to diseases of debility,
such as the gout, the indigestion that after a long time succeeds to luxury,
asthma, epilepsy, and similar others. The latter management is more
accommodated to those, who otherwise enjoy great vigor, are under
predisposition to sthenic pyrexia, and in the flower of their age. But, it is
not, even in the latter state of the body, to be prosecuted, unless for a time;
because, such is the debilitating influence of that practice, that, while it is
sufficient to remove any degree of obesity, especially with the addition of
exercise, it is found to have signal efficacy in producing asthenic diathesis,
and all the diseases depending on that.

PART THE FOURTH.
THE SECOND FORM OF GENERAL DISEASES. OR THE ASTHENIC DISEASES.
CHAP. I.
DIII. THE form of asthenic diseases, and which is to be called asthenia, for
the sake of distinguishing it from the form of sthenic diseases, which is
called sthenia, is a state of the living body, in which all the functions are
more or less weakened, often disturbed, almost always with a more conspicuous
affection of some function. In the treatment of which, that order will be
observed, in which the progress from the smallest disease of this kind to the
greatest, through all the intermediate degrees, is to be followed out.

DIV. In this part of our subject, there occurs a great variety of symptoms; of
which, because it is without meaning, and even misleading, no use is to be made
in marking the scale of diseases. But, for the sake of placing what is about to
be delivered in a clearer, if not a more specious, point of view, we shall
begin with a simple enumeration of the principal diseases to be afterward
fully treated of.

DV. The asthenic diseases are macies, inquietude, or restlessness without
sleep, the asthenic amentia, the scabby eruption, the slight diabetes, the
asthenic scarlet fever, the rickets; the haemorrhaeae, or general bleeding
discharges, such as menorrhaea, or a morbid excess of the menses, epistaxis, or
bleeding from the nose, haemorrhois, or the piles: and also three morbid states
seemingly in appearance opposite to these, the loitering, impaired, or
suppressed menstruation, next come thirst, vomiting, indigestion, diarrhaea, or
loose belly, and colic without pain; after these the affections of children, as
the worms, the general consumption, called tabes, dysentery and cholera in the
gentle state of these two; angina, the scurvy, the gentle hysteria,
rheumatalgia, asthenic cough, cystirhaea, or mucus discharge from the bladder;
the gout of strongish persons, asthma, cramp, anasarca, dyspepsia with pain,
the violent hysteria, the gout of weakened persons, the hypochondriasis,
dropsy, chin-cough, epilepsy, or the falling sickness, palsy, the lock-jaw,
apoplexy, tetanus; lastly fevers, as the quartan, tertian, and quotidian,
intermittents or remittents, dysentery, and cholera, both in their violent
degree, synochus, simple typhus, the gangrenous sore throat, the confluent
smallpox, the pestilential typhus, and the plague.

DVI. This scale of asthenic diseases is to be understood in this way, that
those diseases, which in their most usual state are slight, and claim a higher
place in the scale, are sometimes more, sometimes most, violent; and those that
in their most common state are severe, such as the gout of weakened persons,
the pestilential fevers, and the plague itself, sometimes proceed with the
greatest gentleness See par. CCCCL.


DVII. The affections of parts, which often accompany those diseases, such as
ulcer, tumor, increased excretion, bleeding discharge, inflammation, spasm,
convulsion, point out indeed some degree of debility as their cause, but in
such sort that the same degree may happen without them. Hence, because it is
the influence of debility that is fundamentally regarded in this scale; with
the diseases, that are often conjoined with these affections, others, without
them, as hysteria and the cramp are blended; and, with the cases that are
accompanied with spasm and convulsion, dropsy is conjoined, by keeping to the
idea of an equal degree of debility; and all this without any regard to
remarkable symptoms, but keeping the degree of debility only in view. Neither
is the violent cholera kept back from its place among fevers, which last are
distinguished by failure in the intellect and affections of the head, because
it shows a degree of debility equal to the febrile. The idea in proportioning
this division is to show, that true morbid energy does not consist in an
affection of any parts, but of the whole body; and that the restoration of
health is not to be attempted by a change of the state of parts only, but,
without excluding that, by a change of the state of the whole system.

Of Leanness.
DVIII, Leanness is an asthenia, less discernible in the other functions, but
evident from the weakness of the digestive function; in consequence of which,
the system, though receiving proper aliment, does not become plump.

DIX. Since the cause of this disease is debility, both in the rest of the
system, and in the stomach and other organs of digestion; it thence follows,
that the general indication for the cure of it, should be chiefly directed to
the most languid part, that is, the organs of digestion and the perspiratory
vessels. More nourishing food, therefore, should be used, less labor
undertaken, and moisture on the surface, or too free perspiration, should be
checked by more rest of body, by proper gestation, and rubefaction, and a plan,
quite contrary to that which is suited to the cure of obesity should be pursued.

Of Restless Watching.
DX. In the asthenia called inquietudo, or restless watching, the other
functions are under some degree of languor, and the patient is affected with a
constant necessity to change his posture, and toss about his limbs without
being able to fall asleep.

DXI. As the cause in this case, in the same manner as in every other general
disease, is universal over the system; so its affects the organs of voluntary
motion, and the brain in particular, with the inequality so often formerly
mentioned See par. XLIX.
: Consequently, to remove the disease, ultimate excess in either mental labor,
or exertion in any passion, as well as the opposite extreme of deficiency in
either, should be avoided; and that stimulus of both, which is agreeable,
ultimately excessive corporeal labor when it has proved hurtful, as well as
deficient when it has had a concern in the cause, should be guarded against;
and the proper medium betwixt the extremes of excessive activity and indolence
restored: Or the disease should be repelled by wine, and the other stimuli
have, each its proportion, in the cure.

Of the Scabby Eruption.
DXII. In the scabby eruption, the face is pale, the skin discolored, dry,
lank, and variously disfigured with pustules; there is a lowness of spirits,
and the functions of the body weak and sluggish.

DXIII. In this case, while the debility is universal, there is a prevalence of
it in the perspiratory vessels. And, therefore, the chief parts of cure are,
together with the remedies, the operation of which is directed to the whole
system, such as nourishing food, strong drink, to support the perspiration by
its respective remedies; to bathe the surface of the body in tepid water, to
render it accessible to air, to order clean linen for the patient, and every
thing clean about his cloths.

Of the Gentle Diabetes.
DXIV. In that asthenia, which is named the gentle diabetes, there is an excess
in the quantity of urine discharged, but the profusion is not immoderate as in
the most violent case of the same name. The organ of respiration labors under
the same weakness and sluggishness, as in the scabby eruption.

DXV. To remove this affection much more frequent than it has been hitherto
believed the system should be stimulated by food See par. CCLXVI.
, by strong drink See CCLXVIII.
, and by proper exercise CCLXX.
, such as is neither immoderately excessive, and therefore debilitating nor
deficient in degree, and therefore, not supplying enough of stimulus: And,
above all things, the perspiration should be sustained. The contrivances for
checking the flow of urine, which have no existence, are to be passed from.

Of the Rickets,
DXVI. The rickets is an asthenia; to the general symptoms of which are added
an unusual bulk of the head, especially the fore part of it, and likewise of
the knees and abdomen, a flatness of the ribs and meagerness.

DXVII. The rickets is a disease of children, chiefly arising from
uncleanliness, want of dandling or exercise, cold, either without moisture or
with it, food not giving sufficient nourishment, and bad air.

DXVIII. For its cure the common asthenic indication must be employed;
remedies, of an opposite nature to the hurtful powers that excite the disease,
must be looked out for; the surface of the body should be kept clean See DXIII.
, the perspiration should be carefully restored by the stimulus of pure air and
of heat; the child should be more carefully dandled, and kept much in the open
air, animal food should be administered, vegetable withheld, and strong drink
allowed See CCXCV. CCCIII.
.

Of Retarded Menstruation.
DXIX. Retarded menstruation is also an, sthenia: In which, besides this
discharge not making its appearance at that time of life, when it should, other
evidences of debility, such as a slender make of body, weakness, laxity of
habit, want of appetite, or a craving for things not alimentary, paleness of
the skin, and similar symptoms, appear.

Of Impaired Menstruation.
DXX. Impaired menstruation is that state of asthenia; in which after it has
appeared, and the flow continued for some time, the discharge is made in too
sparing quantity, or after too long intervals of time, with other signs of
weakness accompanying it.

Of the suppression of Menstruation.
DXXI. Suppression of menstruation is that degree of asthenia, in which the
discharge is totally stopped at any period betwixt their natural commencement and
the time when, in the course of nature, they cease altogether.

CXXII. An enquiry must be made into the cause of natural menstruation, before
it would be proper to enter upon that of the retardation, or deficiency, of the
discharge in any of its degrees.

Of the Cause of Menstruation.
DXXIII. The cause of menstruation is a conformation of the vessels that pour
out the blood in this discharge, taking place at a certain time of life, that
is, about the age of puberty, and a stimulant energy in women, more powerful
than in the females of the other species of animals.

DXXIV. Of other animals there are very few, the females of which undergo any
sort of menstruation out of the venereal orgasm.

DXXV. As all the vessels are gradually unfolded in the course of the growth of
the body, so the same thing happens to the genital and uterine vessels, but
last of all to these. The ends of the latter, terminating, on the sides of the
womb about the age of puberty, are at last so very much expanded, as now to
transmit first the serous part of the blood, and then, after an effort kept up
for some time, pass to formal blood.

CXXVI. At this time of life a great change over the whole system takes place.
Now the desire for coition, a stimulus, never experienced before, produces a
commotion over the whole body; and, in preference to other parts, in the
genitals of both sexes, in the female, over the whole region of the ovaria,
womb, and vagina: By this stimulus, the uterus, its seat, being nearly
incessantly solicited, is the more powerfully affected, the more there is of
excitability, hitherto acted upon by no such stimulus, existing in the system.
Hence, among other organs, the muscular fibers of the next vessels, as well as
the nerves interwoven with them, undergo the highest degree of excitement: This
excitement increasing over the whole system, again increases that in the
uterus: The mutual contact of the sexes, whether in kissing, in shaking hands,
or otherwise, fires both sets of genitals, and the uterus in a remarkable
manner; but the actual embrace produces the highest degree of that effect. The
remembrance of each embrace remains, renews the dear idea of the delightful
scene, and continues more or less to excite the uterus.

DXXVII. This new affection is further cherished and nourished by every
stimulus that is usually applied to the system: Hence, in the absence, in the
presence, of the beloved object, at all times generally, scarce with the
exception of that which passes in dreaming, a stimulus so steady, and the more
powerful, that its novelty implies, that the excitability in this case is
entire, rouses the fibers of the vessels, already sufficiently unfolded, to
violent contractions. The blood is carried into the region of the uterus with
the greatest rapidity, a rapidity momentarily increased, in proportion as the
blood, by powerfully distending the vessels, and agitating them by its
impetuous flow, stimulates the fibers more and more, and thereby increases the
activity by which it is driven on. This is the first cause of menstruation: In
that way, the two circumstances, a sufficient enlargement of the diameters of
the vessels, and the stimulus acting more powerfully, from its novelty, upon
the unwasted excitability See DXXIII.
, are sufficient for the whole business.

DXXVIII. This state is not inconsistent with other states of the body, but
bears an analogy to some well known ones: Accordingly, different vessels, from
the mere difference of their diameters, are subservient to different purposes:
The perspiratory vessels are destined to the transmission of a vapor, the
excretory vessels of the alimentary canal to that of a thing fluid, the renal
vessels to that of a grosser one; so as to take off our surprise at finding
vessels fitted, by their degree of diameter, for the purpose of transmitting
red blood.

DXXIX. The reason that the females of other animals do not menstruate but in
their orgasm, and not at other times, is, that it is only at certain times that
they are exposed to that energy of stimulus which produces menstruation.

DXXX. How much is owing to the stimulus just now mentioned See DXXIII. DXXVI.
, in the production of menstruation, is further evident from the following
chain of facts: Which are, that, the less addicted to love women are, the less
they menstruate; the more they give way to that passion, the freer do they
experience this discharge within certain boundaries; that, before puberty, and
after the time of life when menstruation ceases (which are the two periods, at
which the fitness for effective love has not yet commenced, or is now passed,)
the menstrual discharge is constantly wanting; that the privation of enjoyment,
which, by its debilitating effect, produces chlorosis or the green sickness.
and other similar diseases, is remarkable for bringing on a menorrhoea, or a
retention of menstruation; and, finally, that girls, who are of a forward
growth, of great strength, and large limbs, and consequently sooner ripe for
love, are also more early in menstruation; while those, who are weakly, puny,
and of a small size, and, consequently, later in attaining to the period of
puberty, are proportionally late in attaining the first menstrual discharge.
Lastly, if, like all the other functions, that of love is limited at the same
time by its duration and degree; and if, as the commencement of the love
embraces is more or less early, it is proportionally more early or late in
coming to its final termination, and if the duration of menstruation does not
usually exceed that period; that fact also, which it certainly is, added to
those above, gives weight to our conclusion, and shows, in a clearer point of
view, how much menstruation depends upon the venereal emotion. It is to be
asserted, therefore, again DXXIII. DXXVI.
, that, besides the conformation of the vessels, suited to the function of
menstruation, and the stimulus which has been mentioned(k), there is occasion
for no other circumstance to explain either commencement, establishment, or
continuation, of the menstrual discharge.

DXXXI. The cause of full menstruation, and that of a moderate degree of it,
happening within the boundaries of health, is the same; only differing in
degree; the degree of the latter being smaller, and that of the former greater.

DXXXII. And, as the stimuli, mentioned above, explain, why women menstruate
more than the females of other animals; so their immoderate operation upon
women serves to show, why their effect, the menstrual discharge, becomes
greater than natural Women menstruate more than other females, because they are
subjected to a higher degree of the stimulus, which is its cause; and such
women as are exposed to more of the same stimulus than others, will also
experience more of the effect, precisely upon that same principle.
.

DXXXIII. The stimuli that produce abundant menstruation, short of morbid
state, are unchaste ideas, and a high energy of passion. In this way, the
influence of reading to ones' self, or to others, of conversation, of pictures,
contrived to kindle up lustful appetite, and the uncovering of parts that
modesty conceals, which all produce a lively impression on the imagination of
the thing so much desired; can be indistinctly felt by none perhaps but
eunuchs. The same is the effect of nourishing food, and generous drink, and
high seasoning; and hence the proverb, without meat and drink love starves:
Likewise, that degree of exercise, or even labor, that does not prove
fatiguing, but that keeps within the boundary of stimulant operation; as also
an abundance of blood, both from that circumstance and from rich diet; lastly,
frequent and ardent dalliance, or inconcessa bujus imitatio; all these,
increase the menstrual discharge, in proportion to the high degree of their
stimulus, but still do not carry their effect to morbid excess.

DXXXIV. The same conclusion applies to the effect of these stimuli, which was
formerly applied to an over-proportion of blood producing sthenic diathesis:
For the ultimate end of all the stimuli, that produce excessive menstruation,
is such, that, if excessive menstruation and an increase of love be the
consequence of the excess of the stimuli, one or other of the following must be
the effect: that is, it will either be such as remains within the latitude of
health, or such, as first produces sthenic diathesis, and then, in a higher
degree of it, runs rapidly into indirect debility.

DXXXV. That this is the fact, is proved by the hurtful powers that produce
excessive and morbid menstruation; and by remedies, that are stimulant and
suited to fill the vessels, removing the disease according to our late
discovery; and also by the unfortunate effect of the debilitating evacuant plan
of cure in the same diseases.

DXXXVI. As it is stimulant operation that produces both proper menstruation
and that which goes to a little excess; so, when once menstruation is
established, the conformation and stimulus, that have been mentioned,
remaining, are sufficient to support it. The same operation is renewed during
every interval of menstruation: The stimulus acts and quickens the motion of
the blood in every part, but chiefly in that where it is most powerful and most
required, that is, in the region of the womb: The blood thrown into quick
motion, and rushing with a more rapid flow, increases its cause, the stimulus:
And, as this mutual stimulus continues incessantly to affect the women through
the whole interval, when they are allowed scope of love; the uterine vessels
are gradually unfolded, till at last, within three weeks, or a lunar month,
they are opened to their ultimate extremities: And, when the fluid, first
serous for a little, and afterward sanguine, and afterward serous again for a
little, has flowed one, two, or three days, in healthy persons, the vessels are
at last shut up.

DXXXVII. During the whole time of this process, the more excitability there
is, and consequently at the beginning of each menstrual effort, the more
violently the stimulus acts, and produces proportionally more excitement: And
it has, from this time, always less and less effect to the end, in proportion
as the excitability is more wasted; though, till the excitability, in so far as
it has a relation to the stimulus, is altogether exhausted, the stimulus always
adds something to the sum of excitement, See XXXVI.
, though constantly less and less. The same is the explanation of the operation
of food, of drink, and of all the exciting powers.

DXXXVIII. As what has been said of the stimulus, productive of menstruation,
is conformable to the effects of all the other stimuli; the same is its
conformity to the whole sum of menstrual effect from the beginning to the end
of the process. Thus, in the beginning of that long period, the force of
stimulus is far the greatest, upon account of its novelty, and the unwasted
state of excitability that relates to it. At this period, above all others,
love in persons in health is exquisite; and, in consequence of the stimulus
which excites it, menstruation, when once established, is most exactly
performed; that is, it does not, either from deficiency or excess, deviate into
morbid state.

DXXXIX. But after the beginning of this function, and when now the office of
menstruation is established; because in this, as well as every other function,
the excitability is gradually diminished in the progress of life, the stimulant
power also has gradually less, and, at last, no effect: Consequently, in the
same gradual way, the power of love in women, and, in proportion, that of
menstruation, is diminished, and at last altogether extinguished.

DXL. While both the faculties, that of love as well as that of menstruation,
in this way decrease from the beginning to the end; so, menstruation is often
interrupted, in pregnancy, in suckling, in the diminution or suppression of
menstruation. This interruption in the two former i^ natural, and suitable to
health; but in the diminution or suppression of the menstrual evacuation, it
becomes morbid.

DXLI. Since the stimulus with the conformation of the vessels is the cause of
menstruation, and the latter depends upon the former; so again the defect of
the stimulus, and, therefore, of the conformation, produces both the
retardation, diminution, and, at last, the complete suppression of the
discharge.

DXLII. Whether ever the defect of menstruation, like that of perspiration, or
of any internal excretion, as that in the fauces and alimentary canal, is
sometimes to be imputed to sthenic diathesis, is uncertain, for this reason;
that, while the diameters of the small vessels on the skin and in the
intestines are more nearly allied to such a contraction for a reason formerly
assigned LVII. LXII. CXII. CXIII.
; so great a force of excitement, so high a degree of sthenic diathesis, as
would be sufficient to shut up vessels destined to the transmission of blood,
is not easy to be conceived. And the doubt i^ further increased by a certain
fact; which is, that both in the retardation of the menstrua, and in all the
degrees of their diminution to their total suppression, when local affection is
out of the question, there are evident proofs of a debilitating cause.

DXLIII. To ascertain that fact, which is of the greatest consequence for this
reason, that it directly interests the method of cure, and, if not explained,
would leave a gap in our principles; we have to observe, that, as some men, in
consequence of the stimulus of excessive love, in the case of a most beautiful
woman being the subject of it, have, by means of sthenic diathesis, been so
inflamed as to fall into a temporary fit of impotence, and been cured by
bleeding; so, besides that that is a rare fact I remember one instance in Dr.
White, and I think I have only heard of another.
, it is not very probable, that the patulous uterine vessels can be so
contracted in their diameters, as to be incapable of transmiting their fluid.
Nay facts contradict it: The retardation or deficiency of menstruation receive
a temporary alleviation from the debilitating plan of cure; but the discharge
is not usually also brought back, on the contrary it is more kept off: But
allowing an over-proportion of blood and an excess of stimulus to be the cause
of the first deficiency of menstruation, after it has been removed by bleeding
and the rest of the debilitating plan of cure, can it again be the cause of a
disease, which resists a degree of evacuant and debilitating plan of cure, that
would cure ten peripneumonies? And since any stimulus, as well as that of an
over-proportion of blood, may, from its excessive force, go into indirect
debility; why may not the same thing happen in a disappointment in love, and
first deficiency of menstruation; and, in both cases, atony, ushering in
manifest debility, and not excess of tone, be the cause? As peripneumony, where
the over-proportion of blood and sthenic diathesis is by far the greatest that
ever happens, in consequence of indirect debility passes into hydrothorax; why
may not a similar cause in this case produce a similar effect?

DXLIV. The cause, then, of deficient menstruation, whether partial or
complete, is a languid excitement over the whole body, especially in the
uterus, from a deficiency of the stimulus of love DXXIII. DXXVI. DXXIX.
, and of all those stimuli that support it DXXVI. DXXVII. DXXXII. DXXXVII.
, and from a penury, or under-proportion of blood.

DXLV. That that is the fact, is proved by the hurtful powers mentioned in the
retardation of menstruation, and other debilitating ones in every deficiency of
that discharge, producing each disease; it is proved by the stimulant and
filling plan of cure removing it, and also by the hurtful effect of the
debilitating plan of cure DXXXV.
.

DXLVI. The remedies for the cure of retarded menstruation are, rich food,
generous drink, gestation, exercise accommodated to the strength, pediluvium
and semicupium, or the warm bath of the under-extremities, and gratification in
love DXXVI.
.

DXLVII. The same remedies are required for the suppression, and the same, but
inferior in their degree of force, for the diminution of menstruation: When
there is an unusual force of the disease, either in degree or duration, we must
have recourse to the assistance of the diffusible stimuli.

Of Menorrhoea, or the excessive Discharge of Menstruation.
DXLVIII. Menorrhoea is an effusion of blood from the uterus, or an
over-copious menstruation, or too long a continuance of it in a more moderate
degree of the excess, accompanied by all the symptoms of asthenia.

DXLIX. This disease is occasioned not by an over-proportion of blood, not by a
vigorous state of body, but by an over-proportion of the former, and an
exhaustion of the latter. The hurtful powers, therefore, that produce it, are
food not nourishing enough, or too small a proportion of what is so, watery
drink, or that over-proportion of pure strong drink that produces indirect
debility, excessive heat, or cold not prevented from its debilitating operation
by any stimulus, and salacity.

DL. Its remedies are the reverse of the hurtful powers; rich food, generous
strong drink, heat acting within its stimulant range, cold kept from direct
debility by the stimulus of heat and other stimuli, and gratification in love.

DLI. The effect of the hurtful powers and remedies of which we have spoken,
that of the former in producing, and that of the latter in removing, the
disease, and the failure in success of the debilitating plan of cure, all
confirm the fact.

Of Epistaxis, or bleeding from the Nose.
DLII. Epistaxis is an asthenia; which, besides the general symptoms of the
latter, is distinguished by bleeding from the nose, without any force behind,
an affection troublesome at any age, but particularly to young persons under a
rapid growth, and to enfeebled old age.

Of Haemorrhois.
DLIII. The characteristic of haemorrhois, or the piles, added to other signs
of asthenia, is a flow of blood from the anus, or the parts around it.

DLIV. The same thing, nearly, that has been said of menorrhoea, is to be said
of the hurtful powers and remedies of this disease.

DLV. The cause of the piles is manifest, from the hurtful powers producing it,
the remedies removing it, and the unhappy effect of the common asthenic plan of
cure; that is to say, it is debility of the whole body, from the deficiency of
other stimuli, and chiefly that of the blood See par. DXLIX.
; Which debility, while it relaxes all the vessels, and impair^ their tone,
produces that effect, in a special manner, upon the laboring vessels. The
reason of which is, that, in consequence of the inequality so often mentioned,
the chief prevalence of the cause operates in the feat of the urg^n^ symptom
See XLIX. L. LI.
. Nor is it to be thought wonderful, that the blood should flow through the
vessels of the uterus that are patulous, and in the habit of pouring out blood,
through be pendulous hemorrhoidal vessels, and those of the nose, which are
delicate, and weakly supported, in preference to others. In this case plethora,
which has no existence See par. CXXXI. CXXXIV.
, is equally unnecessary to our reasoning CCXXXII.
.

Of Thirst, Vomiting and Indigestion, as well as the Kindred Diseases of the
Alimentary Canal.
DLVI. There is a very frequently occurring affection, beginning with thirst
and proceeding to vomiting CLIX. CLXXXV. CLXXXVI. and CLXXXVII.
. It often proceeds no farther than those symptoms; it oftener ^shers in the
most severe affections, such as sometimes dyspepsia, or indigestion, sometimes
colic, sometimes the gout, sometimes proper ^evers, and many other asthenic
diseases. Its most frequent source by far is weakness, being the attendant
sometimes of too long suckling, sometimes of the diarrhoea incident to women,
wasted with a long course both of that and repeated pregnancies.

DLVII. There are two causes of as many affections which have got only one name
between them, that of thirst: The one is sthenic, the other asthenic Ibid.
. The former arises from the stimulus of salt, of rich and plentiful meals, of
heat and labor, and some others; never ending in vomiting till the sthenic
state is over, which is seldom. Its cure, with which we have here no concern,
is cold water and the several debilitating powers.

DLVIII. The asthenic thirst, which is our present subject, depends always on
pure debility, sometimes indirect, sometimes direct CLXXXV.
. Its tendency is always to stomach sickness, and, as that increases, to
vomiting See CLXXXVII. CLXXXVIII.
; and when the vomiting becomes any way considerable, the consequence is that
most acute pain, which a cramp in the stomach produces See par. CLXXXIX.
, and the other affection formerly explained CXC. to CXCV. and from that to
CXCVIII.
. This progress is spontaneous, direct, and for the most part rapid.

DLIX. The hurtful powers here are all debilitating. The indirectly
debilitating hurtful powers are, debauch in eating and drinking CXXVIII. CXXX.
, drunkenness, extreme fatigue, ultimately excessive heat CXV.
, violent passions CLXI.
, excessive exercise of the intellectual faculty CXXXIX.
, debilitating food CXXVIII.
, an over-proportion of blood now converted into an under-proportion, together
with the conversion of the sthenic diathesis that attended the former, into the
asthenic, the inseparable attendant on the latter. The following powers act by
a directly debilitating operation; cold corrected by no stimulus CXXII.
, cold drink, vegetable food CXXVIII.
, penury of blood CXXXIV.
, of other fluids CXXXVII.
, want of pure air CXLVI.
, anxiety, grief, fear CXLIII.
, and in fine, that weakness of the system, which arises from all those. The
affection is often of a mixed origin, from a mixture of both these sorts of
hurtful powers: For, as direct debility always increases the indirect, so does
the latter the former, both in this and all cases XLVII. LXXI.
.

DLX. A corruption of the common mass of fluids, whether it be called acrimony,
or putrefaction, has no concern in the cause; because, while life remains, and
the action of the vessels upon their respective fluids continues, such a faulty
state of the fluids cannot make its havoc over such an extent of the system,
that being only the effect of a cessation of motion of the fluids under heat;
nor can it happen, but in the extreme vessels and excretory ducts, which, by
their atony, do occasion such a cessation of motion, and likewise in the
alimentary canal.

DLXI. The cause of this thirst is the common one of every asthenia, but
predominant in the throat and stomach, upon account of the atony of the
salivary, and other excretory ducts CLXXXVI. CLXXXVII.
.

DLXII. The remedies are also the common ones of every asthenia, to be
accommodated to the degree of debility in the cause. In a slighter degree of
thirst a glass or two of brandy, or of any similar spirit, or, which is a
better rule, given till the complaint is removed, is sufficient. It should be
either pure, or diluted with a very little hot water The addition of cold water
counteracts, that of hot co-operates with, the effect, which has been
ascertained in a thousand trials.
. That should be followed by eating some animal food When the thirst was but
just coming on, and not yet established, I have found a hearty breakfast carry
it off. But when it is come to a head, the mixture of stomach sickness, that
now begins to take place with it, renders eating impracticable.
; and it should afterward be supported by other stimulants taken moderately,
and in the degree that suits good health. After which the proper practice is,
to proceed to the use of the permanent stimuli.

DLXIII. When the thirst, not quenched by these means, proceeds directly to
vomiting, and when, by and by, an excruciating pain supervenes upon the
vomiting; which, excepting the pain, is an affection, that, together with the
symptoms that have been mentioned From DLVI. to DLXII.
, should receive the appellation

Of Dyspepsanodyne, or Indigestion without Pain:
And when, besides the pain of the stomach, now induced, the affection going
downward to the intestines, sometimes produces a loose, sometimes a bound,
belly; at other times only a loose belly, and at others only a bound one; which
is an affection, when unaccompanied by costiveness that is distinguished by the
title

Of Diarrhoea:
DLXIV. And, when accompanied with costiveness, is entitled to the denomination

Of Colicanodyne, or Colic without Pain:
DLXV. In all those cases recourse must be had to a larger dose of the drink:
And, when that does not succeed to our wish, we must next fly to opium, and
other more diffusible stimuli, if they are not to be found: When, by these,
relief is procured, rich and pure soups, without grease, should, from time to
time, be poured in, and the canal carefully bathed all over with them. After
which, the other stimulants should be added; in the use of which, a straight
direction between direct and indirect debility should be held, without the
least deviation toward either: And our efforts must always be continued till
the disease is radically removed.

DLXVI. The necessity for this direction in the cure is so much the greater;
that, by neglecting it, or depending upon the common purgative debilitating
plan, the consequence is, that often a proper general disease degenerates into
a local affection. To proceed to the consideration

Of the Kindred Diseases of the Alimentary Canal.
DLXVII. Among them, besides those that have been mentioned above From DLVI. to
DLXVI.
, there are not wanting, others, which, when compared with them in the
similitude and nature of the cure, absolutely claim this place in the scale.

Of the Diseases of Children.
DLXVIII. The diseases of children are, dryness of the skin, sudden slaver, or
salivation of short continuance; a similar rejection of milk, without effort
See CCCC^^.
; green scouring; at other times costiveness; both commonly with gripes; the
usual mark of which is, a pulling up of their knees toward their stomach, with
very severe crying; unequal heat. A little more severe than those are the two
following cases, the one of which has the name

Of Worms.
DLXIX. Which are distinguished by a thickening of the columna nasi It is that
longitudinal depression which runs down from the partition of the nostrils
perpendicular to the upper-lip.
; by a custom of picking the nostrils; by loss of complexion; by paleness of
the face and of the rest of the skin; by a swelling of the belly; and, lastly,
by the discharge of worms by stool. The most distinct symptoms of the other
affection, or

Of Tabes, or the general Wasting of the Body.
DLXX. Are meagerness all over the body, an unusual bulk of the abdomen, almost
constant watching, such a weak, distressed, assiduous, and hoarse manner of
crying, as excites tenderness and compassion.

DLXXI. The hurtful powers, producing all those affections, are in common to
them with every asthenia; that is, they are every thing that has an effect of
debilitating the whole system, and especially the alimentary canal: Such as, at
this age, are, milk not nourishing enough, and at the same time acescent and
flatulent; want of food, or made of watery matter and bread; cold, and
moisture, the latter increasing the effect of the former; habitual vomiting and
purging; too little dandling; mistiming sleep, and meals, and every part of
management; nastiness; impure air; a neglect of natural likings and dislikings.

DLXXII. The remedies are the converse of all those, nourishing exciting milk;
three or four meals a day, consisting chiefly of warm milk, pure animal soups,
not weak, with a mixture of flower of bread of the same kind; heat without
being carried so far as to produce sweat, or too much redness, and free from
moisture; laying aside every sort of evacuation; a great deal of dandling and
gestation; a proper timing of sleep, of food; and of every part of management
of these delicate systems; cleanliness; tepid bathing in cold weather, and cold
bathing in warm; and pure air, being out in the fields as often as possible in
all but moist weather; such a judicious attention to desires and propensities,
as not to neglect scratching any part that itches See above DXVIII.
.

DLXXIII. These directions suit the gentler cases under consideration. To
remove the more violent, while they also are not by any means to be neglected;
at the same time others are to be subjoined. When the green scourings, great
looseness, and boundness of belly, are vexatious; recourse must be had to pure
wine, spirits more or less diluted as the occasion may require, or if there
should be need, not diluted at all: More of the soup that has been mentioned
and also of a richer kind.

DLXXIV. If those should not succeed to the physician's mind, which will seldom
be the case; in the same affections, and more certainly in worms, and still
more certainly in the tabes, or general consumption, with the remedies that
have been spoken of, the more diffusible stimuli of opium and musk should be
alternated. Both sorts of remedies The durable and diffusible.
, should be so accommodated to the violence of the symptoms, as not to be
dropped till the whole morbid tumult is allayed, and the healthy state
replaced; which will, upon trial, be found more practicable, than has yet been
imagined from the employment hitherto of the contrary plan of cure, to the
great comfort of mankind in their sufferings.

DLXXV. From what has been said it will appear, that these affections of
children, all flow from the same cause, are removed all upon the same
indication of cure, as any other asthenia, or disease of debility, that has
either yet been, or is to be, mentioned in this work. The unhappy termination
of them hitherto, is to be imputed not to their cause, but to the depravity of
the common method employed for their cure I cannot help repeating again,
because the importance of the subject calls upon me to do so; that the practice
of the new plan of cure, in all the diseases of children, as well as in the
others lately spoken of, has ever succeeded in my hands, as well as in those of
my pupils, to a miracle. I cannot say that I ever met with an instance where it
could be said to have failed. Let then who will compare that account with the
known mortality that is every day the result of any other practice yet thought
of in the profession.
: Nay, though they do degenerate into local affection, as in the instance of
the tabes, or general consumption, ending in an obstruction of the mesentery;
in that of cholic at every age, terminating in an inflammation, tumor, or
complication of the intestines; and in those of both cholic and long-neglected
diarrhoea, running into a gangrene in the same part; that is a misfortune that
never happens, when a proper method of cure is early enough used to remove
primary disease: And, on the contrary, it most commonly arises from the
perversity of that plan of cure, or the neglect of this, which is the proper
one. To the same kindred diseases of the alimentary canal From DLXVI. to the
present paragraph.
, further belong the two following ones, under the title

Of the gentle Dysentery and Cholera.
DLXXVI. To which, every thing that has been said of those kindred ones, will
apply: Or, if there be occasion for any particular observation upon them, it
will be taken up, after we come to treat of them in their more severe and
violent state: Of a similar nature to all these, but of a degree so much higher
as to merit the next place in rank below them, and, at the same time, not
unconnected with them, as having the seat of its predominant symptom in the
same canal, is the disease to which I have given the the name

Of Angina.
For the symptoms and method of cure of which turn back to number CCXXII. Where
it is introduced, in the explanation of asthenic symptoms.

Of Scurvy.
DLXXVII. Scurvy is an evident asthenia: The principal symptoms of which are,
want of appetite, loathing of food, laxity of the living solids considered as
simple solids; an oozing of blood, both from other parts, and particularly from
the gums; aversion to labor; low spirits, and a languor in all the functions.

DLXXVIII. The hurtful powers producing this disease, are the common asthenic
ones, appearing in the following form: It is cold in this case, but conjoined
with moisture in the northern seas, and, as we may well suppose, in the parts
of the southern ocean of the same temperature, that generally produces the
peculiar form of the disease. But with it all the other debilitating powers
contribute their share: Such are, grief for the loss of liberty, relations,
kindred, and friends; a horrid dislike to their present state of life; a
longing desire for that which they have parted with; the awe which the severity
of discipline keeps them in; the effect of a calm, where there is nothing to
do, producing direct debility on them; a storm, where they have to labor above
their powers, as certain a cause of indirect debility; their not having been
allowed, till o^ (...), fresh meat, which is the only nourishing and
envigorating See CXXIV.
form of i^; their being kept upon salted and spoiled meat, and not even
corrected by recent vegetable aliment, such as that is See CXXVIII.
; watery or small drink; the terror which the expectation of a battle at sea
inspires.

DLXXIX. All those particulars prove, that scurvy is so far from being the
effect of one or two hurtful powers, and from resting upon so narrow a basis of
the cause producing it, as has hitherto been imagined; that it is rooted in a
multiplicity of debilitating powers, and is a real asthenia, or universal
disease of debility.

DLXXX. And this fact is confirmed by both the true and false method employed
for its cure: For, though nearly all the common powers concur in the production
of scurvy; if, however, it be considered, how easily, upon the removal of the
hurtful powers, and the patient getting a shore, the disease is got under, by
fresh meat, either with or without greens, by wine, gestation, and exercise, in
fine, by the recovery of his usual manner of living; it will be impossible to
entertain a doubt of its being both an asthenia, and by no means a violent one.
The pretense of its cure being effected by greens, roots, sour^rout, and
similar things, so much boasted of lately, which, without the remedies just now
enumerated, could not fail, by their debilitating operation, to aggravate the
disease, is derived from a noted blunder among physicians, by which they are
led to overlook the most certain, simple, and evident facts, and take up in
place of them, the greatest falsehoods, or such facts as have a very narrow
foundation in truth.

Of the gentle Hysteria.
DLXXXI. The gentle hysteria is a form of asthenia, of frequent occurrence
among women, but very rarely happening to men; in which a noise is heard in the
belly, and the patient has a sensation of a ball rolling within the bowels,
rising up to the throat, and there threatening the patient with suffocation.

DLXXXII. The striking symptom in this disease is a spasm, not fixed in a part,
but running the course just now described. The disease attacks in fits, for the
most part leaving long intervals betwixt them, and often never recurring more
than once or twice.

DLXXXIII. The fits are soon removed by small doses of opium, repeated at short
intervals: The intervals should be secured from danger by full diet, and a
moderate and naturally stimulant management.

Of Rheumatalgia, or the Chronic Rheumatism.
DLXXXIV. Rheumatalgia is an asthenia, not so much a sequel of rheumatism when
left to proceed in its own spontaneous course, as of the profusion of blood and
of other fluids employed for the cure of it, and of too debilitating a cure;
with a change of the sthenic diathesis and the inflammation, which is a part of
that, into the asthenic diathesis and inflammation. Paleness of the skin takes
the place of complexion: The appetite is diminished, the involuntary motions
are impaired, debility and torpor prevail over all. So far the disease is
understood to be chronic. As in rheumatism, the joints are pained and inflamed:
As that, which has been assigned, is the most frequent cause of rheumatism, so
it sometimes arises not from a sthenic origin, and an excess in the means of
reducing that.

DLXXXV. The cause of the disease is the usual one of any asthenia, predominant
in the moving fibers of the muscles, situated below the skin over the whole
surface of the body.

DLXXXVI. Its worst morbific powers are, penury of blood, cold, especially with
the addition of moisture impure air, and besides these, as many of the other
powers that act by a debilitating operation as happen to be applied,
contribute, in proportion to the degree in which they are applied to the morbid
effect. Of these excessive indolence and the reverse are particularly hurtful.

CLXXXIII. As all stimulants contribute to the restoration of the healthy
state; so the most powerful of them in this case is nourishing food, friction,
gestation, wine, taken in moderation, exercise, rather frequent than violent,
and being as much as possible in the open air. If it is an acknowledged fact,
that rheumatalgia is one of the reproaches of physicians, it is more so than
has been hitherto understood; it being an asthenic disease, while they at all
times made use of the same kind of cure, as if it had been the most sthenic, or
even upon the whole more debilitating If they should pretend to say that their
bleeding and other evacuations were more moderate that in rheumatism; the
answer is, that they were not so profuse at any given time: But, considering
the length of time, that rheumatalgy draws out into, the frequent, and almost
constant evacuations, conjoined with every species of inanition, made the
debilitating practice upon the whole far exceed that used in the sthenic case.
No wonder, then, that much mischief was done.
.

Of the Asthenic Cough.
DLXXXVIII. The asthenic cough is an asthenia, which with the constant symptoms
of the latter, depends upon a frequent expectoration, that the cough excites;
affecting every age which has been under the influence of either direct, or
indirect debility, and therefore old age, which is unavoidably the prey of
indirect debility.

DLXXXXIX. As consisting in indirect debility, it is the effect of an excessive
violence of all stimuli that have been applied either for a short time, or for
a great part of life, their operation coming to the same amount, that of the
former from its degree, and that of the latter from its long continuance See
above XXIX. XXX. and CCCCI.
. In so far as its cause is direct deblity, a deficiency of all the stimuli,
leaving the excitability to be accumulated, allows this form of asthenia to
happen from the spontaneous tendency of nature, of which life is only a forced
state So great is nature's tendency to that particular increase of exertion;
which forms the matter of expectoration in this disease, that every case of
death from disease is an instance of it. Hence the dead rattle in the throat is
universally the expiring symptom. See LXXII, and CCCXXVI.
.

DXC. The cough, which depends upon indirect debility, is cured by reducing the
stimulus which occasioned it, gradually and cautiously to the proper and
natural degree And when it originates from indirect debility, the increase of
the stimulus, the want of which occasioned the disease, till the degree of
excitement, which constitutes health is replaced, effects the cure.

DXCI. Such is the nature of direct and indirect debility; that if the remedies
of the former be pushed beyond the boundary, the cough appears again; and the
same is the event of the same excess in the use of the remedies of the latter
See par. XXXIII. XXXIV. and XLIII. XXX. CXXXIV. and especially CCXXXIII. to
CCXXXVI.
.

DXCII. Frequent and violent cough with copious expectoration has been always
held for a sure mark of a vitiation or faulty state in the lungs. That faulty
state was esteemed to be of a sthenic nature, and to give assurance of the
presence sometimes of phthisipneumony, or consumption from an ulcer in the
lungs, sometimes bastard peripneumony, sometimes of a burning inflammation in
the alimentary canal. In the former case an ulcer, or, in their way of
speaking, and what amounts to the same thing, tubercles were believed the cause
of the disease; in the second case inflammation either in the intercostal
muscles, or a different one from that, which in true peripneumony was, in their
opinion, its primary cause, was considered as the cause; and in the last case,
no one of them would have hesitated a moment to have ascribed the state of the
bowels, to the only inflammation they were acquainted with, that which requires
bleeding and evacuation for its cure. And no other enquiry was made, but
whether the matter that was spit up, was mucus or pus. To ascertain that
premiums were proposed.

DXCIII. But, in fact, besides that no phthisipneumony, no bastard
peripneumony, as they call it, no inflammation in the alimentary canal, was
ever cured by antisthenic or debilitating remedies; and that, in the several
trials tha^ have yet been made, the first of these cases has been evidently
assisted, nay frequently completely removed, and the two latter thoroughly cured
in numberless instances, and in all in which it has been used by the sthenic,
or stimulant plan of cure; I say, besides these large and comprehensive facts,
so little signification is here, either in the quantity or appearance of the
expectoration, that in certain fevers, in other diseases of debility, quite
free of all local affection, and finally in this very cough of which we are
speaking, there is often a more violent cough, and a greater expectoration of
matter putting on every form and every appearance, than usually happens in a
confirmed consumption, and where every hour is expected to be the last. And yet
the whole tumult, hitherto so alarming, could be stopped in a few hours, and
quite cured in as many days.

DXCIV. And, who does not know, that there are many persons, who have an
immoderate cough, and proportional expectoration for a whole and long life
time, whose lungs, however, are sound, and free from any organic taint? How
often in phthisipneumony itself after finishing its course, and at last
terminating in death, has the whole fabric of the lungs been found upon
dissection as sound as ever happens in death from any cause There are several
cases upon record, of the lungs after death from a confirmed consumption,
having been found perfectly sound. A most respectable pupil of mine went to
Lisbon with a young gentleman of considerable rank in Scotland, under a
confirmed consumption, whom he brought back perfectly freed from his disease.
He also saved either two or three ladies, I am not just now sure which; equally
given up upon the common practice. He happened to assert before the physician
of the factory, that a person just dead of the same disease had no local
affection in the lungs, and upon dissection it was found to be as he had said.
I have restored many phthisipneumoniacs, but am obliged to own, that I have
lost three, to whom I was called too late. Their loss, however mortified me,
because there were many reasons for my setting my heart upon their cure. I also
lost in Edinburgh the most amiable young man of that kingdom, after curing a
prodigious hemorrhagy from his lungs* This was he whom my pupil two years
before brought home safe from Lisbon. But I was permaturely dismissed in this,
and counteracted, in the other cases.
?

DXCV. The cause of cough has hitherto been unknown. To pass over the sthenic
cough, with which we have nothing to do in this part of our subject See CLX.
CCXXXIII.
; the cause of the asthenic is the same as that of any asthenia, but more
vehement in the fountain of expectoration, to wit, the exhalant and mucus
arteries, the secreted fluids of which, inspissated by stagnation in the
bronchia, compose the matter to be expectorated.

a* a* The most powerful of the asthenic hurtful agents in exciting asthenic
cough, is cold, just as heat has been demonstrated the most hurtful agent in
catarrh See par. CCCCVII. to CCCCXII.
. Nay, in the asthenic cough, such is the rage of cold, that the slightest
breath of air reaching the body, excites a most prodigious tumult of coughing,
and brings out the whole series of subsequent symptoms; and heating the body in
the bed as soon allays the cough, prevents the threatening, and cures the
urgent disturbances.

DXCVI. In this as well as the sthenic cough, it is the serous and mucous
fluids that chiefly flow to the bronchia. Which bear their pressure for a
little, till, distended by the load, they can bear it no longer. The
disagreeableness of the stimulus excites a commotion in the excitability of the
laboring part, and, therefore, over its whole seat, and rouses the excitement.
A cough arises, and throws off its cause, the collected humors.

DXCVII. This disease is always to be treated for its cure, first with
stimulant remedies, and then with such as also fill the vessels. If indirect
debility has been the morbific power, still we must stimulate, but at first
with a force of stimulus little less than that, which occasioned the disease,
and then with still less; and, after changing, from time to time, the form of
the stimulus, with less still; till we come down to the stimuli that are
agreeable to nature, those that suit the most perfect health See par. CIII.
. In that way is ebriety, in that way is every form of intemperance, to be
treated. If direct debility has been the cause, the cure will be a good deal
more easy: That is we must go on to stimulate more and more, till we get up to
that point of excitement, to which we came down in the case of indirect
debility. In this way is the first stage of phthisipneumony, as well as its
middle course, and also bastard peripneumony, nay, most cases of the debility
affecting young people, and the disease to which the name

Of Chincough
DXCVIII. Is given, to be encountered in practice. Chincough is attended by a
contagious matter; which varies in its degree, but in such sort, however, that
a sthenic plan of cure, adapted to the degree of the disease, for certain cures
it. The change of climate or place is a tale, the practice of vomiting is death
Still to the old tune "cantile^^a^^ candem canunt." They confessed they knew
nothing about this disease, yet they prescribe change of air and place: If they
knew nothing about the disease, how could they know what would be of service?
-- Others told them so. But why do they prescribe vomiting? -- They heard that
from their master's desk at school, and found, that the same authority, was the
reason of others for doing the same thing. Why vomiting? For the same reason,
and because a relic of the doctrine of morbific matter has run through all
their systems. Hence in bleeding diseases, the universal rule has been to
bleed; in vomiting to give emetics, in diarrhaea to give cathartics, in
imitation, forsooth of nature. The symptoms of disease have been mistaken for
efforts of the constitution to remove the disease. It is now, however, proved
that there are no such efforts. Every symptom, and particularly every morbid
evacuation, is to be stopped. The contrary practice is as good sense, as it would
be to propose bringing on a dead rattle to cure the morbid one.
. And, since the disease is an asthenia, vomiting, which is so very
debilitating an agent, cannot fail to be of the highest detriment See par.
CXXXVII. and CCXCIV.
.

Of Cystirrhaea, or the Mucous Discharge from the Bladder of Urine.
DXCIX. Cystirrhaea is that mode of asthenia; in which, to the general symptoms
of asthenia, and the particular ones of asthenic cough, there is an addition of
mucus, rendering the urine turbid, without any previous pain or symptom of
internal local affection.

DC. In so far as this is a general affection, the laxity proportioned to the
atony must be removed equally in it, as in other cases of increased excretion;
and particularly the stimuli of health must be accurately administered.

Of the gout of stronger Persons.
DCI. The gout of stronger persons is a form of asthenia; in which, after a
long habit of luxury and indolence, and especially, when to those hurtful
powers directly debilitating, ones have been recently superadded, indigestion,
or diarrhaea, or rather both conjoined, with manifest signs of a diminished
perspiration, precede; then the lower extremities are affected with languor. Of
the lesser joints, almost always the one or other foot is seized with an
inflammation, which, if not resisted by a piece of art quite new, will prove
most severe, most painful, and of a short duration, comparatively to its state
in that respect in the after part of the disease.

DCII. This disease may be called the indigestion or dyspepsia of the
luxurious, that is, depending upon indirect debility; while dyspepsia may be
denominated the same disease, that is the gout of persons under direct
debility, as having every symptom of the gout, except the inflammation There
are very few persons, who at one time or another in their life have not
experienced painful twitches in some part or other of one of their feet,
especially when they happened to be in a state more languid and sluggish than
ordinary. Every which case may be considered as a gout in miniature. But when
the whole phenomena, except the inflammation, happen to any person, call it
dyspepsia, or what you will; it is to all intents and purposes a gout. Indeed,
from all that has been said through this work, general morbid state appears to
be a very simple affair, being nothing but an increase or diminution of the
cause of the functions or powers of life, without any other difference, but
that of the mere appearance of the symptoms to our senses, an appearance by
which, when we look no further for information, we are also constantly deceived.
. For, in diseases, so little is there in names, that not only those diseases,
of which we have been just now treating, but likewise asthma, hysteria, the
cholic, and most of the diseases, which have taken their appellations from any
remarkable disturbance of the alimentary canal, are equally prevented and cured
by the same method of cure precisely. Which is indeed the reason why the gout
has been ranked in the number of the diseases of the same canal.

DCIII. A taint transmitted from parents to their offspring, and celebrated
under the appellation of hereditary, is a ^ale, or there is nothing in the
fundamental part of this doctrine. The sons of the rich, who succeed to their
fathers estate, succeed also to his gout: Those who are excluded from the
former, are also from the latter, unless they bring (...) on by their own
merit. Nay, (...) there be but only two diseases in the strict sense of the
word, they must be either all, or none of them, hereditary. The former
supposition makes the hurtful powers superfluous, which have been proved to be
every thing respecting disease; and, as it is, therefore absurd, so the truth
of the latter must be admitted. The stamina, or bulk of our simple solids, are
so given in our first confirmation, that some persons are distinguished by a
gross, others by a slender state of the whole mass. That variety of the
stamina, of the exciting powers, upon which the whole phoenomena of the life
depend, be properly directed, admits each its respective state of health.
suited to its respective nature, and sufficiently commodious, if the excitement
suited to each, from a proper direction of the stimuli producing it, be
properly applied. Though Peter's father may have been affected with the gout,
it does not follow that Peter must be affected; because, by a proper way of
life, that is by adapting his excitement to his stamina, he may have learned to
evade his father's disease.

b. b. If the same person, who from his own fault and improper management, has
fallen into the disease; afterward by a contrary management, and taking good
care of himself, both prevents and removes the disease, as it has been lately
discovered: What then is become of hereditary taint.

Lastly, if the gout is the same disease as dyspepsy, arises from the same
hurtful powers, is removed by the same remedies; and the only symptom, in which
it can possibly be thought to differ, the inflammation, is only a slight part
of the disease, depending upon the same original cause, and ready to yield to
the same remedies; what signify distinctions about either, that do not apply to
both If I have kept off my gout for seven years past, after having been
subjected to the most severe rage of the disease, might not I, much more
easily, have prevented it before? But, it may be said perhaps, that
excruciating pain makes a great difference in the scale of comparison of any
two diseases: The answer to that is, that since the pain is as easily removed
as the other symptoms, the difference is removed, and the weights in the (...)
equalized.
? Nothing by them further is set forth, than, that a certain texture of stamina
is favorable to certain forms of diseases, which (forms) are of no
consequence, in such sort, that, when the excitement is adapted to the stamina,
even those forms can be prevented or cured.

DCIV. The hurtful powers producing the gout are, first, indirectly
debilitating, not effectual all of a sudden, nor commonly before the meridian
of life, that is, before the thirty-fifth year of one's age. Rich food, too
much ease, have a very great effect, drink has less. To that all that have a
tendency, to wear out life, to consume the excitability, contribute. But the
first fit scarce comes on till directly debilitating hurtful powers have been
superadded to the indirect My gout came on at the thirty-sixth year of my age,
after five or six month's low living: It returned not again till betwixt five
or six years after, because all the intermediate time I had been well
supported: And this second fit was ushered in with low living, immediately
previous to it, for near the same length of time, as before the coming on of
the first fit. Nay, no gout ever came on but in consequence of direct debility;
the indirect has not so quick an effect in that respect; at the same time it
has a tendency to be hurtful, and therefore should be avoided.
. The following are particularly hurtful, abstinence, vegetable food, the
hurtful effect of which is in proportion to the imbecility of the matter that
composes it. The farinaceous substances, which are by no means safe A mess of
porridge, a dish used in Scotland, with small beer poured upon it, and taken
over night, would bring on a fit of the gout next day.
, and less hurtful than roots, and these less so than greens The juice of
turnips, of cabbage, and even pease-pudding and pease-soup, which are commonly
reckoned substantial dishes, have the same effect: When those substances, after
being boiled, are used with a good solid meal of meat, I have always found them
innocent. Green pease ate, with lamb or fowl, are both harmless and grateful.
; but fruits are the most hurtful of all Apples and pears are such: But the
cold fruits, as melons, cucumbers, are almost instantaneous in their hurtful
effect.
. Cold water, in the height of the diathesis, given to quench thirst,
immediately produces nausea, vomiting, and other distressing symptoms of the
stomach and of the rest of that canal, and hurries on a formal fit See CLXXXIV.
to CXC. to CCXXXVII.
. The mixture of an acid with pure cold water increases the hurtful effect. Of
the strong drinks; those prepared from barley by fermentation, that is, the
different ales and beers, all the white wines in common use, except Madeira and
Canary; and among the red wines claret, indeed all the French wines, and punch
with acid, all these are remarkably hurtful. And as indolence helps on with the
first fit, so fatigue, especially that of walking, hurry on all future ones.
Want of a sufficient quantity of blood is so hurtful at all times, that, though
the theory of physicians led them to the notion that the disease depended on
plethora and vigor, yet no body ever thought of taking blood This is one of
their many contradictions between theory and theory, and theory and practice.
* Vomiting is bad, and indeed one of the natural symptoms of a very bad state
of the disease; but purging the belly is worse At any time I can bring on a fit
by a single dose of Glauber's salt, unless I happen to be very strong, and
quite free of all diathesis.
. Every evacuation has a similar bad effect, with this distinction, that the
artificial are much more hurtful than the spontaneous.

DCV. One is to be excepted, that is, excess in venery, to which, though it be
a spontaneous and natural, not an artificial, evacuation, gouty persons are so
addicted, and so exceed others in power, that in the very middle of a very bad
fit, they are not sparing of it. That effort at first is not perceived; but in
the advance of age, and after many returns of the disease, it is felt at last
with a vengeance At any advanced (...) of age, in persons who had been
vigorous, an unnatural power of execution sometimes, even in actual morbid
state, will take place, so as that the person will be able to outdo all his
former doings in that way. But it is a false power, it is a symptom of disease:
It is like unnatural appetite for food amidst a weakness of the powers of
digestion.
. Great heat, by its indirectly debilitating operation, does some hurt CX^.
, but great cold, by its direct debility, much more CXVIII.
. Impurity of air is inimical CXLVI.
, as well as an interruption in the train of thinking CXXXIX.
; but hard thinking is more hurtful. A deficiency in the stimulus of passion is
a pretty considerable hurtful power CX^^.
: But a high intensity of it will convert this moderate degree of the gout into
that highest degree of it, that attacks the head; lays a snare to life, and
brings on certain death Ibid.
.

DCVI. Long sleep is bad CCXLV.
, as producing direct debility, by deferring the re-application of the stimuli,
which the watching state afford; but short sleep is much more hurtful, leaving
behind it a degree of fatigue still remaining from the effect of the stimuli of
the former day See part II. Chap. VII. CCXXXVII.
. Often after the upper parts of the body have been recruited with enough of
sleep, after getting up, the podagric feeling a state of languor in his lower
extremeties, and a demand for more sleep to them, is obliged to go to bed
again, and give the unrecruited limbs their respective share of sleep. When a
person is torpid from short sleep, how great is the luxury to cherish again by
the heat of the bed-clothes all the parts that have been exposed to cold, that
is, the whole surface of the body and thighs, but especially the legs and feet,
which last, during the presence of the fit, is the seat of the inflammation;
and, how delightful in that way, to make up the necessary compliment of the
sleep that is wanted.

DCVII. To prolong the intervals of health, and prevent a fit the remedies are
all the reverse of the hurtful powers: They are, rich food taken in plenty See
par. CCLXVI.
, but remaining within its stimulant range, consequently of the animal kind,
with a rejection of all sorts of vegetable matter, or a very sparing use of it;
strong drink, not taken cold, unless when there is no danger of the disease I
know well when I may take cold drink and use some vegetable matter; it is when,
for some time past, I have been well supported, and feel strong and vigorous. I
also know, if I have, either in food or drink, taken any thing improper in
kind, how to correct it; which is, by having recourse to a proper stimulus. By
eating an exotic fruit, which had a mixture of the qualities of the water melon
the orange and lime, in a quarter of an hour I had an attack in my stomach, in
the middle of my lecture last summer, at the Devil Tavern. By some of the
diffusible stimulus I repelled it, and went well on with my lecture. At other
times I have prevented such an effect, by anticipating the remedy. This
doctrine puts much more in our power: But we should not, therefore, play tricks
with it. On the contrary, we have great reason to be thankful for the command
it gives us over our health, and that also, by the use of means not inelegant,
nauseous, and clumsy, but quite the contrary. The old motto of Ascle^ades,
tuto, celeriter, (...) jucunde, is verified and improved by the important
addition of s^^^briter.
(at which time cold water is safe after a good meal), not mixed with acid not
acescent, not under a turbid fermentation while it is taken CCLXVIII.
; gestation CCLXIX.
, exercise short of bringing out sweat, or giving fatigue Ibid.
, a full quantity of blood, which is procured by food and the motion just now
mentioned CCXC. CCXCV.
, no evacuation CCXC.
, sparing venery, if that be made good in such persons DCXIX.
, a moderate temperature CXII.
, kept equally between the extremes of direct and indirect debility, and
inclining to neither; pure air CCCIII.
, consequently cleanliness, and being much in the open fields, a happy train of
thinking DXIII. DXVIII.
; such a state of excitement as to passion, as keeps between (...) excess and
stupid apathy, with as great tranquillity of mind as possible CXL. CCCIII.
; moderate sleep, rather inclining to be long than short, a rule which should
be so much the the more observed, as the disease is of longer standing and
greater severity: In fine sleep should be allowed to continue till the most
vigorous watching state is procured DC.


DCVIII. From what has been said it must appear certain, that the gout of
stronger persons is not also itself a disease of strength, or a sthenic one;
and that it does not depend upon vigor of the constitution and plethora, as it
has been commonly hitherto imagined; but that it is manifestly asthenic, like
all the rest of the cases belonging to asthenia, and proved to be so by the
strongest evidence; and that it is not to be treated by an antisthenic, as it
has hitherto been the notion, but by a sthenic plan of cure; and that there is
every encouragement for treating it in that point of view.

DCIX. What had hitherto deceived physicians, and passed for a cause of the
gout, was the appearance of vigor and an over proportion of blood, in most
podagrics, from the bulk of simple solids in consequence of their way of life,
and often from great strength. But, good men! they never recollected, that
vigor and a great quantity of blood was not a property inherent in animals,
but that it depended upon foreign circumstances every day and every hour X. XI.
XII. XIII.
. If any one, according to that idea, who has happened to get a great bulk of
(...) solids, and who has had abundance of proper diet, and lived in that way
to the thirtyfifth or fortieth year of his age, should all at once be deprived
of all the articles of diet; and if a dwarf two foot high, who has lived
poorly, and is, therefore meager, and slender should equally suddenly be put
upon a rich living; will there be the least probability, that the former will,
notwithstanding his present absolute want, continue plethoric and vigorous; and
that the latter, from being now crammed with unusual plenty, will continue
empty, as he had been before? Is the fundamental proposition of this doctrine,
in which it has been demonstrated, that we are nothing of ourselves, and that
we are altogether governed by foreign powers, to be forgot? Is a person liable
to the gout, who has for twenty years undergone an excess of stimulant
operation, about the fortieth year of his age, or even afterward, to be
reckoned fuller of blood and more vigorous, either than another person who has
lived lower, or then himself twenty years before? Where, pray, was the
necessity of comparing gouty persons with others free from all bias to that
disease, and not comparing them with themselves Such is the effect of the
powers operating upon us, that a certain degree of that operation produces an
effect that would not arise under another. If the accustomary operation has
been moderate, habit will render the excitement arising from it, in some
measure, sufficient for the demands of the system: Hence, day-labourers are
supported upon less stimulus than gentlemen. Again, which is a circumstance
liable to happen to the latter, if the accustomary operation has been
excessive, there will be a necessity for a continuation of some degree of the
excess. A podagric may be stronger than a labourer, and yet, fall into the
gout. For, though compared with the other person, he is strong; compared with
himself at another time, he is weak: And the reason is, that though he is still
better supported than the labourer, he is worse supported, than the usual state
of his system requires. Further, the labourer, though he falls not into the
gout, may, by carrying his moderation too far, fall into indigestion, or some
other disease, in every essential respect the same as the gout. A double
inference arises here: Which is, that, though both excess and deficiency can be
borne to a certain degree, so as to require a continuance of them, or a gradual
correction, yet they should both be avoided as entailing that sort of necessity
for their continuance while their effect makes no sort of compensation, being,
at best, not the best state, that of perfect health, but a state of
predisposition to disease; the one to sthenic and at last indirect debility;
the other to asthenic, as depending on direct debility. The perfect rule for
ensuring the healthy state, is to keep within the extremes of excess and
defect, and thereby produce the due degree of excitement; and to apply all the
exciting powers equally, each in its due proportion. The due degree may be
secured by one or a few, but the equality of it over the system can only be
secured by their equal application. This proposition goes to the bottom of two
extensive doctrines, that of life, and that of morals; the last of which has as
yet not attained to any thing like a fundamental principle. I intend to
prosecute the idea upon some future occasion. I know a book filled with
valuable ethic facts, but have not yet had time to consider, whether they all
point to a general one, in which they all agree, and which reflects proof and
confirmation upon them; without which it would ^all short of scientific
exactness.
?

Of the gentle Asthma.
DCX. Asthma is an asthenia; in which, to the symptoms in common to all
astheniae, there is superadded a difficult respiration, returning at uncertain
spaces of time, often unequal, without any unusual expectoration accompanying
the fits.

DCXI. The same are the hurtful and curative powers here, as in the gout: In
the same manner are the fits both prevented and removed This has been proved,
both upon other occasions, and particularly in the case of a young gentleman,
who lived with me during my first management of my gout. See Preface to the
Elementa.
.

Of Cramp.
DCXII. Cramp is also one of the cases of asthenia; in which, often from pain,
often from drunkenness, and not seldom from sweat, and disagreeable soaking
heat, sometimes the wrists, sometimes one of the calves of the leg, in fine,
any external part, are affected: Of the internal parts, it is sometimes the
stomach, sometimes some part in the intestinal canal, sometimes the bladder of
urine, that suffers: The disease is not confined to indirectly debilitating
powers, as producing it; it also arises from directly debilitating ones, such
as abstinence, vomiting, loose belly, and drinking water contrary to custom.

DCXIII. To remove this disease; when it does not exceed the gentleness that is
here understood, the whole body must be invigorated by moderate stimuli, every
most urgent exciting power should be taken out of the way; gestation, and that
exercise, which does not exceed the strength, should be put in practice. A more
severe degree of the disease will by and by be treated under tetanus.

Of Anasarca.
DCXIV. Anasarca is a form of asthenia, distinguished by water betwixt the fill
and the flesh, occasioning an external swelling of the body, without the signs
of any suffusion of the same fluid into the interior parts.

DCXV. In the cure, the body must be invigorated, and in that part of it
chiefly, where the greatest laxity and atony prevails, that is the skin. This
indication is answered by stimulating heat, by friction, by pure and dry air,
by nourishing stimulant diet, and the Peruvian bark: No internal local
affection gives occasion to it, which may be known from the symptoms yielding
to this plan of cure.

Of Cholic with Pain.
DCXVI. Cholic with pain is a form of asthenia, and a higher degree of the
cholic without pain; in which, to the signs of debility in common to all the
asthenic cases, are superadded a greater violence of the same symptoms, and
twisting pain about the navel, with pain in some part of the belly, often
enormous, and sometimes with a tumor, that can be felt externally immediately
above the brim of the pelvis, on the right-side, at the place of the blind-head
of the colon.


Of the Dyspepsodynia, or Indigestion with Pain.
DCXVII. Indigestion with pain is an asthenia, which adds to the symptoms of
indigestion without pain, a pain and gnawing feeling in the region of the
stomach, and is highly expressive of a very severe disease.

Of the violent Hysteria.
DCXVIII. The violent hysteria is a higher degree of the gentle hysteria: in
which, besides the symptoms there described, mobility and changeability of
mind, disposition to sleep, convulsive state, and a great resemblance to
epilepsy, are conspicious. The temperament, that favors hypochondriasis, is of
an opposite nature to this, which is commonly called the sanguine. Both the
temperament and predisposition in this case are produced by a moist, lax, set
of simple solids.

Of the Gout of weakened Persons.
DCXIX. The gout of weakened persons, which is an increased degree of the gout
of strong persons, is that asthenia, in which the inflammation runs out to
greater length, and at last, does not form at all; and the general affection
increases in violence, in obstinacy, and, at last, attains its highest degree;
exhibiting, toward the end of the disease, almost all the symptoms of
debility, every form of asthenia, and sometimes by a false resemblance,
counterfeiting synocha.

DCXX. As the diseases affecting the alimentary canal, formerly mentioned From
DLVI. to DLXXVI.
, have, in a great measure, a common nature; so, these also, that is, the
colicodynia DCX.
, the dyspepsodynia DCXI.
, the violent hysteria DCXIL.
, and the gout DCXIII.
, are equally participant of the same, differing only from the former in their
higher degree of violence. Their most distinguished symptoms are either spasm,
which takes place in the cholic, and indigestion, both with pain, or a
spasmodic convulsive affection, distinguishing the rest. But neither in that
respect, do th^^ differ from each other in any thing (...) they a^^, without
distinction, depend not only on debility, but also nearly upon an equality in
the degree of it, as the similarity of their morbific powers and remedies
proves. For a very full explanation of spasm and convulsion go back to the
following numbers, CLXXXVIII. to CXCV. and from the latter to CCI.

DCXXI. For the cure of them all Peruse the whole of Chap. IX. Part II. from
numb. CCLXXXI.
, abstinence, fatigue, evacuations, acids, and acescents, cold, directly and
indirectly debilitating passions, the debility arising from exertion of the
intellectual function, and impurity of air, must be avoided. The cure of every
one of them must be stimulant: When each of them is but slight, beet soup and
similar rich ones, which act partly by dilution, partly by a nourishing and
stimulant operation, in the weak state of the stomach, and by supporting the
system, and afterward, when the strength is so far recovered, solid animal
food, and moderately diluted drink, which, at last, confirm the strength, are
sufficient. In a higher degree of violence of any of them, while the soups
should still be continued, at the same time pure strong (...) should be
administered. And when the violence of any case baffles this whole form of
stimulus, recourse must be (...) to musk, volatile alkali, camphor, ether, and
opium. These must be administered in large doses; and all acid and fermenting
things, every thing cold, though accompanied with stimulus, must be guarded
against.

DCXXII. For the patient's management in the intervals, all debilitating powers
must be avoided, such as fatigue, abstinence, cold, and excessive heat See
again the same Chapter, which compare with the preceding, the VIIIth of the IId
Part.
; and take it for a certain and demonstrated fact, that the fits of recurrent
diseases do not return from any inherent power of nature, but from human folly.
Accept of that as a joyous piece of news, and such as nobody every expected.
The recurrence of fits of the gout itself is not unavoidable See par. DXCVII.
; but, by guarding against the hurtful powers mentioned, may be repelled for
any length of time; and, when it happens at any time to come on from the fault
of the patient, it can often be removed in two hours, and almost always in as
many days, and the state of health secured in every respect. In all the same
diseases of similar vehemence, whenever any stimulus, from a long continuation
of its use, has begun to have less effect, we should lay it aside, and proceed
to the use of another, from that still to another, and in that way go over the
whole circle XLI.
.

Of Hypochondriasis.
DCXXIII. The hypochondriasis is an asthenia, in which, with the symptoms of
dyspepsy, there is a noise in the belly flatulency, and uneasiness, and a
rooted opinion in the patient, of the disease being always worse than it is.
The way is paved to the disease by a dry set of simple solids, and that
temperament, in which there is a natural slowness to passion; which, however,
once excited rises to the highest violence, and continues long with obstinacy.
It is further distinguished by a fixed attention of mind, whereby the patient
is liable to dwell to excess upon any pursuit or study, and not to be easily
diverted to another, as also by a dry state of the surface of the body, a rough
skin, with black hair, and black eyes, and always a dark complexion and serious
aspect.

DCXXIV. From the definition given of it by hypochondria^^, it is beyond doubt
an asthenia, as being accompanied with a noise in the belly and flatulency; and
the course of the disease distinguished by slowness to passion, keenness in
thinking, and that state of the simple solids, which requires a high force of
stimulant operation to procure, and keep up a sufficient degree of excitement.

DCXXV. Since the state of the simple solids is a state given by nature, and
not to be changed by art, and the only indication of cure left in the
physicians power, is to fit a certain degree of excitement to that given state,
which is exactly the case in this disease; it follows, therefore, that the
stimulus of food, drink, and others, should be employed in the cure of
hypochondriasis. The patient should be kept cheerful, by being placed in
agreeable company, and gay entertainments, by entering upon a journey, and
amusing himself with the various scenes of nature and art through which he
passes. He should ride, that in guiding the horse, his mind may be more
occupied. His studies and every subject of his ordinary contemplation should be
often changed and varied. He should have generous wine given him to relieve the
symptoms of his stomach and intestines, and to raise his animal spirits. And if
these should fail of success, the diffusible stimuli, as opiates, should have
their turn for a time, for the purpose of striking a stroke at once. And their
use again gradually laid aside in proportion as the strength can now be
supported by the more natural and accustomary stimulants. Darkness and bad air
should be shunned; pure light, and all lively objects, should be sought after.
No hypochondriac, even in a (...) of delirium, should be provoked, but by every
contrivance soothed I have heard of an hypochondriac so provoked at his
physicians, who maintained that nothing ailed him, that he, on the contrary, to
carry his opinion of his disease to the utmost; at last took it into his head,
that it had attained its utmost height, by depriving him of his life. He
continued obstinately in the notion of his being dead, till a more sensible
practitioner was called in to see him. This gentleman agreed that he was dead,
but as he could not discern the particular cause of his death; he, therefore,
proposed to open the body: In setting about which, he made such a clashing with
a great apparatus of instruments, provided for the purpose he intended, that
the patient was roused from his obstinate sullenness, and allowed, that this
gentleman had come nearer to his case than any of the rest; but acknowledged,
that he now found he had some
.

Of Dropsy.
DCXXVI. Dropsy is an asthenia, commonly in the form of an anasarca, with a
swelling in some viscus, which, for the most part, at least in the beginning,
attacks some place in preference to others, and more than any other.

DCXXVII. The cause of dropsy, in so far as it respects the collection of
water, is easily explicable upon this doctrine, but altogether inexplicable
upon any other. For the universal debility, that is laxity and atony, is
chiefly predominant in the extreme red arteries, and the exhalants immediately
continued from these, as well as in the commencements of the absorbent veins;
and, of the same kind of vessels, it is often urgent in a particular part in
preference to others.

DCXXVIII. As all the debilitating hurtful powers concur in producing this, as
well as any other asthenia; so those powers have the greatest influence in this
case, that press most urgently upon the vascular system. Hence, as we see in
the conversion of peripneumony into the dropsy of the chest, profuse bleeding,
and a large draught of cold water, when the body is fatigued, overheated, and
burned up with thirst, are the most powerful agents in bringing on this
disease. The hurtful effect of the latter of which, in every case of debility,
when its operation is followed by no stimulus, has been more than sufficiently
explained above See par. CXVII. to CXXIV.
. Besides, in this case, when all the vessels are open, the water flowing to
their most weak terminations, passing out by these, and being not at all
transmitted from the exhalants into the absorbents, is collected into every
neighboring cavity LIX. LX. LXI.
. And hence the commencement of the urgent symptom in this disease.

DCXXIX. To this asthenia belong all the watery effusions, which do not arise
from a local affection, but depend on pure debility. And, therefore, if at any
time any other form of asthenia, whether from wrong treatment, or other hurtful
powers, in its progress terminates in this effusion; every such case should be
held as a proper dropsy See LXXXI.
; and it should be ever present to our recollection, that there are only two
general diseases, and that the distinctions hitherto received, are devoid of
all solid foundation. Accordingly, both from other improprieties, and
particularly from bleeding, epilepsy, palsy, the gout, terminate in real
dropsy. Nay, the same is the termination of peripneumony itself, when it is
either converted into indirect debility, from the debilitating plan of cure
having been pushed to excess, or into direct debility, from having been left to
itself, and the body not sufficiently debilitated. The affections, confined to
parts, which are considered as the remote causes of dropsy, will be treated
among the local diseases, to which they belong.

DCXXX. After this explanation of the nature of dropsy, the cure of it,
provided that it be a proper one, and early enough set about, ought by no means
to be so much despaired of, as it should be when local affection, with a
similar effusion, and the general disease are blended together without
distinction, and considered as one and the the same Sometimes the predominant
symptom rises to the degree of being above the power of the excitement, as in
the tumor of schirrus, and the effusion here.
. If long before the effusion there was no internal complaint, if the disease
rather came on suddenly, and in consequence of evident hurtful powers, and
yields to the first part of the curative means, there is no reason to doubt of
a cure.

DCXXXI. Besides the general indication of cure for asthenia, that suited to
this case must be particularly directed to the whole vascular system, and
especially about their terminations, and the commencements of the absorbent
veins. The remedies are also the usual ones; that is diet, as nourishing and
stimulant as possible; first in a fluid form, when the solid cannot be admitted
upon account of the debility of the stomach; then, also in a solid; and
together with both, strong drink, such as the best wine that can be got,
fermented spirit, sometimes pure, sometimes diluted. If the disease does not
yield to these, after their use has been continued for a proper length of time;
recourse must be had to the diffusible forms: By this means, when the effusion
has not yet attained to that high degree that constitutes a local affection,
not to be altered by any state of the excitement, this asthenia can be as
easily cured as any other.

DCXXXII. But, when a great quantity of water has now got into some large
cavity, it should immediately be removed by the catheter; when that has been
done, and the emptied cavity secured with as much care as possible, and the
strength supported by wine, strong drink, and any stimulus more diffusible, we
must return to the management mentioned a little above. And if it should
likewise fail now, our judgment must be, that either the general disease has
degenerated into a local, or that the affection has been local from the
beginning.

Of Epilepsy.
DCXXXIII. Epilepsy is an asthenia; the distinguishing symptoms of which are,
some heaviness of intellect, dullness in the exercise of the senses; and then a
very impaired state, or temporary extinction of the latter, accompanied with
various convulsions over the body: Fits, consisting of such a concourse of
symptoms usually return afterward at uncertain spaces of time, and each of
them terminates in a foaming at the mouth.

DCXXXIV. As all the debilitating hurtful agents are productive of this
disease; so the loss of the blood and other fluids, excess in venery, passions,
such as fear, terror, assiduous and intense thinking in great geniuses; a
deficiency of that kind of stimulus in stupid persons, are particularly so See
above par. CXXXIV. CXXXVII. CXLII. and CXXXIX.
. These powers that produce the first fit, more easily bring on after ones: And
besides them, certain unusual impressions upon the senses, some of them
disagreeable, some highly agreeable; such as the flavor of some foods, the
smell of a rose, have the same tendency; and certain poisons See XX.
are said to have the same effect.

DCXXXV. But the appearance of symptoms is a thing full of fallacy, and, unless
the nature of the hurtful powers producing them, and of the remedies removing
them, be thoroughly understood, it is incomprehensible. To solve the present
difficulty about poisons, and to settle the question, whether the symptoms
belong to universal, or local disease; we must consider, whether the latter one
produced by a vitiated state of a part, suppose that part either the stomach or
brain, such a vitiated state, as in some point of the lower extremities proves
the cause of the aura epileptica; and whether this vitiated state resists the
virtue of the remedies, that perform their cure by changing the excitement; or
whether all the symptoms are either relieved or removed by the change of
excitement. If the former is the cause, the affection must be considered as
local See above CCXXIV.
; if the latter be the truth, the disease must be held for a general one, and a
true, but a great asthenia. Nor must we forget, that a great many symptoms of
general diseases, from the same origin, are dissimilar; and many from
different, nay, opposite causes are similar; that many local symptoms have a
great resemblance to those of general diseases, and that they sometimes, by a
most false appearance, counterfeit epilepsy, sometimes apoplexy, sometimes
certain other general diseases besides.

DCXXXVI. For the purpose of preventing this disease, we must both avoid other
debilitating powers, and those that have the greatest power in producing it.
The vessels should be filled, by giving food as nourishing, and as effectual in
producing blood as possible; the indulgence in venery must be moderated,
cheerfulness and tranquillity of mind must be favored, and agreeable train of
thinking must be found, and all the objects of the senses, which give them
disturbance, guarded against; the strength must be fortified by recruiting
exercise, by the peruvian bark, if the approach of the fits can be perceived,
and by wine and the more diffusible stimuli. A length of sleep, that is a
medium betwixt too long and too short a continuance of it, should be kept up.
Stimulant heat should be appplied; and all excess of it as well as cold avoided
See CXXIV. CXXVII. CCXXVIII. CCLXXVII. CXXXVII. CXXX. CCXXXVIII. CCXXXIX. CCLX.
. The purest air, such as that in the fields, which is free from moisture
should be sought after. The surface of the body should be excited by friction,
and cleanliness, for the purpose of cherishing the organs of voluntary motion,
that are most closely connected with the animal power in the brain.

CCXXXVII. The same remedies, which radically cure the gout, also cure
epilepsy, and precisely in the same manner This paragraph is the answer to the
question proposed in that which stands in the Elementa, answering to the same
number. That paragraph therefore is erased, and this put in its place. I had
heard from some of my pupils, that they had been able by their diffusible
stimuli, to remove epileptic fits. But in case of any mistake I would not
venture to mark the fact for certain, which I have now done from my own perfect
conviction. A young man lately married had the most alarming fit of epilepsy
that ever was: His case was thought beyond remedy: as an extreme one, however,
he got from some person the full of a tea-cup of tinctura The baica up to a
blue ring a little below the brim. He got out of his fit some how or other. But
was perfectly stupid and senseless for a fortnight. Upon his falling into
another I was sent for, and brought him above in twenty minutes, as I am told,
(for I did not wait,) so completely, that he got out of bed, and ate a hearty
meal of beef stakes. Many weeks after, by mismanaging himself, and neglecting
directions given him, he fell into a slighter one, and was cured in the same
way.
.

Of Palsy.
DCXXXVIII. Palsy is an asthenia, in which, with the other proofs of the usual
debility, often with some degree of apoplectic fit, commonly all on a sudden,
the motion of some part of the body, and sometimes the sense of feeling is
impaired. When the fit is slight and of short continuance it terminates in
health; but the consequence of a higher degree and greater duration of it is
death.

DCXXXIX. The hurtful powers, that usually produce epilepsy and apoplexy, also
tend to produce palsy. And besides these, all the common debilitating powers
that produce any asthenia, directly or indirectly; great commotion of the
nervous system by means of to too diffusible stimuli; more affecting the
circumference of the body, where the organs of voluntary motion are chiefly
seated, and the internal parts and the brain less; as is evident in ebriety,
gluttony, and every sort of intemperance; likewise an indolent way of life,
which as commonly connected with these hurtful powers, have all the same
tendency.

DCXL. When the disease has once taken place, as it is kept up equally by
directly and indirectly debilitating powers; so

DCXLI. For the indication of cure, which is precisely the same as in epilepsy
as the energy of the cause operates more immediately upon the surface of the
body, consequently according to what has been said upon the subject of
epilepsy, the principal remedies are those, that have the greatest power in
invigorating the surface of the body: Such are friction, gestation, that degree
of exercise which the strength can bear, for the purpose of rousing by their
powerful operation, the languid excitement in the fibers of the muscles;
likewise a proper degree of heat of pure air, and therefore, as much as
possible, the open air; lastly, as none of the powers endued with stimulant
virtue, by any means should be omitted, in order that the excitement, which is
of great consequence in every cure, be more equal and vigorous all over; so in
that extreme debility which produces such an impotency of voluntary motion, as
it is of the greatest consequence to make an impression upon the principal
symptom; we should, therefore, employ a great deal of an opiate, (CXXX. and
CCXXX.) the influence of which, upon the surface, is the most considerable of
all other powers, and press the cure, till some commencement of returning
motion be procured; and then, without neglecting of the assistance of any of
the other stimuli, but using them all in concourse or succession, for the sake
of rendering their common effect more powerful and more equal, to eradicate the
disease.

DCXLII. Debilitating and evacuant powers are to be avoided for this reason,
that it is not vigor, it is not an over-proportion of blood, but a scantiness
of the latter, and a deficiency of the former, that is the cause.

Of Apoplexy.
DCXLIII. Apoplexy is an asthenia, resembling the two just now mentioned, in
its cause and cure, differing in the appearance of the symptoms, which makes no
difference in the truth LXXXI. DXXIX.
: In which, besides the symptoms in common to it with them and the other
astheniae, all of a sudden, sense, intellectual energy, and the voluntary
motions, are impaired, the respiration remains, but with s^oring, the pulse is
weak, and the whole fit is finished with the appearance of a profound sleep
CLIII. CC.
.

DCXLIV. The heads of the patients are large and not well formed, their necks
short and thick: The disease arise from both direct and indirect debility, but
chiefly from the latter. Of the indirect debilitating powers, the most powerful
is the luxury of food, drink, and sloth, which, after its course of stimulating
and filling the vessels is run, is truly debilitating and productive of a
penury of fluids: And, as each sort of debility is increased by the other, and
consequently the indirect by the direct, so that is remarkably the case in this
disease. Hence the effect of the debilitating plan of cure is so pernicious in
apoplexy, that it is received as a rule, that the third fit is not often, the
fourth never, got the better of.

DCXLV. The cause of epilepsy, palsy, and apoplexy, is the same with that of
every asthenia; affecting the head less in palsy, excepting in the beginning
and end, but greatly in the two others; and in all the three producing a
disturbance in the organs of voluntary motion. This disturbance, whether the
motion be destroyed or diminished, in convulsion seemingly increased, amounts
to the same thing, and, as was formerly explained, depends upon debility LVIII.
CCXXX.
.

DCXLVI. The same here too is the indication of cure; with that, which runs
through this whole form of diseases, and the force of the remedies is
especially, and as much as possible, to be directed to the parts most affected.
To prevent, therefore, the fits, in every respect alarming and full of danger,
we ought to recollect, how far indirect debility has a share in producing this
disease, and how far the direct concurs with it; and also consider the
operation of a greatly advanced age. All excessive stimulus, therefore, must be
avoided in such a manner, that the body may be invigorated and direct debility
guarded against, the stimulant plan of cure should be set on foot with
moderation and accuracy; and, in the place of the forms of stimuli, that have,
either from long or excessive use, lost their stimulant operation, according to
the rule of nature, others, which the excitability, yet not worn out with
respect to them, can receive, should be substituted, that is, the kinds of
food, of drink, and of diffusible stimuli, should be changed all round, and
upon the failure of each lately used one, to return to those that have been
long ago laid aside CCCI.
.

DCXLVII. The three diseases we are treating of, are commonly supposed to arise
from a plethora, attacking the head, and proving hurtful by compression upon
the brain. But, besides that, plethora has no existence in any case where it
has been supposed CXXXI. CXXXIV. DXLIX. DLV.
, at that extreme age at which those diseases happen; or sometimes in epilepsy,
when it affects weak and starved children, how can the blood be in
over-proportion? Can penury of food, which alone is the matter that forms blood
in the latter, and in the former a vigor long gone, create an over-proportion
of blood, and not, on the contrary, a penury of it?

DCXLVIII. As plethora has then no share in inducing those diseases, so neither
is an effusion of blood or of serum CXXXVII. and the addition.
upon the brain, to be accused to it. Nay, a similar effusion happens in every
case of the vessels, from great debility as well as in this case.

Of the Lock-Jaw.
DCXLIX. The lock-jaw is a less degree of tetanus, its spasm being confined to
the lower jaw and the neighboring parts. This is a rare affection, without
others equally conspicuous; as being a formidable symptom of fevers and wounds.
When the former of th^se happens, it will be treated of in fevers; when the
latter, it will give occasion to an enquiry, whether it belongs to local or
general disease.

DCL. Since it never arise immediately after a wound is inflicted, but usually
happens, either when the latter is healed up, or after a considerable interval
of time; the inference from that is that it either arises from the violence and
duration of the pain, which is always a cause of very much debility, or from
that debility, which the usual antisthenic plan of cure produces, or from an
unknown taint in the substance of the nervous system.

DCLI. That it depends upon debility we have reason to believe, from every sort
of spasm always depending on debility CLXXXIX. CXI.
; from tetanus, which is precisely the same affection, only differing in degree
CCXXVIII.
, having no other origin; and, in fine, from the success of the stimulant plan
of cure in this as well as all other spasms; and the want of success of the
antisthenic, or debilitating evacuant one. All the other particulars regarding
this subject will be taken notice of under the next head of disease tetanus.

Of Tetanus.
DCLII. Tetanus is an asthenia, and, therefore, always affecting persons under
debility, whether direct or indirect; in which, sometimes with consciousness,
sometimes not, sometimes with difficulty, sometimes with freedom of
respiration, the whole body, or the neck and its neighborhood only, are bent
sometimes forward, sometimes backward, and held fast by a rigid spasm.

DCLIII. Tetanus is the offspring of cold countries, as the northern parts of
Europe, but rarely; more frequently of the warm southern regions of that
division of the world; but most frequently of the torrid zone. The rare case,
such as that among us, is the sequel of a debility scarce usual in other
general diseases: On the contrary, it almost always arises from that unusual
debility, which is occasioned by a lacerating wound, through which fractured
bones are dashed, increasing the sum of that debility that existed before, or
that happened to be induced in the course of the cure. To produce the more
frequent case, or that most frequent one of all, which is quite common in the
torrid zone, the most powerful of the debilitating powers, and a very great
many, if not all of them, concur. The most powerful of these is, that degree of
heat, which is intolerable, to persons engaged in exercise or labor CXXVII.
, to whom almost only, and therefore to the slaves, it is hostile. Hence, even
under the slightest corporeal motion, fatigue, and sweat, are produced CXV.
CXXXVII.
, and from the sweat a scantiness of blood and other fluids. From a^^ those
arises a languor over the whole body, and, therefore, in the stomach CLXXXVI.
CXCIV. to CXCVIII.
: From the languor of the stomach there is a puny appetite, and food, which is
another cause of penury of the fluids, is either not taken in, or thrown up
again. All these affections, as well as that indolence both in mind and body,
which is inseparable from such a state of circumstances, are followed by the
highest degree of debility over the whole body: And, as the most noxious power,
the intense heat distresses the head more than any other part, as well as the
organs of voluntary motion, whether in the neighborhood of the head, or more
distant from it; that is the cause of the urgent symptom, the spasm, occupying
the parts that have been mentioned.

DCLIV. As tetanus is occasioned by all the debilitating powers, according ^o
the different degrees in which they possess that effect, and, consequently,
like every other asthenia, depends upon debility as its cause; and, as all the
astheniae are removed by remedies, exciting the whole system in such a manner,
as to exert the greatest influence possible upon the laboring part; the same,
accordingly, is the nature of tetanus, however little that disease has been
understood, the same simplicity of nature is found in it: And if there is
occasion in it for the very highest remedies, that circumstance shows, that the
whole disease does not depend upon the spasm, and that the laboring muscles
are not its whole seat, but that there is vast debility in every part, only
greater in the muscles, than in any other equal part, according to the law we
have mentioned XLIX.
.

DCLV. From what has been said, after tetanus has taken place, and upon account
of the teeth being shut by the lock-jaw, there is neither access to the weaker
and less powerful stimuli of food, drink, and such like, which are often
sufficient for the cure of diseases of lesser de^^ity, nor any sense in using
them; we must, therefore, immediately have recourse to the most powerful and
the most diffusible stimuli possible, and continue their use without regard to
quantity, not even that of opium itself, till the whole tumult of the disease
is allayed CCXCV. to CCCII.
.

Of Intermittent Fevers.
DCLVI. Paroxsyms, consisting of a cold, hot, and sweating fit, are a sort of
phoenomena that occur in every intermittent; and, in a certain proportion, in
every remittent fever. They often come on in consequence of a certain taint
received from neighboring morasses, or from a similar state of a neighboring
soil; but they also happen and often too, after an application of cold only as
in the vernal intermittents in Scotland. In the Mers, or county of Berwick,
where I labored three months under a tertian, that is, from the beginning of
March to the beginning of June, and in the Carse of Gowrie, and some other
places in that country, nothing is more common than the tertian ague happening
at the time at which I was ^ffected; and nothing is more certain, than that the
cold and moisture are the chief powers inducing it. It is somewhat strange,
that a man born in that country, if he would patch up a system of fevers,
should have overlooked a form of them, that occurred to his eyesight every
day, and borrowed his hypothetical course from a marsh miasma, supposed to be
the produce of great heat and moisture, though he had only heard or read of the
intermittents of warm countries.
; at other times after that of heat only In the warm countries agues often
occur, when it is easy to discern heat to be an hurtful power; but when
moisture is much less prevalent, for that very reason that the heat is
prevalent, than at other seasons when the disease does not occur.
, when the common asthenic hurtful powers accompany either: And they return
with a remarkable exacerbation, after a temporary solution of the disease, or
an abatement of it; in the cold fit, exhibiting manifest debility; in the hot,
counterfeiting a deceitful appearance of vigor; and scarce ever observing any
strict exactness in the time of their return Dr. Sydenham was content to count
the periods by the day, which was even too particular, but Nosology has refined
the matter into the wonder of exactness to an hour.
; but returning sooner in a higher, and later in a lower, degree of the
disease; and not unfrequently, besides the remittent, also gradually assuming a
continued form; and, on the contrary, sometimes without interference, oftener
in consequence of an improper method of cure, before the disease is ended,
changing into quintans Where the fit does not return till the fifth.
, septans Where its return is not till the seventh day.
, nonans Where the intermission continues till the ninth day.
or into sex^ans, octons, and decans That is, prolonged their intermission till
the sixth, eighth, or tenth day.
.

DCLVII. The fever of this kind, which returns every fourth day, and is
therefore called a quartan, is milder than that which receives the name of
tertain, from its recurrence being on the third day, and the latter is milder
than that which, from its return every day, is denominated quotidian. The
disease, that degenerates into a remittent or continued form, is of a worse
nature than that which is regular in its returns, or that which puts off fits,
and protracts the intervals betwixt them: And, the form and type of each case
being given, the whole set is both of more frequent recurrence, and of a more
severe kind in hot, than cold, climates.

DCLVIII. That this sort of fever depends upon debility throughout the cold
fit, is proved by the symptoms, by the exciting hurtful powers, and by the
method of cure, whether successful, or the contrary.

DCLIX. The whole disease, as well as every paroxysm, begins with a sense of
cold, the greatest desire for a warm situation, I remember yet, that it was the
highest luxury for me, when the cold fit came on, to be put in bed, and covered
under such a load of blankets (for the cold of sheets was intolerable) as
would, at any other time, have oppressed me. I was then about eleven years of
age.
, with trembling, and that shaking motion in which the whole body is lifted up
from the bed By authors and lecturers in Latin absurdly called rigor.
, with paleness, dryness, and shriveling of the skin, with the diminution of
tumors, and drying up of ulcers, that the patient may happen to have had before
the arrival of the disease, with an impaired state of the intellectual faculty,
a want of steadiness in its exertions, and sometimes delirium, with a dullness
of sensation, languor of spirits, torpor of the voluntary motions, a
listlesness of mind and body in all the functions, in fine, a manifest debility.

DCLX. If terror, horror, cucumbers, cold melons, famine, debauch in eating and
drinking, food of difficult digestion, have been found for certain, to have a
great effect in bringing back paroxysms, after a long intermission of them; if
in cold situations, where cold is the principal hurtful power, it is the poor
people, who are ill clothed, starved in their diet, and enfeebled by labor,
who in general are only affected with disease; if in warm regions of the globe,
those who have been most exposed to debilitating hurtful powers of all kinds,
who, in preference to others are seized with it See DCXLVII.
; if in moist places, those who live well in their diet, and cheer themselves
with their bottle, escape the disease as in Holland; where the Dutch students
who live not near so well as the English, are very liable to the disease, while
the jolly living English, who do not like the weak rhenish wines, and the weak
ill managed vin de Bourdeaux, which is a cheap dirty claret, almost never fall
into the disease at L^^den, while the Dutch are perpetual victims to it as
often as it is epidemic.
, and water drinkers and persons in a state of inanition from low living
peculiarly experience it; all these facts show, how far this disease is from
depending upon heat and moisture alone; and prove, that it also arises from
cold, and not from either alone, but also from all the usual hurtful powers,
like every other asthenia.

DCLXI. Further, if every kind of evacuation, as often as it has been tried, is
found, without the possibility of a doubt, to be hurtful; if no person in his
senses has scarcely ever attempted bleeding They have talked of taking a little
blood in the spring intermittents, but that was a theory of Dr. Sydenham's, who
divided the diseases of the whole year, into inflammatory and putrid; and I do
not find, that that idea has ever been followed in practice. For though they
follow him most servilely in most respects, especially where he is wrong, their
vanity, that they may now and then seem to strike out something from
themselves, disposes them to differ from him in others, especially where he is
right, as in the rejection of purging in some sthenic diseases (CXXXVII.)
; if, before the Peruvian and some other barks of similar operation were found
out to act as remedies, a variety of strong drinks as ale, wort, wine, spirits,
strong punch; Riverius followed this plan; and I remember it was a custom among
the common people to cure themselves by getting tipsy. But I was allowed
neither the one method of cure, nor the other. The authority of Dr. Sth^^^^^nd
Boerhaave, had thrown the bark into disrepute in Britain: And my mother, "who
trusted in God, and not in physicians," left me to the course of desires and
aversions, which were chiefly to avoid cold, and anxiously seek for heat. She
kept me upon a vegetable diet in the intermissions, which I even then did not
much like. It was the kindly warmth of summer, which then set in early, that
had the chief effect in gradually finishing that cure.
were used with sufficient success; and if it now also is found and
demonstrated in fact, that the diffusible stimuli are by far more effectual
than any bark; nay, that the bark often fails, while they are perfectly
effectual in the re-establishment of health; from this sort of argument and
certainty in point of fact, we derive the most solid conviction, that there is
nothing in this disease different from other astheniae, but that it perfectly
agrees with them in the exciting hurtful powers, in the cause, and in the cure.
And, if it differs in the appearance of the symptoms, that shows no difference
of nature, and not even any thing unusual; as all the astheniae that have been
mentioned, however much they have been proved to be the same See par. LXXI.
LXXXI. DCXXIX.
, differ notwithstanding, in a similar manner, from each other, and symptoms
lead not to truth, give no real information. For, though precisely the same
^ound functions flow from the same state of perfect health; yet when the latter
is so changed, as that the excitement is either increased or diminished, the
functions are changed from the standard into every sort of appearance, in such
sort, however, that they point out no difference in the cause as has been
commonly believed, and not always even a difference of degree DIV. DVII.


DCLXII. Accordingly, the following demonstrated facts of spasm, convulsion,
tremor, inflammation from weakness, deficiency of menstruation DXLV. and the
following paragraph.
, bleeding discharges DXLVIII.
, loss of appetite, thirst, nausea, vomiting, diarrhaea with pain* diarrhaea
without pain, and all the other asthenic affections CLXXVI. to CXCV. and to
CXCVII.
, arising from one and the same cause, and being removed by one and the same
operation of the remedies CCXXII. DLVI. DLXI. DLXXI. DLXXIII. DLXXIV. to DCXCV.
and from that to DCXCVIII. Look also carefully over the whole IVth Chapter of
the second part.
, and not even in their morbid state, expressing degrees of debility in such a
manner, as that it can be thought proper to take any order of arrangement from
that mark; all these serve to confirm the observation just now made, and by
their analogy, to demonstrate, that the fevers also are distinguished by
intervals of freedom from febrile state, sometimes greater, sometimes scarcely
perceived in common with what happens to many other diseases, not from any
peculiarity in the cause, but from a variation in its force. If fevers
sometimes intermit their febrile impulse, sometimes exert it more remissly, and
sometimes, by performing the latter imperceptibly, go on almost in a continued
career DCL.
; do they, in that respect, differ from the gout When the gout in the old way,
is left to patience and flannel and low diet and watery drink, it shows both
remissions and considerable intermissions. I have been often mortified, at
finding, in consequence of walking a little too freely, when I thought the fit
was gone, a more violent return than the first part had been; when I had not
yet attained to the full knowledge of the nature and management of that
disease. Which is a circumstance, that every podagric, who is still treated in
the old way, can bear witness to. Dr. Sydenham fell a victim to his ignorance
of its nature.
, which never goes on with an equal force, but abates from time to time; and
even, when it has interposed an interval of health returns with more severity
than ever? Or do they differ from asthma, as well as many other diseases, in
all which the same thing precisely happens? And what is more usual, in
indigestion, and often violent vomiting A gentleman in Scotland, came to dine
with his brother, who lived with me, and my family in a house in the
neighborhood of Edinburgh. He ate and drank so sparingly, that I predicted,
from a knowledge I had of his manner of living, which was an excess of
temperance and abstemiousness to a faulty degree, that if he did not indulge a
little more in these respects, he would soon fall into a disease of debility.
The prediction was verified in a few days; when his brother having occasion to
go to town, found him, in the intervals of a violence of vomiting, making his
testament. By a good dose of the diffusible stimulus, he removed the whole
disease at once, and enabled him, with the additional help of some good ^ound
port and genuine Madeira, in a few minutes to eat heartily of beef stakes.
Before his brother's arrival he had been treated in the usual evacuant, and, as
they call it, the antiphlogistic way. Upon the return of his medical friends a
glister was prescribed, which threw him back into his disease, from which, with
the same ease and in the same short space of time, he was extricated upon his
brother's return to his post. This young gentleman from that beginning, like
many other of my pupils, is now a most respectable man in his profession. Some
time after that, he performed the greatest cure, that ever happened since the
first annals of medicine. In a very dirty ship, the Dutton, which was going to
the East Indies, he stemmed, in the latitude of Rio Janeiro, a fever that was
carrying off numbers every day, losing not one; as can be attested by the
ship's books, for no less than five weeks -- his name is Dr. Campbell.
, accompanied with a rage of other symptoms, than the intervals of the greatest
relief? The same is the nature of the chin cough See 579.
the same as that of the asthenic cough And from DLXXXVII. to DXCVII.
. In fine, where is there one of all the asthenic diseases, the morbid career
of which continues the same from beginning to end? There is none All this
confirms, and not only the point at present meant to be settled, which is that
the distinctions, that physicians have made about the differences of fevers,
are without all foundation, and that they are all the same with no other
difference but in degree, and that, unless in that respect, they do not differ
from other diseases of the same form; but it likewise adds additional weight to
our fundamental proposition, that we are nothing in ourselves, but according to
the powers acting on us. Many circumstances in the course of diseases, that
escape the observation both of patients and physicians, are of hourly and
momentary occurrence, and sufficient, when their importance is weighed
according to the principles of this doctrine, to account for the variations in
the progress of diseases. We shall, by and by, see that the circumstances of
heat, from the gratification of indulging in which the patient is not to he
turned aside by any advice, is, with its consequences upon the whole system,
sufficient to account for the gradual conversion of the cold into the hot, and
the hot, into the sweating, stages.
. For, as life in all its states See par. IX.
is always in proportion to the action of the exciting powers, upon the
excitability, and both predisposition to diseases, and diseases themselves
supervene in proportion to its being greater or less than the proper degree; so
the course of diseases follows the same rule; and, according to the variation
of the degree of that action, is one while increased, another while diminished,
another while exhibits a temporary eruption; just like what happens in this
sort of fevers,

DCLXIII. The cause of them is the common one of all astheniae, whether febrile
or not; but under such direction and application to the system, that, after an
interval of some hours, all their morbid energy departs entirely, or in some
degree. And the reason of that is, that the exciting hurtful powers in the same
proportion are either removed, or more gentle in their operation; in one word,
the excitement is increased for the time. The variation of types is not owing
to a matter, subject to the same variation: For, if that were the case, how
could the same case run through all the forms, sometimes of intermission,
sometimes of remission, and at other times of nearly going on with a continued
movement and the contrary? Is the matter, which is supposed to produce each
form, in order to produce another form, changed into that matter, which is
supposed necessary to the latter The ancients supposed, that every type arose
from a matter suited to produce it. Now, suppose a quotidian type to depend
upon any given matter, and a tertian upon any other, different from that; when
either type is changed into the other, are we to suppose that the matter is
also changed, and so forth of the rest?
? Is the vapor, or, as they call it, the effluvium, proceeding from animals,
which is supposed to produce any typhus, or continued fever, and, therefore,
the Egyptian one, when this is changed into an intermittent, or remittent
nature, also, together with the change of type, changed into a marsh miasma, or
defilement arising from morasses, which is supposed to produce that form of
fever? Or rather does the matter, which at first produced each type still
continue the same, and become the cause of another form? If any person should
fix upon the latter as being the truth, how should the same cause produce
different effects? But, if he inclines to adopt the former supposition, what
proof is there, that can be admitted upon any principle of reasoning, that, as
often as the form of the fever changes, so often its cause, the matter, is also
changed? It has been already proved, that marsh miasmata, or defilements, are
not the cause DCLIII. DCLIV. DCLV.
. And it shall be by and by evinced, that the animal effluvium, or vapor,
arising from the body, when affected with a continued fever, is not: Nay, it
has been proved by the most solid arguments, that neither is any other matter
taken into the body, either in this or any case, that which produces the
disease, and that the change of excitement alone is the universal source of all
general diseases See the paragraphs XXII. XXIII. LXII. LXIX. LXX. LXXII.
LXXIII. and LXXXVIII.
.

DCLXIV. To enquire into the return of fits; it is not peculiar to this form of
fevers, to have a return of the general affection after its temporary solution;
the same thing happens to the gout, as often as a return of the disease again
succeeds to a return of health DCLVI.
, and for the same reason DCLVII.
: For, as those diseases are repelled by invigorating means, so they are
brought back by the debilitating powers, which were their first cause.
Accordingly, when the disease is left to itself, when it is treated by a
debilitating plan of cure, it perseveres in returning; when it is treated with
Peruvian bark, and still more certainly by the forms of wine and diffusible
stimuli, and when that mode of cure is persisted in, till the strength is quite
confirmed, it never returns.

DCLXV. The tertian vernal fevers of Scotland go off without medicines, in
process of time, first in consequence of the heat of the bed, and then, as the
summer sets in, by basking in the rays of the sun, and by a moderate use of
food and strong drink, their duration commonly not exceeding the space of three
months. In all the southern regions, and even in England, the Peruvian bark,
when the whole cure is entrusted to it, often fails, and they are not removed
but by very diffusible stimuli Dr. Wainman, as it was said before, found that
to be the case in the fens of Lincolnshire. From which we may learn how little
dependence is to be had on the facts in medicine, as they are delivered from
desks or in books; from both which we have always been taught to believe, that
the Peruvian bark was a catholicon in intermittent fevers. But, if it fails in
the cure of the mild state of that disease in this country, what must we think
of its efficacy in the malignant intermittents and remittents of the warm
countries? And, if that medicine, with its universal high character, shall turn
out next to an imposition, what are we to think of testimonies in favor of any
thing? One of the ways of administering the bark is in strong wine or spirit,
and it can hardly be doubted, but in that compound form it may have been of
service. But where shall we find a panegyrist on the bark, who will make any
allowance for the powerful medicine conjoined with it? They talk of it as a
vehicle, without allowing it any other credit. In the same manner, at all
times, have many powers of great operation been overlooked in the accounts
given us of remedies, and the merit of the cure imputed to the most inert. I
have most generally found an analogy betwixt the remedies, that are, in
reality, powerful, and our ordinary supports of health. The wines and strong
drinks are certainly a part of diet with most people, and so is opium among the
Turks. But what analogy can be found betwixt the same ordinary supports of
life, the same durable and natural stimuli, and the bark of a tree, whether
brought from South America, or growing among ourselves? I will not pretend to
say, that the bark is devoid of all virtue: but I must have greater proofs of
its power over disease than I have yet met with, before I can retract much of
what I have said.
.

DCLXVI. The debility during the cold stage is the greatest, that of the hot
less, and that of the sweating stage, which ends in health for the time, is the
least of all. Hence, in a gentle degree of the disease, as cold is the most
hurtful power, the consequence is, that its effect is gradually taken off by
the agreeable heat of the bed or of the sun, and the strength, thereby
gradually drawn forth. The heart and arteries, gradually excited by the same
heat, acquire vigor, and at last, excited in their perspiratory terminations
by the same stimulus the most hurtful symptom being thereby removed, they
restore the hot ^it, and afterward carry on the same process to the breaking
out of sweat.

DCLXVII. When the force of the disease is greater, these powers are
ineffectual; and, unless the most powerful remedies are applied, the disease,
instead of producing intermissions, rushes headlong into the remittent state
only, or even into those very obscure remissions, which give the appearance of
a continued disease.

DCLXVIII. And, since in every case of disease of any energy, the disease
returns, for this reason, that either the lesser force, by which it is kept up,
is not stopped by a lesser force of remedies, or the greater force of the former
by a greater force of the latter For the curative force must be always
accommodated to the mo^bific, or cause of the disease. See above XCII. CIX.
; the remedies, therefore, should be given both before the cold fit, and during
it, as also through the whole course of the intermission to the next paroxism,
and they should be continued even through this, and after it is over. Lastly,
like the practice in every other cure of asthenic diseases, we should gradually
recede from the use of the highest stimuli, in proportion as the body can now
be supported by the lesser and more natural CV. and CVII.
.

Of the severe Dysentery.
DCLXIX. The severe dysentery, or bloody flux, is an asthenia; in which,
besides the symptoms in common to that whole form of diseases, so often now
repeated, there are pains in the intestines, gripes, innumerable dejections,
chiefly mucous, sometimes bloody, for the most part without the natural matter
that passes that way, all which happen often after contagion has been applied.

Of the severe Cholera.
DCLXX. The severe cholera adds to the common symptoms of every asthenia, those
of vomiting and purging, alternating with great violence, and for the most part
consisting of bilious matter.

Of Synochus.
DCLXXI. Synochus is a very mild typhus, and such as chiefly happens in cold
countries and cold seasons; in the beginning deceiving physicians by a certain
resemblance to synocha, but a counterfeit one.

Of the simple Typhus or Nervous Fever.
DCLXXII. The simple typhus, or nervous fever, is such a synochus, as appears
in warm countries or seasons, but somewhat more severe, and yet sufficiently
simple.

Of the Cynanche Gangrenosa.
DCLXXIII. The gangrenous cynanche is a typhus, a little more severe than the
simple typhus, or nervous fever, with an eruption upon the skin, and a red
tumid inflammation of the throat, and with mucous crusts of a whitish color,
and concealing ulcers below them. The end of the angina, formerly mentioned
CCXXII. CCXIV.
, equals or exceeds the violence of this disease.

Of the confluent Smallpox.
DCLXXIV. The confluent smallpox is a typhus chiefly depending upon indirect
debility. It is preceded by a great eruption of the distinct kind, and an
universal crust of local inflammation over the whole body; which, by their
local and violent stimulus, convert the sthenic into the asthenic diathesis,
and the inflammatory affection into a gangrenous one. Its cure is to be
conducted upon the stimulant or antisthenic plan, but in such a way, however,
as is suitable to indirect debility.

Of the pestilential Typhus, the jail, putrid, or the petechial Fever, and the
Plague.
DCLXXV. The pestilential typhus, or the jail, putrid, and petechial fever, is
an asthenic disease of the highest debility, scarce excepting the plague
itself; in which the surface of the body is first dry, pale, hot, shrivelled;
then, chiefly toward the end, moist, drivelled with spots, and colliquative
sweats, diversified with vibices, or long strokes like those laid on by a whip,
and wasted with colliquative diarrhoea; in which the stomach is affected with
the want of appetite, loathing of food, nausea, often with vomiting; in which
the belly is first boundish, and then, as it has been said, subject to
colliquative evacuation; in which the intellectual function is first impaired,
then becomes incoherent, afterward delirious, and that often in the highest
degree; in which the spirits are dejected and wasted with sadness and
melancholy; in which the voluntary motions are early impaired, and then so
destroyed, that the patient cannot be supported in his posture in bed by his
own muscles, or prevented from slipping down, from time to time, from the upper
to the lower part, and the senses are either blunted or preternaturally acute.
In fine, the urine, the foeces, the breath, and all the excrementitious
discharges, have a singular foetid smell.

DCLXXVI. The plague begins, holds on in its course, and ends with similar
symptoms: To which, however, carbuncles, buboes, and anthraces, or fiery sores,
are added. These are most frequent in the plague, but not so confined to it, as
to be excluded from the pestilential fever CCXIX.
.

DCLXXVII. Contagious matter sometimes accompanies typhus, always the plague:
The former is of a common nature, or such as is liable to happen in any part of
the globe; the latter is thought peculiar to the eastern part of Europe, and
the western of Asia, possessed by the Turks, called the Levant.

DCLXXVIII. With respect to the contagious matter of typhus; the corruption of
the fluids is by no means to be imputed to it See above CXV. CXXII. CCXXXVI.
, nor is heat so much to be blamed; for cold has an equal power in producing
that effect as heat Ibid. and CCLXI.
, as has also every thing, as well as heat, that either directly, like cold, or
indirectly like it, debilitates See again CCXXXVI.
. Nay, the emptiness of the vessels, from want o^ food, or from the
incapability of the digestive organs to take it in and assimilate it, as also
that debility which is induced by melancholy and grief, though, in these cases,
no matter at all is present, admit of the same application. By means of that
debility in the extreme vessels, internally, as well as externally, and,
therefore, especially in those of the alimentary canal and in the perspiratory
vessels, the fluids stagnate; and by stagnating under the heat of the body,
degenerate^ into that foreign quality, which, in a more extensive sense, is
called corruption, but in a more uncertain one, putrefaction There are three
states or qualities produced in fluids by as many different fermentations, the
sacharine acid, or putrefactive. To one or other of those we are apt to refer
every state of corruption in our fluids; but they are liable to degeneracies,
which do not exactly correspond to any of those: And, as we are not yet
acquainted with any of those deviations from the natural state, it is safer to
use the general term corruption. Even the word acrimony is too general, as we
can by no means pretend to say, that perfect blandness is the natural and
healthy state of our fluids: Nay, the different uses and subserviency to the
functions seem to require a considerable deviation from blandness; the urine,
the perspirable fluid, the bile, and others, being intended, by a certain
poigna^cy, to answer certain purposes. These, compared to certain blander
fluids, may be said to be acrid; while compared to their state in morbid
degeneracy, they, may be called bland, and the latter acrid.
.

DCLXXIX. As the cause of all these diseases is the same with that of diseases
not febrile, to wit, debility; differing only in this, that it is the greatest
debility compatible with life, and not long compatible with it; so,

DCLXXX. The indication also of cure is the same as that of the other
astheniae, but must be conducted with a good deal of more attention than is
necessary in them, upon account of their much greater mildness Fevers will
require many more visits from the physician than are commonly either bestowed
or required, and often a good deal of watching. While this is more generally
the case in fevers, at least in the high degree in which these fevers exist, at
the same time they are not the only ones that require such strict attention; as
every disease, when it has attained to the same degree of debility, endangering
life, will claim the same circumspection and vigilance from the judicious and
conscientious physician.
. It is, then, debility alone, that is to be regarded in the cure; and
stimulant or antisthenic remedies alone, that are to be administered. Nor is
there occasion for any distinction in the method of cure, but what direct or
indirect debility requires See par. CIII. CVII.
.

DCLXXXI. The indirectly debilitating powers, are the violent and local
stimulus of the eruption in the confluent smallpox See CLXXV, CCXV. CCXVI.
CCXVII. CCXVIII.
, so often inducing prostration of strength, and drunkenness CXXX.
, heat See CXV.
, or long continued luxury See above par. CXXVII.
. To these hurtful powers, thus indirectly dibilitating, all the others may
more or less be added Look for them in Part. I. Chap. I.
.

DCLXXXII. And as it never happens, that either direct or indirect debility
alone proves hurtful, hence we have a third case given, where we have to combat
both sorts of debility Suppose any direct debility has occasioned a disease,
when that is established, the excitability is so morbidly accumulated, that the
slighest exertion of any exciting power becomes too much for it; which
immediately constitutes an admixture of indirect debility. The stimulus of
corporeal motion, which is a great and rough indirectly debilitating power, is
often too long continued, after a typhus fever has begun its insidious attack
upon the habit; and hence the after-part of the disease becomes more severe and
dangerous. It is also to the same cause that we owe the propriety of excluding
light and sound, when they prove causes of irritation, their stimulus, though
slight, being too strong for their accumulated excitability. The guarding
against gusts of passion and emotion, as well as mental exertion, is all upon
the same principle. When a person falls into a fever from excessive labor and
low diet at the same time, that is an instance of a mixture of debility from
the beginning. Again, when any disease, chiefly of indirect debility, is
treated by bleeding, other evacuations and starving, that is an instance of a
superinducement of direct upon indirect debility. A judicious practitioner, and
who prescribes according to the rules that arise from a near acquaintance with
the operations of the inanimate part of matter upon living systems, will find
plenty of scope for the exercise of his judgment in these and many other
niceties: And he will find, that the Brunonian doctrine, as it is now nicknamed
by those who know it not, is not a doctrine to be practiced without knowledge,
without judgment, and without sense; but that it requires every part of
knowledge requisite to throw light upon so extensive a subject, as that of the
science of life over all nature, and all the judgment and good sense of the
soundest understanding to carry it into application upon many occasions of
nicety and difficulty. The trash that has hitherto too often passed for
knowledge, is to be acknowledged not only useless, but hurtful. But the true
knowledge of nature must be always elegant, always satisfactory, always useful.
It is to be hoped the day is not far distant, when this doctrine will change
its present appellation, into that of the doctrine of Nature, over the living
part of her productions; comprehending not only the morbid but healthy
phoenomena, and the distinctions between the living and the dead state.
.

DCLXXXIII. The directly debilitating powers ^^e known, to wit, cold See par.
CXVII.
, low diet, CXXVIII.
, bleeding, and other evacuations CXXXIV. CXXXVII.
, rest of body and mind, and want of passion and emotion CXXXVII. and CXXXIX
and CXLII.
, and impure air CXLVI. Compare the whole with Part II. Chap. X. all from CCXC.
to CCCXII. and from that to par. CCCXV.
.

DCLXXXIV. As both those sets of powers act by debilitating; be, at the same
time, on your guard from believing, that some of them are septic, and prove
hurtful by fermentation, and are to be cured by antiseptics, or powers that
resist putrefaction; and that, among the former, heat is to be reckoned; among
the latter, cold, wine, the Peruvian bark, and acids See par. DCLXXVIII.
.

DCLXXXV. In the gentle cases, as in the agues of cold places, and especially
the vernal agues See DCL. DCLIV. DCLX.
, and likewise in synochus, in the simple typhus, and in the plague itself,
when mild; scarce any stronger stimulus than wine is required; and the rest of
the cure is to be conducted according to the directions so often now laid down
in the mild asthenic diseases.

DCLXXXVI. In the most severe fevers, such as the remittent DCL. DCLX. DCLXIV.
DCLXV.
, in the warmer regions of the earth, and in the torrid zone, and in the severe
typhus, when it is pestilential, in the very violent dysentery and cholera of
the same places, and in the most violent plague itself (b), the cause of all
which affections is in general direct debility; or in gentler cases of the same
disease at first, and that have now acquired a great deal of virulence in their
progress from the neglect of the proper, or the use of an improper plan of
cure; we ought immediately to begin with the highest diffusible stimuli, such
as opium, volatile alkali, musk, and ether, in small doses but often repeated
XLI. XLIII. CXIII. DCLX. to DCLXIV.
; and afterward, when the strength is restored, and the force of the stomach
confirmed by their use, to proceed to the use of food, drink, gestation, pure
air, cheerfulness, and, last of all, to the usual offices and occupations of
life.

DCLXXXVII. When indirect debility has had more concern in the cure, as in
agues, or more continued fevers, occasioned by drunkenness, and in the
confluent smallpox; the same remedies are to be employed, but in an inverted
proportion of dose. We should, consequently, set out here in the cure with the
largest doses, and which, are next in quantity to that degree of stimulus,
which produced the disease This may be exemplified by the treatment of a person
the next and second day after he has been hurt by drinking. His excitability
has been worn out by an unusually strong stimulus, the effect of the first
night's sleep is to allow it to accumulate again: In this state much exercise
fatigues, for want of excitement to enable it to be born: Fluid nourishment is
commonly used, but it is not strong enough to waste the redundance of
excitability, and bring the patient back to his healthy excitement. The dram
drinkers know the remedy, but they know not its bounds. They have recourse to a
glass of strong spirit, and they would be right if they stopped at one, two, or a
very few, according to the quantity, that their former habit may render
necessary, and take no more than what gave them an appetite for solid
nourishing animal food; which, whatever the quantity that is required to
produce it be, is the best general rule: But they go on, and every day till
that of their death, which soon arrives, renew the disease. The rule is to take
a little of what proved hurtful, till a return of appetite comes on: After
eating a little, a walk or a ride will add more stimulus: The air, in which the
exercise or gestation is performed, will furnish another. In that way, more
strength will be acquired in proportion as a greater number or stimuli have
wasted more excitability, and with more equality. A second day's management by
applying the stimuli in a still lesser degree, will commonly remove all the
complaints. When an habit of hard drinking has brought on, as it always will
sooner or later, a very bad and confirmed disease; if the excitability is
nearly worn out, and what remains is very unequal, as having been produced
chiefly by an alternation betwixt one stimulus acting with partial excess and
sleep, either imperfectly removing the excess, or by its length superadding
direct to the indirect debility, which the drink occasions; the patient should
have somewhat a lesser quantity, than that which at any time hurts him; then
the next day still less; and so on, till very little will serve him, and he
should add all the other stimuli in proportion as he diminishes the morbid one.
; then recourse should be had to lesser stimuli, and a greater number of them,
till, as was said just ^ow DCLXXXIV.
, the strength can be supported by the accustomary and natural stimuli CCCVIII.
to CCCXII.
.

DCXXXVIII. To give some estimate of the dose in both cases DCLXXXVI and
DCLXXXVII.
; in direct debility, where the redundancy of excitability does not, for the
time, admit of much stimulus The abundant excitability of an infant cannot be
reduced at once to that wasted degree, in which the strength of an adult
consists; it must be by the gradual application, of what it can bear always for
the present time that that can be brought about; and, therefore, not sooner
than a space of time equal to half the individual's given period of existence.
In a similar manner, an excitability that has been accumulated from deficicacy
of stimuli for a number of weeks or months, will require a space of time,
somewhat proportioned to that, to wear it out in the manner most suitable, to
restore the lost vigor. Some health will be sooner brought about, but the
effectuating of perfect health must be a work of time. Again, the direct
debility of a few days will be easily removed in a few days. In fevers, and
every case of high debility, the accumulation of excitability for want of
stimulant power to produce excitement, must be estimated by the number of
stimuli that have been withheld, as well as the degree of force of each of
them. In a fever, then, the stimulus of exercise, of the open air, of
conversation, of diversion of every kind, of an agreeable flow of spirits, of a
pleasant train of thinking, of light and sound in a great measure, as well as
of the exercise of all the other senses, and particularly the stimulus of a due
quantity of blood, and other fluids, and mo^^ especially that of nourishing
food, and, at least upon the common plan of practice, that of wine and
exhilarating drink, all these, are withheld, and, therefore, for want of them,
the diminution of excitement must both be great and unequal. What then is
required as to the idea of the cure? Since most of those, which are the
ordinary stimuli, by which the ordinary health is supported, cannot be applied;
the proper idea is to look out for a power in nature, that can, as nearly as
possible, supply, both the degree and equality of stimulant operation that is
wanted. Such a power we find in the few diffusible stimuli, and particularly in
opium (See par. CXXX.) Any of those act powerfully on the stomach, and diffuse
proportional excitement over the system. So soon and effectually do they
pervade it, and act with the most powerful effect upon the surface, that it is
often an object of attention in the practice to think of means to prevent it
from going too far. By the blessed use of those remedies, the excitement of the
stomach is restored, so that with a return of appetite, food can be taken in,
and digested, in so far as the powers of that organ go; which are confined
chiefly to the first part of digestion, or what is called the first concoction.
Next the excitement is restored in the other digestive organs, in the duodenum,
in the biliary vessels, the pancreatic duct, in the lacteal vessels, through
their whole course from the intestines to their common receptacle, as all the
vessels that return lymph from every part of the body, in the veins betwixt the
thoracic duct and the heart, in all the cavities of the latter, in all the red
arteries, in the colorless terminations of all these, whether exhalant or
glandular, and whether only simple separating, or also changing, the property
of the fluid they secrate, in all the internal cavities of the body, in the
commencing extremities of the absorbent vessels, and in their progress through
their lymphatic trunks to the receptacle in common to them with the lacteals,
which are a part of their number, in the thoracic duct again; as also from that
to the heart, and from the heart to the extremities of the arteries: Lastly,
the influence of excitement is extended to these terminations of the arterial
system, whether exhalant or glandular* which perform the several functions of
excrementitious secretion and excretion, by which every portion of fluids, now
become useless, or, if they were retained, hurtful to the system, are thrown
out by their several emunctories. When, by the use of the diffusible stimuli,
the stomach, and all the organs can perform their respective functions, the
natural stimuli begin to be restored; the stomach, the intestines, the lacteals
and blood vessels, and all the other vessels, are gradually filled with their
respective fluids; the muscles on the surface, and the muscular fibers recover
their tone and density; the brain recovers its vigor; heat and air can be now
restored to the surface; exercise can now add its useful stimulus; and all the
functions return to their usual capability of being acted upon by the usual and
ordinary exciting powers.
, ten or twelve drops of laudanum given every quarter (...) hour, till the
patient, if, as is usually the case, in such a high degree of debility, he has
wanted sleep long Want of sleep is an indirectly debilitating power; and, in
this weakened state of the system, in this redundancy of excitability, where
every exciting power is liable to be too much for the excitability, the want of
sleep, by not allowing this partial waste of excitability to be repaired, is
the occasion of so much more indirect debility being added to the direct; and
hence the sum total of debility is increased. The effect of sleep in removing
this partial indirect debility becomes so far an invigorating power.
falls into it: After sleep, when now some vigor is acquired both by that and
the medicine, and now some of the excessive excitability is worn off, a double
quantity of the diffusible stimulus should be added, and, in that way,
gradually increased, till the healthy state can now be supported by (...)
lesser in degree, greater in number, and more natural See above par. CIII. and
CVII.
.

DCLXXXIX. In indirect debility an hundred and fifty drops should forthwith be
thrown in; and then the superaddition to be made, should be less and less, till
we arrive at the boundary just now mentioned DCLXXXVIII.
. Both the measures recommended in par. DCLXXXVIII. and this.
, are in general applicable to adults; but less will suffice at an early or
late age. Nay, the rule further varies according to the habit, the way of life,
the nature of the place, and the peculiarities of the patient When the habit is
delicate, the patient's way of life moderate a^ to the use of the stimuli, the
place cold, or both cold and moist, and the patient easily affected with
stimuli of all kinds; in all these cases the rule, which common sense
prescribes, is to diminish the dose of the diffusible. A lady in Edinburgh, who
had born and nursed many children, had lived exceedingly moderately, had been
and still was very assiduous in the management of her family affairs, and
usually stimulated with little air out of own her house, fell into a cholic,
and, by the evacuant and starving plan, had been kept in it for a full month,
till the urgent sy^^^^om of vomiting required further assistance: When I came,
I first retarded the vomiting by a glass of whisky: And, by two more, with no
other help but that of a mixture containing 30 drops of the Thebaic tincture,
which the surgeon had been administering in miserable small portions, in three
hours removed the whole disease. As I have said somewhere before, the disease,
from her neglect in fulfilling directions, had very nigh returned next day; but
another glass repelled it.
.

DCXC. And since the use of the diffusible stimuli only succeeds, when life
cannot be preserved by the usual and more congruous to nature, and a due
quantity of blood and other stimuli soon become sufficient to finish the
healthy state; we should, on that account, even from the beginning immediately
give animal food, if not in a solid form in which it can neither be taken nor
digested, at least in a fluid form, in that of soups; which should be
alternated with all the doses of the diffusible stimulus: Then, in a gradual
way, proportioned to the return of vigor, first a very little of something
solid, and afterward more and more should be thrown in, and the other stimuli,
each at its proper time, brought into play; till the whole cure terminate in
the management commonly observed in good health, where there is less occasion
for medical injunctions

DCXCI. When the affection is more a mixture of both sorts of debility, these
proportions of the doses must be blended together.

DCXCII. Contagion, which either adds nothing to the effect of the usual
hurtful powers, or proves hurtful by the same operation by which they are so,
is not otherwise to be regarded, than that time be allowed for its passing out
by the pores, together with the perspiratory fluid, and, therefore, the
perspiration be properly supported; which, as it is affected by stimulating, is
no addition to the general indication See LXXXVIII. XCVIII.
.

DCXCIII. Lastly, the corruption of the fluids in the extreme vessels must be
obviated CCXXXVI. and CCLXXIV.
, not by means, that by a direct operation remove it, but by the powers that
act upon the excitement of the solids, and that increase excitement over the
whole body, and therefore, among other parts, upon the laboring vessels.

DCXCIV. Having now run over the whole scale of decreasing exciting power from
peripneumony to the plague, and from death by indirect, to death by direct
debility; and having so executed the work, as to present the public with a new
science, if not finished off in an elaborate, elegant, and highly polished
manner, at least marked in outlines, and, like a rough statue, to be polished
afterward, in some measure fashioned in all its limbs, and embracing an entire
plan of a work, connected in all its parts; we must next pass over the
consideration of local diseases.

THE FIFTH AND LAST PART.
LOCAL DISEASES.
CHAP. I.
Of Local Diseases.
DCXCV. LOCAL diseases V. VI. VII.
are divided, according to an order of nature, into five parts; the first of
which consists of organic affections, where no disease over the whole system
arises, none but in the hurt part. This is a sort of affection, that happens in
parts less sensible, according to common language, or more devoid of
excitability.

DCXCVI. The second part, likewise made up of organic affections, occurs in
parts of the system, whether internal, or external, that are very sensible,
endued with a great deal of excitability The excitability is here not talked of
in its comparative states of abundance or deficiency, but in the degree in
which any part possesses it in preference to other parts. It is used in the
sense of the greater or lesser vitality of parts: Accordingly we can say, that
some parts possess an exquisite sensibility, as the stomach, the brain, and
intestines, and, I believe, most of the interior, soft, fleshy parts, and the
shut cavities; and externally, the parts immediately under the nails; that
others possess less, as the bones, ligaments, and cartilages and ligaments; and
externally, the cuticle, or scarf-skin. It is, with respect to the difference
of sensibility, or excitability, or capability, to be acted upon by exciting
powers, that we use the expression of more or less excitability. See above par.
XLIX. and the addition, and LIII. and addition.
; where the effect of the local affection is propagated over the whole body,
over the whole nervous system, and where a very great many symptoms arise,
similar to those which are peculiar to universal diseases.

DCXCVII. The third part of local diseases, takes place when a symptom of
general disease, that at first arose from increased or diminished excitement
like all the other symptoms, of which it was one,
, arrives at that height of degree, at which, being no longer under the
influence of excitement, it cannot be affected by remedies that correct the
excitement.

DCXCVIII. The fourth part, or division of local diseases, consists of those,
in which a contagion, externally applied to the body, is diffused over all,
without affecting the excitement If it affected the excitement its effect would
be general disease, which sometimes happens, as in the smallpox, measles,
contagious typhus, and the plague.


DCXCIX. The fifth part of local diseases, arises from poisons that have been
applied to the body, and flow through all the vessels in such a manner, that
they are understood not immediately, nor at first, to have any tendency either
to increase or diminish the excitement, but falling upon parts some on one,
some on another, hurt the texture of these in different manners; and, after
occasioning that local hurt, by means of it produce disturbance over the rest
of the body.

CHAP. II.
The first Part of Organic Local Diseases, where no Effect, but in the hurt
Part, arises.
DCC. WITH regard to the first part of local, organic diseases; the hurting
powers, that produce them, are such as produce a solution of the continuity of
a part, by wounding, eroding, or poisoning; or that derange a part by
contusion, compression, or spraining.

DCCI. The hurting powers, producing solution of continuity, are all cutting,
pricking, or missive, weapons: Acrid bodies and poisons produce solution of
continuity in another manner.

DCCII. When any of these hurting powers slightly divide the surface, and
scarcely, or not at all, get to the bottom of the skin; for the cure of so
trifling an affection, there is occasion for nothing but shutting out the air,
and cold, and excessive heat, and avoiding every irrating substance. For the
only use of the cuticle is, by means of its insensibility, See DCXCVI. and the
note.
, (it being a simple not a living,
solid, and devoid of all excitability), to keep off the air, and all excess of
temperature, and every rough or rude matter, which are all inimical to living
solids So hurtful is the air and temperature to all parts below the cuticle,
the ^^thing is a more certain cause of gangrene than their exposure, eve^ for a
very short space of time: Nor is there any other way of acounting for the fatal
effect of slight, superficial, but extensive burning. Death has been the
consequence of a burn, that extended no farther than the ^ore-part of the
thorax, or the breast, and was not of longer continuance, than the time taken
to tear off the burning clothes that occasioned it.
, whether external or internal.

DCCIII. When the surface, therefore, is hurt in its texture, either by being
cut, or bit, or stung by venomous animals, or by being burned, or by a very
high degree of cold; in that case a thin, mild, (...) plaster is sufficient
for the cure.

DCCIV. The division, therefore, of phlegma^^ae, into ^^^egmone, or erythema,
is without foundation, and mi^^eading, both as to the cause, and as to the
cure, from the knowledge of the truth See the seventh Genus in Genera Morborum
Culleni, where you will find Linnaeus's prototype of inflammation, that is, of
inflammatory diseases, or what is in this work called phlegmasiae, or sthenic
diseases with inflammation or an approach to it, also adopted by this author.
It is nothing else but a collection of local affections, or, in a few cases,
symptoms of disease, and that they almost all come under this head of local
diseases, and every one of them under one of these heads.
: For, however much they differ in their remote cause, as they call it, and in
their seat, and in their appearance; since the exclusion of the air and of
other stimuli is their effectual cure; it, consequently, follows, that their
cause is the same, that is, that the nature of all these affections is the same.

DCCV. In the cure of contusion, compression, and sprains See par. DCC.
, the same, in general are the remedies; and besides them, there is occasion
for rest of body, and bland tepid fomentations.

DCCVI. Through this whole division of local affections, there is a certain
energy of nature, that tends to the restoration of the healthy state; but it is
not the celebrated vis medicatrix naturae of physicians: For in this case
nothing else happens, but what equally happens in the cure of general diseases.
If proper remedies are applied, the sound state in both sorts of diseases
follows: If the remedies be neglected, the solution of continuity degenerates
into a worse and worse nature, and then into gangrene, or the death of the part
Of this we are presented with examples in every day's experience; where we find
the slightest sores, from the neglect of the simple rule of cure laid down
here, degenerate into very troublesome affections.
. It is the excitability, or that property of life, by which the functions are
produced See above par. X. to XIV. If I cure a peripneumony by bleeding, other
evacuations, and other debilitating powers, that are not evaant, it is by
diminishing the force of exciting power; If I cure a fever by opiates and other
stimulant powers, whether stimulating by filling the vessels, or without that,
it is by increasing the same force; and if I cure a sore on the surface, by the
method just now mentioned, I thereby prevent the force of exciting power from
rising too high, from an excess of stimuli, or from running either into direct
or indirect debility, from too little stimulus, or an ultimate excess. If
either these general or local cures are neglected, or mismanaged, the cure will
not be supplied by any effort of the system; and if the cure is made out by
regulating the excitement, such effort is superfluous. The vis medi^atrix then
is as little real in local as general diseases See above par. LXII. and the
addition.
, that, wherever (...), whether in a part, or over the whole body, is hurt,
procures the (...) of the healthy state by means of the external powers acting
upon (...). It is, then, the excitability, affected by the action of those
powers, that is to say, the excitement, that governs the state of the solids,
both in parts, and over the whole body (g).

CHAP III.
The second Division of Local Diseases.
DCCVII. THE local organic diseases of the second division are the inflammation
of the stomach or gastritis.
, and that in the intestines or enteritis.
; as also bleeding discharge, with an inflammation subsequent to it; and, in
fine, an inflammation in any very sensible part, in consequence of a wound,
producing commotion over the whole body.

Of the Inflammation in the Stomach.
DCCVIII. The principal symptoms in gastritis are, pain in the region of the
stomach, a burning heat, deep seated, increased by every thing that is either
ate or drank, or in any shape taken into the stomach; hiccup, an inclination to
vomiting, and the sudden throwing up what is taken in; and the pulse soon
getting into a state of debility, quickness, swiftness, and hardishness.

DCCIX. The exciting hurtful powers, and which produce the solution of
continuity in this case, are such as act by cutting, pricking or erosion. Such
are the small bones of fishes, ground glass, or Cayan pepper and such like
things.

DCCX. Inflammation is a consequence of the wound or erosion, that are the
effect of the operation of those exciting powers: The effect of which, in the
very sensible organ of the stomach, is to diffuse the disturbance
beforementioned DCXCVI.
over the whole system. The burning heat and pain, inseparable from every
inflammation, and the anxiety CLXXI. CCCXLV.
, are the offspring of the inflammation CLXXI.
: And, of them, the anxiety is more peculiar to the stomach, the latter being
its accustomary seat CCCXLV.
, and the pulse becomes such as has been related, because it is peculiar to
every rude, fixed, and permanent local stimulus XVII.
; to weaken, and to be so much the more liable to that effect, the greater the
excitability of the part is. Hence, in the external parts of the body, that are
less endued with excitability, a pretty considerable inflammation by no means
affects the pulse or the body any way generally; though even there, when a part
is sensible, as in the case of a burn spread to any extent, or of a thorn
having been thurst below the nails, an equal disturbance arises over the whole
body CCCXLIV. CCCXLV.
, which confirms a former proposition, in which it is asserted, that the more
abundant the excitability is XXXVI.
, the less stimulus can be born.

DCCXI. The disease is easily known, both from the symptoms above described,
and, with not a little more certainty, from the known taking in of the hurtful
powers; and, over and above, by this particular sign, that, as it has been said
before, with us such marks, inflammation scarce seizes upon an internal and
shut part CXIII. and CLXVII. The stomach is sometimes inflamed from a schirrous
tumor occupying the pylorus; and that case also is taken in by the systematic
and nosological writers, as belonging to their gastritis: But the consideration
of it does not belong to this head of local diseases, but to the third division
of them. At the same time, both it and the present case are local diseases, and
not phlegmasiae, differing from the phlegmasiae, so fully treated of in the
third part of this work. It, as well as enteritis, of which we are next to
speak, have every mark of difference from the general diseases mentioned in the
VIth paragraph. See also Chap. I. of the fifth Part.
.

DCCXII. As this is a local disease, and does not, like the general ones,
depen^ upon the increase or diminution of excitement; consequently, the
indication suited to the latter, to wit, to diminish increased, or increase
diminished, excitement, over all, will not apply. On the contrary, unless a
general disease happen to be combined with it, nothing else is to be done, but,
by throwing in bland, demulcent liquors, to defend the tender part from the
rude contact of the stomach's contents, and give the inflammation time to
finish its course; and, if the physician is called soon enough, to wash off the
hurtful matter with a diluent drink.

Of the Inflammation in the Intestines,
DCCXIII. The inflammation in the intestines is a local affection; in which
there is an acute pain in the belly, and distention, and sometimes a sort of
twisting of the pain around the travel, with vomiting, and an obstinate
costiveness, and such a pulse as in the inflammation of the intestines.

DCCIV. The hurtful powers, exciting this disease, are precisely the same, as
those that have been said to excite the inflammation of the stomach, that is:

DCCXV. The inflammation arises in a similar manner, as in the inflammation of
the stomach, and the more readily, that the intestines are more sensible than
the stomach Baron d^ (...) from some experiments that he made, sound the
intestines (...) than m^^t parts of the body, more than the stomach, and (...)
to the (...)
. And hence also, in a similar manner, is a state of disturbance diffused over
the whole body.

DCCXVI. The acute pain of the belly depends upon the inflammation: Its
distention and the costiveness is the offspring of the detained foeces. The
same is the cause of vomiting; for the peri^ta^^ic motion being prevented, upon
account of the obstruction, to proceed downward in its usual way, from its
re^^less nature recoils in the direction upward; as affecting neither
direction, unless in so far as the stimulus, by the impulse of which it is
regulated, either commences from above, as health requires, or from below, as
happens in other diseases, and in this in particular See par. CLXXXVIII.
CLXXXIX.
. The pain twisting about the navel, is produced by the inflammation, for this
reason, that the principal, and by far the greatest part of the intestines, is
thrown in a convoluted state about the navel.

DCCXVII. The diagnosis is the same as in the gastritis; excepting, that the
seeds of fruits, hairs, and similar foreign (...) sometimes upon account of the
torpor of the (...) adhering to the sides of the intestinal canal, gradually,
by their irritation, kindle up an inflammation: Which is a fact, that if
examined attentively, and once rightly considered, will not disturb our
diagnosis.

DCCXIII. The cure is precisely the same as in the inflammation of the stomach.

DCCXIX. All the rest of the pretended phlegmasiae, distinguished by the
appellation of "itides," as the splenitis or inflammation of the spleen
, hepatitis or the inflammation of the liver
, the true nephritis or inflammation of the kidneys.
, the cystidis or inflammation of the bladder of urine.
without a stone, or the hysteritis, not arising from schirrus or inflammation
of the womb.
, and the peritonitis or inflammation of the peritonaeum.
, do not belong to this place; as, besides the doubt of their ever being
inflamed, not arising from stimulants and acids, neither of which have access
to the shut viscera (for these substances are not carried in the vessels, or
can be carried), but from the relics of other diseases, of which we are to
speak afterward, with the following exception:

DCCXX. The exception is, that if any one falls from a height, i^ he is run
through any part of his bowels with a sword, if a poisoned arrow, thrown by any
savage, has pierced any of his inward parts, he will, in

DCCXXI. The case of the inflammation affecting the liver, be affected with a
pain in his right hypochondrum, with vomiting and hiccup: If

DCCXXII. The inflammation affect his spleen, the pain will be in his left
hypochondium; in

DCCXXIII. The case of the true nephritis, or inflammation of one of the
kidneys, he will be pained in the region of the kidney, and seized with
vomiting, and a stupor of his leg; in

DCCXXIV. The case of the inflammation happening in his bladder, he will have a
tumor and pain in the under belly.

DCCXXV. Bleeding discharge, followed by inflammation DCCVII.
, such as happens in the inflammation of the womb, or of any neighboring part,
and in abortion, and in the wound of any internal part, is easily distinguished
by the pain of the affected part, and by the preceding accident.

DCCXXVI. In the inflammation of the womb, or any neighboring part, the lower
belly is affected with heat, tension, tumor, pain, and these symptoms
accompanied with vomiting The inflammation is frequently not in the womb, but
in a neighboring portion of the intestines, or me^ocolon, or in the peritoneum
itself, as dissection has frequently shown. This is a disease, than which none
has been more enquired into, and none yet less understood.
.

DCCXXVII. The hurtful powers, that excite the hysteritis, or inflammation of
the womb and parts in its neighborhood, all amount to violence done to the
womb. Thus using violence during the labor, hurrying the birth, often produce
a solution of continuity, and wound the womb with a tearing rudeness.

DCCXXVIII. And, since a great deal of blood is often lost in that way, and the
local affection followed by debility of the whole system Pain and loss of blood
are in one degree or another inevitable causes of debility.
; for that reason bleeding, according to the common practice, any mode of
evacuation, are not to be practiced, nor is the patient to be forbid to eat;
but, in the first place, regard is to be had to the affected part, the body
must be laid in an horizontal posture, she must be kept from motion, and be
allowed rich soups and wine: By and by more solid animal food should be used
morsel by morsel, but frequently repeated, and she should have her belly
ba^hed: And, if the debility should get a head, recourse must be had to more
wine, drink still stronger, and o^^rates: The use of which last should not be
neglected, even at first.

Of Abortion.
DCCXXIX. In abortion, the back, the loins, the belly, are pained, like what
happens in child-labour; and there is either an unusual flow of the menses, or
an extraordinary discharge from the vagina.

DCCXXX. The hurtful powers, that force abortion, are ^a^ling from a height,
s^^pping a foot, a rash step, intense walking, running, going up and down hill.
This disease seldom, however, happens but to persons previously weak; and the
most powerful agent in bringing it on, is some taint left since a former
abortion, which increases in proportion to the number of abortions. When the
disease happens in consequence of the local hurting powers just now mentioned,
in that case it is perfectly local: But wh^^ (...) is blended with the effect
of those powers it is a case of combination of general with local affection.

DCCXXXI. The indication for preventing the disease is, to guard against all
the hurting powers that induce the disease; to ride out, when the patient has
any degree of strength; but, in case of any apprehension of danger from
weakness, to go in a carriage, which will b^ more (...) to be upon guard from
the third month of pregnancy till the seventh is passed; to invigorate the
system, and keep up the patient's spirits, and intellectual amusements.

DCCXXXII. The indication of cure is, to keep the body in a horizontal
position, with the buttocks higher than the head; to be studious to keep the
patient easy in body and mind; to repair the loss of blood with soups, to
secure the vessels, for the purpose of contracting their enlarged diameters,
with wine and (...) and, in that way, take off, at the same time, the a^ony and
laxity, which are the principal cause of the discharge.

Of difficult Child-labour.
DCCXXXIII. In difficult child-labour, the most common cause of which by far is
weakeness, and which always produces weakness when it proves lingering; the
laying-in woman should be supported with wine, and when the labor proves more
difficult, and is now like to be tedious, opium should be (...).

DCCXXXIV. When now some part of the u^e^us is hurt by the hurting powers that
have been mentioned See par. DCCXXX.
, and the child and placenta are now both a livered, the woman should be kept
in an horizontal posture, as was recommended in abortion; she should be
invigorated by soups, chicken, wine and the still higher stimuli, every thing
contrary should be avoided; and the hea^ing up of ^he wound waited for.

Of deep seated Wounds.
DCCXXXV. In deep seated, or gun shot, wounds, when the ball, if a ball
occasioned the wound, is now extra^ted, or though it still remains in the body,
in a place not necessary to life; first of all the whole system is very much
irritated, heated, pained chased, and distressed with restlessness and tossing,
the pulse is strong, full and more frequent than in health. The cause of all
those symptoms is the commotion, which, as we have said, the local stimulus,
either of the ball or of the inflammation supervening upon the wound, by its
constant irritation of a sensible part, gives to the whole system.

DCCXXXVI. Because, in this case asthenic diathesis is commonly supposed to
arise over the whole body, upon account of the irritation from the wound; the
antisthenic plan of cure is, therefore, always employed through the whole
course of the disease; and the use of opium, which, in this case is conjoined
with the antisthenic, or stimulant remedies, is admitted only for the purpose
of acting as a sedative and duller or pain, is admitted: Consequently, upon
account of the fear of a fever being to supervene, though often a great
quantity of blood is lost by the wound; still large bleeding is practiced, the
belly is purged, nourishment is withheld, ab^^inence enjoined: The most
frequent consequence of which treatment is death, and never a recovery that is
not owing to accident.

DCCXXXVII. But all this is a method of cure conducted upon an erroneous
theory, which is proved by all the principles of this doctrine, and by the very
unfortunate issue of that practice. In a person, who has lost a great deal of
blood an over-proportion of blood, can never be the cause of sthenic diathesis:
Neither can any tolerable reason be assigned for the profuse evacuation of the
serous fluid, or for not rather supplying new fluids by the use of food. It is
in vain to accuse frequency of the pulse, as a sign of an excess in the
quantity of blood, and of to much vigor, or of any irritation that wants an
antisthenic plan of cure: For, besides its hardness, if the pulse is not, at
the same time, strong and full; it has been now often above demonstrated, that
all its celerity depends upon debility and penury of blood See par. CLXXIX. to
CLXXXI,
. Finally, as the sthenic diathesis depends upon the general sthenic hurtful
powers, as the energy of pain, from local affection, and particularly
inflammation, has no tendency to induce that diathesis, but the contrary one of
debilitating DCCX.
; that is another reason for the supposition of the habit, either remaining
such as it was before the wound was received Which can hardly happen if blood
has been lost, which must diminish the excitement, and in proportion to its
degree.
or, which is more probable, of degenerating into the asthenic diathesis.
Lastly, the true explanation of the distinction betwixt irritation and sthenic
diathesis is in confirmation of the same conclusion; the sthenic diathesis
being that state of the system, which is produced by all the powers, the
operation in common to which is stimulant, over the whole system, and, by
fullness in the vessels producing the same effect, and to be removed by
debilitating powers weakening also the whole system, and by evacuant remedies
acting by the same general operation; whereas, on the contrary, it is
irritation or that state, in which the whole body is often, without any
stimulus, debilitated When the body is debilitated, the ordinary stimuli, that
in its healthy state invigorate it, and even a much less degree of stimulus,
will produce the irregular motions, which are supposed owing to irritation; not
that any thing irritating is applied, but that the excessive abundance, or
defect of excitability, admits not, without such effects, the degree of
stimulus, which, applied to it in its healthy half-wasted state, would produce
healthy vigorous motions, (See XXV. and XXVI.) The tremors that are occasioned
by the turning of a door upon its hinge, the sweat occasioned by ^light
exertions in walking, are so many instances of that, and the irregularities of
the pulse are owing to the same cause. As the weakness upon which fevers
depends increases, so also do the supposed symptoms of irritation, such as
colliquative sweats, colliquative diarrhoea, subsultus tendinum, etc. But they
are all the effect of the general weakened state being fluttered by every
slight stimuli. At other times irritating powers, in the same weakened state,
do occur; such as those mentioned in the text.
; and often a local stimulus, such as distention exciting spasm, or a
concentrated acid, inducing convulsion, or the pain of a wound that producing
the general commotion here But even in that case, the real state is debility,
and the indication of cure is to remove it, as well as the irritating powers:
Which, while they increase it, are at the same time its offspring, and require
stimulants to enable the system to resist its effect. (DCXCIII.)
, and effect enormous motions in a weakened system. But, whether the debility
be without stimulus, or excited by it there is never occasion for debilitating
evacuant remedies, but always for moderately stimulant ones: And we have only
to take are, that the sthenic diathesis be not produced by the method employed
from the cure, and hereby a general disease, at least, a predisposition to
general disease be su^^^radd^d to the local, which could not fail to aggravate
the latter.

DCCXXXVIII. As, therefore, the an^^sthenic plan of cure is not to be
practiced, from an apprehension of a fever being about to come on, with a view
to allay the disturbance arising from it; which has the contrary tendency, that
of inducing the fever, and of exciting the disturbance apprehended; so, neither
is the stimulant plan to be attempted, till the wound is healed, or the disease
has arrived at an advanced stage, and a great deal of debility is now induced
by the continuance of the pain, least, if that method should be sooner
employed, the blood should be carried with more rapidity than the case would
admit of, and with an increased momentum, into the still open terminations of
the vessels: For it is understood, that neither diathesis takes place in this
case, and that the only affection present is a commotion over the system,
depending upon local affection; and that, consequently, there is no occasion
for the remedies of either; excepting this single consideration, that, as the
loss of blood, in proportion to its degree has a tendency to produce more or
less of asthenic diathesis; there will, therefore, in that proportion, be
occasion for some sthenic remedies.

DCCXXXIX. During the first days of the disease, because the patient, all at
once, does not any longer engage in gestation, exercise, and the other
functions both of body and mind, and of passion or emotion, according to
custom, and, of course, less nourishment and recruit is now required;
therefore, there should be such an abatement in his allowance of the usual
stimuli, as to accommodate what is used to the present condition of the system
and the state of the wound just now described See last paragraph.
. Therefore, to prevent too great an impetus in the vessels, silence should be
kept around the patient, he should not speak himself, he should lie quiet and
without motion, his posture should not be changed, but to avoid the
disagreeable feeling of too long continuance of it, and even then it should be
done as warily as possible. He should make his water lying, and in an urinal;
he should rather use soups, than solid meat; his wound should be examined every
day, for the sake of keeping it clean; its progress should be observed; it
should be dressed with fresh, soft, and bland matter; and if even at this early
period, any faintishness appears, a glass of wine should not be withheld.

DCCXC. After some days, which may be more, or fewer, according to the strength
of the patient, when now the habit is rushing into debility, upon account of
the greatness or long continuance of the pain; in that case, besides the soups
formerly allowed, meat as rich and delicate as possible should be given; wine
should be administered sparingly at a time, but often, and upon the whole in
large quantity; and then at last, recourse should be had to opium, which, in
the common practice, is usually given from the beginning of the disease, and to
the other diffusible stimuli; and the disease should be treated precisely in
the same way as a typhus.

DCCXCI. When very tender external parts are violated by any rude matter, such
as happens in that case, where a thorn is pushed below any of the nails, and an
inflammation spreads from the affected part to a considerable extent, and then,
upon account of the great sensibility of the part, the whole body is drawn into
consent; the injured part should be fomented with warm water, and dressed with
lint and soft, and bland ointment: And as long as the disturbance of the system
remains, the patient should be kept quiet, and free from motion, and nothing
more attempted.

CHAP. IV.
Of a Part of a General Disease, degenerating into a Local.
DCCXCII. TO set about the treatment of that division of local, organic,
diseases; in which a part, or symptom, of general disease degenerates into a
local one; we next proceed to

Suppuration.
DCCXCIII. Suppuration, with which we begin, is for the most part a consequence
of any general inflammation, whether sthenic, or asthenic, or that
inflammation, which is a symptom of general diseases, or it is a consequence of
local inflammation, whether sthenic, or asthenic, as a symptom of local
affection. In it the pulse is softer, fuller, and a little slower, than in
asthenic disease when that precedes it; but a great deal slower, than in
asthenic disease, if it happen to supervene upon it, and it is accompanied with
an undulatory, and, as it were, a pulsatory, motion of the laboring part;
these symptoms are commonly preceded by a shivering: If the affection is
internal, the patient should be kept quiet, and free from motion, and be
stimulated; if it be external, the affected part should, over and above, be
fomented, dressed, and covered, and the pus, when ripe, let out.

Of Pustle.
DCCXCIV. A pustle is a purulent vesicle, turgid, and at last of its own accord
opening in consequence of having become tender, and full of pus.

DCCXLV. It follows the smallpox, arising from the contagion peculiar to that
disease: In the smallpox the number of the pustules is greater or less in
proportion, as more or less sthenic diathesis, occasioned by improper
treatment, or a neglect of the proper, has preceded XXI. LXXVI. XCVI. XCVII.
XCVIII.
.

DCCXLVI. The indication of cure for them is, first to remove sthenic
diathesis, and then, if that has passed into the asthenic, to remove it, each
by its respective remedies; and to besprinkle the pustles with a strong spirit,
or with laudanum, and in the former case to guard against cold, in the latter
against heat, and to open the pustles and soment them.

Of Anthrax.
DCCXLVII. Anthrax is a glandular tumor under the skin, gangrenous in the top,
and inflamed in its edges all round.

Of Bubo.
DCCXLVIII. Bubo is a glandular tumor, especially affecting the one or the
other groin, and of a tendency (...) suppuration.

DCCXLIX. These two affections the anthrax and bubo as well as carbuncle, are
almost always combined with a general disease, to wit, sometimes with typhus,
much oftener with the plague. They depend upon a contagious matter, and, in so
far as they do not sufficiently yield to the general remedies, they must be
treated with a very strong spirit poured upon them, and with laudanum, and
opening them.

Of Gangrene.
DCCL. Gangrene is an imperfect inflammation of a part, not terminating in
suppuration, discolored, scarce painful, consisting of pustules of a bad
matter, and at last inducing the death of the part.

DCCLI. The hurtful power, that precedes gangrene, is always inflammation,
often ultimately violent in a sensible part, oftener languid, and occupying a
part less sensible, less supported by the powers of life The inflammation, out
of which gangrene arises, is always unsupported, and the gangrene always a
state of either direct or indirect debility; the high excitement in the
phlegmasiae, and the low in fevers, causing that.
; it is sometimes a symptom of the phlegmasiae, sometimes of fevers, sometimes
of local phlegmone CCCXLVII. DCL. to DCXCIV.
.

DCCLII. The method of cure, when the gangrene is seated in the alimentary
canal, is to pour in spirit and laudanum; when the shut viscera are affected,
to place some hope in the same and other stimuli, but much less. And, as the
same remedies also suit gangrene, when it is external, consequently liquid
opium should be rubbed in upon the dying part, spirit should be poured upon it,
the parts already dead should be cut out, the edge of the living part all round
should be stimulated, and an inflammation made in it.

Of Sphace^us.
DCCLIII. Sphacelus is a more perfect and more extended grangrene, with an
extinction of sense, motion, and heat; in which the part becomes soft,
blackish, completely black, putrid, and at last thoroughly putrid to the very
bones, thoroughly cadaverous, and shifts rapidly to the neighboring parts, and
quickly extinguishes life.

DCCLIV. The remedies are in general the same as in gangrene, but they should
be stronger, and administered in greater quantity, and with greater nicety, and
in less expectation of a cure. When any limb is greatly affected, it should be
immediately cut off, to prevent the sound parts from being infected.

Of Scrofulous Tumor and Ulcer.
DCCLV. When a scrofulous tumor and ulcer has been of long standing, has
disfigured the parotid gland and neighboring parts, and all the remedies, that
have any effect in removing scrofula, have been employed; after that no more is
to be done, but to keep the ailing part clean, bath it often, and defend it
from the injury of the air; unless that, as local debility also takes place
here, spirit and laudanum, applied to the part, may be of service.

Of Schirrous Tumor.
DCCLVI. When the tumor, which, while it was moderate, was a part or symptom of
the general disease, called schirrhus, has now attained a certain bulk; if it
be external, or situated in the exterior or unequal part of the liver, it should
be cut off, and the system invigorated: If it be internal, nothing can be
attempted, but to prevent its increase by stimulant remedies, and in that way
keep the patient as long alive as possible, and in as good health as the
present circumstances will admit of.

DCLVII. The two heads of division that remain DCXCVIII. and DCXCIX.
, are of so obscure and abstract a nature, that if ever they are to be
attempted, they must be passed over at present. The third head DCXCVII.
DCCXLII. to DCCLVII.
is here only imperfectly sketched and scarce begun: But, because it both
admits of a complete execution, and when so executed, will make an important
addition to the work; shall be prepared for the public perusal, as soon as I
shall be happy enough to find as much leisure and scope for thinking as are
requisite to rescue the subject from its present intricacy, disorder and
obscurity.

FINIS.
INDEX.
A.
ABORTION, page 380. Abstinence, not less immoral and irreligious than excess,
64 Abstract reasoning, cautions against, 136. Acid in the alimentary canal
symptom, not cause of disease, 104. Acrimony, in what sense may be admitted,
361. Agents, external, what, 2. Agriculture, hints respecting, 204. what should
be so termed, 1. Air, atmospheric, if too pure would be perhaps injurious, 77.
impure, produces asthenic diathesis, ibid. inimical to living solids, 372. Air,
stimulus of, necessary to convalescents, 198. Aitiology, absurdity of, 37.
Anascarca, 330. Angina, putrid, described, 124. Anthrax, 387. Antiseptics,
notion of, to be guarded against, 363. Apoplexy, 342. not owning plethora, 117.
Appetite, cause of, 100. Apyrexiae, sthenic, 248. Asthenia, meaning of, 30.
Asthenic diathesis, cause of, 78. cure of, 170. may be converted into sthenic,
33. symptoms of, 96. predisposition to, 95. diseases, 288. cure of 263.
Asthenic plan of cure, different parts of, compared, 4. Asthma, advantages of a
full diet in, IV. gentle, 329. Author's inducements to translate his own work,
XI.
B.
Bark, Peruvian, not to be depended on in intermittents, 355. Bathing, cold,
remarks on, 14. Bladder, inflammation of. See cystitis. Bleeding, cautions
against, 98, 279, 379. remarkson, 259, 268. should always be followed by other
evacuations, 269. singular instance of benefit from, in typhus, 120. when
necessary, 176, 177, 183. Blisters, in what cases useful, 274. Blood, great
extent of the stimulus of, 177. irritates by its quantity, not quality, 66.
slight discharges of* from indirect debility approaching, 142. vessels, usually
more numerous in most sensible organs, 227. Breathing, difficulty of, to what
owing, 223. Bubo, 387.
C.
Calcutta, death in the blackhole at, occasioned by typhus, 77. Canal,
alimentary, asthenic diseases of, 304. Carditis, 220, 225. Catarrh described,
244. method of cure of, 27^. produced by heat, and removed by cold, VIII. 172.
Causes, inquiry into, to be avoided, 5. Changes to be brought about gradually,
18. Children, diseases of, 38. generally owing to debility, V. 241. signs of
asthenic diathesis in, 242. sthenic ditto, ib. Chincough, 319. Cholera, gentle,
311. severe* 358. Circulation, how carried on, 60. Cold, effects of* ^4, 58,
60, 170. how di^^^ution of bulk in animals produced by, 60. remarks on, as a
remedy, 184, 264. succeeding to heat, bad symptom, 1^1. Colic, observations on,
109. with pain, 330. cure of, 332. Colicanodyne, 307. Colliquative sweats, etc.
cause of, 57. Coma, causes of, 158. remarks on, 167 Constitutions of
individuals not fundamentally different, 165. Contagio^s act by stimulus, 6.
produce a fermentation, 229, 231. remarks on, 35, 77, 127, 182, 267, 368.
Contraction and its effects considered, 27. Contusions, cure of, 373.
Convalescent state, remarks on, 199. Convulsions, observations on, 105.
Corruption of the fluids, 57. 58, 360. Cough, asthenic, 151, 315. in
peripneumony, how occasioned, 223. sthenic, 82, 14^, 244. Croup. 320. Croup,
remarks on, 240. Cupping-glasses when may be serviceable, 275. Cure, general
indications of, 43. means of, cautions respecting, 45, 50, 267. Cuticle, not a
living substance, 373. Cynanche, gangrenosa, 124, 358. sthenic, 238. cure of,
275. Cystirrhaea 320. Cystitis, remarks on, 282, 378.
D.
Darkness debilitates, 203. Day, alternation of with night, end of, ib. Death,
how brought about, III. 3, 11, 17. effected by the powers which produce life,
207. Debilitating powers, in what cases to be used, 52. Debility, direct. 15.
cure of, 53. lessening stimulus in cases of, carefully to be avoided, 20. who
subjects of, 50. indirect, III. 13. cure of 51. how progress to, to be
retarded, 13. who subject to, 50. Debility, one kind of, never to be cured by
the other, 50, 52. Delirium produced by deficient stimulus, 98, 118.
superabundant stimulus, 172. Diabetes, gentle, 292. Diagnosis, general, 41.
Diarrhaea, 307. Diet, See food. Diseases, asthenic enumeration of, 288.
Diseases, asthenic, general remarks on, 30, 288. method of curing 363. cause
of, III. 30, 78, general and local, mark of distinction between, 1, 39. how to
distinguish, 42. how produced, 40. general principles and method of cure of,
VIII. 9. ^9, 43. local, 370 causes of. 40. in what way cured, 373. sthenic,
enumeration of, 220. method of cure of, 229. remarks on, 30, 208, 254. Drink,
abstinence from, recommended, 52. cautions respecting, 51, 65. 364. may be
given freely in sthenic diseases, 84. Dropsy, 335* Dysentery, gentle, 311.
severe, 357. Dysepsanodyne, 307. Dyspepsia, effect of debility, V.
Dyspepsodynia 331. cure, of, 332.
E.
Earth, fresh, cap of useful in phrenitis, 275. Enteritis, cure, of, 378.
description of, 376. remarks on, 281. Epilepsy, case of, converted into dropsy
by bleeding, 136. description of, 338. owing to debility, 117. Epistaxis, 303.
Erysipelas, mild, described, 237 method of curing, 275. violent, ^34. cure of,
254. Eruptions, cause of, in diseases, 127. scabby, 291. Exanthemata, sthenic
diseases, 210. explained, 227. Excitability; 3. boundaries of, 10. effects of
the exhaustion of, 11. general, not partial, 22, 144. how increased or
diminished, 9. seat of, 22. superabundant, to be taken off gradually, 18. what
or how affected, unknown, 4. when wasted by one stimulus may be acted upon by
another, 11, 197. Excitement defined, 4. effects of, 29. highest degree of, how
produced, 9. loss of, from over action, how to repaired, 12. Excitement, loss
of, may become irreparable, 18. proportioned to be degree of stimulus, 8.
Exciting powers act more on some parts than others, 23, 25, 370. universally,
23, effects of, 4. what implied by, 3. Excretions, cause of temporary retention
of, 213. Exercise, observations on, 73, 179, 192, 198. Expectoration, natural
tendency to, great, 315. of pus, not always owing to organic lesion, 316.
F.
Fermentations, effects of, 229, 231. remarks on, 360. Fever, intermittent,
347. jail, putrid, or petechial, 359. nervous, 358. requires more attention
from physicians than usually bestowed, 361. yellow, purging necessary in, 72.
Fish, not a nourishing food, IV. Fluids how produced, 29. Food, remarks on,
III. IV. 61, 62. as a remedy, 184, 186, 191, 282. should be stimulant to a
certain degree, 246. vegetable, debilitating, ibid. Force, what, 27. Fossils,
perhaps, not without life, 207. Functions acting on the living animal, 2. may
be impaired by sthenic diathesis, 132. increased by asthenia, ibid.
G.
Gangrene described, 388. to prevent, 148, 185, Ga^^ritis, 348. cure of, 40,
376. remarks on, 40, 219, 281. Gentoos, imbecility of, owing to diet, 63. G^ob,
great change of, 207. Gout throught on by low living, 11. cured by stimuli,
III. VI 12^. not hereditary, ^21. of stronger persons, 120. of weak persons,
331.
H
Habits, effects of, to be considered, 328. Haemorrhages always owing to
debility, 68, 142. blood deficient in cases of, VII. 142. stimuli salutary in,
VI. 142. Haemorrhois, 303. Health and disease not different states, 30. good
and bad, defined, 1, 29. Heart, inflammation of. See carditis. Heat, a remedy
of asthenic diathesis, 187. acts more externally than internally, 253.
excessive, cautions against application of, 188. unusual, cause of, 214.
symptom of disease or predisposition, 130. Hepatitis, remarks on, 281, 378.
Hereditary diseases do not exist, 321. Hypochondriasis, 333. curious case of,
335. Hysteria, gentle, 313. violent, 331. cure of, 332. Hysteritis, remarks on,
282, 379.
I.
Identity of effect proceeds from identity of cause, 5. Imbecility, mental and
corporeal, induced by food insufficiently stimulating, 63. Inflammation,
asthenic, causes of, 119, 123. cure of 123. attacking the brain at the end of
typhus doubted, IV. in phrenitis, not probable, 92. Boerhaave's opinion of the
translation of, from one viscus to another, erroneous, 222. changes its seat
sometimes, ib. distinction of, into parenchymatose and membranous in
phlegmasiae, exploded, 221. ^risypelatorus, seat of, 88. four kinds of, 121. in
general diseases always external, 82, 89. local, 91, 123. not the cause, but
effect of disease, VIII. 90. 215. produced by debility in various diseases, V.
rheumatic, seat of 88. sthenic, causes of, 122. cure of, 123. Influenza,
asthenic disease, ^49. Intellectual functions, failure of, owing to debility,
119. Intermissions, not peculiar to fever, 355. Intestines, inflammation of.
See Enteritis. Irritation, not owing to extraneous matter, 161
J.
Joints smaller, affected in gout, greater in rheumatism, and why, 237.
K.
Kidney, inflammation of. See Nephritis.
L.
Labor, difficult, 381. Lassitude, cause of, 213. Leanness, 290. Leeches, in
what cases may be applied, 275. Life, defined, 2. different periods of,
different excitability in, requiring different degrees of stimuli, 9. not a
natural but a forced state, 34. powers supporting, differ not from those which
bring death, 207. have not various qualities, 302. Light, a stimulus, 203.
Liver, Inflammation of. See Hepatitis. Lock-jaw, 344. Lungs, not always
affected in confirmed consumption, 155, 317. Lungs, tubercles in, symptoms not
cause of disease, 155.
M.
Mania, 249. cure of, 283. sometimes arises from fault of the substance of the
brain, 249. Mathematicians, pedantry of, 200. Matter, morbific, remarkson, 46.
Measles, antiphlogistic plan useful in, VIII. 148. mild, described, 248. no
danger of striking in by cold, 264. violent, 231. cure of, 259. Medicine,
science of, what, 1. Menorrhaea, 302. Menstruation, cause of 294. impaired,
293. retarded, ib. suppressed, ib. Mind, exercise of, to a certain degree,
necessary to health, 75. Moisture increases hurtful effect of temperature, 61.
Mortality, causes of, 32. Motion, inability to perform, may not proceed from
debility, 32, 138. Motions, involuntary, 80. voluntary, 79.
N.
Nature, healing powers of, nonexistent, 46, 374. Nephritis, remarks on, 281,
378. Night, alternation of with day, how useful, 203. Nitre, not so refrigerant
as commonly supposed, 275. Nosologists, common, errors of, 229. Nourishment,
solids not always necessary to, 176. See food.
O.
Oaks perhaps might be planted in parts of Scotland with advantage, 204.
Obesity, 253. cure of, 284. Opium, an excellent stimulus, VI. 62. cold to be
avoided during the operation of, 59. in what doses to be given in different
cases, 365. large dose of given in epilepsy, 340. prevents mortification, 147.
sedative quality attributed to, false notion, 141. 148. 167. under what
circumstances sleep produced by, 17. 76.
P.
Pain, causes of, 108. 104. occasioned by emptiness as well as fullness, 98.
Palsy, 340. Part most affected, in general disease, not acted on before the
rest, 26. 214. Passions, cautions on exciting, 19. 75. 181. 192. or emotions,
strongly influence our activity, 72. sometimes necessary to be excited, 180.
182. 198. termed opposite, differ not in nature but degree, 8. 75. violent,
produce disease and death, 75. Peripneumony, 220. --, cure of, 40, 259. --,
difference in symptoms of, not owing to seat of the disease but degree, 94. --,
not a merely local disease, 24. --, spurious, cure of, -- 110. Peritonitis,
remarks on, 378. Perspiration, diminished, cause of, 28, 565. --, more
difficulty brought on in sthenia than the other excretions, 213. --, produced
by cold, 173. by extreme heat 57. --, to be kept up in diseases, and by what
means 48. Phlegmasiae, local, cure of, 373. --, symptoms of, 227. Phrenitis,
226. cure of, 256. inflammation of brain in, not probable, 92. Physician does
not bestow sufficient attention to patients in fever, 361. province of, 2.
Plague, 359. Plethora, error of the schools respecting, 67. Pleurisy, the same
with peripneumony, 220. Poison produce local disease, 37, 77 remarks on, 5, 77.
Poor, diseases of, owing to want of stimulating food. 63. Predisposition, a
criterion betwixt local and general disease, 39. differs from disease only in
degree, 37. knowledge of, important, 38. necessarily precedes general disease,
35. Predisposition to disease defined 2, 35. Prognosis, general, 42. Pulse,
celerity of, owing to debility, 97, 382. observations on, 211. Purging remedies
considered, 184, 262, 269. Pustules produced by contagion, 94. remarks on, 386.
Pyrexia, 31, 210. scarlet, 246. cure of, 275. symptomatic, 220, 280.
R.
Remedies, a single one never to be trusted to in violent diseases, 46. general
and local, what, ibid. remarks on the variation of, 242. several in a moderate
degree to be preferred to few in excess, 173, 175, 18^. uniform in their
action, 200. Rest necessary in sthenic diathesis, 184. Rheumatalgia, 363.
Rheumatic-inflammation cannot be transferred ^o stomach, 92. seat of, 88.
Rheumatism described, 235. method of curing, 276. Rickets, 292.
S.
Scarlet ^ever. See Pyrexia, scarlet. Schirrous tumor, 389. Scrosulous tumor
and ulcer, 389. Scurvy, 311. not cured by vegetables, 313. Sedative powers are
but lesser degrees of stimuli, 8. do not, as such, exist in nature, 1^9.
Sensation, not different in different parts of its seat, 22. Senses, exercise
of, remarks on the, 75. Shivering and sense of cold, cause of, 213. Skin,
dryness of, how occasioned, 213. Sleep considered, 155, 240. morbid, how
produced, 158. of convalescents to be attended to, 312. owing to a stimulant,
not sedative power, 163. remarks on, producing, 166. Smallpox, 358. confluent,
a disease of debility, 126. distinct, sthenic disease, 35, 127. mild, 247. cure
of, 275, 280. rare case of, 312. 241. remarks on the debilitating plan in, 129.
violent, 230. cure of, 259. Solids, formation and preservation of, 29.
Spasmodic diseases, cautions against evacuants in, VI. 290. owing to debilty.
VI. 210. 289. Specifics, idea of, an error, 165. Sphacelus, 338. Splenitis,
remarks on, 373. Sprains, cure of, 377. Sthenia, meaning of, 215. Sthenic
diathesis, cause of, 78. cure of, 170. may be converted into asthenic, 32.
symptomatic, 230. symptoms of, 80. 209. of predisposition to, 79. plan of cure,
different parts of comp^^ed. 1^^. Stimuli, cautions on the application of, 18,
51, 186. deficiencies of some may be supplied by others, 17. diffusible,
cautions on the use of, 62, 179. properties of, 62. scale of, 62, 190. durable,
197, 201. effects of may be lessened by mixture, 7 general, affect most the
part to which applied, 23. hurtful effect of, how to cure, 52. indirect, 62.
local and universal defined, 4. proper in a state of health, 61. sum of the
action of, composed of power multiplied by continuance, 11. what degree of
necessary in various cases, 161. 365. Stomach, most affected by internal
remedies, 23. 85. inflammation of. See gastritis. Studies, the author's,
progress of, 1. Suppuration, 386. Sweating, utility of, as a remedy, 178. 268.
278. Symptoms, apparently very different, arise from the same disease, and vice
versa, 150. deceitful, 34. Synocha, simple, 245. cure of, 295. Synochus, 358.
System, no power inherent in, productive of disease, 77. Systems, old,
exploded, and a new one established, 78.
T.
Tabes, 308 Temperaments of every individual the same, 160. Temperature, due
return of, best sign of returning health, 130. Tetanus, description of, 133,
344. Thinking has great influence on our activity, 74. straining in, may prove
hurtful, 74. Thirst, asthenic 304. causes of, 81, 99, 214. not always to be
allayed by the same means, 53. Typhus, occasioned by impure air, remarkable
instance of, 77. pestilential, 334. simple, 358.
U.
Urine, redness of, how produced, 213.
V.
Vegetables subject to the same laws as animals, 2, 202, 204. Vessels,
contracted in state of strength, enlarged in state of weakness, 29. Vigor,
abatement of, not always owing to debility, 138. Vomiting, cause of, 84, 101.
considered as a remedy, 184. 262. 269.
W.
Watching causes of, 158. morbid, 159. 250. cure of, 283. owing to
over-fatigue, instance of, 160. restless, or asthenic, 291. Womb inflammation
of. See Hysteritis. Worms, 308. Wounds, deep-seated, or gunshot, 381.
irritating susceptible parts, 385. necessity of keeping air from, 372.

