THE Economy of Human Life, COMPLETE, IN TWO PARTS: TRANSLATED FROM AN INDIAN
MANUSCRIPT, WRITTEN BY AN ANCIENT BRAMIN.

TO WHICH IS PREFIXED, An Account of the Manner in which the said Manuscript
was discovered; IN A LETTER FROM An ENGLISH GENTLEMAN residing in CHINA, TO THE
EARL OF * * * * * * *.

NEW YORK: PRINTED AND SOLD BY HUGH GAIN, AT THE BIBLE, IN HANOVER-SQUARE.
M,DCC,XC.

TO THE PUBLIC.
THE spirit of virtue and morality which breathes in this ancient piece of
Eastern instruction, Meaning the first Part, which was published some time
before the second appeared.
its force and conciseness, and the hopes that it may do good, have prevailed
with the person to whom it was sent, to communicate to the Public what was
translated only for his particular amusement. There are some reasons, which at
present make it proper to conceal, not only his own name, but the name of his
correspondent, who has now resided in China several years, and been engaged in
a business very different from that of collecting literary curiosities. These
reasons will not subsist long; and as he seems to intimate a design, on his
return to England, of publishing an entire translation of Cao-Tsou's whole
journey, the Public will then, in all probability, have an opportunity of being
satisfied concerning any particulars which they may be curious to know.

CONTENTS.
PART I.
DEDICATORY PREFACE, Page ix INTRODUCTION, 13
BOOK I. DUTIES that relate to MAN, considered as an Individual.
CHAP. 1. CONSIDERATION, 14 2. MODESTY, ibid. 3. APPLICATION, 15 4. EMULATION,
16 5. PRUDENCE, 17 6. FORTITUDE, 18 7. CONTENTMENT, 19 8. TEMPERANCE, 20
BOOK II. THE PASSIONS.
CHAP. 1. HOPE and FEAR, 22 2. JOY and GRIEF, 23 3. ANGER, 24 4. PITY, 25 5.
DESIRE and LOVE, 26
BOOK III.
WOMAN. 27

BOOK IV. CONSANGUINITY; Or, NATURAL RELATIONS.
CHAP. 1. HUSBAND, Page 28 2. FATHER, 29 3. SON, 30 4. BROTHERS, 31
BOOK V. PROVIDENCE; Or, The Accidental Differences of MEN.
CHAP. 1. WISE and IGNORANT, 31 2. RICH and POOR, 32 3. MASTERS and SERVANTS,
33 4. MAGISTRATES and SUBJECTS, 34
BOOK VI. The SOCIAL DUTIES.
CHAP. 1. BENEVOLENCE, 36 2. JUSTICE, ibid. 3. CHARITY, 37 4. GRATITUDE, 38 5.
SINCERITY, ibid.
BOOK VII.
RELIGION, 39

PART II.
DEDICATORY PREFACE, Page 45
BOOK I. MAN considered in the general.
CHAP. 1. The HUMAN FRAME and STRUCTURE, 47 2. The USE of the SENSES, 48 3. The
SOUL of MAN, its ORIGIN and AFFECTIONS, 49 4. The PERIOD and USES of HUMAN
LIFE, 51
BOOK II. MAN considered in Regard to his Infirmities, and their Effects.
CHAP. 1. VANITY, 54 2. INCONSTANCY, 56 3. WEAKNESS, 58 4. The INSUFFICIENCY of
KNOWLEDGE, 60 5. MISERY, 62 6. JUDGMENT, 63 7. PRESUMPTION, 66
BOOK III. OF the AFFECTIONS of MAN, which are hurtful to himself, and others.
CHAP. 1. COVETOUSNESS, 68 2. PROFUSION, 69 3. REVENGE, 70 4. CRUELTY, HATRED,
and ENVY, 72 5. HEAVINESS of HEART, 74
BOOK IV. OF the ADVANTAGES Man may acquire over his Fellow Creatures.
CHAP. 1. NOBILITY and HONOR, Page 77 2. SCIENCE and LEARNING, 79
BOOK V. OF NATURAL ACCIDENTS.
CHAP. 1. PROSPERITY and ADVERSITY, 81 2. PAIN and SICKNESS, 82 3. DEATH, 83
TO THE EARL OF * * * * * * *.
PEKING, May 12, 1749. MY LORD,
IN the last letter which I had the honor of writing to your Lordship, dated
December 23, 1748, I think I concluded all I had to say in regard to the
topography and natural history of this great empire. I purposed in this, and
some succeeding ones, to have set down such observations as I have been able to
make on the laws, government, religion, and manners of the people. But a
remarkable occurrence has happened lately, which engrosses the conversation of
the literati here, and may hereafter, perhaps, afford matter of speculation to
the learned in Europe. As it is of a nature which I know will furnish some
entertainment to your Lordship, I will endeavor to give you as distinct and
particular an account of it as I have been able to obtain.

Adjoining to China on the west, is the large country of Thibet, called by some
Barantola. In a province of this country, named Lasa, resides the Grand Lama,
or High Priest of these idolaters; who is reverenced, and even adored as a God,
by most of the neighboring nations. The high opinion which is entertained of
his sacred character, induces prodigious numbers of religious people to resort
to Lasa, to pay their homage to him, and to give him presents, in order to
receive his blessing. His residence is in a most magnificent pagod, or temple,
built on the top of the mountain Poutala. The foot of this mountain, and even
the whole district of Lasa, is inhabited by an incredible number of Lamas of
different ranks and orders; several of whom have very grand pagods erected to
their honor, in which they receive a kind of inferior worship. The whole
country, like Italy, abounds with priests; and they entirely subsist on the
great number of rich presents which are sent them from the utmost extent of
Tartary, from the empire of the Great Mogul, and from almost all parts of the
Indies. When the Grand Lama receives the adorations of the people, he is raised
on a magnificent altar, and sits cross-legged upon a splendid cushion. His
worshippers prostrate themselves before him, in the humblest and most abject
manner; but he returns not the least sign of respect, nor ever speaks even to
the greatest princes. He only lays his hand upon their heads, and they are
fully persuaded that they receive from thence a full forgiveness of all their
sins. They are likewise so extravagant as to imagine, that he knows all things,
even the secrets of the heart; and his particular disciples, being a select
number of about two hundred of the most eminent Lamas, have the address to make
the people believe he is immortal; and that, whenever he appears to die, he
only changes his abode, and animates a new body.

The learned in China have long been of opinion, that, in the archieves of this
grand temple, some very ancient books have for many ages been concealed; and
the present Emperor, who is very curious in searching after the writings of
antiquity, became at length so fully convinced of the probability of this
opinion, that he determined to try whether any discovery of this sort could be
made. To this end, his first care was, (...) find out a person eminently
skilful in the ancient languages and characters. He at length pitched upon one
of the Haulins, or doctors of the first order, whose name was Cao-Tsou; a man
about fifty years of age, of a grave and noble aspect, of great eloquence, and
who, by an accidental friendship with a certain learned Lama, who had resided
many years at Peking, was become entirely master of the language which the
Lamas of Thibet use among themselves.

With these qualifications be set forward on his journey; and, to give his
commission the greater weight, the Emperor honored him with the title of
COLAO, or Prime-minister: To which he added a most magnificent equipage and
attendants, with presents for the Grand Lama, and the other principal Lamas, of
an immense value; also a letter, written with his own hand, in the following
terms: --

TO THE GREAT REPRESENTATIVE OF GOD.
Most High, Most Holy, and worthy to be adored!
WE, the EMPEROR of CHINA, Sovereign of all the sovereigns of the earth, in the
person of this our most respected prime minister, CAO-TSOU, with all reverence
and humility, prostrate ourself beneath thy sacred feet, and implore, for
ourself, our friends, and our empire, thy most powerful and gracious
benediction.

Having a strong desire to search into the records of antiquity, to learn and
retrieve the wisdom of the ages that are past; and being well informed, that,
in the sacred repositories of thy most ancient and venerable hierarchy, there
are some valuable books, which, from their great antiquity, are become to the
generality, even of the learned, almost wholly unintelligible; in order, as far
as in us lies, to prevent their being totally lost, we have thought proper to
authorize and employ our most learned and respected minister, Cao-Tsou, in this
our present embassy to thy Sublime Holiness. The business of which is, to
desire, that he may be permitted to read and examine the said writings -- we
expecting, from his great and uncommon skill in the ancient languages, that he
will be able to interpret whatever may be found, though of the highest and most
obscure antiquity. And we have commanded him to throw himself at thy feet, with
such testimonies of our respect, as, we trust, will procure him the admittance
we desire.


I will not detain your Lordship with any particulars of his journey, though he
has published a large account of it, abounding with many surprising relations,
and which, at my return to England, I may probably translate and publish
entire. Let it suffice at present, that, when he arrived in these sacred
territories, the magnificence of his appearance, and the richness of his
presents, failed not to gain him a ready admission. He had apartments appointed
him in the sacred college, and was assisted in his enquiries by one of the most
learned Lamas. He continued there near six months: during which time, he had
the satisfaction of finding many valuable pieces of antiquity; from some of
which he has made very curious extracts, and has formed such probable
conjectures concerning their authors, and the times wherein they were written,
as proves him to be a man of great judgment and penetration, as well as most
extensive reading.

But the most ancient piece he has discovered, and which none of the Lamas for
many ages had been able to interpret or understand, is a small system of
morality, written in the language and character of the ancient Gymnosophists or
Bramins; but by what particular person, or in what time, he does not pretend to
determine. This piece, however, he wholly translated, though, as he himself
confesses, with an utter incapacity of reaching, in the Chinese language, the
strength and sublimity of the original. The judgments and opinions of the
bonzes and the learned doctors, are every much divided concerning it. Those who
admire it the most highly, are very fond of attributing it to Confucius, their
own great philosopher; and get over the difficulty of its being written in the
language and character of the ancient Bramins, by supposing this to be only a
translation, and that the original work of Confucius is lost. Some will have it
to be the institutes of Laokinn, another Chinese philosopher, cotemporary with
Confucius, and founder of the sect Tao-^ss^^; but these labor under the same
difficulty, in regard to the language, with those who attribute it to
Confucius. There are others, who, from some particular marks and sentiments
which they find in it, suppose it to be written by the Bramin Dandamis, whose
famous letter to Alexander the Great, is recorded by the European writers. With
these Cao-Tsou himself seems most inclined to agree; at least so far as to
think, that it is really the work of some ancient Bramin; being fully
persuaded, from the spirit with which it is written, t^^^ it is no translation.
One thing, however, occasions some doubt amongst them; and that is, the plan of
it; which is entirely new to the Eastern people, and so unlike any thing they
have ever seen, that, if it was not for some turns of expression peculiar to
the East, and the impossibility of accounting for its being written in this
very ancient language, many would suppose it to be the work of an European.

But whoever was the writer of it, the great noise which it makes in this city,
and all over the empire, the eagerness with which it is read by all kinds of
people, and the high encomiums which are given to it by some, at length
determined me to attempt a translation of it into English; especially as I was
persuaded it would be an agreeable present to your Lordship. And I was the more
easily induced to make this trial, as, very happily for me, you cannot judge
how far I have fallen s^^rt of the original, or even of the Chinese
translation. One thing, however, it may perhaps be necessary to apologize for,
at least to give some account of; and that is, the style and manner in which I
have translated it. I can assure your Lordship, that when I first sat down to
the work, I had not the least intention of doing it in this way; but the
sublime manner of thinking which appeared in the Introduction, the great energy
of expression and the shortness of the sentences, naturally led me into this
kind of (...). And I hope the having so elegant a pattern to form myself upon,
is our version of the book of Job, the Psalms, the works of Sc^^^^^, and the
Prophets, has been of some advantage to my translation.

Such as it is, if it affords your Lordship any entertainment. I shall think
myself extremely happy; and, in my next, will re^o^^e my account of this
people, and their empire.

I am, My Lord, Yours, etc.

THE Economy of Human Life.
INTRODUCTION.
BOW down your heads unto the dust, O ye Inhabitants of earth! Be silent; and
receive, with reverence, instruction from on high.

Wheresoever the sun does shine; wheresoever the wind does blow; wheresoever
there is an ear to hear, and a mind to conceive; there let the precepts of life
be made known, let the maxims of truth be honored and obeyed.

All things proceed from God. His power is unbounded, his wisdom is from
eternity, and his goodness endures for ever.

He sits on his throne in the center, and the breath of his mouth gives
life to the world.

He touches the stars with his finger, and they run their course rejoicing.

On the wings of the wind he walks abroad, and performs his will through
all the regions of unlimited space.

Order, and grace, and beauty, spring from his hand.

The voice of wisdom speaks in all his works; but the human understanding
comprehends it not.

The shadow of knowledge passes over the mind of man as a dream: He sees as
in the dark; he reasons and is deceived.

But the wisdom of God is as the light of heaven: He reasons not; his mind is
the fountain of truth.

Justice and mercy wait before his throne; benevolence and love enlighten his
countenance for ever.

Who is like unto the Lord in glory? Who in power shall contend with the
Almighty? Has he any equal in wisdom? Can any in goodness be compared unto him?

He it is, O man! who has created thee; thy station on earth is fixed by his
appointment: The powers of thy mind are the gifts of his goodness, the wonders
of thy frame are the work of his hand.

Hear then his voice, for it is gracious; and he that obeys shall establish
his soul in peace.

BOOK I. DUTIES that relate to MAN, considered as an INDIVIDUAL.
CHAP. I CONSIDERATION.
COMMUNE with thyself, O man! and consider wherefore thou were made.

Contemplate thy powers; contemplate thy wants, and thy connections: So shall
thou discover the duties of life, and be directed in all thy ways.

Proceed not to speak, or to act, before thou have weighed thy woods, and
examine the tendency of every step thou shall take: So shall disgrace fly far
from thee, and in thy house shall shame be a stranger; repentance shall not
visit thee, nor sorrow dwell upon thy cheek.

The thoughtless man bridleth not his tongue; he speaks at random, and is
entangled in the foolishness of his own words.

As one that runs in haste, and leapeth over a fence, may fall into a pit on
the other side which he does not see; so is the man that plungeth suddenly into
any action, before he has considered the consequences thereof.

Hearken therefore unto the voice of Consideration: Her words are the words of
wisdom, and her paths shall lead thee to safety and truth.

CHAP. II. MODESTY.
WHO art thou, O man! that presumes on thine own wisdom? or why do thou
vaunt thyself on thine own acquirements?

The first step toward being wise, is to know that thou art ignorant; and, if
thou would not be esteemed foolish in the judgment of others, cast off the
folly of being wise in thine own conceit.

As a plain garment best adorneth a beautiful woman, so a decent behavior is
the greatest ornament of wisdom.

The speech of a modest man gives luster to truth, and the diffidence of his
words absolveth his error.

He relieth not on his own wisdom; he weighs the counsels of a friend, and
receives the benefit thereof.

He turns away his ear from his own praise, and believes it not; he is the
last in discovering his own perfections.

Yet, as a veil adds to beauty, so are his virtues set off by the shade which
his modesty casts upon them.

But, behold the vain man, and observe the arrogant! He clotheth himself in
rich attire; he walks in the public street; he casts round his eyes, and
courteth observation.

He tosseth up his head, and overlooketh the poor; he treats his inferiors
with insolence; and his superiors, in return, look down on his pride and folly
with laughter.

He despises the judgment of others; he relieth on his own opinion, and is
confounded.

He is puffed up with the vanity of his imagination; his delight is to hear,
and to speak of himself all the day long.

He swalloweth, with greediness, his own praise; and the flatterer, in return,
eats him up.

CHAP. III. APPLICATION.
SINCE the days that are past are gone for ever, and those that are to come,
may not come to thee; it behooves thee, O man! to employ the present time,
without regreting the loss of that which is past, or too much depending on that
which is to come.

This instant is thine; the next is in the womb of futurity, and thou know
not what it may bring forth.

Whatsoever thou resolvest to do, do it quickly. Defer not till the evening
what the morning may accomplish.

Idleness is the parent of want, and of ^^^n; but the labor of virtue brings
forth pleasure.

The hand of diligence defeateth want; prosperity and success are the
industrious man's attendants.

Who is he that has acquired wealth, that has risen to power, that has
clothed himself with honor, that is spoken of in the city with praise, and
that stands before the king in his counsel? Even he that has shut out
idleness from his house; and has said, Sloth, thou art mine enemy.

He rises up early, and lies down late; he exercises his mind with
contemplation, and his body with action; and preserves the health of both.

The slothful man is a burden to himself, his hours hang heavy on his head; he
loitereth about, and knows not what he would do.

His days pass away like the shadow of a cloud, and he leaves behind him no
mark for remembrance.

His body is diseased for want of exercise: He wishes for action, but has not
power to move; his mind is in darkness; his thoughts are confused; he longs
for knowledge, but has no application.

He would eat of the almond, but hates the trouble of breaking its shell.

His house is in disorder, his servants are wasteful and riotous, and he
runs on toward ruin: He sees it with his eyes; he hears it with his
ears; he shakes his head, and wishes, but has no resolution; till ruin
comes upon him like a whirlwind, and shame and repentance descend with him to
the grave.

CHAP. IV. EMULATION.
IF thy soul thirsts for honor; if thy ear has any pleasure in the voice of
praise; raise thyself from the dust, whereof thou art made -- and exalt thy aim
to something that is praise worthy.

The oak that now spreads its branches toward the Heavens was once but an
acorn in the bowels of the earth.

Endeavor to be first in thy calling, whatever it be; neither let any one go
before thee in well-doing: Nevertheless, do not envy the merits of another, but
improve thine own talents.

Scorn also to d^^^ess thy competitor, by any dishonest or unworthy method;
^^^ve to raise thyself above him, only by excelling him: So shall thy contest
for superiority be crowned with honor, if not with success.

By a virtuous emulation, the spirit of a man is exalted within him; he pants
after fame, and rejoiceth as a racer to run hi^ course.

He rises like the palm tree, in spite of oppression; and, as an eagle in the
firmament of Heaven, he soareth aloft, and fixes his eye upon the glories of
the sun.

The examples of eminent men are in his visions by night; and his delight is to
follow them all the day long.

He forms great designs, he rejoiceth in the execution thereof, and his name
goes forth to the ends of the world.

But the heart of the envious man is gall and bitterness; his tongue spitteth
venom; the success of his neighbor breaks his rest.

He fitteth in his cell repining; and the good that happens to another, is to
him an evil.

Hatred and malice feed upon his heart, and there is no rest in him.

He feels in his own breast no love of goodness, and therefore believes his
neighbor is like unto himself.

He endeavors to depreciate those that excel him, and puts an evil
interpretation on all their doings.

He lies on the watch, and meditates mischief: But the detestation of man
pursues him; he is crushed as a spider in his own web.

CHAP. V. PRUDENCE.
HEAR the words of Prudence, give heed unto her counsels, and store them in
thine heart: Her maxims are universal, and all the virtues lean upon her. She
is the guide and the mistress of human life.

Put a bridle on thy tongue; set a guard before thy lips; lest the words of
thine own mouth destroy thy peace.

Let him that scoffeth at the lame, take care that he halt not himself:
Whosoever speaks of another's failings with pleasure shall hear of his own
with bitterness of heart.

Of much speaking comes repentance, but in silence is safety.

A talkative man is a nuisance to society; the ear is sick of his babbling, the
torrent of his words overwhelmeth conversation.

Boast not of thyself, for it shall bring contempt upon thee; neither deride
another, for it is dangerous.

A bitter jest is the poison of friendship; and he who cannot restrain his
tongue, shall have trouble.

Furnish thyself with the proper accommodations belonging to thy condition; yet
spend not to the utmost of what thou can afford, that the providence of thy
youth may be a comfort to thy old age.

Avarice is the parent of evil deeds; but frugality is the sure guardian of our
virtues.

Let thine own business engage thy attention; leave the care of the state to
the governors thereof.

Let not thy recreations be expensive, lest the pain of purchasing them exceed
the pleasure thou have in their enjoyment.

Neither let prosperity put out the eyes of circumspection, nor abundance cut
off the hands of frugality: He that too much indulgeth in the superfluities of
life, shall live to lament the want of its necessaries.

From the experience of others, do thou learn wisdom; and from their failings,
correct thine own faults.

Trust no man before thou have tried him; yet mistrust not without reason, it
is uncharitable.

But when thou have proved a man to be honest, lock him up in thine heart as a
treasure; regard him as a jewel of inestimable price.

Receive not the favors of a mercenary man, nor join in friendship with the
wicked; they shall be snares unto thy virtue, and bring grief to thy soul.

Use no^ today what tomorrow may want; neither leave that to hazard, which
forefight may provide for, or care prevent.

Yet expect not, even from prudence, infallible success; for the day knows
not what the night may bring forth.

The fool is not always unfortunate, nor the wise man always successful; yet
never had a fool a thorough enjoyment, never was a wise man wholly unhappy.

CHAP. VI. FORTITUDE.
PERILS, and misfortunes, and want, and pain, and injury, are more or less the
certain lot of every man that comes into the world.

It behooves thee, therefore, O child of calamity! early to fortify thy mind
with courage and patience, that thou may support, with a becoming
resolution, thy allotted portion of human evil.

As the camel bears labor, and heat, and hunger, and thirst, through deserts
of sand, and faints not; so the fortitude of a man shall sustain him through
all perils.

A noble spirit disdaineth the malice of fortune; his greatness of soul is not
to be cast down.

He has not suffered his happiness to depend on her smiles, and therefore with
her frowns he shall not be dismayed.

As a rock on the seashore he stands firm, and the dashing of the waves
disturbeth him not.

He raises his head like a tower on a hill, and the arrows of fortune drop at
his feet.

In the instant of danger, the courage of his heart sustaineth him; and the
steadiness of his mind bears him out.

He meets the evils of life as a man that goes forth unto battle, and
returns with victory in his hand.

Under the pressure of misfortunes, his calmness alleviates their weight; and,
by his constancy, he shall surmount them.

But the dastardly spirit of a timorous man, betrayeth him to shame.

By shrinking under poverty, he stoopeth down to meanness; and by tamely
bearing insults, he inviteth injuries.

As a reed is shaken with the breath of the air, so the shadow of evil makes
him tremble.

In the hour of danger he is embarrassed and confounded; in the day of
misfortune, he sinketh, and despair overwhelmeth his soul.

CHAP. VII. CONTENTMENT.
FORGET not, O man! that thy station, on earth is appointed by the wisdom of
the Eternal; who knows thy heart, who sees the vanity of all thy wishes, and
who often in mercy denies thy requests.

Yet for all reasonable desires, for all honest endeavors, his benevolence
has established, in the nature of things, a probability of success.

The uneasiness thou feel, the misfortunes thou bewailest; behold the root
from whence they spring! even thine own folly, thine own pride, thine own
distempered fancy.

Murmur not therefore at the dispensations of God, but correct thine own heart:
Neither say within thyself, if I had wealth, or power, or leisure, I should be
happy; for know they all bring to their several possessors their peculiar
inconveniences.

The poor man sees not the vexations and anxieties of the rich, he feels not
the difficulties and perplexities of power, neither knows he the
wearisomeness of leisure; and therefore it is that he repineth at his own lot.

Envy not therefore the appear^nes of happiness in any man, for thou know
not his secret griefs.

To be satisfied with a little, is the greatest wisdom; and he who increases
his riches, increases his cares: But a contended mind is a hidden treasure,
and trouble finds it not.

Yet if thou suffer not the allurements of fortune to rob thee of justice,
or temperance, or charity, or modesty, even riches themselves shall not make
thee unhappy.

But hence shall thou learn, that the cup of felicity, pure and unmixed, is by
no means a draught for mortal man.

Virtue is the race which God has set him to run, and happiness the goal;
which none can arrive at, till he has finished his course, and received his
crown in the mansions of eternity.

CHAP. VIII. TEMPERANCE.
THE nearest approach thou can make to happiness, on this side the grave, is
to enjoy from Heaven, health, wisdom, and peace of mind.

These blessing if thou possessest, and would preserve to old age, avoid the
allurements of voluptuousness, and fly from her temptations.

When she spreads her delicacies on the board, when her wine sparkleth in the
cup, when she smileth upon thee, and persuateth thee to be joyful and happy;
then is the ho^^ of danger, and let reason stand firmly on her guard.

For, if thou harkenest unto the words of this adversary of virtue, thou art
deceived and betrayed.

The joy which she promises changes to madness, and her enjoyments lead on to
diseases and death.

Look round her board, cast thine eyes upon her guests, and observe those who
have been allured by her smiles, who have listened to her temptations.

Are they not meagre? are they not sickly? are they not spiritless?

Their short hours of jollity and riot, are followed by tedious hours of pain
and dejection. She has debauched and palled their appetites, that they have
now no relish for her nicest dainties; her votaries are become her victims; the
just and natural consequence which God has ordained, in the constitution of
things, for the punishment of those who abuse his gifts.

But who is she that, with graceful steps, and with a lively air, trips over
yonder plain?

The rose blusheth on her cheeks, the sweetness of the morning breaths from
her lips; joy, tempered with innocence and modesty, sparkleth in her eyes, and
from the cheerfulness of her heart the sings as she walks.

Her name is Health; she is the daughter of exercise, who begot her on
temperance; their sons inhabit the mountains that stretch over the northern
regions of San Ton Hoe.

They are brave, active, and lively, and partake of all the beauties and
virtues of their sister.

Vigor stringeth their nerves, strength dwells in their bones, and labor is
their delight all the day long.

The employments of their father excite their appetites, and the repasts of
their mother refresh them.

To combat the passions is their delight; to conquer evil habits, their glory.

Their pleasures are moderate, and therefore they endure; their repose is
short, but sound and undisturbed.

Their blood is pure, their minds are serene, and the physician finds not the
way to their habitations.

But safety dwells not with the sons of men, neither is security found within
their gates.

Behold them exposed to new dangers from without, while a traitor within
lurketh to betray them.

Their health, their strength, their beauty, and activity, have raised desire
in the bosom of lascivious love.

She stands in her bower, she courteth their regard, she spreads her
temptations.

Her limbs are soft, her air is delicate, her attire loose and inviting.
Wantonness speaks in her eyes, and on her bosom sits temptation. She
beckoneth them with her finger, she wooeth them with her looks, and by the
smoothness of her tongue she endeavors to deceive.

Ah! fly from her allurements, stop thine ears to her enchanting words. If thou
meetest the languishing of her eyes, if thou hear the softness of her voice,
if she casts her arms about thee, she binds thee in chains for ever.

Shame follows, and disease, and want, and care, and repentance.

Enfeebled by dalliance, with luxury pampered, and softened by sloth, strength
shall forsake thy limbs, and health thy constitution. Thy days shall be few,
and those inglorious; thy griefs shall be many, yet meet with no compassion.

BOOK II. THE PASSIONS.
CHAP. I. HOPE and FEAR.
THE promises of hope are sweeter than roses in the bud, and far more
flattering to expectation; but the threatenings of fear, are a terror to the
heart.

Nevertheless, let not hope allure, nor fear deter thee, from doing that which
is right: So shall thou be prepared to meet all events with an equal mind.

The terrors even of death, are no terrors to the good: He that commits no
evil, has nothing to fear.

In all thy undertakings, let a reasonable assurance animate thy endeavors; if
thou despairest of success, thou shall not succeed.

Terrify not thy soul with vain fears, neither let thine heart sink within thee
from the phantoms of imagination.

From fear proceeds misfortune; but he that hops, helps himself.

As the ostrich, when pursued, hides his head, but forgets his body; so the
fears of a coward expose him to danger.

If thou believe a thing impossible, thy despondency shall make it so; but he
that persevereth, shall overcome all difficulties.

A vain hope flattereth the heart of a fool; but he that is wise, pursues it
not.

In all thy desires, let reason go along with thee, and fix not thy hopes
beyond the bounds of probability: So shall success attend thy undertakings, and
thy heart shall not be vexed with disappointments.

CHAP. II. JOY and GRIEF.
LET not thy mirth be so extravagant as to intoxicate thy mind, nor thy sorrow
so heavy as to depress thy heart. This world affords no good so transporting,
nor inflicteth any evil so severe, as should raise thee far above, or sink thee
much beneath the balance of moderation.

Lo! yonder stands the house of joy. It is painted on the outside, and
looks gay; thou may know it by the continual noise of mirth and exultation
that issues from it.

The mistress stands at the door, and calls aloud to all who pass by; she
sings, and shouteth, and laugheth without ceasing.

She inviteth them to go in and taste the pleasures of life, which she tells
them are no where to be found but beneath her roof.

But enter thou not into her gate; neither associate thyself with those who
frequent her house.

They call themselves the sons of Joy, they laugh and seem delighted; but
madness and folly are in all their doings.

They are linked with mischief hand in hand, and their steps lead down to evil.
Dangers beset them round about, and the pit of destruction yawneth beneath
their feet.

Look now on the other side; and behold, in that vale overshadowed with trees,
and hid from the fight of men, the habitation of sorrow.

Her bosom heaveth with sighs, her mouth is filled with lamentation, she
delights to dwell on the subject of human misery.

She looks on the common accidents of life, and weepeth; the weakness and
wickedness of man is the theme of her lips.

All nature to her teemeth with evil, every object she sees is tinged with the
gloom of her own mind, and the voice of complaint saddeneth her dwelling day
and night.

Come not near her cell; her breath is contagious; she will blast the fruits,
and wither the flowers that adorn and sweeten the garden of life.

In avoiding the house of joy, let not thy feet betray thee to the borders of
this dismal mansion; but pursue with care the middle path, which shall lead
thee, by a gentle ascent, to the bower of tranquillity.

With her dwells peace, with her dwells safety and contentment. She is
cheerful, but not gay; she is serious, but not grave: she vieweth the joys and
sorrows of life, with an equal and steady eye.

From hence, as from an eminence, shall thou behold the folly and the misery of
those, who, either led by the gaiety of their hearts, take up their abode with
the companions of jollity and riotous mirth; or, infected by gloominess and
melancholy, spend all their days in complaining of the woes and calamities of
human life.

Thou shall view them both with pity, and the error of their ways shall keep
thy feet from straying.

CHAP. III. ANGER.
AS the whirlwind in its fury teareth up trees, and deformeth the face of
nature; or, as an earthquake in its convulsions overturneth cities; so the rage
of an angry man throws mischief around him; danger and destruction wait on
his hand.

But consider, and forget not thine own weakness; so shall thou pardon the
fa^lings of others.

Indulge not thyself in the passion of anger; it is whetting a sword to wound
thine own breast, or murder thy friend.

If thou bear slight provocations with patience, it shall be imputed unto
thee for wisdom; and if thou wipest them from thy remembrance, thy heart shall
feel rest, and thy mind shall not reproach thee.

See thou not that the angry man loses his understanding? Whilst thou art
yet in thy senses, let the wrath of another be a lesson to thyself.

Do nothing in a passion. Why will thou put to sea in the violence of a storm?

If it be difficult to rule thine anger, it is wise to prevent it; avoid
therefore all occasions of falling into wrath, or guard thyself against them
whenever they occur.

A fool is provoked with insolent speeches, but a wise man laugheth them to
scorn.

Harbor not revenge in thy breast; it will torment thy heart, and discolor
its best inclinations.

Be always more ready to forgive, than to return an injury: He that watches for
an opportunity of revenge, lies in wait against himself, and draws down
mischief on his own head.

A mild answer to an angry man, like water cast upon the fire, abateth his
heat, and from an enemy he shall become thy friend.

Consider how few things are worthy of anger, and thou will wonder that any but
fools should be wroth.

In folly or weakness it always begins; but remember, and be well assured,
it seldom concludes without repentance.

On the heels of folly, treads shame; at the back of anger, stands remorse.

CHAP. IV. PITY.
AS blossoms and flowers are strewed upon the earth by the hand of spring; as
the kindness of summer produces in perfection the bounties of harvest; so the
smiles of pity shed blessings on the children of misfortune.

He who pitieth another, recommendeth himself; but he who is without
compassion, deserves it not.

The butcher relenteth not at the bleating of the lamb; neither is the heart of
the cruel moved with distress.

But the tears of the compassionate are sweeter than dew drops falling from
roses on the bosom of the earth.

Shut not thine ear therefore against the cries of the poor; neither harden
thine heart against the calamities of the innocent.

When the fatherless call upon thee, when the widow's heart is sunk, and she
imploreth thy assistance with tears of sorrow; O! pity her affliction, and
extend thy hand to those who have none to help them.

When thou see the naked wanderer of the street, shivering with cold, and
destitute of habitation; let bounty open thine heart, let the wings of charity
shelter him from death, that thine own soul may live.

Whilst the poor man groaneth on the bed of sickness, whilst the unfortunate
languish in the horrors of a dungeon, or the hoary head of age lifts up a
feeble eye to thee for pity; O! how can thou riot in superfluous enjoyments,
regardless of their wants, unfeeling of their woes?

CHAP. V. DESIRE and LOVE.
BEWARE, young man! beware of the allurements of wantonness, and let not the
harlot tempt thee to excess in her delights.

The madness of desire shall defeat its own pursuits; from the blindness of its
rage, thou shall rush upon destruction.

Therefore give not up thy heart to her sweet enticements, neither suffer thy
soul to be enslaved by her enchanting delusions.

The fountain of health, which must supply the stream of pleasure, shall
quickly be dried up, and every spring of joy shall be exhausted.

In the prime of thy life, old age shall overtake thee: Thy sun shall decline
in the morning of thy days.

But when virtue and modesty enlighten her charms, the luster of a beautiful
woman is brighter than the stars of Heaven, and the influence of her power it
is in vain to resist.

The whiteness of her bosom transcendeth the lily, her smiles are more
delicious than a garden of roses.

The innocence of her eye is like that of the turtle; simplicity and truth
dwell in her heart.

The kisses of her mouth are sweeter than honey; the perfumes of Arabia breathe
from her lips.

Shut not thy bosom to the tenderness of love; the purity of its flame shall
enoble thine heart, and soften it to receive the fairest impressions.

BOOK III. WOMAN.
GIVE ear, fair daughter of love! to the instructions of prudence, and let the
precepts of truth sink deep in thy heart: So shall the charms of thy mind add
luster to the elegance of thy form; and thy beauty, like the rose it
resembles, shall retain its sweetness when its bloom is withered.

In the spring of thy youth, in the morning of thy days; when the eyes of men
gaze on thee with delight, and nature whispereth in thine ear the meaning of
their looks: Ah! hear with caution their seducing words, guard well thy heart,
nor listen to their soft persuasions.

Remember thou art made man's reasonable companion, not the slave of his
passion; the end of thy being is not merely to gratify his loose desire, but to
assist him in the toils of life, to soothe him with thy tenderness, and
recompense his care with soft endearments.

Who is she that wins the heart of man, that subdueth him to love, and
reigns in his breast?

Lo! yonder she walks in maiden sweetness, with innocence in her mind, and
modesty on her cheek.

Her hand seeks employment, her foot delights not in gadding abroad.

She is clothed with neatness, she is fed with temperance; humility and
meekness are as a crown of glory circling her head.

On her tongue dwells music, the sweetness of honey flows from her lips.

Decency is in all her words, in her answers are mildness and truth.

Submission and obedience are the lessons of her life, and peace and happiness
are her reward.

Before her steps walks prudence, and virtue attends at her right hand.

Her eye speaks softness and love; but discretion, with a scepter, sits on
her brow.

The tongue of the licentious is dumb in her presence, the awe of her virtue
keeps him silent.

When scandal is busy, and the fame of her neighbor is tossed from tongue to
tongue; if charity and goodnature open not her mouth, the finger of silence
rests on her lip.

Her breast is the mansion of goodness, and therefore she suspecteth no evil in
others.

Happy is the man that shall make her his wife; happy the child that shall call
her mother.

She presideth in the house, and there is peace; she commands with judgment,
and is obeyed.

She arises in the morning, she considers her affairs, and appoints to every
one their proper business.

The care of her family is her whole delight; to that alone she applies her
study, and elegance, with frugality, is seen in her mansions.

The prudence of her management is an honor to her husband, and he hears her
praise with a secret delight.

She informs the minds of her children with wisdom, she fashioneth their
manners from the example of her own goodness.

The word of her mouth is the law of their youth, the motion of her eye
commands their obedience.

She speaks, and her servants fly; she points, and the thing is done.

For the law of love is in their hearts, and her kindness adds wings to their
feet.

In prosperity, she is not puffed up; in adversity, she heals the wounds of
fortune with patience.

The troubles of her husband are alleviated by her counsels, and sweetened by
her endearments; he puts his heart in not bosom, and receives comfort.

Happy the man that has made her his wife; happy the child that calls her
mother.

BOOK IV. CONSANGUINITY; or, NATURAL RELATIONS.
CHAP. I. HUSBAND.
TAKE unto thyself a wife, and obey the ordinance of God: Take unto thyself a
wise, and become a faithful member of society.

But examine with care, and fix not suddenly. On thy present choice depends thy
future happiness.

If much of her time is destroyed in dress and adornments; i^ she i^ enamoured
with her own beauty, and delighted with her own praise; if she laugheth much,
and talks loud; if her foot abides not in her father's house, and her eyes
with boldness rove on the faces of men; though her beauty were as the sun in
the firmament of Heaven, turn thine eyes from her charms, turn thy feet from
her paths, and suffer not thy soul to be ensnared by the allurements of
imagination.

But when thou find sensibility of heart, joined with softness of manners;
an accomplished mind, with a form agreeable to thy fancy; take her home to thy
house; she is worthy to be thy friend, thy companion in life, the wife of thy
bosom.

O cherish her, as a blessing sent thee from Heaven. Let the kindness of thy
behavior endear thee to her heart.

She is the mistress of thy house; treat her therefore with respect, that thy
servants may obey her.

Oppose not her inclination without cause; she is the part^^^ of thy ca^es,
make her also the companion of thy pleasures.

Reprove her faults with gentleness, exact not her obedience with rigor.

Trust thy secrets in her breast; her counsels are sincere, thou shall not be
deceived.

Be faithful to her bed; for she is the mother of thy children.

When pain and sickness assault her, le^ thy tenderness soothe her affliction;
a look from thee, of pity and love, shall alleviate her grief, or mitigate her
pain, and be of more avail than ten physicians.

Consider the tenderness of her sex, the delicacy of her frame; and be not
severe to her weakness, but remember thine own imperfections.

CHAP. II. FATHER.
CONSIDER thou who art a parent, the importance of thy trust; the being thou
have produced, it is thy duty to support.

Upon thee also it depends, whether the child of thy bosom shall be a
blessing or a curse to thyself; an useful or a worthless member to the
community.

Prepare him early with instruction, and season his mind with the maxims of
truth.

Watch the bent of his inclination, set him right in his youth, and let no evil
habit gain strength with his years.

So shall he rise like a cedar on the mountains; his head shall be seen above
the trees of the forest.

A wicked son is a reproach to his father; but he that does right, is an
honor to his gray hairs.

The soil is thine own, let it not want cultivation; the seed which thou
sowest, that also shall thou reap.

Teach him obedience, and he shall bless thee; teach him modesty, and he shall
not be ashamed.

Teach him gratitude, and he shall receive benefits; teach him charity, and he
shall gain love.

Teach him temperance, and he shall have health; teach him prudence, and
fortune shall attend him.

Teach him justice, and he shall be honored by the world; teach him sincerity,
and his own heart shall not reproach him.

Teach him diligence, and his wealth shall increase; teach him benevolence, and
his mind shall be exalted.

Teach him science, and his life shall be useful; teach him religion, and his
death shall be happy.

CHAP. III. SON.
FROM the creatures of God let man learn wisdom; and apply to himself the
instruction they give.

Go to the desert, my son! Observe the young s^^^k of the wilderness, let him
speak to thy heart; he bears on his wings his aged sire; he lodges him in
safety, and supplieth him with food.

The piety of a child is sweeter than the incense of Persia, offered to the
sun; yea, more delicious than odours, waited from a field of Arabian spices by
the western gales.

Be grateful then to thy father, for he gave thee life, and to thy mother, for
she sustained thee.

Hear the words of his mouth, for they are spoken for thy good; give car to his
admonition, for it proceeds from love.

He has watched for thy welfare, he has toiled for thy ease, do honor
therefore to his age, and let not his gray hairs be treated with irreverence.

Forget not thy helpless infancy, nor the frowardness of thy youth, and indulge
the infirmities of thy aged parents; assist and support them in the decline of
life.

So shall their hoary heads go down to the grave in peace, and thine own
children, in reverence of thy example, shall repay thy piety with filial love.

CHAP. IV. BROTHERS.
YE are the children of one father, provided for by his care, and the breast of
one mother has given you suck.

Let the bonds of affection, therefore, unite thee with thy brothers, that
peace and happiness may dwell in thy father's house.

And when ye separate in the world, remember the relation that binds you to
love and unity, and prefer not a stranger before thine own blood.

If thy brother is in adversity, assist him; if thy sister is in trouble,
forsake her not.

So shall the fortunes of thy father contribute to the support of his whole
race; and his care be continued to you all, in your love to each other.

BOOK V. PROVIDENCE; or, the accidental DIFFERENCES of MEN.
CHAP. I. WISE and IGNORANT.
THE gifts of the understanding are the treasures of God; and he appoints to
every one his portion, in what measure seems good unto himself.

Has he endued thee with wisdom? Has he enlightened thy mind with the
knowledge of truth? Communicate it to the ignorant, for their instruction;
communicate it to the wise, for thine own improvement.

True wisdom is less presuming than folly. The wise man doubts often, and
changes his mind: The fool is obstinate, and doubts not; he knows all
things, but his own ignorance.

The pride of emptiness is an abomination; and to talk much, is the foolishness
of folly: Nevertheless, it is the part of wisdom to bear the impertinence of
fools, to hear their absurdities with patience, and pity their weakness.

Yet be not puffed up in thine own conceit, neither boast of superior
understanding; the clearest human knowledge is but blindness and folly.

The wise man feels his imperfections, and is humbled; he labors in vain
for his own approbation. But the fool peepeth in the shallow stream of his own
mind, and is pleased with the pebbles which he sees at the bottom: He brings
them up, and shows them as pearls; and with the applause of his brethren,
delights he himself.

He boasts of seize in things that are of no worth; but where it is a
shame to be ignorant, there he has no understanding.

Even in the paths of wisdom, he toileth after folly; and shame and
disappointment are the reward of his labor.

But the wise man cultivates his mind with knowledge; the improvement of arts
is his delight, and their utility to the public, crowns him with honor.

Nevertheless, the attainment of virtue he accounts as the highest learning;
and the science of happiness is the study of his life.

CHAP. II. RICH and POOR.
THE man to whom God has given riches, and blessed with a mind to employ them
aright, is peculiarly favored, and highly distinguished.

He looks on his wealth with pleasure, because it affords him the means to
do good.

He protecteth the poor that are injured, he suffers not the mighty to
oppress the weak.

He seeks out objects of compassion; he enquireth into their wants; he
relieveth them with judgment, and without ostentation.

He assisteth and rewards merit; he encourages ingenuity, and liberally
promoteth every useful design.

He carries on great works, his country is enriched, and the labourer is
employed; he forms new schemes, and the arts receive improvement

He considers the superfluities of his table, as belonging to the poor of his
neighborhood, and he defraudeth them not.

The benevolence of his mind is not checked by his fortune; he rejoiceth
therefore in riches, and his joy is blameless.

But woe unto him that heapeth up wealth in abundance, and rejoiceth alone in
the possession thereof;

That grindeth the face of the poor, and considers not the sweat of their
brows;

He thriveth on oppression without feeling; the ruin of his brother disturbeth
him not.

The tears of the orphan he drinks as milk, the cries of the widow are music
to his ear.

His heart is hardened with the love of wealth; no grief nor distress can make
impression upon it.

But the curse of iniquity pursues him: He lives in continual fear; the
anxiety of his mind, and the rapacious desires of his own soul, take vengeance
upon him, for the calamities he has brought upon others.

O! what are the miseries of poverty, in comparison with the gnawings of this
man's heart?

Let the poor man comfort himself, yea, rejoice; for he has many reasons.

He sits down to his morsel in peace; his table is not crowded with
flatterers and devourers.

He is not embarrassed with a train of dependants, not teased with the clamours
of solicitation.

Debarred from the dainties of the rich, he escapes also their diseases.

The bread that he eats, is it not sweet to his taste? the water he drinks,
is it not pleasant to his thirst? yea far more delicious than the richest
draughts of the luxurious.

His labor preserves his health, and produces him a repose to which the
downy bed of sloth is a stranger.

He limiteth his desires with humility; and the calm of contentment is sweeter
to his soul, than the acquirements of wealth and grandeur.

Let not the rich therefore presume on his riches, nor the poor despond in his
poverty; for the providence of God dispenses happiness to them both, and the
distribution thereof is more equally made than the fool can believe.

CHAP. III. MASTERS and SERVANTS.
REPINE not, O man! at the state of servitude; It is the appointment of God,
and has many advantages; it removes thee from the cares and solicitudes of
life.

The honor of a servant is his fidelity; his highest virtues are submission
and obedience.

Be patient, therefore, under the reproofs of thy master; and when he rebukes
thee, answer not again. The silence of thy resignation shall not be forgotten.

Be studious of his interests, be diligent in his affairs, and faithful to the
trust which he reposeth in thee.

Thy time and thy labor belong unto him. Defraud him not thereof, for he
pays thee for them.

And thou who art a master, be just to thy servant, if thou expectest from him
fidelity; and reasonable in thy commands, if thou expectest a ready obedience.

The spirit of a man is in him; severity and rigor may create fear, but can
never command his love.

Mix kindness with reproof, and reason with authority; so shall thy admonitions
take place in his heart, and his duty shall become his pleasure.

He shall serve thee faithfully, from the motive of gratitude; he shall obey
thee cheerfully, from the principle of love; and fail not thou, in return, to
give his diligence and fidelity their proper reward.

CHAP. IV. MAGISTRATES and SUBJECTS.
O THOU, the favorite of Heaven! whom the sons of men, thy equals, have agreed
to raise to sovereign power, and set as a ruler over themselves: Consider the
ends and importance of their trust, far more than the dignity and height of thy
station.

Thou art clothed in purple, and seated on a throne; the crown of majesty
investeth thy temples, the scepter of power is placed in thy hand: But not for
thyself were these ensigns given; not meant for thine own, but the good of thy
kingdom.

The glory of a king is the welfare of his people; his power and dominion rest
on the hearts of his subjects.

The mind of a great prince, is exalted with grandeur of his situation; he
revolveth high things, and searches for business worthy of his power.

He calls together the wise men of his kingdom, he consulteth among them with
freedom, and hears the opinions of them all.

He looks among his people with discernment: He discovers the abilities of
men, and employeth them according to their merits.

His magistrates are just, his ministers are wise, and the favorite of his
bosom deceives him not.

He smileth on the arts, and they flourish; the sciences improve beneath the
culture of his hand.

With the learned and ingenious he deligheth himself; he k^^^dleth in their
breasts emulation, and the glory of his kingdom is exalted by their labors.

The spirit of the merchant who extends his commerce, the skill of the farmer
who enricheth his lands, the ingenuity of the artist, the improvements of the
scholar, all these he honors with his savor, or rewards with his bounty.

He planteth new colonies, he builds strong ships, he opens rivers for
convenience, he forms harbors for safety; his people abound in riches, and
the strength of his kingdom increases.

He frames his statutes with equity and wisdom; his subjects enjoy the fruits
of their labor in security; and their happiness consists in their observance
of the law.

He foundeth his judgments on the principles of mercy; but in the punishment of
offenders, he is strict and impartial.

His ears are open to the complaints of his subjects; he restrains the hand
of their oppressors, and delivers them from their tyranny.

His people therefore look up to him as a father, with reverence and love: They
consider him as the guardian of all they enjoy.

Their affection unto him begets in his breast a love of the public; the
security of their happiness is the object of his care.

No murmurs against him arise in their hearts; the machinations of his enemies
endanger not his state.

His subject are faithful, and firm in his cause; they stand in his defense as
a wail of brass; the army of his enemy flies before them, as chaff before the
wind.

Security and peace bless the dwellings of his people; and glory and strength
encircle his throne for ever.

BOOK VI. The SOCIAL DUTIES.
CHAP. I. BENEVOLENCE.
WHEN thou considerest thy wants, when thou beholdest thy imperfections,
acknowledge his goodness, O son of humanity! who honored thee with reason,
endued thee with speech, and placed thee in Society, to receive and confer
reciprocal helps, and mutual obligations.

Thy food, thy clothing, thy convenience of habitation; thy protection from the
injuries, thy enjoyment of the comforts and pleasures of life: All these thou
owe to the assistance of others, and could not enjoy but in the bands of
society.

It is thy duty therefore to be a friend to mankind, as it is thy interest that
man should be friendly to thee.

As the rose breaths sweetness from its own nature, so the heart of a
benevolent man produces good works.

He enjoys the ease and tranquillity of his own breast, and rejoiceth in the
happiness and prosperity of his neighbor.

He opens not his ear unto slander; the faults and the failings of men give
pain to his heart.

His desire is to do good, and he searches out the occasions thereof; in
removing the oppressions of another, he relieveth himself.

From the largeness of his mind, he comprehends in his wishes, the happiness
of all men; and from the generosity of his heart, he endeavors to promote it.

CHAP. II. JUSTICE.
THE peace of Society depends on justice; the happiness of individuals, on
the sa^e enjoyment of all their possessions.

Keep the desires of thy heart, therefore, within the bounds of moderation; let
the hand of justice lead them aright.

Cast not an evil eye on the goods of thy neighbor; let whatever is his
property, be sacred from thy touch.

Let not temptation allure, nor any provocation excite thee, to lift up thy
hand to the hazard of his life.

Defame him not in his character; bear no false witness against him.

Corrupt not his servants to cheat or forsake him; and the wife of his bosom, O
tempt not to sin.

It will be a grief to his heart, which thou can not relieve; an injury to
his life, which no reparation can a^one.

In thy dealings with men, be impartial and just; and do unto them, as thou
would they should do unto thee.

Be faithful to thy trust, and deceive not the man who relieth upon thee; be
assured, it is less evil in the sight of God, to steal, than to betray.

Oppress not the poor, and defraud not of his hire, the laboring man.

When thou sellest for gain, hear the whisperings of conscience, and be
satisfied with moderation; nor from the ignorance of the buyer, make advantage
to thyself.

Pay the debts which thou owe: For he who gave thee credit, relied upon thy
honor; and to withhold from him his due, is both mean and unjust.

Finally, O son of society! examine thy heart, call remembrance to thy aid; and
if in any of those things thou find thou have transgressed, take sorrow and
shame to thyself, and make speedy reparation to the utmost of thy power.

CHAP. III. CHARITY.
HAPPY is the man who has sown in his breast the seeds of benevolence; the
produce thereof shall be charity and love.

From the fountain of his heart shall rise rivers of goodness; and the streams
shall overflow for the benefit of mankind.

He assisteth the poor in their trouble, he rejoiceth in furthering the
prosperity of all men.

He censureth not his neighbor; he believes not the tales of envy and
malevolence, neither repeateth he their slanders.

He forgiveth the injuries of men, he wipeth them from his remembrance; revenge
and malice have no place in his heart.

For evil he returns not evil; he hates not even his enemies, but requiteth
their injustice with friendly admonition.

The griefs and anxieties of men excite his compassion; he endeavors to
alleviate the weight of their misfortunes, and the pleasure of success
rewards his labor.

He calmeth the fury, he hears the quarrels of angry men, and preventeth the
mischiefs of strife and animosity.

He promoteth in his neighborhood, peace and good will, and his name is
repeated with praise and benedictions.

CHAP. IV. GRATITUDE.
AS the branches of a tree return their sap to the root from whence it arose;
as a river pours his streams to the sea whence his spring was supplied; so
the heart of a grateful man, delights in returning a benefit received.

He acknowledges his obligation with cheerfulness, (...) looks on his
benefactor with love and esteem.

And if to return it be not in his power, he nourishes the memory of it in his
breast with kindness, he forgets it not all the days of his life.

The hand of the generous man is like the clouds of Heaven, which drop upon the
earth, fruits, her^^ge, and flowers: But the heart of the ungrateful, is like a
desert of sand, which swalloweth with greediness the showers that ^^ll, burieth
them in his bosom, and produces nothing.

Envy not thy benefactor, neither strive to conceal the benefit he has
conserved: For though to oblige is better than to be obliged; though the act of
generosity commands admiration; yet the humility of gratitude touches the
heart, and is amiable in the sight both of God and man.

But receive not a favor from the hand of the proud; to the selfish and
avaricious have no obligation: The vanity of pride shall expose thee to shame,
the greediness of avarice shall never be satisfied.

CHAP. V. SINCERITY.
O THOU who art enamoured with the beauties of truth, and have fixed thy heart
on the simplicity of her charms! hold fast thy fidelity unto her, and forsake
her not; the constancy of thy virtue shall crown thee with honor.

The tongue of the sincere is rooted in his heart; hypocrisy and deceit have no
place in his words.

He blusheth at falsehood, and is confounded; but in speaking the truth, he has
a steady eye.

He supporteth, as a man, the dignity of his character; to the arts of
hypocrisy he scorneth to stoop.

He is consistent with himself; he is never embarrassed; he has courage enough
for truth, but to lie he is afraid.

He is far above the meanness of dissimulation; the words of his mouth are the
thoughts of his heart.

Yet with prudence and caution he opens his lips; he studieth what is right,
and speaks with discretion.

He advises in friendship; he reproves with freedom; and whatsoever he
promises, shall surely be performed.

But the heart of the hypocrite is hid in his breast; he masketh his words in
the semblance of truth, while the business of his life is only to deceive.

He laugheth in sorrow, he weepeth in joy; and the words of his mouth have no
interpretation.

He works in the dark as a mole, and fancieth he is safe; but he blundereth
into light, and is exposed to full view with h^s dirt on his head.

He passes his days in perpetual constraint, his tongue and his heart are for
ever at variance.

He labors for the character of a righteous man; and huggeth himself in the
thoughts of his cunning.

O fool! fool! the pains which thou take to hide what thou art, are more than
would make thee what thou would seem; the children of wisdom shall mock at
thy cunning, when, in the midst of security, thy disguise is stripped off; and
the finger of derision shall point thee to scorn.

BOOK VII. RELIGION.
THERE is but one God, the Author, the Creator, the Governor of the world;
Almighty, Eternal, and ^^comprehensible.

The sun is not God, though his noblest Image. He enlighteneth the world with
his brightness, his warmth gives life to the products of the earth: Admire him
as the creature, the instrument of God; but worship him not.

To the One who is supreme, most wise and beneficent, and to him alone, belong
worship, adoration, thanksgiving, and praise.

Who has stretched forth the Heavens with his hand, who has described with his
finger the courses of the stars.

Who sets bounds to the ocean, that it cannot pass; and says unto the
stormy winds, Be still.

Who shakes the earth, and the nations tremble; who darteth his lightnings,
and the wicked are dismayed.

Who calls forth worlds by the word of his mouth; who smites with his arm,
and they sink into nothing.

O! reverence the majesty of the Omnipotent; and tempt not his anger, lest thou
be destroyed.

The providence of God is over all his works; he rules and directs with
infinite wisdom.

He has instituted laws for the government of the world: He has wonderfully
varied them in all beings; and each, by his nature conformeth to his will.

In the depths of his mind he revolveth all knowledge; the secrets of futurity
lie open before him.

The thoughts of thy heart are naked to his view; he knows thy determinations
before they are made.

With respect to his pre^^ience, there is nothing contingent; with respect to
his providence, there is nothing accidental.

Wonderful he is in all his ways; his counsels are inscrutable; the manner of
his knowledge transcendeth thy conception.

Pay, therefore, to his wisdom all honor and veneration; and bow down thyself
in humble and submissive obedience to his supreme direction.

The Lord is gracious and beneficent; he has created the world in mercy and
love.

His goodness is conspicuous in all his works; he is the fountain of
excellence, the center of perfection.

The creatures of his hand declare his goodness, all their enjoyments speak his
praise; he clotheth them with beauty, he supporteth them with food, he
preserves them with pleasure from generation to generation.

If we lift up our eyes to the Heavens, his glory shines forth; if we cast
them down upon the earth, it is full of his goodness: The hills and the valleys
rejoice and sing; fields, rivers, and woods, resound his praise.

But thee, O man! he has distinguished with peculiar favor; and exalted thy
station above all creatures.

He has endued thee with reason, to maintain thy dominion; he has fitted thee
with language, to improve by society, and exalted thy mind with the powers o^
meditation, to contemplate and adore his inimitable perfections.

And in the laws he has ordained as the rule of thy life, so kindly has he
suited thy duty to thy nature that obedience to his precepts is happiness to
thyself.

O praise his goodness with songs of thanksgiving, and meditate in silence on
the wonders of his love: let thy heart overflow with gratitude and
acknowledgment, let the language of thy lips speak praise and adoration, let
the actions of thy life show thy love to his law.

The Lord is just and righteous, and will judge the earth with equity and truth.

Has he established his laws in goodness and mercy, and shall he not punish
the transgressors thereof?

O think not, bold man! because thy punishment is delayed, that the arm of the
Lord is weakened; neither flatter thyself with hopes, that he winketh at thy
doings.

His eye pierces the secrets of every heart, and he remembereth them for ever:
He respects not the persons, nor the stations of men.

The high and the low, the rich and the poor, the wise and the ignorant, when
the soul has shaken off the cumbrous shackles of this mortal life, shall
equally receive from the sentence of God, a just and everlasting retribution,
according to their works.

Then shall the wicked tremble and be afraid; but the heart of the righteous
shall rejoice in his judgments.

O! fear the Lord, therefore, all the days of thy life, and walk in the paths
which he has opened before thee. Let prudence admonish thee; let temperance
restrain, let justice guide thy hand, benevolence warm thy heart, and gratitude
to Heaven inspire thee with devotion. These shall give thee happiness in thy
present state, and bring thee to the mansions of eternal felicity in the
paradise of God.

THIS IS THE TRUE Economy of Human Life.
THE Economy of Human Life, PART THE SECOND: TRANSLATED FROM AN INDIAN
MANUSCRIPT, Found soon after that which contained the Original of the FIRST
PART, And written by the same Hand.

IN A SECOND LETTER FROM An ENGLISH GENTLEMAN residing at CHINA, TO THE EARL OF
*******.

NEW YORK: PRINTED AND SOLD BY HUGH GAIN, AT THE BIBLE, IN HANOVER-SQUARE.
M,DCC,XC.

To the Right Honorable THE EARL OF * * * * * * *.
Peking, Jan. 10, 1749-50. My LORD,
NOT a month after I had enclosed to your Lordship the translation I had
attempted, of the Oriental System of Morality, so famous in these parts, we
were agreeably surprised with a manuscript of the same size, whose antiquity,
characters, and other internal marks, determined it to be the performance of
the same author; which, at the same time that it showed us something was
wanting to what we had before esteemed a complete system, very happily supplied
the deficiency.

I could not rest, after the first dipping into it, without the pleasing task
of a translation; nor, when I had finished it, without doing myself ^he honor
of transmitting it to your Lordship. I need not tell your Lordship, that the
energy of thought, sublimity of style, and many other circumstances, prove it
to come from the divine hand that planned the other. The substance of it
carries abundantly more proof of it.

If I did not flatter myself, that the first Part had met the honor of your
Lordship's approbation, I should not be so earnest in dispatching this after
it. But while I know the value of the work, and know your Lordship's
distinguishing genius, it would be ridiculous to affect a doubt about it.

I am, My Lord, Yours, etc.

THE Economy of Human Life. PART SECOND.
BOOK I. MAN considered in the general.
CHAP. I. Of the HUMAN FRAME and STRUCTURE.
WEAK and ignorant as thou art, O Man! Humble as thou ought to be, O child
of the dust! would thou raise thy thoughts to infinite wisdom? would thou
see Omnipotence displayed before thee? contemplate thine own frame.

Fearfully and wonderfully art thou made: Praise therefore thy Creator with
awe, and rejoice before him with reverence.

Wherefore of all creatures art thou only erect, but that thou should behold
his works? wherefore art thou to behold, but that thou may admire them?
wherefore to admire, but that thou may adore their and thy creator?

Wherefore is consciousness reposed in thee alone? and whence is it derived to
thee?

It is not in flesh to think; it is not in bones to reason. The lion knows
not that worms shall eat him; the ox perceives not that he is fed for
slaughter.

Something is added to thee unlike to what thou see: Something informs thy
clay, higher than all that is the object of thy senses. Behold! what is it?

Thy body remains perfect after it is fled, therefore it is no part of it: It
is immaterial, therefore it is eternal: It is free to act, therefore it is
accountable for its actions.

Knows the ass the use of food, because his teeth mow down the herbage? or
stands the crocodile erect, although his backbone is straight as thine?

God formed thee as he had formed these: After them all were thou created:
superiority and command were given thee over all, and of his own breath did he
communicate to thee thy principle of knowledge.

Know thyself then, the pride of his creation, the like uniting divinity and
matter! Behold a part of God himself within thee! Remember thine own dignity,
nor dare descend to evil or to meanness.

Who planted terror in the tail of the serpent? who clothed the neck of the
horse with thunder? Even he who has instructed thee to crush the one under thy
feet, and tame the other to thy purposes.

CHAP. II. Of the USE of the SENSES.
VAUNT not of thy body, because it was first formed; nor of thy brain, because
therein thy soul resideth. Is not the master of the house more honorable than
its walls?

The ground must be prepared, before corn can be planted: The potter must build
his furnace, before he can make his porcelain.

As the breath of Heaven says unto the waters of the deep, This way shall thy
billows roll, and no other; thus high, and no higher shall they raise their
fury: So let thy spirit, O man! actuate, and direct thy flesh; so let it
repress its wildness.

Thy soul is the monarch of thy frame; suffer not its subjects to rebel against
it.

The body is as the globe of the earth, thy bones the pillars that sustain it
on its basis.

As the ocean gives rise to springs, whose waters return again into its bosom
through the rivers; so runs thy life from the heart outward, and so
returns it unto its place again.

Do not both retain their course for ever? Behold! the same God ordained them.

Is not thy nose the channel to perfumes? thy mouth the path to delicacies? Yet
know thou, that perfumes long smelt become offensive, that delicacies destroy
the appetite they flatter.

Are not thine eyes the sentinels that watch for thee? Yet how often are they
unable to distinguish truth from error?

Keep thy soul in moderation, teach thy spirit to be attentive to its good; so
shall these, its ministers, be always to thee conveyances of truth.

Thine hand, is it not a miracle? Is there in the creation aught like unto it?
wherefore was it given thee, but that thou might stretch it out to the
assistance of thy brother?

Why of all things living art thou alone made capable of blushing? The world
shall read thy shame upon thy face; therefore do nothing shameful.

Fear and dismay, why rob they thy countenance of its ruddy splendour? Avoid
guilt, and thou shall know that fear is beneath thee; that dismay is unmanly.

Wherefore to thee alone speak shadows in the visions of thy pillow? Reverence
them; for, know that dreams are from on high.

Thou, man, alone can speak. Wonder at the glorious prerogative; and pay to
him who gave it thee, a rational and welcome praise, teaching thy children
wisdom, instructing the offspring of thy loins in piety.

CHAP. III. The SOUL of MAN, its ORIGIN and AFFECTIONS.
THE blessings, O Man! of thy external part, are health, vigor, and
proportion. The greatest of these is health. What health is to the body, even
that is honesty to the soul.

That thou have a soul, is of all knowledge the most certain, of all truths the
most plain unto thee. Be meek, be grateful for it. Seek not to know it
perfectly. It is inscrutable.

Thinking, understanding, reasoning, willing, call not these the soul. They are
its actions, but they are not its essence.

Raise it not too high, that thou be not despised. Be not thou like unto those
that fall by climbing, neither debase it to the sense of brutes; nor be thou
like to the horse and the mule, in whom there is no understanding.

Search it by its faculties, know it by its virtues. They are more in number
than the hairs of thy head; the stars of Heaven are not to be counted with them.

Think not with Arabia, that one soul is parted among all men; neither believe
thou with the sons of Egypt, that every man has many: Know, that as thy heart,
so also thy soul is one.

Does not the sun harden the clay? Does it not also soften the wax? As it is
one sun that works both, even so it is one soul that wills contraries.

As the moon retains her nature, though darkness spread itself before her
face as a curtain; so the soul remains perfect, even in the bosom of the fool.

She is immortal; she is unchangeable; she is alike in all. Health calls her
forth to show her liveliness, and application anointeth her with the oil of
wisdom.

Although she shall live after thee, think not she was born before thee. She
was concreated with thy flesh, and formed with thy brain.

Justice could not give her to thee exalted by virtues, nor mercy deliver her
to thee deformed by vices. These must be thine, and thou must answer them.

Suppose not death can shield thee from examination; think not corruption can
hide thee from enquiry. He who formed thee of thou know not what, can he not
raise thee from thou know not what again?

Perceives not the cock the hour of midnight? Exalts he not his voice, to
tell thee it is morning? Knows not the dog the footsteps of his master? and
flies not the wounded goat unto the herb that heals him? Yet when these die,
their spirit returns to the dust: Thine alone surviveth.

Envy not these of their senses, because quicker than thine own. Learn that the
advantage lies not in possessing good things, but in knowing to use them.

Had thou the ear of the stag, or were thine eye as strong and piercing as
the eagle's; did thou equal the hound in smell, or could the ape resign to
thee his taste, or the tortoise her feeling; yet, without reason, what would
they avail thee? Perish not all these like their kindred?

Has any one of them the gift of speech? Can any say unto thee, Therefore did
I so?

The lips of the wise are as the doors of a cabinet; no sooner are they opened,
but treasures are poured out before thee.

Like unto trees of gold arranged in beds of silver, are wise sentences uttered
in due season.

Can thou think too greatly of thy soul? or can too much be said in its
praise? It is the image of him who gave it.

Remember thou its dignity for ever; forget not how great a talent is committed
to thy charge.

Whatsoever may do good, may also do harm. Beware that thou direct its course
to virtue.

Think not that thou can lose her in the crowd; suppose not that thou can
bury her in thy closet. Action is her delight, and she will not be withheld
from it.

Her motion is perpetual; her attempts are universal; her agility is not to be
suppressed. Is it at the uttermost part of the earth? she will have it: Is it
beyond the region of the stars? yet will her eye discover it.

Enquiry is her delight. As one who traverseth the burning sands in search of
water, so is the soul that thirsts after knowledge.

Guard her, for she is rash; restrain her, for she is irregular; correct her,
for she is outrageous: More supple is she than water, more flexible than wax,
more yielding than air. Is there aught that can bind her?

As a sword in the hand of a madman, even so is the soul to him who wants
discretion.

The end of her search is truth; her means to discover it, are reason and
experience. But are not these weak, uncertain and fallacious? How then shall
she attain unto it?

General opinion is no proof of truth; for the generality of men are ignorant.

Perception of thyself, the knowledge of him who created thee, the sense of the
worship thou owe unto him; are not these plain before thy face? And, behold!
what is there more than man needs to know?

CHAP. IV. Of the PERIODS and USES of HUMAN LIFE.
AS the eye of the morning to the lark, as the shade of evening to the owl, as
honey to the be, or as the carcass to the vulture: even such is life unto the
heart of man.

Though bright, it dazzleth not; though obscure, it displeases not; though sweet, it
cloyeth not; though corrupt, it forbids not: Yet who is he that knows its
true value?

Learn to esteem life as it ought; then art thou near the pinnacle of wisdom.

Think not with the fool, that nothing is more valuable; nor believe with the
pretended wise, that thou ought to contemn it. Love it not for itself, but
for the good it may be of to others.

Gold cannot buy it for thee, neither can mines of diamonds purchase back the
moment thou have now lost of it. Employ the succeeding ones in virtue.

Say not, that it were best not to have been born; or, if born, that it had
been best to die early: Neither dare thou to ask of thy Creator, where had been
the evil, had I not existed? Good is in thy power; the want of good is evil;
and, if thy question be just, lo! it condemns thee.

Would the fish swallow the bait, if he knew the hook was hid therein? would
the lion enter the toils, if he saw they were prepared for him? So neither,
were the soul to persh with this clay would man wish to live; neither would a
merciful God have created him: Know hence thou shall live afterward.

As the bird enclosed in the cage before he sees it, yet tear h^ not his
flesh against its sides; so neither labor thou vainly to run from the state
thou art in; but know it is allotted thee, and be content with it.

Though its ways are uneven, yet are they not all painful? Accommodate thyself
to all; and where there is least appearance of evil, suspect the greatest
danger.

When thy bed is straw, thou sleep in security; but when thou have stretched
thyself on roses, beware of the thorns.

A good death is better than an evil life: Strive to live, therefore, as long
as thou ought, not as long as thou can.

While thy life is to others worth more than thy death, it is thy duty to
preserve it.

Complain not with the fool, of the shortness of thy time: Remember, that with
thy days, thy cares are shortened.

Take from the period of thy life the useless parts of it, and what remains?
Take off the time of thine infancy, the second infancy of age, thy sleep, thy
thoughtless hours, thy days of sickness; and, even at the fullness of years,
how few seasons have thou truly numbered.

He who gave thee life as a blessing, shortened it to make it more so. To what
end would longer life have served thee? Wishest thou to have had an opportunity
of more vices? As to the good, will not he who limited thy span, be satisfied
with the fruits of it?

To what end, O child of sorrow! would thou live longer? To breathe, to eat,
to see the world? All this thou have done often already. Too frequent
repetition, is it not tiresome? or, is it not superfluous?

Would thou improve thy wsdom and thy virtue? Alas! what art thou to know?
or who is it that shall teach thee? Badly thou employest the little thou have:
Dare not therefore to complain that more is not given thee.

Repine not at the want of knowledge; it must perish with thee in the grave. Be
honest here, thou shall be wise hereafter.

Say not unto the crow, why numbrest thou seven times the age or thy lord? or
to the fawn, Why are thine eyes to see my offspring to an hundredth generations?
Are these to be compared with thee in the abuse of life? are they riotous? are
they cruel? are they ungrateful? Learn from them rather, that innocence of life
and simplicity of manners are the paths to a good old age.

Know thou to employ life better than these? then less of it may suffice
thee.

Man who dares enslave the world, when he knows he can enjoy his tyranny but a
moment, what would he not aim at if he were immortal?

Enough have thou of life, but thou regardest not: Thou art not in want of it,
O man? but thou art prodigal: Thou throwest it lightly away, as if thou had
more than enough; and yet thou repinest that it is not gathering again unto
thee.

Know that it is not abundance which makes rich, but economy.

The wise continues to live from his first period; the fool is always
beginning.

Labor not after riches first, and think thou afterward wilt enjoy them. He
who neglects the present moment, throws away all that he has. As the arrow
passes through the heart, while the warrior knew not that it was coming; so
shall his life be taken away, before he knows that he has it.

What then is life, that man should desire it? what breathing, that he should
covet it?

Is it not a seen of delusion, a series of misadventure, a pursuit of evils
linked on all sides together? In the beginning it is ignorance; pain is in its
middle, and its end is sorrow. As one wave pusheth on another, till both are
involved in that behind them, even so succeeds evil to evil in the life of
man; the greater and the present swallow up the lesser and the past. Our
terrors are real evils; our expectations look forward into improbabilities.

Fools, to dread as mortals, and to desire as if immortal.

What part of life is it we would wish to remain with us? Is it youth! Can we
be in love with outrage, licenciousness and temerity? Is it age? then are we
fond of infirmities.

It is said, gray hairs are revered, and in length of days is honor. Virtue
can add reverence to the bloom of youth; and without it, age plants more
wrinkles in the soul than on the forehead.

Is age respected because it hates riot? What justice is in this, when it is
not age despises pleasure, but pleasure that despises age?

Be virtuous while thou art young, so shall thine age be honored.

BOOK II. MAN considered it regard to his INFIRMITIES, and their EFFECTS.
CHAP. I. VANITY.
INCONSTANCY is powerful in the heart of man; intemperance swayeth it whether
it will; despair engrosseth much of it; and fear proclaims, Behold! I sit
unrivalled therein: But vanity is beyond them all.

Weep not therefore at the calamities of the human state; rather laugh at its
follies. In the hands of the man addicted to vanity, life is but the shadow of
a dream.

The hero, the most renowned of human characters, what is he but the bubble of
this weekness? The public is unstable and ungrateful; why should the man of
wisdom endanger himself for fools?

The man who neglects his present concerns, to revolve how he will behave
when greater, feeds himself with wind, while his bread is eaten by another.

Act as becomes thee in thy present station, and in more exalts ones thy
face shall not be ashamed.

What blinds the eye, or what hides the heart of a man from himself, like
vanity? Lo! when thou see not thyself, then others discover thee most plainly.

As the tulip that is gaudy without smell, conspicuous without use; so is the
man who sets himself up on high, and has not merit.

The heart of the vain is troubled, while it seems content; his cares are
greater than his pleasures.

His solicitude cannot rest with his bones; the grave is not deep enough to
hide it: He extends his thoughts beyond his being; he bespeaketh praise to be
paid when he is gone: But who^^ promises it, deceives him.

As the man who engages his wife to remain in widowhood, that the disturb not
his soul; so is he who expects that praise shall reach his ears beneath the
earth, or cherish his heart in its shroud.

Do well while thou live; but regard not what is said of it. Content thyself
with deserving praise, and thy posterity shall rejoice in hearing it.

As the butterfly who sees not her own colors, as the jessamine which feels
not the scent it casts around it; so is the man who appears gay, and
bids others take note of it.

To what purpose, says he, is my vesture of gold, to what end are my tables
filled with dainties, if no eye gaze upon them? If the world kn^w it not? Give
thy raiment to the naked, and thy food unto the hungry; so shall thou be
praised, and feel that thou deservest it.

Why bestowest thou on every man the flattery of unmeaning words? Thou know,
when returned thee, thou regardest it not. He knows be lies unto thee; yet
he knows thou will thank him for it. Speak in sincerity, and thou shall hear
with instruction.

The vain delights to speak of himself; but he sees not that others like not
to hear him.

If he has done any thing worthy praise, if he possess that which i^ worthy
admiration, his joy is to proclaim it, his pride is to h^ar it reported.

The desire of such a man defeateth itself. Men say not, Behold, he has done
it; or, See, he possesses it, But mark how proud he is of it!

The heart of man cannot attend at once to many things. He who fixes his soul
on show, loses reality. He pursues bubbles, which break in their flight,
while he treads to earth what would do him honor.

CHAP. II. INCONSTANCY.
NATURE urges thee to inconstancy, O man! Therefore, guard thyself at all
times against it.

Thou art, from the womb of thy mother, various and wavering. From the loins of
thy father, inheritest thou instability: How then shall thou be firm?

Those who gave thee a body, furnished it with weakness; but he who gave thee a
soul, armed thee with resolution. Employ it, and thou art wise; be wise, and
thou art happy.

Let him who does well, beware how he boasts of it; for rarely is it of his
own will.

Is not the event of an impulse from without born of uncertainty, enforced by
accident, dependent on somewhat else? To these then, and to accident, is due
the praise.

Beware of irresolution in the intent of thy actions, beware of instability in
the execution; so shall though triumph over two great failings of thy nature.

What reproacheth reason more than to act contrarieties? What can surpress the
tendencies to these, but firmness of mind?

The inconstant feels that he changes, but he knows not why; he sees that
he escapes from himself, but he perceives not how. Be thou incapable of
change in that which is right, and men will rely upon thee.

Establish unto thyself principles of action; and see that thou ever act
according to them.

First know that thy principles are just, and then be thou inflexible in the
path of them.

So shall thy passions have no rule over thee; so shall thy constancy ensure
unto thee the good thou possessest, and drive from thy door misfortune. Anxiety
and disoppointment shall be strangers to thy gates.

Suspect not evil in any one, until thou see it; when thou see it, forget
it not.

Whosoever has been an enemy, will not easily be a friend: for a man mendeth not
soon of his faults.

How should his actions be right, who has no rule of life? Nothing can be
just, which proceeds not from reason.

The inconstant has no peace in his soul; neither can any be at ease, whom he
concerns himself with.

His life is unequal; his motions are irregular; his soul changes like the
weather.

Today he loves thee, tomorrow thou art detested by him: And why? himself
knows not wherefore he loved, or wherefore he now hates.

Today he is the tyrant, tomorrow thy servant is less humble: And why? he who
is arrogant without power, will be servile where there is no subjection.

Today he is profuse, tomorrow he grudgeth unto his mouth, that which it
should eat: Thus it is with him who knows not moderation.

Who shall say of the cameleon, He is black, when, the moment after, the
verdure of the grass overspreadeth him.

Who shall say of the inconstant, He is joyful, when his next breath shall be
spent in sighing?

What is the life of such a man, but the phantom of a dream? In the morning he
rises happy, at noon he is on the rack; this hour he is a god, the next below
a worm; one moment he laugheth, the next he weepeth; he now wills, in an
instant he wills not, and in another he knows not whether he wills or not.

Yet neither ease nor pain have fixed themselves on him: Neither is he waxed
greater, or become less; neither has he had cause for laughter, nor reason for
his sorrow: Therefore shall none of them abide with him.

The happiness of the inconstant is as a palace built on the surface of the
sand; the blowing of the wind carries away its foundation; What wonder then
that it falls?

But what exalted form is this, that hitherward directs its even, its
uninterrupted course; whose foot is on the earth, whose head above the clouds?

On his brow sits majesty; steadiness is in his port; and in his heart
reigns tranquillity.

Though obstacles appear in the way, he deigneth not to look down upon them;
though heaven and earth oppose his passage, he proceeds.

The mountains sink beneath his tread; the waters of the ocean are dried up
under the sole of his foot.

The tiger throws herself across his way in vain; the spots of the leopard
glow against him unregarded.

He marches through the embattled legions; with his hand he puts aside the
terrors of death.

Storms roar against his shoulders, but are not able to shake them; the thunder
bursteth over his head in vain; the lightning serves but to show the glories
of his countenance.

His name is resolution! He commands from the utmost part of the earth; he
sees happiness afar off before him; his eye discovers her temple beyond the
limits of the pole.

He walks up to it, he enters boldly, and he remains there forever.

Establish thy heart, O man! in that which is right; and then know the greatest
of human praise is to be immutable.

CHAP. III. WEAKNESS.
VAIN and inconstant as thou art, O child of imperfection! how can thou but
be weak? Is not inconstancy connected with frailty? Can there be vanity without
infirmity? Avoid the danger of the one, and thou shall escape the mischiefs of
the other.

Wherein art thou most weak? in that wherein thou seem most strong; in that
wherein most thou gloriest; even in possessing the things which thou have; in
using the good that is about thee.

Are not thy desires also frail? or know thou even what it is thou would
wish? When thou have obtained what most thou soughtest after, behold it
contenteth thee not.

Wherefore loses the pleasure that is before thee, its relish? and why
appears that which is yet to come, the sweeter? Because thou art wearied with
the good of this, because thou know not the evil of that which is not with
thee. Know, that to be content, is to be happy.

Could thou choose for thyself, would thy Creator lay before thee all that
thine heart could ask for: Would happiness then remain with thee? Or would joy
dwell always in thy gates?

Alas! thy weakness forbids it; thy infirmity declares against it. Variety
is to thee in the place of pleasure; but that which permanently delights,
must be permanent.

When it is gone, thou repentest the loss of it; though while it was with thee,
thou despisedst it.

That which succeeds it, has no more pleasure for thee; and thou afterward
quarrellest with thyself for preferring it: Behold the only circumstance in
which thou errest not!

Is there any thing in which thy weakness appears more than in desiring
things? It is in the possessing, and in the using them.

Good things cease to be good in our enjoyment of them. What nature meant pure
sweets, are sources of bitterness to us; from our delights arise pain; from our
joys, sorrow.

Be moderate in the enjoyment, and it shall remain in thy possession; let thy
joys be founded on reason, and to its end shall sorrow be a stranger.

The delights of love are ushered in by sighs, and they terminate in
languishment and dejection. The object thou burnedst for, na^^eates with
satiety; and no sooner had thou possessed it, but thou were weary of its
presence.

Join esteem to thy admiration, unite friendship with thy love; so shall thou
find, in the end, content so absolute, that it surpasses raptures, tranquillity
more worth than extacy.

God has given thee no good without its admixture of evil; but he has given
thee also the means of throwing off the evil from it.

As joy is not without its allay of pain, so neither is sorrow without its
portion of pleasure. Joy and grief, though unlike, are united. Our own choice
only can give them to us entire.

Melancholy itself often gives delight, and the extremity of joy is mingled
with tears.

The best things in the hands of a fool may be turned to his destruction; and
out of the worst, the wise will find the means of good.

So blended is weakness in thy nature, O man! that thou have not strength
either to be good, or to be evil entirely. Rejoice that thou can not excel in
evil, and let the good that is within thy reach content thee.

The virtues are allotted to various stations. Seek not after impossibilities,
nor grieve that thou can not possess them all.

Would thou at once have the liberality of the rich, and the contentment of
the poor? or should the wife of thy bosom be despised, because she shows not
the virtues of the widow?

If thy father sink before thee in the divisions of thy country, can at once
thy justice destroy him, and thy duty save his life?

If thou behold thy brother in the agonies of a slow death, is it not mercy to
put a period to his life? and is it not also he who takes away his life his
murderer?

Truth is but one; thy doubts are of thine own raising. He who made virtues
what they are, planted also in thee a knowledge of their pre-eminence. Act as
thy soul (...) to thee, and the end shall be always right.

CHAP. IV. Of the INSUFFICIENCY of KNOWLEDGE.
IF there is any thing lovely, if there is any thing desirable, if there is
any thing within the reach of man that is worthy of praise, is it not
knowledge? and yet who is it that attaineth unto it?

The statesman proclaims that he has it; the ruler of the people claims
the praise of it; but finds the subject, that he possesses it.

Evil is not requisite to man; neither can vice be necessary to be tolerated:
Yet how many evils are permitted, by the connivance of the laws? how many
crimes are committed, by the decrees of the council?

But be wise, O ruler! and learn, O thou that art to command the nations! one
crime authorized by thee, is worse than the escape of ten from punishment.

When thy people are numerous, when thy sons increase about thy table, sendest
thou them not out to slay the innocent, and to fall before the sword of him
whom they have not offended?

If the object of thy desires demands the lives of a thousand, say thou
not, I will have it? Surely thou forgettest, that he who created thee, created
also these; and that their blood is as rich as thine.

Say thou, that justice cannot be executed without wrong? Surely thine own
words condemn thee.

Thou who flatte^est with false hopes the criminal, that he may confess his
guilt, art not thou unto him a criminal? or is thy guilt the less, because he
cannot punish it?

When thou command to the torture, him who is but suspected of ill, dare
thou to remember, that thou may wrack the innocent?

Is thy purpose answered by the event? Is thy soul satisfied with his
confession? Pain will enforce him to say what is not, as easily as what is; and
anguish has caused innocence to accuse herself.

That thou may not kill him without cause, thou do worse than kill him:
That thou may prove if he be guilty, thou destroyest him innocent.

O blindness to all truth! O insufficiency of the wisdom of the wise! Know,
when thy judge shall bid thee account for this, thou shall wish ten thousand
guilty to have gone free, rather than one innocent then to stand forth against
thee.

Insufficient as thou art to the maintenance of justice, how shall thou arrive
at the knowledge of truth? how shall thou ascend to the footstep of her throne?

As the owl is blinded by the radiance of the sun, so shall the brightness of
her countenance dazzle thee in thy approaches.

If thou would mount up into her throne, first bow thyself at her footstool:
If thou would arrive at the knowledge of her, first inform thyself of thine
own ignorance.

More worth is she ^^^n pearls, therefore seek her carefully: The emerald, and
the sapphire, and the ruby, are as dirt beneath her feet; therefore pursue her
manfully.

The way to her is labor; attention is the pilot that must conduct thee into
her ports. But weary not in the way; for when thou art arrived at her, the toil
shall be to thee for pleasure.

Say not unto thyself, Behold, truth breeds hatred, and I will avoid it;
dissimulation raises friends, and I will follow it. Are not the enemies made
by truth, better than the friends obtained by flattery?

Naturally does man desire the truth; yet when it is before him, he will not
apprehend it, and, if it force itself upon him, he is not offended at it.

The fault is not in truth, for that is amiable; but the weakness of man
bears not its splendour.

Would thou see thine insufficiency more plainly, view thyself at thy
devotions. To what end was religion instituted, but to teach thee thine
infirmities; to remind thee of thy weakness, to show thee that from heaven
alone thou art to hope for good?

Does it not remind thee, that thou art dust? does it not tell thee that thou
art ashes? And, behold! repentance; is it not built on frailty?

When thou give thy oath; when thou swearest thou will not deceive; behold!
it spreads shame upon thy fate, and upon the face of him that receives it.

Learn to be just, and repentance may be forgotten: Learn to be honest, and
oaths are unnecessary.

The shorter follies are, the better: Say not therefore to thyself, I will not
play the fool by halves.

He that hears his own faults with patience, shall reprove another with
boldness.

He that gives a denial with reason, shall suffer a repulse with moderation.

If thou art suspected, answer with freedom: Whom should suspicion affright,
except the guilty?

The tender of heart is turned from his purpose by supplications, the proud is
rendered more obstinate by entreaty, the sense of thine insufficiency
commands thee to hear; but to be just, thou must hear without thy passions.

CHAP. V. MISERY.
FEEBLE and insufficient as thou art, O man! in good; frail and inconstant as
thou art in pleasure: Yet there is a thing in which thou art strong and
unshaken. Its name is Misery.

It is the character of thy being, the prerogative of thy nature: In thy breast
alone it resideth; without thee there is nothing of it. And, behold! what is
its source, but thine own passions?

He who gave thee these, gave thee also reason to subdue them; exert it, and
thou shall trample them under thy feet.

Thine entrance into the world, is it not shameful? thy destruction, is it not
glorious! Lo, men adorn the instruments of death with gold and gems, and wear
them above their garments.

He who begets a man, hides his face; but he who kills a thousand, is
honored.

Know thou, notwithstanding, that in this is error. -- Custom cannot alter the
nature of truth; neither can the opinion of man destroy justice: The glory and
the shame are misplaced.

There is but one way for man to be produced: There are a thousand by which he
may be destroyed.

There is no praise or honor to him who gives being to another; but triumphs
and empire are the rewards of murder.

Yet he who has many children, has as many blessings; and he who has taken
away the life of another, shall not enjoy his own.

While the savage curses the birth of his son, and blesses the death of his
father; does he not call himself a monster?

Enough of evil is allotted unto man; but he makes it more, while he lamenteth
it.

The greatest of all human ills, is sorrow: Too much of this thou art born
unto: Add not unto it by thine own preverseness.

Grief is natural to thee, and is always about thee; pleasure is a stranger,
and visits thee but by times: Use well thy reason, and sorrow shall be cast
behind thee; be prudent, and the visits of joy shall remain long with thee.

Every part of thy frame is capable of sorrow; but few and narrow are the paths
that lead to delight.

Pleasures can be admitted only simply; but pains rush in a thousand at a time.

As the blaze of straw fades as soon as it is kindled, so passes away the
brightness of joy, and thou know not what is become of it.

Sorrow is frequent; pleasure is rare: Pain comes of itself; delight must be
purchased: Grief is unmixed; but joy wants not its allay of bitterness.

As the soundest health is less perceived than the lightest malady; so the
highest joy touches us less deep than the smallest sorrow.

We are in love with anguish; we often fly from pleasure; when we purchase it,
costeth it not more than it is worth?

Reflection is the business of man; a sense of his state is his first duty: But
who remembereth himself in joy? Is it not in mercy, then, that sorrow is
a^^^^^d unto us?

Man foreseeth the evil that is come; he remembereth it when it is past: He
considers no^ that the thought of affliction wounds deeper than the
affliction itself. Think not of thy pain, but when it is upon th^e, and thou
shall avoid what most would hurt thee.

He who weepeth before he needs, weepeth more than he needs: And why? but
that he loves weeping.

The stag weepeth not till the spear is lifted up against him; nor do the tears
of the beaver fall till the hound is ready to seize him: Man anticipateth
death, by the apprehension of it; and the fear is greater misery, than the
event itself.

Be always prepared to give an account of thine actions: And the best death is
that which is least premeditated.

CHAP. VI. Or JUDGMENT.
THE greatest bounties given to man are, judgment and will; happy is he who
misapplieth them not.

As the torrent that rolieth down the mountains destroys all that is borne
away by it; so does common opinion overwhelm reason, in him who submits to
it without saying, What is thy foundation?

See that what thou receivest is truth, be not the shadow of it: What thou
acknowledgest as convincing, is often but plausible. Be firm, be constant,
determine for thyself; so shall thou be answerable only for thy own weakness.

Say not that the event proves the wisdom of the action, remember man is not
above the reach of accidents.

Condemn not the judgment of another, because it differs from thine own; may
not even both be in an error?

When thou esteemest a man for his titles, and contemnest the stranger because
he wants them; judge thou not of the camel by his bridle?

Think not thou art revenged of thine enemy when thou slayest him: Thou put
him beyond thy reach, thou give him quiet, and thou take from thyself all
means of hurting him.

Was thy mother incontinent, and grieveth it thee to be told of it? Is frailty
in thy wife, and art thou pained at the reproach of it? He who despises thee
for it, condemns himself. Art thou answerable for the vices of another?

Disregard not a jewel, because thou possessest it, neither enhance thou the
value of a thing, because it is another's. Possession to the wise adds to the
price of it.

Honor not thy wife the less because she is in thy power; and despise him that
has said, Would thou love her less, marry her! What has put her into thy
power, but her confidence in thy virtue? Should thou love her less for being
more obliged to her?

If thou were just in thy courtship of her; though thou neglectest her while
thou have her, yet shall her loss be bitter to thy soul.

He who thinks another best, only because he possesses her; if he be not
wiser than thee, at least he is more happy.

Weigh not the loss thy friend has suffered by the tears he sheddeth for it;
the greatest griefs are above these expressions of them.

Esteem not an action, because it is done with noise and pomp; the noblest soul
is that which does great things, and is not moved in the doing of them.

Fame astonisheth the ear of him who hears it, but tranquillity rejoiceth the
heart that is possessed of it.

Attribute not the good actions of another to bad causes. Thou can not know
his heart; but the world will know by this, that thine is full of envy.

There is not in hypocrisy more vice than folly; to be honest, is as easy as to
seem so.

Be more ready to acknowledge a benefit than to revenge an injury; so shall
thou have more benefits than injuries done unto thee.

Be more ready to love than to hate; so shall thou be loved by more than hate
thee.

Be willing to commend, and slow to censure; so shall praise be upon thy
virtues; and the eye of enmity shall be blind to thy imperfections.

When thou do good, do it because it is good; not because men esteem it: When
thou avoidest evil, fly it because it is evil; not because men speak against
it: Be honest for the love of honesty, and thou shall be uniformly so: He that
does it without principle, is wavering.

Wish rather to be reproved by the wise, than to be applauded by him who has
no understanding: When they tell thee of a fault, they suppose thou can
improve; the other, when he praises thee, thinks thee like unto himself.

Accept not an office for which thou art not qualified, left he who knows
more of it despise thee.

Instruct not another in that wherein thyself art ignorant; when he sees it,
he will upbraid thee.

Expect not a friendship with him who has injured thee: He who suffers the
wrong, may forgive it; but he who does it, never will be well with him.

Lay not too great obligations on him thou wishes thy friend: behold! the
sense of them will drive him from thee: A little benefit alienateth friendship,
a great one makes an enemy.

Nevertheless, ingratitude is not in the nature of man; neither is his anger
irreconcilable: He hates to be put in mind of a debt he cannot pay; he is
ashamed in the presence of him whom he has injured.

Repine not at the good of a stranger; neither rejoice thou in the evil that
befalls thine enemy: Wishes thou others should do thus by thee?

Would thou enjoy the good will of all men? Let thine own benevolence be
universal. If thou obtainest it not by this, no other means could give it thee:
And know, though thou have it not, thou have the greater pleasure of having
merited it.

CHAP. VII. PRESUMPTION.
PRIDE and meanness seem incompatible, but man reconcileth contrarieties; he is
at once the most amiable and the most arrogant of all creatures.

Presumption is the bane of reason; it is the nurse of error; yet it is
congenial with reason in us.

Who is there that judges not either too highly of himself, or thinks not to
meanly of others?

Our Creator himself escapes not our presumption: How then shall we be safe
from one another.

What is the origin of superstition? and whence arises false worship? From our
presuming to reason about what is above our reach, to comprehend what is
incomprehensible.

Limited and weak as our understandings are, we employ not even their little
forces as we ought; we soar not high enough in our approaches to God's
greatness, we give not wing enough to our ideas, when we enter into the
adoration of Divinity.

Man, who fears to breathe a whisper against his earthly sovereign, trembles
not to arraign the dispensations of his God; He forgets his majesty, and
rejudgeth his judgments.

He who dares not repeat the name of his prince without honor, yet blusheth
not to call that of his Creator to be witness to a lie.

He who would hear the sentence of the magistrate with silence, yet dares to
plead with the Eternal: He attempteth to soothe him with entreaties, to flatter
him with promises, to agree with him upon conditions; nay, to brave and murmur
at him if his request is not granted.

Why art thou unpunished, O man! in thy impiety, but that this is not the day
of retribution?

Be not like unto those who fight with the thunder; nor dare thou to deny thy
Creator thy prayers, because he chastises thee. Thy madness is on thine own
head in this; thy impiety hurts no one but thyself.

Why boasts man, that he is the favorite of his Maker; yet neglects to pay
his thanks, his adorations for it? How suiteth such a life with a belief so
haughty? Man, who is truly but a mote in the wide expanse, believes the whole
earth and Heaven created for him. He thinks the whole frame of nature has
interest in his well-being.

As the fool, while the images tremble on the bosom of the water, thinks,
that trees, towns, and the wide horizon, are dancing to do him pleasure; so
man, while nature performs her destined course, believes that all her motions
are but to entertain his eye.

While he courts the rays of the sun to warm him, he supposes it made only to
be of use to him; while he traceth the moon in her nightly path, he believes
she was created to do him pleasure.

Fool to thine own pride! be humble: Know thou art not the cause why the world
holds its course; for thee are not made the vicissitudes of summer and winter.

No change would follow, if thy whole race existed not; thou art but one among
millions that are blessed in it.

Exalt not thyself to the Heavens; for, lo! the angels are above thee: Nor
disdain thy fellow-inhabitants of the earth, in that they are beneath thee. Are
they not the work of the same hand?

Thou who art happy by the mercy of thy Creator, how dare thou in wantonness
put others of his creatures to torture? Beware that it return not upon thee.

Serve they not all the same universal master with thee? Has he not appointed
unto each its laws? Has he not the care of their preservation? and dare thou
to infringe it?

Set not thy judgment above that of all the earth; neither condemn, as
falsehood, what agrees not with thine own apprehension. Who gave thee the power
of determining for others? or who took from the world the right of choice?

How many things have been rejected, which now are received as truths? How
many, now received as truths, shall in their turn be despised? Of what then can
man be certain?

Do the good that thou know, and happiness shall be unto thee. Virtue is
more thy business here, than wisdom.

Truth and falsehood, have they not the same appearance in what we understand
not? What then, but our presumption, can determine between them?

We easily believe what is above our comprehension; or we are proud to pretend
it, that it may appear we understand it. Is not this folly and arrogance?

Who is it, that affirms most boldly? who is it that holds his opinion most
obstinately? Even he who has most ignorance; for he also has most pride.

Every man, when he lays hold of an opinion, desires to remain in it; but
most of all, he who has most presumption. He contenteth not himself to betray
his own soul into it, but he will impose it on others to believe in it also.

Say not that truth is established by years, or that in a multitude of
believers there is certainty.

One human proposition has as much authority as another, if reason makes not
the difference.

BOOK III. Of the AFFECTIONS of MAN, which are hurtful to himself and others.
CHAP. I. COVETOUSNESS.
RICHES are not worthy a strong attention; therefore an earnest care of
obtaining them is unjustifiable.

The desire of what man calls good, the joy he takes in possessing it, is
grounded only in opinion. Take not up that from the vulgar; examine the worth
of things thyself, and thou shall not be covetous.

An immoderate desire of riches, is a poison lodged in the soul. It
contaminates and destroys every thing that was good in it. It is no sooner
rooted there than all virtue, all honesty, all natural affection, fly before
the face of it.

The covetous would sell his children for gold; his parent might die ere he
would open his coffer; nay, he considers not himself in respect of it; in the
search of happiness, he makes himself unhappy.

As the man who sells his house to purchase ornaments for the embellishment
of it; even so is he who gives up peace in the search of riches, in hope he
may be happy in enjoying them.

Where covetousness reigns, know that the soul is poor. Whosoever accounts not
riches the principal good of man, will not throw away all other goods in the
pursuit of them.

Whosoever fears not poverty as the greatest evil of his nature, will not
purchase to himself all other evils in the avoiding of it.

Thou fool! is not virtue of more worth than riches? is not guilt more base
than poverty? Enough for his necessities is in the power of every man; be
content with it, and thy happiness shall smile at the sorrows of him who
heapeth up more.

Nature has hid gold beneath the earth, as unworthy to be seen; silver has
she placed, where thou tramplest it under thy feet. Means she not by this to
inform thee, that gold is not worthy thy regard, that silver is beneath thy
notice?

Covetousness burieth under ground millions of wretches; these dig for their
hard masters, what returns the injury? what makes them more miserable than
their slaves?

The earth is barren of good things where she hoardeth up treasure: Where gold
is in her bowels, there no herb grows.

As the horse finds not there his grass, nor the mule his provender; as the
fields of corn laugh not on the sides of the hills; as the olive holds not
forth there her fruits, nor the vine her clusters: Even so no good dwells in
the breast of him, whose heart broodeth over his treasure.

Riches are servants to the wise; but they are tyrants over the soul of the
fool.

The covetous serves his gold; it serves not him. He possesses his wealth,
as the sick does a fever; it burns and tortureth him, and will not quit him
unto death.

Has not gold destroyed the virtue of millions? did it ever add to the
goodness of any? Is it not most abundant with the worst of men? wherefore then
should thou desire to be distinguished by possessing it? Have not the wisest
been those who have had least of it? and is not wisdom happiness?

Have not the worst of thy species possessed the greatest portions of it? and
has not their end been miserable?

Poverty wants many things; but covetousness denies itself all.

The covetous, can be good to no man; but he is to none so cruel as to himself.

Be industrious to procure gold, and be generous in the disposal of it. Man
never is so happy, as when he gives happiness unto another.

CHAP. II. PROFUSION.
IF there be a vice greater than the hoarding up of riches; it is the employing
them to useless purposes.

He that prodigally lavisheth that which he has to spare, robs the poor of
what Nature gives him a right unto.

He who squandereth away his treasure, refuses the means to do good: He
denies himself the practice of virtues, whose reward is (...) their hand,
whose end is no other than his own happiness.

It is more difficult to be well with riches, than to be at ease under the want
of them. Man governs himself much easier in poverty, than in abundance.

Poverty requires but one virtue, patience to support it: The rich, if he has
not charity, temperance, prudence, and many more, is guilty.

The poor has only the good of his own state committed unto him; the rich is
entrusted with the welfare of thousands.

He that gives away his treasure wisely, gives away his plagues: He that
retains their increase, heapeth up sorrows.

Refuse not unto the stranger, that which he wants; deny not unto thy
brother, that which thou want thyself.

Know, there is more delight in being without what thou have given, than in
possessing millions which thou know not the use of.

CHAP. III. REVENGE.
THE root of revenge is in the weakness of the soul; the most abject and
timorous are the most addicted to it.

Who torture those they hate, but cowards? Who murder those they rob, but the
base and timid?

The feeling an injury, must be previous to the revenging it: but the noble
mind disdaineth to say it hurts me.

If the injury is not below thy notice, he that does it unto thee, in that
makes himself so: Would thou enter the lists with thine inferior?

Requite with kindness the man who attempteth to wrong thee: do good to him who
would give thee disquiet.

In this thou not only preservest thine own peace, but thou inflictest
punishment, without stooping to employ revenge against him.

As the tempest and the thunder affect not the sun or the stars, but spend
their fury on stones and trees below; so injuries ascend not to the souls of
the great, but waste themselves on such as those are who offer them.

Poorness of spirit will actuate revenge; greatness of soul despises the
offense: nay, it does good unto him who intended to have disburbed it.

Why seek thou vengeance, O man! with what purpose is it that thou pursuest
it? Think thou to pain thine adversary by it? Know, that thyself feel its
greatest torment.

Revenge gnaweth the heart of him who is infected with it; while he against
whom it is intended, remains easy.

It is unjust in the anguish it inflicts; therefore, Nature intended it not for
thee: Needs he who is injured, more pain? or ought he to add force to the
affliction which another has cast upon him?

The man who meditateth revenge, is not content with the mischief he has
received; he adds to his anguish the punishment due unto another: While he
whom he seeks to hurt, goes his way laughing; he makes himself merry at
this addition to his misery.

Revenge is painful in the intent, and it is dangerous in the execution: Seldom
does the axe fall, where he who lifts it up intended; and lo! he remembereth
not that it must recoil against himself.

Whilst the revengeful seeks his enemy's hurt, be oftentimes procures his
own destruction; while he aims at one of the eyes of his adversary, lo! he
puts out both his own.

If he attain not his end, he lamenteth it; if he succeed, he repents of it:
The fear of justice takes away the peace of his own soul; the care to hide him
from it, destroys that of his friend.

Can the death of thine adversary satiate thy hatred? Can the setting him at
rest restore thy peace?

Would thou make him sorry for the offense, conquer him, by sparing him: In
death he owneth not thy superiority; nor feels he any more the power of thy
wrath.

In revenge, there should be a triumph of the avenger; and he who has injured
him, should feel his displeasure: He should suffer pain from it, and should
repent him of the cause.

This is the revenge inspired from anger; but that which make thee greater, is
to repay injuries with kindness.

Murder for an injury, arises only from cowardice: He who inflicteth it
fears that the enemy may live, and avenge himself.

Death ends the quarrel; but it restores not the reputation: Killing is an
act of caution, not of courage; it is safe, but it is not honorable.

There is nothing so easy as to revenge an offense, but nothing is so
honorable as to pardon it.

The greatest victory man can obtain, is over himself: He that disdaineth to
feel an injury, retorteth it upon him who offers it.

When thou meditatest revenge, thou confessest that thou feel the wrong;
when thou complainest, thou acknowledgest thyself hurt by it: Meanest thou to
add this triumph to the pride of ^hine enemy?

That cannot be an injury which is not felt; how then can he who despises it
revenge it?

If thou think it dishonorable to bear an offense, more is in thy power; thou
may conquer it.

Good offices will make a man ashamed to be thine enemy; greatness of soul will
terrify him from the thought of hurting thee.

The greater the wrong, the more glory is in pardoning it; and by how much the
more justifiable would be revenge, by so much the more honor is in clemency,

Have thou a right to be a judge in thine own cause; to be a party in the Act,
and yet to pronounce sentence on it? Before thou condemnest, let another say it
is just.

The revengeful is feared, and therefore he is hated: but he that is endued
with clemency, is adored: The praise of his actions remains forever; and the
love of the world attends him.

CHAP. IV. CRUELTY, HATRED, and ENVY.
REVENGE is detestable: What then is cruelty? Lo! it possesses the mischiefs
of the other; but it wants even the pretense of its provocations.

Men disown it as not of their nature; they are ashamed of it, as a stranger to
their hearts: Do they not call it inhumanity?

Whence then is her origin? unto what that is human, owes she her existence?
Her father is Fear; and, behold Dismay! is it not her mother?

The hero lifts his sword against the enemy that resists; but no sooner
does he submit, then he is satisfied.

It is not in honor, to trample on the object that fears; it is not in
virtue, to insult what is beneath it: Subdue the insolent, and spare the
humble, and thou art at the height of victory.

He who wants virtue to arrive at this end, he who has not courage to ascend
thus unto it; lo! he supplieth the place of conquest by murder, of sovereignty
by slaughter.

He who fears all, strikes at all: why are tyrants cruel, but because they
live in terror?

The our will tear the carcass, though be dared not look it in the face while
living; the hound that hunteth it to the death, mangleth it not afterward.

Civil wars are the most bloody, because those who fight them are cowards:
Conspirators are murderers, because in death there is silence: Is it not fear
that tells them they may be betrayed?

That thou may not be cruel, set thyself too high for hatred; that thou
may not be inhuman, place thyself above the reach or envy.

Every man may be viewed in two lights; in one he will be troublesome, in the
other less offensive: Choose to see him in that which he least hurts thee,
then shall thou not do hurt unto him.

What is there that a man may not turn unto his good? In that which offends
us most, there is more ground for complaint than hatred. Man would be
reconciled to him of whom he complains: What murdereth he, but what he hates?

If thou art prevented of a benefit, fly not into a rage; the loss of thy
reason is the want of a greater.

Because thou art robbed of thy cloak, would thou strip thyself of thy coat
also?

When thou enviest the man who possesses honors; when his titles and his
greatness raise thy indignation, seek to know whence they came unto him;
enquire by what means he was possessed of them, and thine enmity will be turned
into pity.

If the same fortune were offered unto thee, at the same price, be assured, if
thou were wise, thou would refuse it.

What is the pay for titles, but flattery? How does man purchase power, but by
being a slave to him who gives it?

Would thou lose thine own liberty, to be able to take away that of another?
or can thou envy him who does so?

Man purchases nothing of his superiors, but for a price; and that price, is
it not more than the value? Would thou pervert the customs of the world?
would thou have the purchase and the price also?

As thou can not envy what thou would not accept, disdain this cause of
hatred; and drive from thy soul this occasion of the parent of cruelty.

If thou possessest honor, can thou envy that which is obtained at the
expense of it? if thou know the value of virtue, pitiest thou not those who
have bartered it so meanly?

When thou have taught thyself to bear the seeming good of men without
repining, thou will hear of their real happiness with pleasure.

If thou see good things fall to one who deserves them, thou will rejoice in
it; for virtue is happy in the prosperity of the virtuous.

He who rejoiceth in the happiness of another, increases by it his own.

CHAP. V. HEAVINESS of HEART.
THE soul of the cheerful forces a smile upon the face of affliction; but the
despendence of the sad deadeneth even the brightness of joy.

What is the source of sadness, but a feebleness of the soul? what gives it
power, but the want of spirit? Rouse thyself to the combat; and she quitteth
the field before thou strikest.

She is an enemy to thy race, therefore drive her from thy heart; she poisoneth
the sweets of thy life, therefore suffer her not to enter thy dwelling.

She raises the loss of a straw to the destruction of thy fortune. While she
vexes thy soul about trifles, she robs thee of thine attention to the
things of consequence: Behold! she but prophesies what she seems to relate
unto thee.

She spreads drowsiness as a vail over thy virtues; she hides them from
those who would honor thee on beholding them; she entangleth and keeps them
down, while she makes it most necessary for thee to exert them.

Lo! she oppresses thee with evil; and she tieth down thine hands, when they
would throw the load from off thee.

If thou would avoid what is base, if thou would disdain what is cowardly,
if thou would drive from thy heart what is unjust, suffer not sadness to lay
hold upon it.

Suffer it not to cover itself with the face of piety; let it not deceive thee
with a show of wisdom. Religion pays honor to thy Maker: Let it not be
clouded with melancholy: Wisdom makes thee happy; know then, that sorrow is to
her looks a stranger.

For what should man be sorrowful, but for afflictions? Why should his heart
give up joy, when the causes of it are not removed from him? Is not this being
miserable for the sake of misery?

As the mourner who looks sad because he is hired to do so, who weepeth
because his tears are paid for; such is the man who suffers his heart to be
sad, not because he suffers aught, but because he is gloomy.

It is not the occasion that produces the sorrow; for behold the same thing
shall be to another rejoicing.

Ask men if their sadness makes things the better, and themselves will confess
to thee that it is folly; nay, they will praise him who bears his ills with
patience, who makes head against misfortune with courage. Applause should be
followed by imitation.

Sadness is against nature, for it troubles her motions: Lo! it rendereth
distasteful whatsoever she has made amiable.

As the Oak falls before the tempest, and raises not its head again; so
boweth the heart of man to the force of sadness, and so returns it unto its
strength no more.

As the snow melts upon the mountains, from the rain that trickleth down
their sides, even so is beauty washed from off the cheeks by tears; and neither
the one nor the other restores itself again for ever.

As the pearl is dissolved by the vinegar, which seems at first only to
obscure its surface; so is thy happiness, O man! swallowed up by heaviness of
heart, though at first it seems only to cover it with its shadow.

Behold sadness in the public streets! Cast thine eye upon her in the places of
resort. Does any look upon her? avoideth she not every one? and does not every
one fly from her presence?

See how she droopeth her head, like the flower whose root is cut asunder! see
how she fixes her eyes upon earth! see how they serve her to no purpose but
for weeping!

Is there in her mouth discourse? is there in her heart the love of society? is
there in her soul reason? Ask her the cause, and she knows it not; enquire
the occasion, and behold there is none!

Yet does her strength fail her: Lo! at length she sinketh into the grave, and
no one says, What is become of her?

Have thou understanding, and see thou not this? have thou piety, and
perceivest thou not thine error?

God created thee in mercy: Had he not intended thee to be happy, his
beneficence would not have called thee into existence; how dare thou then to
fly in the f^ his majesty?

While thou art most happy with innocence, thou do him most honor, and what
is thy discontent, but murmuring against him?

Created he not all things liable to changes; and dare thou to weep at their
changing?

If we know the law of nature, wherefore do we complain of it? if we are
ignorant of it, what should we accuse, but our blindness to what every moment
gives us proof of?

Know that it is not thou that art to give laws to the world; thy part is to
submit to them as thou find them. If they distress thee, thy lamenting it
but adds to thy torment.

Be not deceived with fair pretenses, nor suppose that sorrow heals
misfortune.

It is a poison under the color of a remedy: While it pretends to draw the
arrow from thy breast, lo! it plungeth it into thine heart.

While sadness separateth thee from thy friends, does it not say, Thou art
unfit for conversation? While it drives thee into corners, does it not
proclaim, that it is ashamed of itself?

It is not in thy nature to meet the arrows of ill-fortune unhurt; nor does
reason require it of thee: It is thy duty to bear misfortune like a man; but
thou must first also feel it like one.

Tears may drop from thine eyes, though virtue falls not from thine heart: Be
thou careful only that there is cause, and that they flow not too abundantly.

The greatness of the evil is not to be reckoned from the number of tears shed
for it. The greatest griefs are above these testimonies, as the greatest joys
are beyond utterance.

What is there that weakeneth the soul like grief? what depresseth it like
sadness? Is the sorrowful prepared for noble enterprises? or armeth he himself
in the cause of virtue?

Subject not thyself to ills, where there are in return no advantages; neither
sacrifice thou the means of good, unto that which is in itself an evil.

BOOK IV. Of the ADVANTAGES Man may acquire over his FELLOW CREATURES.
CHAP. I. NOBILITY and HONOR.
NOBILITY resideth not but in the soul: nor is there true honor except in
virtue.

The favor of princes may be bought by rank and vices; titles may be purchased
for money: But these are not true honor.

Crimes cannot exalt the man who commits them to real glory; neither can gold
make men noble.

When titles are the reward of virtue, when he is set on high who has served
his country; he who bestows the honors has glory, like as he who receives
them; and the world is benefitted by it.

Would thou wish to be raised for men know not what? or would thou that
they should say, Why is this?

When the virtues of the hero descend to his children, his titles accompany
them well; but when he who possesses them is unlike unto him who deserved
them, lo! do they not call him degenerate?

Hereditary honor is accounted the most noble; but reason speaks in the
cause of him who has acquired it.

He who, meritless himself, appealeth to the actions of his ancestors for his
greatness, is like the thief who claims protection by flying to the pagod.

What good is it to the blind, that his parents could see? what benefit is it
to the dumb, that his grandfather was eloquent? Even so, what is it to the
mean, that their predecessors were noble?

A mind disposed to virtue makes great the possessor of it; and without
titles, it will raise him above the vulgar.

He will acquire honor, while others receive it; and will he not say unto
them, Such were the men whom you glory in being derived from?

As the shadow waits on the substance, even so true honor attends on
virtue.

Say not that honor is the child of boldness, nor believe thou that the hazard
of life alone can pay the price of it: It is not to the action that it is due,
but to the manner of performing it.

All are not called to the guiding the helm of state; neither are their armies
to be commanded by every one: Do well in that which is committed to thy charge,
and praise shall remain upon thee.

Say not that difficulties are necessary to be conquered, or that labor and
danger must be in the way to renown. The woman who is chaste, is she not
praised? the man who is honest, deserves he not to be honored?

The thirst of fame is violent; the desire of honor is powerful; and he who
gave them to us, gave them for great purposes.

When desperate actions are necessary to the public; when our lives are to be
exposed for the good of our country: what can add force to virtue, but ambition?

It is not the receiving honor that delights the noble mind; its pride is
the deserving it.

Is it not better men should say, Why has not this man a statue? than that
they should ask, Why he has one?

The ambitious will always be first in the crowd; he presses forward, he
looks not behind him. More anguish is it ^o his soul, to see one before him,
than joy to leave thousands at a distance.

The root of ambition is in every man; but it rises not in all: Fear keeps
it down in some; in many it is suppressed by modesty.

It is the inner garment of the soul; the first thing put on by it with the
flesh, and the last it lays down at its separation from it.

It is an honor to thy nature when worthily employed; when thou directest it
to wrong purposes, it shameth and destroys thee.

In the breast of the traitor ambition is covered; hypocrisy hides its face
under her mantle; and cool dissimulation furnishes it with smooth words: but
in the end, men shall see what it is.

The serpent loses not his sting, though benumbed with the frost; the tooth of
the viper is not broken, though the cold closes his mouth: Take pity on his
state, and he will show thee his spirit; warm him in thy bosom, and he will
requite thee with death.

He that is truly virtuous, loves virtue for herself; he disdaineth the
applause which ambition aims after.

How pitiable were the state of virtue, if she could not be happy but from
another's praise? She is too noble to seek recompense, and no more will, than
can be rewarded.

The higher the sun arises, the less shadow does he make: Even so the greater
is the virtue, the lest does it covet praise; yet cannot it avoid its reward in
honors.

Glory, like a shadow, flies him who pursues it; but it follows at the
heels of him who would fly from it: If thou courtest it without merit, thou
shall never attain unto it; if thou deservest it, though thou hidest thyself,
it will never forsake thee.

Pursue that which is honorable, do that which is right; and the applause of
thine own conscience will be more joy to thee, than the shouts of millions who
know not that thou deservest them.

CHAP. II. SCIENCE and LEARNING.
THE noblest employment of the mind of man is the study of the works of his
Creator.

To him whom the science of nature delights, every object brings a proof of
his God; every thing that proves it, gives cause of ^doration.

His mind is lifted up to heaven every moment; his life is one continued act of
devotion.

Casts he his eye toward the clouds, finds he not the heavens full of his
wonders? Looks he down (...) the earth, does not the worm proclaim to him,
Less than Omnipotence could not have formed me?

While the planets perform their courses; while the sun remains in his place;
while the comet wandereth through the liquid air, and returns to its destined
road again: Who but thy God, O man! could have formed them? what but infinite
wisdom could have appointed them their laws?

Behold, how awful their splendour! yet do they not diminish: Lo, how rapid
their motions! yet one runs not in the way of another.

Look down upon the earth, and see her produce, examine her bowels, and behold
what they contain! Has not wisdom and power ordained the whole?

Who bids the grass to spring up? who waters it at its due seasons?
Behold! the ox croppeth it; the horse and the sheep, feed they not upon it? Who
is he that provideth it for them?

Who gives increase to the corn which thou sowest? who returns it to thee a
thousand fold?

Who ripeneth for thee the olive in its time? and the grape, though thou
know not the cause of it?

Can the meanest fly create itself? or were thou ought less than God, could
thou have fashioned it?

The beasts feel that they exist, but they wonder not at it; they rejoice in
their life, but they know not that it shall end: Each performs its course in
succession; nor is there a loss of one species in thousand generations.

Thou who see the whole as admirable as its parts, can thou better employ
thine eye, than in tracing out thy Creator's greatness in them? thy mind, than
in examining their wonders?

Power and mercy are displayed in their formation; justice and goodness shine
forth in the provision that is made for them: All are happy in their several
ways; nor envieth one the other.

What is the study of words compared with this? In what science is knowledge,
but in the study of nature?

When thou have adored the fabric, enquire into its use; for know, the earth
produces nothing but what may be good to thee. Are not food and raiment, and
the remedies for thy diseases, all derived from this source alone?

Who is wise then, but he that knows it? who has understanding, but he that
contemplateth it? For the rest, whatever science has most utility, whatever
knowledge has least vanity, prefer these unto the others; and profit of them
for the sake of thy neighbor.

To live, and to die; to command, and to obey; to do, and to suffer: Are not
these all that thou have further to care about? Morality shall teach thee
these; the Oeconony of life shall lay them before thee.

Behold! they are written in thy heart, and thou need only to be reminded of
them: They are easy of conception; be attentive, and thou shall retain them.

All other sciences are vain, all other knowledge is boast: Lo! it is not
necessary or beneficial to man; nor does it make him more good, or more honest.

Piety to thy God, and benevolence to thy fellow creatures, are they not thy
great duties? What shall teach thee the one, like the study of his works? what
shall inform thee of the other, like understanding thy dependencies?

BOOK V. Of NATURAL ACCIDENTS.
CHAP. I. PROSPERITY and ADVERSITY.
LET not prosperity elate thine heart above measure; neither depress thy soul
unto the grave, because fortune bears hard against thee.

Her smiles are not stable, therefore build not thy confidence upon them; her
frowns endure not for ever, therefore let hope teach thee patience.

To bear adversity well, is difficult; but to be temperate in prosperity, is
the height of wisdom.

Good and ^ll are the tests by which thou art to know thy constancy; nor is
there aught else that can tell thee the powers of thine own soul: Be therefore
upon the watch, when they are upon thee.

Behold prosperity, how sweetly she flattereth thee! how insensibly she robs
thee of thy strength and thy vigor!

Tho thou have been constant in ill fortune; though thou have been invincible
in distress; yet by her thou art conquered, not knowing that thy strength
returns not again; and yet that thou again may need it.

Affliction moves our enemies to pity; success and happiness cause even our
friends to envy.

In adversity, is the seed of well-doing; it is the nurse of heroism and
boldness: Who that has enough will endanger himself to have more? who that is
at ease, will set his life on the hazard.

True virtue will act under all circumstances; but men see most of its effects,
when accidents concur with it.

In adversity, man sees himself abandoned by others; he finds that all his
hopes are centered within himself: He rouseth his soul, he encountereth his
difficulties, and they yield before him.

In prosperity, he fancieth himself safe; he thinks he is beloved of all that
smile about his table: He grows careless and remiss; he sees not the danger
that is before him: He trusts to others, and in the end they deceive him.

Every man can advise his own soul in distress; but prosperity blinds the
truth.

Better is the sorrow that leads to contentment, than the joy that rendereth
man unable to endure distress, and afterward plungeth him into it.

Our passions dictate to us in all our extremes. Moderation is the effect of
wisdom.

Be upright in thy whole life; be content in all its changes: So shall thou
make thy profit out of all occurrences; so shall every thing that happens
unto thee, be the source of praise.

The wise man makes every thing the means of advantage; and with the same
countenance beholds he all the faces of fortune: He governs the good, he
conquereth the evil; he is unmoved in all.

Presume not in prosperity, neither despair in adversity: Court not dangers,
nor meanly fly from before them: Dare to despise whatever will not remain with
thee.

Let not adversity tear off the wings of hope; neither let prosperity obscure
the light of prudence.

He who despaireth of the end, shall never attain unto it; and he who sees not
the pit, shall perish therein.

He who calls prosperity his good; who has said unto her, With thee will I
establish my happiness: Lo! he builds his foundation on the sand, which the
rain and storms wash away.

As the water that passes from the mountains, kisseth, in its way to the
ocean, every field that bordereth on the rivers; as it tarrieth not in any
place; even so fortune visits the sons of men: Her motion is incessant, she
will dot stay; she is as unstable as the winds, how then will thou hold her?
When she kisseth thee, thou art blessed; but, behold! as thou turnest to thank
her, she is gone unto another.

CHAP. II. PAIN and SICKNESS.
THE sickness of the body affects even the soul; the one cannot be in health
without the other.

Pain is of all ills that which is most felt; and it is that which from nature
has the fewest remedies.

When thy constancy fails thee, call in thy reason; when thy patience
quitteth thee, ^^ll in thy hope.

To suffer, is a necessity entailed upon thy nature; would thou that maricles
should protect thee from it? or shall thou repine, because it happens unto
thee, when, lo! it happens unto all?

It is injustice to expect exemption from what thou were born unto; submit with
modesty to the laws of thy condition.

Would thou say to the seasons, Pass not on, lest I grow old? Is it not
better to suffer well that which thou can not avoid?

Pain that endures long, is moderate; blush therefore to complain of it: That
which is violent, is short; behold! thou see the end of it.

Thy body was created to be subservient to thy soul; while thou afflictest the
soul for its pains, behold thou set that above it.

As the wise afflicts not himself, because a thorn teareth his garment; so
the patient grieveth not his soul, because that which covers it is injured.

CHAP. III. DEATH.
AS the production of the metal proves the work of the alchymist; so is death
the test of our lives, the assay which shows the standard of all our actions.

Would thou judge of a life, examine the period of it; the end crowns the
attempt: And where dissimulation is no more the truth appears.

He has not spent his life ill, who knows to die well; neither can he have
lost all his time, who employeth the last portion of it to his honor.

He was not born in vain, who dies as he ought; neither has he lived
unprofitably, who dies happily.

He that considers he is to die, is content while he lives; He who striveth
to forget it, has no pleasure in any thing; his joy appears to him a jewel,
which he expects every moment he shall lose.

Would thou learn to die nobly! let thy vices die before thee. Happy is he
who ends the business of his life, before his death; who when the hour of it
comes has nothing to do but to die; who witheth not delay, because he has no
longer use for time.

Avoid not death, for it is a weakness; fear it not, for thou understandest not
what it is: All that thou certainly know, is, that it puts an end to thy
sorrows.

Think not the longest life the happiest; that which is best employed, does man
the most honor: himself shall rejoice after death, in the advantages of it.

THIS IS THE COMPLETE Economy of Human Life.
THE FOLLOWING BOOKS, Lately printed by HUGH GAIN, are sold at his Book-Store
and Printing-Office, at the Bible, in Hanover-Square.

THE CONDUCTOR GENERALIS: OR, THE Office, Duty, and Authority of JUSTICES of
the PEACE, High-Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs, Coroners, Constables, Gaolers,
Jurymen, and Overseers of the Poor.

AN INTRODUCTION to the LAW RELATIVE TO TRIALS AT NISI PRIUS. The fifth
Edition, with Additions and Corrections. By Francis Buller, Esquire, of the
Middle Temple.

THE YOUNG CLERK's VADE MECUM; OR, COMPLETE LAW TUTOR: Being a useful
Collection of the most approved Precedents in the Law.

THE Young Gentleman and Ladies MONITOR, AND English Teacher's ASSISTANT: Being
a Collection of select Pieces from our best modern Writers, and esteemed the
best Book for Schools of any in America.

THE SCHOOLMASTER'S ASSISTANT: Being a Compendium of Arithmetic, both practical
and theoretical; in five Parts.

HERVEY's MEDITATIONS. Two Vols. bound in one.

A neat Edition of POMFRET's POEMS. On fine Paper.

Ash's Grammatical Institutes: Or, an easy Introduction to Dr. Lowth's English
Grammar.

THE AMERICAN INSTRUCTOR: Or, Young Man's Best Companion.

THE ART OF SPEAKING: Containing an Essay, in which are given Rules for
expressing properly the principal Passions and Humors which occur in Reading
or public Speaking.

Corderii Colioquiorum Centuria Selecta. By J. CLARK.

SYSTEM OF RHETORIC. By JOHN HOLMES.

Riggs's New American LATIN GRAMMAR: Or, a complete Introduction to the Latin
Tongue.

BLANK BOOKS, STATIONARY, etc.
IMPERIAL, Royal, Medium, and Demi Paper. Folio and Quarto Post, gilt and
plain. Thin oiled Paper for tracing Maps. Propatria and pot Paper of every
Size. Imperial, Royal, Medium, Demi, and Propatria Ledgers, Day-Books and
Journals, in rough Calf and other Bindings. Receipt Books, of all Sizes, with
or without Clasps. Best Office Quils and Pens. Sealing-Wax, and Waters in Boxes
Sand, and Sand-Boxes. Middleton's black Lead Pencils. Razors, and shaving
Boxes. Most excellent Parchment. Counting House and other Penknives. Gentlemen
and Ladies Pocket-Books, with and without Instruments. Powder-Horns and
Shot-Pouches. Very neat Silver mounted double and single Temple Spectacles.
Ivory and Ass-Skin Memorandum-Books. Horsemen's and Pocket Pistols. Very neat
Silver mounted H^ngers. Leather Pocket Ink-Pots. Large and small Pewter
Standishes. Red and black Ink-Powder. Backgammon Tables, with Dice, Men, and
Boxes; and Dice by the Pair, separate. Steel and Leather Spectacle Cases. Large
and small Spy-Glasses. Letter Files, with Laces. Scales and Dividers. Surveyors
Compasses and Chains. Mathematical Instruments. Proportional Dividers, etc.
etc.
PATENT MEDICINES.
ANDERSON's and Hooper's Pills. Turlington's Balsam of Life. Dr. Ryan's
incomparable Worm-destroying Sugar Plumbs. Jesuit's Drops. Betton's British
Oil. Doctor James's Fever Powders. Balsam of Honey. Stoughton's Bitters.
Nurenburgh Salve. Harleam Oil, etc. etc.

