OBSERVATIONS UPON NEGRO-SLAVERY.

SO I RETURNED AND CONSIDERED ALL THE OPPRESSIONS THAT ARE DONE UNDER THE SUN:
AND BEHOLD THE TEARS OF SUCH AS WERE OPPRESSED, AND THEY HAD NO COMFORTER; AND
ON THE SIDE OF THEIR OPPRESSORS THERE WAS POWER, BUT THEY HAD NO COMFORTER.

Ecclesiastes, iv. 1. SHALL NOT THE LAND TREMBLE FOR THIS, AND EVERY ONE MOURN
THAT DWELLS THEREIN.

Amos, viii. 8. A NEW EDITION. BY CHARLES CRAWFORD, ESQUIRE.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by ELEAZER OSWALD, in Market-street, between
Fourth and Fifth-streets. M,DCC,XC,

CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. NEGRO-SLAVERY totally i^consistent with the Principle^ of revealed
Religion and natural Justice. 5 CHAP. II. The Color of the N^gr^es is the
Effect of Climate -- People in New-Ireland and other countries in the same
parallel of latitude with Africa, though more than 2000 leagues distant, (...)
the black skin and woolly head of the Negroes -- The Arras in South-Am^rica are
nearly as black as the Negroes -- The Arabians by rem^ving into Africa became
black -- The Circassians, according to H^r^d^tus, are the descendants of
ancestors who had a black skin and crisped ha^. 12 CHAP. III. Of the Natural
genius of the Negroes -- Ignatius Sa^cho -- Phillis Wheatley -- Negro mentioned
in Acts -- Job Ben Solomon -- Farhan -- Mr. Listel -- Dr. Derham -- Gustavus
Vassa the African, etc. 20 CHAP. IV. Of the moral Virtues of the Negroes. 32
CHAP. V. Of the method of procuring Slaves in Africa. 43 CHAP. VI. Of the
Treatment of the Negroes on the Passage to the West Indies and the Southern
States of America -- Explanation of the Plate. 61 CHAP. VII. Of the Treatment
of the Negr^es in the West Indies and other places. 77 CHAP. VIII. Of the
beneficial Consequences of declining the Slave Trade -- of entering into a
C^mmerce with the Natives of Africa -- of making settlements in the Country,
etc. 96
OBSERVATIONS UPON NEGRO SLAVERY.
CHAP. I.
Negro slavery totally inconsistent with the principles of revealed religion
and natural justice.

I CONCEIVE that it would become every advocate of Christianity to testify
against a custom which is now practiced by a great part of Christendom. I mean
the custom of enslaving the Africans. It is said in the gospel, "thou shall
love thy neighbor as thyself." It would be vain to plead that a Negro is not
the neighbor of a white man, and that a difference of complexion will alter
the necessity of obeying the command of our Savior. To plead this would be an
affront to reason, as well as a direct contradiction to the express declaration
of christianity, -- For the same revelation which says, "Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thyself," says, that GOD "has made of one blood all nations of
men to dwell on all the face of the earth." The words here are as comprehensive
and as forcible as any words can be to prove that men of every color and
appearance, that Negroes, as well as the rest of mankind, should be considered
as their neighbors by the disciples of Christ. It is first said that GOD has
made of one blood, all nations of men, and then again it is said that these of
one blood are to dwell on all the face of the earth. When therefore it can be
proved that one blood signifies various bloods, that all nations signif^y some
nations, and that all the face of the earth signifies only a part of the earth,
then it may be proved that those who call themselves Christians, are not
culpable in their conduct toward the oppressed Africans. St. Paul says, that
the gospel was designed to give freedom to all mankind. "Where there is neither
Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor
free, but Christ is all, and in all." Colosians iii. 11. In short, we may apply
to some of the oppressors of this unhappy race of men, who perhaps may conceive
from their color that they are of an inferior species, and that they may be
oppressed without guilt, what this Apostle says in another place, we may say of
them, that GOD has sent them "strong delusion, that they should believe a lie:
that they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness." II. Thessalonians ii. 11 and 12. For have not Negroes the
same figure, the same voice, the same passions, and the same feelings, with
white men? Were they not made by the same GOD, and are they not redeemed by the
same Savior? Can it be any signification in the eye^ of the Supreme, who the
Apostle tells us "is no respecter of persons," whether we are brown, or black,
or white? -- In the Old Testament the Prophets frequently denounce the heaviest
judgments upon the Jews for keeping their brethren in slavery. The cause of
freedom is mentioned as the cause of GOD in the Bible. Jeremiah says that the
people of Jerusalem made a covenant with King Hezekiah, that they should
proclaim liberty unto their servants. And afterward he represents the Almighty
as declaring, "But ye turned and polluted my name, and caused every man his
servant, and every man his handmaid, whom he had set at liberty at their
pleasure, to return, and brought them into subjection, to be unto you for
servants and for handmaids: -- Therefore, thus says the Lord, ye have not
hearkened to me in proclaiming liberty every one to his brother, and every man
to his neighbor; behold I proclaim a liberty for you, says the Lord, to the
sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine, and I will make you to be removed
into all the kingdoms of the earth." Jeremiah xxxiv. 16 and 17. These severe
afflictions were to be the consequence of unjustly keeping others in a state of
servitude much milder than that with which the Negroes are oppressed. The
making others work without payment, which is but a trivial part of the
oppression of the Negroes, was esteemed by the Jewish Prophets a crime of
considerable magnitude. Jeremiah says, "Woe unto him that builds his house by
unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong; that uses his neighbor's service
without wages, and gives him not for his work: That says I will build me a
wide house and large chambers, and cutteth him out windows, and it is ceiled
with cedar, and painted with vermilion. Shall thou reign because thou closest
thyself with cedar? Did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment and
justice, and then it was well with him? He judged the cause of the poor and
needy, then it was well with him: Was not this to know me? says the Lord. But
thine eyes and thine heart are not but for thy covetousness, and for to shed
innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence to do it. Therefore, thus
says the Lord concerning Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, King of Judah, They
shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my brother! or, Ah sister! They shall not
lament for him, saying, Ah Lord! or Ah his glory! He shall be buried (attend ye
tyrants!) with the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of
Jerusalem." chap. xxii. verses 13 -- 19. The slavery with which the Negroes in
various parts of the West Indies, and in the southern states of America, and
with which the peasants in Poland, and some other countries, are afflicted, is
not only opposed by the principles of religion, but of reason and justice. It
is well said by Dr. Blackstone, "I have formerly observed that pure and proper
slavery does not, nay cannot, subsist in England; such I mean, whereby an
unlimited power is given to the master over the life and fortune of the slave.
And indeed it is repugnant to reason and the principles of natural law, that
such a state should subsist any where. The three origins of the right of
slavery, assigned by Justinian Servi fiunt aut nascuntur; fiunt Jure Gentium,
aut Jure Civili; nascuntur ex A^cillis nostris. Inst. I.
, are all of them built upon false foundations. As first slavery is held to be
"Jure Gentium" from a state of captivity in war; whence slaves are called
Mancipia, quasi Manu capti. The conqueror, say the Civilians, had a right to
the life of his captive, and having spared that, has a right to deal with him
as he pleases. But it is an untrue position, when taken generally, that by the
law of nature or nations, a man may kill his enemy; he has only a right to kill
him in particular cases; in cases of absolute necessity for self-defence; and
it is plain this absolute necessity did not subsist, since the victor did not
actually kill him, but made him prisoner. War itself is justifiable only on
principles of self-preservation; and therefore it gives no other right over
prisoners, but merely to disable them from doing harm to us, by confining their
persons; much less can it give a right to kill, torture, abuse, plunder, or
even to enslave an enemy, when the war is over. Since, therefore, the right of
making slaves, by captivity, depends on a supposed right of slaughter, that
foundation failing, the consequence drawn from it must fail likewise. But
secondly, it is said that slavery may begin "jure civili;" when one man sells
himself to another. This, if only meant of contracts to serve or work for
another, is very just; but when applied to strict slavery, in the sense of the
laws of old Rome, or modern Barbary, is also impossible. Every sale implies a
price, a quid pro quo, an equivalent given to the seller in lieu of what he
transfers to the buyer: But what equivalent can be given for life and liberty,
both of which (in absolute slavery) are held to be at the master's disposal.
His property also, the very price he seems to receive, devolves ipso facto to
his Master, the instant he becomes his slave. In this case, therefore, the
buyer gives nothing, and the seller receives nothing: Of what validity then can
a sale be, which destroys the very principles upon which all sales are founded?
Lastly, we are told that besides these two ways by which slaves "fiunt," or are
acquired, they may also be hereditary: "Servi nascuntur," the children of
acquired slaves, are jure naturae, by a negative kind of birth right, slaves
also. But this being built on the two former rights, must fall together with
them. If neither captivity, nor the sale of one's self, can, by the law of
nature and reason, reduce the parent to slavery, much less can they reduce the
offspring." Blackstone's Commentaries, vol. I. page 243. 4to. edition.

CHAP. II.
The color of the Negroes is the effect of climate -- People in New-Ireland and
other countries in the same parallel of latitude with Africa, though more than
2000 leagues distant, have the black skin and woolly head of the Negroes -- The
Arras in South-America are nearly as black as the Negroes -- The Arabians by
removing into Africa became black -- The Circassians, according to Herodotus,
are the descendants of ancestors who had a black skin and crispe^ hair.

AS many have been apt to pretend that the Negroes are inferior to the white
people on account of their color, it may serve the cause of humanity to prove
this color to be the effect of climate. It has been said that the Negroes are
the descendants of Ca^n upon whom GOD set a mark. If it were not for the great
number in various parts of the world who have this assertion in their mouths,
it would not be worthy of a serious answer. A little attention to scripture,
however, will convince us of the absurdity of this opinion: for we there find
that all who are upon earth are the descendants of Noah and his family only.
The Apostle most certainly says the truth when he says that GOD "has made of
one blood all nations of men to dwell on all the face of the earth." If we
examine the matter with due care we shall also find that true Philosophy will
tell us the same as the scripture. It will tell us that the Negro is in every
respect similar to us, only that his skin, or rather the skin of his ancestors,
has been darkened by the sun. If we attend to ourselves we shall find that the
part of our bodies which is exposed is of a very different color from that
which is covered. If we take a piece of bread and put it to the fire for a
little time it will be brown, but if it is continued there long it will be
black. In the same manner it is the nature of the sun first to embrown, and
then to blacken the skin. I myself knew a gentleman in the West Indies, who
from his engagements for a considerable part of his life used to be almost
daily exposed to the sun, which made him so brown that he was proverbially
called Mulatto Frank. The lower part of his face had as much of the Negro tinge
in it as the face of a mulatto, of a person born from a white and black parent.
And he, I very well knew, was descended from English parents, who had not the
least Negro blood in them. It has been observed that if the black skin and the
frizzled head of the Negroes proceeded from the heat of the sun, we should find
people of a similar appearance in the same parallels of latitude with Africa.
This is a circumstance of which we have sufficient evidence. In Captain
Carteret's account of his voyage round the world, in the years 1766, 1767,
1768, and 1769, he says, "In the night of Monday the 24th, we fell in with nine
islands; they stretch nearly N. W. by W. and S. E. by E. about 15 leagues, and
lie, in latitude 4 36 S. longitude 154 17 E. according to the ship's account. I
imagine these to be the islands which are called Ohang ^aya, and were
discovered by Tasman; for the situation answers very nearly to their place in
the French Chart, which, in the year 1756, was corrected for the King's ships.
The other islands Carteret's, Gower's, and Simpson's, I believe had never been
seen by an European navigator before. There is certainly much land in this part
of the ocean not yet known. One of these islands is of considerable extent, the
other eight are scarcely better than large rocks, but though they are low and
flat, they are well covered with wood and abound with inhabitants. The people
are black and woolly-headed like the Negroes of Africa: their weapons are bows
and arrows; and they have large canoes which they navigate with a fail, one of
which came near us, but they would not venture on board." Hawkesworth's
voyages, vol. 1 pages 586 and 587, quarto edition Captain Carteret says also of
New-Ireland (which is nearly in the same latitude) that "the people are black
and woolly-headed like the Negroes, but have not the flat nose and thick lips;
and we thought them much the same people as the inhabitants of Egmont's-Island:
like them they were all stark naked, except a few ornaments made of shells upon
their arms and legs. They had, however, adopted a practice without which none
of our belles and beaus are supposed to be completely dressed, for the hair, or
rather the wool, upon their heads, was very abundantly powdered with white
powder." Page 599. -- Buffon, in his essay on the varieties of the human
species, says "to the south of the Mariana Islands, and eastward of the
Moluccas, we find the land of the Papous and New-Guinea, which seem to be the
most southerly regions of the globe. According to Argensola, the Papous are as
black as the Caffres, have crisped hair, and a meagre disagreeable visage."
Vol. 3, page 92 -- In another place he says, "the Papous and other nations
adjacent to New-Guinea, are real Negroes, and resemble those of Africa; though
they are feparated from the continent, by a tract of sea more than 2200 leagues
over. The natives of New-Holland have a strong analogy to the Hottentots." Page
96 -- Dampier (according to Buffon) speaking of an island in New-Guinea, called
Garret Denis, says, "that the inhabitants are black, robust, and well made,
that they have large round heads, and short, crisped hair, which they cut in
different fashions, and paint with various colors, as red, white, and yellow."
See Dampier, vol. 5, page 102. If we cast our eyes over a globe or a map of the
world, we shall find all these places to be in the same parallel of latitude
with Africa. Buffon says, in his above mentioned essay, that "the natives of
the coast of New-Holland, which is situated in the 16th degree of south
latitude and beyond the island of Timor, are perhaps the most miserable of the
human species. They have no beard, and their visage is long without a feature
that is agreeable; their hair is short, black and crisped, and their skin is as
black as that of the Guinea Negroes." He refers to Dampier, vol. 2, page 171.
In "A Journal of a voyage round the World," made by Capt. Cook, in his
Majesty's ship the Endeavor, in the years 1768, 1769, 1770, 1771, it is said,
speaking of the inhabitants of New-Holland, in latitude 36 21 S. and longitude
150 18 E. variation 10 42 E. "the inhabitants were entirely naked and black,
but they differed from the Negroes of Africa in having long strait hair,
instead of wool upon their heads." Buffon speaks of the inhabitants in the 16th
degree of latitude, and Captain Cook of those in the 36th, which may account
for the difference in their hair, which is not so soon made crisped by the sun
as the skin is darkened.

It has been objected that if color were the effect of climate, many of the
inhabitants of South America would be black. There are several reasons why the
same parallel of latitude in South America, may not be as hot as that in
Africa. There are very high mountains in many parts of South America, which,
with extensive marshes, may there render the air cooler than in many parts of
Africa, where they have no mountains and a sandy soil. South America, however,
is not without people who are black, and in Africa may be found some who are of
a copper or an olive complexion. Buffon, speaking of South-America, says, "Some
voyagers mention a nation in Guiana, of which the natives are blacker than any
other Indians. The Arras, says Raleigh, are nearly as black as the Negroes, are
extremely strong, and use poisoned arrows." Essay on the Varieties of the Human
Species, vol. 3, page 183.

It may be observed by some that the inhabitants of New-Guinea and other
places, who are black and have frizzled hair, are the descendants of emigrants
from Africa. This appears, however, to be an observation totally unsupported by
reason. New-Guinea and these places are distant more than 6000 miles from
Africa. We have no record in history, whatever, to make us suppose that such an
emigration was ever practiced, and indeed it is difficult to suppose how it
could be practiced.

It is most certain that if a white people were to emigrate to Africa, they
would in the course of time become black, and have the woolly head of the
Negroes. Job Ludolphus, in his "History of Fthiopia or the Kingdom of
Abessinia," says, "I am now about to write the History of the Abessines,
concerning whom there have been many large but few true relations. For these
people having transplanted themselves from the maritime regions of the Arabian
Guif, into the more upland parts of Africa, etc." Page 1. And in another place
he says, "The Abessines are generally black which they most admire." Page 71.
The Arabians are swarthy, it must be confessed, but they became generally black
in the course of a very few centuries from the heat of Africa. In Aftley's
collection of voyages, it is mentioned, that, in the beginning of the 15th
century, some Portuguese settled in Africa, married with the natives, and that
their descendants have now a black skin and woolly head similar to other
Negroes. On the other hand, if the Africans were to emigrate to colder climates
their descendants would in the course of time become white, and have long silky
hair. It is a well known fact that the descendants of the Negroes in America
become every generation whiter; that their hair also gradually lengthens; and
Herodotus mentions that the Colchi, of whom the Circassians are descended, were
black, and had crisped hair. This will appear to the learned reader to be a
fair translation of that Historian's The words of Herodo^us are, (...). Lib.
II. cap. 104.
expressions in regard to this matter, if he will refer to the second book (to
the Euterpe) of Herodotus. The Colchi were originally Ethiopians, who settled
upon the borders of the ^uxine or Black Sea, and their descendants are now
proverbially called the fair Circassians. If we were able to prove, however,
for which we cannot produce any thing like an argument, the Hypothesis that
color is not the effect of climate in regard to the human species, and that the
Almighty originally made some men white and some black as he made horses, yet
this should not induce us to treat the Negroes otherwise than as our Brethren.
For a black man, as well as a black horse, may have all the good properties of
a white one. We are told by the Prophet that the Almighty does not consider us
with affection from being white or black, from having long or frizzled hair,
but he represents him saying, "The Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my
footstool, but to this man will I look who is of an humble and contrite
spirit, and who trembles at my word."

CHAP. III.
Of the natural genius of the Negroes -- Ignatius Sancho -- Phillis Wheatly --
Negro mentioned in Acts -- Job Bon Solomon -- Farhan -- Mr. Listel -- Dr. (...)
G^stavus Vassa the African, etc.

IT is an assertion of Mr. David Hume, in his Essay on National Characters,
that "there never arose a man of genius among Negroes." This assertion is
attacked, as well as many other absurd and dangerous principles of Mr Hume,
with great propriety, by the celebrated Dr. Beattie, in his Essay on the Nature
and Immutability of Truth. There are two disadvantages against the improvement
of their talents, under which the negroes labor, from which the white people
are free. They are enslaved, and they want opportunity. Slavery depresses the
mind, and prevents it from expanding its faculties. It has the effect which the
Latin Poet ascribes to intemperance.

A^^igit humi divinae particulam aurae.
The late Anthony Benezet of Philadelphia, seems to have been as well qualified
as almost any man, to judge of the difference between the natural genius of the
Negroes and the white people. He originally kept a school for be instruction of
white children, and afterward for the instruction of the blacks. He says in a
little pamphlet which he published, that "he, as teacher of a school
established by private subscription in Philadelphia, for the instruction of the
black children and others of that people, has for many years had opportunity of
knowing the temper and the genius of the Africans, particularly of those under
his tuition, who have been many of different ages; and he can with truth and
sincerity declare, that he has found amongst them as great a variety of
talents, equally capable of improvement, as amongst a like number of whites;
and he is bold to assert, that the notion entertained by some, that the blacks
are inferior to the whites in their capacities, is a vulgar prejudice, founded
on the pride orignorance of their lordly masters, who have kept their slaves at
such a distance, as to be unable to form a right judgment of them."

Ignatius Sancho may be produced as an instance of genius among Negroes under
great disadvantages. His letters are published in a volume. I will transcribe
his letter to the celebrated Mr. Stern, as it not only exhibits a fine
specimen of his talents, but as it contains something which may influence the
mind against the detestable practice of enslaving the Negroes.

LETTER XXXVI. To Mr. STERN.
July 1767. Reverend Sir,
IT would be an insult to your humanity (or perhaps look like it) to apologize
for the liberty I am taking. -- I am one of those people whom the vulgar and
illiberal call "Negurs." The first part of my life was rather unlucky, as I was
placed in a family who judged ignorance the best and only security for
obedience. A little reading and writing I got by unwearried application. The
latter part of my life, has been, through GOD's blessing, truly fortunate,
having spent it in the service of the best of families in the kingdom. My chief
pleasure has been books -- Philanthropy I adore. How very much, good Sir, am I
(amongst millions) indebted to you for the character of your amiable Uncle
Toby! I declare I would walk ten miles in the dog days to shake hands with the
honest Corporal. Your Sermons have touched me to the heart, and I hope have
amended it, which brings me to the point. In your tenth discourse, page 78, in
the second volume, is this very affecting passage: "Consider how great a part
of our species, in all ages down to this, have been trod under the feet of
cruel and capricious tyrants; who would neither hear their cries, nor pity
th^ird stresses. Consider slavery -- what it is -- how bitter a draught -- and
how many millions are made to drink it!" Of all my favorite authors not one has
drawn a tear in favor of my miserable black brethren, excepting yourself and
the humane author of Sir George Ellison. I think you will forgive me -- I am
sure you will applaud me for beseeching you to give half an hour's attention to
slaver^, as it is at this day practiced in our West Indies. That subject,
handled in your striking manner, would ease the yoke (perhaps) of many: but if
only of one -- Gracious GOD! what a f^ast to a benevolent heart! And sure I am
you are an epicurean in acts of charity. You who are universally read and
universally admired -- you could not fail. Dear Sir, think in me you behold the
uplifted hands of thousands of my brother Moors. Grief (you pathetically
observe) is eloquent; figure to yourself their attitudes! hear their
supplicating addresses! Alas! you cannot refuse. Humanity must comply -- in
which hope I beg permission to subscribe myself,

Reverend Sir, etc. IGNATIUS SANCHO.


Mr. Sterne's I have c^nceived that it might not be disagreeable to the reader
to print Mr. Sterne's answer.

From Mr. Stern to Ignatius Sancho. LETTER LXXXV.
Coxwould, July 27, 1767.
THERE is a strange coincidence, Sancho, in the little events (as well as the
great ones) of this world; for I had been writing a tender tale of the sorrows
of a friendless poor Negro girl, and my eyes had scarce done smarting with it,
when your letter of recommendation in behalf of so many of her brethren and
sisters, came to me -- but why her brethren? or yours, Sancho, any more than
mine? It is by the finest ^in^s and most insensible gradations, that nature
descends from the fai^est face about St. James's, to the footiest complexion in
Africa: at which tint of these, is it, that the ties of blood are to cease? And
how many shades must we descend lower still in the scale, ^re mercy is to
vanish with them? But it is no uncommon thing, my good Sancho, for one half of
the world to use the other half like brutes, and then endeavor to make them so.
For my own part, I never look westward (when I am in a pensive mood at least)
but I think of the burdens which our brothers and sisters are there carrying;
could I ease their shoulders from one ounce of them, I declare I would set out
this hour upon a pilgrimage to Mecca for their sakes -- which by the bye,
Sancho, exceeds your walk of ten miles, in the same proportion that a visit of
^^^^nity should one of mere form. However, if you meant my Uncle Toby, more he
is your debtor. If I can weave the tale I have written, into the work I am
about -- it is at the service of the afflicted -- and a much greater matter --
for in serious truth it casts a sad shade upon the world, that so great a part
of it are, and have been so long bound in chains of darkness, and in chains of
misery; and I cannot but both respect and felicitate you, that by so much
laudable diligence, you have broke the one -- and that by falling into the
hands of so good and merciful a family, providence has rescued you from the
other.

And so good hearted San^no, adieu! And believe me I will not forget your
letter.

Yours, L. STERN.



answer to this letter is to be found in the third volume of his letters,
published by his daughter Mrs. Medaille.

Phillis Wheatley, a Negro girl, who was brought a slave from Africa to Boston,
has shown great talents for poetry. Many creditable persons have signed their
names in favor of her being the real author of the poems which are published
under her name. The following lines to the University of Cambridge, in New
England, have certainly a considerable share of merit -- STUDENTS, to you it is
given to scan the heights
Above, to traverse the etherial space,
And mark the systems of revolving worlds.
Still more, ye sons of science, ye receive
The blissful news by messengers from Heaven,
How Jesus' blood for our redemption flows.
See him with hands our-stretch'd upon the cross
Immense compassion in his bosom glows;
He hears revilers, nor resents their scorn;
What matchless mercy in the son of GOD!
When the whole human race by sin had fallen,
He deigned to die that they might use again,
And share with him in the sublimest skies,
Life without death, and glory without end.
Improve your privileges while they stay
Ye pupils, and each hour redeem, that bears
Or good or bad account of you to Heaven.
Let sin, that baneful evil to the soul,
By you be shunned, nor once remit your guard;
Suppress the deadly serpent in its egg.
Ye blooming plants of human race divine,
An Ethiop tells you it is your greatest foe;
Its transient sweetness turns to endless pain,
And in immense perdition sinks the soul.


These also deserve equal admiration.

To a Clergyman, on the death of his Wife.
WHERE contemplation finds her sacred spring,
Where heavenly music makes the arches ring,
Where virtue reigns unfully'd and divine,
Where wisdom throned, and all the graces shine,
There sits thy spouse amidst the radiant throng,
While praise eternal warbles from her tongue;
There choirs angelic shout her welcome round,
With perfect bliss, and peerless glory crowned.
While thy dear mate to flesh no more confined,
Exults a blessed, an heav'n-ascending mind,
Say in thy breast shall floods of sorrow rise?
Say, shall its torrents overwhelm thine eyes?
Amid the feats of Heaven a place is free,
And Angels open their brilliant ranks for thee;
For thee they wait, and with expectant eye,
Thy spouse leans downward from the empy real sky;
"O come away, her longing spirit cries,
"And share with me the raptures of the skies.
"Our bliss divine to mortals is unknown;
"Immortal life and glory are our own:
"There too may the dear pledges of our love
"Arrive, and taste with us the joys above;
"Attune the harp to more than mortal lays,
"And join with us the tribute of their praise
"To him, who died, stern justice to atone,
"And make eternal glory all our own.
"He in his death flew ours, and as he rose,
"He crushed the dire dominion of our foes;
"Vain were their hopes to put the GOD to flight,
"Chain us to Hell, and bar the gates of light."
We read of a Negro in scripture who must have been a man of genius and
learning, as well as in an elevated station. We are told (Acts, chap. 8.) that
he was of great authority under Candace, Queen of the Ethiopians, and that he
was entrusted with all her treasure It is said that he was sitting in his
chariot, and was reading the Prophet Isaiah (probably in Hebrew) when Philip
the Apostle was led by the spirit to interpret the Prophet to him, and to
finish his character by making him a Christian It is said that Job Ben Solomon,
a native of Africa, who was brought to the acquaintance of Sir Hans Sloane, was
by him known to be a complete master of the Arabian tongue, by his translating
several manuscripts and inscriptions upon medals. He was thought to be a man of
very extraordinary talents. There is a long account of him by Bluet and Moore,
in Astley's Collection, vol. 2. The celebrated James Ramsay in a pamphlet of
his called, "An Enquiry into the effects of putting a stop to the African Slave
Trade", says, page 43 and 44 -- "It is pleasing to communicate an account of
the virtues and improvements of an honest African, that I have just met with in
the late travels of five Danish Philosophers (voyage en Arabie et en d'autres
pays circonvoisins par C. Niebuhr) originally published in German, and since
translated into French in three volumes, 4to. Farhan, a jet black Negro, was
carried a boy into Arabia, and there sold to an officer in the Court of Imam or
Prince of Yemen. His master gave him every advantage of education, and
entrusted him, as he grew up, in the management of his affairs. These he
conducted with so much propriety and address as to attract the notice of the
Prince, who took him near his person, and afterward made him Governor of
Loheia, a city on the sea coast. There our travelers found him, ruling his
people, as a kind father would his children. To these travelers he behaved
with the utmost kindness, generosity, and even politeness, expressed the
greatest fondness for their conversation, and a warm desire to learn, and be
informed, of whatever was striking in Europeans. In short, they, when speaking
of him, call him the good Farhan, and had many sad opportunities of contrasting
his behavior with the other native Arabian Governors. Here then we have an
African towering above the subtle Arabian; and shall his country by European
insolence, be depressed in the seat of reason and human excellence? It is
ignorant pride that fancies a distinction." It is said in Dodsley's Annual
Register for 1786, vol. 28, page 177 -- "The Royal Academy of Sciences at
Paris, this year, elected, as one of their foreign correspondents, a Mr.
Listel, a free black, of the Isle of France, who had distinguished himself by a
series of curious and extremely well calculated meteorological observations;
thus breaking down in some degree the strong and long established line of
distinction between colors, and holding out encouragement to future Africans to
cultivate the sciences and philosophy, by showing them that the way is opened
to academical honors, wherever they are merited, without any regard to the
country or natural hue of the ingenious proficient."

Dr. James Derham, a Negro, who is now living, may be produced as an instance
of genius. He was born in the city of Philadelphia, and became a practitioner
of physic at the Spanish settlement of New-Orleans on the Mississippi. He was
sold as a slave to Dr. Robert Dove of New-Orleans, who liberated him, after two
or three years service, upon easy terms. From having served several persons in
the medical line, from having received some education, he became a physician
hisself, and now ^^es business to a considerable amount. A gentleman of my
acquaintance, who is a physician, told me that he lately saw Dr. Derham in
Philadelphia; and that he has a very good opinion of the Doctor's integrity and
knowledge. He mentioned that he invited Dr. Derham to tea, and that it was with
difficulty his own black servant could be prevailed upon to hand a dish to him,
who thought that Derham had impudently obtru^^d himself into the parlour among
gentlemen.

Olaudah Equiano, or, Gustavus Vassa, the African, is a man of talents, as
appears by the narrative of his life, which was written by himself, and
published in London, in 1789. The friends of humanity by encouraging the sale
of his work, might make him some recompense for the injuries which he has
received from mankind.

William Dickson in his Letters on Slavery, mentions Francis Williams, a Negro,
to be a poet and a mathematician. He quotes some of his verses, which are
written in Latin.

Thomas Fuller, a Negro born in Africa, but who has lived almost all his life
near Alexandria, in Virginia, is reported by many to have a most astonishing
genius for calculations. It is said that in two minutes after being asked, he
told, (and he is unable to read or to write) the exact number of seconds that
were in a year and a half. He answered still more difficult questions in
arithmetic with uncommon facility.

Monsieur Adanson, in his Voyage to Senegal, speaking of the Negroes, says --
"It is amazing that such a rude and illiterate people should reason so
pertinently in regard to the heavenly bodies, for there is no manner of doubt,
but that with proper instruments, and a good will, they would become excellent
Astronomers." Page 254. It is said of the inhabitants Kongo, in Astley's
Voyages, vol. 3, page 247. "In conversation they discover a great quickness of
parts and understanding; delivering themselves with so much good sense, and
humor, that the most knowing persons take delight in conversing with them."

Br^e, says of a Negro ball, at which he was present in Africa, "Every one
talked upon the subject he liked; and it is easy at these meetings, to perceive
what happy memoirs they are blessed with; and how great a progress they would
make in the sciences, in case their genius was cultivated with study. They
explain themselves in very choice terms: their expressions are noble, and
manners polite." Astley's collection of Voyages and Travels, vol. 2, page 57.

In the West Indies I have seen much of the Negroes, and I think I can safely
say, with Anthony Benezet, if we make the just allowances for the disadvantages
under which they labor, that their capacity is equal to that of white men. They
are made in the West Indies, with little instruction, excellent carpenters,
coopers, and masons. They very commonly know the art of making sugar, and some
the more difficult science of distilling rum. Some of them are expert swimmers
and fishermen. They have an eye, like a lynx, to detect their prey. I have been
delighted when in the boat with them, to see them dive to the bottom of the
sea, and strike the sea hedgehog or other things, with an iron instrument
formed for that purpose. -- Some of them have been known, in this situation,
and when thus armed, to fight a shark, and beat him off. Their natural genius
for music, is by many thought to equal that of any people upon earth.

In short, it would be difficult and tedious to enumerate the various arts in
which the Negroes are expert, and the different men of genius who have arisen
in former and in modern times among them.

CHAP. IV.
Of the moral virtues of the Negroes.

IT has been said by some that the Negroes are not inferior to the white
people, only in the endowments of the mind, but in the virtues of the heart;
and some extravagantly assert that they generally possess he malignant spirit
of Cain, from whom they are supposed to be descended. It is said by a sensible
writer in his account of the nations of Africa. "The inhabitants of the Grain
and Ivory coast are represented by those that deal with them as sensible,
courteous, and the fairest traders on the coasts of Guinea. They rarely drink
to excess: If any do they are severely punished by the King's order. They are
seldom troubled with war: If a difference happen between two nations, they
commonly end the dispute amicably.

The inhabitants of the Gold and Slave coast likewise, when they are not
artfully incensed against each other, live in great union and friendship, being
generally well tempered, civil, tractable, and ready to help any that need it.
In particular the natives of the kingdom of Whidah, are civil, kind, and
obliging to strangers. And they are the most gentleman-like of all the negroes,
abounding in good manners toward each other. The inferiors pay great respect
to their superiors: So wives to their husbands, children to their parents. And
they are remarkably industrious: all are constantly employed; the men in
agriculture, the women in spinning and weaving cotton.

The Gold and Slave Coasts are divided into several districts, some governed by
kings, others by the principal men, who take care each of their own town or
village, and prevent or appease tumults. They punish murder and adultery
severely; very frequently with death. Theft and robbery are punished by a fine
proportionable to the goods that were taken. All the natives of this coast,
though Heathens, believe there is one GOD, the author of them and all things.
-- They appear likewise to have a confused apprehension of a future state. And
accordingly every town and village has a place of public worship I^ is
remarkable that they have no beggars among them: Such is the care of the chief
men in every city and village, to provide some easy labor, even for the old and
weak. Some are employed in blowing the smith's bellows; others in pressing
palm-oil; others in grinding colors. If they are too weak even for this, they
sell provisions in the market.

The account we have of the natives of the kingdom of Benin is, that they are a
reasonable and a good-natured people, sincere and inoffenfive, and do no
injustice either to one another or to strangers. They are civil and courteous:
If you make them a present, they endeavor to repay it double. And if they are
trusted till the ship returns next year, they are sure honestly to ^pay the
whole debt. Theft is punished among them, although not with the same severity
as murder. If a man and woman of any quality, are taken in adultery, they are
certain to be put to death, and their bodies thrown upon a dunghill, and left
a prey to wild beasts. They are punctually just and honest in their dealings;
and are also very charitable. The king and the great lords taking care to
employ all that are capable of any work. And those that are utterly helpless
they keep for God's sake; so that here also are no beggars.

The inhabitants of Congo and Angola are generally a quiet people. They
discover a good understanding, and behave in a friendly manner to strangers,
being of a mild temper and affable carriage. Upon the whole, therefore, the
Negroes who inhabit the coast of Africa, from the river Senegal to the southern
bounds of Angola, are so far from being the stupid, senseless, b^utish, lazy
barbarians, the fierce, cruel, perfidious savages, they have been described,
that on the contrary, they are represented by them, who had no motive to
flatter them, as remarkably sensible, considering the few advantages they have
for improving their understanding; as very industrious, perhaps more so than
any nation of so warm a climate; as fair, just, and honest in their dealings,
unless where white men have taught them to be otherwise; and as far more mild,
friendly, and kind to strangers, than any of our forefathers were. Our
forefathers! Where shall we find at this day, among the fair faced natives of
Europe, a nation generally practicing the justice, mercy, and truth, which are
related of these poor black Africans? Suppose the preceding accounts are true
(which I see no reason or pretense to doubt of) and we may leave England and
France to seek genuine honesty in Benin, Congo, and Angola." -- Thoughts on
Slavery, by John Wesley, A. M. Pages 13, 14, 15, 16.

Some may think that the virtues of the Negroes are too highly extolled in this
account of them; but I think that every impartial and intelligent person will
agree with me that, with the same advantages, there is as great likelihood of
finding virtue in a Negro as in a white man. Mr. Ramsay, however, in his Essay
on the Treatment and Conversation of African Slaves in the British Sugar
Colonies, page 262, gives an extract of a letter from a humane, intelligent sea
officer, in which it is said -- "The Negroes along the seacoast of Africa,
(particularly among the French) are well-informed, easy, kind, generous, and
have a better sense of right and wrong than any other people I ever visited. I
was thrown among them in a state of wretchedness and sickness, with twenty
seven dying men, being abandoned by our own people, who refused me assistance
and medicines. I cast myself on the charity of savages, and received more
instances of compassion and goodness from them than from all Christians I have
ever known. From this exemplary be^ignity in this people, who are inhabitants
about Cape Verd, may be collected the probability of introducing freedom and
christianity among them." Monsi^ur Adanson in his Voyage to Senegal, the Isle
of Goree, and the River Gambia, says -- "As the island of Senegal is within the
dependence of the kingdom of Oualo, the Negroes who live there, especially
those who are free, are of that nation. They are, generally speaking, very
good-natured, sociable, and obliging. Those whom the company entertained in my
service, were Oualofs, as they call themselves, or by corruption, Jalofs." Page
40. And again he says -- "Which way soever I turned my eyes on this pleasant
spot, I beheld a perfect image of pure nature, an agreeable solitude, bounded
on every side by a charming landscape. The rural situation of cottages in the
midst of trees; the ease and indolence of the Negroes, reclined under the shade
of their spreading foliage; the simplicity of their dress and manners; the
whole revived in my mind the idea of our first parents, and I seemed to
contemplate the world in its primitive state." Page 54. Abbe Raynal gives us a
fine instance of heroic virtue in a Negro. He says, "In America it is generally
believed and asserted that the Africans are equally incapable of reason and
virtue. The following well-authenticated fact will enable us to judge of this
opinion.

An English ship that traded in Guinea, in 1752, was obliged to leave the
surgeon behind, whose bad state of health did not permit him to continue at
sea. Murray, for that was his name, was there endeavoring to recover his
health, when a Dutch vessel drew near the coast, put the blacks in irons, whom
curiosity had brought to the shore, and instantly sailed off with their booty.

Those who interested themselves for these unhappy people, incensed at so base
a treachery, instantly ran to Cudjoe, who stopped them at his door, and asked
them what they were in search of. "The white man who is with you, (replied
they) who should be put to death, because his brethren have carried off ours."
"The Europeans (answered the generous host) who have carried off our countrymen
are barbarians, kill them whenever you can find them. But he who lodges with me
is a good man, he (...) my friend; my house is his fortress; I am his soldier,
and will defend him. Before you get at him, you shall pass over my body. O my
friends, what just man would enter my doors, if I had suffered my habitation to
be stained with the blood of an innocent man!" This discourse appeased the rage
of the blacks: they retired ashamed of the design that had brought them there,
and some days after acknowledged to Murray himself how happy they were they had
not committed a crime which would have occasioned them perpetual remorse."
Justamond's translation of Abbe Raynal's history, vol. III, page 440. Mr.
Ramsay in his Essay on the Treatment and Conversion of African Slaves in the
British Sugar Colonies, gives the following noble instance of gratitude in a
Negro. "Joseph Rachel was a black trader in Barbados; he dealt chiefly in the
retail way, and was so fair and complaisant in business, that in a town filled
with little peddling shops, his doors were thronged with customers. I have
often dealt with him, and found him remarkably honest and obliging. If any one
knew not where to procure an article Joseph would be at pains to search it out,
to supply him, without making an advantage of it. In short, his character was
so fair, his manners so generous, that the best people showed him a regard
which they often deny men of their own color, because not blessed with like
goodness of heart.

"In 1756, a fire happened which burned down great part of the town, and ruined
many of the inhabitants. Joseph luckily lived in a quarter that escaped the
destruction, and expressed his thankfulness, by softening the distresses of his
neighbors. Among those who had lost their all by this heavy misfortune, was a
man to whose family Joseph, in the early part of life, owed some obligations.
This man, by too great hospitality, an excess common enough in the West Indies,
had involved his affairs, before the sire happened, and his estate lying in
houses, that event entirely ruined him, he escaping with only the clothes on
his back. Amidst the cries of misery and want which excited Joseph's
compassion, that man's unfortunate situation claimed particular notice. The
generous, the open temper of the sufferer, the obligations that Joseph had to
his family, were special and powerful motives for acting toward him the
friendly part.

Joseph had his bond for sixty pounds sterling. "Unfortunate man, (says he)
this shall never come against thee. Would Heaven thou could settle all thy
other matters as easily! But how am I sure that I shall keep in this mind: may
not the love of gold, especially, when by length of time thy misfortune has
become familiar to me, return with too strong a current, and bear down my
fellow feeling before it? But for this I have a remedy. Never shall thou apply
for the assistance of any friend against my avarice." He got up, ordered a
current account that the man had with him to a considerable amount to be drawn
out, and with a whim that might have called up a smile on the face of charity,
filled his pipe, sat down again, twisted the bond, and lighted his pipe with
it. While the account was drawing out he continued smoking in a state of mind a
monarch might envy. When finished he went in search of his friend, with the
account discharged, and the mutilated bond in his hand. On meeting with him he
presented the papers to him with this address. 'Sir, I am sensibly affected
with your misfortunes -- the obligations that I have received from your family,
give me a relation to every branch of it. I know that your inability to satisfy
for what you owe, gives you more uneasiness than the loss of your own
subsistence. That you may not be anxious on my account in particular, accept of
this discharge, and the remains of your bond. I am overpaid in the satisfaction
that I feel from having done my duty. I beg you to consider this only as a
token of the happiness that you will impart to me whenever you put it in my
power to do you a good office.' One may easily guess at the man's feelings, on
being thus generously treated, and how much his mind must have been
strengthened to bear up against his misfortunes. I knew him a few years after
this; he had got a small post in one of the forts, and preserved a decent
appearance." Page 254.

In Astley's Voyages it is mentioned, speaking of The Manners and Customs of
the Inhabitants of Kongo, that, "although some of them be surly and proud, yet
in general they carry themselves very friendly toward strangers; being of a
mild conversation, courteous, affable, and easy to be overcome with reason, yet
inclined to drink, especially Spanish wine and brandy." Vol. III. page 247.

It appears to me that these people must generally have possessed a good
disposition, (excepting their passion for strong liquors) and a great
inclination to hospitality, who could be very friendly toward strangers, when
they had found so many strangers to be treacherous and wicked. It is
astonishing that they did not all seem surly and proud.

In short, there are some travelers who give very unfavorable accounts of the
morals of some black nations. Their accounts are certainly not wholly devoid of
truth. But does not history and experience furnish us with undeniable proofs of
the monstrous and excessive wickedness of white nations? Have not white nations
committed all the crimes which are imputed to the black, nay, all which
imagination can conceive?

CHAP. V.
Of the Methods of procuring Slaves in Africa.

IT has been said by some in defense of the Slave Trade, that the Negroes
purchased in Africa, are prisoners of war, or criminals, who have justly
forfeited their liberty; that the trade will prevent them from cutting one
another's throats; and that it may be the means of initiating them into the
principles of christianity. It must be allowed that some of the Negroes who are
purchased in Africa are prisoners of war, or criminals; but it can be proved by
the most incontestable evidence, that most of those who are taken from thence
are innocent people, who have in no manner whatever forfeited their right to
freedom. Francis Moore, who was Factor for the English African Company, on the
river Gambia, says, "The Kings of that country generally advise with their
head-men, scarcely doing any thing of consequence without consulting them
first, except the King of Barsalli, who being subject to hard-drinking, is very
absolute. It is to this King's insatiable thirst for brandy, that his subjects'
freedoms and families are in so precarious a situation." Page 61. In another
place he says, "Whenever this King wants goods or brandy, he sends a messenger
to the English Governor, at James Fort, to desire he would send a sloop there
with a cargo; this news being not at all unwelcome, the Governor sends
accordingly; against the arrival of the sloop, the King goes and ransacks some
of his enemies' towns, seizing the people, and selling them for such
commodities as he is in want of, which commonly is brandy, guns, powder, balls,
pistols and cutlasses for his attendants and soldiers; and coral and silver for
his wives and concubines (...) case he is not at war with any neighboring
King, he then falls upon one of his own towns, which are numerous, and uses
them in the same manner. He often goes with some of his troops by a town in the
daytime, and returning in the night, sets fire to three parts of it, and
putting guards at the fourth, there seizes the people as they run out from the
fire; he ties their arms behind them, and marches them either to Joar or
Cohone, where he sells them to the Europeans." Page 46. Andrew Brue, the
principal Factor for the French African Company, and who resided a considerable
time in Africa, says, "That having received goods he wrote to Damel, (King of
Kayor) that if he had a sufficient number of slaves, he was ready to trade with
him. This Prince, as well as the other Negro Monarchs, has always a sure way of
supplying his de^iciencies by selling his own subjects, for which they seldom
want some pretension or other. Damel had recourse to this method: he seized
three hundred of his own people, and sent word to Brue that he had slaves to
deliver for his goods." Astley's Collection of Voyages, vol. 2, page 29.
Afterward he says, "that some of the natives are, on all occasions,
endeavoring to surprise and carry off their country people. They land without
noise, and if they find a lone cottage, without defense, they surround it, and
carry off all the people and effects to their boat, and immediately reimbark."
Page 98. Barbot, the French Factor, says, "It is well known that many of the
European nations, trading amongst these people, have very unjustly and
inhumanly, without any provocation, stolen away, from time to time, abundance
of the people, not only on this coast, but almost every where in Guinea, who
have come on board their ships in a harmless and confiding manner. These they
have in great numbers carried away, and sold in the plantations with other
slaves, which they had purchased." Page 110. It is also confirmed by writers of
a later date, that Negroes are frequently stolen from the coast of Africa; and
that the Kings of that country, seize by violence, their innocent subjects, to
sell them to the Europeans. It is said in an account of the Slave Trade on the
Coast of Africa, by Alexander Falconbridge, late Surgeon in the African Trade,
London, printed, 1788; "Upon the windward coast another mode of procuring
slaves is pursued; which is, by what they term boating; a mode that is very
pernicious and destructive to the crews of the ships. The sailors who are
employed upon this trade go in boats upon the rivers seeking for Negroes, among
the villages situated upon the banks of them. But this method is very slow, and
not always effectual. For, after being absent from the ship during a fortnight
or three weeks they sometimes return with only from eight to twelve Negroes.
Numbers of these are procured in consequence of alleged crimes, which, as
before observed, when any ships are upon the coast, are more productive than at
any other period. Kidnapping, however, prevails here.

"I have good reason to believe, that of one hundred and twenty Negroes, which
were purchased for the ship to which I belonged then lying at the river Ambris,
by far the greater part, if not the whole, were kidnapped. This, with various
other instances confirms me in the belief, that kidnapping is the fund which
supplies the thousands of Negroes annually sold off these extensive windward
and other coasts where boating prevails." Page 18. It is said in a pamphlet,
which was printed in London in 1789, entitled, Observations on the Slave Trade,
and a Description of some part of the Coast of Guinea, during a Voyage made in
1787 and 1788, in company with Doctor A. Sparrman and Captain Arr^henius. By C.
B. Wadstrom, Chief Director of the Royal Assay and Refining Office; Member of
the Royal Chamber of Commerce, and of the Royal Patriotic Society for improving
Agriculture, Manufactures, and Commerce in Sweden. "The King of Almammy had, in
the year 1787, very much to his honor, enacted a law, that no slave, whatever,
should be marched through his territories. At this time several French vessels
lay at anchor in the Senegal, waiting for slaves. The route of the black
traders in consequence of this edict of the King was stopped, and the slaves
carried to other parts. The French, unable on this account, to complete their
cargoes, remonstrated with the King. He was, however, very unpropitious to
their representations, for he returned the presents which had been sent him by
the Senegal Company, of which I myself was a witness; declaring at the same
time, that all the riches of that Company should not divert him from his
design. In this situation of affairs the French were obliged to have recourse
to their old friends the Moors. These, who had before shown themselves so ready
on such occasions, were no less ready and active on this. They set off in
parties to surprise the unoffending Negroes, and to carry among them all the
calamities of war. Many unfortunate prisoners were sent, and for some time
continued to be sent in. I was once curious enough to see some of those that
had just arrived. I applied to the director of the Company, who conducted me to
the slave-prisons. I there saw the unfortunate captives chained two and two
together, by the foot. The mangled bodies of several of them, whose wounds were
still bleeding, exhibited a most shocking spectacle; and their situation may be
much easier conceived than described. The Director of the Company, however,
used his best means to console them.

"This is a specific instance clearly showing that one war at least was
undertaken for the sole purpose of procuring slaves. I cannot, however, help
observing, that if no such instance as this had come within my knowledge during
my stay in those parts, I should yet have thought myself justifiable in
supposing that the wars among the Negroes originated in the slave trade. For in
all the observations I have been able to make (and I went to the Coast of
Africa, not with any commercial views, but for the sole purpose of inquiry and
observation) I have ever considered the Negroes as a quiet, inoffensive people,
happy in themselves, and in one another enjoying the comforts of life, without
the intervention of toil and trouble. If, therefore, I had found wars among a
people of such dispositions, and so situated as to have no motive for them, I
should certainly have set them down, as having been excited for some diabolical
purpose, and for none so likely as the prosecution of the slave trade." Pages
4, 5, and 6. In another place he says -- "A second source from whence the
Europeans are supplied with slaves on the Coast of Africa, is pillage, which is
of two kinds; public and private. It is public, when practiced by the direction
of the kings, private, when practiced by individuals. I must also make a
further distinction, namely, as it is practiced by the blacks and the whites.
This last I call robbery, which will be the subject of the next article.

"The public pillage is of all others the most plentiful source from which the
slave trade derives its continuance and support. The Kings of Africa, (I mean
in that part of the country which I have visited) incited by the merchandise
shown them, which consists principally of strong liquors, give orders to their
military to attack their own villages in the night. Saturday night is
particularly fixed upon for this purpose, being esteemed the most lucky for
expeditions of this kind. However, when slaves are wanted in haste, no night is
deemed so inauspicious as to prevent an attempt.

"As I have been myself an eye witness to several of these nocturnal
exhibitions, it will, perhaps, be better to illustrate this kind of pillage by
some examples.

"The French make presents to the Negro as well as the Moorish Kings. It
happened when I was at Goree, that an Ambassador was to be sent from thence to
the King of Barbesin on this errand. I obtained leave with my fellow-travellers
to accompany the embassy. We accordingly set out and arrived at Joal, a place
where the King resides at particular times of the year, viz. when the trading
vessels arrive there.

"It is usual on the receipt of these presents to send back a number of slaves
in return. It so happened, however, that the King of Barbesin had no slaves in
possession at that time. This circumstance it was that afforded me an
opportunity of seeing the expeditions before mentioned.

"We resided, I believe, about a week at Joal. During our residence there, the
pillage, of which I have been speaking, was attempted almost every night. The
following is a desciption of the persons concerned in it, and of their various
success.

"There were several parties of the military assembled at fix in the evening,
or about dusk. Each party consisted of about ten or twelve. A large horseman's
musket was rested on each of their saddles, in the same manner as those of the
English heavy cavalry. On their shoulders were suspended a bow and a quiver
full of arrows. -- Thus equipped, they went to different villages belonging to
the King, and returned usually about five in the morning, or a little before
daylight." Page 7, 8 and 9. Afterward he says, "At another time, the
military, who had been sent out to pillage, returned with several captives.
These consisted of men, women, and children. The men, as they were brought in,
exhibited great marks of dejection. One of them, however, appeared to be quite
f^antic with grief. He beseeched his captors, with great fervency, that they
would not tear him from his wife and children. The women, on the other hand,
vented their sorrow in shrieks and lamentations. The children, in a state of
palpitation, clung to their mother's breasts. Their little eyes were so swelled
with crying that they could cry no more. During all this time the captors, to
show their joy on the occasion, and to drown the cries of their unfortunate
fellow subjects, were beating large drums. To this was added all the noise that
could be collected from the blowing of horns, and the human voice. Taking in
the shrieks and agony of the one, and the shouts and joy of the other, with the
concomitant instruments of noise, I was never before witness to such an
infernal scene.

"What I have said of the King of Barbesin's conduct with respect to the mode
of procuring slaves is equally applicable to those other Kings of the country
of whom I have any knowledge. King Damel, whose dominious lie between Portugal
and Senegal, wanting a slave to deliver in exchange for some goods he had
bargained for with a Goree trader, ordered his soldiers to seize on one of his
own subjects. Finding a woman (whose husband was absent) in a hut with their
children, they seized her, bound her, and tore her from her babes, who were
rejected, as not being able to perform the journey to the shore." Pages 11 and
12.

The celebrated Mr. Clarkson, in a work published in London, in 1789, which he
calls "The Substance of the Evidence of sundry Persons on the Slave Trade,
collected in the course of a Tour made in the Autumn of the Year 1788," gives a
long account of an infamous transaction which happened in Old Calabar river in
1767. In page 4 and 5 he mentions, "In the King's Bench -- The King against
Lippincot and others -- "William Floyd, of the city of Bristol, mariner, makes
oath and says, that he has sailed out of the port of Bristol, and been
employed in the African trade, as Mate and Master of a vessel, about twenty
years.

"And this deponent also says, that in the year 1767, he, this deponent, was
Chief Mate of the merchant ship, called the Indian Queen, John Lewis, Master;
and says that some time in that year, the said ship was in the river of Old
Calabar, on the coast of Africa, with several other English ships, particularly
the Duke of York, Captain Bevan; the Nancy, Captain Maxwell; and the Concord,
all of Bristol; the Edgar, Captain Ambrose Lace, of Liverpool; and a ship
belonging to London, commanded by one Captain --.

"And this deponent also says, that a quarrel having for some time subsisted
between the inhabitants of Old Town, Old Calabar, and those of New Town, Old
Calabar, the principal inhabitants of Old Town were invited on board the said
English ships, then in the said river, by the respective Captains, under the
pretense of the Captains of those ships using their utmost endeavors to put an
end to the said quarrel between the inhabitants of the said two towns. And this
deponent also says, that on the faith and confidence of being protected by the
said Captains and their crews, whilst on board their ships, about three or four
hundred of the inhabitants of Old Town, Old Calabar, aforesaid, came in ten
canoes, first along side the said Indian Queen, and afterward, the same
evening, went on board the said ship Edgar, Captain Lace, leaving three or four
of their people on board the said ship Indian Queen, among whom the deponent
recollects was one Amboe Robin John, brother of Ephraim Robin John, then a
Grandee, and afterward the King of Old Town aforesaid.

"And this deponent also says, that the same morning, his Commander, Captain
Lewis, gave this deponent orders, that as soon as he, this deponent, should
observe a jack at the mizen-top-mast-head of the said ship Edgar, he, this
deponent, should seize all the people of the Old Town who were on board the
said ship Indian Queen, and along-side of her in canoes; and this deponent also
says, that he, this deponent, in obedience to the said orders, having for some
time looked out for the said signal, but none appearing, he at length, to his
great surprise, heard and saw a firing of small arms and wall-pieces from the
said ship Duke of York, James Bevan, Master, into a canoe, then lying along
side of the said ship Duke of York, (which canoe afterward appeared to belong
to the said Amboe Robin John, and his brother the said little Ephraim Robin
John, and Ancona Robin Robin John) and presently afterward this deponent
observed the said canoe to fill, and several of the people belonging to her
swimming in the water, and the rest being either killed or seized on board the
said ship Duke of York (as this deponent afterward heard and still verily
believes.)

"And this deponent also says, that immediately upon the said firing, all the
other ships then in the said river, (except the Edgar, of Liverpool, and
Concord of Bristol) began likewise to fire on all the canoes belonging to Old
Town aforesaid, and to seize the inhabitants: nine of whom were seized on board
the Indian Queen and along-side of her.

"And this deponent also says, that during the said siring from the ships, he,
this deponent, saw sundry of the inhabitants of New Town, aforesaid, (who this
deponent believes were concerned in the said plot, who had lain concealed near
the shore behind the bushes, until the said firing began) coming from their
hiding-places, in pursuit of the inhabitants of Old Town aforesaid, as had
escaped from the ships. And this deponent saw several of the said ships' boats
join the inhabitants of New Town aforesaid in such pursuits.

"And this deponent also says, that after the firing was over, he saw many
dead bodies in the said river, and on the sands; and he, this deponent, heard
and believes that about three hundred inhabitants of Old Town aforesaid, (many
of whom were principal men of the place) were, through the treachery of the
English Captains, either killed or made slaves of. And this deponent actually
saw the aforesaid Amboe Robin John delivered over from on board the said ship
Duke of York, to some of the inhabitants of New Town aforesaid, one of whom,
this deponent saw, strike off his head in a canoe along side of the said ship
Duke of York. And this deponent also says, that six of the inhabitants of Old
Town aforesaid, were carried off the coast of Africa in the said ship Indian
Queen: and this deponent has heard and believes, that many others were
likewise carried off the said coast by the Duke of York, and other ships there,
and made slaves of in some of the islands and plantations in America."

That the slave trade will prevent the Negroes from cutting one another's
throats is an assertion totally unsupported by reason or experience. It is most
certain that it has a contrary effect, that it tends to promote an incessant
contention between the people of Africa, and to deluge the land with blood.
Anthony Benezet mentions, in his Historical Account of Guinea, page 119, from
an original manuscript journal of a person of credit, who went Surgeon on the
same trade, in a vessel from New York; "Being on the coast, the Commander of
the vessel, according to custom, sent a person on shore with a present to the
King, acquainting him with his arrival, and letting him know they wanted a
cargo of slaves. The King promised to furnish them with slaves; and in order to
do it, set out to go to war against his enemies; designing to surprise some
town, and take all the people prisoners: Some time after the King sent them
word he had not yet met with the desired success, having been twice repulsed in
attempting to break up two towns; but that he still hoped to procure a number
of slaves for them; and in this design he persisted till he met his enemies in
the field, where a battle was fought which lasted three days, during which time
the engagement was so bloody that four thousand five hundred men were slain on
the spot." The author of the journal, who beheld the dead bodies on the field
after the battle, says, "Think what a pitiable sight it was to see the widows
weeping over their lost husbands, orphans deploring the loss of their fathers,
etc." Mr Clarkson says, in his admirable Essay on the Slavery and Commerce of
the human Species, particularly the African. -- "Another argument yet remains,
which, though nature will absolutely turn pale at the recital, cannot possibly
be omitted. In those wars, which are made for the sake of procuring slaves, it
is evident that the contest must be generally obstinate, and that great numbers
must be slain on both sides, before the event can be determined. This we may
reasonably apprehend to be the case: and we have shown that there have not been
wanting instances, where the conquerors have been so incensed at the resistance
they have found, that their spirit of vengeance has entirely got the better of
their avarice, and they have murdered in cool blood, every individual, without
discrimination, either of age or sex: From these and other circumstances, we
thought we had sufficient reason to conclude, that where ten were supposed to
be taken, an hundred, including the victors and vanquished, might be supposed
to perish. Now, as the annual exportation from Africa consists of an hundred
thousand men, and as the two orders of those who are privately kidnapped by
individuals, and of those who are publicly seized, by virtue of the authority
of their Prince, compose together, at least, nine-tenths of the African slaves,
it follows, that about ten thousand consist of convicts and prisoners of war.
The last order is the most numerous. Let us suppose then that only six thousand
of this order are annually sent into servitude, and it will immediately appear
that no less than sixty thousand people annually perish in those wars, which
are made only for the purpose of procuring slaves. But that this number, which
we believe to be by no means exaggerated, may be free from all objection, we
will include those in the estimate who die as they are traveling to the ships.
Many of these unfortunate people have a journey of one thousand miles to
perform on foot, and are driven like sheep through inhospitable woods and
deserts, where they frequently die in great numbers, from fatigue and want. Now
if to those who thus perish on the African continent by want and traveling, we
subjoin those who afterward perish on the voyage, and in the seasoning
together, it will appear that, in every yearly attempt to supply the Colonies,
an hundred thousand must perish even before one useful individual can ^e
obtained.

"Gracious GOD! how wicked, how beyond all example impious, must be that
servitude, which cannot be carried on without the continual murder of so many
and innocent persons! What punishment is not to be expected for such monstrous
and unparalleled barbarities! For if the blood of one man, unjustly shed, cries
with so loud a voice for the Divine vengeance, how shall the cries and groans
of an hundred thousand men, annually murdered, ascend the celestial mansions,
and bring down that punishment which such enormities deserve!" Page 152 and 153.

It seems a sorry argument in favor of the slave trade that it may be the means
of initiating the Negroes into the principles of Christianity. It was not in
this manner that the Apostles propagated the gospel. St. Paul, in his first
Epistle to Timothy, ranks men-stealers among the very worst of mankind. The
penalty for this foul crime was death by the Mosaic law. "And he that steals
a man and sells him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to
death." Exodus, xxi. 16.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Treatment of the Negroes on the Passage to the West Indies and the
Southern States of America -- Explanation of the Plate.

WHEN the Negroes are objected to by the Captains on account of age, sickness,
deformity, or any reason whatever, they are frequently beaten and treated with
great cruelty by the traders. At New Calabar, it is said, by Alexander
Falconbridge, in his Account of the Slave Trade, on the Coast of Africa, the
black traders have frequently in these circumstances put them to death. They
have been known to drop their canoes under the stern of the vessel, and
instantly to behead them in sight of the ship's crew -- Mr. Clarkson says, in
his Substance of the Evidence of sundry Persons on the Slave Trade. "Mr. -- was
lying in the --, in Benin river. At the time alluded to Captain Lemma Lemma, a
great trader of Benin was on board. This trader, happening to be on deck,
observed a canoe with three people in it, crossing the above river. Upon seeing
it he dispatched a war canoe, which was then lying along side the --; and on
board of which were five of his people, in pursuit. They presently came up with
the canoe aforesaid, and having seized her brought her along side of the --.
The three people were then taken out of the canoe, and brought on board. They
consisted of a father, son, and daughter. The two latter were sold to the Chief
Mate, Captain -- being then at the Factory at Gatoe. The former, on account of
his age, was refused. Upon this Capt. Lemma Lemma ordered his people to take
him into his own canoe, which they accordingly did, but laid his head upon the
thwart of the boat, and in two strokes with a cutlass cut it off. This Mr. --
saw with his own eyes." Page 33. The Negroes upon being brought on board the
vessel as slaves, will sometimes, especially the women, become insane; which to
a feeling mind must greatly add to the horror of the scene, though it may be
matter of laughter to the unfeeling. They will sometimes jump into the sea to
escape the fangs of the oppressor, or aim at the destruction of themselves by
some other means. They often attempt insurrections. "The men Negroes (says
Alex. Falconbridge) on being brought aboard the ship are immediately fastened
together, two a^^ two, by handcuffs on their wrists, and by irons riveted on
their legs. They are then sent down between the decks, and placed in an
apartment partitioned off for that purpose. The women likewise are placed in a
separate apartment between decks, but without being ironed. And an adjoining
room, on the same deck, is besides appointed for the boys. Thus are they all
placed in different apartments.

"But at the same time they are frequently stowed so close, as to admit of no
other posture than lying on their sides. Neither will the height between decks,
unless directly under the grating, permit them the indulgence of an erect
posture; especially where there are platforms, which is generally the case.
These platforms are a kind of shelf, about eight or nine feet in breadth,
extending from the side of the ship toward the center. They are placed nearly
midway between the decks, at the distance of two or three feet from each deck.
Upon these the Negroes are stowed in the same manner as they are on the deck
underneath." Page 20.

The annexed plate is a copy of that which was lately published in England by
the Committee of the Plymouth Society for the Abolition of the Slave Trade.
"The annexed plate (they say) represents the lower deck of an African ship of
two hundred and ninety seven tons burden, with the slaves stowed in it, in the
proportion of not quite one to a ton.

"In the men's apartment the space allowed to each is six feet in length, by
sixteen inches in breadth. The boys are each allowed five feet by fourteen
inches. The women five feet ten inches, by sixteen inches; and the girls four
feet by one foot each. The perpendicular height between the decks is five feet
eight inches. -- It may perhaps be conceived from the crowded state in which
the slaves appear in the plate, that an unusual and exaggerated instance has
been produced; this, however, is so far from being the case, that no ship, if
her intended cargo can be procured, ever carries a less number than one to a
ton, and the usual practice has been to carry double that number. The bill
which was passed the last sessions of Parliament, only restricts the carriage
to five slaves for three tons; and the Brooks, of Liverpool, a capital ship,
from which the annexed sketch was proportioned, did, in one voyage, actually
carry six hundred and nine slaves, which is more than double the number that
appear in the plate. The mode of stowing them was as follows: platforms, or
wide shelves, were erected between the decks, extending so far from the sides
toward the middle of the vessel, as to be capable of containing four
additional rows of slaves, by which means the perpendicular height between each
tier, after allowing for the beams and platforms, was reduced to two feet six
inches, so that they could not even sit in an erect posture; besides which, in
the men's apartments, instead of four rows, five were stowed, by placing the
heads of one between the thighs of another. All the horrors of this situation
are still multiplied in the smaller vessels. The Kitty of one hundred and
thirty-seven tons, had only one foot ten inches, and the Venus, of one hundred
and forty-six tons, only one foot nine inches perpendicular height, above each
laver."

Alexander Falconbridge in his beforementioned publication says, "About eight
o'clock in the morning the Negroes are generally brought upon deck. Their irons
being examined, a long chain, which is locked to a ring-bolt, fixed in the
deck, is run through the rings of the shackles of the men, and then locked to
another ring-bolt, fixed also in the deck. By this means fifty or sixty, and
sometimes more, are fastened to one chain, in order to prevent them from
rising, or endeavoring to escape. If the weather proves favorable, they are
permitted to remain in that situation till four or five in the afternoon, when
they are disengaged from the chain, and sent down." Page 21.

In another place he says, "Upon the Negroes refusing to take sustenance, I
have seen coals of fire, glowing hot, put on a shovel, and placed so near their
lips, as to scorch and burn them. And this has been accompanied with threats,
of forcing them to swallow the coals, if they any longer persisted in refusing
to eat. These means have generally had the desired effect I have also been
credibly informed, that a certain Captain in the slave trade, poured melted
lead on such of the Negroes as obstinately refused their food." Page 23.

Again he says, "On board some ships, the common sailors are allowed to have
intercourse with such of the black women whose consent they can procure. And
some of them have been known to take the inconstancy of their paramours so much
to heart, as to leap overboard, and drown themselves. The officers are
permitted to indulge their passions among them at pleasure, and sometimes are
guilty of such brutal excesses, as disgrace human nature.

"The hardships and inconveniences suffered by the Negroes during the passage
are scarcely to be enumerated or conceived. They are far more violently
affected by the sea-sickness, than the Europeans. It frequently terminates in
death, especially among the women. But the exclusion of the fresh air is among
the most intolerable. For the purpose of admitting this needful refreshment,
most of the ships in the slave trade are provided between the decks, with five
or six air-ports on each side of the ship, of about six inches in length, and
four in breadth: in addition to which, some few ships, but not one in twenty,
have what they denominate wind-sails. But whenever the sea is rough, and the
rain heavy, it becomes necessary to shut these, and every other conveyance by
which the air is admitted. The fresh air being thus excluded, the Negroes'
rooms very soon grow intolerably hot. The confined air, rendered noxious by the
effluvia exhaled from their bodies, and by being repeatedly breathed soon
produces fevers and fluxes, which generally carry off great numbers of them.

"During the voyages I made I was frequently a witness to the fatal effects of
this exclusion of the fresh air. I will give one instance, as it serves to
convey some idea, though a very faint one, of the suffering of those unhappy
beings whom we wantonly drag from their native country, and doom to perpetual
labor and captivity. Some wet and blowing weather having occasioned the
port-holes to be shut, and the granting to be covered, fluxes and fevers among
the Negroes ensued. While they were in this situation, as my profession
required it, I frequently went down among them, till at length their apartments
became so extremely hot, as to be only suffered for a very short time. But the
excessive heat was not the only thing that rendered their situation
intolerable. The deck, that is the floor of their rooms, was so covered with
the blood and mucus, which had proceeded from them in consequence of the flux,
that it resembled a slaughterhouse. It is not in the power of human
imagination to picture to itself a situation more dreadful or disgusting.
Numbers of the slaves having fainted they were carried upon deck, where several
of them died, and the rest were with great difficulty restored. It had nearly
proved fatal to me also." Page 24 and 25.

This author mentions that a small ship from Liverpool took in near seven
hundred slaves. -- "By purchasing so great a number (he says) the slaves were
so crowded that they were obliged to lie, one upon another. This occasioned
such a mortality among them, that, without meeting with unusual bad weather, or
having a longer voyage than common, nearly one half of them died before the
ship arrived in the West Indies." Page 26.

He says, "The place allotted for the sick Negroes is under the half deck,
where they lie on the bare planks. By this means those who are emaciated,
frequently have their skin, and even their flesh, entirely rubbed off, by the
motion of the ship, from the prominent parts of the shoulders, elbows, and
hips, so as to render the bones in those parts quite bare. And some of them, by
constantly lying in the blood and mucus, that had flowed from those afflicted
with the flux, and which, as before observed, is generally so violent as to
prevent their being kept clean, have their flesh much sooner rubbed off, than
those who have only to contend with the mere friction of the ship. The
excruciating pain which the poor sufferers feel from being obliged to continue
in such a dreadful situation, frequently for several week, in case they happen
to live so long, is not to be conceived or described. Few, indeed, are ever
able to withstand the fatal effects of it." Pages 27, 28.

The Rev. John Newton, says, in his Thoughts on the African Slave Trade.
London, printed 1788. "With the English ships on the coast the great object is
to be full. When the ship is there it is thought desirable she should take as
many as possible. The cargo of a vessel of one hundred tons, or little more, is
calculated to purchas^ from two hundred and twenty to two hundred and fifty
slaves. Their lodging rooms, below the deck, which are three (for the men, the
boys, and the women) besides a place for the sick, are sometimes more than five
feet high, and sometimes less; and this height is divided toward the middle
for the slaves lie in two rows, one above the other, on each side of the ship,
close to each other, like books upon a shelf. I have known them so close that
the shelf would not easily contain one more. And I have known a white man sent
down among the men to lay them, in these rows, to the greatest advantage, so
that as little space as possible might be lost. Let it be observed that the
poor creatures thus cramped for want of room are likewise in irons, for the
most part both hands and feet, and two together, which makes it difficult for
them to turn or move, to attempt either to rise or life down without hurting
themselves or each other. Nor is the motion of the ship, especially her
heeling, or stoop on one side, when under sail, to be omitted; for this as they
lie athwart or across the ship, adds to the uncomfortableness of their lodging,
especially to those who lie on the leeward, or leaning side of the vessel.

Dire is the tossing, deep the groans. The heat and the smell of these rooms,
when the weather will not admit of the slaves being brought upon deck, and of
having their rooms cleaned every day, would be almost insupportable to a person
not accustomed to them. If the slaves and their rooms be constantly aired, and
they are not detained too long on board, perhaps there are not many die, but
the contrary is often their lot. They are kept down by the weather to breathe a
hot and corrupted air sometimes for a week: this added to the galling of the
irons, and the despondency which seizes their spirits, when thus confined, soon
becomes fatal. And every morning, perhaps, more instances are found than one,
of the living and the dead, like the captives of Menzentius fastened together.

Epidemical fevers and fluxes which fill the ship with noisome and noxious
effluvia, often break out, infect the seamen likewise, and the oppressor and
oppressed fall by the same stroke. I believe nearly one half of the slaves on
board have sometimes died, and that the loss of a third part in these
circumstances is not unusual. The ship in which I was mate, left the coast with
218 slaves on board; and though we were not much affected with epidemical
disorders, I find by my journal of that voyage (now before me) that we buried
sixty, on our passage to South Carolina, exclusive of those who died before we
left the coast, of whom I have no account.

"I believe upon an average between the more healthy and the more sickly
voyages, and including all contingencies, one fourth of the whole purchase may
be allotted to the article of mortality. That is, if the English ships purchase
sixty thousand slaves annually upon the whole extent of the coast, the annual
loss of lives cannot be much less than fifteen thousand." Pages 19 and 20.

This author mentions a shocking instance of inhumanity in a mate of a vessel
with whom he once sailed. The mate was carrying in a longboat, to the ship, a
Negro woman whom he had bought, who had a small child. The child would often
cry, which enraged him so much, that he at last snatched it from the mother and
threw it into the sea.

Mr. Wadstrom the author whom we quoted in the preceding chapter says, "I am
very sorry that humanity obliges me here to divulge a most barbarous practice,
frequently used by the French traders in the middle passage. I have been
assured by several of their merchants captains, that when detained by calms or
contrary winds occasioning a shortness of provisions and water, or when some
fatal disease happens to break out among the slaves, they never fail to mix
corrosive sublimate, or some other active poison with their victuals, and thus
coolly dispatch the wretches committed to their charge. They affirm that it
would be an act of imprudence to undertake such a voyage unprovided with
poisonous drugs, and they boast of being less cruel than the Dutch and English,
who in similar circumstances, throw the innocent victims overboard, without
ceremony. Since my arrival in London, this horrid practice has been
authenticated by the respectable authority of several French gentlemen.

"Of the above cruel practice my Journal furnishes a melancholy instance
communicated to me by Capt. L. of Havre-de-Grace. About two years ago a
slave-vessel, belonging to Breast, having been becalmed on the middle passage,
fell short of provisions and water. The Captain on this occasion had recourse
to poison, by which so great a number was daily dispatched, that of five
hundred slaves only twenty-one arrived at Cape Francois." Pages 29, 30. In
corroboration of what is here mentioned by Mr. Wa^st^om, who cannot be
suspected with reason of any inducement whatever to misrepresent the truth, I
must mention that after writing the above, I have seen a young gentleman of
Philadelphia, who says, that in his passage to the East Indies in the Harmony,
Ca^t Willet, he stopped with the vessel at the Island of Joanna, where he
conversed with the surgeon of a French slave-vessel which had been wrecked at
the Island of Assumption; and that the surgeon told him, they, through fear of
the Negroes obtaining the mastery over them, had massacred some and poisoned
others with ^orrosive sublimate and poisonous drugs Out of 600 the original
number when they left Q^^loa in Africa, only one hundred remained alive. A few
died from sickness in the passage.


It is the general custom of the Captains of the vessels in the slave trade, if
there should be occasion on account of bad weather, to throw some of the
Negroes overboard to lighten the ship. This is also done without reluctance, if
there should be any fear that provisions or water should fall short before the
arrival of the ship at its destined port. Mr. Clarkson, however, in his
celebrated Essay on the Slavery and Commerce of the Human Species, particularly
the African, says, "But indeed so lightly are these unhappy people esteemed
that their lives have even been taken away upon speculation: there has been an
instance within the last five years of one hundred and thirty-two of them being
thrown into the sea, because it was supposed that by this trick their value
could be recovered from the insurers. This instance happened in a ship,
commanded by one Collingwood. On the 29th of November, 1781, fifty four of them
were thrown into the sea alive, on the 30th forty-two more; and in about three
days afterward, twenty six. Ten others, who were brought upon the deck for the
same purpose, did not wait to be hand-cuffed, but bravely leaped into the sea,
and shared the fate of their companions. It is a fact, that the people on board
this ship had not been put upon short allowance. The excuse that this execrable
wretch made on board for his conduct, was the following, "that if the slaves,
who were then sickly had died a natural death, the loss would have been the
owners; but as they were thrown alive into the sea, it would fall upon the
underwriters." Page 88 and 89.

I would now appeal to the heart of every feeling and intelligent person, and
ask them if they think a more horrible scene of cruelty and wickedness, than
this can easily be described? -- One would think that every man who attends to
it, if he is not a villain, must be fired with indignation at it. I would
appeal particularly to the sensibility and the virtue of my female readers,
many of whom know the beauty, the cleanliness, the healthiness, the peace, the
liberty, the dignity, the sanctity of chastity, and how preferable it is to the
misery, the filth, the unwholesomeness, the servitude, the debasement, the
brutality, of incontinence. It is impossible but they must feel exquisitely for
the condition of any of their sex where their persons can be violated with
impunity. It is their duty, however, to do more than to feel -- to act for
their relief. They can act for the relief of the Negroes, by subscribing to
some of the various societies established in America and Europe for their
benefit. In the "Societe des Amiss des Noirs de Paris," women are permitted to
be Some women of great consideration are Members of the Paris Society, viz.
Madame la Marq^^se de Bruss^^s, Madame P^^v^e, Madame Claviere, Madame la
D^chesse de la Roche^oucault, Madame la Marquise de la Fayette. These names are
taken from an accurate list of their Members published by the French Society in
1789. Some other ladies may have been admitted since.
Members; and I should be happy myself, though it might appear romantic to
some, to hear of this custom being established in other countries. A woman can
never act in an unbecoming manner by executing the offices of humanity.



CHAP. VII.
Of the Treatment of the Negroes in the West Indies and other places.

THE appearance of a slave-ship in the harbor of a West India Island is the
most horrible and disgusting of any sight that can be conceived. It is black
with filth, and emits a most fetid smell. It is surrounded with sharks of an
enormous size, who have followed it perhaps from Guinea, and who appear eager
to taste again of those carcases upon which they have frequently been fed. The
Negroes upon their arrival in the West Indies are sometimes sold by scramble.
In a scramble the Negroes bear an equal price, which is settled beforehand
with the purchasers, and every man is to be content with the Negro or Negroes
which he can seize. It has been known that when the sale in this manner has
been made on board a ship, and when upon a signal given the purchasers have
rushed in upon the Negroes, they have been struck with terror, and have jumped
into the sea. When they have been sold in this manner in a merchant's yard on
shore, they have been known to climb over the fence or wall that surrounded
them, and to run wild and affrighted over the whole town. This fear proceeds
greatly from an opinion, very common among the Negroes lately taken from
Africa, that the white people design to eat them. The most usual method,
however, of selling them, is on shore without a scramble. At the sale the most
shocking indecencies are practiced; and husbands and wives, and parents and
children, are separated without reluctance, if it is inconvenient to the
purchaser that they should be kept together. A Negro in some of the West India
Islands and in some parts of America, has scarcely a greater protection, from
the laws, than a horse. The murder of a slave is in many places not punishable
by death, but by a pecuniary fine. The notorious and execrable law of
Barbados, which is a disgrace to human nature, says that "if any man shall of
wantonness or only of bloody-mindedness, or cruel intention, wilfully kill a
Negro, or other slave of his own, he shall deliver into the public treasury,
fifteen pounds sterling, and not be liable to any other punishment or
forfeiture, for the same." -- Laws of Barbados, Act 329.

It has been asserted in the newspapers that this law has very lately been
repealed; and that by the laws of Barbados the penalty of death, is now
affixed to the murder of a Negro by a white man.
The most wanton cruelties are daily practiced upon the Negroes in the
West Indies. I have known, in an Island in the West Indies, where I resided for
some years, a Negro to be severely whipped and to be incessantly persecuted for
refusing his daughter to a manager of an estate, upon the plea that she was
from her early youth unripe for love, and that he had designed her at a more
advanced age, for a young man of his own color, who was his friend, and
attached to his daughter. Reader attend to the hand of Heaven, which was
palpably raised for the punishment of this profligate villain, and if ever thou
have committed an act of injustice or tyranny against any of thy
fellow creatures, know that thy crime can only be expiated by repentance, or by
retribution here or hereafter. This man, whose name was Thomson or Thompson,
left the estate on which he lived soon after the persecution of this Negro for
refusing his daughter to his peevish and damnable lust, and entering into a
privateer, accumulated in a short time the ^^m of a thousand pounds. He
returned to the West Indies, and quickly having consumed his money in riot and
debauchery, he was seized with a disorder the consequence of his amors. As he
lay dying in a tavern, with what is called a corona veneris upon him, and
putrid before his death, there were some gamesters in a near chamber to him,
who were rattling the dice-box, and he was at last, unlamented, and almost
unattended, thrown into a hole like a dead dog. -- "Vengeance is mine; I will
repay says the Lord." Paul's Epistles. A fellow who had the management of an
estate in the same island, is said, when peevish from the gout, to have ordered
a Negro-boy, as he was lying down, to brush the flies from his face, and to
have threatened him with thirty nine lashes for every fly that should touch
him. The consequence is said to have been, what we should naturally suppose,
that in a hot country, where flies are numerous, a great many settled upon the
face of this scoundrel, and inexorable tyrant, and the boy was almost whipped
to death. Sir Hans Sloane, in his introduction to the Natural History of
Jamaica, says, "The punishments for crimes of slaves, are usually for
rebellions, burning them, by nailing them down on the ground, with crooked
sticks, on every limb, and then applying the fire by degrees from the feet and
hands, burning them gradually up to the head, whereby their pains are
extravagant; for crimes of a lesser nature, gelding, or chopping off half the
foot with an axe. These punishments are suffered by them with great constancy.
-- For negligence they are usually whipped by the overseers with lance-wood
switches, till they be bloody, and several of the switches broken, being first
tied up by their hands in the mill-houses. -- After they are whipped till they
are raw, some put on their skins, pepper an^ salt, to make them smart; at other
times (...) masters will drop melted wax on their ski^^s, and use several very
exquisite torments." Vol. 1. Page 57.

There is an account o^ the singular cruelty with which a Negro was put to
death in America, in Letters from an American Farmer, describing certain
provincial situations, manners, and customs, not gener^ly known, and conveying
some idea of the late and present interior circumstances of the British
colonies in North America. Written for the information of a friend by J. Hector
St John, a Farmer in Pennsylvania. He says, "I was not long since invited to
dine with a^ l^nter, who lived three miles from --, where he then resided. To
avoid the heat ^f the sun, I resolved to go on foot, sheltered in a path,
leading through a pleasant woo^ I was leisurely traveling along examining some
peculiar plants which I had collected, when all at once I felt the air strongly
agitated, through the day was perfectly calm and sultry. I immediately cast my
eyes toward the clear ground, from which I was but a small distance, in order
to see whether it was not occasion^d by a sudden shower; when at that instant a
sound resembling a deep rough voice, uttered, as I thought, a few inarticulate
monosyllables. Alarmed and surprised, I precipitately looked all around, when I
perceived at the distance of about six rods, something resembling a cage
suspended to the limb of a tree; all the branches of which appeared covered
with large birds of prey, These birds must have been Turkey Buzzards, of which
see a description in a magnificent work. The Natural History of Catolina.
Florida, and the Bahama Islands. By Mark Catesby, F. R. S.
fluttering about, and anxiously endeavoring to perch on the cage. Actuated by
an involuntary motion of my hands, more than by any design of my mind, I fired
at them; they all flew to a short distance with a most hideous noise; when,
horrid to think, and painful to repeat, I perceived a Negro suspended in a
cage, and left to expire! I shudder when I recollect that the birds had already
picked out his eyes; his cheek-bones were bare; his arms had been attacked in
several places, and his body seemed covered with a multitude of wounds. From
the edges of the hollow sockets, and from the lacerations with which he was
disfigured, the blood slowly dropped, and tinged the ground beneath. No sooner
were the birds flown, than swarms of insects covered the whole body of this
unfortunate wretch, eager to feed on his mangled flesh, and to drink his blood.
I found myself suddenly arrested by the power of affright and terror; my nerves
were convulsed; I trembled; I stood motionless, involuntarily contemplating the
fate of this Negro, in all its dismal latitude. The living spectre, though
deprived of his eyes, could distinctly hear, and in his uncouth dialect begged
me to give him some water to allay his thirst. Humanity herself would have
recoiled back with horror; she would have balanced whether to lessen such
reliefless distress, or mercifully with one blow to end this dreadful scene of
agonizing torture. Had I had a ball in my gun, I certainly should have
dispatched him; but finding myself unable to perform so kind an office, I
sought, though trembling, to relieve him as well as I could. A shell, ready
fixed to a pole, which had been used by some Negroes, presented itself to me; I
filled it with water, and with trembling hands I guided it to the quivering
lips of the wretched sufferer. -- Urged by the irresistible power of thirst, he
endeavored to meet it, as he instinctively guessed its approach by the noise it
made in passing through the bars of the cage. "Tanke, you white man, tanke you,
pute some poison, and give me." How long have you been hanging there? I asked
him. "Two days and me no die; the birds, the birds, aah me!" Oppressed with the
reflections which this shocking spectacle afforded me, I mustered strength to
pass away, and soon reached the house at which I intended to dine. There I
heard the reason for the slave being thus punished, was on account of his
having killed the Overseer of the plantation. They told me that the law of
self-preservation rendered such executions necessary, and supported the
doctrine of slavery with the arguments generally made use of to justify the
practice; with the repetition of which I shall not trouble you at present."
Page 233, etc.

The punishment of this Negro is somewhat similar to the punishment of a Negro
for murder in the island of St. Eustatius: an account of which is to be found
in one of Dodsley's Annual Registers. The conduct of the Negro in St. Eustatius
seems, however, to have been more violent than the conduct of the Negro in
America. As he was working on board a vessel in the harbor of that island, he
happened to kill a white man. At the instigation of another Negro, who was
standing by, and who told him he could be no more than hung if he killed
several white men, he jumped into the sea, swam to the town, and running a muck
(as certain people are described in Hawkesworth's Voyages to do in Batavia) he
was desirous of killing every one he met. A resolute sailor at last overpowered
him. He was condemned to suffer death by being put without food or water in a
cage, which was raised some distance from the ground. He then became, after
some time a most wretched spectacle, and his cries, for water, water, were
incessant. I believe the circumstances in general which are mentioned of the
execution of these two Negroes to be true. It is impossible for a benevolent
mind to read of the torture to which they, but especially the Negro in America,
were exposed, without the utmost horror. It is said his crime was that of
killing the Overseer of the Plantation. He might have killed the overseer in
his own defense* or he might have been provoked to it by injuries of the most
galling and afflictive nature (which we know to be too often inflicted by
tyrants on their slaves) by injuries, through which patience itself might have
been irritated, and which the uncorrected passions of an African could not in
any manner brook. We are told that oppression will make even a wise man mad.
But if we were to allow that the Negro killed the Overseer unjustly, still we
must allow that the punishment to which he was exposed was inhuman, and such as
should not have been inflicted. If he had been guilty of a deliberate murder,
it should have been remembered, however, when he was put to death that he was a
man. There is something diabolical in torture; it begins to be exploded by
civilized nations. It will be said that executions like these are necessary to
strike terror into slaves. In answer to which I will observe that if such
executions are necessary where slavery is practiced, it is a forcible argument
for the abolition of it.

There are ten thousand murders or more committed every year in the West India
islands belonging to the various nations of Europe; without reckoning the
various thousands of Negroes who are destroyed in Africa, in the passage from
Africa to these islands, and in the seasoning them to the climate of the
West Indies. -- There are ten thousand or more Negroes who fall sacrifices
every year to hunger and oppression, who have their lives shortened by the want
of proper sustenance and by unkind treatment. Cook, i^ his Voyage round the
World, speaking of the Island of Rio Jan^^^o, says, "Much gold is certainly
brought from these mines, but at an expense of life that must strike every man,
to whom custom has not made it familiar, with horror. No less than forty
thousand Negroes are annually imported on the King's account, to dig the mines;
and we were credibly informed that, the last year but one before we arrived
here, the number fell so short, probably from some epidemic disease, that
twenty thousand men were draughted from the town of Rio." Hawkesworth's
Voyages, vol. 2, page 34 -- 4 to edition.
If we keep a slave and do not allow him food enough to support him, or time to
procure food enough for his sustenance, we are guilty, in the court of just
conscience, of starving him. I have known in one of the West India islands, I
have been a witness in person to the fact, where masters have allowed their
slaves no food whatever, but have only excused them from the work of a day or
two in the week to provide themselves This is wisely prevented in the Code
Noir, established by the King of France. Leu^ defendous po^eillement de se
decharger de la Nourriture et Subsistence de leurs Esclaves, en leur permettant
de travailler certain Jour de la semaine pour leur Compte particulier. 1 Art.
Sect. 34. -- The Code Noir, though framed by Roman Catholics, by Heretics,
contains some principles which are worthy to be adopted by men of a better
says.
with food. In some of the West India islands they allow no more than six or
eight pints of horse-beans By the Code Noir, the Master of a slave is obliged
to give him two pounds of salt beef, or three pounds of fish, every week, with
a certain quantity of meal. Intelligent Physicians, in the West Indies, have
strongly recommended giving some animal food to the Negroes. It is humanely
ordered in this code, art. 1. sect. 47. Ne pour^ont etre saisis et vendus
separatement, le Mari and la feme, and leurs Infants impuberes, s'ils sont tous
sous la Puissance du meme Maitre.
to each Negro man or woman for a week. Will the Physicians say that this is
food sufficient to support a hard-working and robust person? A healthy Negro
might eat his week's allowance in two days.

In the West Indies the Negroes work from the rising to the setting sun, with
but little intermission, and are driven like cattle, in herds, to their labor,
by the smack of the whip, some under the pressure of disease, some of the women
soon after being delivered, some of these unhappy people tied to a weight of
fifty-six pounds by a chain around their necks, some chained together, and some
of them without clothes to conceal what decency requires to be concealed. A
Negro in one of the British West India islands is said, when persecuted, to
have jumped in a fit of despair into a large copper of boiling sugar, as into
an asylum from tyranny. There are frequent instances of their destroying
themselves from being wearied with oppression. Poor and persecuted sufferers! I
have often seen your afflictions with a moistened eye and a breaking heart. Mr.
Ramsay, speaking of the island of St. Christopher, says, "In the year 1774, or
before the American war, the several articles that a slave had annually
returned to him out of his labor, were, in too many plantations, within the
following proportion. In others, his allowance of food considerably exceeded
what is here mentioned.

Annual allowance of rice, flour, maise, beans, and other grain, L. 0 12 0
Ditto of herrings, and his fish or scrap of salt beef at Christmas, 0 8 0 Ditto
clothes, 0 3 6 Surgeon, quack, medicines, and extraordinary necessaries, when
sick, 0 2 6 Whole annual allowance, L. 1 6 0."

Mr. Wesley says that a gentleman (if he may be called such) roasted his
Negro-slave alive in the southern states of America. He says the following
advertisement was taken from one of the North Carolina papers.

Runaway last November from the subscriber, a Negro fellow named Zeb, about 30
years of age, about 5 feet 8 inches high, a cooper by trade, etc. As he is
outlawed, I will pay twenty pounds proclamation money, out of what the act of
Assembly allows in such cases, to any person who shall produce his head severed
from his body, and five pounds proclamation money if brought home alive.

JOHN MOSLEY.

Here is encouragement given, under the sanction of an act of Assembly, to
commit murder. This, with many other circumstances, should teach us not to pay
too much veneration to what is called law. We should disregard the law of man,
where it is contrary to the law of God. It is said by Attorney General Noy, "It
is a maxim of the common law of England, that "the inferior law must give place
to the superior, man's laws to GOD'S laws." Noy's Maxims, page 19. It would be
happy for mankind if this noble maxim were adopted by all the lawyers upon
earth.

Mr. Clarkson in his Essay on the Slavery and Commerce of the human species,
particularly the African, says, "An iron coffin, with holes in it, was kept by
a certain colonist, as an auxiliary to the lash. In this the poor victim of the
Master's resentment was enclosed, and placed sufficiently near a fire, to
occasion extreme pain, and consequently shrieks and groans, until the revenge
of the master was satiated, without any other inconvenience on his part, than a
temporary suspension of the slave's labor. Had he been slogged to death, or his
limbs mutilated, the interest of the brutal tyrant would have suffered a more
irreparable loss." Page 97.

It must give some consolation to the friends of humanity to know that the
cruelty which was practiced upon the Negroes, begins in some places to be
restrained by law. This may be greatly attributed to the clamor which has been
raised by various writers in defense of these persecuted persons, and should
urge those who have abilities or information to greater exertions in the noble
cause of vindicating the oppressed. -- The Assembly of Jamaica have lately
passed an act to meliorate the condition of the Negroes, and have affixed the
penalty of death to the murder of a Negro. The Assembly of Grenada have passed
an act on the 3d of November 1788, "for the better protection, and for
promoting the increase and population of slaves." The intent of this act, it is
mentioned in the preamble, is "to prescribe reasonable bounds to the power of
masters, and others, having the charge of slaves, by compelling them
sufficiently and properly to lodge, feed, cloth and maintain them, by
introducing them to the knowledge of the christian religion, and affording them
opportunity of improvement in morality, and by inducing them to regular
marriage, and when married protecting them in their conjugal rights." It is to
be lamented that the act does not immediately prevent the further importation
of slaves, but speaks only of the "means of removing in the course of time the
necessity of further importations from Africa." It is worthy, however, of high
approbation in many particulars. It affixes a penalty upon the debauching the
wives of the Negroes.

"9. And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if after the
publication of this act, the proprietor or master of any female married slave
shall debauch, and have carnal knowledge of such slave during her marriage,
such master shall forfeit the sum of one hundred and sixty five pounds, current
money, to be recovered in the Court of Common Pleas, by an action of debt,
bill, plaint, or information, in the name of the Guardians, or any one or more
of them, with the approbation of at least two of them, of the parish or town
where such master resides.

"10. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any
attorney, manager, overseer, book-keeper, tradesman, or other free person,
shall debauch and have carnal knowledge of any married female slave, on the
estate or plantation on which he resides, or in the house or family in which he
is employed, he shall forfeit for every such offense, a sum equal to one half
of his annual salary or wages; and if any stranger or transient visitor shall
debauch and have carnal knowledge of any married female slave, he shall, for
every such offense, forfeit fifty pounds; which said last mentioned forfeitures
shall be recovered, in the said Court of Common Pleas by action of debt, bill,
plaint, or information, in the name of the guardians of the parish, where such
master resides, to be paid into the public treasury for the public use of this
island.

"11. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any slave
shall debauch and have carnal knowledge of any female married slave, during her
marriage, and shall be thereof convicted before any one or more Justice or
Justices of the Peace, both or either of the parties so offending shall and may
receive such corporal punishment not extending to life or limb, as such Justice
or Justices shall, in his or their discretion think reasonable." This act also
aims to prevent a most horrible iniquity, which is taken notice of by Capt. J.
S. Smith, in his "Letter to the Rev. Mr. Hill on the state of the Negro-Trade."
I mean the giving a Negro his freedom, when he has become unable through age or
sickness to do any work. This is a cruelty often practiced in the West Indies.

"18. And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, That no master, owner or
possessor of any slave or slaves shall, under pretense of manumission, or
otherwise, discard or (...) any slave or slaves, on account or by reason of
such slave, or slaves being rendered incapable of labor or service by means of
sickness, age, or infirmity; but every such owner, master, or possessor shall
keep such slave or slaves, on his, her, or their respective properties, and
feed and provide them with wholesome food and decent comfortable clothing and
lodging, and not suffer them to wander about and become burdensome to others
for subsistence, under the penalty of one hundred pounds current money for each
slave so turned away or neglected as aforesaid, to be recovered in the said
Court of Common Pleas, by action of debt, plaint, or information, in the name
of any one or more, with the approbation of two at least of the guardians of
the district in which such slave's residence is, or ought to be, and paid into
the public Treasury, for the public uses of the colony." The penalty prescribed
by this act for a Negroe's running away, is not death, but "such punishment,
not extending to life and limb," as two Justices of the Peace shall in their
discretion order to be inflicted.

It is to be lamented that this act does not lay a heavy penalty upon a crime
which is very frequent in the West Indies. I mean the punishing a young Negro
girl, or her father, if the girl at his instigation, should not consent to
gratify a planter's or a manager's lust. I can vouch for the authenticity of
the account which I have given of the flagitious conduct of one manager in this
respect. It is mentioned in the Roman History that a similar attempt in Appius,
a Decemvir, produced a revolution in Rome, and for ever overturned the power of
him and his colleagues. The people shocked at the wickedness of this
magistrate, who wished to debauch the daughter of a Centurion, fled from the
city as from a polluted place. "What have we to do, (said they) in a city,
where neither chastity nor liberty is safe." See Hooke's Roman History, vol. 2,
page 181, octavo. The celebrated Machiavel, though he often gives dishonest
advice to a Prince for the government of his kingdom, yet sometimes gives him
that which is very salutary. He recommends to him not to debauch the wives or
daughters of his subjects, as such actions have a tendency to inflame the mind
with singular indignation, and to make the family who are injured attempt the
subversion of a government.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the beneficial consequences of declining the Slave Trade; of entering into
a commerce with the natives of Africa; of making settlements in the country,
etc.

IT surely would not be impolitic in the countries of Europe, or in the states
of America, to abolish the slave trade. Here humanity would be doubly or trebly
blessed. It would not only bless those who receive, but those who give. -- It
would not only be advantageous to the Negro, but to the Planter or Farmer, and
afterward to the generous country which should stretch out its hand to relieve
the oppressed. The existence of the European settlements would not be
endangered, nor would a defalcation of revenue ensue, from an abolition of the
slave trade. I am convinced that the abolition of the slave trade would tend to
the interest of the Planters, that it would make the condition of the
West India islands more prosperous, and therefore that no diminution of revenue
would ensue. -- Long, in his History of Jamaica, says, "The purchase of new
Negroes is the most chargeable article attending these estates, and the true
source of the distresses under which their owners suffer: for they involve
themselves so deeply in debt to make these inconsiderate purchases, and lose so
many by disease or other means in the seasoning, that they become unable to
make good their engagements, are plunged in law suits and anxiety; while for
want of some prudent regulation in the right husbanding of their stock, and
promoting its increase by natural means, they intail upon themselves a
necessity of drawing perpetual recruits of unseasoned Africans, the expense of
which forms only a new addition to their debts and difficulties." Vol. 1, page
437. The celebrated Mr. Clarkson in his essay on the impolicy of the African
slave trade says, in confirmation of Mr. Long's Observations which he quotes;
that in the island of Jamaica four Courts are annually held; in each of which
Courts about three thousand new actions are usually brought, chiefly upon
bonds, nine tenths of which bonds have been given to the factors for new
slaves. He says the principal part of the people who were confined in the goals
of that island, were such whose persons had been seized, after their property
had been found inadequate to satisfy the demands of those from whom they had
purchased newly inported Negroes. I myself when I was in the West Indies, knew
a gentleman who purchased ten young Negroes at the sale of the cargo of an
African vessel, for each of whom, he gave thirty pounds current money of the
island of Antigua. His wife was remarkable for the tenderness and the care with
which she caused the new, the young, and the sick Negroes to be nursed upon the
estate, yet notwithstanding every art and expense, every one of them, excepting
one, shortly died. The survivor was a singularly sine boy when he first was
brought to the island, with a piercing eye and cheerful spirit. He, however,
did not escape without a severe illness. In this method of proceeding every
Negro from Africa, who is raised to bear the work of an estate, costs the
purchaser three hundred pounds; or more, for the price of Negroes is now
advanced. It is not unusual, however, that among ten Negroes imported from
Africa into the West Indies not one should survive the seasoning. It has been
asserted by some that the abolition of the slave trade, would cause the ruin of
the European settlements, where Negroes have been used in the cultivation of
the land, and of the southern states of America. It is certain, however, if the
Negroes were treated with humanity, there would be no occasion for further
importations from Africa. Mr. Clarkson, in his beforementioned Essay, says,
"In the year 1771, a gentleman, now in England, became the proprietor of an
estate situated near Montego-Bay, in the parish of Hanover, Jamaica. The number
of slaves at that time upon it, amounted to two hundred and seventy-six, all of
whom had been born in the island. In the year 1786, after fifteen years had
elapsed, the number was found the same: nor had any purchase whatever been made
within that period, nor was any at the end of it necessary.

In the year 1754, another gentleman succeeded to an estate in the same parish
and island. -- It contained at that time, two hundred and thirty three slaves.
^^y this last account, dated in June 1786, the number appeared to have
increased without any supplies from the coast, to three hundred and fourteen,
though fourteen had been sent to other estates, or manumitted.

In the same island are six other estates, which have been in a similar
situation, and for the truth of which I will become accountable if required.

The first of these has supported itself, independently of the slave trade, for
twenty years, and from no other cause than that the owner, having thought it
more to his interest that his slaves should increase, by birth, than by
purchase, made his arrangements accordingly.

The ^^cond and third, situated in the parish of Clarendon, have had no
occasion for a single recruit from Africa for many years.

The fourth, in the parish of St. James, found a resource within itself, and by
the following means: The proprietor made it a rule to release every woman from
all obligation to labor, as soon as she had a certain number of children, sit
to be put to work. The consequence of this was, that his slaves were
continually on the increase.

The fifth and sixth, situated in the parish of St. John, and vale of Guanaboa,
on account of the humane disposition of the overseer, and the moderate share of
labor which he imposes on the slaves, have no necessity for supplies.

The above is an account of such plantations as can be specified, and proved
beyond the possibility of refutation, to have subsisted independently of the
slave trade in the island of Jamaica. Many others are to be found there in the
same predicament." Page 82 and 83.

What has been brought about in Jamaica may be practiced in other places. The
use of the plough in the West Indies, would enable a Planter to work his estate
with fewer Negroes than he uses in his present system. Mr. Long, in his History
of Jamaica, says, "It was found that one plough used on an estate in the Parish
of Clarendon, turned up as much ground in one day, and in a much better manner,
than one hundred Negroes could perform with their hoes in the same time." Vol.
1, page 449. The objection that has been made to the plough in the island of
Antigua, is that it would require more cattle upon an estate, and consequently
more land to be laid out in pasture. This, in many estates, where they have a
good deal of pasture, would be no inconvenience whatever, and where they are
deficient in this respect, the inconvenience might be remedied by planting
Guinea grass in the intervals between the cane-pieces: for the additional
number of cattle required would be very small. In Jamaica they have lately
thought it worth the while to enter again upon this plan of working an estate,
and have encouraged people from England, who are acquainted with the method of
managing a plough, to live upon their estates as overseers, that the Negroes
might be properly instructed. There cannot be a doubt but that with judgment
and with patience this new system might be adopted with vast advantage.

The Members of the British Legislature, and those who are in authority among
other nations of the world who carry on the slave trade, if they do not
endeavor by every reasonable exertion to abrogate that trade, are guilty
indirectly of murder. They suffer murder to be committed by their neglect. They
will answer, therefore, for such neglect at that dread tribunal where there
will be an "Inquisition for blood." The Privy Council in England have lately
been engaged in inquiries concerning the slave trade. This surely is highly
becoming in them. If a single murder is committed among a civilized people, do
we not raise an immediate hue and cry after the supposed murderer? Is not the
house, the city, the country, where it was done, all at once agitated? And
shall the annual murder of an hundred thousand, or more, innocent persons, not
excite our inquiries, and not inflame our indignation? In England petitions
have been presented to Parliament against the slave trade by various sects of
christians, and from numerous cities; and it is expected that before long an
act will be past for its final abolition. -- In America the states of
Rhode Island and Pennsylvania, to their immortal honor be it spoken, have led
the way in this holy and glorious work. The ^^gislatures in both these states
have lately past acts, which (...) a heavy penalty upon any of their citizens
who shall be engaged in the business of carrying Negroes from Africa to any
part of the world whatever. It would be happy if all their sister states would
follow them in this path of virtue and of glory, which they have trodden.

It has been said in defense of the slave trade that it is a nursery for
seamen. Mr. Clarkson in his Essay on the Impolicy of the African Slave Trade,
has shown that it is rather the grave of the seamen of Great Britain. He says
that "In 910 seamen employed in the slave-vessels for one year, will be lost
more than 200 In 910 do. in East-Indiamen, 37 87 In 910 do. in West-Indiamen,
21 87 In 910 do. in the Petersburgh trade, 10 87 In 910 do. in the Newfoundland
do. 10 87 In 910 do. in the Greenland do. 9 87

Having now furnished a comparative view of the loss sustained in some of the
trades that are carried on by the subjects of this country, I will venture to
assert that if we except the slave trade, all the rest of them put together did
not dissipate more than ^ine hundred seamen in the year 1786. In the same year
were destroyed by the slave trade nineteen hundred and fifty. So that the truth
of my former assertion, "that this iniquitous trade destroys more, in one year,
than all the other trades of Great Britain, when put together, destroy in two,"
will but too manifestly appear." Page 66 and 67.

Mr. Clarkson says that the Captains in the slave trade are generally the most
inhuman tyrants in the world; that they often cruelly beat their seamen for
trivial or imaginary faults, and will sometimes wantonly murder them. He says
that he has within his possession the most indisputable proofs of his
assertions.

It is greatly to be lamented that mankind will not relinquish the trade for
slaves with Africa, and carry on a commerce for other matters. The country is
fertile in the extreme. It is productive of various and important articles of
trade. In the Westminster Magazine, for February, 1784, Monthly Chronic^e, page
106, it is said, "Authentic letters from the factory at Senegal advise that
some English gentlemen have been near 150 leagues up the country, in search of
natural curiosities, and that they had brought specimens of several valuable
plants, among others that called the Vereck, or white gum tree, which the Moors
and Arabs, who know neither to sow or reap, live upon during their long
journies. This gum is likely to prove a valuable article of commerce, being of
great use in giving a body to silks, cottons, etc." Tout le Monde pretend que
la Gomme est pectorale, ^umeetante, anodine, and ^efiai^hissante, qu^ elle
epaissit les hum^urs trop sereuses, and qu' en leur donnant plus de
consistance, elle les empeche de se me^er a^^c le sang, and de le gater. Elle
est bonne your le Rhume, speci^igue pour ari^^^er le Flux de sang and les
Dyssenteries* and m^me pour les Hemorrhagies les plus obstinees. Elie sert de
Nour^^^re aux Negres qui habitent le long du Niger, and aux Maures qui
l'apportent aux Europeens: ils ne prennent d'autres provisions de Vivies que la
Gomme meme qu'ils portent a la Traite. Tou^ la mangent, avec Plaisir, on ils la
^^oquent comme du suc^e, on been ils la ^ont amollir, dans l'Eau, and
l'avalent. Ils la regardent comme une Noutriture qua sa simplicite and ses
autres qualites rendent excellent. Bien des Ouvriers s'en servent, surlou^
ceux qui travaillent aux Eto^fes de Lain, and de sole, ^ux Taffetas, aux
Rubans, aux Treillis, and a ^ne Infinite d'autres ouvrages. -- Nouvelle
Histoi^e de l' Asrique Francoise. Par. M. L' Abbe Demanet, Ci-devant Cure et
Aum ^er pour le Roi en Afrique. Tome Pr^mier. Pages 54, 55.
-- Africa also produces gold-dust, ivory, indigo, tobacco, cotton, coffee,
ambergris, spices, drugs, rice, silver, wool, skins, vermillion, quicksilver,
musk, copper, wax, ebony, lignum-vitae, dying-woods, etc. Mr. Clarkson says,
"It is a curious circumstance, but it has been established by the experience of
many years, that continents produce the finest cotton, and that the larger the
island, and of course the nearer they approximate to continents, the finer is
the cotton there. In the first class is reckoned the Persian and African. In
the second that from the Brazils, Siam, and Surinam. In the third that from St.
Domingo; and in the fourth that from the British West-Inda islands." Page 19.
-- He says again, "I cannot close my account of this article without mentioning
that cotton, crimson in the pod, is to be found in Africa. It grows principally
in the Eyeo country, and is to be seen in many of the Whidah cloths. A small
specimen of it was brought home in the year 1786.

The value of this cotton would be great both to the importer, and manufacturer
of muslins. The former would immediately receive eight shillings for a pound of
it, and the latter would gain considerably more by his ingenuity and taste. He
might work it up into the white cotton in delicate spots and figures, and as
both would be of their natural color, no inconvenience would arise from
washing." Page 20. Mr. Clarkson says that the dies of Africa are superior to
those in any part of the world, and that in Africa they have the most curious
as well as the most valuable woods, not only for dying, but for other purposes.

If the slave trade were abolished, settlements of great importance could be
immediately commenced in the country, for the purpose of carrying on a
different commerce. It is said that the French purchased, a few years ago, a
considerable tract of land at Cape Verd, which they now wish to use with this
design. Preachers also of different sects of christianity would immediately
repair to Africa to propagate the Gospel, who are now, on account of the
commotions and troubles which the slave trade produces, discouraged from the
attempt.

It might be advantageous to the European settlements and the southern states
of America to abolish gradually the slavery of the Negroes which they at
present possess, as well as to prevent the importation of others. Mr. Coxe, in
his travels, says, "The generality, indeed, of the Polish Nobles are not
inclined either to establish or give efficacy to any regulations in favor of
the peasants, whom they scarcely consider as entitled to the common rights of
humanity: A few Nobles, however, of benevolent hearts and enlightened
understandings, have acted upon different principles, and have ventured upon
the expedient of giving liberty to their vassals. -- The event has showed this
project to be no less judicious than humane, no less friendly to their own
interests than to the happiness of their peasants: for it appears that in the
districts, in which the new arrangement has been introduced, the population of
their villages is considerably increased, and the revenues of their estates
augmented in a triple proportion. The first noble who granted freedom to his
peasants was Zamoiski, formerly Grand-Chancellor, who in 1760, infranchised six
villages in the Palatinate of Masovia.

The revenues of the six villages since their enfranchisement, have augmented
in a much greater proportion than their population. In their state of vassalage
Zamoiski was obliged, according to the custom of Poland, to build cottages and
barns for his peasants, and to furnish them with seed, horses, ploughs, and
every implement of agriculture; since their attainment of liberty they are
become so easy in their circumstances, as to provide themselves with all these
necessaries at their own expense; and they likewise cheerfully pay an annual
rent, in lieu of the manual labor, which their master formerly exacted from
them. By these means the receipts of this particular estate have been nearly
tripled.

Upon signing the deed of enfranchisement of six villages, their benevolent
master intimated some apprehensions to the inhabitants, lest encouraged by
their freedom, they should fall into every species of licentiousness, and
commit more disorders than when they were slaves. The simplicity and good sense
of their answer is remarkable: "When we had no other property," returned they,
"than the stick which we hold in our hands, we were destitute of all
encouragement to a right conduct, and having nothing to lose, acted on all
occasions in an inconsiderate manner; but as soon as our houses, our lands, and
our cattle, are our own, the fear of forfeiting them will be a constant
restraint upon our actions." The sincerity of this assertion was manifested by
the event.

The example of Zamoiski has been followed by Chreptowitz, Vice Chancellor of
Lithuania, and the Abbe Bryzotowski, with similar success. I was informed by a
person who had visited the Abbe's estate at Pawlowo near Vilna, that the happy
countenance and comfortable air of these peasants made them appear a different
race of men from the wretched tenants of the neighboring villages. The
peasants, penetrated with a sense of their master's kindness, have erected at
their own expense, a pillar with an inscription expressive of their gratitude
and affection." -- Coxe's Travels into Poland, etc. vol. 1, page 158, etc.
octavo.

What has been practiced in Poland, may in some measure be brought about in the
West Indies, and the southern states of America. In these latter places the
receipts of a man's estate who liberated his negroes might not be tripled, but
they might be considerably augmented, if his Negroes were gradually liberated
in a judicious manner. It is well said, by the Bishop of Chester, in a sermon
which was preached a few years ago in England, before the society for the
propagation of the Gospel in foreign parts: "If ever then we hope to make any
progress in our benevolent purpose of communicating to our Negroes the benefits
and the blessings of religion, we must first give them some of the benefits and
blessings of society and of civil government. We must, as far as is possible,
attach them and their families inseparably to the soil, must give them a little
interest in it; must indulge them with a few rights and privileges to be
anxious for; must secure them by sixed laws from injury and insult; must inform
their minds, correct their morals, accustom them to the restraints of legal
marriage, to the care of a family, and the comforts of domestic life: must
improve and advance their condition gradually, as they are able to bear it; and
even allow a certain number of the most deserving to work out their freedom by
degrees (according to the plan said to be established in some of the Spanish
settlements) as a reward of superior merit and industry, and of an uncommon
progress in the knowledge and the practice of christianity." The Bishop, in a
(...), adds "The Spanish regulation here alluded to is said to have taken place
at the Havannah, and is as follows: As soon as a slave is landed, his name,
price, etc. are entered in a public register; and the master is obliged by law
to allow him one working day in every week to himself, besides Sunday; so that
if he chooses to work for his master on that day, he receives the wages of a
freeman for it; and whatever he gains by his labor on that day is so secured
to him by law, that the master cannot deprive him of it. As soon as the slave
is able to purchase another working day, the master is obliged to sell it him
at a proportionable price, viz. one fifth part of his original cost; and so
likewise the remaining four days, at the same rate, as soon as the slave is
able to redeem them, after which he is absolutely free. See "Mr. Sharp's
Appendix to the just limitation of slavery," etc. page 53.

There is something wonderfully pleasing and benevolent in this institution. It
were greatly to be wished that some expedient of this kind might be tried at
least as an experiment, in some of the English islands. It is believed (on very
just grounds and after the maturest consideration of the subject) by men of
great judgment and long experience in the management of West India estates,
that if the Negroes on any of our plantations were emancipated gradually (for
every improvement of their situation must be very gradual) in some such way as
is here proposed, and retained afterward by their owner as day-laborers at a
certain fair stipulated price, it would be an alteration no less advantageous
to the Planter, than kind and compassionate to the Negroes. Having been
previously habituated to the climate and to hard labor, and animated at the
same time by that spirit, which freedom and gratitude, and the prospect of some
little property never fail to inspire, he would do three times the work of a
languid, feeble, heart-broken slave; and the plantation would be cultivated
with far less expense to the proprietor than the frequent purchase of fresh
Negroes, and their maintenance in health, sickness, and old age, amount to. See
"History of Jamaica," 502 and 503.

I have been informed that in the most flourishing state of Barbados, the
sugar-cane there was principally cultivated by hired white servants." Vide
Bishop of Chester's Sermon, pages 21, 22, 23.

Mr. Wesley, in his Thoughts upon Slavery, says, "white men, even Englishmen,
are well able to labor in hot climates: provided they are temperate both in
meat and drink, and inure themselves to it by degrees. I speak no more than I
know by experience. It appears from the thermometer, that the summer heat in
Georgia, is frequently equal to that in Barbados, yea to that under the line.
-- And yet I and my family (eight in number) did employ all our spare time
there, in felling of trees and clearing of ground, as hard labor as any Negro
need be employed in. The German family likewise, forty in number, were employed
in all manner of labor. And this was so far from impairing our health that we
all continued perfectly well, while the idle ones all round about us, were
swept away as with a pestilence."


That this regulation might in a great measure answer the end proposed appears
from the memoirs of Guilma, superior of the Indian Mission on the great river
Oronoko, where he resided thirty years. He informs us, that a great number of
Negroes on the coast of Curacoa, where it is said this regulation took place,
had bought themselves free; that of all those who had been converted to
christianity, he had not known one, who ever turned back to his former
heathenish practices; and that the King of Spain had not more faithful and more
industrious subjects than these Negroes who were thus liberated. It has been
observed that if the Negroes were liberated they would not continue in the
West Indies, and the Planters would be ruined for the want of laborers to work
their estates. If they were free they would become attached to the places where
they were born, and would consider them in every respect as their country. It
is probable also, if proper laws were made in the West Indies for the
protection of the Negroes that many would go thither from England and other
places. It is said in an address to the Honorable Sir William Dolben, Baronet,
signed Thomas Cooper, Gustavus Vassa, Thomas Jones, Ottobah Cugoana Steward,
George Robert Mandevil, John Mandevil, who are free Negroes residing in
England: "We are not ignorant, however, Si^, that the best return we can make
is, to beha^^ with sobriety, fidelity, and diligence in our several stations,
whether remaining here under the protection of the laws, or colonizing our
native soil, as most of us wish to do under the dominion of this country; or,
as free laborers and artizans in the West India islands, which, under equal
laws, might become to men of our color places of voluntary and very general
resort." This address was printed in the London papers of July 1788. It is to
be allowed, however, that an immediate and abrupt liberation of the Negroes in
the West Indies and the southern states of America, might often be not only
disadvantageous to their masters, but to themselves, Simuel Nottingham, a
Quaker of the Island of Tortola, who sately died, liberated his slaves who were
twenty in number. In a few years it is said that almost all of them were taken
up for theft, or perished from intemperance and wa^^.
and the community in general.

It will be objected by some that the evidence, relative to the enormities in
the treatment of Negroes which have been mentioned in the foregoing chapters,
should be certain and unexceptionable. In answer to which it may be observed
that the evidence that may be produced is the most certain and unexceptionable
that can be conceived. Factors, of various nations, who in different times have
been in Africa, allow that that the Negroes are frequently stolen from ^hence.
They may be said to give evidence against their interest. Mr. Wadstrom, who is
a man of character and rank in Sweden, went to Africa for the purpose of
enquiring into the particulars of the slave trade. He says that the Negroes are
generally stolen from thence, and gives such instances of cruelty as would melt
the heart if it were flesh and not stone. In this he is supported by the
evidence of other impartial reputable persons. It is regularly proved, as
appears in the fifth chapter, in a Court of Justice, that the crews of some
ships upon the coast of Africa, murdered a King, and carried his two brothers,
with many other Negroes, into slavery. Mr. Falconbridge and Mr. Newton, whom I
have mentioned in the preceding part of my work, are men of credit, and were
eye witnesses of the savage cruelties committed in a slave vessel. What they
have declared, may be coroborated by the evidence of thousands. Mr. Wesley and
Mr. Ramsay, who have given long accounts of the treatment of the Negroes, were
religious men, (as well as myself) and could be tempted by no interest to
misrepresent the matter. All candid men who have an opportunity of judging,
will say that we have generally spoken the truth. We were witnesses of many of
the facts which we write upon, and have not, intentionally, I believe, uttered
a falsehood in regard to the most trivial matter.

I think it necessary to observe before I conclude that it is just to
discriminate between the Planters. There are some among this class of people
for whom I have a great regard. My father, who was a genuine descendant of the
ancient and highly illustrious House of Crawford, One branch of the family of
Lindsay, Earl of Crawford, were to take "the Si^name and Arms of Crawford." See
British Compendium, or, Rudiments of Honor. Vol. 3. page 402. -- Third ^^tion.
London, printed, 1729.
settled, however, in the West Indies. -- He married a native of the island of
Antigua; where, at his death, he bequeathed a sugar-estate to my elder brother.
In the female line I have relations in the West Indies, who are the possessors
of numerous slaves, for whom I bear a becoming affection. I have also in the
Indies, many friends, from whom I have received great civilities. In traveling
through several of the West India islands I have met the most liberal
hospitality. The Planters are sometimes polished men, with the best education
which Europe can afford. I have known some to live in great splendour and
elegance, and who disdaining the vulgar vicious custom of pressing their guest^
to drink, have permitted me to depart from their houses, cheerful and
satisfied, but sober. Some of my relations and some of my friends are
remarkable for the humanity with which they treat their slaves, and perhaps
would not be unhappy if government were to adopt a rational plan for their
gradual emancipation. It is not, therefore, from malice, that I give these
Observations on Negro-Slavery, to the world, but from a firm, a holy, regard to
truth, and a generous solicitude for the interests of the afflicted.

Some injudicious persons, in their rage against Negro-Slavery, are fond of
representing all the Planters, as men utterly destitute of Principles and good
manners. The celebrated Dr. Priestley, who, though all his religious tenets may
not be defensible, is certainly, in many respects, an enlightened man, says,
that the West-Indians "are not themselves aware, how much their natures are
debased, and how offensive their behavior often is to others." In many, there
may be this offensive behavior, and whose natures may be much debased, but in
other natives of the West Indies and the southern states of America, (I think I
shall not be accused of partiality by those who may properly judge of the
matter) are to be found men of elegant manners and of generous spirits. The
West-Indians are remarkable, as well as the natives of the southern states of
America, for one virtue, the noble one of hospitality, in which many of their
opponents should endeavor to imitate them. -- This under proper regulations is
the virtue of a Christian. The Apostle recommends to "use hospitality one to
another without grudging." 1 Peter, 4; 9.

It is to be lamented that in some of the states of America, where they have in
some degree liberated the Negroes, they have not advanced them to all the
rights of men. Why, if their color is only the effect of climate, the effect of
that glorious sun which we all admire, and God has made of one blood all
nations of men, and his son has impartially redeemed them all, why, if these
things are so, do we haughtily keep them at such a distance from us? If these
propositions are true, which I have indisputably proved in this work, which has
been the produce of much reading and consideration, a Negro should elect and be
elected like other freemen; he should be suffered to marry a white woman
without their being persecuted; he should sit, if he deserves it by his morals
and his manners, at the first of our tables; and should be encouraged to sit in
religious meetings, not on a bench with Negroes only, but indiscriminately with
white people In short, he should be admissible to all the rights, privileges,
and honors, of a white man.

It is the duty of all the nations in the world who are engaged in the
slave trade to desist from the iniquitous occupation. I am aware of the
objection that would be made to a discontinuance of the slave trade by
interested men. It would be said that a fresh importation of Negroes is
absolutely necessary for the carrying on a West-Indian or American plantation.
I am of a contrary opinion. If the slave trade is prohibited, the owners of
these plantations, as it has been before observed, can work them with the
Negroes which they already possess. They would be prevented from the injury of
their fortunes by the purchase of newly imported Negroes, which experience
proves to be a fascinating and ruinous custom to many. They would also be
induced, that they might raise a sufficient number to cultivate their property,
to treat their slaves with more humanity. The premium, which is said to be
given of late of twenty shillings to an Overseer, who should raise any Negro
child to one year's age upon any estate in Jamaica, would be offered in other
places. The regulation established in the Spanish settlements might be
introduced, which experience has proved to be wise and salutary, and not
visionary and prejudicial. In addition to this regulation, a Code of Laws might
be enacted, and properly executed, for the security of various rights to the
Negroes until the final obtainment of their freedom. And above all things it
would be happy if the Moravians, who are scattered over the West Indies, were
every where invited to instruct the Negroes in the principles of christianity.
There is generally a remarkable difference between those Negroes who attend to
the preaching of the Moravians, and the others. They become, when influenced by
the doctrines of this respectable set of men, composed, and decent in their
appearance. Their dress is cleanly, without any thing in it that is garish or
absurd. Their conduct also is industrious and moral. They steal no more, are
faithful to their trusts, and are capable, frequently, of advancing,
considerably, the interests of their masters. From relinquishing also that
promiscuous commerce between the sexes with which the others injure themselves,
they are more healthy, live longer, and when married, raise more children. The
slave trade, however, in whatever gradual manner the Negroes may be liberated
in various countries, should at all events be immediately abolished

If the atrocious and numberless murders which are committed by those engaged
in it are not punished, they must bring down the curse of Heaven upon those
governments which suffer their subjects to perpetrate them unmolested. It is
said in scripture, "For blood it polluteth the land, and cannot be wiped out,
but by the blood of him that shed it." A celebrated and pious author in a
pamphlet which I before have quoted, addresses himself in a feeling and
eloquent manner to the Captains of the vessels engaged in this trade. These are
the persons who are said to reap the greatest profit from the commerce, and
are, perhaps, the most criminal of all the parties concerned. These people see
the mischiefs which are practiced in the trade of which some, especially among
the young planters, are ignorant. He says, "May I speak plainly to you? I must.
Love constrains me: Love to you, as well as those you are concerned with? Is
there a GOD? You know there is. Is he a just GOD? Then there must be a state of
retribution: a state wherein the just GOD will reward every man according to
his work. Then what reward will he render to you. O think betimes! before you
drop into eternity: think how "he shall have judgment without mercy, that
showed no mercy." Are you a man? Then you should have a human heart. But have
you indeed? What is your heart made of? Is there no such principle as
compassion there? Do you never feel another's pain? Have you no sympathy? no
sense of human woe? No pity for the miserable? When you saw the flowing eyes,
the heaving breasts, or the bleeding sides and tortured limbs of your
fellow creatures, was you a stone or a brute? Did you look upon them with the
eyes of a tiger? When you squeezed the agonizing creatures down in the ship, or
when you threw their poor mangled remains into the sea, had you no relenting?
Did not one tear drop from your eye, one sigh escape from your breast? Do you
feel no relenting now? If you do not, you must go on till the measure of your
iniquities is full. Then will the great GOD deal with you, as you have dealt
with them, and require all their blood at your hands." See Wesley's Thoughts on
Slavery. We are not, however, to place the criminality of this business wholly
upon the Captains, for the Merchants who are engaged in it, as well as the
Planters, and the Government which suffers it, should participate in our blame.
The Merchant, who originally contrives the design of sending a vessel to Africa
for the purpose of buying or kidnapping Negroes, seems to be highly guilty. He
who knew the mischief, according to the doctrine of scripture and reason,
appears worthy of many stripes, while he who was ignorant is worthy of few.
That there are some in a great measure ignorant of the evils which are
practiced in the procuring slaves, especially among the young Planters, and
who, if they knew those evils would not defend it, is reasonable to imagine.
The societies therefore which have been formed for the abolition of the
Slave Trade would render an important service to mankind by publishing the
various tracts which have been written by men of talents in favor of the
Negroes, and dispersing them about the world. They should solicit subscriptions
for this noble purpose. They should endeavor to excite, in the words of the
Apostle, "what indignation, yea what fear, yea what vehement desire, yea what
zeal, yea what revenge."

It is thought by all impartial and enlightened writers to be more advantageous
for a nation to employ the labo^ of freemen "Les Mines des Tures dans (...)
B^nnat de Temeswar, eto^ent plus riches que celles de Hongrie, and else ne
rendoient pas tant, parce qu'^ls n'imagin^ient jamais que les Bras de leurs
Esclaves." Montesquieu.
than of slaves, in any work whatever. But if it were to be allowed that a West
Indian or American plantation could be worked somewhat better with Negro-slaves
than without them, yet this would avail but little with wi^e and good men. Is
the human form to be degraded to the brutal by this odious practice of slavery
I would ask (for I want to wake the conscience which now slumbers in the
breasts of these tyrants; I want to rouse it, and to make it come forth "like a
giant refreshed with wine") is humanity and reason, and christianity, and GOD,
to be insulted for so trivial a purpose? It will become us to tell those who
against the light of conscience, perversely and stubbornly continue to
encourage this deleterious and detestable practice, that they will for ever
preclude themselves from the entrance into that joy which GOD has promised to
the just and the benevolent. They must expect to see (for such a consequence
will follow their sullen unrepentance as naturally as the night follows the
day) the Redeemer and the Judge of Mankind, at that tremendous bar, to which we
shall all be brought, put off for a while his benignant aspect, and with a look
alienated from them, and clothed with terror as with a robe. They must expect
to hear him pronounce these dreadful and heartrending words, "Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels." I cannot
speak with moderation of this odious custom of Negro-slavery. It is a flagrant
and portentous wickedness. It comprehends or it leads to every other crime. It
makes us passionate, revengeful, unjust, inhuman. It is the essence of
iniquity. It is an insult to the understanding for any one to defend it, and to
pretend to the character of a christian or an honest man. When I consider this
gigantic evil in all its dismal consequences; the cruel wars it occasions in
Africa; the horrible anguish that those who are kidnapped must feel when
confined in the loathsome hold of a ship and rent from their freedom, their
family, their property, and their country; the agony inexpressible in
particular of a husband in such a situation who knows that the wife of his
bosom cannot be used by himself while she may be polluted by others; the
unrelenting oppression with which they are afterward scourged in a foreign
land; the insults, the famine the drudgery, the tortures to which they are
exposed: when I consider these things I could say of the Slave Trade, in the
words of the Roman Orator, that verbo satis digno tam nefaria res appellari
nullo modo potest. I could almost exclaim upon this matter, as he does when
speaking of a Roman citizen who was crucified in Sicily, by Verres, as he says
in sight of liberty and his country, Denique si non ad homines, verum ad
Bestias; aut ^^iam, ut longius progrediar, si in aliqua desertissima
solitudine, ad saxa and ad scopulos haec conqueri and deplorare vellem, tamen
omnia muta atque inanima, tanta and tam indigna rerum atrocitate commoverentur
See near the conclusion of the last Oration upon Verre^.
.

The blood of the persecuted Africans, which has been shed by the merciless
hand of oppression, cries against many a nation to the Throne of the Almighty
for vengeance. -- It shakes ^he pillars of Heaven. O let us desist from the
oppression of these unhappy men, lest GOD (to use the emphatical language of
the Prophet) should "come, and smite the earth with a curse."

FINIS.
Lately published by this Author, THE Christian, a Poem, in four Books;
Observations upon the Downfall of the Papal Power, and the consequent Events;
etc.


