THE MISCELLANEOUS WORKS OF COLONEL HUMPHREYS.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY HODGE, ALLEN, AND CAMPBELL; AND SOLD AT THEIR RESPECTIVE
BOOK-STORES.

M.DCC.XC.

[With Copy-right according to Law.]

TO THE Duke de ROCHEFOUCAULT.
MY LORD,
YOUR knowledge of the language in which these miscellanies are written, your
protection of the fine arts, and your civilities to the Author, induce him to
address this Collection to your Lordship. It is consistent with the frankness
of a freeborn American to say, that your noble blood, and immense possessions,
would be of little consideration with the Republicans, whose Constitutions of
Government you have made familiar to your own nation by translating them into
French, if unsupported by your personal merit and amiable accomplishments.

THE frequency of naval intercourse, and the extension of polite literature,
seem greatly to approximate the distant parts of the globe -- the Atlantic is
no barrier for limiting fame. Your reputation has been long since extensively
and advantageously known throughout the United States of America. That
republican people cannot but admire so excellent a private character, so
disinterested a patriot, and so able a defender of the rights of human nature.
The voice of undebauched reason, which is thus raised at this vast distance
from you, to bestow a tribute of applause on your virtues, is infinitely
different from the venal voice of flattery. Nor should the conscious
satisfaction, which results from the review of a life spent in beneficent
pursuits, prevent a virtuous man from being also pleased with the favorable
opinion that is entertained of his conduct, by such of his fellow-men as can
have no possible sinister object to bias their judgments.

IN presenting for your amusement the trifles which have been occasionally
composed at my leisure hours, I assume nothing beyond the negative merit of not
having ever written any thing unfavorable to the interests of freedom,
humanity, and virtue. With sentiments of the highest consideration and respect,

I have the honor to be, Your Grace's Most obedient and most humble servant, D.
HUMPHREYS.
New York, July 4, 1790.
Extract from Barlow's Vision of Columbus.
" WHILE freedom's cause his patriot bosom "warms,
" In lore of nations skilled, and brave in arms,
" See HUMPHREYS glorious from the field retire,
" Sheath the glad sword, and string the sounding lyre --
" That lyre, which erst, in hours of dark despair,
" Roused the sad realms to urge the unfinished war:
" Over fallen friends with all the strength of woe,
" His heartfelt sighs in moving numbers flow.
" His country's wrongs, her duties, dangers, praise,
" Fire his full soul, and animate his lays.
" Immortal WASHINGTON with joy shall own
" So fond a favorite, and so great a son."
Extract from the Critical Review for June, 1785.
THE performance, [i. e. the Address to the Armies of America] may, with some
trifling exceptions, be justly styled a GOOD POEM, but not a very pleasing one
to good Englishmen.

Extract from the Monthly Review for May, 1785.
THE Reviewers, after mentioning the indulgence to which the Author of the Poem
addressed to the Armies of America is entitled, on account of his having
written it amidst the "hurly burly" of military toils, proceed to observe,
Under every disadvantage, however, we perceive, in his conceptions, much of the
true spirit of poetry; and there is a considerable degree of melody and harmony
in his versification. He is a warm patriot; full of zeal for the prosperity of
the American Arms; and consequently, to the English reader, some of his
expressions respecting the British Invasion will seem to have fallen from a pen
dipped in gall; but we must remember that he wrote, as well as fought, IN
America, and FOR America. He celebrates the principal events of the war, and
has many descriptive glances at the SCENERY, which cannot but afford amusement
to even his readers on this side of the Atlantic, however they may disapprove
the cause which gave birth to the POEM. --

From the Journal de Paris, May 7, 1786. Strictures on a Poem addressed to the
American Armies.
A GREAT many remarkable circumstances render this little performance worthy of
the public attention. It was composed in America, in 1782, at the encampment of
general Washington, when the British still occupying New York and Charleston,
the great cause of American liberty was not then decided. The author is an
American officer, writing in the midst of the tumult of a camp, and
conciliating the occupations and duties of his profession, with that silence
and meditation which every poetical composition demands. The translator is a
French general officer (M. le M. de Chattellux) in whom the talents of a great
military and literary character are acknowledged to be blended in a very
extraordinary degree.

THE object of the work is to animate the citizens of America to the defense of
their country. The marcl^ of the poet is easy and unaffected; his ideas are
noble and just, his sentiments amiable; and his translator, animated with the
same spirit, and endowed with the same talents, has not only transfused into
our language the beauties of the original, but even added new ones to them.

THE translator himself announces in his letter to Col. Humphreys, that he has
not piqued himself upon being literal, and that he has taken some liberties in
his translation. But he is right in saying that this liberty does not go so far
as independence: for that which he adds, is so connected with the text itself,
that it may be considered as a development of his author's idea; and what he
retrenches (being commonly foreign to our idiom and phraseology) would not have
been preserved by the American author himself, if, more familiarised with our
language, he had been pleased to translate his work into French. This liberty
may be criticized: but we will say, in justification of the translator, that
the author is very far from complaining of it.

THIS little poem is scarcely susceptible of extracts, We will only cite the
apostrophe to Genesis Washington, when he comes to take command of the American
army.

O FIRST of heroes, favorite of the skies,
To what dread toils thy country bade thee rise!
O raised by heaven to save the invaded state!
(So spoke the sage long since thy future fate)
'Twas thine to change the sweetest scenes of life
For public cares -- to guide the embattl'd strife --
Unnumber'd ills of every kind to dare --
The winter's blast, the summer's sultry air,
The lurking dagger -- and the turbid storms
Of wasting war, with death in all his forms --
Nor aught could daunt. Unspeakably serene,
Thy conscious soul smiled over the dreadful scene."
THE recital of the death of Brown, who perished in an ambuscade of savages, of
Scammel who was assassinated by a pistol-shot in the reins, at the moment after
he had surrendered himself to a detachment of English, and that of Col.
Laurens, son to the famous Laurens, president of Congress, will ever be read
with sympathetic sorrow. The descriptions of the author are full of animation,
his regrets of sensibility; and the translator has not rested below his model.

THE reader will, moreover, remark with pleasure, the contrast which the author
has had the art to introduce, in a skilful manner, between the two very
distinct parts of his poem. In the first, he paints the dangers which America
experienced, and the calamities of war which desolated her for so long a
period. In the last he collects only delightful ideas and pictures of happiness
he unfolds to America the auspicious effects of that liberty she had obtained,
and the felicity she is about to enjoy. He invites his fellow citizens, for
whom the task of glory is henceforth accomplished, to transport themselves upon
the borders of the lakes, and upon the fertile banks of the Belle Riviere The
name by which the Ohio is known in French,
, a river most worthy of its name. He represents to them all the beauties which
nature has lavished upon those happy regions, as a recompense to make them
forget, on the bosom of rural felicity, the toils which they have endured for
their country.

IN fine, he predicts the future prosperity of this nascent empire, which rises
upon a plan dictated by wisdom, and which will for ever remain the asylum of
happiness and liberty.

Translation of the introductory letter, prefixed by the Marquis de Chatellux,
to the French edition of this Poem.
"I WAS with you, my dear Colonel, when, after a glorious campaign, you
composed in silence those elegant verses, wherein you have displayed the whole
extent of your genius, in only wishing to express your patriotic sentiments.
You made a mystery of the matter to me -- and your modesty has exposed you to
commit an unpardonable fault against the alliance that you have so nobly
celebrated; since the European nation, which has had the first fruits of your
poem, is precisely the English: but it is proper to acknowledge, on the
present, as well as on many other occasions, this nation has proved that its
enmity does not extend to merit and talents. All the public papers which are
printed in London, have made your praises resound, and those very papers have
first disclosed your secret. It is true, I have seen some of them, the authors
of which appeared to be vexed, that a composition, in which the English are not
treated with ceremony, should obtain the honors of public readings and public
applauses The Morning Herald, and other English papers, made mention of the
lecture of the poem in question, made in public, apparently in clubs or other
places, where people enter by ticket.
; and who wished to despoil you of your most illustrious title, that of being
an American, by making you to be born in, I known not what district, of
England. However that may be, it is certain that France had reason to complain.
Of no avail will it be for you to say, that your work is written in English; do
you not know how much that language is in vogue among us, and how much we are
disposed to translate it? I will not disguise any thing. It has happened that
your friend, your companion in arms, came to seize possession at your
apartments, of a beautiful copy of your poem, printed at London with all the
accuracy and magnificence, which they always bestow on every important work. It
has, moreover, fallen to his lot to avail himself of your absence This letter
was addressed to Col Humphreys, while he was in England.
for making it known to his countrymen. For making it known! that is saying too
much: but at least to give some idea to those who are not sufficiently
acquainted with the English language, to read it with facility. I have caused
the text to be printed with the translation. This is a very generous
proceeding, with which, I contend, you ought to be mightily satisfied. Every
reader who may be in a condition to compare one with the other, will often cry
out: "he has not known how to render all the energy, all the beauty of the
original:" -- and that is exactly what I desire. There is not a pretty woman
who does not pardon her painter for not making her as handsome as she really
is, whenever she is placed by the side of her portrait; then not a comparison
but what proves to her advantage: and comparison is of all praises the most
flattering, because it is the most perceptible, the most precise. My object
will, therefore, be entirely completed, since all the criticisms which I shall
merit, will turn to your glory. Being a translator in prose, and a translator
who does not pique himself upon being literal, I should have much to fear from
my author, if that author was not Colonel Humphreys, whom I wish in every point
to make my model. He loves liberty too much, to be offended at what I have
taken on this occasion: this liberty shall not go quite to independence: this
is all I promise in assuring him that I will always be more faithful to that
friendship he has accorded me, than to the text of which I took possession."

Le Marquis de Chatellux.

ADDRESS TO THE ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
PREFACE.
PERHAPS the following little poem may be considered with the more indulgence
by the public, after it shall be known, that it was actually written, at a
period While the American army was encamped at Peck's-kill, and the enemy
occupied the heights of New York and Charleston.
when the army was in the field, and the author so far engaged in the duties of
his profession, as to have but little leisure for subjects of literature or
amusement. And it will not be necessary to demonstrate to those who have the
least knowledge of a military life, how unfavorable such a state is to poetical
contemplation. This, it is presumed, may pertinently be urged in excuse for the
slighter errors and inaccuracies of the performance: and the design must, in
some measure, alone for any of a different complexion.

To inspire our countrymen, now in arms, or who may, hereafter, be called into
the field, with perseverance and fortitude, through every species of difficulty
and danger, to continue their exertions for the defense of their country, and
the preservation of its liberties, is the object of this address.

For this purpose, it was imagined, no considerations could be more effectual,
than the recollection of the past, and the anticipation of the future. For,
where is the man to be found, who, after all that has been done and suffered --
after such a profession of blood and treasure has been expended -- and such
important advantages have been obtained -- would basely relinquish and leave
unfinished the illustrious task of rearing an empire, which, from its situation
and circumstances, must surpass all that have ever existed, in magnitude,
felicity, and duration?

Although the author entertains the most sanguine expectations of the gratitude
and liberality, with which the continent will reward those who have literally
borne the heat and burden of the day of war -- he has not insisted on those
pecuniary or slighter considerations; but has attempted to turn the attention
to the future grandeur, happiness and glory of the country for which we are now
contending. The lands already granted to the army, first suggested the idea of
a military settlement on the Ohio, or some of those western regions, whose
beauties can never be sufficiently displayed, much less exaggerated by
description. The mild temperature and serenity of the air, the salubrity of the
climate, the fertility of the soil, the luxuriance of its products, the extent
of territory, and the amazing inland navigation, which those boundless lakes
and immeasurable rivers will open -- cannot fail, one day, to render that
garden of the world equal to the representation given of it, in the conclusion
of the poem. The possession of such a country, (rescued from the hand of
invasion) in a perfect state of freedom and security, will be a glorious
compensation for all our toils and sufferings, and a monument of the most
unparalleled bravery and patriotism, to the remotest posterity. Stimulated with
the love of glory, allured by these delightful prospects, and animated with the
pleasing hope of the speedy fruition of those rapturous scenes -- there are
thousands who have drawn the sword, with a resolution never to sheath it, until
a happy period shall be put to the contest. For himself, the writer declares,
that having already devoted whatsoever talents and abilities nature has
conferred upon him, to the service of his country -- no efforts that can be
made with his voice, his pen, or his sword, shall ever be wanting to confirm
its LIBERTIES and INDEPENDENCE.

ARGUMENT.
THE Armies, which are adderssed, designated: and the subject proposed --
Great Britain commences hostility against her Colonies -- the Colonies arm --
contrast of the two armies -- battle of Bunker's-hill -- a Commander in Chief
appointed to the American armies -- his character -- augmentation of the
American forces -- reinforcement to those of Britain -- peculiarly affecting
circumstances which attended the deaths of Brown, Scammel and Laurens --
eulogium of the American troops -- anticipation that their meritorious services
and sufferings will be consigned to immortality -- apostrophe to Britain on the
cruelty practiced upon prisoners, and its effects in exciting such indignation
in the Americans as will tend to the emancipation of their country -- view of
the successes of the American arms at Trenton, Princeton, Saratoga, Stony
Point, in the Southern States, and at York Town -- tribute of gratitude to the
French King and nation -- still the Americans are to rely on their own
resources for the establishment of Independence -- apostrophe to Independence
-- Britain obliged to relinquish her ideas of conquest -- dawn of peace --
invocation to peace -- address to the armies on the happiness to be expected
from it -- invitation for them to settle in the western country -- its beauties
and advantages described -- enjoyments resulting from the friendship of those
who were in arms together -- character of Americans in different ages --
improvements of every kind in America -- prayer to the Supreme Being that its
felicity may become complete and perpetual.

ADDRESS, etc.
Jam fides, et pax, et honor, pudorque
Priscus, et neglecta redire virtus
Audet; apparetque beata pleno
Copia cornu." --
HOR.
Incipient magni procedere menses. --
VIRG.
YE martial bands! Columbia's fairest pride!
To toils inured, in dangers often tried --
Ye gallant youths! whose breasts for glory burn,
Each selfish aim and meaner passion spurn.
Ye who, unmoved, in the dread hour have stood,
And smiled, undaunted, in the field of blood --
Who greatly dared, at freedom's rapturous call,
With her to triumph, or with her to fall --
Now brighter days in prospect swift ascend,
Ye sons of fame, the hallowed theme attend;
The past review; the future scene explore;
And Heaven's high King with grateful hearts adore!
WHAT time proud Albion, thundering over the waves,
Frowned on her sons, and bade them turn to slaves --
When, lost to honor, virtue, glory, shame,
When naught remained of Britain but the name --
The parent state -- a parent now no more --
Let loose the hirelings of despotic power,
Urged to keen vengeance their relentless ire,
And hoped submission from their sword and fire.
As when dark clouds, from Andes' towering head,
Roll down the skies, and round the horizon spread,
With thunders fraught, the black'ning tempest sails,
And bursts tremendous over Peruvian vales:
So broke the storm, on Concord's fatal plain;
There fell our brothers, by fierce ruffians slain,
Inglorious deed! to wild despair then driven,
(...), suppliant, made our great appeal to heaven.
Then the thrill trumpet echoed from afar,
And sudden blazed the wasting flame of war;
From state to state, swift flew the dire alarms,
And ardent youths, impetuous, rushed to arms:
"To arms," the matrons and the virgins sung,
To arms, their sires, their husbands, brothers sprung.
No dull delay -- wherever the sound was heard,
Where the red standards in the air appeared,
Where, through vast realms, the cannon swelled its roar,
Between the Acadian and Floridian shore.
Now joined the crowd, from their far-distant farms,
In rustic guise, and unadorned in arms;
Not like their foes, in tinsel trappings gay,
And burnished arms that glittered on the day;
Who now advanced, where Charl'stown reared its height,
In martial pomp, and claimed the awful fight;
And proudly deemed, with one decisive blow,
To hurl destruction on the routed foe --
Not so -- just heaven had fixed the great decree,
And bade the sons of Freemen still be free;
Bade all their souls with patriot ardour burn,
And taught the coward fear of death to spurn,
The threats of vengeance and of war to brave,
To purchase freedom, or a glorious grave.
Long raged the contest on the embattled field;
Nor those would fly, nor these would tamely yield --
Till Warren fell, in all the boast of arms,
The pride of genius and unrivaled charms,
His country's hope! -- full soon the gloom was spread:
Oppressed with numbers, and their leader dead,
Slow from the field the sullen troops retired,
Behind, the hostile flame to heaven aspired.
THE imperious Britons, on the well-fought ground,
No cause for joy or wanton triumph found,
But saw with grief their dreams of conquest vain,
Felt the deep wounds, and mourned their vet'rans slain.
NOR less our woes. Now darkness gathered round;
The thunder rumbled, and the tempest frowned;
When lo! to guide us through the storm of war,
Beamed the bright splendour of Virginia's star.
O first of heroes, favorite of the skies,
To what dread toils thy country bade thee rise!
" This alludes to expressions made use of by president Davies, in a sermon
preached at Hanover, in Virginia, during the war of 17^5.
Oh raised by heaven to save the invaded state!"
(So spoke the sage long since thy future fate)
'Twas thine to change the sweetest scenes of life
For public cares -- to guide the embattled strife --
Unnumber'd ills of every kind to dare,
The winter's blast, the summer's sultry air,
The lurking dagger, and the turbid storms
Of wasting war, with death in all his forms --
Nor aught could daunt. Unspeakably serene,
Thy conscious soul smiled over the dreadful scene.
THE foe then trembled at the well-known name;
And raptured thousands to his standard came.
His martial skill our rising armies formed;
His patriot zeal their generous bosoms warmed:
His voice inspired, his godlike presence led,
The Britons saw, and from his presence fled.
Soon reinforced from Albion's crowded shore,
New legions came, new plains were drenched in gore;
And scarce Columbia's arm the fight sustains,
While her best blood gushed from a thousand veins.
Then thine, O Brown! that purpled wide the ground,
Pursued the knife through many a ghastly wound.
Ah hapless friend! permit the tender tear
To slow even now, for none flowed on thy bier,
Where cold and mangled, under northern skies,
To famished wolves a prey thy body lies --
Which erst so fair and tall in youthful grace,
Strength in thy nerves, and beauty in thy face,
Stood like a tower, till struck by the swift ball --
Then what availed (to ward the untimely fall)
The force of limbs, the mind so well informed,
The taste refined, the breast with friendship warmed,
(That friendship which our earliest years begun)
Or what the laurels that thy sword had won,
When the dark bands from thee, expiring, tore
Thy long hair mingled with the spouting gore?
Nor less, brave Scammel, frowned thine angry fate,
(May deathless shame that British deed await!)
On York's famed field, amid the first alarms,
Ere yet fair victory crowned the allied arms,
Fell chance betrayed thee to the hostile band,
The hapless victim of the assassin hand!
Lo! while I tell the execrable deed,
Fresh in his side the dark wound seems to bleed;
That small red current still for vengeance cries,
And asks, "why sleeps the thunder in the skies?"
On him, ye heavens, let all your vengeance fall,
On the cursed wretch who winged the insidious ball.
But thou, blessed shade, be soothed! be this thy praise,
Ripe were thy virtues, though too few thy days.
Be this thy fame, through life of all approved,
To die lamented, honored, and beloved.
AND see, far south, where yonder hearse appears,
An army mourning, and a land in tears!
There Laurens, passing to an early tomb,
Looks like a flower just withering in its bloom.
Thy father's pride, the glory of our host!
Thy country's sorrow, late thy country's boast!
O Laurens! generous youth! twice had thou bled --
Could not the ball with devious aim have sped?
And must thy friends, now peace appears so near,
Weep the third stroke that cuts a life so dear,
That blots the prospect of our rising morn,
And leaves thy country, as thy ^ire, forlorn?
Companions loved! long as the lifeblood flows,
Or vital warmth in this fond bosom glows,
While there I cherish your remembrance dear,
Often will I drop the tributary tear.
BUT what avails to trace the fate of war
Through fields of blood, and point each glorious scar?
Why should the strain your former woes recall,
The tears that wept a friend or brother's fall,
When by your side first in the adventurous strife,
He dauntless rushed, too prodigal of life?
Enough of merit has each honored name,
To shine, untarnish'd, on the rolls of fame,
To stand the example of each distant age,
And add new luster to the historic page:
For soon their deeds illustrious shall be shown
In breathing bronze, or animated stone,
Or where the canvas, starting into life,
Revives the glories of the crimson strife.
YE sons of genius, who the pencil hold,
Whose master strokes, beyond description bold,
Of other years and climes the history trace,
Can ye for this neglect your kindred race?
Columbia calls -- her parent voice demands
More grateful offerings from your filial hands.
And soon some bard shall tempt the untried themes,
Sing how we dared, in fortune's worst extremes;
What cruel wrongs the indignant patriot bore,
What various ills your feeling bosoms tore,
What boding terrors gloom'd the threatening hour,
When British legions, armed with death-like power,
Bade desolation mark their crimsoned way,
And lured the savage to his destined prey,
When fierce Germania her battalions poured,
And rapine's sons, with wasting fire and sword,
Spread death around: wherever your eyes ye turned,
Fled were the peasants, and the village burned --
How did your hearts for others' sufferings melt!
What torturing pangs your bleeding country felt!
What! when you fled before superior force,
Each succor lost, and perished each resource!
When nature fainting from the want of food,
On the white snow your steps were marked in blood!
When through your tattered garbs you met the wind,
Despair before, and ruin frowned behind!
When naught was seen around, but prospects drear,
The insulting foe hung dreadful on your rear,
And boastful ween'd, that day to close the scene,
And quench your name, as though it never had been.
WHY, Britain! raged thine insolence and scorn?
Why burst thy vengeance on the wretch forlorn?
The cheerless captive, to slow death consigned,
Chilled with keen frost, in prison glooms confined,
Of hope bereft, by thy vile minions cursed,
With hunger famished, and consumed with thirst,
Without one friend -- when death's last horror stung,
Rolled the wild eye, and gnawed the anguish'd tongue.
WHY, Britain! in thine arrogance and pride,
Did thou heaven's violated laws deride,
Mock human misery with contemptuous sneers,
And fill thy cup of guilt with orphans' tears?
The widow's wailing, and the wretch's groan,
Rise in remembrance to the eternal throne,
While the red flame, through the broad concave driven,
Calls down the vengeance of insulted heaven.
And did thou think, by cruelty refined,
To damp the ardor of the heaven-born mind,
With haughty threats to force the daring train
To bow, unnerv'd, in slav'ry's galling chain --
Make countless freemen -- then no longer free --
Shrink at thy frown, and bend the servile knee?
And could thou dream? then wake, dissolve thy charms,
Roused by their wrongs, see desperate hosts in arms!
No fear dismays, nor danger's voice appalls,
While kindred blood for sacred vengeance calls:
Their swords shall triumph over thy vaunted force,
And curb the conqu'ror in his headlong course.
WHAT spoils of war, thy sons, Columbia, claimed!
What trophies rose, where thy red ensigns flamed!
Where the great chief, over Del'ware's icy wave,
Led the small band, in danger doubly brave,
On high designs -- and ere the dawning ^our,
Germania's vet'rans owned the victor's power;
Or on the muse's plain, where round thy tomb,
O gallant Mercer! deathless laurels bloom;
Or where, anon, in northern fields renowned,
The tide of slaughter stained the sanguine ground,
When the bold freemen, gathering from afar,
Foiled the proud foe, and crushed the savage war:
On that brave band their country's plaudit waits,
And consecrates to fame the name of Gates.
Nor less the valor of the impetuous shock,
Which seized the glorious prize on Hudson's rock,
Where Wayne, even while he felt the whizzing ball,
Plucked the proud standard from the vanquished wall.
Now turn your eyes, where southern realms are seen,
From ruin rescued, by the immortal Green:
See toils of death, where many a hero bleeds,
Till rapid victory, to defeat, succeeds,
On numerous plains, whose streams, unknown to song,
Till this great era, rolled obscure along,
Their names shall, now, to fame familiar grown,
Outlast the pile of monumental stone.
Or see on fair Virginia's strand arise,
The column pointing to the favoring skies,
Inscribed with deeds the allied arms have done,
And engraved with trophies from Britannia won:
Here stand the conquering bands: the vanquished throng
Through the long lines in silence move along:
The stars and lilies, here, in laurels dressed --
And there, dark shrouds the banner'd pride invest:
These twice twelve banners once in pomp unfurled,
Spread death and terror round the southern world:
In various colors from the staff unroll'd,
The lion frowned, the eagle flamed in gold,
Hibernia's harp, reluctant, here was hung,
And Scotia's thistle, there, spontaneous sprung:
These twice twelve flags no more shall be displayed,
Save in the dome where warlike spoils are laid:
Since, where the fathers in high council meet,
This hand has placed them prostrate at their feet.
So beam the glories of the allied band!
And such the dawning hope that cheers our land!
Since Gallia's sire, high on a throne of state,
Sublimely good, magnanimously great!
Protector of the rights of human kind,
Weighed the dread contest in his royal mind,
And bade his fleets over the broad ocean fly,
To succor realms beneath another sky:
Since his blessed troops, in happiest toils allied,
Have fought, have bled, have conquered by your side:
The mingled stream, in the same trench that flowed,
Cements the nations by their heroes' blood.
YET still, Columbians, see what choice remains,
Ignoble bondage, and inglorious chains,
Or all the joys which liberty can give,
For which you dare to die, or wish to live.
On the drawn sword, your country's fate depends:
Your wives, your children, parents, brothers, friends,
With all the tender charities of life,
Hang on the issue of the arduous strife.
To bolder deeds, and vict'ry's fierce delights,
Your country calls, and heaven itself invites.
Charmed by their potent voice, let virtue's flame,
The sense of honor, and the fear of shame,
The thirst of praise, and freedom's envied cause,
The smiles of heroes, and the world's applause,
Impel each breast, in glory's dread career,
Firm as your rock-rais'd hills to persevere.
Now the sixth year of independence smiles,
The glorious meed of all our warlike toils;
Auspicious power, with thy broad flag unfurled,
Shed thy stern influence on our western world!
With thy congenial flame our hearts inspire,
With manly patience, and heroic fire,
The rudest shock of fortune's storm to bear;
Each ill to suffer; every death to dare;
To rush undaunted in the adventrous van,
And meet the Britons, man opposed to man;
With surer aim, repel their barbarous rage;
Shield the poor orphan, and the white-hair'd sage;
Defend the matron, and the virgin's charms;
And vindicate our sacred rights with arms.
This, the great genius of our land requires,
This, the blessed shades of our illustrious fires,
This, the brave sons of future years demand,
Cheers the faint heart, and nerves the feeble hand;
This, sacred hope, that points beyond the span,
Which bounds this transitory life of man,
Where glory lures us with her bright renown,
The hero's triumph, and the patriot's crown,
The fair reward to suffering virtue given,
Pure robes of bliss, and starry thrones in heaven.
CHANGED are the scenes. Now fairer prospects rise,
And brighter suns begin to gild our skies.
The exhausted foe, his last poor effort tried,
Sees naught remain, save impotence and pride:
His golden dreams of fancied conquest over,
(And Gallia thundering round his native shore,
Iberia aiding with Potosi's mines,
While brave Batavia in the conflict joins)
Reluctant turns, and, deep involved in woes,
In other climes prepares for other foes.
ANON, the horrid founds of war shall cease,
And all the western world be hushed in peace:
The martial clarion shall be heard no more,
Nor the loud cannon's desolating roar:
No more our heroes pour the purple flood,
No corse be seen with garments rolled in blood;
No shivering wretch shall roam without a shed;
No pining orphans raise their cry for bread;
No tender mother shriek at dreams of woe,
Start from her sleep, and see the midnight foe;
The lovely virgin, and the hoary sire,
No more behold the village flame aspire,
While the base spoiler, from a father's arms,
Plucks the fair flower, and riots on its charms.
EVEN now, from half the threatened horrors freed,
See from our shores the lessening sails recede:
See the red flags, that to the wind unfurled,
Waved in proud triumph round the vanquished world,
Inglorious fly: and see their haggard crew,
Despair, rage, shame, and infamy pursue.
HAIL, heaven-born peace! thy grateful blessings pour
On this glad land, and round the peopled shore:
Thine are the joys that gild the happy scene,
Propitious days, and festive nights serene;
With thee gay pleasure frolics over the plain,
And smiling plenty leads thy prosperous train.
THEN oh, my friends! the task of glory done,
The immortal prize by your bold efforts won --
Your country's faviours, by her voice confessed,
While unborn ages rise and call you blessed --
Then let us go where happier climes invite,
To midland seas, and regions of delight;
With all that is ours, together let us rise,
Seek brighter plains and more indulgent skies;
Where fair Ohio rolls his amber tide,
And nature blossoms in her virgin pride;
Where all that beauty's hand can form to please,
Shall crown the toils of war, with rural ease,
The shady coverts, and the sunny hills,
The gentle lapse of ever-murm'ring rills,
The soft repose amid the noontide bowers,
The evening walk among the blushing flowers,
The fragrant groves that yield a sweet perfume,
And vernal glories in perpetual bloom,
Await you there: and heaven shall bless the toil,
Your own the produce, as your own the soil.
No tyrant lord shall grasp a thousand farms,
Curse the mild clime, and spoil its fairest charms:
No blast severe your ripening fields deform,
No vollied hailstones, and no driving storm:
No raging murrain on your cattle seize,
And nature sicken with the dire disease.
But golden years, anew, begin their reigns,
And cloudless sunshine gild salubrious plains.
Herbs, fruits, and flowers, shall clothe the uncultur'd field,
Nectareous juice, the vine and orchard yield,
Rich, dulcet creams the copious goblets fill,
Delicious honey from the trees distill;
The garden smile, spontaneous harvests spring,
The woodlands warble, and the valleys sing.
ALONG the meads, or near the shady groves,
There sport the flocks, there feed the fatt'ning droves;
There strays the steed, through gloomy vales afar,
Who erst moved lofty in the ranks of war.
THERE free from envy, cank'ring care, and strife,
Flow the calm pleasures of domestic life:
There mutual friendship soothes each placid breast,
Blessed in themselves, and in each other blessed.
From house to house the social glee extends,
For friends in war, in peace are doubly friends:
Their children taught to emulate their fires,
Catch the warm glow, and feel the kindred fires,
Till by degrees the mingling joys improve,
Grow with their years, and ripen into love:
Nor long the blushing pair in secret sigh,
And drink sweet poison from the lovesick eye;
Blessed be their lot! when in his eager arms
The enamored youth folds the fair virgin's charms,
On her ripe lip imprints the burning kiss,
And seals with hallowed rites, the nuptial bliss.
Then festal sports the evening hours prolong --
The mazy dance, and the sweet warbling song:
Then each endearment wakes the ravished sense
To pure delights, and raptures most intense:
And the pleased parent tells his listening son,
What wondrous deeds, by him, in youth, were done.
No fights of woe, no torturing fears annoy
The sweet sensations of the heartfelt joy:
Nor shall the savages of murderous soul,
In painted bands dark to the combat roll,
With midnight orgies, by the gloomy shade,
On the pale victim point the reeking blade;
Or cause the hamlet, lulled in deep repose,
No more to wake, or wake to ceaseless woes:
For your strong arm the guarded land secures,
And freedom, glory, happiness, are yours.
So shall you flourish in unfading prime,
Each age refining through the reign of time;
A nobler offspring crown the fond embrace,
A band of heroes, and a patriot race:
Not by soft luxury's too dainty food,
Their minds contaminated with their blood:
But like the heirs our great forefathers bred,
By freedom nurtured, and by temperance fed;
Healthful and strong, they turned the virgin soil,
The untamed forest bowed beneath their toil:
At early dawn they sought the mountain chase,
Or roused the Indian from his lurking place;
Curbed the mad fury of those barbarous men,
Or dragged the wild beast struggling from his den:
To all the vigor of that pristine race,
New Charms are added, and superior grace.
THEN cities rise, and spiry towns increase,
With gilded domes, and every art of peace.
Then cultivation shall extend his power,
Rear the green blade, and nurse the tender flower;
Make the fair villa in full splendors smile,
And robe with verdure all the genial soil.
Then shall rich commerce court the favoring gales,
And wondering wilds admire the passing sails,
Where the bold ships the stormy Huron brave,
Where wild Ontario rolls the whit'ning wave,
Where fair Ohio his pure current pours,
And Missisippi laves the extended shores.
THEN oh, blessed land! with genius unconfined,
With polished manners, and the illumined mind,
Thy future race on daring wing shall soar,
Each science trace, and all the arts explore;
Till bright religion, beck'ning to the skies,
Shall bid thy sons to endless glories rise.
AS round thy clime celestial joy extends,
Thy beauties ripen, and thy pomp ascends;
Farther and farther still, thy blessings roll,
To southern oceans and the northern pole;
Where now the thorn, or tangled thicket grows,
The wilderness shall blossom as the rose,
Unbounded deserts unknown charms assume,
Like Salem flourish, and like Eden bloom.
AND oh, may heav'r when all our toils are past,
Crown with such happiness our days of old:
So rise our sons, like our great fires at last:
In freedom's cause, unconquerably bold;
With spotless faith, and morals pure, their name
Spread through the world, and gain immortal fame.
AND thou Supreme! whose hand sustains this ball,
Before whose nod, the nations rise and fall,
Propitious smile, and shed diviner charms,
On this blessed land, the queen of arts and arms:
Make the great empire rise on wisdom's plan,
The seat of bliss, and last retreat of man.
Extract from the Columbian Magazine, for Oct. 1786. Remarks on "THE HAPPINESS
OF AMERICA," a Poem.
A LOVE of liberty, a spirit of enterprise, fortitude in difficulties, and a
military turn of mind, are conspicuous traits in the American character. Those
dispositions, if properly directed, will tend to the aggrandizement and
prosperity of our infant republican empire.

AMERICA stands high, also, in literary reputation: and so great is the spirit
which now prevails in the United States, for the promotion of useful learning,
and advancement of science, that, aided by the native genius of our people, we
may reasonably expect to arrive at the highest degree of eminence, in these
respects. Nor have we cause to draw less favorable expectations, from the
specimens that have been already exhibited, of the natural taste and propensity
of our countrymen for the liberal and polite arts.

AMONG the patriots, statesmen, heroes, philosophers, and artists of this
country, we find names that would do honor to any age or nation. -- What a
glorious constellation is formed by an assemblage of those worthies, whom
America has the honor of enrolling among her sons!

AMIDST the favorite pursuits of our countrymen, the muses have had their
votaries; -- nor have (...) been unsuccessfully courted. Their genius seems
much delighted with our sylvan scenes. The face of nature, throughout the
United States, exhibits the sublime and beautiful, in the most exalted degree.
In almost every part of this country, we are surrounded with objects calculated
to inspire the most elevated conceptions of the imagination. Our mountains,
valleys, plains, and rivers, are formed upon a great scale; the extent of the
country itself is great; and the whole is rendered magnificently beautiful, by
the creating hand of the Almighty Architect! And, if we contemplate the
eminently dignified part that has been recently acted on the vast national
stage; with the scenes of magnanimity, wisdom, and patriotic virtue, which our
gallant countrymen have exhibited thereon; we must allow, that nothing can
afford more noble themes, for our native bards.

AMONG the literary productions of American genius, "A Poem on the Happiness of
America, addressed to the Citizens of the United States," by Col. Humphreys
claims a superior station. The beauties of this piece do great honor to the
author, and discover that he possesses a truly patriotic soul, as well as a
mind animated with genuine poetic fire.

AS this elegant piece, by some unaccountable circumstance, has not yet made
its appearance in the shops of our booksellers, we beg leave to present the
public with a few quotations from it; reminding them, at the same time, of the
imperfect idea of its merit, that mutilated parts of the piece must be supposed
to convey.

AS it is probable, that a new edition of this poem will speedily be published,
the public will then have the gratification of reading it entire.

PREFACE TO THE NINTH EDITION OF THE POEM ON THE HAPPINESS OF AMERICA.
THIS Poem, having passed through eight Editions in little more than four
years, without having been accompanied with any introduction or preface, the
writer hopes he shall escape every uncandid imputation, in offering with this
Edition his acknowledgments for the flattering reception it has met with from
the Public, together with some of the motives which originally engaged him in
this performance.

THE writer is happy, that he has chosen a subject more interesting than almost
any other to the feelings of his Countrymen; and that the topics introduced in
its discussion have not proved unsatisfactory to those for whose entertainment
the work was designed. To these causes, rather than to its intrinsic value as a
composition, he attributes the distinguished regard with which it has been
honored.

THE United States of America, when first assuming the form of a nation,
presented a momentuous and awful spectacle to mankind. For the political
welfare of the species seemed, in some sort, involved in the event. The theater
was vast, the plot new, the parts important, and the conduct of the action for
a long time so doubtful, as to produce distressing apprehensions respecting its
termination. The Americans, whose exertions and sufferings had been rewarded by
the acquisition of Independence, were, however, at the end of the war,
surrounded with threatening prospects. In these circumstances, the writer
endeavored to show his countrymen the superior advantages for happiness which
they possessed, to dissipate their gloomy apprehensions, by the exhibition of
consolatory anticipations, and to make them think favorably of their own
situation when compared with that of other nations. Many circumstances
conspired to give facility to the execution of the task he had imposed on
himself. The ideas were principally suggested by the peculiarity of our
condition. We began our political career, in a great measure, free from the
prejudice, and favored with the knowledge of former ages and other nations.
The amiable innocence and simplicity of manners, which resulted from the
present state of society in America, offered a curious subject for
philosophical contemplation. Our minds, imperceptibly impressed with the
novelty, beauty or sublimity of surrounding objects, gave energy to the
language which expressed our sensations. While the shades of changing nature,
which diversified the scenery through all the intermediate stages of settlement
and population, from the rude grandeur of a wilderness, to the pleasant
landscapes of cultivation, afforded an extensive field for variegated
description. To an assemblage of such magnificent images, so proper for poetry,
were added a multitude of incidents derived from the delights of agricultural
life, the blessings of enlightened society, and the progress of human
improvements. The author, by thus availing himself of circumstances, was
enabled to gratify an early and decided propensity for contemplating the
beauties of creation; especially under that point of view, in which they are
most conspicuously beneficial to his fellow men.

SINCE this Poem was written, by the establishment of a general government, and
the concurrence of fortunate events, scenes of happiness have been realised in
this country, which were considered by some altogether chimerical. And the
prospects, which are now expanding before our view, seem peculiarly calculated
to excite us to greater exertions, notonly for promoting the national
prosperity, but even for producing such examples in civil policy as will tend
essentially to the amelioration of the human lot.

A POEM ON THE HAPPINESS OF AMERICA. Addressed to the CITIZENS of the UNITED
STATES.
ARGUMENT.
THE characters to whom the poem is addressed, and the subject of it -- peace
-- dissolution of the army -- General Washington's farewell, advice, and
retirement -- apostrophe to him -- the happiness of the Americans, considered
as a free and agricultural people -- articles which contribute to their
felicity, during the different seasons -- winter's amusements, which produce a
digression, concerning the late war and the author -- the pleasures which
succeeded the horrors of war -- invocation to connubial love -- description of
the female sex and character, marriage and domestic life in America -- the
present state of society there -- the face of the country at, and since the
period of, its discovery -- the pleasant prospects exhibited by the progress of
agriculture and population -- eulogy of agriculture -- address to congress --
the genius of the western world invoked to accelerate our improvements -- a
treaty of commerce proposed with Great Britain -- superior advantages for a
marine -- America called upon to employ her sons on discoveries, in the
carrying trade, fishing, and whaling -- commerce -- interrupted by the
Algerines -- sensation produced by it in the Americans -- invocation for powers
of expression to excite them to revenge -- a view of the miseries of the
prisoners, which terminates in an anathema on the perpretrators of such
cruelties -- friends of the captives and ruined merchants, how affected --
exhortation to arm, unless an equitable peace can be obtained -- apostrophe to
the tributary powers -- resolution to be taken by us -- our resources hinted,
from a glance at the late war -- Great Britain and Algiers contrasted -- prayer
to the Supreme Being -- an army raised -- preparations for war -- a navy formed
-- naval combat with the corsairs -- their defeat -- their woe -- the utter
destruction of their country -- return and rejoicings of the victors -- a
prospect.

POEM, etc.
OH happy people, ye to whom is given,
A land enriched with sweetest dews of heaven!
Ye, who possess Columbia's virgin prime,
In harvests blessed of every soil and clime!
Ye happy mortals, whom propitious fate
Reserved for actors on a stage so great!
Sons worthy sires of venerable name,
Heirs of their virtue and immortal fame,
Heirs of their rights still better understood,
Declared in thunder, and confirmed in blood:
Ye chosen race, your happiness I sing,
With all the joys the cherub peace can bring,
When your tall fleets shall lift their starry pride,
And sail triumphant over the bill'wy tide.
THE song begins where all our bliss began,
What time the Almighty checked the wrath of man,
Distilled, in bleeding wounds, the balm of peace,
And bade the rage of mortal discord cease.
Then foes, grown friends, from toils of slaughter breathed,
Then war-worn troops their blood-stained weapons sheathed:
Then our great Chief to Vernon's shades withdrew,
And thus, to parting hosts, pronounced adieu:
" FAREWELL to public care, to public life:
" Now peace invites me from the deathful strife.
" And oh my country, may thou never forget
" Thy bands victorious, and thy honest debt!
" If aught, which proves to me thy freedom dear,
" Gives me a claim to speak, thy sons shall hear:
" On them I call -- Compatriots dear and brave,
" Deep in your breasts these warning truths engrave:
" To guard your sacred rights -- be just! be wise!
" Thence flow your blessings, there your glory lies.
" Beware the feuds whence civil war proceeds;
" Fly mean suspicions; spurn inglorious deeds;
" Shun fell corruption's pestilential breath,
" To states the cause and harbinger of death.
" Fly dissipation, in whose vortex whirled,
" Sink the proud nations of the elder world.
" Avoid the hidden snares that pleasure spreads,
" To seize and chain you, in her silken threads;
" Let not the lust of gold nor power enthral;
" Nor list to wild ambition's frantic call.
" Stop, stop your ears to discord's cursed alarms,
" Which, rousing, drives a mad'ning world to arms:
" But learn, from others' woes, sweet peace to prize,
" To know your bliss, and where your treasure lies --
" Within the compass of your little farms,
" Lodged in your breasts, or folded in your arms:
" Blessed in your clime, beyond all nations blessed,
" Whom oceans guard, and boundless wilds invest.
" NOR yet neglect the native force which grows,
" Your shield from insult, and your wall from foes:
" But early train your youth, by mimic fights,
" To stand the guardians of their country's rights.
" By honor ruled, with honesty your guide,
" Be that your bulwark, and be this your pride:
" Increase the fed'ral ties: support the laws:
" Guard public says: revere religion's cause.
" Thus rise to greatness -- by experience find,
" Who live the best, are greatest of mankind.
" AND ye, my faithful friends (for thus I name
" My fellow lab'rers in the field of fame)
" Ye, who for freedom nobly shed your blood,
" Died every plain, and purpled every flood,
" Where havoc heaped of arms and men the wreck,
" From Georgia's stream to walls of proud Quebec;
" To these stern toils the peaceful scene succeeds,
" The eyes of nations watch your future deeds:
" Go act, as citizens, in life's retreat,
" Your parts as well, and make your fame complete:
" It Is our's for ever, from this hour to part.
" Accept the effusions of a grateful heart!
" Wherever you go, may milder fates pursue,
" Receive my warmest thanks, my last adieu!"
THE HERO spoke (...) An awful pause ensued:
Each eye was red, each face with tears bedewed;
As if the pulse of life suspended stood,
An unknown horror chilled the curdling blood:
Their arms were locked: their cheeks irriguous met,
By thy soft trickling dews, affection! wet.
Words past all utt'rance mocked the idle tongue,
While petrified in final gaze they clung.
THE bands retiring, sought their ancient farms,
With laurels crowned -- received with open arms.
Now citizens, they formed no separate class,
But spread, commixing, through the general mass:
Congenial metals, thus, by chymic flame,
Dissolve, assimilate, and grow the same.
SWORDS turned to shears, and war to rural toil,
The men who saved, now cultivate the soil.
In no heroic age, since time began,
Appeared so great the majesty of man.
HIS task complete, before the fires august,
The hero stood, and rendered up his trust.
But who shall dare describe that act supreme,
And fire his numbers with the glowing theme?
Who sing, though aided with immortal powers,
The towns in raptures, and the roads in flowers,
Wherever he passed? what monarch ever knew
Such acclamations, bursts of joy so true?
What scenes I saw! how often, surprised I felt
Through streaming eyes, my heart, dilated, melt!
Scenes that no words, no colors can display,
No sculptured marble, and no living lay:
Yet shall these scenes impress my memory still,
Nor less the festal hours of Vernon's hill;
Nor that sad moment when 'twas mine to part,
As the last heart string severs from the heart.
" ADIEU," I cried, "to Vernon's shades, adieu;
" The vessel waits -- I see the beck'ning crew --
" Me now to foreign climes new duties guide,
" Over the vast desert of the Atlantic tide.
" It Is thine, blessed sage, while distant thunders roll,
" Unmoved thy calm serenity of soul,
" It Is thine whose triumphs bade the combat cease,
" To prove how glorious are the works of peace;
" To lure rich commerce General Washington is actually occupied in opening the
falls of Potowmac and James' Rivers, the noble object of which is to extend the
navigation through the interior parts of America. Posterity will judge whether
this is not one of the great works of peace, worthy the consistency and dignity
of his character.
up thy native bay;
" Make freighted barks beyond the mountains stray:
" Make inland seas through opening channels glide;
" Monongahela wed Potowmac's tide:
" New states, exulting, see the fitting sails,
" Waft joy and plenty round the peopled vales."
ALL former empires rose, the work of guilt,
On conquest, blood, or usurpation built:
But we, taught wisdom by their woes and crimes,
Fraught with their lore, and born to better times,
Our constitutions formed on freedom's base,
Which all the blessings, of all lands embrace;
Embrace humanity's extended cause,
A world our empire, for a world our laws.
THRICE happy race! how blessed were freedom's heirs,
Blessed if they knew what happiness is theirs,
Blessed if they knew to them alone it is given,
To know no sovereign but the law and heaven!
That law for them, and Albion's realms alone,
O^ sacred justice elevates her throne;
Regards the poor; the fatherless protects;
The widow shields, the proud oppressor checks!
Blessed if they knew, beneath umbrageous trees,
To prize the joys of innocence and ease,
Of peace, of health, of temperance, toil, and rest,
And the calm sunshine of the conscious breast.
For them, the spring his annual task resumes,
Invests in verdure, and adorns in blooms
Earth's parent lap, and all her wanton bowers,
In foliage fair, with aromatic flowers.
Their fanning wings the zephyrs gently play,
And winnow blossoms from each floating spray:
In bursting buds the embryo fruits appear,
The hope and glory of the ripening year!
The mead that courts the scythe, the pastur'd vale,
And garden'd lawn, their breathing sweets exhale,
On balmy winds a cloud of fragrance moves,
And floats the odours of a thousand groves.
For them, young summer sheds a brighter day,
Matures the germe with his prolific ray;
With prospects cheers, demands more stubborn toil,
And pays their efforts from the grateful soil.
The lofty maize its ears luxuriant yields;
The yellow harvests gild the laughing fields,
Extend over all the interminable plain,
And wave in grandeur like the boundless main.
For them, the flock over green savannahs feeds:
For them, high prancing, bound the playful steeds:
For them, the heifers graze sequestered dales,
Or pour white nectar in the brimming pails:
To them, what time the hoary frosts draw near,
Ripe autumn brings the labors of the year.
To nature's sons, how fair the autumnal even,
The fading landscape, and impurpl'd heaven,
As from their fields they take their homeward way,
And turn to catch the sun's departing ray!
What streaming splendors up the skies are rolled,
Whose colors beggar Tyrian dies and gold!
Till night's dun curtains, wide over all displayed,
Shroud shad'wy shapes in melancholy shade.
THEN doubling clouds the wintry skies deform;
And, wrapped in vapor, comes the roaring storm,
With snows surcharged, from tops of mountains sails,
Loads leafless trees, and fills the whitened vales.
Then desolation strips the faded plains:
Then tyrant death over vegetation reigns:
The birds of heaven to other climes repair,
And deep'ning glooms invade the turbid air.
Nor then, unjoyous, winter's rigours come,
But find them happy and content with home;
Their gran'ries filled -- the task of culture past --
Warm at their fire, they hear the howling blast,
With patt'ring rain and snow, or driving sleet,
Rave idly loud, and at their window beat:
Safe from its rage, regardless of its roar,
In vain the tempest rattles at the door --
The tame brute sheltered, and the feathered brood
From them, more provident, demand their food.
It Is then the time from hoarding cribs to feed
The ox laborious, and the noble steed:
It Is then the time to tend the bleating fold,
To strew with litter, and to fence from cold.
THE cattle fed -- the fuel pil'd within --
At setting day the blissful hours begin:
It Is then, sole owner of his little cot,
The farmer feels his independent lot;
Hears with the crackling blaze that lights the wall,
The voice of gladness and of nature call,
Beholds his children play, their mother smile,
And tastes with them the fruit of summer's toil.
FROM stormy heavens the mantling clouds unroll'd,
The sky is bright, the air serenely cold.
The keen north-west, that heaps the drifted snows,
For months entire over frozen regions blows:
Man braves his blast, his gelid breath inhales,
And feels more vigorous as the frost prevails.
The obstructed path, beneath the frequen^ tread,
Yields a smooth crystal to the flying steed.
IT IS then full often, in arts of love untried,
The amorous stripling courts his future bride;
And often, beneath the broad moon's paler day,
The village pairs ascend the rapid sleigh;
With jocund sounds impel the enlivened steed --
Say ye, who know their joys, the lulling speed,
At every bridge the tributary kiss;
Can courtly balls exceed their rustic bliss?
BUT different ages different joys inspire,
Where friendly circles crowd the social fire:
For there the neighbors gathering round the hearth,
Indulge in tales, news, politics, and mirth;
Nor need we fear the exhausted fund should fail,
While garrulous old age prolongs the tale,
There some old warrior, grown a village sage,
Whose locks are whitened with the frosts of age,
While life's low burning lamp, renews its light,
With tales heroic shall beguile the night;
Shall tell of battles fought, of feats achieved,
And suff^rings never by human heart conceived;
Shall tell the adventures of his early life,
And bring to view the fields of mortal strife;
What time the m^ttin trump to battle sings,
And on his steed the horseman swiftly springs,
While down the line the drum, with thundering sound,
Wakes the bold soldier, slumbering on the ground;
Alarmed he starts; then sudden joins his band,
Who, ranged beneath the well-known banner, stand:
Then ensigns wave, and signal flags unfurled,
Bid one great soul pervade a moving world;
Then martial music's all-inspiring breath,
With dulcet symphonies, leads on to death;
Lights in each breast the living beam of fame;
Kindles the spark; and fans the kindled flame:
Then meets the steadfast eye, the splendid charms
Of prancing steeds, of plumed troops and arms:
Reflected sunbeams, dazzling, gild afar
The pride, the pomp, and circumstance of war;
Then thick as hailstones, from an angry sky,
In vollied showers, the bolts of vengeance fly;
Unnumber'd deaths, promiscuous, ride the air,
While, swift descending, with a frightful glare,
The big bomb bursts; the fragments scattered round,
Beat down whole bands, and pulverize the ground.
Then joins the closer fight on Hudson's banks:
Troops strive with troops; ranks, bending, press on ranks;
Over slippery plains the struggling legions reel;
Then livid lead and Bayonne's glittering steel,
With dark-red wounds their mangled bosoms bore;
While furious coursers, snorting foam and gore,
Bear wild their riders over the carnag'd plain,
And, falling, roll them headlong on the slain.
To ranks consumed, another rank succeeds;
Fresh victims fall; afresh the battle bleeds;
And naught of blood can staunch the opened sluice,
Till night, o'ershad'wing, brings a grateful truce.
Thus will the vet'ran tell the tale of wars,
Disclose his breast, to count his glorious scars;
In mute amazement hold the listening swains;
Make freezing horror creep through all their veins;
Or often, at freedom's name, their souls inspire
With patriot ardour and heroic fire.
I TOO, perhaps, should heaven prolong my date,
The oft-repeated tale shall often relate;
Shall tell the feelings in the first alarms,
Of some bold enterprise the unequalled charms;
Shall tell from whom I learnt the martial art,
With what high chiefs I played my early part,
With Parsons first, whose eye, with piercing ken,
Reads through their hearts the characters of men;
Then how I aided, in the foll'wing scene,
Death-daring Putnam -- then immortal Green --
Then how great Washington my youth approved,
In rank preferred, and as a parent loved,
(For each sine feeling in his bosom blends
The first of heroes, sages, patriots, friends)
With him what hours on warlike plans I spent,
Beneath the shadow of the Imperial tent;
With him how often I went the nightly round,
Through moving hosts, or slept on tented ground;
From him how often (nor far below the first
In high behests and confidential trust)
From him how often I bore the dread commands,
Which destined for the fight the eager bands;
With him how often I past the eventful day,
Rode by his side, as down the long array,
His awful voice the columns taught to form,
To point the thunders, and to pour the storm.
But, thanks to heaven! those days of blood are over,
The trumpet's clangor, the loud cannon's roar:
No more advance the long extended lines,
Front formed to front -- no more the battle joins
With rushing shock -- the unsufferable sound
Rends not the skies -- nor blood distains the ground --
Nor spread through peaceful villages afar,
The crimson flames of desolating war.
No more this hand, since happier days succeed,
Waves the bright blade, or reins the fiery steed.
No more for martial fame this bosom burns,
Now white-rob'd peace to bless a world returns;
Now fost'ring freedom all her bliss bestows,
Unnumber'd blessings for unnumber'd woes.
REVOLVING seasons thus by turns invite
To rural joys and conjugal delight --
Oh thou sweet passion, whose blessed charm connect;
In heaven's own ties, the strong and feebler sex!
Shed thy soft empire over the willing mind,
Exalt, adorn, and purify mankind!
All nature feels thy power. The vocal grove
With air-borne melody awakes to love;
To love the boldest tenants of the sky,
To love the little birds, extatic, fly;
To love submit the monsters of the main,
And every beast that haunts the desert plain:
But man alone the brightest flame inspires,
A spark enkindled from celestial fires.
Hail, hallowed wedlock! purest, happiest state,
Thy untried raptures let my song relate:
Give me, ere long, thy mysteries to prove,
And taste, as well as sing, the sweets of love!
YE blooming daughters of the western world,
Whose graceful locks by artless hands are curled,
Whose limbs of symmetry, and snowy breast,
Allure to love, in simple neatness dressed;
Beneath the veil of modesty, who hide
The boast of nature and of virgin pride --
(For beauty needs no meretricious art
To find a passage to the opening heart)
Oh make your charms even in my song admired,
My song immortal by your charms inspired.
THOUGH lavish nature sheds each various grace,
That forms the figure, or that decks the face --
Though health, with innocence, and glee, the while,
Dance in their eye, and wanton in their smile --
Though mid the lily's white, unfolds the rose,
As on their cheek the bud of beauty blows,
Spontaneous blossom of the transient flush,
Which glows and reddens to a scarlet blush,
What time the maid, unread in flames and darts,
First feels of love the palpitating starts,
Feels from the heart, life's quickened currents glide,
Her bosom heaving with the bounding tide --
Though sweet their lips, their features more than fair --
Though curls luxuriant of untortur'd hair
Grow long, and add unutterable charms,
While every look enraptures and alarms;
Yet something still, beyond the exterior form,
With goodness fraught, with animation warm,
Inspires their actions; dignifies their mien;
Gilds every hour; and beautifies each scene.
It Is those perfections of superior kind,
The moral beauties which adorn the mind;
It Is those enchanting sounds mellifluous hung,
In words of truth and kindness on their tongue,
It Is delicacy gives their charms new worth,
And calls the loveliness of beauty forth:
It Is the mild influence beaming from their eyes,
Like vernal sunbeams round coerulian skies;
Bright emanations of the spotless soul,
Which warm, and cheer, and vivify the whole!
HERE the fair sex an equal honor claims,
Wakes chaste desire, nor burns with lawless flames:
No eastern manners, here, consign the charms
Of beauteous slaves to some loathed master's arms:
No lovely maid in wedlock ever was sold
By parents base, for mercenary gold;
Nor forced the hard alternative to try,
To live dishonored, or with hunger die.
Here, uncontrolled, and foll'wing nature's voice,
The happy lovers make the unchanging choice,
While mutual passions in their bosoms glow,
While soft confessions in their kisses flow,
While their free hands in plighted faith are given,
Their vows, accordant, reach approving heaven.
NOR here the wedded fair in splendour vie,
To shine the idols of the public eye;
Nor place their happiness, like Europe's dames,
In balls and masquerades, in plays and games;
Each home felt bliss exchanged for foreign sports,
A round of pleasures, or the intrigues of courts;
Nor seek of government to guide the plan,
And wrest his bold prerogatives from man.
What though not formed in affectation's school,
Nor taught the wanton eye to roll by rule,
Nor how to prompt the glance, the frown, the smile,
Or practice all the little arts of guile --
What though not taught the use of female arms,
Nor clothed in panoply of conquering charms,
Like some fine garnished heads -- the exterior fair,
In paints, cosmetics, powder, borrowed hair:
Yet theirs are pleasures of a different kind,
Delights at home, more useful, more refined;
Theirs are the attentions, theirs the smiles that please,
With hospitable cares and modest ease:
Their youthful taste, improved by finer arts,
Their minds embellished, and refined their hearts --
It Is theirs to act, in still sequestered life,
The glorious parts of parent, friend, and wife:
What nameless grace, what unknown charm is theirs,
To soothe their partners, and divide their cares,
Calm raging pain, delay the parting breath,
And light a smile on the wan cheek of death!
No feudal ties the rising genius mar,
Compel to servile toils, or drag to war;
But, free, each youth his favorite course pursues,
The plough paternal, or the sylvan muse.
For here exists, once more, the Arcadian scene,
Those simple manners, and that golden mean:
Here holds society its middle stage,
Between too rude and too refined an age;
Far from that age, when not a gleam of light
The dismal darkness cheered of gothic night,
From brutal rudeness of that savage state --
As from refinements which overwhelm the great,
Those dissipations which their bliss annoy,
And blast and poison each domestic joy.
WHAT though for us, the pageantry of kings,
Crowns, thrones, and sceptres, are superfluous things;
What though we lack the gaudy pomp that waits
On eastern monarchs, or despotic states;
Yet well we spare what realms despotic feel,
Oppression's scourge, and persecution's wheel.
WHAT though no splendid spoils of other times,
Invite the curious to these western climes;
No virtuoso, with fantastic aim,
Here hunts the shadow of departed fame:
No piles of rubbish his attention call,
Nor mystic obelisk, or storied wall:
No ruined statues claim the long research;
No sliding columns and no crumbling arch;
Inscriptions, half effaced, and falsely read,
Or cumbrous relics of the unlettered dead:
Yet here I rove untrodden scenes among,
Catch inspiration for my rising song;
See nature's grandeur awfully unfold,
And, rapt in thought, her works sublime behold!
For here vast wilds, which human foot never trod,
Are marked with footsteps of a present God;
His forming hand, on nature's broadest scale,
Over mountains, mountains pil'd, and scoop'd the vale;
Made sea-like streams in deeper channels run,
And rolled through brighter heavens his genial sun.
In vain of day, that rolling lucid eye
Looked down in mildness from the smiling sky;
In vain, the germe of vegetation lay,
And pined in shades, secluded from the day;
In vain, this theater for man so fair,
Spread all its charms for beasts or birds of air;
Or savage tribes, who, wandering through the wood,
From beasts and birds obtained precarious food:
Till great Columbus rose, and, led by heaven,
Called worlds to view, beneath the skirts of even.
RISE, daring muse, with bolder flight explore
The heavenly wonders for these climes in store:
Sing nature laboring with her latest birth,
And a new empire rising on the earth!
Now other scenes in these blessed climes prevail:
The sounds of population fill the gale:
The dreary wastes, by mighty toils reclaimed,
Deep marshes drained, wild woods and thickets tamed:
Now fair Columbia, child of heaven, is seen
In flower of youth, and robes of lovely green,
Than virgin fairer, on her bridal morn,
Whom all the graces, all the loves adorn.
HERE planters find a ceaseless source of charms
In clearing fields, and adding farms to farms:
It Is independence prompts their daily toil,
And calls forth beauties from the desert soil:
What untried pleasure fills each raptured sense,
When sturdy toil, through darkened wilds immense,
First pours the day-beams on the opening glade,
And glebes embrown'd with everlasting shade!
Here equal fortunes, ease, the ground their own,
Augment their numbers with increase unknown.
Here hamlets grow. Here Europe's pilgrims come
From vassall'd woes to find a quiet home.
The eye no view of waning cities meets,
Of mouldering domes, of narrow, fetid streets;
Of grey-hair'd wretches, who never owned a shed,
And beggars dying for the want of bread:
But often, in transport, round the horizon roves,
Over mountains, valleys, towns, and stately groves;
Then dwells, best pleased, on cultivated plains,
Steeds, flocks, and herds, commix'd with laboring swains.
HAIL, agriculture! by whose parent aid,
The deep foundations of our states are laid;
The seeds of greatness of thy hand are sown;
These shall mature with thee and time alone;
But still conduct us on thy sober plan,
Great source of wealth, and earliest friend of man.
YE reverend fathers! props of freedom's cause,
Who reared an empire by your sapient laws,
With blessed example give this lesson weight,
"That toil and virtue make a nation great!"
Then shall your name's reach earth's remotest clime,
Rise high as heaven, and brave the rage of time --
His listening sons the fire shall often remind,
What parent sages first in congress joined:
The faithful Hancock graced that early scene,
Great Washington appeared in godlike mien,
Jay, Laurens, Clinton, skilled in ruling men,
And he, who earlier, held the farmer's pen.
'Twas Lee, illustrious, at the father's head,
The daring way to independence led.
The self-taught Sherman urged his reasons clear,
And all the Livingston's to freedom dear:
What countless names in fair procession throng,
With Rutledge, Johnson, Nash, demand the song!
And chiefly ye, of human kind the friends,
On whose high task my humbler toil attends.
Ye who, uniting realms in leagues of peace,
The sum of human happiness increase!
Adams, the sage, a patriot from his youth,
Whose deeds are honor, and whose voice is truth;
Undying Franklin, in the hill of fame,
Who bids the thunders spread his awful name;
And Jefferson, whose mind with space extends,
Each science woos, all knowledge comprehends,
Whose patriot deeds and elevated views,
Demand the tribute of a loftier muse: --
Though Randolph, Hosmer, Hanson sleep in death,
Still these great patriots draw the vital breath:
And can a nation fail in peace to thrive,
Where such strong talents, such high worth survive?
Roused at the thought, by vast ideas fired,
His breast enraptured, and his tongue inspired,
Another Mr. Barlow, author of the Vision of Columbus.
bard, in conscious genius bold,
Sings the new world now happier than the old.
GREAT genius of our world, assert our fame,
In other bards awake the dormant flame!
Bid vivid colors into being start,
Men grow immortal by the plastic art!
Bid columns swell, stupendous arches bend,
Proud cities rise, and aerial spires ascend!
Bid music's power the pangs of woe assuage!
With nobler views inspire the enlightened age!
In freedom's voice pour all thy bolder charms,
Till reason supersede the force of arms,
Till peaceful streamers in each gale shall play,
From orient morning to descending day.
In mortal breasts shall hate immortal last?
Albion! Columbia! soon forget the past!
In friendly intercourse your interests blend!
From common fires your gallant sons descend;
From freeborn fires in toils of empire brave --
It Is yours to heal the mutual wounds ye gave,
Let those be friends whom kindred blood allies,
With language, laws', religion's holiest ties!
Yes, mighty Albion! scorning low intrigues,
With young Columbia form commercial leagues.
So shall mankind, through endless years, admire
More potent realms than Carthage leagued with Tire.
WHERE lives the nation, fraught with such resource,
Such vast materials for a naval force?
Where grow so rife, the iron, masts, and spars,
The hemp, the timber, and the daring tars?
Where gallant youths, inured to heat and cold,
Through every zone, more hardy, strong, and bold?
Let other climes of other produce boast:
Let gold, let di'monds, grow on India's coast:
Let flaming suns from arid plains exhale
The spicy odours of Arabia's gale:
Let fragant shrubs, that bloom in regions calm,
Perfumes expiring, bleed ambrosial balm:
Let olives flourish in Hesperia's soil,
Ananas ripen in each tropic isle:
Let Gallia gladden in her clust'ring vines:
Let Spain exult in her Peruvian mines:
Let plains of Barb'ry boast the generous steed,
Far-fam'd for beauty, strength, and matchless speed;
But men, Columbia, be thy fairer growth,
Men of firm nerves, who spurn at fear and sloth,
Men of high courage, like their fires of old,
In labor patient, as in dangers bold!
THEN wake Columbia! daughter of the skies,
Awake to glory, and to greatness rise!
Arise and spread thy virgin charms abroad,
Thou last, thou fairest offspring of a God;
Extend thy view where future blessings lie,
And open new prospects for the enraptured eye!
See a new era on this globe begun,
And circling years in brighter orbits run
See the fair dawn of universal peace,
When hell-born discord through the world shall cease!
Commence the task assigned by heaven's decree,
From pirate rage to vindicate the sea!
BID thy live oaks, in southern climes that grow,
And pines that shade the northern mountain's brow,
In mighty pomp descending on the main,
With sails expanded, sweep the watery plain:
Thy rising stars in unknown skies display,
And bound thy labors with the walks of day.
BID from the shore a philanthrophic band,
The torch of science glowing in their hand,
Over trackless waves extend their daring toils,
To find and bless a thousand peopled isles;
Not lured to blood by domination's lust,
The pride of conquest, or of gold the thirst;
Not armed by impious zeal with burning brands,
To scatter flames and ruin round their strands;
Bid them to wilder'd men new lights impart,
Heaven's noblest gifts, with every useful art.
BID thy young sons, whom toil for glory forms,
New skill acquiring, learn to brave the storms,
To every region thy glad harvest bear --
Where happy nations breathe a milder air;
Or where the natives feel the scorching ray,
And pant and faint beneath a flood of day;
Or through those seas where mounts of ice arise,
The eternal growth of hyperborean skies,
Where feeble rayless sons obliquely roll,
Or one long night invests the frozen pole.
THEN bid thy northern train, who draw the line,
In ocean's caverns find a richer mine,
Than famed Potosi's or Golconda's ore,
Or all the treasures of the Asian shore.
Bid them with hooks delusive ply the flood,
And feed whole kingdoms with the finny brood.
AND bid thy youths, whose brawny limbs are strung
For bolder toils -- pursue those toils unsung --
Pursue through foreign seas, with venurous sail
The dreadful combat of the enormous whale:
Lo where he comes, the foaming billows rise!
See spouted torrents cloud the misty skies;
See in the skiff the bold harpooner stand,
The murdering iron in his skilful hand;
From him alone the attentive youths await
A joyful victory, or a mournful fate:
His meas'ring eye the distance now explores,
His voice now checks, and now impels the oars:
The panting crew a solemn silence keep,
Stillness and horror hover over the deep;
Now nigh he kens a vulnerable part,
And hurls with deadly aim the barbed dart;
The wounded monster plunging through the abyss,
Makes uncoil'd cords in boiling waters hiss --
And often the boat, drawn headlong down the wave,
Leads trembling seamen to their watery grave;
And often, when rising on his back upborne,
Is dashed on high, in countless pieces torn.
But now afar see ocean's monarch rise,
Over troubled billows see how fast he flies,
And drags the feeble skiff along the flood,
Lashed into foam, and colored red with blood!
At length subsides the elemental strife,
His rage exhausted with his ebbing life;
As towers a rock on some sky-circled plain,
So looms his carcass over the dusky main.
Elate, the victors urge the added toil,
Extract the bone, and fill their ship with oil.
FRAUGHT with the germe of wealth, our seamen roam
To foreign marts, and bring new treasures home;
From either Ind' and Europe's happier shore,
The assembled produce crowds the merchant's store:
From east to west the fruits and spices sweet,
On our full boards in rich profusion meet;
Canary isles their luscious vintage join;
In crystal goblets flows the amber wine;
European artists send their midnight toil
For crude materials of our virgin soil;
For us, in tissue of the silken loom,
The lilacks blush, the damask roses bloom;
For us in distant mines the metals grow,
Prolific source of pleasure, care, and woe!
Never may our sons for heaps of useless wealth,
Exchange the joys of freedom, peace, or health,
But make even riches to their weal conduce,
And prize their splendour by their public use!
IT IS thus our youth, through various climes afar,
(...) toils of peace obtain the nerves of war --
But what dark prospect interrupts our joy?
What arm presumptuous dares our trade annoy?
Great God! the rovers, who insult thy waves,
Have seized our ships, and made our freemen slaves:
And hark! the cries of that disastrous band
Float over the main, and reach Columbia's strand --
The wild alarm from ocean spreads around,
And circling echoes propagate the found,
From smooth Saluda, fed with silver rills,
Up the Blue-ridge, over Alleganean hills;
To where Niagara tremendous roars,
As over white-sheeted rocks his torrent pours,
(The dreadful cataract whole regions shakes
Of boundless woods, and congregated lakes!)
To farthest Kennebeck, adown whose tide,
The future ships, unfashion'd, monstrous glide,
On whose rough banks, where stood the savage den,
The axe is heard and busy hum of men --
But hark! their labors and their accents cease,
A warning voice has interdicted peace,
Has spread through cities, gained remotest farms,
And fired the indignant states with new alarms:
The sickly flame in every bosom burns,
Like gloomy torches in sepulchral urns.
WHY sleep'st thou Barlow, child of genius? why
See thou, blessed Dwight, our land in sadness lie?
And where is Trumbull, earliest boast of fame?
It Is yours, ye bards, to wake the smothered flame --
To you, my dearest friends! the task belongs,
To rouse your country with heroic songs;
For me, though g'owing with conceptions warm,
I find no equal words to give them form:
Pent in my breast, the mad'ning tempest raves,
Like imprisoned fires in Etna's burning caves:
For me why will no thundering numbers roll?
Why, niggard language, do thou baulk my soul!
Come thou sweet feeling of another's woe,
That make the heart to melt, the eye to flow!
Come thou, keen feeling, liveliest sense of wrong!
Aid indignation, and inspire my song!
Teach me the woes of slavery to paint,
Beneath whose weight our captur'd freemen faint!
Teach me in shades of Stygian night to trace,
In characters of hell the pirate race!
Teach me, prophetic, to disclose their doom,
A newborn nation trampling on their tomb!
WHAT mortal terrors all my senses seize,
Possess my heart, and life's warm current freeze?
Why grow my eyes with thick suffusions dim?
What visionary forms before me swim?
Where am I? Heavens! what mean these dol'rous cries?
And what these horrid scenes that round me rise?
Heard ye the groans, those messengers of pain?
Heard ye the clanking of the captive's chain?
Heard ye your freeborn sons their fate deplore,
Pale in their chains, and laboring at the oar?
Saw ye the dungeon, in whose blackest cell,
That house of woe, your friends, your children dwell?
Or saw ye those, who dread the torturing hour,
Crushed by the rigours of a tyrant's power?
Saw ye the shrinking slave, the uplifted lash,
The frowning butcher, and the red'ning gash?
Saw ye the fresh blood where it bubbling broke,
From purple scars, beneath the grinding stroke?
(...) ye the naked limbs, writhed to and fro,
In wild contortions of convulsing woe,
Felt ye the blood, with pangs alternate rolled,
Thrill through your veins, and freeze with death-like cold,
Or fire, as down the tear of pity stole,
Your manly breasts, and harrow up the soul?
SOME guardian power in mercy intervene,
Hide from my dizzy eyes the cruel scene!
Oh stop the shrieks, that tear my tortured ear!
Ye visions, vanish! dungeons, disappear!
Ye fetters, burst! ye monsters fierce, avaunt!
Infernal furies on those monsters haunt!
Pursue the footsteps of that miscreant crew,
Pursue in flames, with hell-born rage pursue!
Shed such dire curses as all utt'rance mock,
Whose plagues astonish, and whose horrors shock!
Great maledictions of eternal wrath,
Which, like heaven's vial'd vengeance, singe and scathe,
Transfix with scorpion stings the callous heart,
Make blood-shot eye balls from their sockets start!
For balm, pour brimstone in their wounded soul;
Then open, perdition, and ingulf them whole!
HOW long will heaven restrain its bursting ire,
Nor rain blue tempests of devouring fire?
How long shall widows weep their sons in vain,
The prop of years in slav'ry's iron chain!
How long the lovesick maid, unheeded, rove
The sounding shore, and call her absent love;
With wasting tears and sighs his lot bewail,
And seem to see him in each coming sail?
How long the merchant turn his failing eyes,
In desperation, on the seas and skies,
And ask his captur'd ships, his ravished goods,
With frantic ravings, of the heavens and floods?
HOW long, Columbians dear! will ye complain
Of these cursed insults on the open main?
In timid sloth shall injured brav'ry sleep?
Awake! awake! avengers of the deep!
Revenge! revenge! the voice of nature cries:
Awake to glory, and to vengeance rise!
To arms! to arms! ye bold indignant bands!
It Is heaven inspires; it is God himself commands.
Save human nature from such deadly harms,
By force of reason, or by force of arms.
O YE great powers, who passports basely crave,
From Afric's lords, to sail the midland wave --
Great fallen powers, whose gems and golden bribes
Buy paltry passports from these savage tribes --
Ye whose fine purples, silks, and stuffs of gold,
(An annual tribute) their dark limbs infold --
Ye whose mean policy for them equips,
To plague mankind, the predatory ships --
Why will ye buy your infamy so dear?
Is it self-int'rest, or a dastard fear?
Is it because ye meanly think to gain
A richer commerce on the infested main?
Is it because ye meanly wish to see
Your rivals chained, yourselves ignobly free?
Who gave commission to these monsters fierce,
To hold in chains the humbled universe?
Would God, would nature, would their conquering swords,
Without your meanness, make them ocean's lords?
What! Do ye fear? nor dare their power provoke?
Would not that bubble burst beneath your stroke?
And shall the weak remains of barbarous rage,
Insulting, triumph over the enlightened age?
Do ye not feel confusion, horror, shame,
To bear a hateful, tributary name?
Will ye not aid to wipe the foul disgrace,
And break the fetters from the human race?
THEN, though unaided by these mighty powers,
Ours be the toil; the danger, glory ours:
Then, O my friends, by heaven ordained to free,
From tyrant rage, the long-infested sea --
Then let us firm, though solitary, stand,
The sword, and olive branch in either hand:
An equal peace propose with reason's voice,
Or rush to arms, if arms should be their choice.
STUNG by their crimes, can aught your vengeance stay?
Can terror daunt you? or can death dismay?
The soul enraged, can threats, can tortures tame,
Or the dank dungeon quench the etherial flame?
Have ye not once to Heaven's dread throne appealed,
And has not Heaven your independence sealed?
What was the power ye dared that time engage,
And brave the terrors of its hostile rage?
Was it not Britain, great in warlike toils,
The first of nations, as the queen of isles --
Britain, whose fleets, that ruled the briny surge,
Made navies tremble to its utmost verge,
Whose single arm held half the world at odds,
Great nurse of sages, bards and demigods!
But what are these whose threatenings round you burst?
Of men the dregs, the feeblest, vilest, worst:
These are the pirates from the Barb'ry strand,
Audacious miscreants, fierce, yet feeble band!
Who, impious, dare (no provocation given)
Insult the rights of man -- the laws of heaven!
WILL thou not rise, oh God, to plead our cause,
Assert thine honor, and defend thy laws!
Will thou not bend thine awful throne to hear
The pris'ner's cry, and stop the falling tear!
Will thou not strike the guilty race with dread,
On impious realms thy tenfold fury shed!
Oh thou Most High, be innocence thy care,
Oh make thy red right arm of vengeance bare,
Resume in wrath the thunders thou have hurled,
To blight the tenants of the nether world!
Thou God of Hosts, our steadfast councils guide,
Lead forth our arms, and crush the sons of pride!
BUT hark! the trumps, as if by whirlwinds blown,
Sound from cold Lawrance to the burning zone!
Thy cause, humanity, that swells their breath,
Wakes in each bosom cool contempt of death.
By rumbling drums, from distant regions called,
Men, scorning pirate rage, start unappall'd:
With eye balls flaming, cheeks of crimson flush,
From rice-green fields, and fir-clad mountains, rush
High-mettled youths -- unused to sights of slain,
Of hostile navies, or the stormy main --
Enraged they leave unfinished furrows far,
To dare the deep, and toil in fields of war:
From dreams of peace, stern-visag'd vet'rans wake,
Their rattling arms, with grasp indignant, shake;
Those At the conclusion of the war, Congress gave to the soldiers of the
Continental Army, the arms, with which they had defended their (...)
arms, their pride, their country's gift, what day
To independence they had opened the way;
Frowning wide ruin, terrible they rise,
Like battling thunders bursting from the skies.
From Erie's inland vales, unnam'd in song,
In native fierceness pour the hunter throng:
Beneath their rapid march, realms roll behind;
Their uncomb'd locks loose floating on the wind:
Coarse their worn garbs -- they place their only pride
In the dread rifle, often in battle tried.
With aim unbalk'd whose leaden vengeance sings,
Sure as the dart the king of terrors flings:
So erst, brave Morgan, thy bold hunters sped --
Such light-armed youths the gallant Fayette led,
Ere Steuben brought the Prussian lore from far,
Or Knox created all the stores of war.
Through tented fields impatient ardour spreads --
Roused by the trump the coursers rear their heads,
Snuff in the tainted gale the nitrous grain,
Responsive neigh, and prance the wide campaign.
NOW preparation forms the gleaming blade;
In moulds capacious ponderous deaths are made:
In crowded docks the incessant labor glows;
The tool resounds -- the wondrous structure grows --
Propp'd on the stocks, stupendous navies stand,
Raise their huge bulks, and darken all the strand;
Till towering fleets, from different harbors joined,
Float on the pinions of the favoring wind;
Tall groves of masts, like mountain forests, rise;
Waved high in air, the crimson streamer flies:
To prosperous gales the canvas wide unfurled,
Bears the roused vengeance round the watery world:
See! ocean whitens with innum'rous sails;
Be still, ye storms! breathe soft, ye friendly gales!
See! where Columbia's mighty squadron runs
To climes illum'd by other stars and suns;
Gains the deep straight; ascends the midland wave,
Of ancient fleets the unfathomable grave!
When freedom's ardent chiefs, with eager eye,
Dim through the mist the corsair force descry;
Their cloudlike sails hang in the distant heaven,
Like shad'wy vapors of ascending even --
Here over the topmast, flames the imperial star,
There the red crescent leads the coming war.
The obstructions cleared -- obliquely on the gales --
With open ports -- half-furl'd the flapping sails --
Near and more near, athwart the bill'wy tide,
In terrors armed, the floating bulwarks glide;
Tier pil'd over tier, the sleeping thunder lies,
Anon to rend the shudd'ring main and skies.
ERE yet they shut the narrow space between,
Begins the prelude of a bloodier scene --
With sudden touch, deep-throated engines roar,
Pierce heaven's blue vault, and dash the waves to shore;
Then mad'ning billows mock the fearful sound,
While over their surface globes of iron bound;
Unknown concussions rolling over their heads,
Far fly the monsters round their coral beds.
THE battle closes -- fiercer fights begin --
And hollow hulls reverberate the din:
The green waves blacken, as the tempest lours,
Chain-bolts and langrage rain in dreadful showers;
Ship locked to ship, hangs over the foaming flood,
The black sides wrapped in flame, the decks in blood:
From both the lines now smoke, now flames aspire,
Now clouds they roll, now gleam a ridge of fire:
On hostile prows, Columbia's heroes stand,
Conquering 'mid death, or dying sword in hand:
Promiscuous cries, with shouts confusedly drowned,
In the wild uproar, swell the dol'rous sound:
And naught distinct is heard, and naught is seen,
Where wreaths of vapor hovering intervene,
Save when black grains expand imprisoned air,
The thunders wake, and shoot a livid glare;
Then ghastly forms are seen by transient gleams,
The dead and wounded drenched in purple streams.
NOW helmless ships in devious routes are driven,
The cordage torn, the masts to atoms riv'n:
Now here they glow with curling waves of fire,
In one explosion total crews expire.
Here barks relinquished, burnt to ocean's brink,
Half veiled in crimson clouds begin to sink.
With men submerg'd, there frailer fragments float,
Here yawning gulfs absorb the o'erloaded boat:
There red-hot balls, that graze the waters, hiss,
And plunge the galleys down the dread abyss.
Here shattered limbs -- there garments dipped in blood,
With mingling crimson stain the foughten flood,
While Afric's pirates, shrinking from the day,
By terror urged, drag wounded hulks away.
AS when two adverse storms, impetuous driven,
From east and west, sail up the azure heaven,
In flaming fields of day together run,
Explode their fires, and blot with night the sun --
The eastern cloud, its flames expired at last,
Flies from the lightning of the western blast:
So fled the corsair line the blighting stroke
Of freedom's thunder -- so their battle broke --
As if by heaven's own arm subdued at length,
Their courage perished, withered all their strength.
OH then let victory stimulate the chase,
To free from shameful chains the human race,
To drive these pirates from the insulted waves,
To open their dungeons to despairing slaves,
To snatch from impious hands and break the rod,
Which erst defaced the likeness of a God:
Then seize the occasion, call the furious gales,
Crack bending oars, stretch wide inflated sails;
On rapid wings of wind the tempest bear,
Make death's deep tubes with lucid lightnings glare:
Like evanescent mists dispel their hosts,
And with destruction's besom sweep their coasts!
WOE to proud Algiers; to your princes woe!
Your pride is falling with your youths laid low --
Woe to ye people, woe, distress, and fears!
Your hour is come to drink the cup of tears:
A ghastly paleness gathers on your cheeks,
While memory haunts your ears with captive shrieks;
Then stifled conscience wak'ning dares to cry,
"Think on your crimson crimes, despair, and die." --
Then ruin comes, with fire, and sword, and blood,
And men shall ask, where once your cities stood?
IT IS done! Behold the uncheery prospects rise;
Unwonted glooms the silent coasts surprise:
The heavens with sable clouds are overcast,
And death-like ^ounds ride on the hollow blast --
The rank grass rustling to the passing gale:
Even now of men the cheerful voices fail --
No busy marts appear, no crowded ports,
No rural dances, and no splendid courts;
In halls, so late with feasts, with music crowned,
No revels sport, nor mirthful cymbals sound.
Fastidious pomp! how are thy pageants fled!
How sleep the fallen in their lowly bed!
Their cultured fields to desolation turned,
The buildings levelled, and the enclosures burned.
Where the fair garden bloomed, the thorn succeeds,
'Mid noxious brambles and envenomed weeds.
Over fallow plains, no vagrant flocks are seen,
To print with tracks, or crop the dewy green,
The plague, where thousands felt his mortal stings,
In vacant air his shafts promiscuous flings;
Here walks in darkness, thirsting still for gore,
And raves, unsated, round the desert shore --
The sandy waste, the immeasurable heath,
Alone are prowl'd by animals of death.
Here tawny lions guard their gory den;
There birds of prey usurp the haunts of men;
Through dreary wilds, a mournful echo calls,
From mouldering towers and desolated walls.
Where the wan light through broken windows gleams,
The fox looks out, the boding raven screams;
While trembling travelers in wild amaze,
On wrecks of state, and piles of ruin, gaze.
THE direful signs, which mark the day of doom,
Shall scarcely scatter such portentous gloom --
When, rocked the ground, convulsed each roaring flood,
The stars shall fall, the sun be turned to blood,
The globe itself dissolve in fluid fire,
Time be no more, and man's whole race expire.
THUS has thy hand, great God! through every age,
When ripe for ruin, poured on man thy rage:
So did thou erst on Babylon let fall
The plagues thy hand inscribed upon the wall:
So did thou give Sidonia's sons for food,
To cow'ring eagles, drunk with human blood;
Seal in thy wrath imperial Salem's doom,
And sweep her millions to a common tomb.
BUT let us turn from objects that disgust,
The ghosts of empires, and of men accursed:
Turn we from sights that pain the feeling breast,
To where new nations populate the west:
For there, anon, shall new auroras rise,
And, streaming, brighten up the Atlantic skies,
Back on the solar path, with living ray,
Heaven's own pure splendors pour a tide of day.
AND lo! successful from heroic toils,
With glory covered, and enriched with spoils,
With garlands waving over these spoils of war,
The pomp preceded by the imperial star,
'Mid shouts of joy, from liberated slaves,
In triumph ride the avengers of the waves.
And see they gain Columbia's happy strand,
Where anxious crowds in expectation stand.
See raptured nations hail the kindred race,
And court the heroes to their fond embrace:
In fond embraces strained, the captive clings,
And feels and looks unutterable things.
See there the widow finds her darling son,
See in each others' arms the lovers run,
With joy tumultuous their swollen bosoms glow,
And one short moment pays for years of woe!
When grateful sports and festal songs proclaim
Their joys domestic, and their distant fame.
THEN glorious days, by hallowed bards foretold,
Shall far surpass the fabled age of gold,
The human mind its noblest powers display,
And knowledge, rising to meridian day,
Shine like the liberal sun; the illumined youths
By fair discussion find immortal truths.
WHY turns the horizon red? the dawn is near:
Infants of light, ye harbingers appear!
With ten-fold brightness gild the happier age,
And light the actors over a broader stage!
This drama closing -- ere the approaching end,
See heaven's perennial year to earth descend.
Then wake, Columbians! favorites of the skies,
Awake to glory, and to rapture rise!
Behold the dawn of your ascending fame,
Illume the nations with a purer flame;
Progressive splendors spread over every clime,
Then rapt in visions of unfolding time,
Pierce midnight clouds that hide his dark abyss,
And see, in embryo, scenes of future bliss!
See days, and months, and years, there roll in night,
While age succeeding age ascends to light,
Till your blessed offspring, countless as the stars,
In open ocean quench the torch of wars;
With god-like aim, in one firm union bind,
The common good and interest of mankind;
Unbar the gates of commerce for their race,
And build the general peace on freedom's broadest base.
AN IMPROMPTU. Addressed to a young lady, about to embark for Europe, who
desired to have some manuscript verses written by Colonel Humphreys.
(ANACREONTIC).
MAY you, fraught with every grace,
All the charms of mind and face,
Ripen fair in wisdom's beam;
Thine the bliss that poets dream.
Happier still thy prospects shine,
And each wish fulfilled be thine!
Riches make them wings and fly;
Envy blasts the buds of joy;
Deadly pangs may youth invade,
When the rosy cheek must fade;
Only virtue can impart
Our defense -- it soothes the heart,
Death disarms, or blunts his dart.
AN EPITAPH. ALEXANDER SCAMMEL,
Adjutant General of the American Armies, and Colonel of the first regiment of
New Hampshire, while he commanded a chosen corpse of light infantry, at the
successful siege of York-town in Virginia, was, in the gallant performance of
his duty, as field officer of the day, unfortunately captured, and afterward,
insiduously wounded -- of which wound he expired at Williamsburgh, Oct. 1781.
Anno ^^tatis........

THOUGH no kind angel glanced aside the ball,
Nor fed'ral arms poured vengeance for his fall:
Brave Scammel's fame, to distant regions known,
Shall last beyond this monumental stone,
Which, conquering armies (from their toils returned)
Reared to his glory, while his fate they mourned.
MOUNT VERNON: AN ODE. Written at Mount Vernon, August, 1786.

BY broad Potowmack's azure tide,
Where Vernon's mount, in sylvan pride,
Displays its beauties far,
Great Washington, to peaceful shades,
Where no unhallowed wish invades,
Retired from fields of war.
ANGELS might see, with joy, the sage,
Who taught the battle where to rage,
Or quenched its spreading flame.
On works of peace employ that hand,
Which waved the blade of high command,
And hewed the path to fame.
LET others sing his deeds in arms,
A nation saved, and conquest's charms:
Posterity shall hear,
'Twas mine, returned from Europe's courts,
To share his thoughts, partake his sports,
And sooth his partial ear.
To thee, my friend, these lays belong:
Thy happy seat inspires my song,
With gay, perennial blooms,
With fruitage fair, and cool retreats,
Whose bow'ry wilderness of sweets
The ambient air perfumes.
HERE spring its earliest buds displays,
Here latest on the leafless sprays,
The plumy people sing;
The vernal shower, the ripening year,
The autumnal store, the winter drear,
For thee new pleasures bring.
HERE lapp'd in philosophic ease,
Within thy walks, beneath thy trees,
Amidst thine ample farms,
No vulgar converse heroes hold,
But past or future scenes unfold,
Or dwell on nature's charms.
WHAT wondrous era have we seen,
Placed on this isthmus, half between
A rude and polished state!
We saw the war tempestuous rise,
In arms a world, in blood the skies,
In doubt an empire's fate.
THE storm is calmed, seren'd the heaven,
And mildly over the climes of even,
Expands the imperial day:
" O God, the source of light supreme,
" Shed on our dusky morn a gleam,
" To guide our doubtful way!
" RESTRAIN, dread power, our land from crimes!
" What seeks, though blessed beyond all times,
" So querulous an age?
" What means to freedom such disgust;
" Of change, of anarchy the lust,
" The fickleness and rage?"
SO spoke his country's friend, with sighs,
To find that country still despise
The legacy he gave --
And half he feared his toils were vain,
And much that man would court a chain,
And live through vice a slave.
A TRANSIENT gloom overcast his mind:
Yet, still on providence reclined,
The patriot fond believed,
That power benign too much had done,
To leave an empire's task begun,
Imperfectly achieved.
THUS buoyed with hope, with virtue blessed,
Of every human bliss possessed,
He meets the happier hours:
His skies assume a lovelier blue,
His prospects brighter rise to view,
And fairer bloom his flowers.
THE GENIUS OF AMERICA. Written during the insurrections in Massachusetts, in
the year 1787.
A SONG. -- Tune, the watery God, etc.
WHERE spirits dwell, and shad'wy forms,
On Andes' cliffs mid black'ning storms,
With livid lightnings curled:
The awful genius of our clime,
In thunder raised his voice sublime,
And hushed the listening world.
" IN lonely waves and wastes of earth,
" A mighty empire claims its birth,
" And heaven asserts the claim;
" The sails that hang in yon dim sky,
" Proclaimed the promised era nigh,
" Which wakes a world to fame.
" HAIL ye first bounding barks that roam,
" Blue-tumbling billows topp'd with foam,
" Which keel never plough'd before!
" Here suns perform their useless round,
" Here rove the naked tribes embrown'd,
" Who feed on living gore.
" TO midnight orgies, offering dire,
" The human sacrifice on fire,
" A heavenly light succeeds --
" But, lo! what horrors intervene,
" The toils severe, the carnag'd scene,
" And more than mortal deeds!
" YE FATHERS, spread your fame afar,
" It Is yours to still the sounds of war,
" And bid the slaughter cease;
" The peopling hamlets wide extend,
" The harvests spring, the spires ascend,
" 'Mid grateful songs of peace.
" SHALL steed to steed, and man to man,
" With discord thundering in the van,
" Again destroy the bliss?
" Enough my mystic words reveal,
" The rest the shades of night conceal,
" In fate's profound abyss."
AN ELEGY ON LIEUTENANT DE HEART. This young warrior was killed in the attack on
the block-house, near Fort Lee^ 1780.
VOL.-AID. TO GENESIS WAYNE
WHEN autumn all humid and drear,
With darkness and storms in his train,
Announcing the death of the year,
Despoiled of its verdure the plain:
When horror congenial prevailed,
Where graves are with fearfulness trod,
De Heart by his sister was wail'd,
His sister thus sighed over his sod:
" NEAR Hudson, a fort, on these banks,
" Its flag of defiance unfurled:
" He led to the storm the first ranks;
" On them, iron tempests were hurled.
" Transpierc'd was his breast with a ball --
" His breast a red fountain supplied,
" Which, gushing in waves still and small,
" Distained his white bosom and side.
" HIS visage was ghastly in death,
" His hair, that so lavishly curled,
" I saw, as he lay on the heath,
" In blood, and with dew-drops impearl'd.
" How dumb is the tongue, that could speak
" Whatever could engage and delight!
" How faded the rose on his cheek!
" Those eyes, how envelop'd in night!
" THOSE eyes, that illumined each soul,
" All darkened to us are now grown:
" In far other orbits they roll,
" Like stars to new systems when gone,
" My brother, the pride of the plain,
" In vain did the graces adorn;
" His blossom unfolded in vain,
" To die like the blossom of morn.
" OH war, thou have wasted our clime,
" And tortured my bosom with sighs;
" My brother, who fell ere his prime,
" For ever is torn from my eyes.
" To me, how distracting the storm,
" That blasted the youth in his bloom?
" Alas, was so finished a form
" Designed for so early a tomb?
" HOW bright were the prospects that shone;
" Their ruin it is mine to deplore --
" Health, beauty, and youth were his own,
" Health, beauty, and youth are no more,
" No blessings of nature and art,
" Nor music that charmed in the song,
" Nor virtues that glowed in the heart,
" Dear youth, could thy moments prolong!
" THRICE six times the spring had renewed
" Its youth and its charms for the boy:
" With rapture all nature he viewed,
" For nature he knew to enjoy.
" But chiefly his country could charm:
" He felt -- 'twas a generous heat --
" With drums and the trumpet's alarm,
" His pulses in consonance beat.
" YE heroes, to whom he was dear,
" Come weep over this sorrowful urn,
" Come ease the full heart with a tear --
" My hero will never return:
" He died in the dawn of applause,
" His country demanded his breath;
" Go, heroes, defend the same cause,
" Avenge, with your country, his death."
SO sung on the top of the rocks,
The virgin in sorrow more fair;
In tears her blue eyes; and her locks
Of auburn, flew loose in the air.
I heard, as I passed down the stream;
The guards of the foe were in view: --
To enterprise fired by the theme,
I bade the sweet mourner adieu.
THE MONKEY, WHO SHAVED HIMSELF AND HIS FRIENDS A FABLE. -- Addressed to the
Hon. --.
A MAN who owned a barber's shop
At York, and shaved full many a fop,
A monkey kept for their amusement;
He made no other kind of use on it --
This monkey took great observation,
Was wonderful at imitation,
And all he saw the barber do,
He mimic'd strait, and did it too.
IT chanced in shop, the dog and cat,
While friseur dined, demurely sat,
Jacko found naught to play the knave in,
So thought he would try his hand at shaving.
Around the shop in haste he rushes,
And gets the razors, soap, and brushes;
Now puss he fixed (no muscle miss stirs)
And lather'd well her beard and whiskers,
Then gave a gash, as he began --
The cat cried "waugh!" and off she ran.
NEXT Towser's beard he tried his skill in,
Though Towser seemed somewhat unwilling:
As badly here again succeeding,
The dog runs howling round and bleeding.
NOR yet was tired our roguish elf,
He Would seen the barber shave himself;
So by the glass, upon the table,
He rubs with soap his visage fable,
Then with left hand holds smooth his jaw,
The razor, in his dexter paw;
Around he flourishes and flashes,
Till all his face is seam'd with gashes.
His cheeks dispatched -- his visage thin
He cocked, to shave beneath his chin;
Drew razor swift as he could pull it,
And cut, from ear to ear, his gullet.
MORAL.
WHO cannot write, yet handle pens,
Are apt to hurt themselves and friends.
Though others use them well, yet fools
Should never meddle with edge tools.
AN ODE. ADDRESSED TO LAURA.
OH, lovely Laura! may a youth,
Inspired by beauty, urged by truth,
Disclose the heart's alarms,
The fire in youthful blood that glows,
The impassioned pang on love that grows,
And dare to sing thy charms!
ENOUGH with war my lay has rung;
A softer theme awakes my tongue;
It Is beauty's force divine:
Can I resist that air, that grace,
The charms of motion, figure, face?
For every charm is thine.
OF health, of youth, the expanding flush,
Of virgin fear the flying blush,
Distain thy lily cheek:
The be such nectar never sips,
As yields the rose-bud of thy lips,
Thy lips that sweetly speak.
IT IS thine the heaviest heart to cheer,
Those accents caught with eager ear,
So musically roll:
While swells the breast, the snow-white skin
Scarce hides the secret thoughts within,
Nor needs disguise that soul.
WHERE down thy waist, and over thy breast,
In light-brown ringlets neatly dressed,
Devolves thy beauteous hair:
Eager I gaze -- and, gazing, dream
Of halcyon days; while on me beam
Those blue-eyes mild and fair.
UNBLAM'D, oh let me gaze and gaze,
While lovesick fancy fondly strays,
And feasts on many a kiss; --
For us let tides of rapture roll,
Thus intermingling soul with soul,
In ecstasies of bliss!
THE SHEPHERD. A SONG. TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH.
"IT rains, it rains, my fair,
Come drive your white sheep fast:
To shelter quick repair,
Haste, shepherdess, make haste.
I HEAR -- the water pours,
With patt'ring on the vines:
See here! see here! it lours --
See there the lightning shines.
THE thunder do thou hear?
Loud roars the rushing storm:
Take, (while we run, my dear)
Protection from my arm.
I SEE our cot, ah hold!
Mama and sister Nance,
To open our sheepfold,
Most cheerily advance.
GOD bless my mother dear,
My sister Nancy too!
I bring my sweetheart here,
To sleep to night with you.
GO, dry yourself, my friend,
And make yourself at home --
Sister, on her attend:
Come in, sweet lambkins, come. --
MAMA, let us take good care
Of all her pretty sheep;
Her little lamb we'll spare
More straw whereon to sleep.
IT IS done -- now let us haste
To her; -- you here, my fair!
Undressed, oh what a waist!
My mother, look you there.
Let Us sup; come take this place,
You shall be next to me;
This pine-knot's cheerful blaze
Shall shine direct on thee.
COME taste this cream so sweet,
This syllabub so warm;
Alas! you do not eat:
You feel even yet the storm.
'TWAS wrong -- I pressed too much
Your steps, when on the way:
But here, see here your couch --
There sleep till dawn of day.
WITH gold the mountain tips: --
Good night, good night, my dove:
Now let me on your lips,
Imprint one kiss of love.
MAMA and I will come,
As soon as morn shall shine,
To see my sweetheart home,
And ask her hand for mine.
AN EPITHALAMIUM.
I.
'TWAS at the wedding-feast, for Celia won,
By Cymon's coxcomb son:
Aloft in dwarfish state
The foplike bridegroom sat,
And made a deal of fun!
His gallant peers around were placed,
Their hair all curled and dressed in newest taste:
(Of powder what prodigious waste!)
The simp'ring Celia by his side,
His lace and gew-gaws fondly eyed,
And swelled her little heart with pride.
Proper, proper, proper pair!
None but a rake,
None but a rake,
Such pains would take, to gain a fickle fair.
II.
MUNGO was there, and did well,
And led the cap'ring choir;
With fumbling fingers twang'd the fiddle:
The notes awake the amorous fire,
And drinking joys inspire.
The song began of beaux,
And whence the order rose;
(Such wondrous things a fiddler knows.)
A Monkey's grinning form in utmost vigor,
Belied a macaroni's noble figure;
ALEXANDER's FEAST. OR THE POWER OF MUSIC. AN ODE IN HONOR OF ST. CECILIA's
DAY. By Mr. Dryden.
I.
'TWAS at the royal feast for Persia won,
By Philip's warlike son:
Aloft in awful state
The godlike hero sat
On his imperial throne.
His valiant peers were placed around,
Their brows with roses and with myrtles bound;
(So should desert in arms be crowned,)
The lovely Thais by his ^ide,
Sat like a blooming eastern bride,
In flower of youth and beauty's pride.
Happy, happy, happy pair!
None but the brave,
None but the brave,
None but the brave deserves the fair.
II.
Timotheus placed on high,
Amid the tuneful choir,
With flying fingers touched the lyre;
The trembling notes ascend the sky,
And heavenly joys inspire.
The song began from Jove,
Who left his blissful seat above;
(Such is the power of mighty love)
A dragon's fiery form belied the god;
Sublime on radiant spires he rode,
When he to fair Coquetta pressed,
A while he sought her snowy breast;
Then round her slender waist he curled,
And stamped an image of himself, a coxcomb of the world.
A present fop! they shout around;
A present fop! the vaulted roofs rebound:
With ravished ears,
The fopling hears;
Assumes the shape,
Looks like an ape,
And grins, and laughs, and sneers.
III.
The praise of Bacchus then the thirsty fiddler sung;
Of Bacchus, ever plump and ever young:
The jolly god to wedding comes;
Sound the trumpets, beat the drums:
Flushed with a purple nose,
His pimpled face he shows.
Now give the boy a dram. He comes, he comes!
Bacchus! plump and merry younker,
Makes the wedding-folks get drunker;
Bacchus taught to toast the lasses;
Tippling every joy surpasses,
Rich the treasure,
Sweet the pleasure,
After drinking to break glasses.
IV.
Soothed with the sound, the fop grew vain,
Talked all his courtship over again,
And thrice he kissed the girls all round, and thrice they fled amain.
When he to fair Olympia pressed,
A while he sought her snowy breast;
Then round her slender waist he curled,
And stamped an image of himself, a sovereign of the world.
A present deity! they shout around:
A present deity! the vaulted roofs rebound:
With ravished ears
The monarch hears;
Assumes the god,
Affects to nod,
And seems to shake the spheres.
III.
The praise of Bacchus then the sweet musician sung:
Of Bacchus, ever fair and ever young:
The jolly god in triumph comes;
Sound the trumpets, beat the drums:
Flushed with a purple grace,
He shows his honest face.
Now give the hautboys breath. He comes, he comes!
Bacchus! ever fair and young,
Drinking joys did first ordain;
Bacchus' blessings are a treasure;
Drinking is the soldier's pleasure:
Rich the treasure,
Sweet the pleasure,
Sweet is pleasure after pain.
IV.
Soothed with the sound, the king grew vain,
Fought all his battles over again,
And thrice he routed all his foes, and thrice he slew the slain.
The fiddler saw the mischief rise,
His yawning mouth, his maudlin eyes;
And while he sense and song defied,
Changed his hand, and strok'd the bride.
He chose a doleful ditty,
To work him up to pity:
He sung poor Damon's cruel wrongs,
By too severe a fate,
Banished, banished, banished, banished,
Banished for his small estate,
And writing mournful songs:
Deserted, at his utmost need,
By all Apollo's tuneful breed;
On an old feather-bed he lies,
Nor dullness self will close his eyes:
With stupid stare the joyless fopling sat,
Revolving in his altered soul,
The various turns of fate and fun;
And now and then a drink he stole,
And streams began to run.
V.
The mighty fiddler smiled to see
That love was in the next degree:
To touch that string was little labor,
For love to pity is next neighbor.
Softly sweet he tuned his fiddle,
Soon it sounded, tiddle, diddle.
Trade, he sung, is toil and trouble;
Money but an empty bubble;
Constant hurry, still beginning,
Constant cheating, never ending;
If a fortune's worth thy winning,
Think, oh think it worth thy spending!
The master saw the madness rise,
His glowing cheeks, his ardent eyes;
And while he heaven and earth defied,
Changed his hand, and checked his pride.
He chose a mournful muse,
Soft pity to infuse;
He sung Darius, great and good!
By too severe a fate,
Fallen, fallen, fallen, fallen,
Fallen from his high estate,
And welt'ring in his blood:
Deserted at his utmost need,
By those his former bounty fed;
On the bare earth exposed he lies,
Without a friend to close his eyes.
With downcast looks the joyless victor sat,
Revolving in his altered soul,
The various turns of chance below;
And now and then a sigh he stole,
And tears began to flow,
V.
The mighty master smiled to see
That love was in the next degree;
'Twas but a kindred sound to move,
For pity melts the mind to love.
Softly sweet, in Lydian measures,
Soon he soothed his soul to pleasures.
War, he sung, is toil and trouble;
Honor but an empty bubble;
Never ending, still beginning,
Fighting still, and still destroying;
If the world be worth thy winning,
Think, O think it worth enjoying!
Lovely Celia sits beside thee;
Drink about, and luck betide thee,
The many rend the bowls with loud applause;
So love was crowned, but liquor won the cause.
The fop, grown addled in his noddle,
Gazed on his b^^de,
And then his bottle,
And sighed and looked, sighed and looked,
Sighed and looked, and looked and sighed.
At length for love, and drinking more unable,
The tipsy bridegroom fell beneath the table.
VI.
Now tug the wooden lyre again:
A harder yet, and yet a harder strain.
Let scolding break is sleep asunder,
And start him, like a rattling peal of thunder.
Hark, hark, Xantippe's fable
Has raised up his head,
As awaked from the dead,
And he peeps out from under the table.
Revenge, revenge, dark Mungo cries,
See the cuckolds arise!
See the horns that they rear,
How they look in their hair,
And the tears that roll down from their eyes!
Behold the ^en-peck'd band,
In ghostly terror^ stand!
These are husbands whose couches have met with a stain;
Whose wives still remain,
Unconcern^d with their pain:
Give the vengeance due,
To the cuckold crew.
Lovely Thais sits beside thee;
Take the good the gods provide thee.
The many rend the skies with loud applause,
So love was crowned, but music won the cause.
The prince unable to conceal his pain,
Gazed on his fair,
Who caused his care,
And sighed and looked, sighed and looked,
Sighed and looked, and sighed again.
At length, with love and wine at once oppressed,
The vanquished victor sunk upon her breast.
VI.
Now strike the golden lyre again,
A louder yet, and yet a louder strain.
Break his bands of sleep asunder,
And rouse him, like a rattling peal of thunder.
Hark, hark the horrid sound
Has raised up his head,
As awaked from the dead,
And amazed he stares around.
Revenge, revenge! Timotheus cries,
See the furies arise!
See the snakes that they rear,
How they hiss in their hair!
And the sparkles that flash from their eyes!
Behold a ghostly band,
Each a torch in his hand!
These are Grecian ghosts that in battle were slain.
Whose bodies remain
Unburied on the plain:
Give the vengeance due,
To the Valient crew.
Behold how they toss their foreheads up higher,
How they point to the bed-rooms around,
And warn every pair to retire:
The cronies applaud with a Bacchanal sound:
And each in a rapture laid hold on his Helen;
The way fair Celia led,
To light the bucks to bed,
The rest is scarce worth telling.
VII.
Thus long ago,
Ere younger Cymon's horns began to grow,
While Celia's tongue lay still,
Dark Mungo showed prodigious skill,
Both as a finger,
And when he touched his lyre with heavy thumb and finger.
But when the shrill-voic'd Celia came,
And tuned to rage her vocal frame;
The gifted scold from her unborrow'd store,
Enlarged the former narrow bounds,
And added length to jarring sounds
With nature's mother-wit, and screams unknown before.
Let Mungo, if he is able,
Do more -- or yield the wreath --
He stretched a fop beneath the table,
She scolded him to death.
Behold how they toss their torches on high,
How they point to the Persian abodes,
And glittering temples of their hostile gods.
The princes applaud with a furious joy,
And the king seized a flambeau with zeal to destroy;
Thais led the way,
To light him to his prey,
And like another Helen, fired another Troy.
VII.
Thus long ago,
Ere heaving bellows learned to blow,
While organs yet were mute;
Timotheus with his breathing flute,
And sounding lyre,
Could swell the soul to rage, or kindle soft desire.
But when divine Cecilia came,
Inventress of the vocal frame,
The sweet enthusiast, from her sacred store,
Enlarged the former narrow bounds,
And added length to solemn sounds,
With nature's mother-wit, and arts unknown before.
Let old Timotheus yield the prize,
Or both divide the crown;
He raised a mortal to the skies,
She drew an angel down.
A LETTER TO A YOUNG LADY IN BOSTON.
DATED AT NEW HAVEN, APRIL, 1780.
INSPIRED with hope of giving pleasure,
By tale disastrous, told in measure,
I mean, dear miss, from facts diurnal,
To write a kind of sleighing journal;
And minute how I came across, back
From Pomfret to the Sound on horseback.
Suppose (to save the pain of parting)
Your friends (the trouble past of starting)
Far on their way -- the muse will find us --
Our hearts, with you, as far behind us: --
No wonder, then, we soon were lost on
The roads that go direct from Boston,
And came, erroneous where they lead in,
From Brush-Hill, down to Dedham-meeting:
From whence we turned our steeds to Wrentham,
And drove, as if the devil sent 'em,
'Till nine -- nor made a single check first --
At nine, we stopped to take our breakfast.
Here I might use poetic fiction,
With all the tropes and flowers of diction,
To change (since flattery half our trade is)
The tavern-girls to sky-born ladies:
Or give, in number new and rare,
With Homer's fire, a bill of fare;
Or turn, with Ovid's art bewitching,
To rooms of state, a bar or kitchen:
But facts, perhaps, by way of letter,
May shorter be expressed and better;
As, how the woman first denied us
A breakfast; how she scowl'd and eyed us;
And how we slily managed matters,
And coax'd the dame, and squeezed the daughters;
'Till breakfast served, with kinder looks,
Left no pretext to kiss the cooks.
OUR meal complete -- 'ere we departed,
We paid the club -- then off we started --
But now the clouds began to lower,
And threat of rain no drizzly shower:
It dropped -- we came to Attleborough --
The mist increased, as did our sorrow.
I CANNOT choose, with Homer's haste,
'To say, "we snatched a short repast."
We dined: and spent an hour in reading
The news -- from hence, through showers proceeding
To Providence -- 'ere it grew dark
Your friend, the Major D. Putnam, an aid-de-camp to Major General Putnam, as
was the Author.
major, called on Clark,
Delivered your commands, in form,
Then came to Rice's in the storm;
For now the storm, that long impended,
In downright cataracts descended.
HERE I must take, for episodes,
Such as I find -- by no means gods --
For here some half-score strangers met,
I never saw a stranger set:
Our pleasant scene may soon be sketch'd,
We stretched and yawn'd -- then yawn'd and stretched,
WITH doubts (where one can clear the mystery)
I would not puzzle future history:
At dawn (the fact you might suppose)
We waked -- got up -- put on our clothes:
And then, to use our technics arch,
Again took up our line of march,
Through paths of snow, too thin and soft,
Our horses flounder'd deep and often:
Sev'n miles we drove, not over fast,
And reached the eighth -- the eighth and last --
THOU muse, often called at latest shift,
To help poor bards at some dead lift;
Now, let thy succors not be scanted,
They never can be more sadly wanted;
Come to our aid, thou muse of fire,
And drag us through the rhyme and mire!
NO vagrant wights, or true knights errant,
Ever saw such perils, I dare warrant;
Not Homer's hero faced such dangers,
By land or sea, with friends or strangers;
Not Bunyan's pilgrim found such pond,
Quite badly wet in Slough Despond;
Nor Satan, in his various way, was
So plagued (as Milton sings) in chaos;
Nor even the son of old Anchises
Was brought to such a fatal crisis, --
No Charon here, we found to ferry us
Over a villain lake, like Erebus.
THE dismal vale we now 'gan enter,
And down we plunged toward the center --
Above mid-sides the horses slump in,
Nor stir a step, except by jumping --
Again they plunge -- and here full sadly
For our poor driver, honest Bradley,
The pole snapp'd short -- then quickly falling,
It went down, with the horses, all in --
The worst of scrapes to make the best on,
And raise the pole, was now the question --
Bradley (hence named the lion-hearted)
His utmost skill and strength exerted:
While poles we placed across the slough,
And got it out -- the Lord knows how --
Then, many a fruitless effort tried,
We reached, half-drown'd the other side.
THE muse invoked, who sat on bench,
In guise most like a mortal wench,
In our misfortunes wet her wings,
And therefore soars not, though she sings:
That muse, no doubt, with little striving,
Might learn the true sublime of diving,
Even now she tells, how, thick and faster,
Disaster crowded on disaster,
To reach a house how hard we worked,
The horses mir'd, and tired, and cork'd,
'Till neighbors came, with kind assistance,
And drew the sleigh, by hand, some distance.
AS when a sailor, long the sport
Of winds and waves, arrives in port,
He joys, although the vessel's stranded,
To find himself alive and landed:
Not less our glee, nor less our courage,
To find a cot, where we found porridge;
And where three days ourselves we found,
(To try our patience) weather bound.
EACH plan to move in council stated,
Was passed -- rejected -- re-debated.
HERE one might fall to moralizing
Upon some theme which most seem wise in:
Ye, who for human nature stickle,
Come learn that man is frail and sickle,
The sport, or bubble altogether,
Of fire and water, wind and weather!
IT now grew cold -- the path was frozen,
To part the hour of midnight chosen --
Our matters all, at length, adjusted,
The event to Providence we trusted.
THE rubs and jostlings of that night,
Were more by half than I shall write:
Can things like these in rhyme be written!
How by a dog my friend was bitten;
How Bradley tore a piece of skin,
Like paper dollar, from his shin;
And how your bard, 'ere he was seated,
His better ^inger dislocated;
How heavily the horses drew
The sleigh; and how they dragged it through
A mire -- from whence (remains no doubt)
The very bottom had dropped out;
And lastly, how, to make us fret,
The sleigh was fairly overset;
Beset with ills, we rode by moonlight:
Till that was gone -- and then 'twas soon light.
THE sun, to our new world now present,
Brought on the day benign and pleasant;
The day, by milder fates attended,
Our plagues at General Putnam's ended.
That chief, though ill, received our party
With joy, and gave us welcome hearty:
The good old man, of death not fearful,
Retained his mind and temper cheerful,
Retained (with palsy sorely smitten)
His love of country, pique for Britain;
He told of many a deed and skirmish,
That basis for romance might furnish;
The story of his wars and woes
Which I shall write in humble prose;
Should heaven (that fondest schemes can mar)
Protract my years beyond this war.
THUS end the toil and picture frightful
Of sleighing -- often a sport delightful --
A sport, which all our lads and lasses
Agree each other sport surpasses,
When, crossing bridges in that vehicle,
They taste of kisses sweet as treacle.
TO Hartford next, with whip and spur hence
I came -- nor met one ill occurrence --
There Wadsworth's hospitable dome
Received me: 'twas a second home.
SOME days elapsed, I jogged quite brave o^
And found my Trumbull at New Haven;
Than whom, more humor never man did
Possess -- nor lives a soul more candid --
But who, unsung, would know hereafter,
The repartees, and peals of laughter,
Or how much glee those laughters yield one;
Maugre the system Chesterfieldian!
Barlow I saw, and here began
My friendship for that spotless man;
Whom, though the world does not yet know it,
Great nature formed her loftiest poet.
But Dwight was absent at North-Hampton,
That bard sublime, and virtue's champion.
To whom the charms of verse belong,
The father of our epic song!
MY morn of life here happily past,
With youths of genius, science, taste:
But mid the roar of drums and guns,
Where meet again the muse's sons?
The mental banquet must they quit,
The feast of reason and of wit;
For ever lost, in civil strife,
That solace sweet of human life!
THE cannon's distant thunders ring,
And wake to deeds of death the spring:
Far other sounds once touched my ear,
And ushered in the flowery year,
But, now, adieu the tuneful train,
The warblings of my native plain;
Adieu the scenes that charmed my view,
And thou, fair maid, again adieu!
Farewell the bowers and conscious shades! --
My country's cause my soul invades --
Yes, roused by sense of country's wrongs,
I give the wind my idle songs:
No vacant hour for rhyme succeeds,
I go wherever the battle bleeds:
Tomorrow -- (brief then be my story) --
I go to WASHINGTON and GLORY;
His aid-de-camp -- in acts when tried --
Resolved (whatever fates betide)
My conduct, 'till my final breath,
Shall not disgrace my life or death,
AN EPISTLE TO DR. DWIGHT.
On board the Courier de l' Europe, July 30, 1784.
FROM the wide watery waste, where naught but skies
And mingling waves salute the aching eyes;
Where the same moving circle bounds the view,
And paints with vap'ry tints the billows blue;
To thee, my early friend! to thee, dear Dwight!
Fond recollection turns, while thus I write;
While I reflect, no change of time or place,
The impressions of our friendship can efface --
Nor peace, or war -- though changed for us the scene --
Though mountains rise, or oceans roll between --
Too deep that sacred passion was impressed
On my young heart -- too deep it marked your breast --
Your breast which asks the feelings of your friend,
What chance betides him, or what toils attend?
Then hear the muse, in sea-born numbers tell
In mind how cheerful, and in health how well;
And even that muse will deign to let you know,
What things concur to make and keep him so. --
WE go, protected by supernal care,
With cloudless skies, and suns serenely fair;
While over the unruffled main the gentle gale
Consenting breathes, and fills each swelling sail;
Conscious of safety in the self-same hand,
Which guides us on the ocean or the land.
OF thee, fair bark! the muse prophetic sings,
" Europe's swift Messenger! expand thy wings,
" Rear thy tall masts, extend thine ample arms,
" Catch the light breeze, nor dread impending harms --
" Full often shall thou -- if aught the muse avails --
" Wing the broad deep with such delightful gales;
" Full often to either world announce glad news,
" Of allied realms promote the friendly views;
" So shall each distant age assert thy claim,
" And Europe's Messenger be known to fame!"
WHAT though this plain so uniform and vast,
Illimitably spreads its dreary waste;
What though no isles, nor vales, nor hills, nor groves,
Meet the tired eye that round the horizon roves;
Yet, still collected in a narrow bound,
Ten thousand little pleasures may be found --
HERE we enjoy accommodations good,
With pleasant liquors, and well-flavour'd food,
Meats nicely fatten'd in Columbian fields,
And luscious wines, that Gallia's vintage yields,
On which you bards ('it was so in former days)
Might feast your wit, and lavish all your praise.
WITHIN our ship, well-furnish'd, roomy, clean,
Come see the uses of each different scene --
Far in the prow, for culinary use,
Fires, not poetic, much good cheer produce,
The ovens there our daily bread afford,
And thence the viands load our plenteous board.
SEE various landscapes shade our dining hall,
Where mimic nature wantons round the wall,
There no vain pomp appears -- there all is neat --
And there cool zephyrs fanning, as we eat,
Avert the fervours of the noontide ray,
And give the mildness of the vernal day.
SEE the great cabin nigh, its doors unfold,
Show fleeting forms from mirrors fixed in gold!
Over painted ceilings brighter prospects rise,
And rural scenes again delight our eyes --
There often from converse or from social sports,
We drink delight less dashed than that of courts.
BUT when more sober cares the hour requires,
Each to his cell of solitude retires;
His bed -- his books -- his paper, pen and ink --
Present the choice, to rest, to read, or think. --
YET what would all avail to prompt the smile,
Cheer the sad breast, or the dull hour beguile;
If well-bred passengers, discreet and free,
Were not at hand to mix in social glee?
Such my companions -- such the muse shall tell,
Him first whom once you knew in war full well,
Our Polish General Kosciuszke.
friend, whose name still sounds so hard,
To make it rhyme would puzzle any bard;
That youth, whom bays and laurels early crowned,
For virtue, science, arts and arms renowned!
Next him, behold, to grace our watery scene,
An honest German lifts his generous mein,
Him Carolina sends to Europe's shore,
Canals and inland waters to explore;
From thence returned, she hopes to see her tide,
In commerce rich, through ampler channels glide,
Next comes the bleak Quebec's well natured son:
And last our naval chief, the friend of fun,
Whose plain, frank manners, formed on fickle seas,
Are cheerful still, and always aim to please:
Nor less the other chiefs their zeal display,
To make us happy as themselves are gay.
SEVERED from all society but this,
Half way from either world we plough the abyss.
Save the small sea-bird and the fish that flies,
On you blue waves no object meets my eyes. --
Nor has the insidious hook, with lures, beguiled
O^ peopled ocean scarce a single child --
Yet luckless Dolphin, erst to Arion Ille sedet, eitharamque tenet, pretininque
vel^endi Cantat, et (...) carmine mulcet aquas, Ovid. Fast. 2^
true,
Naught could avail thy beauteous, transient hue;
As over the deck, in dying pang you rolled,
Wrapped in gay rainbows and pellucid gold.
Now see that wanderer bird, fatigued with slight
Over many a watery league, is forced to light
High on the (...) the bird our seamen take,
Though (...), too tired its refuge to forsake:
Fear not tweet bird, nor judge our motives ill.
No barbarous man now mean thy blood to spill,
Or hold thee cag'd -- soon as we reach the shore,
Free shall thou fly, and gaily sing and soar!
ANOTHER grateful sight now cheers the eye,
At first a snow-white spot in yo^ clear sky;
Then through the optic tube a ship appears,
And now distinct athwart the billows veers:
Daughter of ocean, made to bless mankind!
Go, range wide waters on the wings of wind --
With friendly intercourse far climes explore,
Their produce barter, and increase their store --
Never saw my eye so fair a pageant swim,
As thou appear'st, in all thy gallant trim! --
AMUSED with trivial things, reclined at ease,
While the swift bark divides the summer seas;
Your bard (for past neglects to make amends)
Now writes to you -- anon to other friends. --
ANON the scene, in Europe's polished climes,
Will give new themes for philosophic rhimes,
Open broader fields for reason to explore,
Improvements vast of scientific lore!
THROUGH nations blessed with peace, but strong in arms,
Refined in arts, and apt for social charms,
Your friend will stray, and strive with studious care
To mark whatever is useful, great, or rare;
Search the small shades of manners in their lives,
What policy prevails, how commerce thrives;
How morals form of happiness the base,
How others differ from Columbia's race;
And, gleaning knowledge from the realms he roved,
Bring home a patriot heart, enlarged, improved. --
EPISTLE FROM DR. DWIGHT TO COL. HUMPHREYS.
Greenfield, 1785.
FROM realms, where nature sports in youthful prime,
Where Hesper lingers over his darling clime,
Where sunny genius lights his sacred flame,
Where rising science casts her morning beam,
Where empire's final throne in pomp ascends,
Where pilgrim freedom finds her vanished friends,
The world renews, and man from eastern fires,
Phoenix divine, again to Heaven aspires,
Health to my friend this happy verse conveys,
His fond attendant over the Atlantic seas.
HEALTH to my friend let every wish prolong;
Be this the burden of each artless song;
This in the prayer of every morn arise;
Thou angel guardian, waft it to the skies!
His devious course let fostering Heaven survey;
Nor ills betide, nor foes arrest his way.
NOR health alone -- may bliss thy path attend;
May truth direct thee, and may peace befriend;
From virtue's fount thy taintless actions flow;
The shield of conscience blunt the dart of woe;
To rising bliss refined above alloy,
Where budding wishes blossom into joy,
Where glory dwells, where saints and seraphs sing,
Let Heaven, in prospect, tempt thy lifted wing.
ME the same views, the same soft tide of cares,
Bear gently onward down the stream of years,
Still the same duties call my course along;
Still grows, at times, the pain-deluding song;
Still scenes domestic earthly joys refine,
Where blessed Maria mingles cares with mine;
The same fond circle still my life endears,
Where Fairfield's elms, or Stamford's groupe appears;
Or where, in rural guise, around me smile
Mansions of peace, and Greenfield's beauteous hill,
Still to my cot the friend delighted hies,
And one loved parent waits beneath the skies.
To thee, far summoned from each native scene,
With half the breadth of this wide world between,
How blessed the news my happy verse conveys,
Of friends, divided by interfluent seas?
Health, peace, and competence, their walks surround,
On the bright margin of you beauteous sound;
Where Hartford sees the first of waters glide,
Or where thy Avon winds his silver tide.
YET thou must mourn a Major Elijah Humphreys brother of Col. Humphrey^ who
died in the West Indies in 1785.
friend, a brother dear;
And over departed merit drop a tear.
Him sense illum'd, the hero's warmth inspired,
Grace taught to please, and patriot virtue fired;
Alike in peace, in war, at home, abroad,
Worth gained him honor, where his footsteps trod;
Yet all in vain: his laureled garlands bloom;
But waste their beauty on the untimely tomb.
MEANTIME, invited over the Atlantic tide,
Where arts refined allure thy feet aside,
May thou unmoved by splendor's painted charms,
And steeled when pleasure smiling spreads her arms,
The great simplicity of soul retain,
The humble fear of Heaven, and love of man,
When round thy course temptations sweetly throng,
When warbling syren's chant the luscious song,
When wealth's fair bubble beams its hues afar,
When grandeur calls thee to her golden car,
When pleasure opes the bosom bright of joy,
And the died serpent gazes to destroy;
Oh! may the heavenly Guide thy passions warm,
Up virtue's hills thy feet resistless charm,
Show thee what crowns reward the glorious strife,
And quicken fainting duty into life.
OFTEN has thine eye, with glance indignant seen
Columbia's youths, unfolding into men,
Their minds to' improve, their manners to adorn,
To Europe's climes by fond indulgence borne,
Often have thou seen those youths, at custom's shrine,
Victims to pride, to folly, and to sin,
Of worth bereft, of real sense forlorn,
Their land forget, their friends, their freedom spurn;
Each noble cause, each solid good desert,
For splendor happiness, and truth for art;
The plain, frank manners of their race despise,
Fair without fraud, and great beyond disguise;
Where, through the life the heart uncovered ran,
And spoke the native dignity of man.
FOR these, the gain let Virtue blush to hear,
And each sad parent drop the plaintive tear!
Trained in foul stews, impoison'd by the stage,
Hoyl'd into gaming, Keyser'd into age,
To smooth hypocrisy by Stanhope led,
To truth an alien, and to virtue dead,
Swollen with an English butcher's sour disdain,
Or to a Fribble dwindled from a man,
Homeward again behold the jackdaw run,
And yield his sire the ruins of a son!
WHAT though his mind no thought has ever perplexed,
Converse illum'd, nor observations vexed;
Yet here, in each debate, a judge he shines,
Of all, that man enlarges, or refines;
Religion, science, politics, and song;
A prodigy his parts; an oracle his tongue,
Hist! hist! ye mere Americans, attend;
Open wide your mouths; your knees in homage bend;
While Curl discloses to the raptured view
What Peter, Paul, and Moses, never knew;
The light of newborn wisdom sheds abroad,
And adds a An awkward addition to a dwelling house, very common in New England.
leanto to the word of God.
What Creole wretch shall dare, with home-made foils,
Attack opinions, brought three thousand miles;
Sense, in no common way to mortals given,
But on Atlantic travelers breathed by Heaven;
A head, en queue, by Monsieur Frizzle dressed;
Manners, a Paris Taylor's arts invest;
Pure criticism, formed from acted plays;
And graces, that would even Stanhope grace?
Commercial wisdom, merchants here inhale
From him, whose eye has seen the unfinished bale;
Whose feet have passed the shop, where pins were sold,
The wire was silvered and the heads were rolled!
Convened, ye lawyers, make your humblest leg!
Here stands the man, has seen Lord Mansfield's wig!
Physicians hushed, hear Galen's lips distill,
From Buchan's contents, all the Art to heal!
Divines, with reverence cease your scripture whims,
And learn this male Minerva's moral schemes;
Schemes theologic found in Drury Lane,
That prove the bible false, and virtue vain!
Heavens! shall a child in learning, and in wit,
Over Europe's climes, a bird of passage flit;
There, as at home, his stripling self unknown,
By novel wonders stupefied to stone,
Shut from the wise, and by no converse taught,
No well-read day, nor hour of serious thought,
His head by pleasure, vice, and hurry, turned,
All prudence trampled, all improvements spurned,
Shall he, with less of Europe in his cap,
Tha^ sat^hell'd schoolboy guesses from the map,
On every subject strutingly decree,
Ken the far shore and search the unfathomed sea,
Where learning has her lamp for ages oil'd,
Where Newton ponders, and where Berkeley toiled?
Of all the plagues, that rise in human shape,
Good Heaven, preserve us from the traveled Ape!
Pape's prologue to the Satires.
"Peace to all such:" but were there one, whose mind
Bold genius winged, and converse pure, refined,
By nature prompted science realms to roam,
And both her Indies bring with rapture home;
Who men, and manners, searched with eagle eye,
Exact to weigh, and curious to descry;
Himself who burnished with the hand of care,
'Till kings might boast so bright a gem to wear;
Should he, deep plunged in Circe's sensual bowl,
Imbrue his native manliness of soul,
With eye estranged, from fair Columbia turn,
Her youth, her innocence, and beauty scorn;
To that foul harlot, Europe, yield his mind,
Witch'd by her smiles, and to her snares resigned;
To nature's bloom prefer the rouge of art,
A tinsell'd outside to a golden heart,
Show, to the bliss by simple freedom given,
To virtue, Stanhope, and Voltaire to Heaven;
Who but must wish, the apostate youth to see?
Who but must agonize, were Humpreys he?
But all, thy soul shall 'scape, the escape to aid,
Fair to thy view be every motive spread.
Of each gay cause the dire effects survey,
And bring the painted tomb disclosed to day
Though there proud pomp uprears his throne on high;
Though there the golden palace lights the sky;
Though wealth unfolds her gay, Edenian seats,
Her walk of grandeur, and her wild of sweets;
The stage, the park, the ring, the dance, the feast
Charm the palled eye, and lure the loathing taste;
Yet there fierce war unceasing sounds alarms;
Pride blows the (...), and millions rush to arms;
See steel and (...) extinguish human good!
See realm, (...) with corses, and with blood!
At slaughter's shrine expires the newborn joy,
And all Jehovah's bounty fiends destroy.
See the huge jail in gloomy grandeur rise,
Lower over mankind, and mock the tempted skies!
Hear the chain thank! the bursting groan attend!
And mark the neighboring gibbet's pride ascend.
See earth's fair face insatiate luxury spoils!
For one poor tyrant, lo, a province toils!
To brothels, half the female world is driven.
Lost to themselves, and reprobates of heaven,
There too refinement glances over the mind;
And naught but vice, and outside, is refined;
To vice auspicious, brilliant manners blend,
The waxen saint, and sinner, so and friend,
Melt from the soul each virtue, as they shine,
And warm the impoison'd blossom into sin.
In fair Columbia's realms, how changed the plan;
Where all things bloom, but, first of all things, man?
Lord of himself, the independent swain,
Sees no superior stalk the happy plain:
His house, his herd, his harvest, all his own,
His farm a kingdom, and his chair a throne.
Unblench'd by foul hypocrisy, the foul
Speaks in her face, and bids his accents roll;
(Her wings unclipp'd) with sire instinctive warms,
Strong pulses feels, and bold conceptions forms;
At noblest objects aims her flight supreme,
The purpose vast, and enterprise extreme.
Hence round the pole her sons exalt the sail,
Search southern seas, and rouse the Falkland whale;
Or on bold pinions hail the Asian skies,
And bid new stars in spicy oceans rise,
Hence in bright arms her chiefs superior flame,
Even now triumphant on the steep of same,
Where Vernon's Hero mounts the throne sublime,
And sees no rival grace the reign of time.
Hence countless honors rising medicine claims;
Hence Law presents her constellated names;
The sacred science sees her concave bright
Instarr'd, and beauteous, with the sons of light:
Hence Edwards cheered the world with moral day,
And Franklin walked, unhurt, the realms where lightnings play,
Mechanic genius hence exalts his eye,
All powers to measure, and all scenes descry,
Bids Rittenhouse the heavenly system feign,
And Bushnell search the chambers of the main.
Hence too, where Trumbull leads the ardent throng,
Ascending bards begin the immortal song:
Let glowing friendship wake the cheerful lyre,
Blessed to commend, and pleased to catch the ^ire.
Be theirs the fame, to bards how rarely given!
To fill with worth the part assigned by Heaven;
Distinguished actors on life's busy stage,
Loved by mankind, and useful to the age;
While science round them twines her vernal bays,
And sense directs, and genius fires their lays.
While this fair land commands thy feet to roam,
And, all Columbian, still thou plan'st for home,
From those bright sages, with whose mission joined,
Thou seek'st to build the interests of mankind,
Experience, wisdom, honor, may thou gain,
The zeal for country, and the love of man,
There through the civil science may thou run;
There learn how empires are preserved, or won;
How arts politic wide dominions sway;
How well-train'd navies bid the world obey;
How war's imperial car commands the plain,
Or rolls majestic over the subject main;
Through earth, how commerce spreads a softer sway,
And Gallia's sons negociate realms away.
THEN, crowned with every gift, and grace, return,
To add new glories to the western morn;
With sages, heroes, bards, her charms display,
Her arts, arms, virtues, and her happy sway;
Bid over the world her constellation rise,
The brightest splendor in the unmeasured skies,
Her genial influence through all nations roll,
And hush the found of war from pole to pole.
AND oh, may he, who stilled the stormy main,
And lightly winged thee over the glassy plain,
Through life's rough-billow'd sea, with kinder gales,
With skies serener, and with happier sails,
Each shoal escaped, afar each tempest driven,
And naught but raptures round the enchanted Heaven
To bliss, fair shore, thy prosperous course convey,
And join my peaceful bark, campanion of thy way.
ELEGY ON THE BURNING OF FAIRFIELD, IN CONNECTICUT. Written in 1779, on the
Spot were that Town stood.
YE smoking ruins, marks of hostile ire,
Ye ashes warm, which drink the tears that flow^
Ye desolated plains my voice inspire,
And give soft music to the song of woe.
How pleasant, Fairfield, on the enraptured sight,
Rose thy tall spires, and opened thy social halls!
How often thy bosom beat with pure delight,
At yonder spot where stand the darkened walls!
But there the voice of mirth resounds no more,
A silent sadness through the streets prevails:
The distant main alone is heard to roar,
And hollow chimnies hum with sullen gales --
Save where scorched elms the untimely foliage shed,
Which, rustling, hovers round the faded green --
Save where, at twilight, mourners frequent tread,
'Mid recent graves over desolation's scene.
How changed the blissful prospect, when compared,
These glooms funeral, with thy former bloom,
Thy hospitable rights when Tryon shared,
Long ere he sealed thy melancholy doom,
That impious wretch, with coward voice decreed
Defenseless domes and hallowed fanes, to dust;
Beheld, with sneering smile, the wounded bleed,
And spurred his bands to rapine, blood and luft.
Vain was the widow's, vain the orphan's cry,
To touch his feelings, or to soothe his rage --
Vain the fair drop that rolled from beauty's eye,
Vain the dumb grief of supplicating age.
COULD Tryon hope to quench the patriot flame,
Or make his deeds survive in glory's page?
Could Britons seek of savages the fame?
Or deem it conquest, thus the war to wage?
Yes, Britons, scorn the councils of the skies,
Extend wide havoc, spurn the insulted foes;
The insulted foes to tenfold vengeance rise,
Resistance growing as the danger grows.
Red in their wounds, and pointing to the plain,
The visionary shapes before me stand --
The thunder bursts, the battle burns again,
And kindling fires encrimson all the strand.
Long dusky wreaths of smoke, reluctant driven,
In black'ning volumes over the landscape bend:
Here the broad splendour blazes high to heaven,
There umber'd streams in purple pomp ascend.
In fiery eddies, round the tottering walls,
Emitting sparks, the lighter fragments fly;
With frightful crash the burning (...) falls,
The works of years in glowing embers lie.
TRYON, behold thy sanguine flames aspire,
Clouds tinged with dies intolerably bright,
Behold, well pleased, the village wrapped in fire,
Let one wide ruin glut thy ravished sight!
Ere fades the grateful scene, indulge thine eye,
See age and sickness, tremulously slow,
Creep from the flames -- see babes in torture die,
And mothers swoon in agonies of woe.
Go, gaze, enraptured with the mother's tear,
The infant's terror, and the captive's pain,
Where no bold bands can check thy cursed career;
Mix fire with blood on each unguarded plain!
These be thy triumphs! this thy boasted fame!
Daughters of memory, raise the deathless songs!
Repeat through endless years his hated name,
Embalm his crimes, and teach the world our wrongs.
THE WIDOW OF MALABAR; OR, THE TYRANNY OF CUSTOM: A TRAGEDY. IMITATED FROM THE
FRENCH OF M. LE MIERRE.

Que sera gens hominum, quiere hunc tam barbara morem permetit Patria? Virg. To
JOHN TRUMBULL, ESQUIRE. OF HARTFORD.
My dear Friend,
THE extraordinary success with which the following Tragedy has been attended
in the representation, and the circumstance of our having been jointly
concerned in writing the Prologue and Epilogue, make an apology unnecessary for
my inscribing it to you. If the public, in judging my writings, has acted the
part of a generous patron, rather than of a rigid critic, this candid public
ought to be informed how much it is owing to you, that my performances are no
still less worthy of its patronage. It is my boast, that we formed our taste
together, and on the same models, Although you preceded me somewhat, in your
classical studies; yet no sooner had we seen each other at the place of our
education, than (as I think I may be allowed to flatter myself) a certain
similarity of genius, and congeniality of soul, connected us by the ties of an
undissoluble friendship.

WE shall not be accused of having neglected real business for poetical
recreations. Had not the tumultuous scenes, which commenced with the late war,
separated our little society, we might perhaps have innocently indulged
ourselves considerably more in literary speculations, than the circumstances
have since permited. It is a consolation that the occasion or tendency of our
performances have conciliated the minds of our Countrymen to receive them with
favor. I will not offend your delicacy by entering into a detail of the merits
of your writings. But I wish you would realise, that, with such talents,
erudition, and critical knowledge as you possess, the present age and posterity
have a kind of claim upon you, for such farther monuments of genius as your
avocations may allow you to furnish.

I am, my dear Sir, With the most affectionate sentiments, Your sincere Friend,
and Humble Servant, DAVID HUMPHREYS.
New York, August 4, 1790.
PROLOGUE. SPOKEN BY MR. HALLAM.
THE Gallic muse, this night, prepares our tale,
And shows what rites in other lands prevail;
Displays the widowed fair a sacrifice,
And draws compassion's drops from melting eyes.
Oh! if your hearts have ever learned to feel,
Let sweet compassion over your bosoms steal;
Believe the plot, from Eastern story, true,
Believe the shores of Malabar ye view.
The haughty Bramin, with imperious smile,
Propels the fair-one to the funeral pile:
There -- see her mounting, with retorted eyes,
And hear, 'midst bursting flames, her dying cries.
Soon tragic strains the nobles charms dispense,
To purge the passions, and refine the sense:
Each virtuous tear confers a newborn grace,
And adds fresh beauty to the fairest face. --
OH! born to bless, and meliorate mankind,
With manners winning, and with taste resin'd,
What wrongs, ye fair! your gentle bosoms bore,
In each rude age -- on every barbarous shore!
Do^m'd the mean vassals of unfeeling lords,
By Western Savages, and Tartar hords!
Through Asian climes, see custom reason braves,
And marks the fairest of their sex for slaves:
Hearts formed for love, but doomed in vain to glow
In imprisoned pomp, and weep in splendid woe: --
Or see their fate in India more severe,
The sad companions of a husband's bier! --
NOT such their doom, where genial science shines,
And Heaven-born freedom, human souls refines;
Where polished manners social life improve,
And teach us to respect the sex we love;
Confirm their claims in equal rights to share,
Friends in our bliss, and partners in our care: --
And hail, ye fair, of every charm possessed --
Who grace this rising empire of the West;
With better fates, and nobler genius born,
Your sex to honor, and your land adorn;
In this blessed age, to share our fond regard,
The friends of heroes, and their blessed reward! --
YET when over foreign woes ye shed a tear,
And find your bliss by contrast still more dear;
With humble joy adore the Almighty hand,
Which fixed your birth in this auspicious land!
YE generous patrons who protect our stage,
Friends to the arts, and guardians of the age;
To tragic woes now lend the listening ear,
Attend with candor, with indulgence hear!
While we display, in pleading nature's cause,
Our best attempts to merit your applause! --
PERSONS.
Laniffa Widow of Malabar Mrs. Henry. Fatima her friend Miss Tuke. High Priest
of Bramins Mr. Henry. Young Bramin Mr. Harper. A Bramin Mr. Biddle. French
General Mr. Hallam. French Officer Mr. Wignell. An officer of the Governor Mr.
Martin. Bramins People Officers and soldiers, French.
Acted in Philadelphia, May 7, 1790.

THE WIDOW OF MALABAR; OR, THE TYRANNY OF CUSTOM: A TRAGEDY.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
The Scene is in the Portico of a Pagod, in the suburbs of a maritime Town on
the Coast of Malabar.
The High Priest. -- Young Bramin -- Bramin. HIGH PRIEST. THE ambassador who
sailed for Pekin's court,
That chief of Malabar, has closed his days:
We must now learn, whether the widowed fair,
According to the custom of our climes,
Devotes herself upon the funeral pile.
This holy rite, inviolate as old,
Which now, religion blends with policy,
It Is our's to guard through India. Go, and learn,
[ to the Bramins.]
I Will wait for your return.

SCENE II.
High Priest. -- Young Bramin. HIGH PRIEST. It Is you, young man,
Who must conduct the awful pomp of death.

YOUNG BRAMIN. What then! is this a time, while Europe's bands,
Invade our country with unnumber'd ships,
And hurl their bursting thunders at our walls:
Is this a time, amidst alarms and deaths,
To give a spectacle more cruel far,
To light new funeral fires -- our shame! our scourge!
Can we unmoved, behold the victim burn;
Should we not rather snatch her from the flames?
Her husband died far off, nor, in that scene,
When nature fails, and when the fleeting soul
Hovers between two worlds, did he demand
Such proof of her affection -- then the fair,
Dissolved in all the extacy of grief,
And prompt to shun the tediousness of life,
Might deem it bliss to die with him she loved.

HIGH PRIEST. WHAT matters it, if dying he received
No oath that she would follow him in death.
Think you, descended from such noble blood,
She can dispose of life just as she wills?
Even now her friends require the sacrifice --
And what a stigma, would refusal cast
On all her kindred! how pollute her name;
And make her thus a slave, in grief of soul,
And steeped in tears -- the scorn of gods and men!
Curse the long horrors of a constant death.

YOUNG BRAMIN. BUT Father! cruel is poor woman's fate,
No choice is left, but infamy or death;
Is it not barbarous in a land like this,
Where woman has no portion save her charms,
That laws unjust should give the husband power!
To leave his wife, confign'd beyond his death,
For heirs to immolate upon his tomb!
Then must she die, or lead a hated life,
Stripped of maternal rights -- The sons forgetting,
A mother dies to deck a father's ashes! --

HIGH PRIEST. KNOW thou, young man, that custom's iron rod,
Rules every land, and sanctifies their laws?
One country gives the father right to fix,
For life or death, his children's destiny: --
One makes the son a pious paracide,
Soon as the authors of his life grow old. --
In Afric, men, like beasts, are bought and sold: --
The Courtiers in Japan, die with their Kings: --
The Sultan strangles all his nearest kindred: --
And even in Europe, where such light prevails,
A foreign sense of honor, for one word,
Often makes the best friends shed each others blood!

YOUNG BRAMIN. So must these cruel customs sanction crimes,
And Hymen's torch allume the funeral fire!
Ah, must our fair-ones, slaves to barbarous men,
Slaves to their husbands even beyond their lives.
Bound with such chains, as death can never break,
Must they in vain thus raise their plaintive cry:
" Ah! cruel Lords of this creation, see;
" How weak, how full of woes, our sex is formed;
" Is it for you, exempt from many ills,
" Which we must bear -- is it for you, instead
" Of lightning much our load, to add new weight
" To nature's heavy yoke! It Is you who give us
" Slavery and death! -- "

HIGH PRIEST. YOUNG man, what horrid language!
Do thou renounce, thy nation and religion?
Oh shocking blasphemy! say, will thou then,
That woman, made for us, shall have her rights?
Do thou defend, that foreign prejudice?
Wives owe their husbands all they have -- their lives --
And in their widowed state they covet death;
Even those whose vulgar blood forbids that honor.
In torrid climes all things are in extremes!
Will thou, who know our rites, bewail their fate!
And yet thou know what voluntary ills,
Our Priests and Faquirs brave -- what glorious palm^
They win -- and how, without a groan or sigh,
They stifle nature as they conquer pain. --

YOUNG BRAMIN. AT least, they, suffering by their own accord,
Do not deplore their pain or wish for pity.
But tyrant honor here pursues the sex
To death. -- Pardon my weakness -- but I thought,
The real woes of life were quite enough,
Without our adding more: -- Of good and ill
The inexplicable laws of nature mix
Each creature's portion -- yet from worm to man,
Instinct directs them to self-preservation --
How strange that man alone, throughout all nature,
Should lift his murderous hand against his life,
As if he spurned the gift of favoring Gods. --
And do those awful powers, whose warning voice
Cries in our inmost souls, "be just, be good,"
Demand such wanton waste of their best blessings?
Who hates too much himself, loves not his neighbor,
And could a righteous Heaven have made the law,
To love all others, and to hate ourselves?

SCENE III.
High Priest. -- Bramin. -- Young Bramin. HIGH PRIEST. WELL! what is your
information? will this widow
Devote herself upon the funeral pile!
And has she promised? --

BRAMIN. Yes, this very day,
SHE means to sacrifice herself -- her friends
Surrounding her unceasing -- but not long,
For when she learnt her loss, she knew her duty;
Our women mostly are too bold or timid:
In triumph dancing, or as victims dragged,
They mount the burning pile -- But she, serene,
Nor mingled marks of joy with death's apparel,
Nor breathed a single sigh, nor seemed depressed --
But fixed in resolution, though so young,
She shows how life sublimely may be lost. --

HIGH PRIEST. I THOUGHT no less -- nor do I view surprised,
Her pious conduct -- oh, my friends, it is well --
For at this time, while strangers press the siege,
And from superior prowess, skill, or fortune,
Seem ready to atchieve their dreadful conquest,
Let us maintain our sacred funeral rites --
Let us, though conquered, piously maintain them.
But will this widow soon be at the temple?

BRAMIN. YES, you will see a great example soon:
Even now the people crowd the sacred porch.

YOUNG BRAMIN. MUST she be burned? alas! how I bewail her. --
In charms distinguished, and in flower of youth,
Ah! how it is pitiful to see such courage,
Employed to haste her beauties to the tomb,
E're nature had reclaimed them -- hateful custom!
Oh! what a world is this, where not even crimes,
And cruelty alone destroy our bliss:
But where, by specious names of law and right,
Inhuman men oppress the feebler sex.
Men hear not the mild voice of sympathy,
But only strive to persecute each other:
Nor all the inevitable pangs or plagues
That flesh is heir to, can, at least, compare
With those which they inflict upon themselves!

HIGH PRIEST. HEAR thou 2 different voice that speaks to thee,
What hop'st thou from this world? is this thy home?
We Are born for woes -- let us not faint -- but learn,
That patient suffering is the proof of virtue.
Now hear of Brama the tremenduous voice,
"Thy sensibility is sacrilege!" --

YOUNG BRAMIN. AH, but some other hand might lead the fair. --

HIGH PRIEST. No -- you were last admitted to our order;
It Is yours to lead the victim to the pile,
And yours the honor to confirm her zeal.
Go wait my final orders at the porch:
The law ordains -- be humble -- though you doubt --

SCENE IV.
High Priest. -- Bramin. -- Officer of government. HIGH PRIEST. WHAT urgent
business brings you now to us?

OFFICER. THE governor's commands. --

HIGH PRIEST. Well, what are they?

OFFICER. HE counsels to postpone the sacrifice,
Lest from their posts too many troops be drawn,
And thus the town be left an easy prey. --
Besides, you see the temple's situation,
Between the walls and camp, will let our foes
Perceive the ceremony: -- which, he fears,
Will greatly irritate European minds! --

SCENE V.
High Priest. -- Bramins. HIGH PRIEST. [to the Bramin's.] YES! -- to postpone,
what should at once be done!
What then is his design? And is it thus,
He means, if conquered, to preserve our manners?
Well -- I Will not trust to his perfidious prudence,
But make him instrumental in my plans.
Whatever this timid governor intends,
The sacrifice shall never be deferred
One moment for the siege -- I Will order that --
The gods themselves, by such a sacrifice,
Are rendered more propitious to our cause. --

BRAMIN. THIS rite omitted, all our rites were vain.

HIGH PRIEST. AH, should this rite, first introduced for safety,
Then fostered by religion, be abandoned,
Where shall we stop? one and another goes,
Till not a temple will be left (...). --
These doctrines stern, and pains extravagant,
Astonish, shake, and petrify the souls
Of mortals made to venerate the skies,
And see in us the delegates of Heaven.
Say, but for these, where were the Bramins' honors?
Our penance would be deemed mistake or madness. --
Yet when mankind behold to what a length,
Enthusiasm in other minds can go,
They wonder, tremble, and believe the more,
Thence order springs, and Brama all adore. --

ACT II.
SCENE I.
Widow. -- Fatima. FATIMA. BUT, Madam! to what law have you submitted?
I shudder at the thought. --

WIDOW. Be not surprised:
You, born in Persia, under milder skies,
Can scarce conceive the manners of our climes.
But Fatima! the dye for me is cast, --
Yo^ walls and rocks are dark with funeral smoke,
Others have fallen in their tombs of fire;
Nor can Lanissa from her fate escape. --

FATIMA. YOUR woes depress my soul, yet you seem tranquil.

WIDOW. MY husband's dead, and calls me from the earth.

FATIMA. AND (...) your sorrows quench the love of life?
Or will your husband's senseless shade be soothed,
By this dread offering of your fairest days?
Suppose he loved, as much as you loved him,
Would he require it?

WIDOW. OH! you understand not: --
Honor's the tyrant that subdues my soul!
To live contemptible -- or die in flames --
I have no other choice -- that is the law!

FATIMA. It Is wrong! -- abominable!

WIDOW. IT exists,
And that is enough. --

FATIMA. WHO made this murderous law?
What woman first was mean enough to yield,
And mount the bonfire of a barbarous spouse?
Forsooth! he claims it -- but if he survives,
Does he destroy himself to honor her?
Ah! does he guard his faith beyond the grave?
Then, by what right does he survive -- but that
Of having made the law? The weaker sex
Must bear a yoke, men will not bear themselves!

WIDOW. I GIVE up life, since honor thus decrees:
Alas! long since, I gave up happiness!
You see my destiny -- my boundless grief --
I never knew aught save misery in this world:
Wedlock and widowhood alike were torments!

FATIMA. WHAT heard I? my surprise exceeds my terror!
You were not happy in your wedded state?

WIDOW. YOU little know how wretched I have been!

FATIMA. I SEE despair invades your very soul,
And yet you hide your tears.

WIDOW. HEAVEN would not yet --

FATIMA. OH speak, what griefs too long concealed --

WIDOW. MY friend!
It Is but too true, I loved and was beloved. --
Oh! hapless day, when from the Ganges' banks,
From Ouglee's shades we came to sojourn here;
And ship accursed, which, to complete my woes,
Carried a youth -- too lovely to my eyes!
There, Fatima, you know the cause of tears,
And all the secret sorrow that consumes me!
Why, in our country's view, are Europe's sons
Esteemed barbarians? why could not my father
Consent his child should wed that foreign chief?
Or rather, why did he compel his daughter
To wed the man she hated?

FATIMA. OH! great Gods!
Your husband sacrifices you to day --
You loved him not; and yet you die for him!
Your funeral pile, erected in despite,
Will prove a trophy for his jealous shade!
You're freed by fortune from him -- but in vain --

WIDOW. STILL more in vain your pity. --

FATIMA. CRUEL woman!
But where is now your lover?

WIDOW. THAT IS unknown:
I know he loved and wished to marry me;
That he was snatched away, that I was forced
To smother flames which I could not extinguish;
And that the flames I vainly strove to quench,
In spite of me, revive and threat my virtue.

FATIMA. YOUR lot is hard! --

WIDOW. HAD I elsewhere been born,
I should have ceased to be a SLAVE, a WRETCH!
The man who forced me to his arms, when living,
Would, when he died, at least, have left me free;
Then soothing hope had whispered to my soul,
That I, some day, might find the youth I loved!
Now all conspires to drive me to despair;
Past vows, remembrance, and a form too dear,
The nuptial ties imposed, and those refused,
What'er I suffered, and what'er I lost --
I die -- and worse -- I die a dreadful death,
To join the man, who forced my lover from me.

FATIMA. YOU much amaze me.

WIDOW. YES -- I Have said too much.
Excuse, oh cruel shade, excuse thy victim:
This heart submissive, though too hardly used,
Pays the strange duty that thy death demands:
For thee, my flesh shall mount the burning pile,
But ask no softer sentiment from me.
If you have caused my woes -- let it suffice,
I shall be faithful found beyond thy death:
Perhaps, the pangs to come will scarcely equal
The sacrifice I made without a sigh --
And yet my fate might sanction more than sighs!

FATIMA. HOW cursed a fate succeeds to such a marriage?

WIDOW. OH! if you love me, leave me all my courage;
I Have need enough of it -- for that is my all.
But you must never disclose this conversation.

FATIMA. NO, madam; -- heavens! I see a Bramin coming,
And read unkindness in his hateful face.

SCENE II.
Widow. -- Fatima. -- Young Bramin. FATIMA. WELL, what do thou announce? for
doubtless death,
Terror, and lamentation come with thee.
And art thou come to claim that cruel promise,
And tear my dearest lady from my arms?

WIDOW, [to Fatima.] YOU may withdraw awhile.

SCENE III.
Widow. -- Young Bramin. YOUNG BRAMIN. It Is thus both parties,
Heap keen and undeserved reproaches on me.
You think me, madam, a relentless monster:
While to our chief my feelings seem too tender;
His views transported into other worlds,
Perceive no scenes of pain, or pity here.
For me, who follow him at awful distance,
I know my heart was made to feel for others:
And when I yield to nature's first decree,
Do I betray my country or religion?
But, oh -- what painful effort! gods! -- it is I
Must lead you to the flames! -- it is I -- who, filled
With horror for your fate, had rather die
To abrogate the infernal rite for ever!
Still as I see thee, still my melting soul
Revolts against the order for thy death.

WIDOW. WHAT interest can you have to plead for me?
Is it for Bramins thus to show their pity?
How then could you accept this ministry,
Without the temper? or, if formed with kindness,
Why did you join with those who stifled theirs?

YOUNG BRAMIN. ALAS! What mortal can command his fate!
I Have been unhappy from my earliest days.
Why did the man, who saved my infant life,
Convey me here from Bengal? Why, so soon,
Did death deprive me of that foster father?
An orphan, forced to take this new profession.
I find some deadly custom every where,
Escaped from one, and but to aid another!

WIDOW. To what do you allude?

YOUNG BRAMIN. THE murderous custom,
Of plunging in the Ganges every child,
Who thrice declines his natural aliment,
When first presented to him -- 'twas my case --
But while I should bewail your woes alone,
I speak of mine. --

WIDOW. IT IS true the tale is piteous --
But, oh, what destiny pursues my race?
Far from these regions in my native land,
I lost a brother by that same strange custom.
He in his dawn of life, at Bengal died:
In Malabar, at morn, I meet my doom!

YOUNG BRAMIN. IN Bengal, madam, did your brother die?
So destiny ordained for me at Ouglee. --

WIDOW. AT Ouglee! that agrees.

YOUNG BRAMIN. THERE was I born.

WIDOW. AND there the tissue of my woes began.

YOUNG BRAMIN. WHAT is your family, your name?

WIDOW. LANISSA. --

YOUNG BRAMIN. OH, gracious gods! my sister. --

WIDOW. HEAVENS!

YOUNG BRAMIN. EMBRACE,
Embrace, and own your brother!

WIDOW. THOU, my brother
Oh, aggravation of my vigorous fate:
Iv'e found thee in the very hour of death.
Just Deities! where are we?

YOUNG BRAMIN. IT IS Providence. --

WIDOW. IN what a day of wrath has heaven rejoined us!
Ah, barbarous brother! ah, why have I found thee?
Restore me that UNKNOWN, who wept my fate! --

YOUNG BRAMIN. WHAT said you?

WIDOW. YES, I Am born to bear strange woes!
If you're my brother, you must wish my death. --

YOUNG BRAMIN. I WISH your death! what madness? oh -- my sister!

WIDOW. IF I am so, begin to steel your heart.
Brothers persuade their sisters here to die:
Our mutual honor claims this sacrifice;
My family attends around the pile:
You must no more be touched with pity for me --
The ties of blood which elsewhere draw mankind,
Repel them here, and nature's plan reverse.
The endearing names of brother and of sister,
Here lose their charms, and urge me to expire.

YOUNG BRAMIN. MY eyes at last are opened -- yes, I ought
To succor thee -- what signify your customs?
Shall I regard your laws? I Will brave them all,
In such a cause -- in vain you name your friends,
Who wish to haste your death -- you saw how I,
A stranger then to you, froze at the thought. --
Shall thy sweet voice, humanity! when mixed,
With cries of kindred blood, have lost its rights?

WIDOW. YOUR rashness, brother, will not profit us.

YOUNG BRAMIN. IF man presumptuous throws down nature's laws,
Let us rebuild them: -- No -- it is not for me,
To heed those customs that consign to death;
I Am not that fierce barbarian -- but the brother,
Whom heaven has sent to you.

WIDOW. YOUR friendship makes
This life more lovely, and its end more dreadful.
Oh, it is much, in this excess of woes,
To combat nature, tenderness and tears.
Why did I see thee? -- I belong to death,
And death demands his prey -- what! you pretend
To change the customs prejudice confirms!
Shame were my portion, if I shunned my fate.
No -- if I Am dear to thee, then join our friends,
Who soon will come to place thee at their head.

YOUNG BRAMIN. WHAT dare thou tell me?

WIDOW. FOLLOW here!

YOUNG BRAMIN. REMAIN!

WIDOW. WITH unavailing grief why will thou goad me?

YOUNG BRAMIN. ART thou then blinded by fanatic rage!

WIDOW. COULD I survive the opprobrium that would follow?

YOUNG BRAMIN. MUST I accuse the heavens for having found thee?

WIDOW. ACT like a brother -- leave me to my fate --

YOUNG BRAMIN. NOT like a brother -- if that act brings death.
Wait but a little time, 'till war decide
The fortune of this place, and give you right
To live.

WIDOW. BUT if the assailants fail, in vain
Shall I have shown timidity and tears.
Then shall I fall too late a sacrifice,
Despised of all -- the glory gone! -- I Have promised,
Nor will delay. --

YOUNG BRAMIN. IT IS well, my sister, well --
Let Us finish this dispute by changing climes:
Let Us fly beyond the reach of such strange rites:
And put the sea between this shame and us.
Let Us fly from India, and its barbarous laws,
To realms where reason guides the human race,
Where nature's God those real duties show,
Which neither mortals, years, or climes can change.

WIDOW. WHAT idle hope now animates your breast?
How, quit these shores? the world is shut to me.
I cannot go, where memory, shame, go not.
Or, were it possible, my friends would then
Be more than exiles in their native land.

YOUNG BRAMIN. Go on! and still respect this murderous law!
Believe thy husband, like a god, will feathe thee:
Thy friends be scorned for thy delinquency.
For me, thy only friend, first known this day,
It Is well that I, by sympathy, must bear
The horrors of thy fate -- while you are unmoved! --
A brother, little as his tears avail,
Has still the power to save you from yourself:
And -- cruel! -- that he will. He Will save thy life,
In spite of thee -- that, once accomplished, then
There Is neither ocean, continent, or isle,
Which can divide me far enough from hence.

SCENE IV.
WIDOW. [alone.] WHAT can this project be? this enterprise?
From his too tender love must I defend me?

SCENE V.
Widow. -- Fatima. FATIMA. MADAM, a truce is settled with the foe,
Which stops all farther carnage for one day.
The shorter is the truce, the more my hopes:
For in the town there is terror and dismay,
Soon Malabar must yield. -- Before the place,
Even now the general of this foreign force,
In parley with the governor, declares
We must surrender, or expect a storm. --
Madam, you may rejoice that soon the law
Which seals your death, will have no farther sway.
But what new trouble rises in your breast?
Perhaps the conversation of this Bramin,
Who, though so young must have a cruel heart,
Has cast such deep dejection in your spirits. --

WIDOW. ALAS! you're ignorant! -- But -- conceal the fact. --
Hark -- Fatima! this Bramin is my brother;
To day recognis'd, in this house of death;
He means to end the rigours of my fate. --

FATIMA. YOU wish for death, with all its dreadful sufferings;
And your connections hurry it: -- In vain
A brother loves you! --

WIDOW. OH! -- I should have wept,
If he had led me to the funeral pile --
And now I weep for fear he will keep me from it. --
Unnat'ral! he had piere'd this heart with sorrows --
Too tender! he still wounds me to the soul --
He wishes my dishonor! -- 'twas too much
To banish love -- without being forced to combat
The ties of nature, and a brother's tears.

FATIMA. WHY paint this lucky chance in such dark shades?
Or why despair? -- all things now bid you live:
A truce, which victory soon perhaps will follow --
A brother found -- and more -- perchance, they know
In yonder camp something of that European --
At least, they come from the same distant land,
And may relate if yet your lover lives.

WIDOW. SHALL I then learn his lot? great gods what hope?
Happy Lanissa! yes -- thou may to day --
My soul now opening to the rays of bliss,
Scarce holds its purpose -- sacrifice myself,
While he still lives -- and more perhaps -- still loves!
I free, at last, from wedlock's cruel chain,
Mistress of both my life and destiny!
Where do I wander? how forget myself --
What dreams thy blindfold friendship offers me?
What fatal expectations have thou raised?
Inexorable honor holds my heart. --
Respect my virtue, glory, resolution,
And let me still believe that this young Frenchman,
Is lost forever to my fond affection!
Oh! spare my aching heart -- Oh! hide my fate
From that loved youth -- and then I die contented.

ACT III.
SCENE I.
French General. -- French Officer. GENERAL. THE truce which I have granted to
this town,
Now gives us free access into these suburbs.
The Malabarian faith cannot be questioned,
For war has laws which all mankind observe.

OFFICER. I KNOW this temple, consecrated to Brama,
Affords an assylum by honor sanctioned.
But then this truce requested by their chief,
And granted by you for a single day --
Why, sir, a day will not suffice to bury
The heroes of both sides, who press these plains,
And, sest'ring, taint the air.

GENERAL. I ONLY meant,
By rigidly abridging thus the term,
And threatening an assault, to save much blood:
Too much already has distained these shores:
Let Us save what yet humanity can save.
But, oh, my friend, what can atone those ills,
Which war inflicts on mortals? -- yet I see,
With indignation, that this race entire,
Are slaves to the proud Bramin -- with what art,
He warms their minds with superstitious fire,
And then alarms them for their ^ites and worship.
But I will calm their fears -- soon shall they learn,
My king will not oppress, or change their laws;
That he proposes trade on equal terms,
And only asks the favor of a port,
Where ships, which cross the ocean, may refit.

OFFICER. SUCH conduct well becomes a patriot prince.

GENERAL. BUT know, my friend, another care of mine:
I love a beauteous native of these climes.
Three' years ago I saw her in this place,
The loveliest of her sex! her father often,
In spite of custom, suffered me to see her --
I saw her virgin soul incline to me,
And hun all other lovers -- thence I hoped,
One day to marry her; -- but letters came,
Which forced me home -- I parted in despair --
And if I sought the honor of command
In oriental regions -- 'twas to find
The object of my fond, my sole desire.
But I delay too long -- dispatch, my friend,
And gain some news of her -- she is called Lanissa.

OFFICER. BUT, sir, for this I must go in the town:
Which by the truce, you know, is not permitted.
How can I be (...)?

GENERAL. WHY out of town,
You may have news of her -- 'twill be enough,
To ask for her by name -- for she is born
Of the first cast in India. -- Go, enquire,
My friend, I rest entirely on your zeal.

SCENE II.
GENERAL. [alone.] THOU, whom the heavens too long have hid from me,
My dear Lanissa! art thou in this place?
Art thou yet free for me -- or have the chains
Of some forced marriage bound thee to another?
Pardon my country, if I give one hour
From war to love! -- and pardon me, Lanissa!
If troubling your repose, it is my fate,
To fight against your country -- pity me,
But do not hate! -- I only do my duty,
And honor made me fly toward my love.

SCENE III.
General -- Officer. GENERAL. WELL! what is her situation? tell me all --
And have you learned if still Lanissa --

OFFICER. I COULD learn nothing --

GENERAL. NOTHING! what stopped you then?

OFFICER. A SPECTACLE of horror, which the rage
Of the proud priest prepares -- a crowd of people
Gathered tumultuous round, and barred my passage.

GENERAL. HOW! speak! explain yourself.

OFFICER. WITHIN an hour,
You Will see a widow plunge herself alive,
Into devouring flames. The law ordains
This fate, when'er a husband dies. --

GENERAL. WHAT say you?

OFFICER. ALREADY is the victim in the temple. --
This ceremony seems to feast the mob;
Who make a holiday. -- The priests contrive it. --
The costly ornaments that deck the fair,
The diamonds, rubies, pearls, and chains of gold,
Become the Bramins' booty, and excite
Their cursed cupidity. -- Why it is the triumph
Of priestcraft over all the ties of blood.

GENERAL. AND yet religion lends its hallowed name!
We Frenchmen, shall we see, unmoved, this sight?
She goes to death -- and I Am to be a witness.

OFFICER. YOUR pardon, sir, -- if charged with other cares --

GENERAL. LOVE we forget -- humanity now calls --
The moments are too dear -- delay is death --
The unfortunate has claims on my defense:
Away -- to succor her shall be my care!
I call on heaven, and all its holy powers,
To witness, I will strive to save the victim!
Haste! follow me --

OFFICER. BUT what are your intentions,
What right, have we to act? what chance to save her?

SCENE IV.
High Priest -- his suite of Bramins. -- General. -- Two Officers. HIGH PRIEST.
HAUGHTY European! whence are these murmurs?
This funeral for a husband nearly stopped!
In violation of the truce, your troops
Have even talked of running to their arms: --
And in yon porch, without respect for Brama,
Had rudely hedged me in on every side. --

GENERAL. I KNOW them by the wish that warms their breasts.

HIGH PRIEST. YOU gave the order to them! --

GENERAL: NO -- 'twas nature. --
Run and suspend the fury of the French:
[ to an officer.]
Let them keep still, they shall be satisfied.

SCENE V.
General. -- High Priest. GENERAL. BARBARIAN! these abominable rites
Are real; which Europeans took for fictions: --
And, you, a priest, support them with your power!
These temples should be refuges for men,
In all misfortunes! -- and these priests, like angels,
The ministers of peace to bless the earth! --
But you, the scandal of the God you serve,
You, raising hands imbrued in blood to heaven,
You make these peculations for your priests,
These cruel crimes, a policy of state! --
Your whole fraternity rejoice to light,
The torch that leads their victims to the tomb:
The sens^r here is in the hands of butchers! --

HIGH PRIEST. THESE mystic rites the deity commands.

GENERAL. THUS, with dry eyes, you will see this woman then,
At thy command, sink in a gulf of flame!
Thine ear will drink the cries of her distress! --
I know her not -- I know her woes -- and hear
The voice of sweet compassion -- and this heart,
Alive to each fine feeling -- not like thine --
Will prompt me to exert my power to save her:
To save your women, forced to suicide,
And make it known to all mankind hereafter,
MONTALBAN FOUNDED HERE HUMANITY. --

HIGH PRIEST. WHAT means thy arrogance?

GENERAL. FIRST learn to know me --

HIGH PRIEST. ARE you a conq'ror, that you speak as master?

GENERAL. I SPEAK as man. --

HIGH PRIEST. AND I, as heaven's own organ,
A PRIEST inspired by gods. --

GENERAL. AND do thy gods
Incite thee to such crimes?

HIGH PRIEST. AND who are you,
Who dare to judge the manners of my country;
And seek to change the customs of old times!! --
Think thou thy proud, but feeble hand, can pluck
The rooted groves of India from their place?

GENERAL. I WILL apply the ax. --

HIGH PRIEST. AND vain thy effort;
For time has placed a triple brass around them. --

GENERAL. SAY, rather round thy heart -- But know, barbarian!
It Is best to change thy cruel custom soon. --
What shall I call thee? Priest! and Bramin! yes --
But thou art not a man! -- Humanity,
The first and sweetest sentiment of nature,
Innate and essence of our very being,
Thou know it not! -- What sort of soul have thou?
What monster bore thee? never have thou known pity?
Nor shed a tear? -- I come to teach compassion: --
I thank the skies, whose salutary voice
Has called me to this pagod -- to this DEN
OF MONSTERS. -- Tigers! stop. -- By heavens, I Will quench
Your funeral sire in blood, but that I Will quench it!

HIGH PRIEST. YOU quench it? quench the orb of day! -- quench love!
And that immortal flame which here unites,
Respect for GODS and HUSBANDS! -- Idiot! learn
It Is love that makes our women vanquish death. --
Or if for fame their breasts can brave all sufferings:
Not more indulgent are we to ourselves.
Know thou how I have reached this glorious height?
'TWAS THROUGH A PATH OF THORNS. -- Yes, more than death,
This body -- bore -- but reason first ordained
The law for women, when they used to haste
Their husbands deaths by poison. --

GENERAL. IT IS not true. --
Not hell itself could send such monstrous wives,
But at long intervals. It Is all pretext. --
For crimes so great are rare, like other plagues;
And women have not cruel souls, like thine. --
See there! I walk over ashes of the dead,
Relics of funeral fires, and bleaching bones,
The sad remains of human sacrifice!
Now hear me, Bramin, hear! your funeral piles,
Those sights of horror, work my soul to rage.
And think your town tomorrow may be mine;
Come then assume our manners -- it is not hard --
Oh, if you are not tender -- be not savage:
And let me save the last, who would have died
According to your custom -- leave your custom --
It Is dear humanity --

HIGH PRIEST. IN vain you dream,
Your arm can save this widow, or that she
Is such a coward as to wish for life --
Has she a fire, or brother? they all join
To silence every murmur -- act like them --
They conquer nature -- go, and stifle pity --

GENERAL. YES, tyrant, yes -- I see your hardened heart,
Has shut each avenue to soft emotions. --
Insensibility has grown a system:
And naught can change your cruel character. --
Yet what my voice cannot, my sword shall do:
And India shall behold my footsteps marked,
WITH (what you cannot conceive) HUMANITY. --
I swear upon this weapon, which my arm
Can never wield in a more worthy cause,
I swear even in this house, where terror dwells,
To save the fair and abrogate your law.

SCENE VI.
Bramin. -- High Priest. -- General. BRAMIN. THE widow has put off her pompous
robes:
The priests all wait for you, since in your hands
They must remit the off rings. --

HIGH PRIEST. WELL! let us go!

GENERAL. FORBEAR, inhuman priests -- There are no means
But I Will employ. -- I Will see her at his instant. --

HIGH PRIEST. NAY, calm your transport -- quit your hope -- and know
Abstracted, as she is, in sacred duties,
No stranger can approach her -- nor even we,
In such a solemn hour. --

GENERAL. SHE shall not die!
In spite of all your artifice, I Will save her.
Oh, tyrant of a feeble sex! you know not,
How dear that sex for ever is to Frenchmen! --
Ah! lovely sex, which destiny unites
With us, to share the joys and woes of life:
Whose innate charms can sweeten every scene,
In every clime, save in this barbarous land:
How long ever India, too, will own your claims!
When will ye lose your savageness of soul,
And learn to treat this sex as tender friends?
Ye know not how our knights, when not in love,
Have often fought to save their life, or glory! --

HIGH PRIEST. WELL! it is to save her glory that she dies. --
Think you she would forget herself so far,
As from desire to live, to lose her fame?
Admire her courage -- do not pity her --
For though I should relax; you could obtain
Nothing from one whose honor stands engaged. --

SCENE VII.
General, -- Officer. OFFICER. MY general, do you know the horrid scheme
The governor has plan'd?

GENERAL. WHAT! will they urge
Their tragic preparations?

OFFICER. YES -- the truce
Was but to give the barbarous Bramin time,
To light the funeral fire. --

GENERAL. I AID their triumph!
My easy faith abused to haste her death!
My indignation burns -- I Will close the scene,
And purge the earth of such a froward race:
To slay them, is to serve the universe. --
But then the truce -- my plighted word restrains me:
Thy rigid laws, oh honor! overwhelm
Me who defend, and innocence which falls! --
To raise this city -- and destroy this race --
Is that humanity? No -- no -- nor yet
Will I believe the governor is leagued
With that base Bramin -- let us learn the truth.
Come on, my friend -- let us follow honor's laws,
And show we are French by shielding nature's cause! --

ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Widow alone, clothed in white linen. BEHOLD my destiny! Behold my portion!
I shall have finished life in early youth --
The heavens restore a brother -- at a time --
When I must tear me from his fond embrace: --
I may not feel sensations so divine!
Though nature draws -- yet honor drives me back --
Another voice delights, and desolates me:
Martyr to marriage -- and of love the victim --
Death in my heart -- and smiles upon my brow --
Oh! how shall I conceal the hidden flame,
And march to meet my doom! my husband too,
A second time now seems to sacrifice me: --
And yet I must look cheerful. -- Oh! fond youth,
Too early loved, too early lost for ever,
Far absent from Lanissa! -- aid her now
To quit that light she only loved for thee! --
SCENE II.
High Priest. -- Widow. HIGH PRIEST. YOUR promise, madam, plighted to your
friends,
Allows you no return. Besides, the blood
Of your great ancestors; the placid smile
That dignifies your face; and your own soul,
Which spurns this speck of earth; announce that you,
Aspire to other worlds. -- By quitting life
And life's delusive charms, your high example
Will fire our heroines, ratify our rites,
Extend your fame, and make your husband blessed,
While you, exulting, soar among the stars!

WIDOW. WITHOUT attempting, with superfluous care,
To scan the world unknown; or knowing how
A righteous God will recompense the pangs,
Of such a dreadful death; I am prepared
To make the sacrifice. -- Our laws, the honor
Of all my kindred and myself require it. --
The fixed disgust of life that gnaws my breast,
Precipitates my fate -- I tax not heaven,
But for the rig'rous mode. -- If I must die,
In vernal bloom -- why did not sharp disease
Cut the thin thread of life -- and not your law! --

HIGH PRIEST. CONSIDER well the immortal prize before you,
Nor lose it for these pains. --

WIDOW. I COULD postpone,
The sacrifice, you know, for one whole year.
But then my fame might be the sport of fools. --
I scorn the tongue of slander -- and will meet,
Instead of shunning, death -- I Have but one wish,
And that is this, that I may be the last,
Whom a false honor destines to the tomb;
And that humanity, whose power is lost,
May soon regain its empire in these climes!

HIGH PRIEST. GOOD heaven's! what wish? what have you rashly said?
Suppress the scandal in your secret soul!
Humanity -- oh weakness -- want of good --
Chymeric coupling of corrupted souls!
This wish was never from yourself alone:
This is the mischief of those foreign manners.
These proud Europeans pour into our souls,
The infectious poison of their coward system!
It Is time to check its progress -- India calls
For courage from a soul sublime, like yours. --

SCENE III.
Widow, alone. Where fly? where shield me from terrific tortures?
The FLAME PURSUES me -- THERE! -- I see it THERE!
I FEEL IT -- OH! -- WHAT PANGS EVER I MUST CEASE
TO BE! -- what land of death and darkness bore me! --
SCENE IV.
Widow. -- Young Bramin. YOUNG BRAMIN. I COME to tell you that your fate is
changed --
Now, sister, give up every thought of dying. --
This chief of the besiegers is resolved,
To save your life. -- He Is with the governor
And quite importunate that thou shall live: --
He seems a God, and will not be denied! --

WIDOW. HE was not made acquainted who I am?

YOUNG BRAMIN. No -- 'twas humanity alone inspired him:
With how much warmth his pity, rage, resentment,
Before us BURST? He could not show more ardor,
Were it to shield a sister or a lover. --
At such fine transports how I longed to applaud him!
But then I feared the Bramins would suspect,
I took some undue interest in thy life.
Sister! it is very hard to hide one's feelings,
And to disguise, that one may seem inhuman --
Ah! how that foreign chief has been deceived,
To view me in the light he viewed our priests.
Indeed I blushed. -- But he has staked his honor,
To save your life -- yes, he, without your leave,
Would bear you off himself, but for the watch. --

WIDOW. BROTHER, dissuade him -- oh, you know the laws,
And that he cannot come into my presence.
A stranger's face would fully all the rites:
And scoffers would impute it as my crime.
But then, perhaps, your interest in my fate,
Has magnified his zeal. He but pursued
The natural bent of pity. This European,
Sent by his king, has more than me to think of. --
Would he defend my life, while I Am unknown?
Could I accept his aid? THERE IS BUT ONE MAN --
[aside.]
YOUNG BRAMIN. I SAW the moment, when humanity
Had well nigh made him pass the bounds of honor.
Rather than see thee die, he seemed resolved
To break the truce, and even to lose his life. --
When I beheld him show such generous warmth,
I FELT a HORROR for our LAWS and LAND.

SCENE V.
Fatima. -- Widow. -- Young Bramin. FATIMA. YOU need not, madam, apprehend the
presence
Of that brave foreigner, who dares defend you --
For neither having seen, or hoped to see you,
He only studies how to save your life.
Perhaps he speaks with too much indiscretion
Against a barbarous custom -- and from that,
His life is not in safety. -- Even the priest
Attempts to exasperate the mob against him:
He paints him as a monster, in our walls,
A foe to our religion, to our laws,
With such success, I fear that blood will follow. --
[to the young Bramin.] OH, strive to make him hide the aid he gives:
Or else his cares, instead of serving you,
Will prove much worse than vain, they will ruin him.

WIDOW. WHAT! can he perish while the truce remains?
Too long have I delayed to fall a victim --
I Will run, and have the funeral pile prepared --

FATIMA. OH heavens! and are you mad?

YOUNG BRAMIN. SHALL I permit it?

WIDOW. YOU see what perils he incurs for me:
He Will lose his life; and I shall be the cause --
I dread the succor which he deigns to yield;
Whatever it be I cannot profit by it. --
But still I ought to keep him from all harms,
And make my funeral pile, a fortress for him. --

YOUNG BRAMIN. SISTER, thy risque is his -- consent to live,
The people then will cease to persecute him.

WIDOW. MY death will serve him better -- and I seek it.
As much to save his days, as do my duty.
Henceforth no one shall see me shun my fate,
To kindle thus the mob's misguided rage.
I Will show, my heart can emulate his own,
And seek his safety, as he sought for mine. --

SCENE VI.
Young Bramin. -- Fatima. YOUNG BRAMIN. YOU will not leave her? -- soon the
foreign chief,
Will come to see the high priest in this place.
I Will wait for this brave chief, and strive that he
May use more moderation for our good. --

SCENE VII.
Young Bramin, alone. THUS does fanatic frenzy blind its victims! --
Heroic mortal! full of noble fires.
Must we then dread, lest such a friend as you,
Should want the generous succor which you give?
SCENE VIII.
Young Bramin. -- French General. YOUNG BRAMIN. WHERE were you going, sir? I
might -- perhaps --

GENERAL. WHAT would you.

YOUNG BRAMIN. SIR! that you would please to know me --

GENERAL. I Have seen your chief -- and know you well enough --

YOUNG BRAMIN. I DIFFER from him more than you imagine. --

GENERAL. WHAT IS that to me?

YOUNG BRAMIN. I PITY the sad fate,
Of her our customs doom to death today!

GENERAL. IT IS very likely you would come to tell me!
Why, sir! -- you're all suspected -- even your pity --
Go -- leave me --

YOUNG BRAMIN. -- No -- not till I have told you,
The interest that my heart takes in this fair.
You wish to save her from impending death;
I wish it more than you; and can assist you --
For know, SHE IS MY SISTER! --

GENERAL. SHE! thy SISTER?

YOUNG BRAMIN. SHE is --

GENERAL. Her danger then is greater far. --

YOUNG BRAMIN. IT IS infinitely less --

GENERAL. I KNOW you better,
And all the rage fraternal blood inspires.

YOUNG BRAMIN. CONFOUND me not, for mercy's sake, with mine. --
Far better I respect the ties of blood. --
My sister ready to be sacrificed
Upon the funeral pile -- GODS! HOW her BLOOD
CRIES IN MY VEINS -- I Will brave extremest peril
So save her -- Sir! -- I feel, in principle,
I Am all European; -- count upon my aid. --

GENERAL. YOU HAVE seen her -- has she sworn to die?

YOUNG BRAMIN. IT IS true --
You Would be SURPRISED! your PITY WILL be TOUCHED!
Her heart is fixed upon her cruel duty. --
A duty still more cruel, since it is known,
The man for whom she falls a sacrifice,
Was not the real object of her love! --

GENERAL. AND he, her choice, with paltry fear oppressed,
Will suffer such a sight before his eyes! --
While I, a stranger, feel my bosom burn,
And, as a man, will come to her relief.
The COWARD! what does he? or what is his fear?
How can he see another person shield her?

YOUNG BRAMIN. THE fact is, sir!, in distant climes detained,
He does not know her doom. -- But let my heart
Disclose its pains to you -- I would redress
The wrong that nature suffers in these realms.
I Have tried persuasion -- but, it is all in vain --
My sister will not yield -- her mind is fixed. --
But happily I have found you at this hour; --
You, who are born with tenderness, will strive,
With me, to save those days which she deserts. --
In spite of her, the GODS propitious call,
TO SAVE, if possible, that DEAREST LIFE, --
To SNATCH LANISSA FROM --

GENERAL. The THUNDER STRUCK ME! --
IMMORTAL GODS! what NAME?

YOUNG BRAMIN. What EXCLAMATION?

GENERAL. LANISSA! -- SHE THE VICTIM?

YOUNG BRAMIN. How! you know her?

GENERAL. LANISSA is to die! -- and I am come,
So far to be a witness! -- OH! I WILL SEE HER --

YOUNG BRAMIN. BUT, sir! --

GENERAL. I fly this very moment to her --
OH! shall they murder all my heart holds dear? --

YOUNG BRAMIN. You LOVED HER? YOU --!

GENERAL. PERDITION! -- STOP me NOT --

YOUNG BRAMIN. IMPENETRABLE walls obstruct all access:
Besides, the truce prohibits open force: --
You take the readiest way to haste her ruin!
Oh, let us not destroy, by starts of passion,
The prodigy a God has wrought for us. --

GENERAL. WHAT CAN YOU DO TO WREST HER FROM THIS PERIL?

YOUNG BRAMIN. THERE is, hard by, a subterranean way,
Through which, I Am told, in former times a widow,
Was rescued from the flames, by means of gold.
From where the pile was built, the passage leads
Directly to the port. If still the priests
Should press the sacrifice, we'll try that plan --
I in the temple -- while you're out of town --
And heaven, I trust, will favor our attempt. --

GENERAL. SO NEAR! -- SO FAR FROM HER! -- each instant kills me!
I SHUDDER with AMAZEMENT! -- and my EAR
HEARS, from devouring flames, her DYING CRY! --

YOUNG BRAMIN. BUT, sir! compose awhile your troubled spirits;
Be cautious how you stir religious zeal,
Among this people, whence revolt might spring.
They know our conversation in this place;
And zealots once inflamed will hear no reason.
Whatever care I take to save Lanissa,
Your rashness would precipitate her death! --
Then, for Lanissa's sake, and for your own,
Return to camp -- avoid the assassin-stroke! --

GENERAL. WELL! I believe you, and have no distrust --
But furnish me one earnest of your zeal;
Abjure before the priest, and in my sight,
The horrid task, which he assigned to you. --

YOUNG BRAMIN. WHAT say you? -- No -- but on the other hand.
It Is best I feign to keep that horrid task:
Since, soon he would commit it to another --
And this delay will serve our purpose best. --

GENERAL. I YIELD -- thy reason's good -- thy zeal confirms me. --
I WILL SERVE THE TIES OF LOVE: -- SERVE THOSE OF NATURE! --

YOUNG BRAMIN. MY sister still resist! -- But I Will inform her,
What arm has raised itself in her defense. --
The high priest comes -- adieu -- I fear lest he
Should see us here, adieu! adieu! remember! --

SCENE IX.
General. -- High Priest. -- GENERAL. WHERE go you? what! to drag her to the
pile!

HIGH PRIEST. THOU impious wretch! think thou her constant virtue --

GENERAL. AH! not in vain shall I have stopped the attempt --

HIGH PRIEST. WHILE you behold her lot -- and even her wish --

GENERAL. HER lot depends not on herself, or you --
Reason legitimates the scheme I Have formed, --
You do not know the value of this victim:
You will ever long, barbarian! -- But, my word
Engaged, I hold the law of nations binding. --
NOW, IF I SEEK to CURB my FURY THUS,
Then, SPARE the VICTIM -- or -- I CANNOT PROMISE.
You may believe me -- IN MY STATE OF MIND --
THERE IS NAUGHT IMPOSSIBLE! -- THERE IS NAUGHT
THAT IS SACRED! --
I Will watch you well -- and -- ever you sacrifice her --
THYSELF, THY RACE, THY ALTARS, and THY IDOLS,
On! I WILL SPARE NOTHING! -- armed for her, MY SWORD
Shall save with her the feeble sex oppressed!
AMIDST THE WAVES of BLOOD, WHICH I WILL SHED,
I WILL BEAR HER THROUGH THIS TOWN, REDUCED TO ASFFS,
AVENGING THUS THE WOES THY WRATH PRODUCED,
'TILL MEN SHALL SEARCH IN VAIN WHERE STOOD
THY TEMPLE! --

SCENE X.
High Priest. -- Bramins. HIGH PRIEST. WHAT means this wild excess of rage and
madness?
The monster braves us at these very shrines --
He dares attack religion's holiest rites,
And means to change our laws to save this victim. --
Let Us lose no time, to ward the storm from us:
To ward the storm? let us hurl it on his head! --
Revenging thus, by his tremendous fall,
Our customs, temple, liberty and laws! --

[ The theater represents a porch of the Pagod of the Bramins, surrounded with
rocks -- a funeral pile erected in the midst -- the ocean seen at a distance.]

ACT V.
SCENE I.
Young Bramin. -- Fatima. FATIMA. YOU'RE lost in melancholy -- what is the cause?

YOUNG BRAMIN. MY sister is forlorn -- our hopes are blasted! --
You heard, this night, the noise toward the sort,
And how the bay re-echo'd with the roar?
'Twas then some traitors bribed('it is thought by Bramins)
Spread fire and ruin through the fleet -- and then
The chief, as he was hastening to its succor,
Was slain by base assassins. -- All the camp
Was panic-struck -- the shore with slaughter stained --
The port with fragments of burnt vessels strewn! --
What still remained of broken bands embarked,
On board the shattered fleet, and put to sea --
The wind sprung up, and all are out of sight. --

FATIMA. THUS every gleam of hope for ever gone! --

YOUNG BRAMIN. THE immediate consequence you see, this moment,
The funeral pile prepared! --

FATIMA. OH! sight of horror!

YOUNG BRAMIN. THE priests will come to make me bring my sister:
But sooner than officiate at those rites,
I Will suffer all the plagues that man can feel;
Yes, me they first shall murder! --

FATIMA. WHY from her
At such a moment?

YOUNG BRAMIN. 'TWAS herprudent care,
Forbade my having access to her room: --
So much she feared my zeal -- so much the aid
Of that European, who engaged to save her! --
But run and carry to my dearest sister,
A brother's resolution, tears, despair!
Oh, tell her, I Am resolved, in spite of worlds,
To die myself, or to prevent her death.

SCENE II.
Young Bramin, alone. IN such a generous cause the stranger fell! --
And my poor sister sinks into the tomb! --
I hoped her heart, which would not yield to me,
Would lean from death toward so fond a lover.
Oh, CRUEL SISTER, with what joy I thought,
To tell thee that thy lover was thy shield.
Now, HAPPY! that thou did not know what hand,
Prepared the succor, Heaven has rendered vain! --
SCENE III.
High Priest. -- Young Bramin. -- Bramin. -- Indian People. HIGH PRIEST.
PEOPLE! enjoy the peace which I Have obtained! --
I Have freed you from these fierce European bands! --
Had they victorious entered once the town,
They would have changed your laws, and chased your Gods. --
It Is true, the better to complete my plans,
I made the effort ever the truce expired.
But then, reduced to such extremities,
'Twas sanction'd by necessity and right.
I saw our soldiers slain upon these shores,
Whose plaintive shades surrounded Brama's shrine,
And seemed to rise to stimulate the blow
Which saved our country, and revenged its dead!

BRAMIN. YOU must have known the wishes of your country.

HIGH PRIEST. I MARKED the sudden pang that pierced your souls,
When first the news was spread, that this mad chief,
Designed a faithful widow to withold,
From yonder honored pile. But Brama smiled,
The god of India smiled, confirmed his rites,
And blessed his favored land. By me, he drove
Those haughty bands far hence -- he saved your walls,
And he avenged his violated power. [ to the young Bramin.]
Young man! it is you must bring the victim here:
Go. --

YOUNG BRAMIN. [aside.] I GROW frantic at their cruel rites. --
I would be calm -- but -- oh -- this rising choler
Will not permit -- it is now too late for prudence --
My breast would burst with silence -- I Will speak daggers
To that proud Bramin's soul -- shall I proud priest!
[to the high priest.] Shall I -- submissive to thy horrid rage, --
Shall I proceed to bring the victim here?
After we know thy crime -- that thou have broken
The truce -- that law agreed upon by nations,
And held inviolate for mutual good --
You wish -- you coward, vile incendiary!
To seem a tutelary God for us! --
Now since your villainy, your treacherous rage,
Has murdered that illustrious foreign chief; --
It Is time that you should know me -- learn, base Bramin,
To save Lanissa, I concurred with him. --

HIGH PRIEST. WHAT do I hear? -- you formed so black a plot,
And dare insult me! traitor! -- you --

YOUNG BRAMIN. YES, I --
And glory in it -- ah! to you a traitor;
But not like you beneath the altar's shade:
I but contrived to save the sex oppressed. --

HIGH PRIEST. SEE then to what your foolish pity led,
To yield your country --

YOUNG BRAMIN. NO -- I would have saved
The feeblest and most wretched half -- whom you,
As having power, oppress with monstrous laws. --

HIGH PRIEST. OH frightful blasphemy! unheard of outrage!
Why does not Brama thunder on thy head?

YOUNG BRAMIN. THOU know not yet but part of what I dared
Nor with what crimes I Am blackened in thy sight --
To save Lanissa -- nature have I served, --
SHE IS MY SISTER. --

HIGH PRIEST. HEIGHT of human crimes!

YOUNG BRAMIN. OH why could I not open my sister's eyes
To see the folly of your barbarous rites.

HIGH PRIEST. You set yourself to judge our laws, our rites!
You wish her shame! -- a native --

YOUNG BRAMIN. RATHER exile,
Who wishes to depart this place for ever;
Such anger rises at your law of blood!
Barbarian! yes, he meant to snatch from death,
A sister whom he loves -- he is not a brother
To immolate -- but to protect and love her. --
Heaven formed his heart far different, wretch! from thine:
So perish in these climes thy cruel custom!
I know sweet nature -- and I know but her --

HIGH PRIEST. YES -- and I know a time will come to punish --
First, let the sacrifice be made -- and then
I shall know how to treat so base a traitor --
You more obedient to my orders, go, [ to another Bramin.]
And bring the victim hither -- but behold,
Unlike her atheist brother -- there she comes
Spontaneously to meet her honored doom. --

SCENE IV.
[Widow, followed by her relations -- and the preceding actors.] WIDOW --
advancing, bewildered. WHERE am I? -- oh! -- I Am dizzy -- all turns round me.
Ah! who will bear me to the banks of Ganges?
What shrouded phantom! -- heavens! -- I see him come --
Let Us fly -- oh! -- he has caught me -- how he drags
Me to the funeral fire? -- he shows himself --
Hold! -- oh! -- unpitying husband! --

YOUNG BRAMIN. Do not die
o save that fost'ring chief! -- thy friend -- that hero --

HIGH PRIEST. HAS fallen in the snares where sinners fall. --

WIDOW. OF whom have you been speaking?

HIGH PRIEST. OF a wretch,
Who died my victim. --

YOUNG BRAMIN. OF a foreign hero --

WIDOW. "A FOREIGN hero"! -- why he succor me?
For what should he attempt to save my life?
What is this generous hero then -- so kind, --
Who, though he knows me not, still dares to shield me: --
That my distresses should so nearly touch him! --
Have all the French the feelings of my lover?

HIGH PRIEST. WHAT word escaped? what have you dared to utter?
Are you not cured of that disgraceful frenzy? --
I Have rescued you from that unworthy Frenchman --
Forget the audacious wretch! --

YOUNG BRAMIN. YOU ought to mourn
For him. --

WIDOW. "To mourn for him!" -- oh! grief
That kills me! --

YOUNG BRAMIN. YES, he died for thee --

WIDOW. COME on!
And light the fires! -- I feel no farther fear --
Death will be now a happiness for me --
At sight of flames, where, I shall make my bed,
Despair affords a certain kind of joy --
I Will die. --

YOUNG BRAMIN. AH! will thou, cruel sister! -- See
Thy brother at thy feet. --

HIGH PRIEST. THY husband calls. --

YOUNG BRAMIN. WHICH of you two has most barbarity?
Now, sister! mark me -- by the rights of blood,
Here misconceiv'd, I Will rescue thee from death.
Stop -- ye attendants! stop -- and learn from me,
Ye shall not lead her to that horrid place --
A brother dares protect her as he ought! --

HIGH PRIEST. HAVE you no reverence for the god of India?
No honor for the priesthood?

YOUNG BRAMIN. BRAMIN hear me!
If I reproach myself for any thing,
It Is that I took this fatal ministry;
It Is that I have too far obeyed your will!
I blush at my respect for such a man;
And at my timid doubts that half restrained,
My arguments against thy murderous creed. --
My reason cannot be obscured by customs,
My instinct changed, nor yet my heart made hard.
In spite of vulgar error, and its crimes,
Here sentiment prevails -- my soul's my own --
Ye people, listen! I abjure for ever,
Your rites, your laws, your solemn mockeries!

HIGH PRIEST. OH! impious renegade! -- ye Bramins seize him --
Consine him for a monument of wrath
To sooth the offended majesty of Brama. --
[ The Bramins separate them by force, she mounts the funeral pile.]
WHAT noise is that?

YOUNG BRAMIN. THEY enter by that way --

HIGH PRIEST. WHAT! have I lost my cares?

YOUNG BRAMIN. GREAT gods! ye heard me?

HIGH PRIEST. REVERSE!

YOUNG BRAMIN. OH! -- bliss! --

SCENE V.
[French General rushing in at the head of troops -- and the preceding actors.]
GENERAL -- running toward the pile -- LANISSA IN THE FLAMES! --

HIGH PRIEST. OUR FOE ALIVE?

GENERAL. Let Us fly! -- oh! live, my dearest --

WIDOW. Who snatches me from death?

GENERAL. DEARER THAN LIFE,
LANISSA! --

WIDOW. [Giving a shriek of surprise and joy in the arms of the French General,
before she names him.] Oh! MONTALBAN! -- my deliv'rer! --

GENERAL. IT IS I,
Who snatch thee from the flames --

YOUNG BRAMIN. IT IS he -- it is he --
Oh! double blessing! -- gods! -- it is he alive! --

GENERAL. THE story of my death was spread on purpose. --
A bay deserted served us for a shelter. --
While -- through the subterranean path -- one band
Entered the town -- another took the fort.
ONE MOMENT MORE -- AND WHAT HAD BEEN MY FATE!
Thus the dark path which avarice opened first,
To save from sacrifice a woman -- now
Has answered nobly for the same design!
And I -- what bliss! have served my king and country,
And gained the place without the loss of blood?
[ to the High Priest.]
Of you (whose plots propitious Heaven confounds)
I learned full soon the villainous designs. --
Your crime was but a coward's -- nor amazed me --
A Frenchman -- I forget it! -- conq'ror -- pardon! --
I leaveyour life -- even after all your crimes --
Guards! make him go from hence -- and never return.
[High Priest goes out.]
SCENE VI. and last.
The preceding Actors. WIDOW. 'TWAS you, Montalban! came to my defense! --
'Twas you I feared, and fled! what god has saved you,
To save your poor Lanissa? -- ah! my life,
Preserved by one so dear, becomes more dear! --
How precious yours and mine should be to me?
Oh -- I had lived less happy by another.

YOUNG BRAMIN. OH! -- just reward for all your pains -- you thought
To save an unknown woman from her fate:
And Heaven saw fit, by way of retribution,
That you should save the idol of your soul!

WIDOW. MY dear Montalban!

GENERAL. OH! my loved Lanissa!
[ pointing to her brother.]
Let him partake your gratitude with me,
After such tears and cruel trepidations!
YE people, ye shall live with happier laws --
Receive as the first favor of my prince,
The entire extinction of this savage rite! --
Louis for this employed my hand; for he,
Alike for greatness and for goodness known,
Diffuses blessings from the rising day
To yonder Western World -- the land that loves him:
While other conq'rors carry rage and lust,
And horrid carnage -- he humanity! --

EPILOGUE. Spoken by Mrs. HENRY, in the character of Lanissa.
WELL, here I come -- and almost out of breath,
'Twixt love, fire, fear, and widow hood and death;
While I for such fictitious strife am harnessed --
I feel -- I suffer -- more than half in earnest:
By Bramin's seized -- those bloody-minded fellows --
My hair-breadth escapes were greater than Othello's!
Naught could have saved me from the jaws of fate,
Had my French lover came one breath too late. --
The pile prepared and kindling brisk as tinder,
They Would burned your poor Lanissa to a cinder!
BUT well our author had contrived the whole,
And seems, in truth, a right good-natured soul:
He swears himself his drama, without vanity,
Is founded on the basis of humanity;
Without one RULE or UNITY infringing,
He saved his heroine from a mortal singing --
So after all this mighty fire and rattle,
Our bloodless play is like a bloodless battle.
AM I to blame, if, this dear life to save,
I liked a lover better than a grave;
Preferred your christian maxims for a drama,
To all the murderous rites of pagan Brama;
And held, retreating from my funeral urn,
"It Was better far to marry than to burn?"
No -- I Will be burned, but every maid and widow,
Would do, in such a case, just as I did do.
YES -- thank your stars, Columbia's happy dames!
Ye need not fear those frightful funeral flames: --
Of other lands let foreign bards be dreaming,
But this, this only is the land for women: --
Here ye invert the Bramins' barbarous plan,
And stretch your scepter over the tyrant -- man.
YE men, if I offend, I ask your pardon,
I would not for the world your sex bear hard on.
Ye are the fathers, founders of a nation,
The gods on earth, the lords of this creation!
And let philosophers say what they please,
You're not grown less by coming over the seas: --
We know your worth, and dare proclaim your merit. --
The world may ask your foes, "if you want spirit?"
Your vict'ries won -- your revolution ended --
Your constitution newly made -- and mended --
Your fund of wit -- your intellectual riches --
Plans in the closet -- in the senate speeches --
Will make this age of heroes, wits, and sages,
The first in story to the latest ages! --
Go on -- and prosper with your projects blessed,
'Till your millennium rises in the west: --
We wish success to your politic scheming,
Rule ye the world! -- and then -- be ruled by women! --
FOR here, ye fair, no servile rites bear sway,
Nor force ye -- (though ye promise) -- to obey:
Blessed in the mildness of this temperate zone,
Slaves to no whims, or follies -- but your own --
Here custom, checked in every rude excess,
Confines its influence to the arts of dress,
Over charms eclipsed the side-long hat displays,
Extends the hoop, or pares away the stays,
Bedecks the fair with artificial geer,
Breast-works in front, and bishops in the rear: --
The idol rears, on beauty's dazzling throne,
Mankind her slaves, and all the world her own;
Bound by no laws a husband's whims to fear,
Obey in life, or burn upon his bier;
She views with equal eye, sublime over all,
A lover perish -- or a lap-dog fall --
Coxcombs or monkeys from their chains broke loose --
And now a husband dead -- and now a goose.
BUT jesting all apart -- and such droll strictures;
We'll strive to charm you with still fairer pictures --
For it is our object to divert -- not tease you --
To make you laugh or cry -- as best shall please you --
So as it suits each kind spectator's turn,
You Will come to see me play the fool -- or burn --
Ladies and gentlemen! on this condition,
I humbly offer my sincere petition,
That you will come often to hear me sing or say --
"And poor Lanissa will for ever pray!"
PROLOGUE To the Translation of ATHALIAH, A TRAGEDY.
THE scenes which Racine drew, bold, tender, chaste,
Too full of nature, not to meet your taste,
We now prepare -- we strive to make your own,
The classic wealth of France -- too long unknown!
This gold of Gaul coined in Columbia's mint,
It Is yours to fix the current value in it.
EVER with these themes we trespass on your time,
Themes moral, novel, beauteous, and sublime:
I come to plead the buskined muse's cause,
To claim your candor, not to bribe applause.
If a well-regulated stage can teach
The noblest maxims, in the purest speech --
If we, the public's servants, virtue's friends,
Attempt, by honest means, those honest ends --
Then let Columbia's voice reward our toil;
On us her sages and her daughters smile!
ATTEND, while first we bring upon our stage,
A sacred drama from the sacred page;
A drama, which has often, on Gallic ground,
(To kings a lesson!) with applause been crowned.
Whatever can please from characters that live,
Whatever of worth pure sentiment can give,
The mighty master to his scenes imparts,
To charm your ears and captivate your hearts,
To fill the melting eye with virtue's tear,
And make you learn to practice what you hear.
If happily our best efforts should avail,
To add due interest to this well-told tale;
Here will ye find instruction with delight,
And say, when done, "We have not lost a night."
ENCOURAGED by your smiles, on virtue's side,
In such a cause, we feel a generous pride:
Here shall no muse attempt by words unchaste,
Or wanton scenes, to soothe fastidious taste;
Nor (for just sentiments can reach your hearts)
To crowd this house by meretricious arts --
Called by far nobler powers, here crowds shall throng,
Called by the powers of genius and of song.
HAIL, thou young nation -- blessed in mental charms,
In taste, arts, science, government and arms!
Raised to new life, the boast of every age,
Long shall thy infant deeds adorn our stage;
Deeds of immortal fame, that graced our land!
Or in the senate, or the warrior band!
Fired with the prospect of thy growing fame,
My breast enkindles with the patriot flame;
Haste, haste, ye sons of song, call glory forth,
And dare display your great compatriots' worth;
Thence future ages will not view unmoved,
What ADAMS, JAY, and WASHINGTON approved!
EPILOGUE To the Translation of ATHALIAH, A TRAGEDY.
SO fell, dethroned, the murderer of her race,
So rose the orphan-king to fill her place!
I saw your breasts, when impious blood was spilt,
Exult that virtue triumphed over guilt: --
Nor do I come to banish from your breasts,
Those fine sensations by some foolish jests;
But rather, shunning trite theatric tricks,
I wish a moral in your minds to fix.
LOOK round this world! the Arbiter of fates,
Holds in his hand the destiny of states;
Makes duty and advantage still accord,
And gives to worthy deeds a just reward.
OFTEN ruin waits on vice -- by discord hurled,
The bolts of vengeance desolate the world. --
Go -- search all lands, with philosophic views,
Go -- read the records of the historic muse!
Where are the mighty states, of former times,
Which braved even Heaven by greatness and by crimes;
The hundred gates of Thebes, with threatening walls,
The hieroglyphic lore of Egypt's halls?
Where the proud boasts of Babylon and Tire,
The Attic muses and the Roman fire?
SEE in that land, where late our scene was laid,
What dreadful havoc, giant discord made!
From want of virtue such dire sufferings flow,
And want of union laid fair Salem low! --
'Twas want of virtue, want of union spread
Flames through her domes and heaped her streets with dead;
Ushered to light immortal deeds of shame --
Infernal deeds -- and deeds without a name --
Bade dearest friends by hidden daggers bleed,
And famished mothers on their infants feed;
Destroyed the dwelling of the ETERNAL SIRE,
His altars whelmed in human blood and fire;
Uptore the towering bulwarks from their base,
While ruin drove her plough-share over the place.
OH discord! parent of each woe and crime,
Far be thy influence from our happy clime!
Far be ambition, which vindictive hurled
Ruin on ruin round a wasted world!
THOU union! guide our senatorial band,
The chosen few, the fathers of our land!
It Is theirs, with patience and enlightened zeal,
To toil incessant for the public weal;
To raise lost credit from its low abyss,
And point the zenith of Columbia's bliss!
SAY ye! who sought for peace, in martial strife,
What forms the greatest good of social life?
What constitutes the real strength of states?
Is it their floating towers? their brazen gates?
Their troops innumerable? -- It Is one soul,
One vital spirit that pervades the whole,
It Is CONCORD! -- glorious offspring of the skies,
Which binds frail mortals in fraternal ties! --
OH favored race! in toils of empire brave,
Defend those rights which God and nature gave!
Heavens! -- what the price those rights confirmed have cost,
What treasures lavished, and what heroes lost?
And yet I hear those forms, from many a plain,
Exulting cry, "WE HAVE NOT BLED IN VAIN!"
I see blessed WARREN rise -- an awful shade!
And great MONTGOM'RY wave the crimsoned blade;
Mild MERCER, dreadful in the day of war,
Brave BROWN, deformed with many a savage scar;
SCAMMEL -- the pride of hosts! -- the Britons' shame! --
And young DE HEART in the first field of fame;
WOOSTER, with locks of age defiled in gore,
And LAURENS! friend to freedom! -- NOW NO MORE! --
FROM high they hail the scenes that now appear,
And point the effulgent dawn of glory near! --
'Rapt in extatic visions -- now my eyes
Pierce the dun curtains of incumbent skies:
What streams of light through western tracks descend,
Fire the wide welkin, and the concave rend!
Thy suns, Columbia! roll over scenes more bright,
And happier ages burst upon my sight!
And hark! what music strikes the enraptured ear?
Hear sounds prophetic! -- mystic numbers hear!
ODE On the GLORY of COLUMBIA, By DR. DWIGHT.
I.
COLUMBIA, Columbia, to glory arise,
The queen of the world, and the child of the skies!
Thy genius commands thee; with rapture behold,
While ages on ages thy splendors unfold.
Thy reign is the last and the noblest of time,
Most fruitful thy soil, most inviting thy clime;
Let the crimes of the east never encrimson thy name,
Be freedom, and science, and virtue thy fame.
II.
To conquest and slaughter, let Europe aspire;
Whelm nations in blood, and wrap cities in fire!
Thy heroes the rights of mankind shall defend,
And triumph pursue them, and glory attend: --
A world is thy realm -- for a world be thy laws,
Enlarged as thine empire, and just as thy cause: --
On freedom's broad basis that empire shall rise,
Extend with the main, and dissolve with the skies!
III.
FAIR science her gates to thy sons shall unbar,
And the east see thy morn hide the beams of her star.
New bards and new sages, unrivaled shall soar,
To fame unextinguish'd when time is no more:
To thee the last refuge of virtue designed,
Shall fly from all nations the best of mankind;
Here, grateful to Heaven, with transport shall bring
Their incense more fragrant than odours of spring.
IV.
NOR less shall thy fair-ones to glory ascend;
And genius and beauty in harmony blend;
The graces of form shall awake pure desire,
And the charms of the soul ever cherish the fire:
Their sweetness unmingled, their manners refined,
And virtue's bright image instamp'd on the mind,
With peace and soft rapture shall teach life to glow,
And light up a smile in the aspect of woe.
V.
THY fleets to all regions thy power shall display,
The nations admire, and the ocean obey;
Each shore to thy glory its tribute unfold,
And the east and the south yield their spices and gold.
As the day star unbounded their splendour shall flow,
And earth's little kingdoms before thee shall bow;
While the ensigns of union in triumph unfurled,
Hush the tumult of war, and give peace to the world!
VI.
THUS, as down a lone valley with cedars overspread,
From wars dread confusion I pensively strayed,
The gloom from the face of fair heaven retired,
The winds ceased to murmur, the thunders expired;
Perfumes, as of Eden, flowed sweetly along,
And a voice, as of angels, enchantingly sung,
" Columbia, Columbia, to glory arise,
" The queen of the world, and the child of the skies."
AN ESSAY ON THE LIFE of the HONORABLE MAJOR GENERAL ISRAEL PUTNAM: Addressed
to the STATE SOCIETY of the CINCINNATI in CONNECTICUT.

BY COL. DAVID HUMPHREYS.

PUBLISHED BY THEIR ORDER.

TO THE HONORABLE COL. JEREMIAH WADSWORTH, President of the State Society of
the Cincinnati in Connecticut, etc.
MY DEAR SIR,
UNAVOIDABLE absence will prevent me from performing the grateful task,
assigned me by the State Society of the Cincinnati, on the fourth day of July
next. Though I cannot personally address them, I wish to demonstrate by some
token of affectionate remembrance, the sense I entertain of the honor they have
more than once conferred upon me by their suffrages.

MEDITATING in what manner to accomplish this object, it occurred to me, that
an attempt to preserve the actions of General Putnam, in the archives of our
State Society, would be acceptable to its members, as they had all served with
great satisfaction under his immediate orders. An essay on the life of a person
so elevated in military rank, and so conversant in extraordinary scenes, could
not be destitute of amusement and instruction, and would possess the advantage
of presenting for imitation a respectable model of public and private virtues.

GENERAL Putnam is universally acknowledged to have been as brave and as honest
a man as ever America produced; but the distinguishing features of his
character, and the particular transactions of his life are but imperfectly
known. He seems to have been formed on purpose for the age in which he lived.
His native courage, unshaken integrity, and established reputation as a
soldier, were necessary in the early stages of our opposition to the designs of
Great Britain, and gave unbounded confidence to our troops in their first
conflicts in the field of battle.

THE enclosed manuscript justly claims indulgence, for its venial errors, as it
is the first effort in Biography, that has been made on this continent. The
attempt I am conscious is laudable, whatever may be the failure in point of
execution.

I AM happy to find the Society of the Cincinnati is now generally regarded in
a favorable manner. Mankind, with fewer exceptions, are disposed to do justice
to the motives on which it was founded. For ourselves, we can never recall to
mind the occasion, without feeling the most tender emotions of friendship and
sensibility. At the dissolution of the army, when we retired to separate walks
of life, from the toils of a successful war, in which we had been associated
during a very important part of our lives, the pleasing idea, and the fond hope
of meeting once a year, which gave birth to our fraternal institution, were
necessary consolations to soothe the pangs, that tore our bosoms at the
melancholy hour of parting. When our hands touched, perhaps, for the last time,
and our tongues refused to perform their office in bidding farewell, Heaven
witnessed and approved the purity of our intentions in the ardor of our
affections. May we persevere in the union of our friendship, and the exertion
of our benevolence; regardless of the censures of jealous suspicion, which
charges our designs with selfishness, and inscribes our actions to improper
motives; while we realize sentiments of a nobler nature in our anniversary
festivities, and our hearts dilate with an honest joy, in opening the hand of
beneficence to the indigent widow and unprotected orphan of our departed
friends.

I PRAY you, my dear Sir, to present my most respectful compliments to the
members of the Society, and to assure them, on my part, that whenever it
shall be in my power. I shall esteem it the felicity of my life to attend their
anniversaries.

I HAVE the honor to be, with sentiments of the highest consideration and
esteem, your most obedient and most humble servant,

D. HUMPHREYS.
Mount Vernon, in Virginia, June 4, 1788.
AN ESSAY ON THE LIFE OF GENERAL PUTNAM.
TO treat of recent transactions and persons still living, is always a delicate
and frequently a thankless office. Yet, while the partiality of friends, or the
malignity of enemies, decides with rashness on every delineation of character,
or recital of circumstances, a consolation remains, that distant nations and
remoter ages, free from the influence of prejudice or passion, will judge with
impartiality, and appreciate with justice. We have fallen upon an era
singularly prolific in extraordinary personages, and dignified by splendid
events. Much is expected from the selections of the judicious biographer, as
well as from the labors of the faithful historian. Whatever prudential reasons
may now occur to postpone the portrait of our own times, the difficulties which
oppose themselves to the execution, instead of being diminished, will increase
with the lapse of years. Every day will extinguish some life that was dear to
same, and obliterate the memorial of some deed which would have constituted the
delight and admiration of the world.

So transient and indistinguishable are the traits of character, so various and
inexplicable the springs of action, so obscure and perishable the remembrance
of human affairs, that, unless attempts are made to sketch the picture, while
the present generation is living, the likeness will be for ever lost, or only
preserved by a vague recollection; disguised, perhaps, by the whimsical
colorings of a creative imagination.

IT will doubtless, hereafter, be an object of regret, that those, who, having
themselves been conspicuous actors on the theater of public life, and, who in
conjunction with a knowledge of facts, possess abilities to paint those
characters, and describe those events, which (during the progress of the
American Revolution) interested and astonished mankind, should feel an
insuperable reluctance to assume the task -- a task, which (if executed with
fidelity) must, from the dignity of its subject, become grateful to the
patriots of all nations, and profitable in example to the remotest posterity.
Equally severe will be the mortification of contemplating the reveries and
fictions, which have been substituted by hacknied writers in the place of
historical facts. Nor should we suppress our indignation against that class of
professional authors, who, placed in the vale of penury and obscurity, at an
immense distance from the scenes of action, and all opportunities of acquiring
the necessary documents, with insufferable effrontery, obtrude their fallacious
and crude performances on a credulous public. Did the result of their
lucubrations terminate only in relieving their own distresses, or gratifying
their individual vanity, it might be passed in silent contempt. But the effect
is extensive, permanent, and pernicious: The lie, The writer had here
particularly in his eye, the Rhapsody, palmed upon the public, under the name
of a History, by a certain Frenchman called D'Auberteiul: Perhaps, so much
falsehood, folly and calumny was never before accumulated in a single
performance.
however improbable or monstrous, which has once assumed the semblance of
truth, by being often repeated with minute and plausible particulars, is at
length so thoroughly established, as to obtain universal credit, defy
contradiction, and frustrate every effort of refutation. Such is the mischief,
such are the unhappy consequences on the bewildered mind, that the reader has
no alternative, but to become the dupe of his credulity, or distrust the
veracity of almost all human testimony. After having long been the sport of
fiction, he will perhaps probably run into the opposite extreme, and give up
all confidence in the annals of ancient as well as modern times: and thus the
easy believer of fine fables and mavelous stories, will find, at last, his
historical faith change to skepticism, and end in infidelity.

THE numerous errors and falsehoods relative to the birth and achievements of
Major General Putnam, which have (at a former period) been circulated with
assiduity on both sides of the Atlantic, and the uncertainty which appeared to
prevail with respect to his real The following lines are extracted from a poem,
entitled "The prospect of America:" written by the late Ingenious Dr. Ladd.

" (...) Putnam! hail thou venerable name
" Though dark oblivion threats thy mighty fame,
" It threats in vain -- for long shall thou be known,
" Who first in virtue and in battle shone,
" When fourscore years had blanched thy laureled head,
" Strong in th^ne age, the flame of war was spread."
On which Dr. (...) made this note:

The brave Putnam seems to have been almost obscured amidst the glare of
succeeding worthies; but his early and gallant services entitle him to an
everlasting remembrance.

Other bards have also assured the glory of this venerable veteran. In the
first concise review of the principal American heroes who signalized themselves
in the last war, the some character is thus represented:

" There stood stern Putnam, seam'd with many a scar,
" The veteran honors of an early wa^."
The Vision of Columbus, Book V.


character, first produced the resolution of writing this essay on his life and
induced the editor to obtain The editor seizes with eagerness an opportunity of
acknowledging his obligations to Dr. A^b^^ence (...), who was so obliging as to
commit to writing many (...), communicated to him by General Putnam in the
course of the present year.
materials from that hero himself. If communications of such authenticity, if
personal intimacy as an aid-de-camp to that general, or if subsequent military
employments, which afforded access to sources A multitude of proofs might be
produced to demonstrate that military facts cannot always be accurately known
but by the commander in chief and his confidential officers. The (...) de
Chastelleox (whose opportunity to acquire genuine information, respecting those
parts of the American war which he has casually mentioned, was better than
that of any other written) gives an account of a Grand Forage which General
Heath ordered to be made toward Kings Bridge in the autumn of 1780. The
Marquis, who was present when the de ac^ment marched, and to whom General Heath
showed the orders that were given o General Stark, the comm^^^ing officer of
the expedition, observes that he had never seen, in manuscript or print, more
pertinent instructions. Now the fact is, that this detachment, under the
pretext of a forage, was intended by the Commander in Chief (...) cooperate
with the main army in an attempt against the enemy's posts on York-Island; and
that General Heath himself was then ignorant of the real design. The Commander
in Chief spent a whole campaign in ripening this project. Boats, mounted on
traveling carriages, were kept constantly with the army. The Marquis de la
Fayette, at the head of the Light Infantry, was to have made the attack in the
night on fort Washington. The period chosen for this enterpr'ze was the very
time, when the army were to break up their camp and march into winter quarters:
so that the Commander in Chief, moving in the dusk of the evening, would have
been on the banks of the Hu^son, with his who'e force, to have supported the
attack. The cautious manner in which the cooperation on the part of the troops
sent by General Heath, on the pretended (...), was to have been conducted, will
be understood from the following (...) instructions.

To Brigadier General STARR.
Head Quarters, Passaic Falls, Nov. 21, 1780. SIR,
Colonel Humphreys, one of my aids-de-^amp, is charged by me with orders of a
private and particular nature, which he is to deliver to you, and which you are
to obey. He will inform you of the necessary of this mode of communication.

I am, Sir, etc. G. WASHINGTON.


To Lieut. Colonel David Humphreys, A. D. Camp.
SIR, You are immediately to proceed to West Print and communicate the business
(...) to you, in confidence, to Major General Heath, and to no other person
whatsoever; from thence you will repair to the detachment at the Write Plains,
on Friday next, taking measures to prevent their leaving that place, before you
get to them. And in the course of the succeeding right you may inform the
commanding officer of the enterprise in contemplation against the enemy's posts
on York Island.

As the troops are constantly to lie on their arms, no previous notice should
be given; but they may be put in motion precisely at 4 o'clock, and commence a
flow and regular march to Kings Bridge, until they shall discover or be
informed of the conce^te: signals being ma^e -- when the march must be pressed
with the greatest rapidity. Parties of horse should be sent forward to keep a
look out for the signals.

Although the main body ought to be kept compact, patro^es of horse and light
parties might be sent toward East and West Chester: and upon the signals being
discovered, Sheldon's regiment and the Connecticut State troops (which may also
be put in motion as soon as the orders can be communicated after 4 o'clock)
should be pushed forward to intercept any of the enemy, who may attempt to gain
Frog's Neck, and to cut off the Refugee-corps at Morissania. A few men, with
some address, may spread such an alarm as to prevent an attempt of the enemy to
retreat to Frog's Neck, from an apprehension of surrounding parties.

You will communicate these instructions to the commanding officer of the
detachment, who, upon his approach to Kings Bridge, will receive orders from me
as early as possible.

Should the signals not be discovered, the troops will halt at least six miles
from the bridge, until further intelligence can be obtained.

The absolute necessity of the most perfect secrecy is the occasion of
communicating my orders through this channel.

Given at Head Quarters, Passaic Falls, this 22 d day of Nov. 1780. G.
WASHINGTON.


Never was a plan better arranged: and never did circumstances promise more
sure or complete success. The British were not only (...), but our own troops
were likewise entirely misguided in their expectations. The accidental
intervention of some vessels prevented at this time the attempt: which was more
than once resumed afterward. Notwithstanding this favorite project was not
ultimately effected, it was evidently not less bold in conception or feasible
in accomplishment, than that attempted so successfully at Trenton; or than
that, which was brought to so glorious an issue in the successful siege of
York-Town.

It is true the Marquis de Chastelleux, whose professional knowledge and
fountainhead intelligence have enabled him to describe several actions better
than they are elsewhere described, speaks in this instance of an (...) object:
and says that secrets were preserved more inviolably in the American than in
the French army. His words are:

C'est que le secret est guard tres exactement a l'armee Americaine; p^u de pe
sons on^ part a la confiance du Chef, et en general only parle moins que dans
les armees Francoises des operations de la guerre, et de ce que son appelle
chez nous les N^^velles.


of intelligence not open to others, give the writer any advantages; the
unblassed mind will decide how far they exculpate him from the imputations of
that officiousness, ignorance and presumption, which in others have been
reprehended with severity. He only wishes that a premature and unfavorable
construction may not be formed of his motive or object. Should this essay have
any influence in correcting mistakes, or rescuing from oblivion the actions of
that distinguished Veteran; should it create an emulation to copy his domestic,
manly and heroic virtues; or should it prompt some more skilful hand to
pourtray the illustrious groupe of Patriots, Sages and Heroes, who have guided
our counsels, fought our battles, and adorned the memorable Epoch of
Independence, it will be an ample compensation for the trouble, and excite a
consolatory reflection through every vicissitude of life.

ISRAEL PUTNAM, who, through a regular gradation of promotion became the senior
Major General in the army of the United States, and next in rank to General
Washington, was born at Salem in the Province, now State, of Massachusetts, on
the 7th day of January, 1718. His father, Capt. Joseph Putnam, was the son of
Mr. John Putnam, who, with two brothers, came from the south of England, and
were among the first settlers of Salem.

WHEN we thus behold a person, from the humble walks of life, starting
unnoticed in the career of fame, and by an undeviating progress through a life
of honor, arriving at the highest dignity in the state; curiosity is strongly
excited, and philosophy loves to trace the path of glory from the cradle of
obscurity to the summit of elevation.

ALTHOUGH our ancestors, the first settlers of this land, amidst the extreme
pressure of poverty and danger, early instituted schools for the education of
youth, designed for the learned professions; yet it was thought sufficient to
instruct those destined to labor on the earth, in reading, writing, and such
rudiments of arithmetic as might be requisite for keeping the accounts of their
little transactions with each other. Few farmers sons had more advantages, none
less. In this state of mediocrity it was the lot of young Putnam to be placed.
His early instruction was not considerable, and the active scenes of life, in
which he was afterward, engaged, prevented the opportunity of great literary
improvement. His numerous original letters, though deficient in scholastic
accuracy, always display the goodness of his heart, and frequently the strength
of his native genius. He had a certain laconic mode of expression, and an
unaffected epigrammatic turn, which characterised most of his writings.

To compensate partially for the deficiency of education (though nothing can
remove or counterbalance the inconveniences experienced from it in public
life) derived from his parents the source of innumerable advantages in the
stamina of a vigorous constitution. Nature, liberal in bestowing on him bodily
strength, hardiness, and activity, was by no means parsimonious in mental
endowments. While we leave the qualities of the understanding to be developed
in the process of life, it may not be improper, in this place, to designate
some of the circumstances which were calculated to distinguish him afterward
as a partizan officer.

COURAGE, enterprise, activity and perseverance were the first characteristics
of his mind. There is a kind of mechanical courage, the offspring of pride,
habit or discipline, that may push a coward not only to perform his duty, but
even to venture on acts of heroism. Putnam's courage was of a different
species. It was ever attended with a serenity of soul, a clearness of
conception, a degree of self-possession and a superiority to all the
vicissitudes of fortune, entirely distinct from any thing that can be produced
by the ferment of blood, and flutter of spirits; which, not unfrequently,
precipitate men to action, when stimulated by intoxication or some other
transient exhilaration. The heroic character, thus founded on constitution and
animal spirits, cherished by education and ideas of personal freedom, confirmed
by temperance and habits of exercise, was completed by the dictate of reason,
the love of his country, and an invincible sense of duty. Such were the
qualities and principles, that enabled him to meet unappalled the shafts of
adversity, and to pass in triumph through the furnace of affliction.

His disposition was as frank and generous, as his mind was fearless and
independent. He disguised nothing; indeed he seemed incapable of disguise.
Perhaps, in the intercourse he was ultimately obliged to have with an artful
world, his sincerity, on some occasions, outwent his discretion. Although he
had too much suavity in his nature to commence a quarrel, he had too much
sensibility not to feel, and too much honor not to resent an intended insult.
The first time he went to Boston, he was insulted for his rusticity by a boy of
twice his size and age; after bearing the sarcasms until his patience was worn
out, he challenged, engaged and vanquished his unmannerly antagonist, to the
great diversion of a crowd of spectators. While a stripling, his ambition was
to perform the labor of a man, and to excel in athletic diversions. In that
rude, but masculine age, whenever the village-youth assembled on their usual
occasions of festivity; pitching the bar, running, leaping and wrestling were
favorite amusements. At such gymnastic exercises (in which during the heroic
times of ancient Greece and Rome, conquest was considered as the promise of
future military same) he bore the palm from almost every ring.

BEFORE the refinements of luxury, and the consequent increase of expenses had
rendered the maintenance of a family inconvenient or burdensome in America, the
sexes entered into matrimony at an early age. Competence, attainable by all,
was the limit of pursuit. After the hardships of making a new settlement were
overcome, and the evils of penury removed, the inhabitants enjoyed, in the lot
of equality, innocence, and security, scenes equally delightful with those
pictured by the glowing imagination of the poets in their favorite pastoral
life or fabulous golden age. Indeed the condition of mankind was never more
enviable. Neither disparity of age and fortune, nor schemes of ambition and
grandeur, nor the pride and avarice of high-minded and mercenary parents,
interposed those obstacles to the union of congenial souls, which frequently in
more polished society prevent, imbitter or destroy all the felicity of the
connubial state. Mr. Putnam before he attained the twenty-first year of his
age, married Miss Pope, daughter of Mr. John Pope of Salem, by whom he had ten
children, seven of whom are still living. He lost the wife of his youth in
1764. Some time after he married Mrs. Gardener, widow of the late Mr. Gardener,
of Gardiner's Island, by whom he had no issue. She died in 1777.

IN the year 1739 he removed from Salem to Pomfret, an inland fertile town in
Connecticut, forty miles east of Hartford: having here purchased a considerable
tract of land, he applied himself successfully to agriculture.

THE first years, on a new farm, are not, however exempt from disasters and
disappointments, which can only be remedied by stubborn and patient industry.
Our farmer, sufficiently occupied in building an house and barn, felling woods,
making fences, sowing grain, planting orchards and taking care of his stock,
had to encounter, in turn, the calamities occasioned by drought in summer,
blast in harvest, loss of cattle in winter, and the desolation of his
sheepfold by wolves. In one night he had seventy fine sheep and goats killed,
besides many lambs and kids wounded. This havoc was committed by a she-wolf,
which, with her annual whelps, had for several years infested the vicinity. The
young were commonly destroyed by the vigilance of the hunters, but the old one
was too sagacious to come within reach of gunshot: upon being closely pursued
she would generally fly to the western woods, and return the next winter with
another litter of whelps.

THIS wolf, at length, became such an intolerable nuisance, that Mr. Putnam
entered into a combination with five of his neighbors to hunt alternately until
they could destroy her. Two, by rotation, were to be constantly in pursuit. It
was known, that, having lost the toes from one foot, by a steel-trap, she made
one track shorter than the other. By this vestige, the pursuers recognized, in
a light snow, the route of this pernicious animal. Having followed her to
Connecticut river, and found she had turned back in a direct course toward
Pomfret, they immediately returned, and by ten o'clock the next morning, the
bloodhounds had driven her into a den, about three miles distant from the
house of Mr. Putnam: The people soon collected with dogs, guns, straw, fire,
and sulphur, to attack the common enemy. With this apparatus several
unsuccessful efforts were made to force her from the den. The hounds came back
badly wounded and refused to return. The smoke of blazing straw had no effect.
Nor did the fumes of burnt brimstone, with which the cavern was filled, compel
her to quit the retirement. Wearied with such fruitless attempts (which had
brought the time to ten o'clock at night) Mr. Putnam tried once more to make
his dog enter, but in vain. He proposed to his negro man to go down into the
cavern and shoot the wolf: the negro declined the hazardous service. Then it
was, that their master, angry at the disappointment, and declaring that he was
ashamed to have a coward in his family, resolved himself to destroy the
ferocious beast, left she should escape through some unknown fissure of (...)
rock. His neighbors strongly remonstrated against (...) enterprise: but he
knowing, that wild animal were intimidated by fire, and having provided several
strips of birch-bark, the only combustible material which he could obtain, that
would afford light in this deep and darksome cave, prepared for his descent.
Having, accordingly, divested himself of his coat and waistcoat, and having a
long rope fastened round his legs, by which he might be pulled back, at a
concerted signal, he entered head foremost, with the blazing torch in his hand.

THE aperture of the den, on the east side of a very high ledge of rocks, is
about two feet square; from thence it descends obliquely fifteen feet, then
running horizontally about ten more, it ascends gradually sixteen feet toward
its termination. The sides of this subterraneous cavity are composed of smooth
and solid rocks, which seem to have been divided from each other by some former
earthquake. The top and bottom are also of stone, and the entrance, in winter,
being covered with ice, is exceedingly slippery. It is in no place high enough
for a man to raise himself upright: nor in any part more than three feet in
width.

HAVING groped his passage to the horizontal part of the den, the most
terrifying darkness appeared in front of the dim circle of light afforded by
his torch. It was silent as the house of death. None but monsters of the desert
had ever before explored this solitary mansion of horror. He, cautiously
proceeding onward, came to the ascent, which he slowly mounted on his hands and
knees, until he discovered the glaring eye balls of the wolf, who was sitting
at the extremity of the cavern. Started at the sight of fire, she gnashed her
teeth and gave a sullen growl. As soon as he had made the necessary discovery,
he kicked the rope as a signal for pulling him out. The people at the mouth of
the den, who had listened with painful anxiety, hearing the growling of the
wolf and supposing their friend to be in the most imminent danger, drew him
forth with such celerity that his shirt was stripped over his head and his skin
severely lacerated. After he had adjusted his clothes and loaded his gun with
nine buck-shot, holding a torch in one hand and the musket in the other, he
descended the second time. When he drew nearer than before, the wolf, assuming
a still more fierce and terrible appearance, howling, rolling her eyes,
snapping her teeth, and dropping her head between her legs, was evidently in
the attitude and on the point of springing at him. At the critical instant, he
levelled and fired at her head. Stunned with the shock, and suffocated with the
smoke, he immediately found himself drawn out of the cave. But having refreshed
himself, and permitted the smoke to dissipate, he went down the third time.
Once more he came within sight of the wolf, who appearing very passive, he
applied the torch to her nose; and perceiving her dead, he took hold of her
ears, and then kicking the rope (still tied round his legs) the people above,
with no small exultation, dragged them both out together.

I HAVE offered these facts in greater detail, because they contain a display
of character; and because they have been erroneously related in several
European publications, and very much mutilated in the history of Connecticut, a
work as replete with falsehood as destitute of genius, lately printed in London.

PROSPERITY, at length, began to attend the agricultural affairs of Mr. Putnam.
He was acknowledged to be a skilful and indefatigable manager. His fields were
mostly enclosed with stone walls. His crops commonly succeeded, because the
land was well tilled and manured. His pastures and meadows became luxuriant.
His cattle were of the best breed and in good order. His garden and fruit trees
prolific. With the avails of the surplusage of his produce, foreign articles
were purchased. Within doors he found the compensation of his labors in the
plenty of excellent provisions, as well as in the happiness of domestic society.

A MORE particular description of his transition from narrow to easy
circumstances might be given; but the mind that shall have acquired an idea of
the habits of labor and simplicity, to which the industrious colonists were
accustomed, will readily supply the omission. The effect of this gradual
acquisition of property, generally favorable to individual virtue and public
felicity, should not however be passed over in silence. If there is something
fascinating in the charms of a country life, from the contemplation of
beautiful landscapes; there is likewise something elevating to the soul, in the
consciousness of being lord of the soil, and having the power of creating them.
The man can scarcely be guilty of a sordid action, or even descend to an
ungenerous thought, who, removed from the apprehension of want, sees his farm
daily meliorating and assuming whatever appearance he pleases to prescribe.
This situation converts the farmer into a species of rural philosopher, by
inspiring an honest pride in his rank as a freeman, flattering the natural
propensity for personal independence, and nourishing an unlimited hospitality
and philanthropy in his social character.

BUT the time had now arrived, which was to turn the instruments of husbandry
into weapons of hostility, and to exchange the hunting of wolves, who had
ravaged the sheep folds, for the pursuit after Savages who had desolated the
frontiers. Mr. Putnam was about 37 years old, when the war between England and
France, which preceded the last, broke out in America. His reputation must have
been favorably known to the government, since among the first troops that were
levied by Connecticut, in 1755, he was appointed to the command of a company in
Lyman's regiment of Provincials. I have mentioned his age at this period
expressly to obviate a prevalent opinion, that he was far advanced in life when
he commenced his military service.

As he was extremely popular, he sound no difficulty in enlisting his
complement of recruits from the most hardy, enterprizing, and respectable young
men of his neighborhood. The regiment joined the army, at the opening of the
campaign, not far distant from CrownPoint. Soon after his arrival at camp, he
became acquainted with the famous partizan Captain, afterward, Major Rogers;
with whom he was frequently associated in traversing the wilderness,
reconnoitring the enemy's lines, gaining intelligence, and taking straggling
prisoners; as well as in beating up the quarters and surprising the advanced
pickets of their army. For these operations a corpse of rangers, was formed from
the irregulars. The first time Rogers and Putnam were detached with a party of
these light troops, it was the fortune of the latter to preserve, with his own
hand, the life of the former, and to cement their friendship with the blood of
one of their enemies.

THE object of this expedition was to obtain an accurate knowledge of the
position and state of the works at Crown Point. It was impracticable to
approach with their party near enough for this purpose, without being
discovered. Alone, the undertaking was sufficiently hazardous on account of the
swarms of hostile Indians, who infested the woods. Our two partisans, however,
left all their men at a convenient distance, with strict orders to continue
concealed until their return. Having thus cautiously taken their arrangements,
they advanced with the profoundest silence in the evening; and lay, during the
night, contiguous to the fortress. Early in the morning, they approached so
close as to be able to give satisfactory information to the general who had
sent them, on the several points to which their attention had been directed:
but Capt. Rogers, being at a little distance from Capt. Putnam, fortuitously
met a stout Frenchman, who instantly seized his fuzee with one hand, and with
the other attempted to stab him, while he called to an adjacent guard for
assistance. The guard answered. Putnam, perceiving the imminent danger of his
friend, and that no time was to be lost, or farther alarm given by firing, ran
rapidly to them, while they were yet struggling, and with the but-end of his
piece laid the Frenchman dead at his feet. The partisans, to elude pursuit,
precipitated their flight, joined the party, and returned without loss to the
encampment. Not many occasions occurred for partisans to display their talents
in the course of this summer. -- The war was chequered with various fortune in
different quarters -- such as the total defeat of General Braddock, and the
splendid victory of Sir William Johnson over the French troops commanded by the
Baron Dieskau. The brilliancy of this success was necessary to console the
Americans for the disgrace of that disaster. Here I might, indeed, take a pride
in contrasting the conduct of the British Regulars, who had been ambuscaded on
the Monongahela, with that of the Provincials (under Johnson) who, having been
attacked in their lines, gallantly repulsed the enemy and took their General
prisoner, did I consider myself at liberty to swell this essay with reflections
on events, in which Putnam was not directly concerned. The time for which the
colonial troops engaged to serve, terminated with the campaign. Putnam was
re-appointed, and again took the field in 1756.

FEW are so ignorant of war as not to know, that military adventures, in the
night, are always extremely liable to accidents. Captain Putnam, having been
commanded to reconnoitre the enemy's camp at the Ovens, near Ticonderoga, took
the brave Lieutenant Robert Durkee as his companion. In attempting to execute
these orders, he narrowly missed being taken himself in the first instance, and
killing his friend in the second. It was customary for the British and
Provincial troops to place their fires round their camp, which frequently
exposed them to the enemy's scouts and patroles. A contrary practice, then
unknown in the English army, prevailed among the French and Indians. The plan
was much more rational; they kept their fires in the center, lodged their men
circularly at a distance, and posted their sentinels in the surrounding
darkness. Our partisans approached the camp -- and supposing the centries were
within the circle of fires, crept upon their hands and knees with the greatest
possible caution, until, to their utter astonishment, they found themselves in
the thickest of the enemy. The sentinels, discovering them, fired and slightly
wounded Durkee in the thigh. He and Putnam had no alternative. They fled. The
latter, being foremost and scarcely able to see his hand before him, soon
plunged into a clay-pit. Durkee, almost at the identical moment, came tumbling
after. Putnam, by no means pleased at finding a companion, and believing him to
be one of the enemy* lifted his tomahawk to give the deadly blow -- when
Durkee, (who had followed so closely as to know him) enquired whether he had
escaped unhurt. Captain Putnam, instantly recognizing the voice, dropped his
weapon: and both, springing from the pit, made good their retreat to the
neighboring ledges, amidst a shower of random shot. There they betook
themselves to a large log, by the side of which they lodged the remainder of
the night. Before they lay down. Captain Putnam said he had a little rum in his
canteen, which could never be more acceptable or necessary; but on examining
the canteen, which hung under his arm, he sound the enemy had pierced it with
their balls, and that there was not a drop of liquor left. The next day he
sound fourteen bullet holes in his blanket.

IN the same summer a body of the enemy, consisting of 600 men, attacked the
baggage and provision wagons at a place called the Halfway Brook; it being
equidistant from Fort Edward, and the south end of lake George. Having killed
the oxen and plundered the wagons, they retreated with their booty without
having met with such resistance as might have been expected from the strength
of the escort. General Webb, upon receiving intelligence of this disaster,
ordered the Captains Putnam and Rogers to take 100 volunteers in boats, with
two wall-pieces and two blunderbusses, and to proceed down lake George to a
certain point: there to leave the batteaux under a proper guard, and thence to
cross by land so as to harrass, and if practicable, intercept the retreating
enemy at the narrows. These orders were executed with so much punctuality, that
the party arrived at the destined place half an hour before the hostile boats
came in view. Here they waited, under cover, until the enemy (ignorant of these
proceedings) entered the narrows with their batteaux loaded with plunder. Then
the volunteers poured upon them volley after volley, killed many of the
oarsmen, sunk a number of the batteaux, and would soon have destroyed the whole
body of the enemy, had not the unusual precipitancy of their passage (favored
by the wind) carried them through the narrows into the wide part of South-Bay;
where they were out of the reach of musket shot. The shattered remnant of the
little fleet soon arrived at Ticonderoga and gave information that Putnam and
Rogers were at the narrows. A fresh party was instantly detached to cut them in
pieces, on their return to Fort Edward. Our partisans, sensible of the
probability of such an attempt, and being full twenty miles from their boats,
strained every nerve to reach them as soon as possible; which they effected the
same night. Next day, when they had returned as far as Sabbath-day-Point, they
discovered, on shore, the beforementioned detachment of 300 men, who had
passed them in the night, and who now, on perceiving our party, took to their
boats with the greatest alacrity, and rowed out to give battle. They advanced
in line, maintaining a good mein and felicitating themselves upon the prospect
of an easy conquest, from the great superiority of their numbers. Flushed with
these expectations, they were permitted to come within pistol-shot before a gun
was fired. At once, the wall-pieces and blunderbusses, which had been brought
to take them in the most vulnerable point, were discharged. As no such
reception had been foreseen, the assailants were thrown into the utmost
disorder. Their terror and confusion were greatly increased by a well-directed
and most destructive fire of the small arms. The larger pieces being re-loaded,
without annoyance, continued alternately, with the musquetry, to make dreadful
havoc, until the route was completed and the enemy driven back to Ticonderoga.
In this action, one of the bark canoes contained twenty Indians, of whom
fifteen were killed. Great numbers, from other boats, both of French and
Indians were seen to fall overboard: but the account of their total loss could
never be ascertained. Rogers and Putnam had but one man killed and two slightly
wounded. They now landed on the Point, and having refreshed their men at
leisure, returned in good order to the British camp.

SOON after these rencounters, a singular kind of race was run by our
nimble-footed Provincial and an active young Frenchman. The liberty of each was
by turns at stake. General Webb, wanting a prisoner for the sake of
intelligence, sent Captain Putnam with five men to procure one. The Captain
concealed himself near the road which leads from Ticonderoga to the Ovens. His
men seemed fond of showing themselves, which unsoldierlike conduct he
prohibited with the severest reprehension. This rebuke they imputed to
unnecessary fear. The observation is as true as vulgar, that persons,
distinguishable for temerity, when there is no apparent danger, are generally
poltroons whenever danger approaches. They had not lain long, in the high
grass, before a Frenchman and an Indian passed -- the Indian was considerably
in advance. As soon as the former had gone by, Putnam, relying on the fidelity
of his men, sprang up, ran and ordered them to follow. After running about
thirty rods, he seized the Frenchman by the shoulders and forced him to
surrender: But his prisoner, looking round, perceiving no other enemy, and
knowing the Indian would be ready in a moment to assist him, began to make an
obstinate resistance. Putnam, finding himself betrayed by his men into a
perilous dilemma, let go his hold, stepped back and snapped his piece, which
was levelled at the Frenchman's breast. It missed fire. Upon this, he thought
it most prudent to retreat. The Frenchman, in turn, chaced him back to his men,
who, at last raised themselves from the grass; which his pursuer, espying in
good time for himself, made his escape. Putnam, mortified that these men had
frustrated his success, dismissed them with disgrace; and, not long after
accomplished his object. Such little feats, as the capture of a single
prisoner, may be of infinitely more consequence than some, who are unacquainted
with military affairs, would be apt to imagine. In a country covered with
woods, like that part of America, then the seat of war, the difficulty of
procuring, and the importance of possessing good intelligence, can scarcely be
conceived even by European commanders. They, however, who know its value, will
not appreciate lightly the services of an able partizan.

NOTHING, worthy of remark, happened during this campaign except the loss of
Oswego. That sort, which had been built by General Shirley to protect the
peltry trade, cover the country on the Mohawk-River, and facilitate an invasion
of Canada by Frontenac and Niagara, fell into the hands of the enemy, with a
garrison of sixteen hundred men and one hundred pieces of cannon.

THE active services of Captain Putnam, on every occasion, attracted the
admiration of the public, and induced the Legislature of Connecticut to promote
him to a majority in 1757.

LORD Loudon was then Commander in Chief of the British forces in America. The
expedition against Crown Point, which, from the commencement of hostilities,
had been in contemplation, seemed to give place to a more important operation
that was meditated against Louisbourg. But the arrival of the Breast squadron at
that place prevented the attempt; and the loss of Fort William-Henry served to
class this with the two former unsuccessful campaigns. It was rumored and
partially credited at the time, that General Webb, who commanded in the
northern department, had early intimation of the movement of the French army,
and might have effectually succored garrison. The subsequent facts will place
the affair in its proper light.

A FEW days before the siege, Major Putnam, with two hundred men, escorted
General Webb from Fort Edward to Fort William-Henry. The object was to examine
the state of this fortification, which stood at the southern extremity of Lake
George. Several abortive attempts having been made by Major Rogers and others
in the night season. Major Putnam proposed to go down the lake in open
daylight, land at Northwest-Bay and tarry on shore, until he could make
satisfactory discovery of the enemy's actual situation at Ticonderoga and the
adjacent posts. The plan (which he suggested) of landing with only five men and
sending back the boats, to prevent detection, was deemed too hazardous by the
General. At length, however, he was permitted to proceed with eighteen
volunteers in three whale-boats: but before he arrived at Northwest-Bay he
discovered a body of men on an island. Immediately upon this, he left two boats
to fish at a distance, that they might not occasion an alarm, and returned
himself with the information. The General, seeing him rowing back with great
velocity, in a single boat, concluded the others were captured, and sent a
skiff with orders for him alone to come on shore. After advising the General of
the circumstances, he urged the expediency of returning to make further
discoveries, and bring off the boats. Leave was reluctantly given. He found his
people, and, passing still onward, discovered (by the aid of a good perspective
glass) a large army in motion. By this time several of the advanced canoes had
nearly surrounded him, but, by the swiftness of his whale-boats, he escaped
through the midst of them. On his return, he informed the General minutely of
all he had seen, and intimated his conviction that the expedition must
obviously be destined against Fort William-Henry. That Commander, strictly
enjoining silence on the subject, directed him to put his men under an oath of
secrecy, and to prepare, without loss of time, to return to the Head Quarters
of the Army. Major Putnam observed he hoped his Excellency did not intend to
neglect so fair an opportunity of giving battle, should the enemy presume to
land. -- What do you think we should do here, replied the General. Accordingly,
the next day he returned, and the day after Colonel Monro was ordered from Fort
Edward, with his regiment, to reinforce the garrison. That officer took with
him all his rich baggage and camp equipage, notwithstanding Major Putnam's
advice to the contrary. The day following his arrival, the enemy landed and
besieged the place.

THE Marquis de Montealm, Commander in chief for the French in Canada
(intending to take advantage of the absence of a large proportion of the
British force, which he understood to be employed under Lord Loudon against
Louisbourg) had assembled whatever men could be spared from Ticonderoga, Crown
Point and the other garrisons; with these he had combined a considerable corpse
of Canadians and a larger body of Indians than had ever before been collected:
making in the whole an army of nearly eight thousand men. Our garrison
consisted of twenty-five hundred and was commanded by Colonel Monro, a very
gallant officer; who found the means of sending express after express to
General Webb, with an account of his situation and the most presling
solicitation for succor. In the mean time, the army at Fort Edward, which
originally amounted to about four thousand, had been considerably augmented by
Johnson's troops and the militia. On the 8th or 9th day after the landing of
the French, General Johnson (in consequence of repeated applications) was
suffered to march for the relief of the garrison, with all the Provincials,
Militia and Putnam's Rangers: but before they had proceeded three miles, the
order was countermanded, and they returned. M. de Montealm informed Major
Putnam, when a prisoner in Canada, that one of his running Indians saw and
reported this movement; and, upon being questioned relatively to the numbers,
answered in their figurative style, "If you can count the leaves on the trees,
you can count them." In effect, the operations of the siege was suspended, and
preparations made for re-embarking, when another of the runners reported that
the detachment had gone back. The Marquis de Montcalm, provided with a good
train of artillery, meeting with no annoyance from the British army, and but
inconsiderable interruption from the garrison, accelerated his approaches so
rapidly, as to obtain possession of the Fort, in a short time after completing
the investiture. An intercepted letter from General Webb, advising the
surrender, was sent into the Fort to Colonel Monro by the French General.

THE garrison engaged not to serve for eighteen months, and were permitted to
march out with the honors of war. But the savages regarded not the
capitulation, nor could they be restrained, by the utmost exertion of the
Commanding Officer, from committing the most outrageous acts of cruelty. They
stripped and plundered all the prisoners, and murdered great numbers in cold
blood. Those, who escaped by flight, or the protection of the French, arrived
in a forlorn condition at Fort Edward: Among these was the Commandant of the
garrison.

THE day succeeding this deplorable scene of carnage and barbarity, Major
Putnam having been dispatched with his Rangers, to watch the motions of the
enemy, came to the shore, when their rear was scarcely beyond the reach of
musket shot. They had carried off all the cannon, stores and water-craft. The
Fort was demolished. The barracks, the outhouses and suttlers booths were
heaps of ruins. The fires, not yet extinct, and the smoke, offensive from the
mucilaginous nature of the fuel, but illy concealed innumerable fragments of
human skulls and bones, and, in some instances carcases half consumed. Dead
bodies, weltering in blood, were every where to be seen, violated with all the
wanton mutilations of savage ingenuity. More than one hundred women, some with
their brains still oozing from the battered heads, others with their whole hair
wrenched collectively with the skin from the bloody skulls, and many (with
their throats cut) most inhumanly stabbed and butchered, lay stripped entirely
naked, with their bowels torn out, and afforded a spectacle too horrible for
description.

NOT long after this misfortune, General Lyman succeeded to the command of Fort
Edward. He resolved to strengthen it. For this purpose one hundred and fifty
men were employed in cutting timber. To cover them, Captain Little was posted
(with fifty British Regulars) at the head of a thick swamp about one hundred
rods eastward of the Fort -- to which his communication lay over a tongue of
land, formed on the one side by the swamp, and by a creek on the other.

ONE morning, at day break, a sentinel saw indistinctly several birds, as he
conceived, come from the swamp and fly over him, with incredible swiftness.
While he was ruminating on these wonderful birds, and endeavoring to form some
idea of their color, shape and size, an arrow buried itself in the limb of a
tree just above his head. He now discovered the quality, and design of these
winged messengers of fate, and gave the alarm. Instantly the working party
began to retreat along the desile. A large body of Savages, had concealed
themselves in the morass before the guard was posted, and were attempting in
this way to kill the sentinel without noise, with design to surprise the whole
party. Finding the alarm given, they rushed from the covert, shot and
tomahawked those who were nearest at hand, and pressed hard on the remainder of
the unarmed fugitives. Captain Little flew to their relief, and, by pouring on
the Indians a well-timed fire, checked the pursuit, and enabled such of the
fatigue-men as did not fall in the first onset, to retire to the fort. Thither
he sent for assistance, his little party being almost overpowered by numbers.
But the Commandant, imagining that the main body of the enemy were approaching
for a general assault, called in his out-posts and shut the gates.

MAJOR Putnam lay, with his Rangers, on an Island adjacent to the fort. Having
heard the musquetry and learned that his friend Captain Little was in the
utmost peril, he plunged into the river at the head of his corpse, and waded
through the water toward the place of engagement. This brought him so near to
the fort, that General Lyman, apprized of his design, and unwilling that the
lives of a few more brave men should be exposed to what he deemed inevitable
destruction, mounted the parapet and ordered him to proceed no farther. The
Major only took time to make the best short apology he could, and marched on.
This is the only instance in the whole course of his military service, wherein
he did not pay the strictest obedience to orders; and in this instance, his
motive was highly commendable. But when such conduct, even if sanctified by
success, is passed over with impunity, it demonstrates that all is not right in
the military system. In a disciplined army, such as that of the United States
became under General Washington, an officer, guilty of a slighter violation of
orders, however elevated in rank or meritorious in service, would have been
brought before the bar of a Court Martial. Were it not for the seductive
tendency of a brave man's example, I might have been spared the mortification
of making these remarks on the conduct of an officer, whose distinguishing
characteristics were promptitude for duty and love of subordination, as well as
cheerfulness to encounter every species of difficulty and danger.

THE Rangers of Putnam soon opened their way for a junction with the little
handful of Regulars, who still obstinately maintained their ground. By his
advice, the whole rushed impetuously with shouts and huzzas into the swamp. The
Savages fled on every side, and were chaced, with no inconsiderable loss on
their part, as long as the daylight lasted. On ours only one man was killed in
the pursuit. His death was immediately revenged by that of the Indian who shot
him. This Indian was one of the runners -- a chosen body of active young men,
who are made use of not only to procure intelligence and convey tidings, but
also to guard the rear on a retreat.

HERE it will not be unseasonable to mention some of the customs in war,
peculiar to the aborigines, which, on the present as well as other occasions,
they put in practice. Whenever a retreating, especially, a flying party had
gained the summit of a rising ground; they secreted one or two runners behind
trees, copses or bushes to fire at the enemy upon their ascending the hill.
This commonly occasioned the enemy to halt and form for battle. In the interim
the runners used such dexterity as to be rarely discovered, or if discovered,
they vanished behind the height and rejoined their brother-warriors, who having
thus stolen a distance, were oftentimes seen by their pursuers no more. Or if
the pursuers were too eager, they seldom failed to atone for their rashness by
falling into an abuscade. The Mohawks, who were afterward much employed in
scouts under the orders of Major Putnam, and who were perfectly versed in all
the wiles and stratagems of their countrymen, showed him the mode of avoiding
the evils of either alternative. In suspicious thickets, and at the borders of
every considerable eminence, a momentary pause was made, while they, in
different parts, penetrated or ascended with a cautiousness that cannot be
easily described. They seemed all eye and ear. When they found no lurking
mischief, they would beckon with the hand and pronounce the word, "OWISH," with
a long labial hissing, the O being almost quiescent. This was ever the
watchword for the main body to advance.

INDIANS, who went to war together, and who, for any reason found it necessary
to separate into different routes, always left two or three runners at the
place of separation, to give timely notice to either party in case of pursuit.

IF a warrior chanced to straggle and lose himself in the woods, or be retarded
by accident or wound; the party missing him, would frequently, on their march,
break down a bush or a shrub and leave the top pointing in the direction they
had gone, that the straggler, when he should behold it, might shape his course
accordingly.

WE come to the campaign when General Abercrombie took the command at Fort
Edward. That General ordered Major Putnam, with sixty men, to proceed by land
to South-Bay on Lake George, for the purpose of making discoveries and
intercepting the enemy's parties. The latter, in compliance with these orders,
posted himself at Wood-Creek, near its entrance into South Bay. On this bank,
which forms a jutting precipice ten or twelve feet above the water, he erected
a stone parapet thirty feet in length; and masked it with young pine-trees, cut
at a distance, and so artfully planted as to imitate the natural growth. From
hence he sent back fifteen of his men, who had fallen sick. Distress for want
of provisions, occasioned by the length of march and time spent on this
temporary fortification, compelled him to deviate from a rule he had
established, never to permit a gun to be fired but at an enemy, while on a
scout. He was now obliged himself to shoot a buck, which had jumped into the
Creek, in order to eke out their scanty subsistence until the fourth day after
the completion of the works. About ten o'clock that evening, one of the men on
duty at the margin of the Bay informed him, that a fleet of bark canoes, filled
with men, was steering toward the mouth of the creek. He immediately called in
all his sentinels and ordered every man to his post. A profound stillness
reigned in the atmosphere, and the full moon shone with uncommon brightness.
The creek, which the enemy entered, is about six rods wide, and the bank
opposite to the parapet above twenty feet high. It was intended to permit the
canoes in front to pass -- they had accordingly just passed, when a soldier
accidentally struck his firelock against a stone. The commanding officer in the
van canoe heard the noise and repeated several times the Savage watchword
OWISH! Instantly the canoes huddled together, with their center precisely in
front of the works, covering the creek, for a considerable distance, above and
below. The officers appeared to be in deep consultation and the fleet on the
point of returning; when Major Putnam, who had ordered his men in the most
peremptory manner, not to fire until he should set the example, gave the signal
by discharging his piece. They fired. Nothing could exceed the inextricable
confusion and apparent consternation occasioned by this well concerted attack.
But, at last, the enemy finding, from the unfrequency, (though there was no
absolute intermission) in the firing, that the number of our men must be small,
resolved to land below and surround them. Putnam, apprehensive of this from the
movement, sent Lieutenant Robert Durkee As the name of the brave Durkee will
occur no more in these sheets, I may be indulged in mentioning his melancholy
fate. He survived this war, and was appointed a Captain in that war which
terminated in the acknowledgment of our Independence. In 1778 he was wounded
and taken prisoner by the Savages, at the battle of Wioming on the
Susquehannah. Having been condemned to be burnt, the Indians kept him in the
flames with pitchforks, until he expired in the most excruciating torments.
, with twelve men, about thirty rods down the creek, who arrived in time to
repulse the party which attempted to land. Another small detachment, under
Lieutenant Parsons, was ordered up the creek to prevent any similar attempt. In
the mean time, Major Putnam, kept up (through the whole night) an incessant and
deadly fire on the main body of the enemy, without receiving any thing in
return but shot void of effect, accompanied with dolorous groans, miserable
shrieks and dismal savage yells. After daybreak, he was advised that one part
of the enemy had effected a sanding considerably below, and were rapidly
advancing to cut off his retreat. Apprised of the great superiority still
opposed to him, as well as of the situation of his own soldiers, some of whom
were entirely destitute of ammunition, and the rest reduced to one or two
rounds per man, he commanded them to swing their packs. By hastening the
retreat, in good order, they had just time to retire far enough up the creek to
prevent being enclosed. During this long continued action, in which the
Americans had slain at least five times their own number, only one Provincial
and one Indian were wounded on their side. These unfortunate men had been sent
off for camp in the night, with two men to assist them, and directions to
proceed by Wood-Creek as the safest, though not the shortest, route. But having
taken a nearer way, they were pursued and overtaken by the Indians, who, from
the blood on the leaves and bushes, believed that they were on the trail of our
whole party. The wounded, despairing of mercy, and unable to fly, insisted that
the well soldiers should make their escape, which, on a moment's deliberation,
they effected. The Provincial, whose thigh was broken by a ball, upon the
approach of the Savages fired his piece and killed three of them; after which
he was quickly hacked in pieces. The Indian, however, was saved alive. This
man, Major Putnam saw, afterward, in Canada; where he likewise learned that
his enemy in the rencounter at Wood-Creek, consisted of five hundred French and
Indians, under the command of the celebrated partizan Molang, and that no
party, since the war, had suffered so severely, as more than one half of those
who went out never returned.

OUR brave little company, reduced to forty in number, had proceeded along the
bank of the creek about an hour's march, when, Major Putnam, being in front,
was fired upon by a party just at hand. He, rightly appreciating the advantage
often obtained by assuming a bold countenance on a critical occasion, in a
stentorophonic tone, ordered his men to rush on the enemy, and promised that
they should soon give a good account of them. It proved to be a scout of
Provincials, who conceived they were firing upon the French; but the Commanding
Officer, knowing Putnam's voice, cried out, that they were all friends. -- Upon
this the Major told him abruptly, that friends or enemies, they all deserved to
be hanged for not killing more when they had so fair a shot. In fact, but one
man was mortally wounded. While these things were transacted, a faithful
soldier, whose ammunition had been early exhausted, made his way to the Fort,
and gave such information, that General Lyman was detached with five hundred
men to cover the retreat. Major Putnam met them at only twelve miles distance
from the fort, to which they returned the next day.

IN the winter of 1757, when Colonel Haviland was Commandant of Fort Edward,
the barracks adjoining to the north-west bastion took fire. They extended
within twelve feet of the Magazine, which contained three hundred barrels of
powder. On its first discovery, the fire raged with great violence. The
Commandant endeavored, in vain, by discharging some pieces of heavy artillery
against the supporters of this flight of barracks, to level them with the
ground. Putnam arrived from the Island where he was stationed, at the moment
when the blaze approached that end which was contiguous to the Magazine.
Instantly a vigorous attempt was made to extinguish the conflagration. A way
was opened by a postern gate to the river, and the soldiers were employed in
bringing water; which he, having mounted on a ladder to the eves of the
building, received and threw upon the flame. It continued, notwithstanding
their utmost efforts, to gain upon them. He stood, enveloped in smoke, so near
the sheet of fire, that a pair of thick blanket mittens were burnt entirely
from his hands -- he was supplied with another pair dipped in water. Colonel
Haviland fearing that he would perish in the flames, called to him to come
down. But he entreated that he might be suffered to remain, since destruction
must inevitably ensue if their exertions should be remitted. The gallant
Commandant not less astonished than charmed at the boldness of his conduct,
forbade any more effects to be carried out of the fort, animated the men to
redoubled diligence, and exclaimed if we must be blown up, we will go all
together. At last, when the barracks were seen to be tumbling, Putnam
descended, placed himself at the interval, and continued from an incessant
rotation of replenished buckets to pour water upon the Magazine. The outside
planks were already consumed by the proximity of the fire, and as only one
thickness of timber intervened, the trepidation now became general and extreme.
Putnam, still undaunted, covered with a cloud of cinders, and scorched with the
intensity of the heat, maintained his position until the fire subsided, and the
danger was wholly over. He had contended for one hour and an half with that
terrible element. His legs, his thighs, his arms, and his face were blistered;
and when he pulled off his second pair of mittens, the skin from his hands and
fingers followed them. It was a month before he recovered. The Commandant, to
whom his merits had before endeared him, could not stifle the emotions of
gratitude, due to the man who had been so instrumental in preserving the
Magazine, the Fort, and the Garrison.

THE repulse before Ticonderoga, took place in 1758. General Abercrombie, the
British Commander in Chief in America, conducted the expedition. His army,
which amounted to nearly sixteen thousand Regulars and Provincials, was amply
supplied with artillery and military stores. This well-appointed corpse passed
over Lake George, and landed, without opposition, at the point of destination.
The troops advanced in columns. Lord How having Major Putnam with him, was in
front of the center. A body of about five hundred men (the advance or pickets
of the French army) which had fled at first, began to skirmish with our left.
"Putnam," said Lord How, "what means that firing?" I know not, but with your
Lordship's leave will see, replied the former. "I will accompany you," rejoined
the gallant young Nobleman. In vain did Major Putnam attempt to dissuade him,
by saying -- My Lord, if I am killed, the loss of my life will be of little
consequence, but the preservation of yours is of infinite importance to this
army. The only answer was, Putnam, your life is as dear to you as mine is to
me; I am determined to go. One hundred of the van, under Major Putnam, filed
off with Lord How. They soon met the left flank of the enemy's advance, by
whose first fire his Lordship sell -- It was a loss indeed; and particularly
felt in the operations which occurred three days afterward. His manners and
his virtues, had made him the idol of the army. From his first arrival in
America, he had accommodated He cut his hair short, and induced the Regiment to
follow the example. He fashioned their clothing for the activity of service,
and divested himself and them of every article of superfluous baggage.
himself and his regiment to the peculiar nature of the service. Examplary to
the officer, a friend of the soldier, the model of discipline, he had not
failed to encounter every hardship and hazard. Nothing could be more calculated
to inspire men with the rash animation of rage, or to temper it with the cool
perseverance of revenge, than the fight of such a hero, so beloved, fallen in
his country's cause. It had the effect. Putnam's party, having cut their way
obliquely through the enemy's ranks, and having been joined by Captain D'Ell
with twenty men, together with some other small parties, charged them so
furiously in rear, that nearly three hundred were killed on the spot, and one
hundred and forty-eight made prisoners. In the mean time, from the
unskilfulness of the guides, some of our columns were bewildered. The left
wing, seeing Putnam's party in their front, advancing over the dead bodies
toward them, commenced a brisk and heavy fire, which killed a sergeant and
several privates. Nor could they, by sounds or sighs, be convinced of their
mistake, until Major Putnam, preserving (if Heaven had thus ordained it) the
loss of his own life to the loss of the lives of his brave associates, ran
through the midst of the flying balls, and prevented the impending catastrophe.

THE tender feelings, which Major Putnam possessed, taught him to respect an
unfortunate foe, and to strive, by every lenient art in his power to alleviate
the miseries of war. For this purpose, he remained on the field, until it began
to grow dark, employed in collecting such of the enemy as were left wounded, to
one place; he gave them all the liquor and little refreshments which he could
procure; he furnished to each of them a blanket; he put three blankets under a
French sergeant who was badly wounded through (...) and placed him in an easy
posture by the (...) tree -- the poor fellow could only squeeze his hand with
an expressive grasp. "Ah," said Major Putnam, depend upon it, my brave soldier
you shall be brought to the camp as soon as possible, and the same care shall
be taken of you as if you were my brother. -- The next morning Major Rogers was
sent to reconnoitre the field, and to bring off the wounded prisoners -- but
finding the wounded unable to help themselves, in order to save trouble, he
dispatched every one of them to the world of spirits. Putnam's was not the only
heart that bled. The Provincial and British Officers who became acquainted with
the fact, were struck with inexpressible horror.

TICONDEROGA is surrounded on three sides by water, on the fourth, for some
distance, extends a dangerous morass, the remainder was then fortified with a
line eight feet high, and planted with artillery. For one hundred yards in
front, the plain was covered with great trees, cut for the purpose of defense;
whose interwoven and sharpened branches projected outward. Notwithstanding
these impediments, the engineer, who had been employed to reconnoitre,
reported, as his opinion, that the works might be carried with musquetry. The
difficulty and delay of dragging the battering cannon, over grounds almost
impracticable, induced the adoption of this fatal advice -- to which, however,
a rumor that the garrison, already consisting of four or five thousand men,
was on the point of being augmented with three thousand more, probably
contributed. The attack was as spirited in execution as ill-judged in design.
The assailants, after having been for more than four hours exposed to a most
fatal fire, without making any impression by their reiterated and obstinate
proofs of valor, were ordered to retreat. Major Putnam, who had acted as an aid
in bringing the Provincial regiments successively to action, assisted in
preserving order. It was said, that a great number of the enemy were shot in
the head, every other part having been concealed behind their works. The loss
on our side was upwards of two thousand killed and wounded. Twenty-five hundred
stands of arms were taken by the French. Our army, after sustaining this havoc,
retreated with such extraordinary precipitation, that they regained their camp
at the southward of Lake George, the evening after the action.

THE successes, in other parts of America, made amends for this defeat.
Louisbourg, after a vigoros siege, was reduced by the Generals Amherst and
Wolf; Frontenac, a post of importance on the communication between Lake
Ontario and the St. Lawrence, surrendered to Colonel Bradstreet: and Fort Du
Quesne, situated at the confluence of Monongahela with the Ohio, (the
possession of which had kindle^ the flame of war, that now spread through the
four quarters of the globe) was captured by General Forbes.

A FEW adventures, in which the public interests were little concerned, but
which, from their peculiarity, appear worthy of being preserved, happened
before the conclusion of the year. As one day, Major Putnam chanced to lie,
with a batteau and five men, on the eastern shore of the Hudson, near the
Rapids, contiguous to which Fort-Miller stood; his men on the opposite bank had
given him to understand, that a large body of Savages were in his rear, and
would be upon him in a moment. -- To stay and be sacrificed -- to attempt
crossing and be shot -- or to go down to the falls, with an almost absolute
certainty of being drowned, were the sole alternatives, that presented
themselves to his choice. So instantaneously was the latter adopted, that one
man who had rambled a little from the party, was, of necessity, left, and fell
a miserable victim to savage barbarity. The Indians arrived on the shore soon
enough to fire many balls on the batteau before it could be got under way. No
sooner had our batteau-men escaped, by favor of the rapidity of the current,
beyond the reach of musket shot, than death seemed only to have been avoided
in one form, to be encountered in another, not less terrible. Prominent rocks,
latent shelves, absorbing eddies, and abrupt descents, for a quarter of a mile,
afforded scarcely the smallest chance of escaping without a miracle. Putnam,
trusting himself to a good Providence, whose kindness he had often experienced,
rather than to men, whose tenderest mercies are cruelty, was now seen to place
himself sedately at the helm, and afford an astonishing spectacle of serenity:
his companions, with a mixture of terror, admiration and wonder, saw him,
incessantly changing the course, to avoid the jaws of ruin, that seemed
expanded to swallow the whirling boat. Twice he turned it fairly round to shun
the rifts of rocks. Amidst these eddies in which there was the greatest danger
of its foundering, at one moment the fides were exposed to the fury of the
waves; then the stern, and next the bow glanced obliquely onward, with
inconceivable velocity. -- With not less amazement the Savages beheld him
sometimes mounting the billows, then plunging abruptly down, at other times
skilfully veering from the rocks, and shooting through the only narrow passage;
until, at last, they viewed the boat safely gliding on the smooth surface of
the stream below. At this sight, it is asserted, that these rude sons of nature
were affected with the same kind of superstitious veneration, which the
Europeans in the dark ages entertained for some of their most valorous
champions. They deemed the man invulnerable, whom their balls (on his pushing
from shore) would not touch; and whom they had seen steering in safety down the
rapids that had never before been passed. They conceived it would be an affront
against the Great Spirit, to attempt to kill this favored mortal with powder
and ball, if they should ever see and know him again.

IN the month of August, five hundred men were employed, under the orders of
Majors Rogers and Putnam, to watch the motions of the enemy near Ticonderoga.
At South-Bay they separated the party into two equal divisions, and Rogers took
a position on Wood-Creek, twelve miles distant from Putnam.

UPON being, some time afterward, discovered, they formed a reunion, and
concerted measures for returning to Fort-Edward. Their march through the woods,
was in three divisions by FILES, the right commanded by Rogers, the left by
Putnam, and the center by Captain D'Ell. The first night they encamped on the
banks of Clear River, about a mile from old Fort-Ann, which had been formerly
built by General Nicholson. Next morning, Major Rogers and a British officer,
named Irwin, incautiously suffered themselves from a spirit of false emulation,
to be engaged in firing at a mark. Nothing could have been more repugnant to
the military principles of Putnam than such conduct; or reprobated by him in
more pointed terms. As soon as the heavy dew which had fallen the preceding
night would permit, the detachment moved in one body, Putnam being in front,
D'Ell in center, and Rogers in the rear. The impervious growth of shrubs, and
under-brush that had sprung up, where the land had been partially cleared some
years before, occasioned this change in the order of march. At the moment of
moving, the famous French partizan Molang, who had been sent with five hundred
men to intercept our party, was not more than one mile and an half distant from
them. Having heard the firing, he hasted to lay an ambuscade precisely in that
part of the wood most favorable to his project. Major Putnam was just emerging
from the thicket, into the common forest, when the enemy rose, and with
discordant yells and whoops, commenced an attack upon the right of his
division. Surprised, but undismayed* Putnam halted, returned the fire, and
passed the word for the other divisions to advance for his support. D'Ell came.
The action, though widely scattered, and principally fought between man and
man, soon grew general and intensely warm. It would be as difficult as useless
to describe this irregular and ferocious mode of fighting. Rogers came not up:
but, as he declared afterward, formed a circular file between our party and
Wood-Creek, to prevent their being taken in rear or enfiladed. Successful as he
commonly was, his conduct did not always pass without unfavorable imputation.
Notwithstanding, it was a current saying in the camp, "that Rogers always sent,
but Putnam led his men to action," yet, in justice, it ought to be remarked
here, that the latter has never been known, in relating the story of this day's
disaster, to affix any stigma upon the conduct of the former.

MAJOR Putnam, perceiving it would be impracticable to cross the creek,
determined to maintain his ground. Inspired by his example, the officers and
men behaved with great bravery: sometimes they fought aggregately in open view,
and sometimes individually under cover; taking aim from behind the bodies of
trees, and acting in a manner independent of each other. For himself, having
discharged his fuzee several times, at length it missed fire, while the muzzle
was pressed against the breast of a large and well proportioned Savage. This
warrior, availing himself of the indefensible attitude of his adversary, with a
tremendous war-hoop sprang forward, with his lifted hatchet, and compelled him
to surrender; and having disarmed and bound him fast to a tree, returned to the
battle.

THE intrepid Captains D'Ell and Harman, who now commanded, were forced to give
ground for a little distance: the Savages, conceiving this to be the certain
harbinger of victory, rushed impetuously on, with dreadful and redoubled cries.
But our two partisans, collecting a handful of brave men, gave the pursuers so
warm a reception as to oblige them, in turn to retreat a little beyond the spot
at which the action had commenced. Here they made a stand. This change of
ground occasioned the tree to which Putnam was tied to be directly between the
fire of the two parties. Human imagination can hardly figure to itself a more
deplorable situation. The balls flew incessantly from either side, many struck
the tree, while some passed through the sleeves and skirts of his coat. In this
state of jeopardy, unable to move his body, to stir his limbs, or even to
incline his head, he remained more than an hour. So equally balanced, and so
obstinate was the fight! At one moment, while the battle swerved in favor of
the enemy, a young Savage, chose an odd way of discovering his humor. He found
Putnam bound. He might have dispatched him at a blow. But he loved better to
excite the terrors of the prisoner, by hurling a tomahawk at his head, or
rather it should seem his object was to see how near he could throw it without
touching him -- the weapon struck in the tree a number of times at a hair's
breath distance from the mark. When the Indian had finished his amusement, a
French Bas-Officer (a much more inveterate savage by nature, though descended
from so humane and polished a nation) perceiving Putnam, came up to him, and,
levelling a fuzee within a foot of his breast, attempted to discharge it; it
missed fire -- ineffectually did the intended victim, solicit the treatment due
to his situation, by repeating, that he was a prisoner of war. The degenerate
Frenchman did not understand the language of honor or of nature: deaf to their
voice, and dead to sensibility, he violently, and repeatedly, pushed the muzzle
of his gun against Putnam's ribs, and finally, gave him a cruel blow on the jaw
with the butt of his piece. After this dastardly deed he left him.

AT length the active intrepidity of D'Ell and This worthy officer is still
living at Marlborough, in the State of Massachusetts.
Harman, seconded by the persevering valor of their followers, prevailed. They
drove from the field the enemy, who left about ninety dead behind them. As they
were retiring Putnam was untied by the Indian who had made him prisoner and
whom he afterward called master. Having been conducted for some distance from
the place of action, he was stripped of his coat, vest, stockings and shoes;
loaded with as many of the packs of the wounded as could be piled upon him;
strongly pinioned, and his wrists tied as closely together as they could be
pulled with a cord. After he had marched, through no pleasant paths, in this
painful manner, for many a tedious mile, the party (who were excessively
fatigued) halted to breathe. His hands were now immoderately swelled from the
tightness of the ligature: and the pain had become intolerable. His feet were
so much scratched that the blood dropped fast from them. Exhausted with bearing
a burden above his strength, and frantic with torments exquisite beyond
endurance; he entreated the Irish Interpreter to implore as the last and only
grace he desired of the Savages, that they would knock him on the head and take
his scalp at once, or loose his hands. A French officer, instantly interposing,
ordered his hands to be unbound, and some of the packs to be taken off. By this
time the Indian who captured him and had been absent with the wounded, coming
up, gave him a pair of mocasons, and expressed great indiguation at the
unworthy treatment his prisoner had suffered.

THAT Savage Chief again returned to the care of the wounded, and the Indians,
about two hundred in number, went before the rest of the party to the place
where the whole were, that night, to encamp. They took with them Major Putnam,
on whom besides innumerable other outrages, they had the barbarity to inflict a
deep wound with a tomahawk, in the left cheek. His sufferings were in this
place to be consummated. A scene of horror, infinitely greater than had ever
met his eyes before, was now preparing. It was determined to roast him alive.
-- For this purpose they led him into a dark forest, stripped him naked, bound
him to a tree, and piled dry brush with other fuel, at a small distance, in a
circle round him. They accompanied their labors, as if for his funeral dirge,
with screams and sounds inimitable but by savage voices. Then they set the
piles on fire. A sudden shower damped the rising flame. Still they strove to
kindle it, until, at last, the blaze ran fiercely round the circle. Major
Putnam soon began to feel the scorching heat. His hands were so tied that he
could move his body. He often shifted sides as the fire approached. This sight,
at the very idea of which all but Savages must shudder, afforded the highest
diversion to his inhuman tormentors, who demonstrated the delirium of their joy
by correspondent yells, dances and gesticulations. He saw clearly that his
final hour was inevitably come. He summoned all his resolution and composed his
mind, as far as the circumstances could admit, to bid an eternal farewell to all
he held most dear. To quit the world would scarcely have cost a single pang,
but for the idea of home, but for the remembrance of domestic endearments, of
the affectionate partner of his soul, and of their beloved offspring. His
thought was ultimately fixed on a happier state of existence, beyond the
tortures he was beginning to endure. The bitterness of death, even of tha^
death which is accompanied with the keenest agonies, was, in a manner, past --
nature, with a feeble struggle, was quitting its last hold on sublunary things
-- when a French officer rushed through the crowd, opened a way by scattering
the burning brands, and unbound the victim. It was Molang himself -- to whom a
Savage, unwilling to see another human sacrifice immolated, had run and
communicated the tidings. That Commandant spurned and severely reprimanded the
barbarians, whose nocturnal Powwas and hellish Orgies he suddenly ended. Putnam
did not want for feeling or gratitude. The French Commander, fearing to trust
him alone with them, remained until he could deliver him in safety into the
hands of his master.

THE Savage approached his prisoner kindly, and seemed to treat him with
particular affection. He offered him some hard biscuit, but finding that he
could not chew them, on account of the blow he had received from the Frenchman,
this more humane Savage soaked some of the buiscuit in water and made him suck
the pulp-like part. Determined, however, not to lose his captive (the
refreshment being finished) he took the mocasons from his feet and tied them to
one of his wrists: then directing him to lie down on his back upon the bare
ground, he stretched one arm to its full length, and bound it fast to young
tree; the other arm was extended and bound in the same manner -- his legs were
stretched apart and fastened to two saplings. Then a number of tall, but
slender poles were cut down; which, with some long bushes, were laid across his
body from head to foot: on each side lay as many Indians as could convenienly
find lodging, in order to prevent the possibility of his escape. In this
disagreeable and painful posture he remained until morning. During this night,
the longest and most dreary conceivable, our hero used to relate that he felt a
ray of cheerfulness come casually across his mind, and could not even refrain
from smiling, when he reflected on this ludicrous groupe for a painter, of
which he himself was the principal figure.

THE next day he was allowed his blanket and mocasons, and permitted to march
without carrying any pack, or receiving any insult. To allay his extreme
hunger, a little bear's meat was given, which he sucked through his teeth. At
night, the party arrived at Ticonderoga, and the prisonor was placed under the
care of a French guard. The Savages, who had been prevented from glutting their
diabolical thirst for blood, took other opportunity of manifesting their
malevolence for the disappointment, by horrid grimaces and angry gestures; but
they were suffered no more to offer violence or personal indignity to him.

AFTER having been examined by the Marquis de Montcalm, Major Putnam was
conducted to Montreal, by a French officer, who treated him with the greatest
indulgence and humanity.

AT this place were several prisoners. Colonel Peter Schuyler, remarkable for
his philanthropy, generosity, and friendship, was of the number. No sooner had
he heard of Major Putnam's arrival, than he went to the Interpreter's quarters,
and enquired, whether he had a Provincial Major in his custody? He found Major
Putnam in a comfortless condition -- without coat, waistcoat, or hose -- the
remnant of his clothing miserably dirty and ragged -- his beard long and
squalid -- his legs torn by thorns and briars -- his face gashed with wounds,
and swollen with bruises. Colonel Schuyler, irritated beyond all sufferance at
such a sight, could scarcely restrain his speech within limits, consistent with
the prudence of a prisoner and the meekness of a Christian. Major Putnam was
immediately treated according to his rank, clothed in a decent manner, and
supplied with money by that liberal and sympathetic patron of the distressed.

THE capture of Frontena^ by General Bradstreet afforded occasion for an
exchange of prisoners. Colonel Schuyler was comprehended in the cartel. A
generous spirit can never be satisfied with imposing tasks for its generosity
to accomplish. Apprehensive, if it should be known that Putnam was a
distinguished partizan, his liberation might be retarded, and knowing that
there were officers, who, from the length of their captivity, had a claim of
priority to exchange; he had, by his happy address, induced the Governor to
offer, that whatever officer he might think proper to nominate, should be
included in the present cartel. With great politeness in manner, but seeming
indifference as to object, he expressed his warmest acknowledgements to the
Governor, and said: There is an old man here, who is a Provincial Major, and
wishes to be at home with his wife and children. He can do no good here, or any
where else: I believe your Excellency had better keep some of the young men,
who have no wife or children to care for, and let the old fellow go home with
me. This justifiable finesse had the desired effect.

AT the house of Colonel Schuyler, Major Putnam became acquainted with Mrs.
How, a fair captive, whose history would not be read without emotion, if it
could be written in the same affecting manner, in which I have often heard it
told. She was still young and handsome herself, though she had two daughters of
marriageable age. Distress, which had taken somewhat from the original
redundancy of her bloom, and added a softening paleness to her cheeks, rendered
her appearance the more engaging. Her face, that seemed to have been formed for
the assemblage of dimples and smiles, was clouded with care. The natural
sweetness was not, however, soured by despondency and petulance; but chastened
by humility and resignation. This mild daughter of sorrow looked as if she had
known the day of prosperity, when serenity and gladness of soul were the
inmates of her bosom. That day was past, and the once lively features, now
assumed a tender melancholy, which witnessed her irreparable loss. She needed
not the customary weeds of mourning, or the fallacious pageantry of woe to
prove her widowed state. She was in that stage of affliction, when the excess
is so far abated as to permit the subject to be drawn into conversation,
without opening the wound afresh. It is then rather a source of pleasure than
pain to dwell upon the circumstances in narration. Every thing conspired to
make her story interesting. Her first husband had been killed and scalped by
the Indians some years before. By an unexpected assault in 1756 upon Fort
Dummer, where she then happened to be present with Mr. How, her second
husband, the Savages carried the Fort, murdered the greater part of the
garrison, mangled in death her husband, and led her away with seven children
into captivity. She was for some months kept with them: and during their
rambles she was frequently on the point of perishing with hunger, and as often
subjected to hardships seemingly intolerable to one of so delicate a frame.
Some time after the career of her miseries began, the Indians selected a couple
of their young men to marry her daughters. The fright and disgust which the
intelligence of this intention occasioned to these poor young creatures, added
infinitely to the sorrows and perplexities of their frantic mother. To prevent
the hated connection, all the activity of female resource was called into
exertion. She found an opportunity of conveying to the Governor a petition,
that her daughters might be received into a convent for the sake of securing
the salvation of their souls. Happily the pious fraud succeeded.

ABOUT the same time the Savages separated, and carried off her other five
children into different tribes. She was ransomed by an elderly French officer,
for four hundred livres. Of no avail were the cries of this tender mother -- a
mother desolated by the loss of her children, who were thus torn from her fond
embraces, and removed many hundred miles from each other, into the utmost
recesses of Canada. With them (could they have been kept together) she would
most willingly have wandered to the extremities of the world, and accepted as a
desirable portion the cruel lot of slavery for life. But she was precluded from
the sweet hope of ever beholding them again. The insufferable pang of parting,
and the idea of eternal separation planted the arrows of despair deep in her
soul. Though all the world was no better than a desert, and all its inhabitants
were then indifferent to her -- yet the loveliness of her appearance in sorrow
had awakened affections, which, in the aggravation of her troubles, were to
become a new source of afflictions.

THE officer, who bought her of the Indians, had a son, who also held a
commission, and resided with his father. During her continuance in the same
house, at St. John's, the double attachment of the father and the son, rendered
her situation extremely distressing. It is true, the calmness of age delighted
to gaze respectfully on her beauty, but the impetuosity of youth was fired to
madness by the sight of her charms. One day, the son, whose attentions had been
long lavished upon her in vain, finding her alone, in a chamber, forcibly
seized her hand, and solemnly declared, that he would now satiate the passion
which she had so long refused to indulge. She recurred to entreaties,
struggles, and tears, those prevalent female weapons, which the distraction of
danger, not less than the promptness of genius is wont to supply: while he, in
the delirium of vexation and desire, snatched a dagger, and swore he would put
an end to her life, if she persisted to struggle. Mrs. How, assuming the
dignity of conscious virtue, told him, it was what she most ardently wished,
and begged him to plunge the poignard through her heart, since the mutual
importunities and jealousies of such rivals, had rendered her life, though
innocent, more irksome and insupportable, than death itself. Struck with a
momentary compunction, he seemed to relent, and relax his hold -- and she,
availing herself of his irresolution, or absence of mind, escaped down the
stairs. In her disordered state, she told the whole transaction to his father,
who directed her, in future, to sleep in a small bed at the foot of that in
which his wife lodged. The affair soon reached the Governor's ears, and the
young officer was, shortly afterward, sent on a tour of duty to Detroit.

THIS gave her a short respite; but she dreaded his return, and the humiliating
insults for which she might be reserved. Her children, too, were ever present
to her melancholy mind. A stranger, a widow, a captive, she knew not where to
apply for relief. She had heard of the name of Schuyler -- she was yet to
learn, that it was only another appellation for the friend of suffering
humanity. As that excellent man was on his way from Quebec to the Jerseys,
under a parole for a limited time, she came with feeble and trembling steps to
him. The same maternal passion, which, sometimes, overcomes the timidity of
nature in the birds, when plundered of their callow nestlings, emboldened her,
notwithstanding her native diffidence, to disclose those griefs which were
ready to devour her in silence. While her delicate aspect was heightened to a
glowing blush, for fear of offending by an inexcusable importunity, or of
transgressing the rules of propriety, by representing herself as being an
object of admiration; she told, with artless simplicity, all the story of her
woes. Colonel Schuyler, from that moment became her protector, and endeavored
to procure her liberty. The person who purchased her from the Savages,
unwilling to part with so fair a purchase, demanded a thousand livres as her
ransom. But Colonel Schuyler, on his return to Quebec, obtained from the
Governor an order, in consequence of which, Mrs. How was given up to him for
four hundred livres -- Nor did his active goodness rest, until every one of her
five sons was restored to her.

BUSINESS having made it necessary that Colonel Schuyler should precede the
prisoners who were exchanged, he recommended the fair captive to the protection
of his friend Putnam. She had just recovered from the meazles when the party
was preparing to set off for New England. By this time the young French officer
had returned, with his passion rather increased than abated by absence. He
pursued her wheresoever she went, and, although he could make no advances in
her affection, he seemed resolved by perseverance to carry his point. Mrs.
How, terrified by his treatment, was obliged to keep constantly near Major
Putnam, who informed the young officer, that he should protect that lady at the
risque of his life. However, this amorous and rash lover, in whose boiling
veins such an agitation was excited, that while he was speaking of her the This
physical effect, wonderful as it may appear, is so far from being a fictitious
embellishment, that it can be proved by the most solemn testimony of more than
one person still living.
blood would frequently gush from his nostrils, followed the prisoners to Lake
Champlain; and, when the boat in which the fair captive was embarked, had
pushed from the shore, he jumped into the Lake, and swam after her until it
rowed out of sight. Whether he perished in this distracted state of mind, or
returned to the shore, is not known.

IN the long march from captivity, through an inhospitable wilderness,
encumbered with five small children, she suffered incredible hardships. Though
endowed with masculine fortitude, she was truly feminine in strength, and must
have fainted by the way, had it not been for the assistance of Major Putnam.
There were a thousand good offices which the helplessness of her condition
demanded, and which the gentleness of his nature delighted to perform. He
assisted in leading her little ones, and in carrying them over the swampy
grounds and runs of water, with which their course was frequently intersected.
He mingled his own mess with that of the widow and the fatherless, and assisted
them in supplying and preparing their provisions. Upon arriving within the
settlements they experienced a reciprocal regret at separation, and were only
consoled by the expectation of soon mingling in the embraces of their former
acquaintances and dearest connections.

AFTER the conquest of Canada in 1760, she made a journey to Quebec, in order
to bring back her two daughters whom she had left in a convent. She found one
of them married to a French officer. The other, having contracted a great
fondness for the religious sisterhood, with reluctance, consented to leave them
and return.

A FEW years previous to the war between Great Britain and America, a question
of some consequence arose respecting the title of the lands in Hinsdale (the
town in which Mrs. How resided) insomuch that it was deemed expedient, that an
Agent should be sent to England to advocate the claim of the town. It may be
mentioned as a proof of the acknowledged superiority of the understanding and
address of this gentlewoman, that she was universally designated for the
mission. But the dispute was fortunately accommodated to the satisfaction of
the people, without their being obliged to make use of her talents.

WE now arrive at the period, when the prowess of Britain, victorious, alike by
sea and by land, in the new and in the old world, had elevated that name to the
zenith of national glory. The conquest of Quebec, opened the way for the total
reduction of Canada. On the side of the Lakes, Amherst having captured the
posts of Ticonderoga and Crown-Point, applied himself to strengthen the latter.
Putnam, who had been raised to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel, and present at
these operations, was employed the remainder of this and some part of the
succeeding season in superintending the parties, which were detached to procure
timber and other materials for the fortification.

IN 1760 General Amherst, a sagacious, humane, and experienced commander,
planned the termination of the war in Canada, by a bloodless conquest. For this
purpose, three armies were destined to cooperate by different routes against
Montreal, the only remaining place of strength the enemy held in that country.
The corpse formerly commanded by General Wolf, now by General Murray, was
ordered to ascend the river St. Lawrence; another (under Col. Haviland) to
penetrate by the Isle Aux Noix; and the third, consisting of about ten thousand
men, commanded by the General himself, after passing up the Mohawk-river, and
taking its course by the Lake Ontario, was to form a junction by falling down
the St. Lawrence. In this progress, more than one occasion presented itself
manifest the intrepidity and soldiership Lieutenant Colonel Putnam. Two armed
vessels obstructed the passage and prevented the attack on Oswegatchie. Putnam,
with 1000 men, in 50 batteaux, undertook to board them. This dauntless officer,
ever sparing of the blood of others, as prodigal of his own, to accomplish it
with the less loss, put himself (with a chosen crew, a beetle and wedges) in
the van, with a design to wedge the rudders, so that the vessels should not be
able to turn their broadsides or perform any other maneuver. All the men in
his little fleet were ordered to strip to their waistcoats, and advance at the
same time. He promised, if he lived, to join and show them the way up the
sides. Animated by so daring an example, they moved swiftly, in profound
stillness, as to certain victory or death. The people on board the ships,
beholding the good countenance with which they approached, ran one of the
vessels on shore, and struck the colors of the other. Had it not been for the
dastardly conduct of the ship's company, in the latter, who compelled the
Captain to haul down his ensign, he would have given the assailants a bloody
reception. For the vessels were well provided with spears, nettings, and every
customary instrument of annoyance as well as defense.

IT now remained to attack the fortress, which stood on an Island, and seemed
to have been rendered inaccessible by an high abbattis of black-ash, that every
where projected over the water. Lieutenant Colonel Putnam proposed a mode of
attack, and offered his services to carry it into effect. The General approved
the proposal. Our partizan, accordingly, caused a sufficient number of boats to
be ^itted for the enterprise. The sides of each boat were surrounded with
fascines (musket proof) which covered the men completely. A wide plank, twenty
feet in length, was then fitted to every boat in such manner, by having an
angular piece sawed from one extremity, that, when fastened by ropes on both
sides of the bow, it might be raised or lowered at pleasure. The design was,
that the plank should be held erect, while the oarsmen forced the bow with the
utmost exertion against the abattis; and that, afterward, being dropped on the
pointed brush, it should serve as a kind of bridge to assist the men in passing
over them. Lieutenant Colonel Putnam, having made his dispositions to attempt
the escalade in many places at the same moment, advanced with his boats in
admirable order. The garrison, perceiving these extraordinary and unexpected
machines, waited not the assault, but capitulated. Lieutenant Colonel Putnam,
was particularly honored by General Amherst, for his ingenuity in this
invention, and promptitude in its execution. The three armies arrived at
Montreal, within two days of each other; and the conquest of Canada became
complete without the loss of a single drop of blood.

AT no great distance from Montreal, stands the Savage village, called
Cochnawaga. Here our partizan found the Indian Chief, who had formerly made him
prisoner. That Indian was highly delighted to see his old acquaintance, whom he
entertained in his own well built stone house, with great friendship and
hospitality; while his guest did not discover less satisfaction in an
opportunity of shaking the brave Savage by the hand, and proffering him
protection in this reverse of his military fortunes.

WHEN the belligerent powers were considerably exhausted, a rupture took place
between Great Britain and Spain, in the month of January, 1762, and an
expedition was formed that campaign, under Lord Albemarle, against the
Havannah. A body of Provincials, composed of five hundred men from the Jerseys,
eight hundred from New York, and one thousand from Connecticut, joined his
Lordship. General Lyman, who raised the regiment of one thousand men in
Connecticut* being the senior officer, commanded the whole: of course, the
immediate command of his regiment developed upon Lieutenant Colonel Putnam. The
fleet, that carried these troops, sailed from New York, and arrived safely on
the coast of Cuba. There a terrible storm arose, and the transport, in which
Lieutenant Colonel Putnam had embarked with five hundred men, was wrecked on a
rift of craggy rocks. The weather was so tempestuous, and the surf, which ran
mountain-high, dashed with such violence against the ship, that the most
experienced seamen expected it would soon part asunder. The rest of the fleet,
so far from being able to afford assistance, with difficulty rode out the gale.
In this deplorable situation, as the only expedient by which they could be
saved, strict order was maintained, and all those people, who best understood
the use of tools, instantly employed in constructing rafts from spars, plank,
and whatever other materials could be procured. There happened to be on board,
a large quantity of strong cords, (the same that are used in the whale fishery)
which, being fastened to the rafts, after the first had with inconceivable
hazard reached the shore, were of infinite service, in preventing the others
from driving out to sea, as also in dragging them athwart the billows, to the
beach: by which means, every man was finally saved. With the same presence of
mind, to take advantage of circumstances, and the same precaution to prevent
confusion, of similar occasions, how many valuable lives, prematurely lost,
might have been preserved as blessings to their families, their friends, and
their country. As soon as all were landed, Lieutenant Colonel Putnam fortified
his camp, that he might not be exposed to insult, from the inhabitants of the
neighboring districts, or from those of Carthagena, who were but twenty-four
miles distant. Here the party remained unmolested several days, until the storm
had so much abated, as to permit the convoy to take them off. They soon joined
the troops before the Havannah, who, having been several weeks in that
unhealthy climate, already began to grow extremely Col. Haviland (an
accomplished officer several times mentioned in these memoirs) who brought to
America a regiment of one thousand Irish veterans, had but seventy men
remaining alive when he left the Havannah. Col. Haviland, during this siege,
having once with his regiment engaged and routed five hundred Spaniards, met
Col. Putnam on his return and said -- "Putnam, give me a pinch of snuff," "I
never carry any," returned Putnam, -- "I have always just such luck" cried
Haviland, "the rascally Spaniards have shot away my pocket, snuff box and all."
sickly. The opportune arrival of the Provincial reinforcement, in perfect
health, contributed not a little to forward the works, and hasten the reduction
of that important place, But the Provincials suffered so miserably by sickness,
afterward, that very few ever returned to their native land again.

ALTHOUGH a general peace among the European powers was ratified in 1763, yet
the Savages, on our western frontiers, still continued their hostilities. After
they had taken several posts, General Bradstreet was sent in 1764, with an army
against them. Colonel Putnam, then, for the first time, appointed to the
command of a regiment, was on the expidition; as was the Indian Chief, (whom I
have several times had occasion to mention as his capturer) at the head of one
hundred Cochnawaga-warriors. Before General Bradstreet reached Detroit, which
the Savages invested, Captain D'Ell, the faithful friend, and intrepid
fellow-soldier of Colonel Putnam, had been slain in a desperate sally. He,
having been detached with five hundred men, in 1763, by General Amherst, to
raise the siege, found means of throwing the succor into the Fort. But the
garrison, (commanded by Major Gladwine, a brave and sensible officer) had been
so much weakened, by the lurking and insiduous mode of war, practiced by the
Savages, that not a man could be spared to cooperate in an attack upon them.
The Commandant would even have dissuaded Captain D'Ell from the attempt, on
account of the great disparity in numbers; but the latter, relying on the
discipline and courage of his men, replied, God forbid, that I should ever
disobey the orders of my General, and immediately disposed them for action. It
was obstinate and bloody. But the vastly superior number of the Savages,
enabled them to enclose Captain D'Ell's party on every side, and compelled him,
finally, to fight his way, in retreat from one stone-house to another. Having
halted to breathe a moment, he saw one of his bravest sergeants, lying at a
small distance, wounded through the thigh, and wallowing in his blood.
Whereupon he desired some of the men, to run, and bring the sergeant to the
house, but they declined it. Then declaring, that he never would leave so brave
a soldier in the field, to be tortured by the Savages, he ran and endeavored
to help him up -- at the instant, a volley of shot dropped them both dead
together. The party continued retreating, from house to house, until they
regained the Fort; where it was found, the conflict had been so sharp, and
lasted so long, that only fifty men remained alive, of the five hundred, who
had sallied.

UPON the arrival of General Bradstreet, the Savages saw, that all further
efforts, in arms, would be vain, and, accordingly, after many fallacious
proposals for a peace, and frequent tergiversations in the negotiation, they
concluded a treaty, which ended the war in America.

COLONEL Putnam, at the expiration of ten years from his first receiving a
Commission, after having seen as much service, endured as many hardships,
encountered as many dangers, and acquired as many laurels as any officers of
his rank, with great satisfaction, laid aside his uniform and returned to his
plough. The various and uncommon scenes of war in which he had acted a
respectable part, his intercourse with the world and intimacy with some of the
first characters in the army, joined with occasional reading, had not only
brought into view whatever talents he possessed from nature, but, at the same
time, had extended his knowledge and polished his manners to a considerable
degree. Not having become inflated with pride or forgetful of his old
connections, he had the good fortune to possess entirely the good will of his
fellow citizens. No character stood fairer in the public eye for integrity,
bravery and patriotism. He was employed in several offices in his own town, and
not unfrequently elected to represent it in the General Assembly. The year
after his return to private life, the minds of men were strangely agitated, by
an attempt of the British Parliament, to introduce the memorable Stamp Act in
America. This germe policy, whose growth was repressed by the moderate
temperature in which it was kept by some administrations, did not fully
disclose its fruit until nearly eleven years afterward. All the world knows
how it then ripened into a civil war.

ON the twenty-second day of March 1765, the Stamp Act received the royal
assent. It was to take place in America on the first day of November following.
This innovation spread a sudden and universal alarm. The political pulse in the
Provinces, from Main to Georgia throbbed in sympathy. The Assemblies, in most
of these colonies, that they might oppose it legally and in concert, appointed
Delegates to confer together on the subject. This first Congress met, early in
October, at NewYork. They agreed upon a Declaration of Rights and Grievances of
the Colonists; together with separate Addresses to the King, Lords, and Commons
of Great Britain. In the mean time, the people had determined, in order to
prevent the stamped paper from being distributed, that the Stamp Masters should
not enter on the execution of their office. That appointment, in Connecticut,
had been conferred upon Mr. Ingersol, a very dignified, sensible and learned
native of the colony, who, upon being solicited to resign, did not, in the
first instance, give a satisfactory answer. In consequence of which, a great
number of the substantial yeomanry, on horseback, furnished with provisions for
themselves, and provender for their horses, assembled in the eastern counties,
and began their march for NewHaven to receive the resignation of Mr. Ingersol.
A junction with another body was to have been formed in Branford. But having
learned at Hartford, that Mr. Ingersol would be in town the next day to claim
protection from the Assembly, they took quarters there and kept out patroles
during the whole night, to prevent his arrival without their knowledge. The
succeeding morning they resumed their march and met Mr. Ingersol in
Wethersfield. They told him their business, and he, after some little
hesitation, mounted on a round table, read his resignation The curious may be
pleased to know that the Resignation was expressed in these explicit terms:

Wethersfield, September 9th, 1765.
I do hereby promise, that I never will receive any stamped papers which may
arrive from Europe, in consequence of an Act lately passed in the Parliament of
Great Britain; nor officiate as Stamp Master or Distributor of Stamps, within
the colony of Connecticut, either directly or indirectly. And I do hereby
notify to all the Inhabitants of his Majesty's Colony of Connecticut
(notwithstanding the said office or trust has been committed to me) not to
apply to me, ever after, for any stamped paper; here^y declaring that I do
resign the said office, and execute these PRESENTS of my own FREE WILL AND
ACCORD, without any equivocation or mental reservation.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand,

J. INGERSOL.



. That finished, the multitude desired him to cry out "liberty and property"
three times; which he did, and was answered by three loud huzzas. He then dined
with some of the principal men at a tavern, by whom he was treated with great
politeness, and afterward was escorted by about five hundred horse to
Hartford: where he again read his resignation amidst the unbounded acclamations
of the people. I have chosen to style this collection the yeomanry, the
multitude, or the people, because I could not make use of the English word mob
(which generally signifies a disorderly concurrence of the rabble) without
conveying an erroneous idea. It is scarcely necessary to add, that the people,
their objects being effected, without offering disturbance, dispersed to their
homes. To give a trait of the urbanity that prevailed, it may not be amiss to
mention a jest that passed in the cavalcade to Hartford, and was received with
the most perfect good humor. Mr. Ingersol, who, by chance rode a white horse,
being asked what he thought, to find himself attended by such a retinue? --
replied, that he had now a clearer idea than ever he had before conceived, of
that passage in the Revelations, which describes, Death on a pale horse, and
hell following him.


COLONEL Putnam, who instigated the people to these measures, was prevented
from attending by accident. But he was deputed soon after, with two other
Gentlemen, to wait on Governor Fitch, on the same subject. The questions of the
Governor, and answers of Putnam, will serve to indicate the spirit of the
times. After some conversation, the Governor asked, What he should do, if the
stamped paper should be sent to him by the King's authority? -- Putnam replied,
lo^k it up, until we shall visit you again, -- And what will you do then? We
shall expect you to give us the key of the room, in which it is deposited; and,
if you think fit, in order to screen yourself from blame, you may forewarn us
upon our peril not to enter the room, -- And what will you do afterward? --
Send it safely back again, -- But if I should refuse admission? -- In such a
case, your house will be levelled with the dust in five minutes. -- It was
supposed that a report of this conversation, was one reason, why the stamped
paper was never sent from New York to Connecticut.

SUCH unanimity in the Provincial Assemblies, and decision in the yeomanry,
carried beyond the Atlantic, a conviction of the inexpediency of attempting to
enforce the new Revenue System. The Stamp Act being repealed, and the measures
in a manner quieted, Colonel Putnam continued to labor with his own hands, at
farming, without interruption, except (for a little time) by the loss of the
first joint of his right thumb from one accident, and the compound fracture of
his right thigh from another -- that thigh, being rendered nearly an inch
shorter than the left, occasioned him ever to limp in his walk.

THE Provincial Officers and Soldiers from Connecticut, who survived the
conquest of the Havannah, appointed General Lyman to receive the remainder to
their prize-money, in England. A company, composed partly of military, and
partly of other gentlemen, whose object was to obtain from the Crown, a grant
of Land on the Missisippi, also committed to him the negotiation of their
affairs. When several years had elapsed in applications, a Grant of Land was
obtained. In 1770, General Lyman, with Colonel Putnam, and two or three others
went to explore the situation. After a tedious voyage, and a laborious passage
up the Missisippi, they accomplished their business.

GENERAL Lyman came back to Connecticut with the Explorers, but soon returned
to the Natchez: theer formed an Establishment and laid his bones. Colonel
Putnam placed some laborers with provisions and farming utensils upon his
location, but the increasing troubles shortly after ruined the prospect of
deriving any advantage from that quarter.

IN speaking of the troubles that ensued, I not only omit to say any thing, on
the obnoxious claim asserted in the British declaratory act, the continuation
of the duty on tea, the attempt to obtrude that article upon the Americans, the
abortion of this project, the Boston Port Bill, the alteration of the charter
of Massachusetts, and other to^ics of universal notoriety; but even wave all
discussion of irritations on the one part, and supplications on the other,
which preceded the war between Great Britain and her colonies on this
continent. It will ever be acknowledged by those who were best acquainted with
facts, and it should be made known to posterity, that the king of England had
not, in his extensive dominions, subjects more loyal, more dutiful, or more
zealous for his glory than the Americans; and that nothing short of a
melancholy persuasion, that the measures which for many years had been
systematically pursued, by his ministers, were calculated to subvert, their
constitutions, could have dissolved their powerful attachment to that kingdom,
which they fondly called their parent country. Here, without digression to
develope the cause, or describe the progress, it may suffice to observe, the
dispute now verged precipitately to an awful crisis. Most considerate men
foresaw it would terminate in blood. But, rather than suffer the chains (which
they believed in preparation) to be rivetted, they nobly determined to
sacrifice their lives. In vain did they deprecate the infatuation of those
transatlantic counsels which drove them to deeds of desperation. Convinced of
the rectitude of their cause, and doubtful of the issue, they felt the most
painful solicitude for the fate of their country, on contemplating the superior
strength of the nation with which it was to contend. America, thinly inhabited,
under thirteen distinct colonial governments, could have little hope of
success, but from the protection of Providence and the unconquerable spirit of
freedom which pervaded the mass of the people: it is true, since the peace, she
had surprisingly increased in wealth and population -- but the resources of
Britain almost exceeded credibility or conception. It is not wonderful then,
that some good citizens, of weaker nerves, recoiled at the prospect: while
others, who had been officers in the late war, or who had witnessed by
traveling, the force of Britain, stood aloof. All eyes were now turned to find
the men, who, possessed of military experience, would dare, in the approaching
hour of severest trial, to lead their undisciplined fellow-citizens to battle.
For none were so stupid as not to comprehend, that want of success would
involve the leaders in the punishment of rebellion. Putnam was among the first
and most conspicuous who stepped forth. Although the Americans had been, by
many who wished their subjugation, indiscreetly as indiscriminately stigmatized
with the imputation of cowardice -- he felt -- he knew for himself, he was no
coward; and from what he had seen and known, he believed that his countrymen,
driven to the extremity of defending their rights by arms, would find no
difficulty in wiping away the ungenerous aspersion. As he happened to be often
at Boston, he held many conversations on these subjects with General Gage, the
British Commander in Chief, Lord Piercy, Colonel Sheriff, Colonel Small, and
many officers with whom he had formerly served, who were now at the Head
Quarters. Being often questioned, in case the dispute should proceed to
hostilities, what part he would really take? He always answered, with his
country, and that, let whatever might happen, he was prepared to abide the
consequence. Being interrogated whether he, who had been a witness to the
prowess and victories of the British fleets and armies, did not think them
equal to the conquest of a country which was not the owner of a single Ship.
Regiment or Magazine? He rejoined, that he could only say, justice would be on
our side, and the event with Providence: but that he had calculated if it
required six years for the combined forces of England and her Colonies to
conquer such a feeble country as Canada; it would at least, take a very long
time for England alone to overcome her own widely extended Colonies, which were
much stronger than Canada: That when men sought for every thing dear, in what
they believed to be the most sacred of all causes, and in their own native
land; they would have great advantages over their enemies, who were not in the
same situation; and that, having taken into view all circumstances, for his own
part, he fully believed that America would not be so easily conquered by
England as those gentlemen seemed to expect. Being once, in particular, asked,
whether he did not seriously believe that a well appointed British army of five
thousand veterans could march through the whole continent of America? He
replied briskly, -- no doubt, if they behaved civilly and paid well for every
thing they wanted -- "but" -- after a moment's pause added -- if they should
attempt it in a hostile manner (though the American men were out of the
question) the women, with their laddles and broomsticks, would knock them all
on the head before they had got half way through. This was the tenor, our hero
has often told me of these amicable interviews. And thus, (as it commonly
happens in disputes about future events, which depend on opinion) they parted
without conviction: no more to meet in a friendly manner, until after the
appeal should have been made to Heaven, and the issue confirmed by the sword.
In the mean time, to provide against the worst contingency, the militia in the
several Colonies was sedulously trained; and those select companies, the flower
of our youth, which were denominated minutemen, agreeably to the indication of
their name, held themselves in readiness to march at a moment's warning.

AT length the fatal day arrived, when hostilities commenced. General Gage, in
the evening of the 18th of April, 1775, detached from Boston the Grenadiers and
Light Infantry of the Army, commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Smith, to destroy
some military and other stores deposited by the Province at Concord. About
sunrise the next morning, the Detachment, on marching into Lexington, fired
upon a company of militia who had just re-assembled: for having been alarmed
late at night, with reports that the Regulars were advancing to demolish the
stores, they collected on their parade, and were dismissed with orders to
re-assemble at beat of drum. It is established by the affidavits of more than
thirty persons who were present, that the first fire, which killed eight of the
militia, then beginning to disperse, was given by the British, without
provocation. The spark of war, thus kindled, ran with unexampled rapidity, and
raged with unwonted violence. To repel the aggression, the people of the
bordering towns spontaneously rushed to arms, and poured their scattering shot
from every convenient station upon the Regulars; who, after marching to
Concord, and destroying the Magazine, would have found their retreat
intercepted, had they not been reinforced by Lord Piercy with the battalion
companies of three regiments, and a body of marines. Notwithstanding the
junction, they were hard pushed, and pursued until they could find protection
from their ships. Of the British, two hundred and eighty-three were killed,
wounded and taken. The Americans had thirty-nine killed, nineteen wounded, and
two made prisoners.

NOTHING could exceed the celerity with which the intelligence flew every
where, that blood had been shed by the British troops. The country, in motion,
exhibited but one scene of hurry, preparation, and revenge. Putnam, who was
plowing when he heard the news, left his plough in the middle of the field,
unyoked his team, and without waiting to change his clothes, set off for the
theater of action. But finding the British retreated to Boston, and invested by
a sufficient force to watch their movements, he came back to Connecticut,
levied a regiment (under authority of the Legislature) and speedily returned to
Cambridge An article, void of foundation, mentioning an interview between
General Gage and General Putnam appeared in the English Gazettes, in these
words: General Gage, viewing the American army with his telescope, saw General
Putnam in it, which surprised him; and he contrived to get a message delivered
to him, that he wanted to speak to him. Putnam, without any hesitation, waited
upon him. General Gage showed him his fortifications, and advised him to lay
down his arms. General Putnam replied, he could force his fortifications in
half an hour, and advised General Gage to go on board the ships with his troops.

The apprehension of an attack, is adduced with much more verisimilitude, in
M'Fingal, as the reason why General Gage would not suffer the inhabitants to go
from the town of Boston, after he had promised to grant permission: So Gage of
late agreed, you know,
To let the Boston people go:
Yet when he saw, against troops that braved him,
They were the only gaurds that saved him,
Kept off that Satan of a Putnam.
From breaking in to maul and mutt'n him,
He Would too much wit such leagues to observe,
And shut them in again to starve.'
M'FINGAL. Canto 1st.


. He was now promoted to be a Major General on the Provincial Staff, by his
Colony: and in a little time confirmed by Congress, in the same rank on the
Continental establishment. General Ward of Massachusetts, by common consent,
commanded the whole: And the celebrated Doctor Warren, was made a Major General.

NOT long after this period, the British Commander in Chief, found the means to
convey a proposal, privately to General Putnam, that, if he would relinquish
the Rebel party, he might rely upon being made a Major General on the British
establishment, ^ad receiving a great pecuniary compensation for his services.
General Putnam spurned at the offer: which, however, he thought prudent at that
time to conceal from public notice.

IT could scarcely have been expected, but by those credulous patriots, who
were prone to believe whatever they ardently desired, that officers assembled
from Colonies distinct in their manners, and prejudices, selected from
laborious occupations, to command a heterogeneous crowd of their equals,
compelled to be soldiers only by the spur of occasion, should long be able to
preserve harmony among themselves, and subordination among their followers. As
the fact would be a phenomenon, the idea was treated with mirth and mockery by
the friends to the British government. Yet this unshaken embryo of a military
corpse, composed of militia, minutemen, volunteers, and levies; with a burlesque
appearance of multiformity in arms, accoutrements, clothing and conduct, at
last grew into a regular Army -- an Army, which, having vindicated the rights
of human nature, and established the independence of a new Empire, merited and
obtained the glorious distinction of the Patriot Army -- the Patriot Army,
whose praises for their fortitude in adversity, bravery in battle, moderation
in conquest, perseverance in supporting the cruel extremities of hunger and
nakedness without a murmur or sigh, as well as for their magnanimity in
retiring to civil life, at the moment of victory, with arms in their hands, and
without any just compensation for their services, will only cease to be
celebrated, when time shall exist no more.

ENTHUSIASM for the cause of liberty, substituted in the place of discipline,
not only kept these troops together, but enabled them at once to perform the
duties of a disciplined army. Though the Commanding Officers from the four
colonies of New England, were in a manner independent, they acted harmoniously
in concert. The first attention had been prudently directed toward forming
some little redoubts and intrenchments; for it was well known, that lines,
however slight or untenable, were calculated to inspire raw soldiers with a
confidence in themselves. The next care was to bring the live stock from the
Islands in Boston bay, in order to prevent the enemy (already surrounded by
land) from making use of them for fresh provisions. In the latter end of May,
between two and three hundred men were sent to drive off the stock from Hog and
Noddle Islands, which are situated on the north-east side of Boston harbor.
Advantage having been taken of the ebb-tide, when the water is fordable between
the main and Hog-Island, as it is between that and Noddle-Island the design was
effected. But a skirmish ensued, in which some of the marines, who had been
stationed to guard them, were killed: and as the firing continued between the
British water-craft and our party, a reinforcement of three hundred men, with
two pieces of artillery, was ordered to join the latter. General Putnam took
the command, and having himself gone down on the beach, within conversing
distance, and ineffectually ordered the people on board an armed schooner to
strike, he plied her with shot so furiously that the crew made their escape,
and the vessel was burnt. An armed sloop was likewise so much disabled as to be
towed off by the boats of the fleet. Thus ended this affair, in which several
hundred sheep, and some cattle were removed from under the muzzles of the
enemy's cannon, and our men, accustomed to stand fire, by being for many hours
exposed to it, without meeting with any loss.

THE Provincial Generals, having received advice, that the British Commander in
Chief, designed to take possession of the heights on the peninsula of Charles
Town, detached a thousand men in the night of the 16th of June, under the
orders of General Warren, to entrench themselves upon one of these eminences,
named Bunker Hill. Though retarded by accidents, from beginning the work until
nearly midnight, yet, by dawn of day, they had constructed a redoubt about
eight rods square, and commenced a breast-work from the left to the low
grounds: which an insufferable fire from the shipping, floating batteries, and
cannon on Cop's Hill, in Boston, prevented them from completing. At midday
four battalions of foot, ten companies of Grenadiers, ten companies of Light
Infantry, with a proportion of Artillery, commanded by Major General How,
landed under a heavy cannonade from the ships, and advanced in three lines to
the attack. The Light Infantry, being formed on their right, was directed to
turn the left flank of the Americans: and the Grenadiers, supported by two
battalions, to storm the redoubt in front. Meanwhile, on application, these
troops were augmented by the 47th Regiment, the 1st Battalion of Marines,
together with some companies of Light Infantry, and Grenadiers, which formed an
aggregate force of between two and three thousand men. But so difficult was it
to reinforce the Americans, by sending detachments across the Neck, which was
raked by the cannon of the shipping, that not more than fifteen hundred men
were brought into action. Few instances can be produced in the annals of
mankind, where soldiers, who never had before faced an enemy, or heard the
whistling of a ball, behaved with such deliberate and persevering valor. It was
not until after the Grenadiers had been twice repulsed to their boats, General
Warren slain, his troops exhausted of their ammunition, their lines in a manner
enfiladed by Artillery, and the redoubt half filled with British Regulars, that
the word was given to retire. In that forlorn condition, the spectacle was
astonishing as new, to behold these undisciplined men, most of them without
bayonets, disputing with the butt end of their muskets against the British
bayonet, and receding in sullen despair. Still the Light Infantry, on their
left, would certainly have gained their rear, and exterminated this gallant
corpse, had not a body of four hundred Connecticut men, with the Captains,
Knoulton and Chester, after forming a temporary breast-work, by pulling up one
post and rail fence, and putting it upon another, performed prodigies of
bravery. They held the enemy at bay, until the main body had relinquished the
heights, and then retreated across the Neck, with more regularity, and less
loss than could have been expected. The British, who effected nothing but the
destruction of Charles Town, by a wanton conflagration, had more than one half
of their whole number killed and wounded: the Americans, only three hundred and
fifty-five killed, wounded, and missing. In this battle, the presence and
example of General Putnam, who arrived with the reinforcement, were not less
conspicuous than useful. He did every thing that an intrepid and experienced
officer could accomplish. The enemy pursued to Winter Hill -- Putnam made a
stand, and drove them back under cover of their ships.

THE premature death of Warren, one of the most illustrious patriots that ever
bled in the cause of Freedom; the veteran appearance of Putnam, collected, yet
ardent in action; together with the astonishing scenery and interesting groupe
around Bunker Hill, rendered this a magnificent subject for the historic
pencil. Accordingly Trumbull, formerly an Aid-de-Camp to General Washington,
afterward Deputy Adjutant General of the northern Army, now an artist of great
celebrity in Europe, has finished this picture with that boldness of
conception, and those touches of art which demonstrates the master. Heightened
in horror by the flames of a burning town, and the smoke of conflicting armies,
the principal scene, taken the moment when Warren fell, represents that hero in
the agonies of death, a Grenadier on the point of bayoneting him, and Colonel
Small (to whom he was familiarly known) arresting the soldier's arm: at the
head of the British line Major Pitcairne is seen falling dead into the arms of
his son: and not far distant General Putnam is placed at the rear of our
retreating troops, in the light blue and scarlet uniform he wore that day, with
his head uncovered, and his sword waving toward the enemy, as it were to stop
their impetuous pursuit. In nearly the same attitude he is exhibited by Barlow
in that excellent Poem, the Vision of Columbus.

" There strides bold Putnam and from all the plains,
" Calls the third host, the tardy rear sustains,
" And, mid the whizzing deaths that fill the air,
" Waves back his sword, and dares the foll'wing war." The writer of this Essay
had occasion of remarking to the Poet and the painter, while they were three
thousand miles distant from each other (at which distance they had formed and
executed the plans of their respective productions) the similarity observable
in their descriptions of General Putnam. These Chiefs d'auvres are mentioned,
not with a vain presumption of adding eclat of duration to works which have
received the seal of immortality, but because they preserve in the sister arts
the same illustrious action of our hero. I persuade myself I need not apologize
for annexing the beautiful lines from the poem in question, on the death of
General Warren.

" There, halpless Warren, thy cold earth was seen:
" There spring thy laurels in immortal green;
" Dearest of Chiefs that ever pressed the plain.
" In freedom's cause, with early honors, slain,
" Still dear in death, as when in fight you moved,
" By hosts applauded and by Heaven approved;
" The faithful muse shall tell the world thy fame,
" And unborn realms resound the immortal name."


AFTER this action, the British strongly fortified themselves on the Peninsulas
of Boston and Charles Town: while the Provincials remained posted in the
circumjacent country in such manner as to form a blockade. In the beginning of
July, General Washington, who had been, constituted by Congress, Commander in
Chief of the American forces, arrived at Cambridge to take the command. Having
formed the army into three grand divisions, consisting of about twelve
Regiments each, he appointed Major General Ward to command the right Wing,
Major General Lee the left Wing and Major General Putnam the reserve. General
Putnam's alertness, in accelerating the construction of the necessary defenses,
was particularly noticed and highly approved by the Commander in Chief.

About the 20th of July, the declaration of Congress setting forth the reasons
of their taking up arms, was proclaimed at the head of the several divisions.
It concluded with these patriotic and noble sentiments, In our own native land,
in defense of the freedom that is our birthright, and which we ever enjoyed
until the late violation of it; for the protection of our property, acquired
solely by the honest industry of our forefathers and ourselves; against
violence actually offered, we have taken up arms. We shall lay them down when
hostilities shall cease on the part of the aggressors, and all danger of their
being renewed shall be removed, and not before.

With an humble confidence in the mercies of the supreme and impartial Judge
and Ruler of the Universe, we most devoutly implore his divine goodness to
conduct us happily through this great conflict, to dispose our adversaries to
reconciliation on reasonable terms, and, thereby, to relieve the empire from
the calamities of civil war. -- As soon as these memorable words were
pronounced to General Putnam's Division, which he had ordered to be paraded on
Prospect Hill, they shouted in three huzzas aloud, amen! Whereat (a cannon from
the Fort being fired as a signal) the new Standard, lately sent from
Connecticut, was suddenly seen to rise and unrol itself to the wind. On one
side was inscribed in large letters of gold, "AN APPEAL TO HEAVEN," and on the
other, were delineated the armorial bearings of Connecticut, which, without
supporters or crest, consist, unostentatiously, of Three Vines: with this
motto, " Literally, "He who transplanted them will support them,"
"Qui transtulit, sustinet;" alluding to the pious confidence our forefathers
placed in the protection of Heaven, on those three allegorical Scions --
KNOWLEDGE -- LIBERTY -- RELIGION -- which they had been instrumental in
transplanting to America.

THE strength of position on the enemy's part, and want of ammunition on ours,
prevented operations of magnitude from being attempted. Such diligence was used
in fortifying our camps, and such precaution adopted to prevent surprise, as to
ensure tranquillity to the troops during the winter. In the spring, a position
was taken so menacing to the enemy, as to cause them, on the 17th of March
1776, to abandon Boston: not without considerable precipitation and dereliction
of royal stores.

As a part of the hostile fleet lingered for some time in Nantasket road (about
nine miles below Boston) General Washington continued himself in Boston, not
only to see the coast entirely clear, but also to make many indispensable
arrangements. His Excellency, proposing to leave Major General Ward with a few
regiments, to finish the fortifications intended as a security against an
attack by water, in the mean time dispatched the greater part of the army to
New York, where it was most probable the enemy would make a descent. Upon the
sailing of a fleet with troops in the month of January, Major General Lee had
been sent to the defense of that city; who, after having caused some works to
be laid out, proceeded to follow that fleet to South Carolina. The Commander in
Chief was now exceedingly solicitous that these works should be completed as
soon as possible, and accordingly gave the following

Orders and Instructions for Major General Putnam.

As there are the best reasons to believe that the enemy's fleet and army,
which left Nantasket road last Wednesday evening, are bound to New York, to
endeavor to possess that important post, and, if possible, to secure the
communication by Hudson's River to Canada; it must be our care to prevent them
from accomplishing their designs. To that end, I have detached Brigadier
General Health with the whole body of Rifle-men and five Battalions of the
Continental Army, by the way of Norwich in Connecticut, to New York. These by
an express arrived yesterday from General Heath, I have reason to believe, are
in New York. Six more Battalions, under General Sullivan, march this morning by
the same route, and will, I hope, arrive there in eight or ten days at
farthest. The rest of the army will immediately follow in Divisions, leaving
only a convenient space between each Division, to prevent confusion, and want
of accommodation upon their march. You will no doubt make the best dispatch in
getting to New York. Upon your arrival there, you will assume the command, and
immediately proceed in continuing to execute the plan proposed by Major General
Lee, for fortifying that city, and securing the passes of the East and North
Rivers. If, upon consultation with the Brigadiers General and Engineers, any
alteration in that plan is thought necessary, you are at liberty to make it:
cautiously avoiding to break in too much upon his main design, unless where it
may be apparently necessary so to do, and that by the general voice and opinion
of the gentlemen abovementioned.

You will meet the Quarter Master General, Col. Mifflin, and Colonel Joseph
Trumbull, eldest son to the Governor of that name.
Commissary General at New York. As these are both men of excellent talents in
their different Departments, you will do well to give them all the authority
and assistance they require: And should a Council of War be necessary, it is my
direction they assist at it.

Your long Service and Experience will, better than my particular directions at
this distance, point out to you the works most proper to be first raised, and
your perseverance, activity and zeal will lead you (without my recommending it)
to exert every nerve to disappoint the enemy's designs.

Devoutly praying that the POWER which has hitherto sustained the American
Arms, may continue to bless them with the divine protection, I bid you --
FAREWELL.

Given at Head Quarters, in Cambridge, this 29th of March, 1776. GEO.
WASHINGTON.


INVESTED with these commands, General Putnam traveled by long and expeditious
stages to New York. His first precaution, upon his arrival, was to prevent
disturbance, or surprise in the night season. With these objects in view, after
posting the necessary guards, he issued his General orders.
Head Quarters, New York, April 5, 1776.
The Soldiers are strictly enjoined to retire to their barracks and Quarters,
at tattoo-beating, and to remain there until the reveille is beat.

Necessity obliges the General to desire the inhabitants of the city to observe
the same rule, as no person will be permitted to pass any centry, after this
night, without the counter-sign.

The Inhabitants, whose business requires it, may know the counter-sign by
applying to any of the Brigade Majors.



Orders. He instituted, likewise, other wholesome regulations to meliorate the
police of the troops, and to preserve the good agreement that subsisted between
them and the citizens.

NOTWITHSTANDING the war had now raged, in other parts, with unaccustomed
severity for nearly a year, yet the British ships at New York (one of which had
once fired upon the town to intimidate the inhabitants) found the means of
being supplied with fresh water and provisions. General Putnam resolved to
adopt effectual measures for putting a period to this intercourse, and
accordingly expressed his prohibition PROHIBITION.
Head Quarters, New York, April 8, 1776.
The General informs the inhabitants, that it is become absolutely necessary,
that all communication between the ministerial fleet and shore should be
immediately stopped; for that purpose, he has given positive orders, the ships
should no longer be furnished with provisions. Any inhabitants, or others, who
shall be taken, that have been on board (after the publishing this order) or
near any of the ships or going on board, will be considered as enemies, and
treated accordingly.

All boats are to ^ail from Beckman's slip. Captain James Alner is appointed
inspector and will give permits to Oystermen. It is ordered and expected that
none attempt going without a pass,

ISRAEL PUTNAM, Major General in the Continental Army and Commander in Chief of
the forces in New York.



in the most pointed terms.

NEARLY at the same moment, a detachment of a thou and Continentals was sent to
occupy Governor's-Island, a Regiment to fortify Red Hook, and some companies of
Riflemen to the Jersey shore. Of two boats, (belonging to two armed vessels)
which attempted to take on board fresh water from the watering place on
Staten-Island, one was driven off (by the Riflemen) with two or three seamen
killed in it; and the other captured with thirteen. A few days afterward
Captain Vandeput, of the Asia man of war, the senior officer of the ships on
this station, finding the intercourse with the shore interdicted, their limits
contracted, and that no good purposes could be answered by remaining there,
sailed, with all the armed vessels, out of the harbor. These arrangements and
transactions, joined to an unremitting attention to the completion of the
defenses, gave full scope to the activity of General Putnam, until the arrival
of General Washington, which happened about the middle of April.

THE Commander in Chief, in his first public orders. complimented the officers
who had successively commanded at New York, and returned his thanks to them as
well as to the Officers and soldiers, under their command, for the many works
of defense which had been so expeditiously erected: at the same time he
expressed an expectation that the same spirit of zeal for the service, would
continue to animate their future conduct, -- Putnam, who was then the only
Major General with the main army, had still a chief agency in forwarding the
fortifications; and, with the assistance of the Brigadiers Spencer and Lord
Sterling, in assigning to the different Corpse their alarm Posts.

CONGRESS having intimated a desire of consulting with the Commander in Chief,
on the critical posture of affairs, his Excellency repaired to Philadelphia
accordingly, and was absent from the twenty-first of May, until the sixth of
June. General Putnam, who commanded in that interval, had it in charge, to open
all letters directed to General Washington, on public service, and, if
important, after regulating his conduct by their contents, to forward them by
express; to expedite the works then erecting; to begin others which were
specified; to establish signals for communicating an alarm; to guard against
the possibility of surprise; to secure well the Powder-Magazine; to augment by
every means in his power the quantity of Cartridges; and to send Brigadier
General Lord Sterling to put the Posts in the Highlands into a proper condition
of defense. He had also a private and confidential instruction, to afford
whatever aid might be required by the Provincial Congress of New York, for
apprehending certain of their disaffected citizens: and as it would be most
convenient to take the detachment for this service, from the troops on
Long Island, under the command of Brigadier General Green, it was recommended
that this officer should be advised of the plan, and that the execution should
be conducted with secrecy and celerity, as well as with decency and good order.
In the records of the army, are preserved, the daily orders which were issued
in the absence of the Commander in Chief, who, on his return, was not only
satisfied, that the works had been prosecuted with all possible dispatch, but
also that the other duties had been properly discharged,

IT was the latter end of June, when the British fleet, which had been at
Halifax, waiting for reinforcements from Europe, begun to arrive at New York.
To obstruct its passage, some marine preparations had been made. General
Putnam, to whom the directions of the whale boats, fire rafts, flat-bottomed
boats, and armed vessels was committed, afforded his patronage to a project for
destroying the enemies shipping, by explosion. A machine, altogether different
from any thing, hitherto devised by the art of man, had been invented by Mr.
David Bushnell, David Bushnell, A. M. of Saybrook, in Connecticut invented,
several other machines for the annoyance of shipping; these from accidents, not
militating against the philosophical principles, on which their success
depended, only partially succeeded. He destroyed a vessel in the charge of
Commodore Symmonds, whose report to the Admiral was published. One of his kegs
also demolished a vessel near the Long Island shore. About Christmas, 1777, he
committed to the Delaware a number of kegs, destined to fall among the British
fleet at Philadelphia: but his squadron of kegs, having been separated and
retarded by the ice, demolished but a single boat. This catastrophe, however,
produced an alarm, unprecedented in its nature and degree; which has been so
happily described in the subsequent song, by the Hon. Francis Hopkinson, that
the event it celebrates will not be forgotten, so long as mankind shall
continue to be delighted with works of humor and taste.

The Battle of the Kegs: -- a Song. -- Tune, Moggy Lawder.
GALLANTS, attend, and hear a friend,
Thrill forth harmonious ditty:
Strange things I Will tell, which late befell,
In Philadelphia city.
'Twas early day, as poets say,
Just when the sun was rising,
A soldier stood on log of wood,
And saw a sight surprising.
As in a maze he stood to gaze,
The truth cannot be denied, Sir,
He spied a score of kegs or more,
Come floating down the tide, Sir.
A sailor, too, in jerkin blue,
The strange appearance viewing,
First damned his eyes, in great surprise,
Then said -- "Some mischief's brewing,"
These Kegs now hold the rebels bold,
Packed up like pickled herring:
And they are come down, to attack the town,
In this new way of ferry'ng.
The soldier flew; the sailor too;
And, scared almost to death, Sir,
Wore out their shoes, to spread the news;
And ran till out of breath, Sir.
Now up and down, throughout the town;
Most frantic scenes were acted:
And some ran here, and some ran there,
Like men almost distracted.
Some fire cried, which some denied,
But said the earth had quaked:
And girls and boys, with hideous noise,
Ran through the town half naked.
Sir William Sir William How,
he, snug as a flea,
Lay all this time a snoring;
Nor dreamt of harm, as he lay warm,
In bed with Mrs. L*r*ng.
Now in a fright, he starts upright,
Awaked by such a clatter:
He rubs both eyes; and boldly cries,
"For God's sake, what is the matter?"
At his bedside, he then espied
Sir Erskine Sir William Erskine,
at command, Sir,
Upon one foot, he had one boot,
And to other in his hand, Sir.
" Arise! arise!" Sir Erskine cries:
" The rebels -- more's the pity --
" Without a boat, are all on float,
" And ranged before the city.
" The motley crew, in vessels new,
" With Satan for their guide, Sir,
" Packed up in bags, or wooden kegs,
" Come driving down the tide, Sir;
Therefore prepare for bloody war:
These kegs must all be routed:
Or surely we despised shall be,
And British courage doubted.
The Royal band now ready stand;
All ranged in dread array, Sir,
With stomach's stout, to see it out,
And make a bloody day, Sir.
The cannons roar from shore to shore,
The small arms make a rattle:
Since wars began, I Am sure no man,
Ever saw so strange a battle.
The rebel The British officers were so fond of the word, rebel, that they
often applied it most absurdly.
vales, the rebel dales,
With rebel trees surrounded,
The distant woods, the hills, and floods,
With rebel echoes sounded.
The fish below, swam to and fro,
Attacked from every quarter:
Why sure, thought they, the Devil's to pay,
Amongst folks above the water.
The kegs, it is said, though strongly made
Of rebel staves and hoops, Sir,
Could not oppose their powerful foes,
The conquering British troops, Sir.
From morn to night, those men of might,
Displayed amazing courage;
And when the sun was fairly down,
Retired to sup their porridge.
An hundred men, with each a pen,
Or more, upon my word, Sir,
It is most true, would be too few,
Their valor to record, Sir.
Such feats did they perform that day,
Upon those wicked kegs, Sir,
That years to come, if they get home,
They Will make their boasts and brags, Sir.
Mr. Bushnell, having been highly recommended for his talents by President
Styles, General Parsons, and some other gentleman of science, was appointed a
Captain in the corpse of sappers and miners: in which capacity he continued to
serve with that corpse, until the conclusion of the war.


for submarine navigation, which was found to answer the purpose perfectly, of
rowing horizontally at any given depth under water, and of rising or sinking at
pleasure. To this machine, (called the American Turtle) was attached, a
magazine of powder, which it was intended to be fastened under the bottom of a
ship, with a driving screw; in such sort, that the same stroke which disengaged
it from the machine, should put the internal clock-work in motion. This being
done, the ordinary operation of a gun-lock (at the distance of half an hour, an
hour, or any determinate time) would cause the powder to explode, and leave the
effects to the common laws of nature. The simplicity, yet combination
discovered in the mechanism of this wonderful machine, were acknowledged by
those skilled in physics, and particularly Hydraulics, to be not less ingenious
than novel. The Inventor, whose constitution was too feeble to permit him to
perform the labor of rowing the Turtle, had taught his brother to manage it
with perfect dexterity; but unfortunately his brother fell sick of a fever,
just before the arrival of the fleet. Recourse was therefore had to a sergeant
in the Connecticut troops; who, having received whatever instructions could be
communicated to him in a short time, (went too late in the night) with all the
apparatus under the bottom of the Eagle, a sixty-four gun ship, on board of
which the British Admiral, Lord How, commanded. In coming up, the screw, that
had been calculated to perforate the copper sheathing, unluckily struck against
some iron plates, where the rudder is connected with the stern. This accident,
added to the strength of tide, which prevailed, and the want of adequate skill
in the sergeant, occasioned such delay, that the dawn began to appear,
whereupon he abandoned the Magazine to chance, and (after gaining a proper
distance) for the sake of expedition, rowed on the surface toward the town.
General Putnam, who had been on the wharf, anxiously expecting the result, from
the first glimmering of light, beheld the machine near Governor's Island, and
sent a whaleboat to bring it on shore. In about twenty minutes afterward, the
magazine exploded, and blew a vast column of water, to an amazing height, in
the air. As the whole business had been kept an inviolable secret, he was not a
little diverted with the various conjectures, whether this stupendous noise was
produced by a bomb, a meteor, a water-spout, or an earthquake. Other operations
of a most serious nature, rapidly succeeded and prevented a repetition of the
experiment.

ON the twenty-second day of August the van of the British landed on
Long Island, and was soon followed by the whole army, except one Brigade of
Hessians, a small body of British, and some convalescents, left on
Staten-Island. Our troops on Long Island had been commanded during the summer
by General Green, who was now sick; and General Putnam took the command, but
two days before the battle of Flatbush. The instructions to him (pointing in
the first place to decisive expedients for suppressing the scattering,
unmeaning and wasteful fire of our men) contained regulations for the service
of the guards, the Brigadiers and the Field officers of the day; for the
appointment and encouragement of proper scouts; as well as for keeping the men
constantly at their posts; for preventing the burning of buildings (except it
should be necessary for military purposes) and for preserving private property
from pillage and destruction. To these regulations were added, in a more
diffuse though not less spirited and professional style, reflections on the
distinction of an army from a mob; with exhortations for the soldiers to
conduct themselves manfully in such a cause, and for their Commander to oppose
the enemy's approach with detatchments of his best troops: while he should
endeavor to render their advance more difficult by constructing abbattis, and
to entrap their parties by forming ambuscades. General Putnam was within the
lines, when an engagement took place on the 27th, between the British army and
our advanced Corpse, in which we lost about a thousand men in killed and
missing, with the General Sullivan and Lord Sterling made prisoners. But our
men (though attacked on all sides) fought with great bravery; and the enemy's
loss was not light.

THE unfortunate battle of Long Island, the masterly retreat from thenoe, and
the actual passage of part of the hostile fleet in the East River above the
town, precluded the evacuation of New York. A promotion of four Majors General,
and six Brigadiers, had previously been made by Congress. After the retreat
from Long Island, the main army, consisting for the moment, of sixty Battalions
(of which twenty were Continental, the residue Levies and Militia) was,
conformably to the exigencies of the service, rather than to the rules of war,
formed into fourteen Brigades. Major General Putnam commanded the right grand
Division of five Brigades, the Majors General Spencer and Green the center of
six Brigades, and Major General Heath the left, which was posted near
Kingsbridge, and composed of two Brigades. The whole never amounted to twenty
thousand effective men; while the British and (...) forces under Sir William
How, exceeded twenty-two thousand: indeed the Minister had asserted in
Parliament, that they would consist of more than thirty thousand. Our two
center divisions, both commanded by General Spencer in the sickness of General
Green, moved toward Mount Washington, Harlem Heights and Horn's Hook, as soon
as the final resolution was taken, in a Council of War, on the twelfth of
September, to abandon the city. That event, thus circumstanced, took effect a
few days after.

ON Sunday the fifteenth the British, after sending three ships of war up the
North River to Bloomingdale, and keeping up, for some hours, a severe cannonade
on our lines, from those already in the East River, landed in force at Turtle
Bay -- our new Levies commanded by a state Brigadier General, fled without
making resistance. Two Brigades of General Putnam's Division, ordered to their
support, notwithstanding the exertion of their Brigadiers, and of the Commander
in Chief himself, who came up at the instant, conducted themselves in the same
shameful manner. His Excellency then ordered the Heights of Harlem, a strong
position, to be occupied. Thither the forces in the vicinity, as well as the
fugitives, repaired. In the mean time General Putnam, with the remainder of his
command and the ordinary out-posts, was in the city. After having caused the
Brigades to begin their retreat by the rout of Bloomingdale, in order to avoid
the enemy, who were then in the possession of the main road leading to
Kingsbridge, he galloped to call off the pickets and guards. Having myself been
a Volunteer in his Division, and acting Adjutant to the last Regiment that left
the city, I had frequent opportunities that day of beholding him, for the
purpose of issuing orders and encouraging the troops, flying, on his horse
covered with foam, wherever his presence was most necessary. Without his
extraordinary exertions the guards must have been inevitably lost, and it is
probable the entire Corpse would have been cut in pieces. When we were not far
from Bloomingdale, an Aid-de-Camp came from him at full speed, to inform, that
a column of British Infantry was descending upon our right. Our rear was soon
fired upon, and the Colonel of our regiment (whose order was just communicated
for the front to file off to the left) was killed on the spot. With no other
loss, we joined the army, after dark, on the Heights of Harlem.

BEFORE our Brigades came in, we were given up for lost by all our friends. So
critical indeed was our situation, and so narrow the gap by which we escaped,
that the instant we had passed, the enemy closed it by extending their line
from river to river. Our men, who had been fifteen hours under arms, harrassed
by marching and countermarching, in consequence of incessant alarms, exhausted
as they were by heat, and thirst (for the day proved insupportably hot, and few
or none had canteens, insomuch that some died at the brooks where they drank)
if attacked, could have made but feeble resistance.

IF we take into consideration the debilitating sickness which weakened almost
all (...) troops, the hard duty by which they were worn down in constructing
numberless defenses, the continual want of rest they had suffered (since the
enemy landed) in guarding from nocturnal surprise, the despondency infused into
their minds by an insular situation, and a consciousness of inferiority to the
enemy in discipline, together with the disadvantageous term upon which, in
their state of separation, they might have been forced to engage; it appears
highly probable that day would have presented an easy victory to the British.
On the other side, the American Commander in Chief had wisely countenanced an
opinion, then universally credited, that our army was three times more numerous
than it was in reality. It is not a subject for astonishment, that the British,
ignorant of the existing circumstances, imposed upon as to the numbers by
reports, and recollecting what a few brave men, slightly entrenched, had
performed at Bunker Hill, should proceed with great circumspection. For their
reproaches, that the Rebels (as they affected to style us) loved digging better
than fighting, and that they earthed themselves in holes like foxes, but ill
concealed at the bottom of their own hearts the profound impression that action
had made. Cheap and contemptible as we had once seemed in their eyes, it had
taught them to hold us in some respect. This respect, in conjunction with a
fixed belief that the enthusiastic spirit of our opposition must soon subside,
and that the inexhaustible resources of Britain would ultimately triumph
without leaving any thing to chance (not the avarice or treachery of the
British General, as the factious of his own nation wished to insinuate)
retarded ^^eir operation, and afforded us leisure to rescue from annihilation
the miserable relics of an army, hastening to dissolution, by the expiration of
enlistments, and the country itself from irretrievable subjugtaion. IN TRUTH WE
ARE NOT LESS INDEBTED TO THE MATTOCK AT ONE PERIOD, THAN TO THE MUSKET AT
ANOTHER, FOR OUR POLITICAL SALVATION. It required great talents to determine
when one or the other was most profitably to be employed. I am aware how
fashionable it has become to compare the American Commander in Chief, for the
prudence displayed in those dilatory and defensive operations, so happily
prosecuted in the early stages of the war, to illustrious Romans, who acquired
immortality in restoring the Commonwealth, by delay. Advantageous and
flattering as the comparison at first appears, it will be found on examination
to stint the American Fabius, to the smaller moiety of his merited fame. Did HE
not in scenes of almost unparalelled activity discover specimens of
transcendent abilities, and might it not be proved to professional men, that
boldness in council, and rapidity in execution were, at least, equally with
prudent procrastination, and the quality of not being compelled to action,
attributes of his military genius? This, however, was an occasion, as apparent
as pressing, for attaining his object by delay. From that he had every thing to
gain, nothing to lose. Yet there were not wanting Politicians, AT THIS VERY
TIME, who querulously blamed these Fabian measures, and loudly clamored, that
the immense labor and expense bestowed on the fortification of New York, had
been thrown away; that, if we could not face the enemy there after so many
preparations, we might as well relinquish the contest at once, for we could no
where make a stand; and that, if General Washington, with an army of sixty
thousand men, strongly entrenched, declined fighting with Sir William How, who
had little more than one third of that number, it was not to be expected he
would find any other occasion that might induce him to engage. -- But General
Washington, content to suffer a temporary sacrifice of personal reputation, for
the sake of securing a permanent advantage to his country, and regardless of
those idle clamors for which he had furnished materials, by making his
countrymen, in order the more effectually to make his enemy believe his force
much greater than it actually was; inflexibly pursued his system, and
gloriously demonstrated how poor and pitiful in the estimation of A GREAT MIND,
are the censorious strictures of those Novices in war and politics, who, with
equal rashness and impudence, presume to decide dogmatically on the merit of
plans they could neither originate or comprehend! --

THAT night our soldiers, excessively fatigued by the sultry march of the day,
their clothes wet by a severe shower of rain that succeeded toward the
evening, their blood chilled by the cold wind that produced a sudden change in
the temperature of the air, and their hearts sunk within them by the loss of
baggage, artillery, and works in which they had been taught to put great
confidence, lay upon their arms, covered only by the clouds of an uncomfortable
sky. To retrieve our disordered affairs, and prevent the enemy from profiting
by them, no exertion was relaxed, no vigilance remitted on the part of our
higher officers. The Regiments which had been least exposed to fatigue that
day, furnished the necessary piquets to secure the army from surprise. Those,
whose military lives had been short and unpractised, felt enough besides
lassitude of body to disquiet the tranquillity of their repose. Nor had those,
who were older in service and of more experience, any subject for consolation.
The warmth of enthusiasm seemed to be extinguished. The force of discipline had
not sufficiently occupied its place to give men a dependence upon each other.
We were apparently about to reap the bitter fruits of that jealous policy,
which some leading men (with the best motives) had sown in our foederal
councils, when they caused the mode to be adopted, for carrying on the war by
detachments of militia; from apprehension that an established Continental army,
after defending the country against foreign invasion, might subvert its
liberties themselves. Paradoxical as it will appear, it may be profitable to be
known to posterity, that, while our very existence as an independent people was
in question, the patriotic jealousy for the safety of our future freedom had
been carried to such a virtuous, but dangerous excess, as well nigh to preclude
the attainment of our Independence. Happily that limited and hazardous system
soon gave room to one more enlightened and salutary. This may be attributed to
the reiterated arguments, the open remonstrances and the confidential
communications of the Commander in Chief; who, though not apt to despair of the
Republic, on this occasion, expressed himself in terms of unusual despondency.
He declared in his letters, that he found, to his utter astonishment and
mortification, that no reliance could be placed on a great proportion of his
present troops, and that, unless efficient measures for establishing a
permanent force should be speedily pursued, we had every reason to fear the
final ruin of our cause.

NEXT morning several parties of the enemy appeared upon the plains in our
front. On receiving this intelligence, General Washington rode quickly to the
outposts, for the purpose of preparing against an attack, if the enemy should
advance with that design. Lieutenant Colonel Knowlton's Rangers (a fine
selection from the eastern Regiments), who had been skirmishing with an
advanced party, came in and informed the General that a body of British were
under cover of a small eminence at no considerable distance. His Excellency,
willing to raise our men from their dejection by the splendour of some little
success, ordered Lieutenant Colonel Knowlton with his Rangers, and Major Leitch
with three Companies of Weedon's Regiment of Virginians, to gain their rear;
while appearance should be made of an attack in front. As soon as the enemy saw
the party sent to decoy them, they ran precipitately down the hill, took
possession of some fences and bushes, and commenced a brisk firing at long
shot. Unfortunately Knowlton and Leitch made their onset rather in flank than
in rear. The enemy changed their front, and the skirmish at once became close
and warm. Major Major Leitch, after languishing some days, died of a locked jaw.
Leitch having received three balls through his side was soon borne from the
field, and Colonel Knowlton (who had distinguished himself so gallantly at the
battle of Bunker-Hill) was mortally wounded immediately after. Their men,
however, undaunted by these disasters, stimulated with the thirst of revenge
for the loss of their leaders, and conscious of acting under the eye of the
Commander in Chief, maintained the conflict with uncommon spirit and
perseverance. But the General, seeing them in need of support, advanced part of
the Maryland Regiments of Griffith and Richardson, together with some
detachments from such eastern Corpse, as chanced to be most contiguous to the
place of action. Our troops this day, without exception, behaved with the
greatest intrepidity. So bravely did they repulse the British, that Sir William
How moved his Reserve with two field pieces, a battalion of Hessian
Grenadiers, and a company of Chasseurs to succor his retreating troops. General
Washington, not willing to draw on a general action, declined pressing the
pursuit. In this engagement were the second and third Battalions of Light
Infantry, the forty-second British Regiment, and the German Chasseurs, of whom
eight officers and upwards of seventy privates were wounded, and our people
buried nearly twenty, who were left dead on the field. We had about forty
wounded: our loss in killed, except of two valuable Officer^, was very
inconsiderable.

AN A transcript from General Washington's Public Orders of the seventeenth,
will better than any other document that could be adduced, show his sentiment
on the conduct of the two preceding days, and how fervently he wished to foster
the good dispositions discovered on the last.

ORDERS.
Head Quarters, Harlem Heights, Sept. 17, 1776.
Parole, Leitch. -- Countersign, Virginia. The General most heartily thanks the
troops commanded yesterday by Major Leitch, who first advanced upon the enemy,
and the others who so resolutely supported them. The behavior yesterday was
such a contrast to that of some of the troops the day before, as must show what
may be done where Officers and Soldiers will exert themselves. Once more,
therefore, the General calls upon Officers and Men, to act up to the noble
cause in which they are engaged, and to support the honor and liberties of
their Country.

The gallant and brave Colonel Knowlton, who would have been an honor to any
Country, having fallen yesterday, while gloriously fighting; Captain Brown is
to take the Command of the party lately ^ed by Colonel Knowlton. Officers and
men are to obey him accordingly.



advantage, so trivial in itself, produced, in event, a surprising and almost
incredible effect upon the whole army. Among the troops not engaged, who during
the action were throwing earth from the new trenches, with an alacrity that
indicated a determination to defend them, every visage was seen to brighten,
and to assume, instead of the gloom of despair, the glow of animation. This
change, no less sudden than happy, left little room to doubt that the men, who
ran the day before at the sight of an enemy, would now (to wipe away the stain
of that disgrace, and to recover the confidence of their General) have
conducted themselves in a very different manner. Some alteration was made in
the distribution of Corpse to prevent the British from gaining either flank in
the succeeding night. General Putnam, who commanded on the right, was directed
in orders, in case the enemy should attempt to force the pass, to apply for a
reinforcement to General Spencer, who commanded on the left.

GENERAL PUTNAM, who was too good a husbandman himself, not to have a respect
for the labors and improvements of others, strenuously seconded the views of
the Commander in Chief in preventing the devastation of Farms, and the
violation of private property. For under pretext that the property in this
quarter belonged to friends to the British government (as indeed it mostly did)
a spirit of rapine and licentiousness began to prevail, which, unless repressed
in the beginning, foreboded, besides the subversion of discipline, the disgrace
and defeat of our arms.

OUR new defenses now becoming so strong as not to admit insult with impunity,
and Sir William How, not choosing to place too much at risque in attacking us
in front, on the 12th day of October, leaving Lord Piercy with one Hessian and
two British Brigades in his lines at Harlem to cover New York, embarked with
the main body of his army with an intention of landing at Frog's Neck, situated
near the town of West Chester, and little more than a league above the
communication called Kingsbridge, which connects New York Island with the main.
There was nothing to oppose him; and he effected his debarkation by nine
o'clock in the morning. The same policy of keeping our army as compact as
possible; the same system of avoiding being forced to action; and the same
precaution to prevent the interruption of supplies, reinforcements or retreat,
that lately dictated the evacuation of New York, now induced General Washington
to move toward the strong grounds in the upper part of West Chester County.

ABOUT the same time, General Putnam was sent to the western side of the
Hudson, to provide against an irruption into the Jerseys, and soon after to
Philadelphia, to put that town into a posture of defense. Thither I attend him,
without stooping to dilate on the subsequent incidents that might swell a
folio, though here compressed to a single paragraph: without attempting to give
in detail, the skilful retrograde movements of our Commander in Chief, who
after detaching a Garrison for Fort Washington, by pre-occupying with
extemporaneous redoubts and entrenchments, the ridges form Mile-Sqare to White
Plains, and by folding one Brigade behind another, in rear of those ridges that
run parallel with the Sound, brought off all his Artillery, Stores, and Sick,
in the face of a superior foe: without commenting on the partial and equivocal
battle fought near the last mentioned village, or the cause why the British,
then in full force (for the last of the Hessian Infantry, and British
Light Horse, had just arrived) did not more seriously endeavor to induce a
general engagement: without journalizing their military maneuvers in falling
back to Kingsbridge, capturing Fort Washington, Fort Lee, and marching through
the Jerseys: without enumerating the instances of rapine, murder, lust, and
devastation, that marked their progress, and filled our bosoms with horror and
indignation: without describing how a division of our dissolving army, with
General Washington, was driven before them beyond the Delaware: without
painting the naked and forlorn condition of these much injured men, amidst the
rigors of an inclement season, and without even sketching the consternation
that seized the States, at this perilous period, when General Lee (in leading
from the North a small reinforcement to our troops) was himself taken prisoner
by surprise; when every thing seemed decidedly declining to the last extremity,
and when every prospect but served to augment the depression of despair --
until the genius of one man, in one day, at a single stroke, wrested from the
veteran Battalions of Britain and Germany the fruits acquired by the total
operations of a successful campaign, and re-animated the expiring hope of a
whole Nation, by the glorious enterprise at Trenton.

WHILE the hostile forces, rashly inflated with pride by a series of
uninterrupted successes, and fondly dreaming that a period would soon be put to
their labors by the completion of their conquests, had been pursuing the
wretched rem^ants of a disbanded army to the banks of the Delaware: General
Putnam was diligently employed in fortifying Philadelphia, the capture of which
appeared indubitably to be their principle object. Here, by authority and
example, he strove to conciliate contending factions, and to excite the
citizens to uncommon efforts in defense of every thing interesting to Freemen.
His personal industry was unparalleled. His As a specimen, the following is
preserved:

GENERAL ORDERS.
Head Quarters, Philadelphia, Dec. 14, 1776.
Colonel Griffin is appointed Adjutant General to the troops in and about this
city. All Orders from the General through him, either written or verbal, are to
be strictly attended to and punctually obeyed.

In case of an alarm of fire, the city guards and patroles are to suffer the
inhabitants to pass unmolested at any hour of the night; and the good people of
Philadelphia are earnestly requested and desired to give every assistance in
their power, with engines and buckets, to extinguish the fire. And, as the
Congress have ordered the City to be defended to the last extremity, the
General hopes that no person will refuse to give every assistance possible to
complete the Fortifications that are to be erected in and about the City.

ISRAEL PUTNAM.



Orders with respect to extinguishing accidental fires, advancing the public
works, as well as in regard to other important objects were perfectly military
and proper. But his health was, for a while, impaired by his unrelaxed
exertions.

THE Commander in Chief, having in spite of all obstacles made good his retreat
over the Delaware, wrote to General Putnam (from his Camp above the Falls of
Trenton, on the very day he recrossed the river to surprise the Hessians)
expressing his satisfaction at the reestablishment of that General's health,
and informing, that, if he had not himself been well convinced before of the
enemy's intention to possess themselves of Philadelphia, as soon as the frost
should form ice strong enough to transport them and their artillery across the
Delaware, he had now obtained an intercepted letter which placed the matter
beyond a doubt. He added, that, if the citizens of Philadelphia had any regard
for the town, not a moment's time was to be lost until it should be put in the
best possible posture of defense; but least that should not be done, he
directed the removal of all public stores, except provisions necessary for
immediate use, to places of greater security. He queried whether, if a party of
Militia could be sent from Philadelphia to support those in the Jerseys about
Mount Holly, it would not serve to save them from submission? At the same time,
he signified (as his opinion) the expediency of sending an active and
influential Officer to inspirit the people, to encourage them to assemble in
arms, as well as to keep those already in arms from disbanding; and concluded
by manifesting a wish that Colonel Forman, whom he desired to see for this
purpose, might be employed on the service.

THE enemy had vainly, as incautiously imagined that to overrun was to
conquer. They had even carried their presumption on our extreme weakness and
expected submission, so far as to attempt covering the country, through which
they had marched, with an extensive chain of Cantonments. That link, which the
post at Trenton supplied, consisted of a Hessian brigade of Infantry, a Company
of Chasseurs, a Squadron of Light Dragoons and fix Field Pieces. At eight
o'clock in the morning of the twenty-sixth of December, General Washington,
with twenty-four hundred men, came upon them (after they had paraded) took one
thousand prisoners, and repassed the same day without loss to his encampment.
As soon as the troops were recovered from their excessive fatigue, General
Washington recrossed a second time to Trenton. On the second of January, Lord
Cornwallis with the bulk of the British army advanced upon him, cannonaded his
post, and offered him battle: but, the two armies being separated by the
interposition of Trenton Creek, General Washington had it in his option to
decline an engagement; which he did for the sake of striking the masterly
stroke that he then meditated. Having kindled frequent fires around his camp,
posted faithful men to keep them burning, and advanced sentinels whose fidelity
might be relied upon, he decamped silently after dark, and, by a circuitous
route, reached Princeton at nine o'clock the next morning. The noise of the
firing, by which he killed and captured between five and six hundred of the
British Brigade in that town, was the first notice Lord Cornwallis had of this
stolen march. General Washington, the project successfully accomplished,
instantly filed off for the mountainous grounds of Morris Town. Meanwhile his
Lordship, who arrived by a forced march at Princeton, just as he had left it,
finding the Americans could not be overtaken, proceeded without halting to
Brunswick.

ON the fifth of January 1777, from Pluckemin, General Washington dispatched an
account of this second success to General Putnam, and ordered him to move
immediately with all his troops to Crosswicks, for the purpose of cooperating
in recovering the Jerseys: an event which the present fortunate juncture (while
the enemy were yet panic-struck) appeared to promise. The General cautioned
him, however, if the enemy should still continue at Brunswick, to guard with
great circumspection against a surprise: especially, as they, having recently
suffered by two attacks, could scarely avoid being edged with resentment to
attempt retaliation. His Excellency farther advised him to give out his
strength to be twice as great as it was; to forward on all the baggage and
scattering men belonging to the Division destined for Morris Town; to employ as
many spies as he should think proper; to keep a number of horsemen, in the
dress of the country, going constantly backwards and forwards on the same
secret service; and lastly, if he should discover any intention or motion of
the enemy that could be depended upon and might be of consequence, not to fail
in conveying the intelligence as rapidly as possible by express to Head
Quarters. Major General Putnam was directed soon after to take post at
Princ^ton; where he continued until the spring. He had never with him more than
a few hundred troops, though he was only at fifteen miles distance from the
enemy's strong garrison of Brunswick. At one period, from a sudden diminution,
occasioned by the tardiness of the militia, turning out to replace those whose
time of service was expired, he had fewer men for duty than he had miles of
frontier to guard. Nor was the Commander in Chief in a more eligible situation.
It is true, that, while he had scarcely the semblance of an army, under the
specious parade of a park of artillery, and the imposing appearance of his Head
Quarters, established at Morris Town, he kept up in the eyes of his countrymen,
as well as in the opinion of his enemy, the appearance of no contemptible
force. Future generations will find difficulty in conceiving how a handful of
new-levied Men and Militia, who were necessitated to be inoculated for the
Smallpox in the course of the winter, could be subdivided and posted so
advantageously, as, effectually to protect the inhabitants, confine the enemy,
curtail their forage, and beat up their quarters, without sustaining a single
disaster.

IN the battle of Princeton, Capt. M'Pherson, of the 17th British Regiment, a
very worthy Scotchman, was desperately wounded in the lungs and left with the
dead. Upon General Putnam's arrival there, he found him languishing in extreme
distress, without a surgeon, without a single accommodation, and without a
friend to solace the sinking spirit in the gloomy hour of death. He visited and
immediately caused every possible comfort to be administered to him. Captain
M'Pherson, who contrary to all appearances recovered, after having demonstrated
to General Putnam the dignified sense of obligations which a generous mind
wishes not to conceal, one day in familiar conversation demanded -- pray, Sir,
what countryman are you? -- An American, answered the latter. -- Not a Yankee?
-- said the other. A full-blooded one, replied the General. By G -- d, I am
sorry for that, rejoined M'Pherson, I did not think there could be so much
goodness and generosity in an American, or, indeed in any body but a Scotchman.

WHILE the recovery of Captain M'Pherson was doubtful, he desired that General
Putnam would permit a friend in the British army at Brunswick to come and
assist him in making HIS WILL. General Putnam, who had then only fifty men in
his whole command, was sadly embarrassed by the proposition. On the one hand,
he was not content that a British Officer should have an opportunity to spy out
the weakness of his post, -- on the other, it was scarcely in his nature to
refuse complying with a dictate of humanity. He luckily bethought himself of an
expedient, which he hastened to put in practice. A Flag of Truce was dispatched
with Captain M'Pherson's request, but under an injunction not to return with
his friend until after dark. In the evening, lights were placed in all the
rooms of the College, and in every apartment of the vacant houses throughout
the town. During the whole night, the fifty men, sometimes all together and
sometimes in small detachments, were marched from different quarters by the
house in which M'Pherson lay. Afterward it was known, that the Officer who
came on the visit at his return reported, that General Putnam's Army upon the
most moderate calculation could not consist of less than four or five thousand
men.

THIS winter's campaign (for our troops constantly kept the field after
regaining a footing in the Jerseys) has never yet been faithfully and feelingly
described. The sudden restoration of our cause from the very verge of ruin, was
interwoven with such a tissue of inscrutable causes and extraordinary events,
that, fearful of doing the subject greater injustice by a passing disquisition
than a purposed silence, I leave it to the leisure of abler pens. The ill
policy of the British doubtless contributed to accelerate this event. For the
manner, impolitic as inhuman, in which they managed their temporary conquests,
tended evidently to alienate the affections of their adherents, to confirm the
wavering in an opposite interest, to rouse the supine into activity, to
assemble the dispersed to the Standard of America, and to infuse a spirit of
revolt into the minds of those men, who had from necessity submitted to their
power. Their conduct in warring with fire and sword against the imbecility of
youth and the decrepitude of age; against the Arts, the Sciences, the curious
Inventions and the elegant improvements in civilized life; against the
melancholy Widow, the miserable Orphan, the peaceable professor of humane
Literature, and the sacred Minister of the Gospel, seemed to operate as
powerfully, as if purposely intended to kindle the dormant spark of resistance
into an inextinguishable flame. If we add, to the black catalogue of
provocations already enumerated, their insatiable rapacity in plundering
friends and foes indiscriminately; their libidinous brutality in violating the
chastity of the female sex, their more than Gothic rage in defacing private
Writings, public Records, Libraries of learning, Dwellings of individuals,
Edifices for education and Temples of the Deity; together with their
insufferable ferocity (unprecedented indeed among civilized nations) in
murdering on the field of battle the wounded while begging for mercy, in
causing their prisoners to famish with hunger and cold in Prisons and
Prison-Ships, and in carrying their malice beyond death itself by denying the
decent rites of sepulture to the dead, -- we shall not be astonished that the
Yeomanry in the two Jerseys, when the first glimmering of hope began to break
in upon them, rose as one man, with the unalterable resolution to perish in the
generous cause or expel their merciless invaders.

THE principal Officers, stationed at a variety of wellchosen, and at some,
almost inaccessible positions, seemed all to be actuated by the same soul, and
only to vie with each other, in giving proofs of vigilance, enterprise and
valor. From what has been said respecting the scantiness of our aggregate
force, it will be concluded, that the number of men, under the orders of each,
was indeed very small. But the uncommon alertness of the troops, who were
incessantly hovering round the enemy in scouts, and the constant communication,
they kept between the several stations most contiguous to each other (agreeably
to the The annexed private Orders to Lord Stirling will show, in a laconic and
military manner, the system of service then pursued.

To Brigadier General Lord STIRLING.
MY LORD,
You are to repair to Baskenridge and take upon you the command of the troops
now there, and such as may be sent to your care.

You are to endeavor, as much as possible, to harrass and annoy the enemy, by
keeping scouting parties constantly (or as frequently as possible) around their
quarters.

As you will be in the neighborhood of Generals Dickenson and Warner, I
recommend it to you, to keep up a correspondence with them, and endeavor to
regulate your parties by theirs, so as to have some constantly out.

Use every means in your power to obtain intelligence from the enemy; which may
possibly be better effected by engaging some of those people who have obtained
Protections to go in, under pretense of asking advice, than by any other means.

You will also use every means in your power to obtain and communicate the
earliest accounts of the enemy's movements; and to assemble, in the speediest
manner possible, your troops either for offense or defense.

GIVEN at Head Quarters, the fourth day of February, 1777. GEO. WASHINGTON.



Instructions of the General in Chief) together with their readiness in giving,
and confidence of receiving such reciprocal aid, as the exigencies might
require, served to supply the defect of force.

THIS manner of doing duty not only put our own posts beyond the reach of
sudden insult, and surprise; but so exceedingly harrassed and intimidated the
enemy, that foragers were seldom sent out by them, and never except in very
large parties. General Dickenson, who commanded on General Putnam's left,
discovered about the 20th of January, a foraging party consisting of about four
hundred men, on the opposite side of the Millstone, two miles from Somerset
courthouse. As the bridge was possessed and defended by three field pieces, so
that it could not be passed; General Dickenson, at the head of four hundred
militia, broke the ice, crossed the river (where the water was about three feet
deep) resolutely attacked and totally defeated the foragers. Upon their
abandoning the convoy, a few prisoners, forty wagons, and more than a hundred
draft horses, with a considerable booty of cattle and sheep, fell into his
hands.

NOR were ou^ operations on General Putnam's right flank less fortunate. To
give countenance to the numerous friends of the British Government in the
county of Monmouth, appears to have been a principal motive with Sir William
How, for stretching the chain of his cantonments (by his own Extract of a
letter from General Sir William How, to Lord George German, dated New York,
December 20, 1776.

Having mentioned the fruitless attempt of Lord Cornwallis to find boats at
Corryel's ferry to pass the Delaware -- he proceeds thus:

"The passage of the Delaware being thus rendered impracticable, his Lordship
took post at Pennington, in which place and Trenton the two divisions remained
until the fourteenth, when the weather having become too severe to keep the
field, and the winter cantonments being arranged, the troops marched from both
places to their respective stations. The chain, I own, is rather too extensive,
but I was induced to occupy Burlington to cover the County of Monmouth, in
which there are many loyal inhabitants; and trusting to the almost general
submission of the Country to the southward of this chain, and to the strength
of the Corpse placed in the advanced posts, I conclude the troops will be in
perfect security."


confession previously to his disaster) rather too far. After that chain became
broken, as I have already related, by the blows at Trenton and Princeton, he
was obliged to collect during the rest of the winter, the useless remains in
his barracks at Brunswick. In the meantime General Putnam was much more
successful in his attempt to protect our dispersed and dispirited friends in
the same district; who, environed on every side by envenomed adversaries
remained inseparably rivetted in affection to American Independence. He first
detached Colonel Gurney, and afterward Major As there happened to be in my
possession a copy of one of his letters to those Officers, it was thought
worthy of insertion here, in order to demonstrate his satisfaction with their
conduct.

To Major John Davis, of the third Battalion of Cumberland County Militia.
SIR,
I am much obliged to you for your activity, vigor and diligence since you have
been under my command: you will, therefore, march your men to Philadelphia, and
there discharge them; returning into the store all the ammunition, arms and
accoutrements, you received at that place.

I am, Sir, your humble Servant ISRAEL PUTNAM.
Princeton February 5 th, 1777.


Davis, with such parties of militia as could be spared, for their support.
Several skirmishes ensued, in which our people had always the advantage. They
took, at different times, many prisoners, horses and wagons from foraging
parties. In effect so well did they cover the country, as to induce some of the
most respectable inhabitants to declare, that the security of the persons, as
well as the salvation of the property of many friends to freedom, was owing to
the spirited exertions of these two detachments: who at the same time that they
rescued the country from the tyranny of Tories, afforded an opportunity for the
militia to recover from their consternation, to embody themselves in warlike
array and to stand on their defense.

DURING this period General Putnam having received unquestionable intelligence,
that a party of Refugees in British pay had taken post, and were erecting a
kind of Redoubt at Lawrence's Neck, sent Colonel Nelson with one hundred and
fifty militia to surprise them. That officer conducted with so much secrecy and
decision as to take the whole prisoners. These Extract of a Letter from General
Putnam to the Council of Safety of Pennsylvania, dated at Princeton, February
18th, 1777.

Yesterday evening Colonel Nelson, with a hundred and fifty men, at Lawrence's
Neck, attacked sixty men of Cortland Skinner's Brigade, commanded by the
enemy's RENOWNED LAND PILOT Major Richard Stockton, routed them and took the
whole prisoners -- among them the Major, a Captain and three Subalterns, with
seventy stand of Arms. Fifty of the Bedford Pennsylvania Riflemen behaved
likeveterans.


Refugees commanded by Major Stockton, belonging to Skinner's Brigade and
amounted to sixty in number.

A SHORT time after this event, Lord Cornwallis sent out another foraging party
toward Bound-Brook. General Putnam, having received notice from his
emissaries, detached Major Smith with a few Riflemen to annoy the party and
followed himself with the rest of his force. Before he could come up, Major
Smith, who had formed an ambush, attacked the enemy, killed several horses,
took a few prisoners and sixteen baggagewaggons, without sustaining any injury.
By such operations, our hero, in the course of the winter, captured nearly a
thousand prisoners.

IN the latter part of February General Washington advised General Putnam,
that, in consequence of a large accession of strength from New York to the
British army at Brunswick, it was to be apprehended they would soon make a
forward movement toward the Delaware: in which case the latter was directed to
cross the river with his actual force, to assume the command of the Militi^ who
might assemble, to secure the boats on the we side of the Delaware and to
facilitate the passage of the rest of the army. But the enemy did not remove
from their winter quarters until the season arrived when green forage could be
supplied. In the intermediate period, the correspondence on the part of General
Putnam with the Commander in Chief consisted principally of reports and
enquiries concerning the treatment of some of the following descriptions of
persons: either of those who came within our lines with flags and pretended
flags, or who had taken protection from the enemy, or who had been reputed
disaffected to our cause, or who were designed to be comprehended in the
American Proclamation, which required that those who had taken protections
should give them to the nearest American Officer, or go within the British
lines. The letters of his Excellency in return, generally advisory, were
indicative of confidence and approbation.

WHEN the Spring had now so far advanced that it was obvious the enemy would
soon take the field; the Commander in Chief, after desiring General Putnam to
give the officers who was to relieve him at Princeton all the information
necessary for the conduct of that post, appointed that General to the command
of a separate Army in the Highlands of New York.

IT is scarcely decided, from any documents yet published, whether the
preposterous plans prosecuted by the British Generals in the Campaign of 1777,
were altogether the result of their Orders from home, or whether they partially
originated from the contingences of the moment. The system, which, at the time,
tended to puzzle all human conjecture, when developed served, also, to
contradict all reasonable calculation. Certain it is, the American Commander in
Chief, was for a considerable time so perplexed with contradictory appearances,
that he knew not how to distribute his troops, with his usual discernment, so
as to oppose the enemy with equal prospect of success in different parts. The
gathering tempests menaced the northern Frontiers, the posts in the Highlands
and the City of Philadelphia: but it was still doubtful where the sury of the
storm would fall. At one time Sir William How was forcing his way by land to
Philadelphia, at another relinquishing the Jerseys, at a third facing round to
make a sudden inroad, then embarking with all the forces that could be spared
from New York, and then putting out to sea -- at the very moment when General
Burgoyne had reduced Ticonderoga, and seemed to require a cooperation in
another quarter.

ON our side, we have seen that the old Continental Army expired with the year
1776: since which, invention had been tortured with expedients and zeal with
efforts to levy another. For on the success of the recruiting service depended
the salvation of the country. The success was such as not to puff us up to
presumption, or depress us to despair. The army in the Jerseys, under the
orders of the General in Chief, consisted of all the troops raised south of the
Hudson: that in the northern department, of the New Hampshire Brigade two
Brigades, of Massachusetts, and the Brigade of New York, together with some
irregular Corpse: and that in the Highlands of the remaining two Brigades of
Massachusetts, the Connecticut Line consisting of two Brigades, the Brigade of
Rhode Island and one Regiment of New York. Upon hearing of the loss of
Ticonderoga, and the progress of the British toward Albany, General Washington
ordered the northern army to be reinforced with the two Brigades of
Massachusetts then in the Highlands -- and, upon finding the army under his
immediate command out-numbered by that of Sir William How, which had by the
circuitous route of the Chesapeak invaded Pennsylvania, he also called from the
Highlands one of the Connecticut Brigades and that of Rhode Island to his own
assistance.

IN the neighborhood of General Putnam there was no enemy capable of exciting
alarms. The army left at New York seemed only designed for its defense. In it
were several entire Corpse, composed of Tories who had flocked to the British
standard. There was, besides, a band of lurking miscreants, not properly
enrolled, who staid chiefly at West Chester: from whence they infested the
Country between the two armies, pillaged the cattle and carried off the
peaceable inhabitants. It was an unworthy policy in British Generals to
patronize Banditti. The Whig inhabitants on the edge of our lines, and still
lower down, who had been plundered in a merciless manner, delayed not to strip
the Tories in return. People, most nearly connected and allied, frequently
became most exasperated and inveterate in malice. Then the ties of fellowship
were broken -- then, friendship itself being soured to enmity, the mind readily
gave way to private revenge, uncontroled retaliation and all the deforming
passions that disgrace humanity. Enormities, almost without a name, were
perpetrated -- at the description of which, the bosom, not frozen to apathy,
must glow with a mixture of pity and indignation. To prevent the predatory
incursions from below and to cover the County of West-Chester, General Putnam
detached from his Headquarters, at Peek'sKill, Meigs's Regiment, which in the
course of the Campaign struck several partizan strokes and achieved the
objects for which it was sent. He likewise took measures, without noise or
ostentation, to secure himself from being surprised and carried within the
British lines by the Tories, who had formed a plan for the purpose. The
information of this intended enterprise, conveyed to him through several
channels, was corroborated by that obtained and transmitted by the Commander in
Chief.

IT was not wonderful that many of these Tories were able, undiscovered, to
penetrate far into the country and even to go with letters or messages from one
British Army to another. The inhabitants, who were well affected to the royal
cause, afforded them every possible support, and their own knowledge of the
different routes gave them a farther facility in performing their
peregrinations. Sometimes the most active Loyalists (as the Tories wished to
denominate themselves) who had gone into the British Posts and received
promises of Commissions upon enlisting a certain number of Soldiers, came back
again secretly with Recruiting Instructions. Sometimes these and others who
came from the enemy within the verge of our Camps, were detected and condemned
to death in conformity to the usages of war. But the British Generals, who had
an unlimited supply of money at their command, were able to pay with so much
liberality, that emissaries could always be foundStill, it is thought that the
intelligence of the American Commanders, was, at least, equally accurate;
notwithstanding the poverty of their military chest, and the inability of
rewarding mercenary agents, for secret services, in proportion to their risque
and merit.

A PERSON by the name of Palmer, who was a Lieutenant in the Tory new Levies,
was detected in the Camp at Peek's-Kill. Governor Tryon, who commanded the new
Levies, reclaimed him as a British Officer, represented the heinous crime of
condemning a man commissioned by his Majesty, and threatened vengeance in case
he should be executed. General Putnam wrote the following pithy reply.

SIR,
NATHAN PALMER, a Lieutenant in your King's service, was taken in my Camp as a
Spy -- he was tried as a Spy -- he was condemned as a Spy -- and you may rest
assured, Sir, he shall be hanged as a Spy.

I have the honor to be, etc. ISRAEL PUTNAM.
His Excellency Governor Tryon.

P. S. Afternoon. He is hanged.




IMPORTANT transactions soon occurred. Not long after the two Brigades had
marched from Peek's-Kill to Pennsylvania, a reinforcement arrived at New York
from Europe. Appearances indicated that offensive operations would follow.
General Putnam, having been reduced in force to a single Brigade in the field,
and a single Regiment in garrison at Fort Montgomery, repeatedly informed the
Commander in Chief that the posts committed to his charge must in all
probability be lost, in case an attempt should be made upon them; and that,
circumstanced as he was, he could not be responsible for the consequences. His
situation was certainly to be lamented, but it was not in the power of the
Commander in Chief to alter it, except by authorizing him to call upon the
Militia for aid -- an aid always precarious; and often so tardy, as when
obtained to be of no utility.

ON the fifth of October, Sir Henry Clinton came up the North River with three
thousand men. After making many feints to mislead the attention, he landed, the
next morning, at Stony Point, and commenced his march over the mountains to
Fort Montgomery. Governor Clinton, an active, resolute and intelligent officer,
who commanded the Garrison, upon being apprised of the movement, dispatched a
letter by express to General Putnam for succor. By the treachery of the
messenger the letter miscarried. General Putnam, astonished at hearing nothing
respecting the enemy, rode, with General Parsons and Colonel Root his Adjutant
General, to reconnoitre them at King's Ferry. In the mean time, at five o'clock
in the afternoon, Sir Henry Clinton's columns, having surmounted the obstacles
and barriers of nature, descended from the Thunder-Hill, through thickets
impassable but for light troops and The Author of these Memoirs, then Major of
Brigade to the first Connecticut Brigade, was alone at Headquarters when the
firing began. He hastened to Colonel Wyllys, the senior officer in camp, and
advised him to dispatch all the men not on duty to Fort Montgomery, without
waiting for orders. About five hundred men marched instantly under Colonel
Meigs; and the author, with Doctor Beardsley, a Surgeon in the Brigade, rode at
full speed through a bye-path, to let the garrison know, that a reinforcement
was on its march. Notwithstanding all the haste these officers made to and over
the river, the Fort was so completely invested, on their arrival, that it was
impossible to enter. They went on board the new Frigate, which lay near the
fortress, and had the misfortune to be idle, though not unconcerned, spectators
of the storm. They saw the minutest actions distinctly when the works were
carried. The Frigate, after receiving several platoons, slipped her cable and
proceeded a little way up the river: but the wind and tide becoming adverse,
the crew set her on fire, to prevent her falling into the hands of the enemy,
whose ships were approaching. -- The louring darkness of the night, the
profound stillness that reigned, the interrupted flashes of the flames that
illuminated the waters, the long shadows of the clis^s that now and then were
seen, the explosion of the cannon which were left loaded in the ship, and the
reverberating echo which resounded, at intervals, between the stupendous
mountains on both sides of the river, composed an awful night-piece, for
persons prepared (by the preceding scene) to contemplate subjects of horrid
sublimity.
attacked the different redoubts. The garrison, inspired by the conduct of
their leaders, defended the works with distinguished valor. But, as the post
had been designed principally to prevent the passing of ships, and as an
assault in rear had not been expected, the works on the land side were
incomplete and untenable. In the dusk of twilight the British entered with
their bayonets fixed. Their loss was inconsiderable. Nor was that of the
garrison great. Governor Clinton, his brother General James Clinton, Colonel
Dubois, and most of the officers and men effected their escape under cover of
the thick smoke and darkness that suddenly prevailed. The capture of this fort
by Sir Henry Clinton, together with the consequent removal of the chains and
booms that obstructed the navigation, opened a passage to Albany, and seemed to
favor a junction of his force with that of General Burgoyne. But the latter
having been compelled to capitulate a few days after this event, and great
numbers of Militia having arrived from New England, the successful army
returned to New York -- yet not before a detachment from it, under the Orders
of General Vaughan, had burnt the defenseless town of Esopus, and several
scattering buildings on the banks of the river.

NOTWITHSTANDING the army in the Highlands had been so much weakened (for the
sake of strengthening the armies in other quarters) as to have occasioned the
loss of Fort Montgomery, yet that loss was productive of no consequences. Our
main army in Pennsylvania, after having contended with superior force in two
indecisive battles, still held the enemy in check. While the splendid success,
which attended our arms at the Northward, gave a more favorable aspect to the
American affairs, at the close of this campaign, than they had ever before
assumed.

WHEN the enemy fell back to New York by water, we followed them a part of the
way by land. Colonel Meigs, with a detachment from the several Regiments in
General Parsons's Brigade, having made a forced march from Crompond to
West-Chester, surprised and broke up for a time the band of freebooters, of
whom he brought off fifty, together with many Cattle and Horses which they had
recently stolen.

SOON after this enterprise, General Putnam advanced toward the British lines.
As he had received intelligence that small bodies of the enemy were out with
orders from Governor Tryon to burn Wright's Mills, he prevented it by detaching
three parties of one hundred men in each. One of these parties fell in with and
captured thirty-five, and another forty of the New Levies. But as he could not
prevent a third hostile party from burning the house of Mr. Van Tassel, a noted
Whig and a Committee man, who was forced to go along with them, naked and
barefoot, on the icy ground, in a freezing night: he, for the professed purpose
of retaliation, sent Captain Buchanan, in a Whale-boat, to burn the house of
General Oliver Delancey on York Island. Buchanan effected his object, and by
this expedition put a period for the present to that unmeaning and wanton
species of destruction.

WHILE General Putnam quartered at New-Rochel, a scouting party which had been
sent to West Farms, below West-Chester, surrounded the house in which Colonel
James Delancey lodged, and, notwithstanding he crept under the bed the better
to be concealed, brought him to Headquarters before morning. This Officer was
exchanged by the British General without delay, and placed at the head of the
Cow-Boys, a licentious Corpse of irregulars, who, in the sequel, committed
unheard of depredations and excesses.

IT was distressing to see so beautiful a part of the country so barbarously
wasted; and, often to witness some peculiar scene of female misery. For most of
the female inhabitants had been obliged to fly within the lines possessed by
one army or the other. Near our quarters was an affecting instance of human
vicissitude. Mr. William Sutton of Maroneck, an inoffensive man, a merchant by
profession, who lived in a decent fashion, and whose family had as happy
prospects as almost any in the country, upon some imputation of Toryism went to
the enemy. His wife, oppressed with grief in the disagreeable state of
dereliction, did not long survive. Betsey Sutton, their eldest daughter, was a
modest and lovely young woman, of about fifteen years old, when at the death of
her mother, the care of five or six younger children devolved upon her. She was
discreet and provident beyond her years. But when we saw her, she looked to be
feeble in health -- broken in spirit -- wan, melancholy, and dejected. She said
that their last cow, which furnished milk for the children, had lately been
taken away -- that they had frequently been plundered of their wearing apparel
and furniture, she believed, by both parties -- that they had little more to
lose -- and that she knew not where to procure bread for the dear little ones,
who had no father to provide for them -- no mother -- she was going to have
said -- but a torrent of tears choked articulation. In coming to that part of
the country, again, after some campaigns had elapsed, I found the habitation
desolate and the garden overgrown with weeds. Upon enquiry, I learnt, that, as
soon as we left the place, some ruffians broke into the house, while she lay in
bed, in the latter part of the night: and that, having been terrified by their
rudeness, she ran half-naked into a neighboring swamp, where she continued
until the morning -- there the poor girl caught a violent cold, which ended in
a consumption. It finished a life without a spot -- and a career of sufferings
commenced and continued without a fault.

SIGHTS of wretchedness always touched with commiseration the feelings of
General Putnam, and prompted his generous soul to succor the afflicted. But the
indulgence, which he showed (whenever it did not militate against his duty)
toward the deserted and suffering families of the Tories in the State of
New York, was the cause of his becoming unpopular with no inconsiderable class
of people in that State. On the other side, he had conceived an unconquerable
aversion to many of the persons, who were entrusted with the disposal of
Tory-property, because he believed them to have been guilty of peculations and
other infamous practices. But, although the enmity between him and the
Sequestrators was acrimonious as mutual; yet he lived in habits of amity with
the most respectable characters in public departments, as well as in private
life.

His character was also respected by the enemy. He had been acquainted with
many of the principal Officers in a former war. As flags frequently passed
between the out-posts, during his continuance on the lines, it was a common
practice to forward Newspapers by them; and as those printed by Rivington, the
Royal Printer in New York, were infamous for the falsehoods with which they
abounded, General Putnam once sent a Packet to his old friend General Robertson
with this Billet: Major General Putnam presents his Compliments to Major
General, Robertson and sends him some American Newspapers for his perusal --
when General Robertson shall have done with them, it is requested they be given
to Rivington, in order that he may print some truth.

LATE in the year we left the lines and repaired to the Highlands. For upon the
loss of fort Montgomery, the Commander in Chief determined to build another
fortification for the defense of the river. His Excellency, accordingly, wrote
to General Putnam to fix upon the spot. After reconnoitering all the different
places proposed, and revolving in his own mind their relative advantages for
offense on the water and defense on the land, he fixed upon WEST POINT. It is
no vulgar praise to say, that to him belongs the glory of having chosen this
rock of our military salvation. The position for water batteries, which might
sweep the channel where the river formed a right angle, made it the most proper
of any for commanding the navigation; while the rocky ridges, that rose in
awful sublimity behind each other, rendered it impregnable, and even incapable
of being invested by less than twenty thousand men. The British, who considered
this post as a sort of American Gibraltar, never attempted it but by the
treachery of an American officer. All the world knows that this project failed,
and that West Point continues to be the receptacle of every thing valuable in
military preparations to the present day.

IN the month of January, 1778, when a snow two feet deep lay on the earth,
General Parsons's Brigade went to West Point and broke ground. Want of covering
for the troops, together with want of tools and materials for the works, made
the prospect truly gloomy and discouraging. It was necessary that means should
be found, though our currency was depreciated and our treasury exhausted. The
estimates and requisitions of Colonel la Radiere, the Engineer who laid out the
works, altogether disproportioned to our circumstances, served only to put us
in mind of our poverty, and, as it were, to satirize our resources. His
petulant behavior and unaccommodating disposition added further embarrassments.
It was then that the patriotism of Governor Clinton shone in full luster. His
exertions to furnish supplies can never be too much commended. His influence,
arising from his popularity, was unlimited: yet he hesitated not to put all his
popularity at risque, whenever the federal interests demanded. Notwithstanding
the impediments that opposed our progress, with his aid, before the opening of
the campaign, the works were in great forwardness.

ACCORDING to a resolution of Congress, an enquiry was to be made into the
causes of military disasters. Major General M'Dougall, Brigadier General
Huntington and Colonel Wigglesworth composed the Court of Enquiry on the loss
of Fort Montgomery. Upon full knowledge and mature deliberation of facts on the
spot, they reported the loss to have been occasioned by want of men, and not by
any fault in the Commanders.

GENERAL Putnam, who during the investigation, was relieved from duty, as soon
as Congress had approved the Report, took command of the right Wing of the
Grand Army, under the Orders of the General in Chief. This was just after the
Battle of Monmouth, when the three armies which had, last year, acted
separately, joined at the White Plains. Our effective force, in one camp, was
at no other time so respectable as at this juncture. The army consisted of
sixty regular Regiments of foot formed into fifteen Brigades, four Battalions
of Artillery, four Regiments of Horse and several Corpse of State Troops. But as
the enemy kept close within their Lines on York-Island, nothing could be
attempted. Toward the end of Autumn, we broke up the Camp, and went first to
Fredericksburg, and thence to winter quarters.

IN order to cover the country adjoining to the Sound, and to support the
garrison of West Point, in case of an attack, Major General Putnam was
stationed for the winter at Reading in Connecticut. He had under his Orders the
Brigade of New Hampshire, the two Brigades of Connecticut, the Corpse of
Infantry commanded by Hazen, and that of Cavalry by Sheldon.

THE troops, who had been badly fed, badly clothed, and worse paid, by
brooding over their grievances in the leisure and inactivity of
winter quarters, began to think them intolerable. The Connecticut Brigades
formed the design of marching to Hartford, where the General Assembly was then
in Session, and of demanding redress at the point of the bayonet. Word having
been brought to General Putnam, that the second Brigade was under arms for this
purpose, he mounted his horse, galloped to the Cantonment and thus addressed
them: My brave lads, whither are you going? Do you intend to desert your
Officers, and to invite the enemy to follow you into the country? Whose cause
have you been fighting and suffering so long in, is it not your own? Have you
no property, no parents, wives or children? You have behaved like men so far --
all the world is full of your praises -- and posterity will stand astonished at
your deeds: but not if you spoil all at last. Don't you confider how much the
country is distressed by the war, and that your officers have not been any
better paid than yourselves? But we all expect better times, and that the
Country will do us ample justice. Let us all stand by one another' then, and
fight it out like brave Soldiers. Think what a shame it would be for
Connecticut-men to run away from their Officers. -- After the several Regiments
had received the General as he rode along the line with drums beating and
presented arms; the Sergeants, who had then the command, brought the men to an
Order, in which position they continued while he was speaking. When he had
done, he directed the acting Major of Brigade to give the word for them to
shoulder, march to their Regimental parades and lodge arms. All which they
executed with promptitude and apparent good-humor. One Soldier only, who had
been the most active, was confined in the quarter-guard: from whence, at night,
he attempted to make his escape. But the sentinel, who had also been in the
mutiny, shot him dead on the spot, and thus the affair subsided.

ABOUT the middle of winter, while General Putnam was on a visit to his
out-post at Horse-Neck, he found Governor Tryon advancing upon that town with a
corpse of fifteen hundred men -- to oppose these, General Putnam had only a
Picquet of one hundred and fifty men, and two iron field pieces without horses
or drag-ropes. He, however, planted his cannon on the high ground by the
meeting house, and retarded their reproach by firing several times, until,
perceiving the horse (supported by the infantry) about to charge, he ordered
the picquet to provide for their safety by retiring to a swamp inaccessible to
horse; and secured his own by plunging down the steep precipice at the church
upon a full trot. This precipice is so sleep, where he descended, as to have
artificial stairs composed of nearly one hundred stone-steps for the
accommodation of foot passengers. There the Dragoons, who were but a sword's
length from him, stopped short. For the declivity was so abrupt that they
ventured not to follow: and, before they could gain the valley by going round
the brow of the hill in the ordinary road, he was far enough beyond their
reach. He continued his route unmolested to Stanford, from whence, having
strengthened his picquet by the junction of some militia, he came back again,
and in turn, pursued Governor Tryon in his retreat. As he rode down the
precipice, one ball, of the many fired at him, went through his beaver. But
Governor Tryon, by way of compensation for spoiling his hat, sent him soon
afterward, as a present, a complete suit of clothes.

IN the Campaign of 1779, which terminated the career of General Putnam's
services, he commanded the Maryland line posted at Butter-milk falls, about two
miles below West Point. He was happy in possessing the friendship of the
officers of that line, and in living on terms of hospitality with them. Indeed
there was no family in the army that lived better than his own. The General,
his second son Major Daniel Putnam, and the writer of these Memoirs composed
that family. This campaign, principally spent in strengthening the works of
West Point, was only signalised for the storm of Stony Point by the Light
Infantry under the conduct of General Wayne, and the surprise of the post of
Powles Hook by the Corpse under the command of Colonel Henry Lee. When the army
quitted the field and marched to Morris Town into winter quarters, General
Putnam's family went into Connecticut for a few weeks. In December, the General
began his journey to Morris Town. Upon the road between Pomfret and Hartford he
felt an unusual torpor slowly pervading his right hand and foot. This heaviness
crept gradually on, and until it had deprived him of the use of his limbs on
that side, in a considerable degree, before he reached the house of his friend
Colonel Wadsworth. Still he was unwilling to consider his disorder of the
paralytic kind, and endeavored to shake it off by exertion. Having found that
impossible, a temporary dejection, disguised however under a veil of assumed
cheerfulness, succeeded. But reason, philosophy, and religion, soon reconciled
him to his fate. In that situation he has constantly remained, favored with
such a portion of bodily activity as enables him to walk and to ride
moderately; and retaining unimpaired his relish for enjoyment, his love of
pleasantry, his strength of memory, and all the faculties of his mind. As a
proof that the powers of memory are not weakened, it ought to be observed, that
he has lately repeated from recollection all the adventures of his life, which
are here recorded, and which had formerly been communicated to the compiler in
detached conversations.

IN patient yet fearless expectation of the approach of THE KING OF TERRORS,
whom he has full often faced in the field of blood, the Christian hero now
enjoys in domestic retirement the fruit of his early industry. Having in youth
provided a competent subsistence for old age, he was secured from the danger of
penury and distress, to which, so many Officers and Soldiers worn out in the
public service have been reduced. To illustrate his merits the more fully, this
Essay will be concluded with a copy of the last letter written to him, by
General Washington, in his military character,

Headquarters, 2d June, 1783. DEAR SIR,
Your favor of the 20th of May I received with much pleasure. For I can assure
you that among the many worthy and meritorious Officers, with whom I have had
the happiness to be connected in service through the course of this war, and
from whose cheerful assistance in the various and trying vicissitudes of a
complicated contest, the name of a PUTNAM is not forgotten: nor will be, but
with that stroke of time which shall obliterate from my mind the remembrance of
all those toils and fatigues, through which we have struggled for the
preservation and establishment of the Rights, Liberties and Independence of our
Country.

YOUR congratulations on the happy prospects of Peace and Independent security,
with their attendant blessings to the UNITED STATES, I receive with great
satisfaction; and beg that you will accept a return of my gratulations to you
on this auspicious event -- an event, in which, great as it is in itself and
glorious as it will probably be in its consequences, you have a right to
participate largely, from the distinguished part you have contributed toward
its attainment.

BUT while I contemplate the greatness of the object for which we have
contended, and felicitate you on the happy issue of our toils and labors, which
have terminated with such general satisfaction; I lament that you should feel
the ungrateful returns of a Country, in whose service you have exhausted your
bodily strength, and expended the vigor of a youthful constitution. I wish
however, that your expectations of returning liberality may be verified. I have
a hope, they may: -- but should they not, your case will not be a singular one.
Ingratitude has been experienced in all ages, and REPUBLICS in particular, have
ever been famed for the exercise of that unnatural, and SORDID VICE.

THE SECRETARY AT WAR, who is now here, informs me that you have ever been
considered as entitled to full pay, since your absence from the field; and that
you will still be considered in that light until the close of the war: at which
period you will be equally entitled to the same emoluments of half-pay or
commutation, as other officers of your rank. The same opinion is also given by
the Pay Master General, who is now with the army, empowered by Mr. Morris for
the settlement of all their accounts, and who will attend to yours whenever
you shall think proper to send on for the purpose; which it will probably be
best for you to do in a short time.

I ANTICIPATE, with pleasure, the day (and that I trust not far off) when I
shall quit the busy scenes of a military employment, and retire to the more
tranquil walks of domestic life. In that, or whatever other situation
Providence may dispose of my sutu days, THE REMEMBRANCE OF THE MANY FRIENDSHIPS
AND CONNECTIONS I HAVE HAD THE HAPPINESS TO CONTRACT WITH THE GENTLEMEN OF THE
ARMY, WILL BE ONE OF MY MOST GRATEFUL REFLECTIONS. Under this contemplation,
and impressed with the sentiments of benevolence and regard, I commend you, my
dear Sir, my other friends, and, with them, the interests and happiness of our
dear Country to the KEEPING AND PROTECTION OF ALMIGHTY GOD.

I have the honor to be, etc. GEORGE WASHINGTON.
To the Honorable Major General Putnam.

GENERAL PUTNAM died the 29th of May, 1790.




AN ORATION, ON The Political Situation of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA, in the
Year 1789.

Pronounced before the State Society of the CINCINNATI of CONNECTICUT, at
NEW HAVEN, in Celebration of the Thirteenth Anniversary of Independence.

PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE SOCIETY.

AN ORATION.
SINCE the last Anniversary of Independence, my dear fellow-citizens! we have
been witnesses to the complete establishment of a new general government: On an
event of such magnitude, the voice of congratulation has already been heard
from one extreme of our land to the other. But as our felicitations can never
be more grateful than at the time, when we are convened to commemorate the
birth of our nation; it may perhaps be expected, from the task I am called upon
to perform this day, that I should be the organ for expressing the part we bear
in this universal joy. I feel a confidence, from the sensations of my own
heart, that every bosom in this assembly beats high at the thought of our
country's happiness. Even the ardent eyes and the animated countenances of all
who compose it, attest how sincerely they rejoice in the prospect before them.
But, in the midst of our rejoicings, we ought to remember, that no occasion can
be more suitable than the present, for employing our reflections on our
political situation. I will therefore hope for your indulgence, while I make a
few observations on the American Revolution: on the necessity which afterward
appeared for establishing a general government of more energy than the original
confederation: on the nature of the government which has lately been carried
into effect: and on the national prosperity which we may reasonably expect will
result from the faithful administration of that government.

AT the commencement of the late war with Great Britain, when we thought
ourselves justifiable in resisting to blood, it was known to those best
acquainted with the different conditions of the combatants, and the probable
cost of the prize in dispute, that the expense, in comparison with our
circumstances as colonists, must be enormous -- the struggle protracted,
doubtful and severe. It was known that the resources of Britain were almost
inexhaustible, that her fleets covered the ocean, and that her troops had
harvested laurels in every quarter of the globe. Not then organized as a
nation, or known as a people on the earth, we had no preparations. Money, the
nerve of war, was wanting. The sword was to be forged on the anvil of
necessity: the treasury to be created from nothing. If we had a resource,
unknown to our enemy, it was in the unconquerable resolution, to our citizens,
the conscious rectitude of our cause, and a confident trust that we should not
be forsaken by Heaven. The people willingly offered themselves to the battle;
but the means of arming, clothing and subsisting them; as well as of providing
the general implements of hostility were only to be found in anticipations of
our future wealth. Bills of credit were emitted: moneys borrowed for the most
pressing emergencies: and our men in the field unpaid for their services. At
this time the magnanimous monarch of France reached a fostering hand to assist
in resening us from ruin. In this manner, peace, attended with every
circumstance that could gratify our reasonable desires, was at length obtained.
But a load of debt was left upon us. The fluctuation of our paper currency, and
the consequent frequency of speculation in it, had, in too many instances,
occasioned vague ideas of property, produced licentious appetites, and
corrupted the morals of men. To these immediate consequences of a fluctuating
medium of commerce, may be joined a tide of circumstances, that flowed together
from sources mostly opened during and after the war. The ravage of farms, the
conflagration of towns, the diminution of agriculture, the extinction of trade,
the embarrassment of some who were indebted to British merchants before the
war, the privation in all (during its continuance) of many conveniences of
life, the subsequent influx of merchandise, the tempting facility of procuring
it without present payment, the growing taste for extravagance, and the habit
-- too soon acquired! -- of deferring or eluding satisfaction for just
obligations, now began to overwhelm the continent with private distress,
bankruptey and breach of faith.

FROM this period also our public affairs were seen to decline. I will ask your
attention for a moment, while I speak of the unsatisfactory part of our old
confederation, and the necessity that became apparent for instituting a
different form of government. It is not a subject of wonder that the first
project of a federal government, formed on the defective models of some foreign
confederacies, in the midst of a war, before we had much experience in
political affairs; and while, from the concurrence of external danger, and the
patriotic impulse of the moment, implicit obedience was yielded to the
requisitions of an Advisory Council, should have been imperfect. Our
astonishment ought rather to be excited, that, feeble and inefficient as the
government was, it not only carried us in safety through the war, but kept us
from severance until another could be substituted. By the original
confederation, the right to make demands on the several states for such
pecuniary supplies as might be necessary for defraying the expenses of the war,
and for supporting the government of the Union, together with some other
specific prerogatives of sovereignty, were committed to Congress. But Congress,
constituted in most respects as a diplomatic body, possessed no power of
carrying into execution a single resolution, however urgently dictated by
prudence, policy, or justice. The individual communities, knowing there existed
no power of coercion, treated with neglect, whenever it suited their
convenience or caprice, the most salutary measures and the most indispensable
requisitions of Congress. Experience taught us, that the powers given by the
members of the union to their federal head, were not sufficient to enable it to
accomplish the purposes for which the body politic had been formed. We now
touched on the hour of humiliation. The confederacy was found to be a
government in name, rather than in reality. Hence the interest due on our
public debts remained unpaid. Hence many a veteran was reduced to unmerited
distress. Hence we were continually liable on our own part to have infractions
made upon treaties, which were equally honorable, advantageous and sacred.
Hence we were in danger of having our faith become as proverbial as that of
Carthage, and our name the scorn of the earth. Hence there was a nation, which,
in some measure, excluded our vessels from its ports, burdened our commerce
with intolerable impositions, introduced its ships into our carrying trade,
and, because we were destitute of a retaliating power, refused to enter into a
commercial treaty with us. With a debt accumulating from the necessity of
obtaining repeated loans; with a credit much impaired for the want of
punctuality, and apprehension of national bankruptcy; with cries for justice
from the widow, the fatherless, and the soldier worn out in his country's
defense, ascending to that Being who has purer eyes than to behold iniquity
with impunity, who is a God of vengeance as well as a God of justice -- whither
could we turn for succor? where could we fly for refuge?

THE veil that concealed this melancholy and afflicting picture was at last
withdrawn. The wise and the good stood astonished at the sight, none but the
ignorant or the wicked rested unconcerned. Even fearfulness seized, in many
instances, upon those well-meaning politicians, whose security had been
produced by the scantiness of their information, and the confinement of their
views to the local advantages of the states to which they belonged. Then it was
that men, better informed and more conversant in civil affairs, began to dread
that a free, yet efficient government, the object which animated in life, and
soothed in death, those heroes who had sealed their principles with their
blood, must still be lost: that the prospect of national happiness, which
invigorated our arms and cheered our hearts through the perilous struggle for
Independence, must vanish for ever from our view: and that the hope of
establishing the empire of reason, justice, philosophy and religion, throughout
the extensive regions of the new world, would be considered but the illusion of
a heated imagination. And what could be more mortifying to every true patriot,
than to perceive our countrymen ready to rush headlong on their ruin -- ready
to destroy the asylum which was just offered for suffering humanity -- ready to
verify the predictions of our foes, that our Independence would prove a curse
to its votaries -- and (by frustrating the fairest opportunity ever afforded
for a people to become great and happy in the enjoyment of freedom) to confirm
the detestable doctrine that mankind, unequal to the task of governing
themselves, were made for a state of slavery? -- Thus our old confederation
seemed passing away. Our day of political probation appeared expiring. The
Republic was about to assume, if I may be allowed the expression, a renovated
body, prepared for a more permanent state of existence in bliss or woe. Life
and death were in our option. The first was involved in UNION under a good
general government -- the last in SEPARATION into a number of miserable
fragments of empire. So long as strength must be deemed preferable to weakness,
harmony to confusion, peace to war, happiness to misery, and Independence to
subjugation, the American People (who will always judge right when they shall
have the means of information) could not hesitate to prefer the former. Nor is
it unworthy of remark, that, amidst the variety of opinions which prevailed
respecting the system of government proper to be adopted, no man was found so
hardy as to outrage the feelings of his countrymen, by openly advocating
counsels of disunion. And may we not, uninfluenced by superstition, believe
that Heaven infused the idea into our Legislatures, to convoke a national
assembly, at this interesting and awful crisis! --

THE result is so well known, that I forbear to dilate upon it. Happily the
spirit of accommodation, that influenced the Convention, has been diffused
among their countrymen. The adoption of the government by so many communities,
distinct in their views and interests, will be an immortal memorial, of victory
gained by enlightened reason over brutal force. Can we contemplate a whole
People, like a nation of Philosophers, discussing and agreeing on a form of
government: can we contemplate a work so vast in its import, and so wonderfully
effected -- not by violence and bloodshed, but by deliberation and consent --
without exclaiming in rapturous admiration, behold a new thing under the fun!
and without uttering in grateful adoration, lo, this is indeed the LORD's
doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes! --

WITHOUT presuming to trespass on your patience so far as to attempt to analise
the Constitution, or to demonstrate its merits by logical deductions; I may
perhaps be permitted just to observe, that it appears, to be, in its formation,
a government of the people, that is to say, a government in which all power is
derived from, and at stated periods, reverts to them -- and that, in its
operation, it is a government of laws made and executed by the fair substitutes
of the people alone. The election of the different branches of Congress by the
free men, either directly or indirectly, is the pivot on which turns the first
wheel of government -- a wheel which communicates motion to the whole machine:
At the same time, the exercise of this right of election seems to be so
regulated, as to afford less opportunity for corruption and influence; and more
for stability and volition than has usually been incident to popular
governments. Nor could the members of Congress exempt themselves from the
consequences of any unjust or tyrannical acts, which they might impose upon
others. For, in a short time, they will mingle with the mass of the people.
Their interests must therefore be the same, and their feelings in sympathy with
those of their Constituents. Besides, their re-election must always depend upon
the good reputation which they shall have maintained, in the judgment of their
fellow citizens. Hence, we may be induced to conclude, that this government is
less obnoxious to well-founded objections, than most which have existed in the
world. And, in that opinion we may be confirmed on three accounts: First,
because every government ought to be possessed of powers adequate to the
purposes for which it was instituted: Secondly, because no other, or greater
powers, appear to be delegated to this government, than are essential to attain
the objects for which it was instituted, to wit, the safety and happiness of
the governed: and, Thirdly, because it is clear, that no government, before
introduced among mankind, ever contained so many checks or such efficacious
restraints, to prevent it from degenerating into any species of oppression. It
is unnecessary to be insisted upon, because it is well understood, that the
impotence of Congress under the former confederation, and the inexpediency of
trusting sufficiently ample prerogatives to a single body, gave birth to the
different branches which constitute the present general government. Convinced
that the balances, arising from the distribution of the Legislative, Executive,
and Judicial Powers in this government, are the best which have hitherto been
instituted; I presume not to assert that better may not still be devised. To
avoid a wanton levity of innovation on the one hand, and an unalterable
practice of error on the other, are points in policy equally desirable; though,
I believe, a constitutional power to effect them never before existed. Whether
the mode which is pointed out in this Constitution, for procuring amendments,
be not the wisest, and apparently the happiest expedient that ever has been
suggested by human prudence, I leave every unprejudiced mind to determine. If,
in the mean time, it was a given point, that the late federal government could
not have existed much longer; if without some speedy remedy a dissolution of
the Union must have ensued; if without adhering to the Union we could have no
security against falling a prey to foreign invasion or domestic usurpation; if
upon our adherence to the Union depended the protection of our property at
home, and the profits of our commerce abroad; if the almost unanimous agreement
of the federal Convention upon this plan of government (under the local
prejudices and various expectations of the States) could be deemed little short
of miraculous; if there was an easy provision made for the correction of such
errors as should be found, from the imbecility of human nature, to have
insinuated themselves into it; and if, upon a rejection previous to amendments,
there did not appear any probability that the same system could be soon enough
amended, or any other substituted in its place by another Convention -- surely
no At this time the States of North Carolina and RhodeIsland had not acceded to
the general Government.
state ought to have rejected it without pondering well on the consequences.
Because, enarchy and civil war, with an eventual government of chance or force,
appeared but too probable consequences of a general rejection.

UNDER such circumstances, it was doubtless the part of wisdom to adopt the
Constitution. I pretend to no unusual foresight into futurity, and therefore
cannot undertake to decide what may be its ultimate fate. If a promised good
should terminate in an unexpected evil, it would not be a solitary example of
disappointment. If the blessings of Heaven showered thick around us, should be
spilled on the ground, or converted to curses, through the fault of those for
whose use they were proffered, it would not be the first instance of folly or
perverseness in short-sighted mortals. The blessed religion, revealed in the
word of God, will remain an eternal and awful monument, to prove that the best
institutions may be abused by human depravity; and that they may even, in some
instances, be made subservient to the vilest of purposes, Should hereafter,
those who are entrusted with the management of this government, incited by the
lust of domination, and prompted by the supineness or venality of their
constituents, break down the barriers of this Constitution, and trample on the
prostrated rights of humanity: it will only serve to show, that no compact
among men, however provident in its construction, and sacred in its
ratification, can be pronounced everlasting and inviolable -- and, if I may so
express myself -- that no wall of words -- that no mound of parchment, can be
so formed as to stand against the sweeping torrent of boundless ambition on the
one side, aided by the sapping current of corrupted morals on the other. But
until the people of America shall have lost all virtue; until they shall have
become totally insensible to the differences between liberty and slavery, until
they shall have been reduced to such poverty of spirit as to be willing to sell
that pre-eminent blessing of rational beings, the birthright of freedom; in
short, until they shall have been found incapable of governing themselves, and
ripe for a master -- these consequences, should fondly hope, can never arrive.
--

I PROCEED now, in the order proposed, to treat of the head that was reserved
for the conclusion of this discourse: I mean, the national prosperity which we
may reasonably expect will result from the faithful administration of this
government. My chief design, in mentioning a few circumstances eminently
calculated to promote our happiness as a people, is, to increase a disposition
to make the best possible use of those circumstances. Can there be any pursuit
more consonant to the dictates of reason and nature, than that whose object is
the promotion of the happiness of our Country? To embrace this object in its
utmost limit, our imaginations must expand with the dimensions of a Continent,
and extend with the revolutions of futurity.

THE preliminary observation, that a free government ought to be founded on the
information and morals of the people, will here find its proper place. Happily
our citizens are remarkably instructed by education, docile to duty, and
ingenious for making improvements. More knowledge is, perhaps, at this moment
diffused among them, than among any other people under Heaven. The conduct and
issue of the late war may be a criterion to decide, whether they are destitute
of wisdom in the cabinet, or fortitude in the field. For investigation of the
rights of man, for ingenuity in applying principles already discovered to works
of mechanism, for inventions in useful arts, and for researches in several
branches of philosophy, few have gone before them. Even for efforts of genius,
in some of the finer arts, they are thought, by the best judges, scarcely to
have been excelled in the present age. The world has applauded their public
writings, for the good sense and manly diction by which they are distinguished.
Yet it is not for us, who claim no more than to be upon a level with our
fellow-men, to encourage one another in entertaining too high an opinion of
ourselves. It is enough, that we do not feel a degrading consciousness of
belonging to that inferior class of mortals, in which some of the Philosophers
of Europe have had the presumption to place us. On the contrary, peculiar
fields of nature and contemplation are peculiarly favorable to the expansion of
the human powers. If we possess any grandeur of soul, any penetration of
thought, any combination for project; the great scenes of nature with which we
are surrounded, and the great political drama in which we are required to take
a part, will call them into action. When wereflect upon our relative situation,
we cannot consider ourselves as members of a petty community, or as being
acting for a fleeting moment. We are not, like many of the European States,
limited to our present numbers. Though it should be the primary object of our
rulers to promote the immediate felicity of a nation, as singular in its origin
as new to political life; yet they cannot forget, that the happiness of
countless millions who are to draw their first breath in America may depend, in
a great degree, on the discipline, institutions and examples of this
generation. For certain it is, the population of our country must increase
almost beyond the power of calculation. The stream of people, wave propelling
wave, must, with the lapse of years, roll back to the lake of the woods. From
our geographical position, it is not for kings and parliaments, with their
assumed omnipotence, to stop those waves in their proper course. It is not for
impolitic princes, vainly checking our commerce for momentary gain, to prevent
us from becoming a commercial, a rich, and a powerful people. Had they really a
design of accomplishing this -- it would be advisable to begin with
annihilating our natural advantages, with drying up our innumerable navigable
rivers, and with sterilising the uncommon fertility of our soil. --

THE benign effects, which, in all human probability, will be produced by the
faithful administration of this government, must not be entirely passed in
silence, though they can be but imperfectly noticed. Hitherto, for want of an
efficient government, the felicities that were promised by our situation, and
the advantages that were expected from our Independence, have not equalled our
hopes. The harvest of blessings, sown in fields fattened with the blood of
heroes, has mocked our expectations. But under the present Constitution, being
uncommonly protected in our persons and our acquisitions, we shall have
uncommonly favorable opportunities for increasing and enjoying our natural
resources. We have purchased wisdom by experience. Though mankind are believed
to be averse to the coertions of government; yet no sooner had our countrymen
felt the inconveniences arising from the feebleness of our former
confederation, than they seemed willing to invest a new Congress with a farther
portion of their original rights, for the purpose of being more fully protected
in the enjoyment of the remainder. Thus the dispositions our Countrymen have
been gradually matured to receive an energetic government. Heaven be thanked
that we have lived to see its wonders, in our native land not less in darkness
and tempest, than in sunshine and ferenity! Now the clouds, that obscured our
political horizon, are bursting away. The dawn of happiness begins to appear.
We cannot refrain from experiencing the consolatory joys of futurity, in
contemplating the immense deserts, yet untrodden by the foot of man, soon to
become fair as the garden of God, soon to be animated by the activity of
multitudes, and soon to be made vocal with the praises of the MOST HIGH. Can it
be imagined that so many peculiar advantages, of soil and of climate; for
agriculture, for navigation, and eventually for manufactures, were lavished in
vain -- or that this vast continent was not created and reserved so long
undiscovered, as a Theater for those glorious displays of Divine power and
goodness, the salutary consequences of which will flow to another Hemisphere,
and extend through the interminable series of ages! Should not our souls exult
in the prospect? -- Though we shall not survive to perceive, with these bodily
senses, but a small portion of the blessed effects which our revolution will
occasion in the rest of the world; yet we may enjoy the progress of human
society, and human happiness, in anticipation. -- We may rejoice in a belief,
that intellectual light will yet illuminate the dark corners of the earth; that
freedom of enquiry will produce liberality of conduct; that mankind will
reverse the absurd position, that the many were made for the few: and that they
will not continue slaves in one quarter of the globe, when they can become free
men in another.

WITH such animating prospects before us; with a spirit of industry becoming
every day more prevalent; with habits of economy, first prompted by necessity,
now acquiring force from fashion; with dispositions that a reverence for public
and private justice should form the basis of our national character -- we only
wanted a good government, well administered, to establish our happiness at home
and our respectability abroad. This is the time for fixing our national
character and national manners. For this purpose, the integrity, the talents
and the examples of such an assemblage of illustrious personages, as those who
are now employed in the general government were highly requisite.
Notwithstanding the unanimous suffrage of our countrymen in favor of the
Supreme Magistrate, supersedes the propriety of my mentioning the circumstances
of his coming again into public life, the sentiments entertained of his
character, and the benefits expected from his administration; yet I may be
allowed to say, that no selection of Sages, in this or any other country, ever
merited the confidence of their fellow citizens more than the members of the
present Congress. If then the body of worthy citizens will cooperate with the
general and state governments, in endeavors to promote the public felicity; if
the ministers of religion will exert themselves in their holy functions to
disseminate peace and good will among men; if the executive officers of
government will not bear the sword of justice in vain, but be a terror to evil
doers and a praise to such as shall do well: we may congratulate ourselves upon
having lived at so important a period; and seen the establishment of a
government, calculated to promote the permanent prosperity and glory of our
nation.

THE END.

