THE CHARACTER and DUTIES OF A CHRISTIAN SOLDIER, CONSIDERED and APPLIED IN A
SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE THE ANCIENT and HONORABLE COMPANY of ARTILLERY, ON
MONDAY, JUNE 7, 1790; BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE ELECTION OF OFFICERS.

BY JONATHAN HOMER, A. M. PASTOR of the FIRST CHURCH in NEWTON.

PRINTED IN BOSTON, BY BENJAMIN RUSSELL, STATE-STREET, 1790.

A SERMON, etc.
I. CHRON. XII. 33. OF ZEBULUN SUCH AS WENT FORTH TO BATTLE, EXPERT IN WAR,
WITH ALL INSTRUMENTS OF WAR, FIFTY THOUSAND, WHICH COULD KEEP RANK: THEY WERE
NOT OF DOUBLE HEART.
THE people of Israel were so impressed with the virtues and exploits of David,
that they generally united, upon the death of Saul, and the defeat of his
rivals, to raise him to the throne. They accordingly sent to him at Hebron a
chosen band out of each tribe, to testify their readiness to support him
against any attempt to hinder his exaltation. Their country had long smarted
under foreign and civil wars, and they anxiously expected more happy days under
the administration of a Monarch wise, pious, and brave.

THE zeal of the tribe of Zebulun was conspicuous on the occasion. Fifty
thousand of its citizens, with arms in their hands, marched to the capital.
These appear to have been the flower of the militia. They were " such as went
forth to battle, expert in war." Either they had been actually tried in the
season of danger, and their courage and discipline had been proved in battle;
or they had paid such attention to the art military, that they were
sufficiently trained to contend with the foes of their country. They were
accordingly prepared to fight, should events require it.

THEY were properly skilled in the duties of the soldier, and were expert in
those evolutions, which were necessary for the successful conduct of war.
Though the civil wars appeared to cease by the consent of all parties to
acknowledge David King, and no public enemy appeared in the land, some foreign
power, or domestic usurper, might take advantage of a state of general
security, and attempt to strike a fatal blow. They went, therefore, prepared
for the worst.

THEY were completely armed, and did not suffer themselves to be deficient in a
single article. They marched " with all instruments of war."

THE shield, the helmet, the bow, the sling, the spear, and the sword, were the
arms of their age and nation. These were naturally preserved in bright and
excellent order by a people of such military taste. They would not allow rust
to canker them, or dust to tarnish their beauty. Yet, while they took a due
care of the appearance of their arms, they would be more attentive to have them
fit for use, than for show. The vain soldier, who preferred ornament to bravery
and discipline, would have been an object of their just and universal contempt.
-- "AMPHIMACUS the vain,
Who, tricked with gold, and glittering in his car,
Rode like a woman to the field of war;
Fool that he was! by fierce ACHILLES slain,
The river swept him to the briny main:
There, whelmed with waves, the gaudy warrior lies,
The valiant victor seized the golden prize."
(...)
When the Persians became enervated with pleasure, and relaxed in discipline,
they were strangers to that martial spirit, which inspired the people of
Zebulun. They despised the plain but useful armor of their brave ancestors,
and adorned themselves before battle with gold and jewels. These served only to
convince the rough Grecians of their loss of their manly feelings, and to urge
them more forcibly, to an irresistible and gainful attack.

THE troops of Zebulun not only possessed " all instruments of war," but they
knew how to use them to the best advantage. They were skilled in the various
branches of military discipline. They marched in regular array, and " could
keep rank" in the field. They felt the importance of order and uniformity in
their movements, and of attacking or maintaining the shock of an enemy, with a
steady, unbroken front. Each soldier carefully kept the station assigned him,
and marched, or countermarched, charged, or retreated, with a firm and regular
step, according to the word of command.

THE sacred Chronicle closes the account with a concise and expressive
delineation of their character: " They were not of double heart."

THEY were sincerely and conscientiously attached to the cause in which they
were engaged. The Hebrew phrase, literally translated, is, they had " not a
heart and a heart." They had not one heart, warm and loud in its loyal,
patriotic expressions, and another heart, more concealed, selfish, inconstant,
and deceitful. They were attached, by a principle of honor and love, to the
late revolution in government, which placed the brave and pious David on the
throne. They were not mercenary soldiers, following the standard of ambitious
leaders, for plunder or pay. They were the freemen, the citizens of the state,
who viewed their religion, their wives, their children, their property,
involved in the liberty, the safety, and the regular government of their
country.

THEY had not forgotten the example of their brave ancestors, who, though a
small band, ranged themselves under the standard of the gallant Barak, wrested
Judea from the iron yoke of oppression, and totally defeated the numerous
regular troops of their tyrant, the King of Canaan. They recollected the
panegyric strains of the Jewish Prophetess and Heroine, See the context.
" Zebulun and Naphtali were a people, that jeoparded their lives unto the
death, in the high places of the field." They wished to emulate their
patriotism and military virtues, and welcomed fatigue and danger, if they might
but perpetuate the felicity of the nation. Their generous souls spurned the
idea of duplicity, and they were willing to seal their attachment to the cause,
which they had espoused, with their blood.

How happy then must these loyal and virtuous citizens be, to find their
brethren flocking into Hebron, from the other tribes, upon the same design! How
pleasing to observe discord withdraw herself from the scene, and every eye
sparkling with joy, at the close of their civil wars, and the establishment of
a first Magistrate, who possessed the happy talent of ruling in the hearts of
the people! --

THE entire unanimity in this vast military body, and the Song of Deborah.
" oneness of heart in all the rest of Israel," without exception, " to make
David King," exhibited him as evidently designated by Heaven to his high office.

THEY could not forbear mutual congratulations on their present prospects. Men,
who were not of double heart, who sincerely sought the public honor and
prosperity, could not but felicitate themselves on the peaceable establishment
of their new Monarch. He became the common center of their affections.
Partyspirit was consequently banished, and they viewed themselves as brethren
of one great family, whose duty and glory it was, to imitate the virtues of
their royal Sire.

IT was natural for them, therefore, to keep a joyful festival on the occasion
-- " Bread and milk, cakes of figs, and bunches of raisins, and wine, and oil,
and oxen, and sheep," were prepared " abundantly," for the whole multitude: "
For there was joy in Israel. Neither need we be surprised, that "David," their
late general, notwithstanding the difficulties with which he had struggled, and
the dark clouds which so often obscured his horizon, " waxed greater and greater;
for the Lord of hosts was with him."

OUR text holds up to view the duties and virtues, which claim the attention of
the military character.

HAPPY would it be, my brethren, if reason or religion laid such restraints
upon the passions of men, that it would be unnecessary to have any knowledge of
the use of arms! But, as the present degenerate condition of human nature
renders this knowledge absolutely requisite, to protect a country against bands
of public robbers and murderers, who consider themselves legally authorized by
their employers, to deal destruction around them, and to wrest the property and
immunities of the citizens from their possession; it is not unsuitable, to
devote an anniversary to the serious consideration of the character, and duties
of a patriot soldier.

AND when a minister of the gospel reflects, on such an anniversary, that he is
not addressing a band of mercenaries, who make war their trade, but a select
body of independent citizens, who are chiefly conversant with the duties of
civil life, and who are incorporated to defend the land of their nativity
against lawless invasions, to seek its true glory, and to cement the ties of
friendship among themselves; he may consider the occasion, not wholly foreign
to the business of his station.

IF the primitive christians faithfully followed the standard of their Heathen
Emperors, and assiduously cultivated the profession of arms, that they might
testify their loyalty at the hazard of life; much more may we pay a temporary
attention to military science to enable us to maintain the civil and religious
rights of a free christian republic.

THE patriot, christian soldier will cordially comply with those laws of the
Commonwealth, which mark out the line of his profession. He will be careful, to
provide himself with a complete military apparatus, and to be expert in the use
of his arms, that he may " not be ashamed to speak with his enemies in the
gate." He will be diligent to make proficiency in discipline. He will keep
rank, while peace allows him securely to practice military evolutions, that he
may maintain good order, and a better countenance, when the trump of war
summons him to battle. True courage enables him to adhere to that discipline,
in the day of trial, which he has learnt in a season of calmness and leisure.

THE simplicity and purity, that reign in his breast, teach him to despise
those selfish arguments, which urge the sacrifice of the public good to
personal safety or interest. He shudders at the idea of a double heart,
influencing his designs or conduct. He sincerely and ardently loves the cause
and country, to which he has devouted himself. He knows, that his station
exposes him to danger in the season of war. But he remembers, that life was
given, to aid him in deeds of patriotism and virtue. If he has military
talents, he believes, that it would be sinful to bury them in a napkin, and
that he is accountable for the neglect of them, when the public honor and
safety require their improvement. He knows, that he must quit this stage, at
the moment decreed by the sovereign Arbiter of human life; and he is desirous
of acting his part well, till he is called to other climes and scenes. -- He is
more anxious to merit the esteem of the virtuous and the brave, and to make a
suitable application of his powers for the promotion of the general good, than
to protract the period of his present existence. " Save my country," is his
first and last request to Heaven.

THE christian soldier affects not to derive any pleasure from the sacking of
towns, the desolation of kingdoms, or the shrieks of wounded and dying men. His
humane heart sighs at these scenes, and he would rejoice in an honorable
opportunity for his sword to sleep for ever in its scabbard.

WHEN he thinks of an agonizing parent deploring the loss of a gallant son, who
can never more share his affectionate smiles -- of the pale virgin, sighing in
vain for the return of her faithful lover, whom the fatal ball or piercing
steel forbid to realize past fond dreams of conjugal felicity, under the roof
of peace -- of the helpless widow bewailing her slain husband, and her tender
offspring asking, with weeping eyes, for a father who once gave them bread; --
he can drop a tear, even over a fallen foe.

HIS own private glory or emolument are not sufficient, in his view, to induce
him to harbor a single wish for war. He is reluctant at the thought of drawing
his sword, unless the liberty and safety of his country urge.

BUT when these call him to the field, he cheerfully complies with the summons.
He is willing to command, or obey, as his duty and station prompt. Confident of
the goodness of a cause, which he has maturely weighed, and committing it, and
himself to the patronage of the GOD of armies, the Fautor of justice, he
directs his unwearied efforts, to promote the great object. He is ready to
encounter fatigue, wounds, and death, with a cool determined courage, to repel
the bold invader, and to establish, on a permanent basis, the rights and
privileges of the republic.

SHOULD the christian soldier fall in his attempts to serve his country, he
believes, that he falls not, unnoticed, by the Father of spirits. He has made
him the object of his trust and love. He has often adopted the language of the
Jewish Hero. Psalms XXVII. 1.
The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear? The Lord is the
strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid? -- He is willing to be
discharged from his earthly labors, as the wisdom and goodness of Heaven may
determine. He remembers the animating promise of his divine Captain, Rev. II.
10.
Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life. --
Cheerful, at his call, his spirit wings its way to those purer climes, where
all the citizens live in perfect harmony, where, instead of the rude din of
arms, joy and gladness shall be found, thanksgiving and the voice of perpetual
melody.

How necessary then is the aid of revealed religion, to render the military
character complete! -- While it reprobates the double minded man, as unstable
in all his ways, it teaches that purity, sincerity, and disinterestedness of
soul, which are requisite to a faithful discharge of duty in every station.
While it leads us to a careful eradication of those lusts, from which unjust
wars and fightings arise, it affords the best motives to courage and fidelity,
in crushing the attempts of men, in whom these lusts predominate.

IT exhibits a bright catalogue of military worthies, who in different ages,
played the men for their God, and the cities of their God. It animates with the
example of an Abraham, a Joshua, a Caleh, a Jonathan, a David, a Jehosaphat, a
Nehemiah, in whom piety and bravery shone illustrious. It shows us, how a
stripling, unskilled in arms, but reposing his trust in Jehovah, can meet
undaunted the gigantic warrior, at whose presence a whole camp trembles, and
calmly reply to his haughty air and menaces, 1 Samuel XVII. 45.
Thou come to me with a sword and with a spear; but I come to thee in the
name of the Lord of Hosts.

IT teaches us, that Romans XIV. 7.
no man should live to himself or die to himself, and that we should II. Cor.
XII. 15.
spend and be spent for the general good, even though we meet with ungrateful
returns.

THE soldier, therefore, who acts under the eye of his divine Commander, and is
influenced by the examples of patriotism and fortitude, which the sacred
scriptures contain, will not fail to discharge the duties of his post. His
exertions will be the result of firm unshaken virtue, not of mechanical or
mercenary principles. His country's good will be, in his esteem, the noblest
reward of these exertions.

THE subject will be closed with a few reflections, and an address to the
military gentlemen, at whose request we are convened.

How natural is it on such an occasion, to lament that depravity of human
nature, which has rendered this globe a theater of desolation in every age, and
necessitates the peaceful citizen to cultivate an acquaintance with the use of
arms, left he fall a prey to tyranny, ambition or avarice! How often does the
benevolent mind turn abhorrent from the history of nations, while its pages
appear stained with the blood of millions, and recount little more than a
continued and awful succession of wars and battles!

IT is agreed, says Mr. Rollin, that wars, undertaken solely from views of
interest or ambition, are real robberies.

BUT an impartial spectator will generally perceive nations actuated by these
views in their contentions. To enlarge the boundaries of an empire, already of
sufficient extent for the maintenance of a peaceable and regular government --
to gain some favorite point of honor, which, when gained, is but an empty name,
or to resent some affront, which is always more tolerable than the calamities
of war, and which is often too insignificant to engage the serious attention of
children; desolation is commissioned to spread wide her ravages, and torrents
of human blood must be deliberately shed.

How fallen, then, is man, selfish, destroying man, from his original
perfection! " God made him upright," and gave him the law of love for his
guide. " But he has sought out many" wanton " inventions," foreign to the
purity and benevolence of religion.

THE gospel explicitly requires us Heb. XII, ^^.
"to follow peace with all men -- Ephesians. IV, 31.
to put away bitterness, wrath, clamor and malice -- to Phil. II. 4.
look not every man on his own, but every man also on the things of others."
How repugnant then is "the spirit, which is of the world" to "the spirit, which
is of God!"

WHILE unbridled selfishness presides in human councils, and nations confine
their regards solely to themselves, vain will be all human schemes, however
benevolent in their orign, to banish war from our globe. A divine influence,
powerfully impressed on the hearts of mankind, will alone effectually teach
them genuine philanthropy, and induce them to live and love as brethren.

How soothing then, how transporting the idea, to the humane, the christian
bosom, that the period rapidly rolls on, when this influence, with concurring
providential events, shall establish the golden age of the world, -- when "the
nations shall not learn war any more" -- when "Ephraim shall not envy Judah,
nor Judah vex Ephraim" -- when " the righteous," rulers and their subjects,
jointly under the influence of religion, " shall flourish, and abundance of
peace, so long as the moon endures."

BUT I hasten to close the subject by a particular address to the worthy
gentlemen, who compose the military body before us.

GENTLEMEN,

AT the request of your ANCIENT AND HONORABLE SOCIETY, I have attempted to
address you on the duties, and objects of your profession. A century and a half
of years have revolved since the first establishment of your company by our
brave and venerable ancestors. The purest patriotism induced the measure of
incorporating a society of respectable citizens, who should be viewed as the
flower of the militia, and a school for the diffusion of military knowledge in
New England.

To defend their country against the ravages of her enemies; to protect the
civil and religious rights of the people, was their leading motive.

THEY were too much under the influence of a just and benevolent religion, to
indulge a wish for an occasion to display their skill and courage in the rough
business of war. But they believed it their duty, to use the best means in
their power, for the protection of a country, in the settlement of which the
providence of the Almighty had so visibly interposed, and where they enjoyed
those immunities, that were dearer than life.

UUINFLUENCED by ambition or injustice, and inspired with a zeal for the public
good, they established a military institution, the beneficial effects of which
might be felt in subsequent years, and ages.

POSTERITY approved the plan, and the children have risen up successively in
the room of their fathers, to prosecute it.

THE fairest names in New England have graced your military rolls. Each
succeeding generation has seen, in your number, men, inspired with the purest
principles of philanthropy, men, who derived their courage from a sincere
confidence in the Lord of hosts, and who esteemed it their highest honor to
approve themselves " good soldiers of Jesus Christ." Each generation has had
occasion to admire the pure republicanism of your institution, while officers
of the first distinction have condescended to enter the ranks, and discharge
the duties of a private sentinel, to stamp a dignity on the station of a
patriot soldier.

WITH pleasure we observe the present respectability of your company, and men
of worth, in the various departments of life, uniting in the friendly discharge
of the military office.

YOUR appearance, on this anniversary of your election, exhibits an agreeable
epitome, and illustration of our text. The state of your arms and discipline
gives you an honorable resemblance to the warlike and patriotic tribe, depicted
by the sacred historian.

LIKE the military citizens of Zebulun, you profess to despise a double heart,
to be actuated by the purest love of your country.

WE rejoice to behold among you men, who "have jeoparded their lives in the
high places of the field," whose courage, coolness, and discipline have been
conspicuous on eminent occasions, and who have contributed largely to the
establishment of our national military character, and the independence of the
United States of America. Your company has discovered the most unequivocal
attachment to those tried worthies, who fought our battles, and by their valor
and discipline, under God, have wrought out our political salvation. If these
have been forgotten, after the hour of danger, by some, who once eyed, and
invocated them as the saviors of the land, you have evidenced that you are not
of double heart, by the fullest tokens of your esteem and gratitude. While it
must give you a generous pleasure, to testify your veneration, by adding some
of their names to the bright catalogue of your leaders, they must be inspired
with the warmest affection for the society: And your proficiency in discipline,
under their eye, must reflect mutual honor, and satisfaction.

IT is a pleasing circumstance, that it is unnecessary, to point you to the
numerous worthies of ancient Rome, or to bring to your view the distinguishing
talents and virtues of a CAMILLUS, a CINCINNATUS, a FABIUS, a REGULUS, the
DECII, the SCIPIOS, and other eminent characters in your line. Your own history
will furnish you with heroes, who deserve your imitation.

EMULATE then the civil and religious virtues of your honorable fathers, who
have trodden in the steps, in which you are called to follow them. Let your
more noble, enlarged object stimulate you to preserve, to increase the
respectability, the usefulness of a company, which was first instituted to
defend a part of the dependent territories of Britain, but is now invited and
engaged to extend its assisting arm in behalf of a rising, independent, and
extensive empire. But, while you remember, with admiration, your valiant
ancestors, and the heroes, who have trodden the stage in the late war; while
you cease not to revere your exalted His Excellency John Hancock. Esquire.
Commander in Chief, whose illustrious qualities, and engaging beneficent
virtues, as a Patriot, a Magistrate, and a Citizen, are too well known, to need
a distinct enumeration; -- your bosom should beat gratitude to that Providence,
which has allowed you to contemplate the brightest military pattern, which,
perhaps, was ever exhibited to human view. A WASHINGTON, like David of ancient
days, has been placed by the unanimous voice of his country at the head of her
civil and military government. Our General in war, is our Leader in peace.

EAGERLY catch that military spirit, which sired his early youth, and has not
yet ceased to glow in his bosom. Ponder those christian virtues, which reflect
the brightest splendour on his character, and qualify him for that "crown of
righteousness," which alone can pay, and more than pay, the debt due from his
country. Think of his piety and patriotism, which have been invariably combined
with his exalted talents to bless it, and to exhibit an instructive example for
the imitation of heroes in every nation and age.

WHILE then, by your sedulous improvements in discipline, you, with your other
worthy brethren of the militia, testify your attention to his important
observation: "The Militia of this country must be considered as the palladium
of our security, and the first effectual resort in case of hostility:" May you
not forget your near concern in his devout prayer for you, for all the
inhabitants of the United States; -- "That we may demean ourselves with that
charity, humility and pacific temper, which were the characteristics of the
divine Author of our Religion, and WITHOUT AN HUMBLE IMITATION OF WHOSE
EXAMPLE, WE CAN NEVER HOPE TO BE A HAPPY NATION"! Genesis Washington's circular
Letter.


WHEN this prayer is effectually heard by that gracious Being who " has all
hearts in his hand," AMERICA will be adorned with a new glory, reflected from
the inspiring example of her Chief; and the FATHER of these States shall live,
when dead, in the resembling lineaments of his children.

LONG, long may he survive to bless us by his example, his prayers, and the
continued efforts of his wisdom and goodness! Long, long may we feel the most
ardent gratitude to a compassionate God, who, again and again, has snatched
him, for our sake, from impending death, and restored him to the embraces of an
affectionate people! May he live to see still brighter days dawn on his
country, to see LIBERTY and PEACE, accompanied by PURE RELIGION, go forth from
these favored climes, to bless a WORLD!

THEN, at least, AMERICA will deeply feel the exhilarating address of one her
warlike and poetic SONS:

"AWAKE, COLUMBIA, daughter of the skies,
Awake to glory, and to greatness rise!
Arise, and spread thy virgin charms abroad,
Thou last, thou fairest offspring of a God;
Extend thy view, where future blessings lie,
And open new prospects to the enraptured eye!
See a NEW ERA on this globe begun,
And circling years in brighter orbits run!
See the fair down of universal peace,
When hell-born discord through the world shall cease!"
"AND thou SUPREME, whose hand sustains this ball,
Before whose nod the nations rise, and fall;
Propituous smile, and shed diviner charms,
On this blessed land, the queen of arts and arms:
Make the great empire rise on wisdom's plan,
The seat of bliss, and last retreat of man."
HUMPHREYS.
