THE RECONCILIATION; OR THE TRIUMPH OF NATURE: A COMIC OPERA, IN TWO ACTS. BY
PETER MARKOE.

Nunc haec plane est pro nova.
TERENT. (IMITATED.)

Enlarged -- perhaps improved -- let taste peruse
This happy offspring of a German muse.
PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY PRICHARD and HALL, IN MARKET STREET, BETWEEN
FRONT AND SECOND STREETS.

M.DCC.XC.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY THOMAS MIFFLIN, ESQUIRE. President of the State of Pennsylvania;
AND TO THE HONORABLE THOMAS M'KEAN, ESQUIRE. Chief Justice of the said State; THIS
COMIC OPERA, Approved of by them in their official Capacity according to Law;
but withdrawn from the Managers of the Theater, after it had remained in their
hands more than four Months;

IS, WITH DUE ACKNOWLEDGMENT FOR THEIR CANDOR, AND IN TESTIMONY OF HIS RESPECT,
INSCRIBED BY Their obliged And humble Servant, THE AUTHOR.

THE PREFACE.
A REVISAL and correction of "Erastus," literally translated by a native of
Germany, lately arrived in Pennsylvania, gave rise to the following piece. The
happy simplicity of the German original, written in one act by the celebrated
Gesner, suggested an enlargement of the plan. A new character is added, songs
are introduced, and the dialogue so modelled, as to be rendered (it is
presumed) pleasing to an American ear.

Those, who understand the German and English languages, will, on comparing the
two pieces, readily perceive the difference between them. To their candor, and
to the indulgence of the public, "the RECONCILIATION, etc." is submited.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Wilson senior. Wilson. William, his son. Simon, a servant.
WOMEN.
Amelia, wife of Wilson. Deborah, a servant.
SCENE, A Lawn before a Cottage.

THE RECONCILIATION, etc.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
DEBORAH alone. MERCY on me! what is become of Simon? Some bad accident or
other has happened to the poor, dear fellow. What shall we do, if he should
never return? No victuals in the house; no messenger to go for any, and little,
very little money remaining. I never suspected, when I turned cook, that things
would come to this pass. Our family at times might as well have a coach with a
fifth wheel to it, as a cook. Now and then we get a comfortable meal; now and
then, I say. But in general we lead the life of a dog -- hunger and ease. --
False-hearted Simon! thou worst of cannibals! thus to desert master and
mistress, our promising young gentleman, and thy own Debby -- The fellow is
certainly taking his swing in some tavern or other, drinking, and gormandizing;
or perhaps making love to some draggled-tail'd -- But I Will match him; I Will
match him.

AIR I. Tune, My Jockey is the blythest Lad, etc.
How happy once were Debby's days!
Ah! days of sweet content!
The hearth rejoiced her with its blaze;
The jack alertly went.
Since Simon leaves his love to weep,
No comfort can she know;
The jack eternally may sleep;
And Debby's cake is dough.
2.
Should roving Simon prove untrue,
How hard will be her lot!
Soon must lost Debby bid adieu,
Alas! to spit and pot.
Two cruel tyrants she obeys;
Ah death! prepare thy dart!
On her poor stomach hunger preys,
And love afflicts her heart.
But here comes my master. A very good sort of a man in the main; but a little
too proud. Pride and poverty never agree well together, -- that is a clear case.


SCENE II.
DEBORAH, WILSON with a Gun in his Hand. WILSON. DEBORAH! is Simon returned?


DEBORAH. No, Sir -- he is always in a hurry to go to town; but before he
thinks of coming home, his hurry is over.


WILSON. What can detain him? No sustenance procured from abroad, and none to
be found at home! Where is your mistress?


DEBORAH. She is mending some old clothes; and now and then she sings a hymn to
keep up her spirits.


WILSON. At once pious and industrious! -- Let the fire be ready against Simon
returns. He at least will not come back empty-handed, as he took with him that
which commands a selfish world.


DEBORAH. Yes, Sir.


SCENE III.
WILSON alone. Exposed to the chilling damps of the morning, and to the
scorching rays of the noonday sun, I have unceasingly wandered in pursuit of
food for my family -- but in vain. The distresses of my mind affect my bodily
faculties. My once unerring hands have forgot their office. The birds hover
over my head, as if unapprehensive of my gun, whilst the deer, no longer timid,
feed in security, and seem to defy my feeble efforts. Once more let me enter my
cottage; the abode -- O Heaven! -- the abode of innocence and affliction.

AIR II. Tune, The Birks of Indermay.
Why sleeps the thunder in the skies,
When guilty men to grandeur rise? --
Or why should innocence bewail
Distress, in bleak misfortune's vale?
Just are the dark decrees of heaven,
Since short the date to either given:
Vice earns unceasing dread and shame,
Whilst endless joys are virtue's claim.

SCENE IV.
WILSON, DEBORAH. DEBORAH. The fire is ready, Sir; but I see nothing of Simon.


WILSON. Where is William?


DEBORAH. Gone a walking to get an appetite. -- A very foolish errand in our
starving condition. (Aside.)


WILSON. Let your mistress know, I should be glad to speak with her; and put up
my gun.


DEBORAH. Yes, Sir.


SCENE V.
WILSON alone. Incomparable woman! how piously resigned to, the will of Heaven!
Alone, she indulges in the extreme of sorrow; but at my approach the smiles of
conjugal affection add new luster to her charms. Joy seems to triumph on her
countenance, lest grief should lour on mine. The wife is studious to cheer the
bosom of her desponding husband, whilst the woman and the mother feels
internally all the horrors of her situation. Such virtue is entitled to reward.
But as for me, O! that distress were my lot only! -- that I alone were doomed
to misery -- provided that she and my son were happy! Our poverty increases.
Age, accelerated by grief and sickness, advances with rapid strides. My money
is nearly exhausted; and alas! I have no credit. Deserted by my father, from
whom can I expect relief? The exertions of my industry have been destroyed by
the late storm. Twelve years have elapsed, since I entreated forgiveness from
my father in a letter fraught with filial contrition. Alas! can the fault,
which I have committed, excuse his severity? Detesting treachery toward a
woman, who united herself to me in consequence of my most solemn promises, I
have discharged the duty of a man of honor, although in so doing I acted
contrary to his commands. Not all the glare of riches, not all the pride of
dominion, could have soothed the horrors of my mind, had I consigned to obloquy
and disgrace a woman, who justly lays claim to universal esteem. But let me not
despond. Nature will assert her rights, and the heart of my father must at
length relent. My son approaches! Gracious Heaven! to what misery may he not be
exposed! I will conceal my sorrow, and assume the semblance of contentment,
whilst anguish preys upon my heart. Hitherto secluded from the world, his
conversation is necessarily puerile, but his heart, I trust, is good, and his
understanding not defective.


SCENE VI.
WILSON, WILLIAM. WILLIAM. My dear, dear father!


WILSON. My beloved child! What have you been doing? You appear quite cheerful.


WILLIAM. I have been this hour or two with the boy, who minds the sheep on the
hill. The poor fellow made me quite sorrowful.


WILSON. But why?


WILLIAM. He burst into tears as we were sitting down together. "I have not had
a morsel to eat all day," says he -- "Here!" says I -- "take this piece of
bread, and much good may it do you" -- and so I gave him all I had saved from
my own dinner. Although I felt a little hungry myself, it did my heart good to
see how eagerly he swallowed it.


WILSON. May Heaven reward my son! (Aside.)


WILLIAM. I hope, Sir, you are not angry with me. I am certain, the little
fellow would have shared any thing he had with me, if I had been hungry.


WILSON. But, my dear! did you not know, that we had not a morsel of food in
the cottage?


WILLIAM. Yes Sir, I did -- but I could not bear to see him starve. Besides,
you have often told me, that God will be kind to us, if we are kind to one
another.


WILSON. Come to my arms, my Son! -- Creator of heaven and earth! Can so much
innocence and tenderness be long afflicted? -- (Aside.)


WILLIAM. What makes you weep, Sir; your tears distress me exceedingly.


WILSON. Go up the hill, and let me know if Simon be coming.


SCENE VII.
WILSON alone. Now indeed is my wretchedness complete. Let me, great Power! let
me implore thee to protect the best of women, and this unoffending child. Add
strength to my mind, lest I should presume to censure thy decrees, or yield to
despair! If I enter the cottage, I must have recourse -- hard task indeed! --
to dissimulation; conceal my anguish, and assume an air of contentment. Happily
the keenness of the air seconds my wishes, and dries up those tears, which
nature demanded.


SCENE VIII.
WILSON, AMELIA. AMELIA. You are welcome home, my dear.


WILSON. Heaven bless you, my love! -- How have you spent this afternoon?


AMELIA. As cheerfully as possible during your absence.


WILSON. What a heroine have you approved yourself throughout our sufferings!


AMELIA. Sufferings! -- On you my happiness, or unhappiness depends. Incited by
your virtues, and secure of your love, I am -- as I ought to be -- contented.
When her husband suffers, then is his Amelia distressed.


WILSON. What tenderness do you not bear toward the man, who has heaped such
misery on you, as might have turned love into hatred, and blessings into
execrations!


AMELIA. Your self-reproaches are injurious to my love. Most solemnly I
declare, that the serenity of my countenance is the true picture of the
tranquillity of my heart. Whilst possessed of you, I am truly happy. Bereft of
you, no earthly consideration could afford me any comfort.


WILSON. And can you enjoy tranquillity of mind, whilst afflicted with poverty,
and threatened with extreme distress?


AMELIA. Discontent and grief are ever strangers to my bosom, 'till I observe,
that they disturb your quiet. Reflect on those, whose distresses are by far
greater than ours. Shall we, who boast the blessings of education, suffer by a
comparison with such? As we know more than they, let our knowledge teach us
greater resignation.


WILSON. They more unhappy than we! -- Less fortunate than a bird of prey, I
have in vain this afternoon traversed those mountains in pursuit of game. As I
departed, I return -- utterly unprovided. My own sufferings I could bear,
especially as your resignation furnishes a bright example. But the present and
future distress of my son overcomes my resolution, particularly as I know, he
endeavors to conceal his sorrow, lest they should add horror to my woes.


AMELIA. Best of husbands! why should you give way to despondence, since the
extremity of distress is as yet at a distance? Fruits at least we may
reasonably expect from our son at his return. But should his exertions prove
vain, Simon will undoubtedly bring a supply from town.


WILSON. I am ashamed -- I confess it -- quite ashamed -- of my despondency.


AMELIA. Besides this embroidery may be sold to the milliner, who has never
failed to pay me for my labor. Despondence is unworthy of you. Recollect that,
in our gloomiest hours relief has always been at hand.


WILSON. Your mind is a never-failing spring of consolation. Yet the situation
of my son distresses me. What must finally be his lot!


AMELIA. If he follows virtue, she will conduct him to happiness.


WILSON. The prospect, at least with regard to this world, is gloomy. Few are
the comforts, which virtue communicates to those who are oppressed by poverty.
Not only his immediate wants, but his future destiny excite apprehension.
Doomed to poverty, how fortunate will he be, should he remain uninfected by the
vices of the outcasts of society. O my father! may thy heart be a stranger to
such sorrow, as I now experience, even should thy offspring, unpitied and
unknown, be compelled to beg a morsel of bread at thy door.


AMELIA. Misery is not necessarily his portion. By innumerable and inscrutable
means Providence can effectuate human happiness.


WILSON. True. But great must be his trials. Reflect on our own sufferings. No
sooner had I experienced the frowns of my father, and expended our little
property, than every trace of friendship and consolation vanished. Deserted by
mankind, on what can we rest our hopes?


AMELIA. On Heaven! -- On Heaven! who pours blessings on us even in this
retreat, and by adversity has reclaimed us from vanity.


WILSON. Be it so. But can any situation in life be conceived for our William,
consistently with probability, in which he will not be exposed to temptations,
which may exceed his strength?


AMELIA. Again I repeat, we may confidently rely on Providence.


AIR III. Tune, The Bird, that hears, etc.
The birds, who wing their way through air,
Are objects of his love:
The wolfs fierce young he tends with care;
His bounty reptiles prove.
Much more to thee, desponding man!
He kindness shall display:
Can we then doubt his glorious plan?
For are we less than they?
WILSON. Admirable woman!


AMELIA. Our situation is not absolutely desperate, and may even be productive
of bliss. Both religion and fortitude condemn our discontent. I lately visited
a female neighbor. How much more grievous are her sufferings than ours? Poorer
than ourselves, she is moreover aged, infirm and helpless. All her prospects
terminate in pain and distress. Yet calamity has not entirely depressed her
mind. Death alone can administer comfort to her; but longer sufferings must
precede that consolation. -- And shall an uneducated woman exhibit an example
to us, which we are incapable of following?


WILSON. It ought not to be so.


AMELIA. It ought not indeed. Both reason and religion forbid it. From him, my
love, let us expect relief, who preserves that bird, chirping on yonder bough;
the be humming near us, and those worms, which crawl at our feet. And shall we
murmur, because our circumstances are not such, as may create envy? Be
cheerful, my dear; behold, how enchanting is the scene around us! How
magnificent is that luster, gilding the clouds of this evening, which brings us
nearer to the completion of our wishes!


WILSON. Amelia, you are entitled to my warmest acknowledgments. What a
blessing do I not possess in you! You have spoken peace to my desponding mind,
and added strength to my wavering reason. The sensations I now feel resemble
the serenity of the midnight hour rendered pleasing by the gentle effulgence of
the moon, more than the fervid splendour of the meredian fun. My distress has
its source in the implacability of my father. O! if at the hour of his death, I
should not be present to receive his benediction, still he will remember his
son, and bless the unhappy being, to whom he gave existence!


AMELIA. Best of men! your melancholy would have soon yielded to the exertion
of your own reason. Animated by the best intentions, I have endeavored to
discharge the duty of a wife in suggesting those consolatory ideas, which after
a short space would have occurred to yourself. With respect to a reconciliation
with your father, would to Heaven your wishes were speedily accomplished! But
as for me -- unhappy woman! -- the object of his fixed, his unalterable
resentment --


WILSON. I conjure you by all my hopes, not to give utterance to the unkind
sentiments, which you were about to express. You are free from reproach. I
should be unworthy of the happiness, you have bestowed, and continue to bestow
on me, should I patiently listen to your unfounded and cruel self-accusations.


AMELIA. The delicacy of your love is great. Henceforth I shall abstain from
offending it. But surely my fond hopes may plead admission to your bosom. How
transporting would be the change, should your relenting father, anxious
concerning a son, whom --


WILSON. Such thoughts, my Amelia, I have frequently indulged, when ardently,
but vainly, I expected answers, replete with love, to my affectionate letters;
letters, which might have drawn tears even from an alien in blood -- from an
entire stranger -- from the most unfeeling of human beings, had he accidentally
found them. But my father -- yes, my father, Amelia!


AMELIA. Had he received them, it were an outrage to nature to suppose, that --


WILSON. An outrage indeed! -- You, who once loved me with all the ardour of
paternal affection; who delighted in every juvenile display of my ripening
talents -- how could you entail on me your inexpiable anger! -- In the hour of
serious reflection, when your displeasure calls tears from my eyes, my
conscience is free from remorse. Had I justly incurred your wrath, how should I
have endured existence! I yet hope, I yet claim, your affection! -- Let me
indulge the rapturous idea! Perhaps his anger is appeased! Perhaps he pities a
son, whom he has exposed to the storms of misfortune. I will write to him, and
endeavor to rouse the latent sparks of affection in his bosom. They cannot be
utterly extinguished. This day, this hour I will write to him. Come, my Amelia!
and assist me in the arduous undertaking.


AMELIA. I obey with pleasure.


SCENE IX.
SIMON alone, with a Basket in his Hand. Is the coast clear? Yes; they are
gone. I am heartily glad of it. I do not wish, they should see me yet awhile --
But why so, Simon! -- A bad conscience is the reason; otherwise the sight of
your best friends would be as agreeable to you as ever. -- What a bustle in my
bosom! My heart is in a terrible uproar. It strikes against my side like a
tennis-ball; -- and my pulse too -- it gallops like a troop of horse. My breast
feels as if a mountain were on it. Simon! you are a coward! -- not I; I am no
coward; a little afraid or so. -- If I am a knave, I am at least a
well-meaning, praiseworthy sort of a knave. I have acted from the best of
principles; a wish to relieve the distressed. Who calls me a robber? -- I say,
he is a good for nothing, lying son of a -- I am an honest, trust-worthy,
tenderhearted fellow. So, Mr. Conscience! I beg of you to be quiet, and give
me no further trouble. If I had committed this robbery -- I say, if I had made
free with the old gentleman's purse from bad motives -- why -- it might have
been called a robbery. But as I acted from pure, disinterested motives -- it is
no robbery at all; not in the least. Intention and circumstances quite alter
the nature of things. I Will be hanged, if there is any crime at all in it. Yet
-- I do not know how it happens -- I tremble in every limb, as if I deserved to
be hanged indeed. I would not for the world old Deborah should see me. She
would swear the gallows was in my face. (Taking a purse out of his pocket.)
Here is the rino! -- What charming music it makes in the old green purse! This
will put Debby in tune, and make her pot boil merrily for some weeks at least.
But it was obtained unjustly -- and on the highway too -- if I had tricked a
man out of it in the way of a bargain, there would have been no harm done --
But to act so barefacedly! -- Simon! you old knave! you will certainly pay for
this one day or another. Good Mr. Conscience! forgive me for this time -- it is
my first offense -- and I will never do so any more. You pull an honest
fellow's heartstrings so severely, that I vow and protest, it is better to die
peaceably with hunger, than to live in luxury after having once offended you.
It is very true, that, because our worthy family are in a starving condition, I
did presume to ask a traveller -- perhaps rather in a peremptory style -- for a
trifle, of which he can be in no great want. He will soon have recourse to his
bureau, which will make him ample amends for the pityful sum I borrowed from
him. But after all is it not a burning shame, that the rich should wallow in
excess, whilst my worthy master, his charming Amelia, the young gentleman,
their son; and honest Simon, not forgetting greasy Deborah -- are ready at
times to perish with hunger in these regions of misery? I say, it is a
scandalous thing; and who dares say to tne contrary? -- O Lud! O Lud! -- I hear
somebody coming. -- No -- What a simpleton I am! -- Simon! take heart; you have
given proofs of courage; you must now display your wisdom. But, as I hate to be
cross-questioned, let me think on what I may safely say. -- Honest Simon! stick
to the truth. -- You old fool! do you mean to tie the rope about your own neck?
-- A hard tax upon my veracity! -- I Will tell him -- what? That will never do --
worse, and worse, you block-head! -- I am at my wits ends. I Will tell him -- yes
-- this will do; now I have it. I Will tell him, that a great man, whom I do not
know, met me -- I have forgot where -- and asked me, if I was yet in Mr. George
Wilson's service; told me, that he had heard lately of his distressed
circumstances; pitied him much -- and a great deal more to the same purpose --
and so -- this good, worthy gentleman -- Who is coming? -- Only Mr. William --
I am so stinted in time, that I fear I shall make but a sorry piece of work of
it. Whilst I am thinking of a plausible story, I will trifle away a minute or
two with this overgrown boy, who knows no more of the world, than if he did
not belong to it. -- Honest Simon, I fear after all, you will turn out but a
pitiful liar, and a paltry politician.


SCENE X.
SIMON, WILLIAM. WILLIAM. You are welcome home, Simon; I am heartily glad to
see you.


SIMON. Thank you, thank you!


WILLIAM. What makes you look so melancholy?


SIMON. Because I am not in a very good humor.


WILLIAM. You come very late from town today.


SIMON. No wonder -- I had a good deal to do there.


WILLIAM. Have you brought any thing with you?


SIMON. Yes; some supply for the cupboard.


WILLIAM. That is a dear clever fellow. I have been busy gathering fruit.


SIMON. Well done. We shall live now like emperors.


WILLIAM. This news, Simon! will be of great comfort to father and mother. Till
you came, we had not a morsel in the house. Today, I saw mother in tears, as
she was at work. She did not see me, but she sighed and wept in such a manner,
that I could not help weeping too. As she turned round, she perceived me, and
then wiped her eyes, because she did not wish I should see her tears; but I saw
them plain enough. Simon! pray, tell me what makes father and mother weep so
much. It always makes me sad to see them so sorrowful.


SIMON. I am inclined to think, it is because they are poor.


WILLIAM. They poor! Our neighbors in the mountains may be poor; but that is
not our case, I am certain.


SIMON. How much he knows of the world. (Aside.)


WILLIAM. If we can be said to be poor at all, it is but for a little while.
This morning we were in a sad condition; but now we have victuals enough, and
some to spare.


SIMON. Charming youth! excellent reasoning! (Aside.) I fancy, Mr. William, you
will be a philosopher -- ha! ha! ha! --


WILLIAM. What makes you so merry, Simon? Those, I think, who suffer no want,
cannot be said to be poor. We have enough for today, and tomorrow, and next
day too.


SIMON. What a sensible lad! (Aside.)


WILLIAM. But, Simon! if we are poor, how do the rich live?


SIMON. Why, in abundance to be sure; they have more than they know what to do
with.


WILLIAM. But of what use is it to them to have too much?


SIMON. No improper question! -- Yet these people are still grasping after more
riches, and are often more unhappy than the poor.


WILLIAM. That is very extraordinary -- Do they never share with the poor?


SIMON. They share with the poor! -- not they truly; they would rather take
from the poor what little they have, and add it to their own monstrous heaps.


WILLIAM. Can this be possible?


SIMON. Very possible, I assure you; and what is more, it is very common.


WILLIAM. Simon! you certainly wish to deceive me. Don't you know you must
never tell a fib?


SIMON. A fib! -- I never told a greater truth in my life. The town swarms with
such sort of gentry.


WILLIAM. For my part, if I could afford it, I would do as father and mother
do, and share with the poor. I cannot tell how it happens, but joy makes me cry,
whenever a poor body thanks us and prays to God to bless us for any trifle,
which we can well enough spare.


SIMON. That is because you are young, and tenderhearted.


WILLIAM. And why should I not be always tenderhearted?


SIMON. Perhaps you may -- (Aside.) unless you take after the old rogue, your
grandfather.


WILLIAM. But, Simon! I had almost forgot. Tell me what makes my dear parents
so sad?


SIMON. It is, I believe, because they are not able to do as much good as they
wish.


WILLIAM. You have hit it, Simon! as sure as a gun. I am often sorry, because I
am not rich; and for the same reason too. I am however contented.


AIR IV. Tune, I kissed, and I prattled, etc.
WILLIAM. Since the rich, in the midst of their ill-gotten store,
From troubles and cares are not free;
Why should they look down with disdain on the poor?
Contentment is wealth to me.

SIMON. My days have in toil and in hardship been spent;
And the world I know well -- do you see? --
On wealth since I find all my betters are bent,
Contentment may wealth bring to me!

WILLIAM. In health I abound, and in conscience am gay;
What happier creature can be?
I lie down to rest, and I rise up to play;
Contentment is wealth to me.

SIMON. Some talk much of friendship, and others of love;
And with such in the main I agree;
But if mistress and friend should both treacherous prove,
Contentment may wealth bring to me.

BOTH. However we differ in words or in things,
Let all bow to Heaven's decree;
Since joy from contentment unceasingly springs,
Contentment be wealth to me.

WILLIAM. Let us go in. Come along, Simon!


End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
SIMON alone. MY master is asleep yet. I wish he may not awake for an hour at
least. I am still at a loss what to say. But courage, Simon! What is the story
I was framing? Fear, I think, has put knavery out of my head. Why do you
tremble, you old simpleton! Look like a judge with a grave, placid countenance,
and deceive with the easy dignity of a man of quality. You may plead many
precedents in your favor.

AIR V. Tune, An old Woman clothed in gray.
Since falsehood triumphantly reigns,
And millions unblushingly lie
In cities, at courts, on the plains;
My genius for once I will try.
It needs neither learning nor wit
To cant, to deceive, and betray;
Here the rustic may vie with the cit,
And deep statesmen to swindlers give way.
2.
Then who shall poor Simon upbraid?
In lying he stands not alone;
Of punishment he is not afraid,
Should innocence throw the first stone;
If truth all the world should obey,
The great would be silent, I fear;
Our wits would have little to say,
And our belles would have little to hear.
After all, I believe, I am rather too old to learn a new trade, especially as
it is contrary to my natural disposition. I shall certainly make but a clumsy
piece of work of it. What would I not give to be fairly out of this scrape! I
have conjured up a great man in my brain; and now what must I make this great
man say? I have it; I have it -- But here comes my master. Mind your hits,
Simon! -- Sharp is the word!


SCENE II.
WILSON. Honest Simon! I am glad to see you. Are you not tired? It is no short
walk from town.


SIMON. I am not in the least tired.


WILSON. Tell Deborah to prepare supper; and then come back to me.


SCENE III.
WILSON alone. Worthy creature! Now may I indulge the pleasing hope of being
enabled to reward his services. The letter is begun, and shall be finished this
evening. How tormenting is doubt! how enchanting is hope! My rapture will
exceed all bounds, should the answer to it speak the language of paternal love.
That answer, the forerunner of bliss, shall be bathed in the tears of filial
affection. But should my supplications be rejected -- there is horror in that
thought! -- Thou universal Father! hear my humble petition! Let me not be
tempted beyond my strength! Suffer not the grave to receive an unrelenting
father! -- But what if Simon should conduct my son to him? -- Alas! the journey
would answer no good purpose; and, as he has hitherto been educated in extreme
simplicity, his ignorance of the world, although he is not deficient in natural
good sense, might expose him to irreparable evils. But surely if the
unoffending youth were placed before his grand-fire; should he deliver to him
my letter; and, clasping his knees, implore a blessing for himself and parents
-- flattering idea! -- but vain and illusive! Such is the situation of the
unhappy man! He forms a thousand and a thousand projects. Disappointed in all,
he experiences still greater misery. But should they go on this embassy of
love, what support can they expect during their absence?


SCENE IV.
WILSON, SIMON. WILSON. What recompense, Simon! can I make you for your
fidelity?


SIMON. Recompense! -- your good opinion, Sir, is a sufficient recompense.


WILSON. No; your services can never be adequately rewarded. Forsaken by my
friends, your attachment to me has been inviolable. Destitute and helpless,
what could be expected from me? You followed me into this wilderness, endured
with me the bitterness of want, and neglected the means of advancing yourself
in life.


SIMON. Pray, good Sir! do not make me proud of my poor services. You will find
it is no easy matter to persuade me that I have even done my duty. -- Be
pleased, Sir, to accept --


WILSON. What?


SIMON. Take it; take it, Sir -- that is all.


WILSON. Take what?


SIMON. Only a small sum of money, which I got in town.


WILSON. A small sum do you call it? What makes your hand shake so?


SIMON. My -- hand -- shake! -- That is because -- I am -- overcome with joy.


WILSON. You stammer too -- what can be the matter with you?


SIMON. Take the money, I beg of you. -- This is very strange -- a little while
ago we were in the greatest distress; and now you seem angry at receiving
relief.


WILSON. Your behavior makes me doubtful, whether I should rejoice, or not.
Answer this question plainly. Where did you get this money?


SIMON. The gentleman, Sir -- a very bashful sort of a gentleman -- would not
tell me his name.


WILSON. Simon! trifle no longer with my feelings. Take back the money. I shall
not receive it, till I know how you became possessed of it. (Delivers the purse
to him.)


SIMON. That is out of my power. I never knew so squeamish a man in my life.


WILSON. Be candid, Simon! -- and tell me all about it.


SIMON. Why then, since you must know -- I found it as I was coming out of town
-- just at the bottom of the hill.


WILSON. Can I believe my ears? Does honest Simon prevaricate? Your story
contradicts itself.


SIMON. I believe you can see through my very soul.


WILSON. There is no necessity for so much penetration. Whenever you wander
from truth, your countenance alone is sufficient to betray you.


SIMON. Well then, as I told you at first, I did not find it.


WILSON. What was it you told me at first?


SIMON. That a gentleman in town gave it to me.


WILSON. O Simon, Simon! -- Is this gentleman acquainted with me?


SIMON. I suppose so. He asked me if I still lived with you.


WILSON. Well; and what then?


SIMON. I told him, I did -- and then he gave me the money, telling me to give
it to you.


WILSON. And have you no knowledge of this worthy gentleman?


SIMON. I told you already, I never saw him before. -- I wish this confounded
cross-examination was over. (Aside.)


WILSON. I readily believe, it was indeed the first time you ever saw him. Till
this unfortunate day, you never swerved from truth. How can you persist in
endeavoring to deceive me?


SIMON. There is not a word of falsehood in all I have said from beginning to
end. Excuse me, Sir -- I am rather in a hurry -- I have a little business in
the garden.


SCENE V.
WILSON alone. There is some mystery in this affair, which I cannot comprehend.
What can create such confusion in the poor man's brain? His second story is as
problematical as his first. I will follow him into the garden. Till this affair
is explained, I shall be incapable of rest.

AIR VI. Tune, In Infancy.
Truth! from thy radiant throne look down
On man's bewildered race;
Teach us, however misfortune frown,
That want is no disgrace.
Teach us, since guilt alone is woe,
To smile at weak distress;
The Power, who man afflicts below,
Is prompt above to bless.

SCENE VI.
SIMON, WILSON. SIMON. I come, Sir, most humbly to crave your pardon. I cannot
bear to deceive you any longer. Be pleased to listen to the whole affair, that
I may know from you, whether I am really as guilty, as my troublesome
conscience tells me I am.


WILSON. Go on; and speak with candor.


SIMON. This purse, Sir -- with its contents -- I received from a traveller in
those mountains.


WILSON. What! did you take it by force?


SIMON. Be patient, Sir -- and I shall relate to you every circumstance of the
affair. -- In crossing those solitary mountains on my return to our dreary
abode, casting my eyes toward the city, I beheld those lofty mansions, whose
roofs are lost in the clouds; and called to mind the debaucheries of their
owners, who live as if fortune were at their beck; lavishing their ill-gotten
wealth in a most scandalous manner, whilst their unhappy fellow creatures are
suffered to perish at their doors, unpitied and even despised.


WILSON. There is too much truth in what you say. But speak to the purpose.


SIMON. I grew angry -- very angry, Sir -- when I recollected, that such should
engross the good things of the world, whilst the finest, the wisest, and the
most virtuous man on earth -- whom, at present, I shall not presume to name --
together with the best, and most accomplished of her sex -- meaning your lady,
Sir -- should live in want and misery.


WILSON. A truce with compliments -- proceed --


SIMON. I took a survey of our deplorable situation, and was reminded by an
importunate, but faithful, monitor near my heart -- I mean, Sir, my stomach --
that we were often without a morsel of bread in the house, whilst many an idle
profligate fellow -- not worthy to clean your honor's shoes -- is living in a
palace in riot and profusion, and often risques on a single card more money
than a sober pains-taking labourer can earn all his life. Your honor knows I
tell nothing but the truth. They storm at a poor man worse than a mercenary
magistrate, when asked for a penny by the old, the lame, or the blind. Your
honor also knows, when they want to trick an innocent maiden out of her
virtue, they spend more money, than would suffice to fill the bellies of a
large family for a twelvemonth.


WILSON. You are in a moralizing humor -- but go on --


SIMON. With these thoughts in my head, I could not help losing my temper. Is
it right, says I -- is it right that such knaves should possess almost all the
gifts of nature, in which their fellow creatures ought to share? Shall one man
waste what would be enough for thousands? My heart ready to break, I took up my
burden, and jogging on in a very bad humor saw a well dressed man in a
cross-road on horseback, advancing toward me. Suppose, thought I on a sudden,
I should frighten this fine spark into a little charity? He might very well
share with me his superfluities; and where there is no harm done -- there can
be no injury received. In this manner I reasoned.


WILSON. An acute logician!


SIMON. Courage told me to accost him boldly; but conscience wanted to make a
coward of me. After some altercation, I compromised the matter between them in
this manner. One half of his money, says I to courage, swearing like a trooper,
he shall give me. The other half, whispered I to conscience, he may keep. I
want the means of subsistence, not wealth; and it is a great pity, so many
worthy people -- including myself -- should perish with hunger.


WILSON. Compassionate, as well as logical!


SIMON. I then threw my bundle amongst the bushes, and felt -- as the man on
horseback approached me -- I cannot tell you how I felt. At one time I was as
bold as a lion, and then again I trembled like a hare. "Please to stop a
little," cried I, taking hold of the bridle with my left hand, whilst I
accidentally flourished my cudgel with my right; "be so kind as to lend me half
of your money; and do not keep me long waiting, for I am in a confounded hurry.
My friends expect me." His courage was certainly less than mine; otherwise he
would have seen my confusion and tremor, as I held the bridle. In short he
threw down this old green purse. I took it into the wood, and after some time,
seemed as if just awaking from a dream. -- Now, Sir, if you will condescend to
consider all the circumstances of this affair, I humbly presume you will by no
means condemn honest Simon to the gallows.


WILSON. Honest! honest, do you say? -- No man, possessed of the smallest
portion of honesty, could have committed so vile an action.


SIMON. Is it come to this? -- I wish all the money was at the bottom of the
sea. -- But, my dear Sir, consult your usual good sense. Reflect with coolness
on our circumstances, our deplorable situation.


WILSON. No situation, however distressing, can warrant injustice.


SIMON. But I cannot conceive it to be so very unjust an action.


WILSON. My mind, once for all I tell you, must be a stranger to rest, till the
money is restored to the rightful proprietor.


SIMON. Where shall I find him? -- The devil take the money, I say. But after
all he parted with it in a manner, that showed he could very well do without it.


WILSON. That is nothing to the purpose. We are forbidden to wrong our
fellow creature in any, even the smallest, degree. Go up the mountain. Perhaps
you will see him on one or other of the roads leading to town.


SIMON. And if I see him, must I in good earnest --


WILSON. What?


SIMON. Must I restore him the money with my own hands?


WILSON. Without doubt. Take it, and act like an honest man.

AIR. VII. Tune, If it is Joy to wound a Lover, etc.
When misfortune sorely presses*
Mortal! call your courage forth;
He, who never felt distresses,
Never showed but half his worth;
Tossed by all the storms of fate,
If we conquer, we are great!

SIMON. Well, well -- I will trudge up the mountain, and keep a good look out
for him* I warrant you. But listen -- listen -- I hear a horse. Who can it be?
What if I should be taken up, tied neck and heels, and hanged like a dog! What
a fool I am! always in dread of the worst -- There is somebody coming however.
He is fastening his bridle to the rails -- O Lud! O Lud! it is he! the very
same!

(He conceals himself.)
SCENE VII.
WILSON, WILSON senior, SIMON (peeping.) WILSON senior. Excuse, Sir, my
intrusion. I have lost my way, and cannot find my servant, who left me for the
purpose of discovering the right road. (He observes Simon.) Heaven! be merciful
to me, or I shall certainly be murdered!


SIMON (Aside.) That is he sure enough. O! I am tried, condemned, and executed.


WILSON. You appear, Sir, unaccountably agitated.


WILSON senior. Good Mr. Highwayman! have pity on a weak, defenseless old man.
That worthy gentleman (pointing to Simon) was humane enough to content himself
with a part of my money. The little that is left will barely suffice to defray
my traveling expenses.


WILSON. You labor, Sir, under a great mistake. We are not robbers, but
unfortunate people, who have taken refuge in this forest from the frowns of an
ungenerous world. Pardon us, I beseech you, for the terror you have undergone.
Simon! bring the gentleman his money.


SCENE VIII.
WILSON, WILSON senior, SIMON. SIMON. I am -- as you see, Sir -- overwhelmed
with shame and sorrow. Be pleased to receive what desperation and the dread of
starving compelled me to take from you. Alas! Sir, I was driven to undertake
this business, by no means suited to my talents, by my master -- I mean, Sir --
by my master's distresses, and those of his family. Heaven, I hope, as well as
your worship, will pardon me for an action, which I abhor in my heart. Here is
your purse, Sir -- take it, and with it its full contents; a load, which would
have lain heavy upon my mind the longest day I have to live. I was looking out
for your worship for this very purpose.


WILSON senior. (To Wilson, after a pause.) I have misconceived, Sir, your
character. Pardon my error. I now find, that you have every claim to compassion
and relief. Oblige me in accepting this trifle. Nay, Sir -- I am in earnest. A
larger sum should be at your service; but a traveller is seldom overburthened
with money.


WILSON. It must not be. We should be altogether undeserving of your good
opinion, should we deprive you of what is absolutely necessary for your journey.


WILSON senior. Will you not allow me the pleasure of evincing my esteem for
you? Surely I am the most proper judge of what is sufficient for my expenses.
At least, Sir, I may present it to your worthy attendant.


SIMON. I thank you, Sir, from the bottom of my heart. -- Honest Simon lays no
claim to mock-modesty. (Aside.)


WILSON. Accept, Sir, my warmest gratitude. Better circumstances were once my
lot. I could then enjoy the supreme delight or conferring a benefit.


WILSON senior. My worthy friend! (pardon the liberty I take in thus addressing
you) your conversation and behavior convince me, that your mind is -- and
ought to be -- superior to your present condition. Your misfortunes must have
flowed from no common source.


WILSON. Alas! Sir, all I now possess is undeviating probity, and an unfullied
conscience.


WILSON senior. How enviable is your situation! I am rich, very rich; yet would
I part with all my possessions in exchange for tranquillity of mind. Like an
avenging fiend, conscience unceasingly afflicts me; nor can I promise myself
the satisfaction of being able to expiate my offense at least in this world.
Merciful Heaven! should I not succeed in my endeavors to find those, who
suffer from my injustice, how severe must be the anguish, which is reserved for
my last hours!


WILSON. Your tears, Sir, afflict me.


SIMON (Aside.) I begin to think the old fellow is the greatest knave in
company.


WILSON senior. You are yet young. Listen to the advice of an old man, who
counsels you to lay up in your youth the treasure of a good conscience, as the
chief comfort of your age. How sharp is self-reproach in the evening of life!
Its stings incessantly goad the unhappy wretch, till they hurry him to a
premature grave. Long have I been in pursuit of those, who from my cruelty --
excruciating reflection! -- from my cruelty have probably either expired in
misery, or still experience all the horrors of extreme distress.


SIMON (Aside.) I am heartily glad, he has not been guilty of murder.


WILSON senior. What spot of earth contains their dust! What pitying skies shed
their dews on their graves! Guide me, gracious Heaven! to where they rest from
anguish. There will I tear up by the roots my gray hairs, scatter them to all
the wind of heaven, and in the bitterness of woe await my ardently expected
dissolution. O! most unfortunate of fathers! -- But perhaps I have no child!
(In taking out his handkerchief he drops a letter, which Simon picks up and
endeavors to read.) You sympathize with me. Indeed, my friend! your pity is
not ill-bestowed. I am -- Heaven knows, I am -- an object of compassion.


WILSON. Wonderful resemblance! -- But how powerful is fancy in suggesting what
we wish -- It cannot be, (Aside.) You have my compassion, Sir. -- You are an
afflicted father; and I --


SCENE IX.
WILSON, WILSON senior, SIMON, AMELIA. AMELIA. My dear! you detain our
venerable guest too long in the damp evening-air. You are certainly fatigued,
Sir -- Be pleased to enter our humble habitation. Your great coat and boots
must be cumbersome to you.


WILSON senior. Your humane invitation, Madam, is extremely acceptable.


SIMON. What is this I read? or am I in a dream? Is this paper yours?


WILSON senior. What paper?


SIMON. Worthy Sir! excuse my freedom -- Is this your name? (Delivers the
paper.)


WILSON seinor. It is.


SIMON. O! I am wild with joy. Master! fall down on your marrow-bones, and
embrace the old gentleman's knees. Mistress! throw your lily-white arms round
his neck. He is your father. -- Blessings on the old green purse, I say, that
brought him here. (Aside.) -- This gentleman, Sir, is your son; and this lady
is Madam Amelia -- your daughter -- and I am honest Simon at your worship's
service. (He goes out.)


WILSON (kneeling.) O! my father! am I once more blessed in beholding you!


AMELIA (kneeling.) May I too presume thus humbly to implore your favor, to
claim you as my father, and to dedicate my days to your future ease and comfort!


WILSON senior. My children! -- Joy almost deprives me of the power of
utterance. Rise, my son! -- my daughter! -- George! you are considerably
altered. Now I recollect your features, although greatly impaired by
affliction. Much have you suffered from my cruelty; but you are still my son --
Nature asserts her rights. Good Heaven! how unexpectedly am I restored to peace
of mind!


SIMON (returning with William.) Kneel down, my brave lad! and ask grand-papa's
blessing. Now ye are all happy -- and I as much as any of you. A moment has
driven away all our sorrows; thanks to Simon's cleverness, and the virtues of
the old green purse. A little while ago I was half mad with grief, and now I am
quite foolish with joy.


WILSON senior. Rise, my child! support me, my son! my transports exceed my
strength. Embrace me, both of ye, embrace your father. Is this youth your son?
Henceforth he shall be mine; and Amelia my daughter.


AMELIA. I am, I am; and will ever approve myself your daughter.


WILSON senior. Providence has at length put an end to my woes. Three years
have I suffered the torments of a disturbed conscience. A severe fit of
sickness had almost reduced me to the grave, and my mind was pierced with
sorrow at the apprehended approach of death, because of my injustice to you.
Great was my affliction, my children! How did I, almost in despair, call upon
the Almighty! Great Power! I exclaimed, snatch me not away in this agony of
mind, till I have once more seen my son; till I embrace him, and acknowledge to
him my injustice! Let me then expire in his arms with a reconciled and cheerful
mind!


SIMON. You must have been in a terrible taking, old gentleman! and well you
might. (Aside.) -- Here is a chair for your honor.


WILSON senior (seated.) As you quitted your first place of residence, my
inquiries were fruitless. I have traversed various regions in quest of you.
Blessed be the hour, which ensures felicity to my declining age! Forgive me, my
son! for my unrelenting severity. In truth it brought with it its own
punishment.


WILSON. Forgive you, my father! -- I alone am the object of pardon.


SCENE the last.
WILSON, WILSON senior, AMELIA, WILLIAM, SIMON, DEBORAH. DEBORAH. Supper is
ready, Madam.


SIMON. Who wants your company, Mrs. Deborah Dishclout?


DEBORAH. The fellow, I believe, is crazy. You graceless varlet! you
scape-gallows! how dare you speak to me in this manner -- before so much
company?


AMELIA. For shame, Simon! -- Peace, Deborah! Let all be harmony.
Notwithstanding your little quarrels, I know you love one another in your
hearts. Let me beseech you, Sir, (to Wilson senior) no longer to reproach
yourself; but enter our cottage. We all stand in need of composure, after
having experienced the extremes of grief, of hope, and of joy. Let us now bend
in gratitude to Heaven!


DUET. Tune, Guardian Angels, etc.
WILSON. Nature! to thy throne thus bending,
Hear a son --

AMELIA. A daughter too!


BOTH. Grief no more our bosoms rending,
Brighter prospects now we view.

WILSON. Let him, Heaven! thy favors share!


AMELIA. Make him thy peculiar care!


BOTH. And in death's awful hour
On him thy blessings pour,
Who thus preserves a faithful pair.

WILLIAM. Tune, The Babes in the Wood.
Dear Grand-papa! indeed, indeed!
I love you passing well.
To you with joy I Will sing and read,
And pretty stories tell.
I mean to copy all your ways,
Instructed by mama;
That wondering crowds the youth may praise,
Who loves his Grand-papa.

DEBORAH. Tune, Good-morning to your Nightcap.
If she may be so bold, Sir,
Poor Debby takes upon her,
Although you are not old, Sir,
To tend and nurse your honor.
With happy art
I Will play my part,
With soup and sago cheer your heart;
For you I Will pray,
And bid each day
Good-morning to your nightcap.

SIMON. Tune, The same as the last.
Since now our cares are over,
I sue for Debby's favor;
No more I Will play the rover,
But stick to her for ever.
To you -- and you
My thanks are due;
Your worship claims my service too.
For you I Will pray,
And bid each day,
Good-morning to your nightcap.

WILSON senior. Tune, How happy a Life does a Miller possess.
Affection! continue to warm every breast;
Henceforth I shall hail thee the welcomest guest.
To nature if just, we most evils defy;
It charms us on earth, and conducts to the sky.
If fond of our friends and our kindred we prove,
Our country may safely depend on our love.
Then may true affection each bosom possess!
It Is the parent of union! the source of success!
CHORUS. If fond of our friends and our kindred we prove,
Our country may safely depend on our love.
Then may true affection each bosom possess!
It Is the parent of union! the source of success!

FINIS.

