Mr. GRAY's ORATION.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED JULY 5, 1790. AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF BOSTON, IN CELEBRATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

By EDWARD GRAY, Esquire.

An vero ullam usquam esse oram tam desertam putatis, quo non illius diei fama
pervaserit?

Cicero pro lege Manilia, Sect. 15. BOSTON: Printed and sold by SAMUEL HALL, at
No. 53, Cornhill. M.DCC.XC.

AT a MEETING of the FREEHOLDERS and other INHABITANTS of the Town of BOSTON,
duly qualified, and legally warned, in public Town-Meeting assembled, at
FANEUIL-HALL, on Monday the 5th day of July, A. D. 1790, 9 o'Clock, A. M.
VOTED, That the SELECTMEN be, and hereby are, appointed a Committee to wait on
EDWARD GRAY, Esquire. and, in the name of the Town, to thank him for the spirited
and elegant ORATION, this day delivered by him, at the request of the Town,
upon the ANNIVERSARY of the INDEPENDENCE of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA; in
which, according to the Institution of the Town, he considered the feelings,
manners, and principles, which led to that GREAT NATIONAL EVENT: -- And to
request of him a copy thereof for the Press.

Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

Boston, July 7, 1790. GENTLEMEN,
UNDER the kind patronage of my Fellow-Townsmen, I consent to give for the
Press, a copy of the ORATION I delivered on the 5th instant, at their request.

I am, GENTLEMEN, With great respect and esteem, Your humble servant, EDWARD
GRAY.

AN ORATION.
FRIENDS and COUNTRYMEN,
THE great deeds of this people in pursuit of liberty, the magnanimity which
achieved them, which did not cease its exertions, until their freedom and
independence were established, dignify the character of Americans, and adorn
the history of man.

But for what purpose are we assembled? As subjects, to rejoice that a king has
granted us some paltry privilege? That he has banished an unjust minister? That
Nero's minion is displaced while Nero reigns? No. Such humiliating inducements
to festivity belong to other countries. As freemen, our object is to
commemorate the day which emancipated our country: It is to celebrate that
great day, which beheld three millions of people break from their chains, and
assume their native All men are born free and equal. Massa. Declar. of Rights.
dignity.

The circumstances which led to this great event naturally command our
attention. The origin of an empire established on the basis of liberty, is not
only interesting to Americans, who enjoy its blessings, it is of importance to
every one, who has a proper sense of the rights of man.

The views of mankind in submitting to government were, to obtain "through its
protection and care, the happiness to which they naturally aspire." What form
is best to attain this object, has divided the opinions of many.

Some writers have been so mean and servile as to become the advocates of
despotism. They have deduced the rights of man from the courtesy of kings, and
taught that the happiness which government affords, can only be procured by the
ignoble means of servitude and submission. Vid. the confutation of these
writers in 2 Burlemaqui, 131, etc. in Vattel, b. i. c. 4. p. 23, 24.


Society is certainly necessary to the felicity of man; and to enjoy it,
government must be established. But are the blessings derived from it, only to
be obtained by enabling one to make millions unhappy, without redress? By
subjecting their rights to the caprice of a fellow-mortal, who, by nature, has
the same frailties as they, and whose elevated station increases them?

Such writers have only debased themselves. No man was ever reasoned into
slavery. Whole nations have been convinced that to be happy, they must be free.
Extreme ignorance of the people, and the artifice of rulers, have been the only
successful advocates of this degraded state.

There can be no doubt a free government is best suited to the nature of man.
It gives him a proper sense of his own importance. Indeed, when the opportunity
has presented, he has uniformly established it. In such a government, men are
distinguished not for the services of their ancestors, but for their own. Great
talents and virtues are the badges of office; and the little distinctions of
rank, created by the pride of kings, give place to the noble rank of freedom,
to which all the people are entitled.

If we look into history, we shall find that freedom has generally originated
from oppression. Absolute kings, who have conducted with moderation, have lived
and died peaceably on the throne. Men being attached to that government, under
which their ancestors lived, and themselves were born and educated, have
commonly suffered, before they resisted. But those who seemed disposed not to
rule, but to ruin; not to govern with prudence, but to enslave, have awakened
the spirit of liberty; which has not commonly been soothed until the rights of
the people have been secured, as they supposed, from future infringement.

From this source originated the freedom of the Grecian states, which were at
first absolute monarchies; until the tyranny of their kings made it necessary
that the people should assume the government. Montague's Ancient Republics,
15. Dion Halicarn, 248.
And in our own country, we behold the same cause produce the same effect.

It is not necessary I should recount your sufferings, which led to the late
war. The claim of right in a British Parliament to bind you in all cases
whatever, the trial by jury in many cases abolished, Judges appointed to hold
their offices during pleasure, standing armies kept among you, without the
consent of your Legislatures, and your charters violated, are too recent to
need a particular recital.

As you proceeded in that contest, it became evident that the downfall of a
minister, and the redress of a few grievances, were principles too limited to
govern an enlightened people, in their conduct toward their oppressors. The
right of sovereignty in the people of America was as sacred as any right they
had ever enjoyed. It was not founded on any institutions of man; such
foundations were too narrow: It was founded on the eternal laws of nature: --
It grew out of those laws: -- It was cherished by the spirit of your fathers;
and under the valor and wisdom of their sons, that sovereignty originated, and
has since attained to its full strength and vigor.

Never did a nation appear with such luster as did America, in the day we
celebrate. Party had no share in it. The declaration of Independence spoke the
united sentiments of the people. It The Declaration of Independence.
was not made in the career of victory, when the mind, flushed with success,
overlooks all dangers in the wildest enterprises; your fortune had been
adverse: Yet on that day you shut the door against reconciliation; on that day
was exhibited the august spectacle of America, alone, and without ally,
fearless of British power and pride, asserting the rights of herself and man.
That day placed you in the station, for which God designed you. It was an
uncommon cause in which you were engaged. It was not the cause of America only;
it was the cause of human nature. The late war commenced on your part, not from
wantonness and pride; but, for freedom's sake. You persevered in it, not with a
view to violate the privileges of others, but to defend your own. Not to add
new triumphs to America, but to preserve those unalienable rights, which
belonged to man in all ages; which are his inherent birthright in all
countries; though overwhelmed in many by fraud or violence.

It would be an unpardonable omission, should I not observe, that the unpaid
army which was peaceably disbanded, and the other patriots who exerted
themselves for you, either in the cabinet or the field, will ever be entitled
to your gratitude: particularly the Commander of that army, whose fame cannot
be exalted by applause. Illustrious Man! in the record of thine actions, shall
the historian secure his own immortality; and though thy grateful country can
afford thee no adequate recompense; yet, if its prayers are heard, thy full
rewards are in Heaven.

During the late war, our minds being fully and eagerly engaged in the great
object of Independence, we imagined, when that object should be obtained, our
liberty must be safe. Having severely suffered under a King and Parliament,
whose constitutional powers were formidable, and having frequently experienced
the fatal effects of those powers, when abused, we suspected that all rule
naturally tended to oppression: That an authority in a government to check the
licentiousness of man, involved in it a power to enslave him; that such must be
its effect, and therefore that rulers, invested with that authority, were
dangerous. Not reflecting that many powers were absolutely necessary to
establish that freedom, so dear to us all; to procure our happiness as a
people, and support our dignity as a nation: And from a preposterous jealousy
of our friends and fellow-citizens, we would not arm them in our defense, lest
they should turn against us. We forgot the honest lessons of history, which
have taught, that a government without sufficient authority to protect those
who live under it; which has not within itself the means of its own defense;
which can exist only when faction slumbers; which cannot control it, but is
controled by it; which pursues the happiness of the people, and yet is
destitute of sufficient energy to enforce obedience, must inevitably fall: and
that from its ruins will arise another, despotic as that, you opposed with such
As would have been immortalized, even if this people had not succeeded in their
contest with Britain.
spirit, and resisted with such As would have been immortalized, even if this
people had not succeeded in their contest with Britain.
firmness; which can be checked in its desolating course, not by the
constitutional barriers, provided by the people; but by the caprice of a
tyrant, or the arbitrary mandate of a minister.

Such a nerveless government, as I have described, was the late Confederation.
It vested in Congress a right to recommend, that is, to give the States advice,
which they might reject. Our rulers had a right to request, and we might
comply, if we thought proper. What protection could that government afford,
whose orders could be executed only by entreaty; whose only resources were in
prayers and supplications?

Those persons are mistaken, who suppose the late articles of Confederation
were annulled by the present happy Constitution of the United States. To every
effectual purpose, they expired with the late war; during which, many States
obeyed the requisitions of Congress. But it was a time of enthusiasm. For what
American heart could be so callous, as to be lukewarm in such a war? Their
desires met a ready compliance; not because Congress required it, but the
cause; not because their powers were regarded, but because an enemy was in the
bowels of our country, carrying ruin in its train.

Indeed had we given that form of government sufficient authority to execute
its own powers, which is necessary for every government, we must have placed
the legislative, judicial and executive powers in a single body of men. Those
three departments of power, vested in one man, is tyranny; Spirit of Laws, b.
11, c. 6, p. 188. Federalist, v. 2, p. 93.
placed in one body of men, must become an oligarchy. Spirit of Laws, b. 11, c.
6, p. 188. Federalist, v. 2, p. 93.
Surely the spirit of Americans would not suffer them to adopt a form of
government, which, invested with those means, that in another would preserve
their liberty, in this, must pervert those means to its destruction.

After the late war, it manifestly appeared to every impartial observer, that
America had not a government to any national purposes. She, who, united in her
late struggles, appeared with such splendour on the theater of nations, being
afterward divided, was falling into insignificance and contempt. To expect
enlarged views, and a liberal and national policy, from thirteen unconnected,
By an efficient government.
independent States, toward themselves and other nations, was to disregard all
former examples. History would tell us, rather to expect a renewal of those
scenes, which ruined and dishonored Greece, where we behold no views, but
those of State importance; no interests regarded, but those which were local:
not the patriot bleeding for his country, but the partizan in his cause. If the
Grecian States sometimes joined in one cause, it was not because the
Amphictionic Council The Amphictionic Council consisted of Deputies from the
several States of Greece: Every State had an equal vote in that Council; and it
operated like the late Confederation, not upon individuals, but upon States.
The Federalist, No. 18, has accurately described it.
ordered it, nor because the common good required it. By accident there was an
union of State interests, and that genius, which should have been employed in
framing such a constitution, and such laws, as would make the people happy, and
Greece respectable, was exhausted in mutual injury, and mutual slaughter.

It seems agreed by political writers, that a people are without liberty, when
the legislative, executive and judicial powers are wholly vested in one man, or
in one body of men; 1 Spirit of Laws, b. 11, c. 6, p. 188. 2 Pub. 93.
and if example is to be our instructor, we must be convinced that a people are
equally destitute of freedom, whose rulers do not possess those powers to a
certain extent, and have not sufficient authority to execute them.

A people subject to little or no constitutional rule, do not govern
themselves. They are deceived, if they suppose they do. Faction rules them, and
assumes to itself their honorable name; it calls itself the people.

Were the Athenians free, when they unjustly banished Aristides, Cimon, and
others, their greatest and best men? Were the Romans free, when Marius,
despising even the forms of law, deliberately murdered all those, whom he
suspected were in the interest of his rival, Sylla? Were they free, when Sylla
revenged himself on the adherents of Marius, with equal contempt of authority,
and with equal cruelty? or when the Triumvirate The Triumvirate alluded to,
were Pompey, Caesar and Crassus. Vid. 2 Vertot's revolutions in the Roman
republic, 255, etc.
were in office? No. Athens and Rome, when in their most democratic state, were
constantly the seats of faction. Vid. Montague's Ancient Republics, 83, 84, 85
and 86. -- 262, 3, 4 and 333.
Yesterday one party was in power, and governed with unbridled despotism, as
well the people, as its enemies. Today, another is uppermost, and, smarting
under its former sufferings, plays the tyrant in its turn. To be neuter, or the
friend of real liberty, was dangerous. The spirit of patriotism sunk into the
spirit of party. The partisans of the bold and factious demagogue, not the
friends of their country, were invested with its honors: And we behold in
both, when at the height of their imagined freedom, the citizen a slave and a
tyrant by turns.

If those governments had possessed sufficient authority to check
licentiousness, control the factious, and protect the peaceable citizen,
history would not have told us of the cruelties of thirty tyrants; nor would
the posterity of the manly Romans have degenerated into slaves.

It is manifest, that for a time, a local, not a national policy, regulated the
conduct of many States; that the prosperity of a single State, and not of all,
was the object of its citizens: and the mind, being accustomed to such narrow
views, was bewildered when it contemplated the interests of a great nation. To
diminish the distinct authority of each, State.
and thereby render all more respectable; to transfer new powers to our rulers,
and thereby increase our liberty; If faction rules in a weak government, as I
have before observed is the case, it is easy to conceive, that, by adding to
the powers of rulers, the liberty of the people may be increased. Indeed,
unless such additions are made, it is difficult to conceive that they have any
liberty at all.
to create a government for a people, whose interests were discordant, Our
Representative, Mr. Ames, in a very sensible speech, delivered in Congress on
the 5th of May, 1789, asserts, that few of the interests of the several States
clash with each other; and that although their interests are various, they are
not opposite.
which should temper, regulate and control those interests, in such a manner,
as would conduce to the benefit of all, appeared impracticable to those, who
had been tutored in the little politics of a State; who perhaps did not
attentively investigate, and, therefore, did not comprehend our national
interests. But an event took place, which, in its consequences, was so alarming
as to awaken in them a sense of our danger; which unveiled the weakness of our
government to the view of all; which demonstrated to the people, that they must
immediately make an efficient, firm and national government for themselves;
and, that if they should delay to improve the opportunity for that purpose,
which they had long possessed, it would be lost forever. It is almost
unnecessary I should tell you, the event to which I allude, was the late
insurrection; which inspired the friends of their country with fear, lest
America should add to the triumphs of the advocates of arbitrary rule, and
thereby exhibit another In addition to Rome and many other countries.
instance of the degeneracy of man. This event revived in the people those
general and extensive views, for which, during the late war, they were
eminently distinguished: And being determined to unite upon liberal principles,
having a just sense of real liberty, and being resolute to preserve it, a
national government for our country was soon framed and adopted, the blessings
of which we have experienced, and still enjoy.

"Civil liberty (says a great Judge) consists, not in a right to every man, to
do just what he pleases; but it consists in equal right, to all the citizens,
to have, enjoy, and to do, in peace, security, and without molestation,
whatever the equal and constitutional laws of the country admit to be
consistent with the public good." This is the liberty for which Americans
fought; and it is a prize worthy of the contest, and of them. They have proved
how much they regard it, by adopting a Constitution, which must be its firm
protection and support: A government, not forced upon, but voluntarily adopted
by them; not framed by others, but by themselves: A government, whose powers
are divided into three departments, Legislative, Executive and Judicial.
independent of each other, and, therefore, checks itself; checked by thirteen
legislatures, which derive their powers from the proper source of all
legitimate authority, viz. the people; checked by the people themselves, who,
at stated times and periods, can displace their rulers, and appoint others in
their stead; controled by the enlightened state of the human mind, at the
present day; controled by that manly spirit which brought our forefathers to
this country; which, with a noble firmness, has uniformly resisted tyranny in
its advances, and has crowned our country with independence and with glory.

But your Constitution, excellent as it is, will not preserve your freedom,
unless you are virtuous. Be assured, that without virtue, no people ever
continued, for a long time, either respectable, happy, or free.

Other (i. e.) Besides our excellent Federal Constitution.
happy effects of Independence, we daily experience. Our commerce is extending;
our manufactures are increasing; and our Country has become, and will continue,
an asylum for the oppressed of others.

Let me congratulate you, that the spirit of liberty is not confined to
America. You have awakened it in other countries, In France, and in the
Austrian Netherlands.
particularly in one, France.
where, with an irresistible force, it has borne down arbitrary power, has
liberated the victims The people of France liberated those who were confined in
the Bastile, and destroyed it.
of despotic rule, and "led a King in triumph." Learning, which is diffusing
itself, must strengthen it in its course: -- And let us rejoice, my countrymen,
that we have sufficient grounds to anticipate the glorious day, although it may
not belong to our times, when this our earth, the greater part of which is in
bondage, will become a world of freemen -- when, perhaps, a day like that we
celebrate, will be the common jubilee of mankind!

FINIS.

