CONCISE OBSERVATIONS ON THE NATURE OF OUR COMMON FOOD, SO FAR AS IT TENDS TO
PROMOTE OR INJURE HEALTH; WITH REMARKS ON WATER, BREAD, MEAT, CHEESE, BUTTER,
MILK, WINE, PUNCH, BEER, COFFEE, TEA, SUGAR, etc. etc.


To which are prefixed, GENERAL RULES FOR A COURSE OF DIET.

BY A GENTLEMAN OF THE FACULTY.

Salutem hominibus dando.

CICERO. -- LONDON: PRINTED -- NEW YORK: REPRINTED BY T. AND J. SWORDS, FOR
BERRY AND ROGERS, HANOVER-SQUARE. M, DCC, XC.

BERRY AND ROGERS, No. 35, Hanover-Square, directly opposite the Bank, HAVE FOR
SALE,
A NEW and elegant assortment of plated buckles, men's fashionable round and
cocked hats, colored and white patent silk stockings, patent silk and cotton
do. ladies fine cotton hose, fans, sliders for ladies hair, fancy waistcoats,
gold and silver lace, gold and silver spangles, with thread for tambour work;
feathers of different colors, ladies beaver hats, jewelry, plated and
japanned ware, knives and forks, mahogany knife-cases, penknives, scissars,
cork screws, razors, pocket and ass-skin books, flutes, guitars, fifes, with
music for the same, cake blacking, cloth and shoe brushes, backgammon-tables,
chess boards and men, billiard-balls, dice, battledores and shuttle-cocks,
playing and message cards, Middleton's black lead pencils, spectacles,
mathematical instruments, gloves, canes, fiddle-strings, sealing-wax, best
quality; whips, spurs, boot garters, wax tapers, Reeve's patent colors,
glazier's diamonds, hair-ribbon, combs, gold and silver leaf, tooth brushes,
guns, pistols, swords, patent shot, battle gunpowder, bird cages, perfumery,
surveying compasses, traveling do* chains for surveyors, umbrellas,
bathing-caps bandoes, curling and pinching tongs, with a variety of other
articles.

Also the following GENUINE PATENT MEDICINES,
James's analeptic pills and fever powders, essence of peppermint, British oil,
Dr. Ruspini's famous stiptic, tooth-powder and liquid, Anderson's pills,
Steer's opodeldoc for sprains, rheumatism and bruises; cephalic snuff for the
headache, lozenges of toulo for colds, coughs and consumptions; Hill's balsam
of honey, jesuits drops, Turlington's balsam, Stoughton's bitters, Hemmet's
pearl and pearl dentifrice for the teeth, essence of lemons for taking out iron
moulds, court plaster, gold beater's skins, etc. etc.

PREFACE.
THE following pages were compiled that the Valetudinarian might exercise his
reason in the choice of his aliment, or food, when he has not an opportunity of
consulting his Physician or Apothecary.

Many people, who are ailing, eat and drink improper things, from a want of
knowing the nature and properties of what they take: to obviate this
inconvenience, the different qualities, etc. of our common food, are here
pointed out, so far as their effects relate to the animal economy.

By consulting this little Treatise, every one may know what is good or bad for
his constitution.

The Valetudinarian will find it very useful to refer to, and he who enjoys
good health, may learn to preserve it.

The compiler has endeavored to be as concise and useful as possible: for
large, voluminous works, which treat chymically and scientifically upon Diet,
are frequently too abstruse, but little read, and as little understood by the
generality of readers. The different subjects are here treated in a way simple
and intelligible to every capacity.

The compiler is well aware that he lays open to the criticism of the world;
but hopes, that the purity of his intentions will secure him from the censures
which otherwise his imperfections might occasion; and however the world may
condemn the manner of his compilation, he trusts there will be few found to
disapprove the matter of it, when he informs them, that it is founded upon the
authority of a Cullen, a Buchan, etc. men whose knowledge and abilities have
never been disputed.

CONTENTS.
GENERAL Rules, etc. Page. 7 On Water, Page. 11 Bread, Pudding, etc. Page. 13
Beef, Veal, Mutton, Lamb, etc. Page. 15 Venison, ib. Hare, ib. Rabbit, Page. 16
Pork, ib. Fowls, ib. Pheasant, ib. Patridges and Quails, ib. Geese and Ducks,
ib. Wild-Duck, Page. 17 Teal, ib. Woodcocks and Snipes, ib. Pigeons, ib.
Jellies, Page. 18 Fish, ib. Shellfish, ib. Salmon, ib. Turtle and Turbot, ib.
Mackerel, Page. 19 Herrings, ib. Flounders and Soals, ib. Perch, Pike, Haddock,
Cods, Whitings, etc. ib. Eels, ib. Lobsters, Page. 19 Muscles, Crabs, Shrimps,
etc. ib. Oysters, ib. Eggs, ib. On Milk, Page. 20 Cheese, Page. 21 Curd, ib.
Whey, ib. Butter-Milk, ib. Cream, Page. 22 Rum and Milk, ib. Butter, Page. 23
Oil, ib. Salt, ib. Sugar, Page. 24 Honey, ib. Vinegar, ib. Nutmegs, Cloves,
Mace, Pepper, Ginger, etc. Page. 25 Of Fruits, etc. ib. Plumbs, Cherries and
Peaches, ib. Apricots, Page. 26 Gooseberries, ib. Currants, ib. Figs and
Grapes, ib. Pears, ib. Mulberries, Strawberries and Rasberries, Page. 26
Raisins, ib. Prunes and Currants, Page. 27 Oranges, ib. Melons, ib. Cucumbers,
Page. 28 Lettuce and Endive, ib. Celery, ib. Spinach, ib. Parsley, Fennel,
Mint, etc. ib. Sago, Page. 29 Cabbages, ib. Turnips, ib. Radishes, ib.
Asparagus and Artichokes, ib. Truffles, Morels and Mushrooms, ib. Carrots and
Parsnips, ib. Leeks, Onions and Garlic, Page. 30 Potatoes, ib. Pease, ib.
Salep, ib. Sago, Page. 30 French Beans, ib. Almonds, ib. Nuts, Walnuts and
Chestnuts, Page. 31 Chocolate, ib. Coffee and Tea, Page. 32 Wine, etc. Page. 33
Claret, ib. Red Wines, ib. Madeira and Sherry, ib. Spanish and Portugueze,
Page. 34 Port, ib. Raisin, Orange, Grape, Current, etc. Wines, ib. Spirits,
Page. 35 Brandy, Rum and Geneva, ib. Brandy and Water, ib. Punch, Shrub, etc.
Page. 36 Beer, ib. Ale, Page. 37 Porter, ib. Tobacco, ib. Conclusion, Page. 38
Concise Observations ON THE NATURE OF OUR COMMON FOOD, etc.
GENERAL RULES, etc.
BY attention to Diet, many diseases may be prevented, and others mitigated. --
It is a just observation, He who lives by rule and wholesome diet, is a
physician to himself.

Weakly people should eat little and often, as, by long fasting, weak stomachs
are apt to be oppressed by wind: whenever such people find an appetite for
food, they should indulge it by eating moderately.

Drinking little at a time, and often, is most wholesome to promote digestion:
large and copious draughts distend the stomach, and pall the appetite. If a
person takes a large draught of water, or any other small liquor, just before
he eats, it will generally spoil the appetite.

Drinking cold beer after hot soup is pernicious, as it generates wind, and
hurts the tone of the stomach.

Strong drinks of every kind, as is well known, are very hurtful to the
stomach, nerves, and digestive faculties; but, when carried to excess, become a
poison to the body, and in the event destroy it. Even the faculties of the mind
fall a victim to their fatal effects.

Those who are subject to bilious complaints should avoid all unripe fruits,
cucumbers, new liquors, bad wines, and bad spirits, and every thing which is
flatulent or windy: their food should be light and simple; they should never
mix too many things together upon the stomach at any meal whatever: their drink
should be moderate, nourishing, but not heating: and above all things, they
should pay particular attention to keep the body open.

Dr. Cullen very justly observes, nothing affects the mind more than the state
of the stomach, and nothing draws the stomach into sympathy, more than
affections of the mind: the stomach has a very general consent with the whole
system. Hence we see an attention to diet, etc. is of the utmost importance, as
the state of the stomach (consequently health) in a great measure depends upon
it.

Those who have weak stomachs, or are troubled with indigestion, should observe
nearly the same rules as those which are laid down for bilious constitutions;
that is, they should pay a more than ordinary attention to their diet: they
should eat little and often, and then of one thing only at a time. It is the
improper mixture of different things which lays the foundation for variety of
diseases; for the stomach being weak, is not able to assimilate or unite
together such an heterogeneous mass as arises from a mixture of things opposite
in their qualities. Every thing should be avoided which is flatulent, or in its
nature hard of digestion. New liquors, thick beer, bad wines and spirits,
unripe fruits, pickles, rich sauces, soups, etc. (as was observed) should be
avoided, as inimical to the relaxed and weakly stomach.

Intemperance and excess, both in regard to eating and drinking, should be
avoided as the parent of indigestion: on the contrary, exercise, (but not too
soon after meals, as it would disturb digestion) and every diversion, which
does not fatigue, are particularly useful.

Light suppers, and early rising, are of the utmost consequence to those who
are troubled with indigestion, for reasons too obvious to mention.

One thing I must not omit, which is generally practiced, consequently its ill
effects are little thought of; that is, eating custards, tarts, pies, almonds,
walnuts, nuts, cream, etc. directly after dinner upon a full stomach; this is a
very unwholesome habit, for the stomach having already received sufficient food
for the nourishment of the body, and probably as much as it can well digest,
the additional quantity overloads the stomach, creates a fever, and becomes
prejudicial to the constitution.

I am of opinion, that the same things, eaten upon an empty stomach, would be
of no prejudice at all; surely, in this case, it is the quantity, more than the
quality, which does the mischief.

Whenever the stomach is employed in digesting our food, it seems to be an
established law of the animal economy, that there is more or less degree of
fever excited during the time of digestion; necessary, indeed, in some degree,
as Cullen observes; but when it proceeds to a noxious one, that is, too high,
we ought to change our diet.

We should always chew our food well, as by that means it will digest much
easier upon the stomach: indeed, nature seems to have provided teeth chiefly
for that purpose.

Keeping the stomach and bowels warm, by a flannel waistcoat, or otherwise, is
very wholesome, and proper for those who are subject to complaints of those
parts, particularly in the winter time.

Having premised these few general Rules, I shall now proceed to some concise
Observations on the nature and properties of our common food, so far as they
relate to the animal economy.

On WATER.
I Shall not mention its peculiar or chemical properties as an element, but
chiefly confine myself to its internal use.

Water, as a diluent, is wholesome; it promotes digestion, and allays thirst,
perhaps more agreeably than any liquor whatever; this daily experience
testifies, and to have it good is of the utmost importance.

It is well known, even among the common people, that there is no means more
effectual in procuring a sweat, than drinking cold water.

In simple colds, from obstructed perspiration, a pint of cold water, drank
immediately upon going to bed, is, among the common people, a very usual, and
often successful remedy. In these cases, it acts by sweat, and relieves the
body. But as there are ways of exciting sweat with less hazard of mischief, a
prudent man would prefer them. For it should be remembered, that it is very
prejudicial, and may be attended with very ill consequences, if drank in
inflammatory fevers, as the quinsey, or pleurisy, etc.

I have no doubt but the poor, who frequently can get nothing else, are
oftentimes relieved in fevers by draughts of cold water.

Cold water will often relieve a vomiting, where there is a great want of
determination (as it is called) to the skin. This I mention from repeated
experience, as well as from the testimony of others.

Common water, Dr. Cullen observes, when taken in considerable quantity, proves
purgative.

A large draught of water taken in a morning fasting, is a very wholesome
custom, and frequently procures a stool.

As a bath, water conduces both to health and pleasure.

On BREAD, PUDDING, etc.
I SHALL confine myself simply to its use as food.

In England, bread is sometimes made of rye, oats, and barley; but that
prepared from wheat is by far the most wholesome.

Coarse bread, as it contains more of the husk of the grain, is more purgative
than fine.

Bread, not properly fermented, will cause the heart-burn, and when too acid,
from over-fermentation, will purge.

Stale bread is more easy of digestion than new; when toasted, it is lighter
and more wholesome.

Home-made bread (as it is called) is most wholesome, when properly prepared,
because it is not adulterated. There is no doubt but bakers use alum, or some
other ingredient, to make their bread white, to please the eye of their
customers: but to children's tender bowels such bread is very pernicious;
biscuit-powder, as being less flatulent, is more proper.

I cannot by any means agree with Dr. Cadogan, that plain, simple bread, well
fermented, can be unwholesome: there is no doubt but that it is of the greatest
use, when mixed with animal food in our ordinary meals. Indeed, bread seems
designed by Providence for food, from the earliest ages of antiquity, either
leavened or unleavened. -- I would ask, who are more hardy and healthy than our
peasants, and their children, whose diet, in these dear and trying times, is
almost bread alone? To see the truth of this, we need only to observe the
children of the villages, as we pass along: their ruddy looks, and athletic
forms, plainly tell us, that nature and simple diet point the way to health.

All pastry, pye-crust, etc. are very unwholesome, hard of digestion, and apt
to produce heart-burn, etc.

Plain simple puddings sit light and easy upon the stomach; but when made rich,
with a variety of ingredients opposite in their qualities, require a strong
stomach to digest them.

Dumplings are not so easy of digestion as light puddings: and pancakes, from
being fried in an oily, greasy substance, are more indigestible than either.

But, in fact, there is no laying down a general rule in this case; as some
stomachs digest puddings best; others, dumplings; and some few, pancakes. As an
instance of this, a particular friend of mine, whose stomach is naturally weak,
can digest nothing but hard dumplings: either light puddings or meat create
violent pain in the stomach, and he has no ease till he is relieved by
vomiting: he has several times attempted to change his diet, but was sure to
suffer from it.

Of MEAT.
BEEF, VEAL, MUTTON, LAMB, etc.
BEEF is not so easy of digestion as mutton, being of a more firm texture, but
is equally nutritious.

The lean part of fat meat is most easy of digestion.

Veal is not so easy digested as beef, nor is it so nutritious.

Mutton is also more wholesome than lamb.

The gravy of meat is not so unwholesome as is generally imagined. -- Dripping
is very prejudicial to weak stomachs.

Beef tea, mutton tea, etc. (which are made by pouring boiling water upon them,
and seasoning to the palate) are good for those whose stomachs will not bear
fat or oily broths, etc.

VENISON
Is very easy of digestion, and passes readily off the stomach; which cannot be
said of the sauce, jelly, etc. which are usually eaten with it.

HARE
Is hard of digestion, and, contrary to the vulgar opinion, that is most
wholesome which is not hunted; owing to the oily and nutritious parts of the
animal being dissipated by a long chase.

RABBIT
Is one of the lightest of the white meats.

PORK
Is very nutritious; but on account of its containing a great quantity of
jelly, and being in general more fat, is not so easy of digestion as beef,
mutton, etc. consequently is not fit for weak stomachs.

FOWLS.
TURKIES, chickens, etc. are food of easy digestion; though the very young are
not so wholesome as the middle-aged.

A good barn-door fowl is more wholesome than one hastily fatted.

The legs, and darker parts of a fowl, are more wholesome than the wings and
breast.

PHEASANT
Is more easy of digestion than the peacock.

PATRIDGES AND QUAILS
Are more tender and easy of digestion than tame fowls.

GEESE AND DUCKS
Are both difficult of digestion, and unfit for weak stomachs. The seasoning
and gravy which are generally eaten with them, make them hot and feverish.

THE WILD-DUCK
Is easier of digestion than the tame.

THE TEAL
Is lighter than either.

WOODCOCKS AND SNIPES
Are tender and easy of digestion. The wing of the woodcock is tough, whilst
that of the partridge is tender; which is owing to the woodcock flying about
more than the partridge.

PIGEONS
Are heating food; the young are the easiest of digestion: but even these are
unfit for weak stomachs.

Boiled meats, fowls, etc. are more hard of digestion than roasted; and the
less boiled or roasted they are, the more wholesome.

Fat meats are more nutritious than lean, but harder of digestion. Animal food
promotes scurvy, and vegetable corrects it: hence a due mixture of both animal
and vegetable food, is most wholesome to the constitution.

Fried meats, dried meats, baked meats, and the paste usually baked with them,
are not easily digested.

The longer meat is kept, the sooner it digests: this, in some measure,
accounts for venison being more easily digested than any other meat, it being
usually kept a longer time; by which means its fibers are more easily broken
down by the powers of the stomach.

JELLIES
Made from meat, being of a viscid nature, are not so easy of digestion as is
generally imagined.

Of FISH, etc.
THE texture of fish is more tender than that of flesh: hence some aver that
fish is more easily dissolved upon the stomach; whilst others maintain that
flesh passes off the stomach more readily than fish. In my opinion, fish, as
being more viscid, is more difficult of digestion than flesh upon weak
stomachs. Of this I am firmly persuaded, that it is the butter, sauces, etc.
which we are accustomed to eat with fish, to give them a relish, which make
them more unwholesome than they would be in their simple state.

SHELLFISH
Are nutritious, but not easy of digestion. They should never be eaten without
vinegar, etc.

SALMON
Is nourishing, but heating, and not easy of digestion.

TURTLE AND TURBOT
Are nourishing, and much more easy of digestion than salmon.

MACKEREL
Are drier, consequently less nutritious.

HERRINGS
Are heating and feverish.

FLOUNDERS AND SOALS
Are more tender than turbot.

PERCH, PIKE, HADDOCK, CODS, WHITINGS, etc.
Are easy of digestion.

EELS
Are oily, nourishing, but heating, and not easy of digestion: they rarely sit
easy upon weak stomachs.

LOBSTERS
Come under the class of insects: as food, they are not easy of digestion. They
should never be eaten without vinegar, pepper, etc.

MUSCLES, CRABS, SHRIMPS, etc.
Are very viscid and unwholesome.

OYSTERS,
Contrary to the opinion of some, are certainly more wholesome raw, than when
dressed in any form whatever -- more easily digested -- very nourishing, and
not heating. They are very proper for people who are recovering from a fit of
sickness, whose weak stomachs will not digest flesh-meats, etc.

EGGS,
As well as oysters, are most wholesome raw. They contain a larger proportion
of pure nourishment than any other food, but are not easy of digestion. They
promote costiveness. The white, when boiled, is the part most difficult of
digestion.

On MILK.
I Shall confine myself to its internal use, so far as it relates to food, etc.

Milk, generally speaking, is acescent, yet it frequently cares the heart-burn.

Where the stomach is weak, and an acid prevails, milk coagulates. Indeed, some
authors aver, that it always coagulates previous to digestion. Be that as it
may, wherever there is bile upon the stomach, milk, as being acescent, will
become purgative; but is generally reckoned to produce costiveness.

Milk, from its animal nature, is very nourishing, and from its vegetable, etc.
easy of digestion.

When milk is too heavy for a weak stomach, it is much more wholesome to dilute
it with water, than to skim it.

Milk diet is very proper in hectic constitutions: if duly persevered in, it
will correct, or, as it were, change the whole mass of blood. It is well known
that gouty people, who have had resolution to persevere in the use of milk,
have experienced happy effects from it.

Boiled milk is more costive than raw.

CHEESE
Is apt to produce costiveness: that sort is most wholesome which is warmest to
the palate, such as Cheshire, etc.

Cream cheese is very unwholesome, liable to rancidity, and hard of digestion.
Indeed, like cucumbers, it ought never to be eaten at all: whenever it is,
plenty of pepper and salt should be used with it.

THE CURD
Made from milk by rennet, is hard of digestion.

THE WHEY
Is more acescent than milk, and more purgative: it retains some of the
qualities of milk, consequently is nourishing, and fattens: it is a great
corrector of the blood, and passes off easily by the secretions of the body.

BUTTER-MILK
Is nourishing, easy of digestion, but not without acidity.

Nutmegs, and all spices, correct milk.

Sugar makes milk turn more acid upon weak stomachs; but as it prevents the
spontaneous separation of milk, is proper for convalescents, or those who are
recovering from sickness.

CREAM,
By being too rich, is improper for weak stomachs, liable to turn rancid, and
difficult of digestion. Upon strong stomachs, which can digest it, it is very
nourishing.

It is an unwholesome custom to eat cream or milk with apple-pies,
strawberries, etc. etc. directly after dinner, if you mean to drink wine; for
the wine ferments, coagulates the cream, and makes the whole mass hard of
digestion; and upon weak stomachs, such a mixture will promote sickness,
vomiting, etc. This I myself have experienced more than once.

Drinking rum and milk in a morning is a very unwholesome custom: rich milk
alone is often too heavy for weak stomachs, and when rum, which is an
inflammable spirit, is mixed with it, becomes of course more pernicious.

Instead of rum and milk, use the following, an it is much more wholesome. Take
a large tea-spoonful of common bohea tea, with about three lumps of sugar; put
them into a basin, and pour upon them a quarter of a pint of boiling water;
cover it over, and let it stand all night; in the morning pour it off clear,
and add about a quarter of a pint of new milk: drink it fasting, an hour or two
before breakfast.

BUTTER,
As partaking more or less of the qualities of oil, is liable to turn rancid,
not easily assimilated, or digested upon the stomach, consequently is apt to
produce disorders of the first passages, to foul the blood, and of course to
throw out eruptions of the skin.

OIL
Is wholesome with sallad, greens, etc. but, as Cullen justly observes, is
liable to particular changes: out of the body it checks fermentation, but is
apt, on weak stomachs, to turn rancid, and occasion heart-burn, a disease more
frequent from this than any other cause.

SALT
Is said to be antiseptic, that is, to resist putrefaction: it certainly
stimulates the stomach, and promotes appetite.

Salted meats are said to produce scurvy; yet it is well known, that animal
food alone, long continued, will have that effect.

Salt alone has not yet been known to produce scurvy; it certainly prevents
coagulation, and in a moderate degree is very wholesome.

Salted meats are harder of digestion than fresh, and should be eaten with
plenty of vegetables.

The scurvy is a natural consequence of our way of living wholly upon animal
food, and also of drinking so much strong liquors.

SUGAR
Is very nutritive: its moderate use appears to be innocent; it preserves both
animal and vegetable substances from putrefaction, and appears to possess this
power in a higher degree than even salt.

The impure, brown, or coarse sugar, is the most laxative.

All sugars are more or less viscid or foul, and when liberally used, apt to
occasion disorders of the skin.

HONEY,
As it consists of acid and sugar, is very apt to occasion heart-burn, and to
disagree with weak stomachs.

VINEGAR.
Its moderate use is wholesome in hot, bilious constitutions, and wherever
there is a tendency to inflammation or putrefaction.

Drinking large quantities of vinegar, as is frequently practiced by those who
wish to grow thin, is very unwholesome, as it hurts the digestive faculties,
and brings on complaints in consequence, which are not easily removed,
particularly in females.

Vinegar, as a sauce, gives a grateful taste to our food, stimulates the
stomach, and excites appetite.

Mixed with our animal and vegetable food, in our ordinary way of using it,
vinegar is wholesome.

Vinegar, as an acid, is much more wholesome than the juice of lemons.

NUTMEGS, CLOVES, MACE, PEPPER, GINGER, etc. etc.
In moderate degree, are wholesome, as they stimulate the stomach, and take off
the spasms arising from the flatulency of our food, and moderate its putrid
tendency in the bowels.

For these reasons, horseradish, mustard, cresses, etc. are wholesome, and
very properly joined both with animal and vegetable food.

Of FRUITS, etc.
PLUMBS, CHERRIES and PEACHES
Are liable to fermentation, cold, viscid, and apt to produce purging, etc.

APRICOTS
Are a sweeter, richer, and less hurtful fruit than either plumbs or cherries.

GOOSEBERRIES
Are grateful, cooling, and wholesome, if eaten in moderation: when green, they
are acid and astringent; when ripe, inclining to viscidity: hence they are apt
to surfeit in large quantities.

CURRANTS
Quench thirst, and are not unwholesome, unless eaten in too large quantities.
Sugar corrects them, and makes them more wholesome than they are without it.

FIGS AND GRAPES
Are among the most wholesome fruits.

PEARS
Are heavier than water, and APPLES are lighter, and swim on the surface: hence
pears are more easy of digestion, as they sink to the bottom of the stomach.
Pears have more sweetness than apples, and are more nourishing.

MULBERRIES, STRAWBERRIES and RASBERRIES
Are very innocent fruits: the most wholesome, as being the most simple way,
is, to eat them by themselves.

RAISINS
Are not so laxative as currants, but more so than figs.

PRUNES AND CURRANTS
Are nearly alike in their qualities, both being gently purgative.

ORANGES
Are very wholesome, and allay thirst.

Oranges and lemons are gathered green; the sea air, and their being shut up
close, gives them that golden color we so much admire.

MELONS
Are more wholesome than cucumbers, as being of a more tender texture, and
containing a proportion of sugar; are more easily digested; but still they are
cold, viscid, and far from wholesome, for those whose stomachs are weak.

Baked or boiled fruits are wholesomer than fresh.

Eating a great quantity of fruit directly after a hearty dinner, is hurtful,
inasmuch as it loads the already satisfied stomach.

All fruits possess an acidity, with a degree of sweetness, consequently are
more or less liable to fermentation upon the stomach, as these abound. The more
compact their texture, the longer they stay upon the stomach, and are in
proportion more hard of digestion.

Dried fruits are most wholesome.

Swallowing the stones of any fruit, is very unwholesome.

The best time to eat fruit is in a morning.

CUCUMBERS,
As being acescent, are very apt to produce flatulency; are hard of digestion,
and have even been brought off the stomach after forty-eight hours.

Oil and pepper are proper to check their fermentation: and they are more
wholesome when eaten with their skin, or peel, (in their early state) as it is
bitter, and may supply, in some measure, the place of aromatics.

I observed before, that cucumbers were very improper for those who were
subject to bilious complaints. Indeed, it would be better if they were totally
rejected from our tables.

LETTUCE AND ENDIVE
Are most wholesome eaten with vinegar, as it corrects them: they are acescent,
cooling, and opening.

CELERY
Is most wholesome when boiled, as in soups, etc.

SPINACH
Is light and wholesome.

PARSLEY, FENNEL, MINT, etc.
Are not wholesome eaten in large quantities; in small ones, they are
agreeable, and can do no harm.

SAGE
Has been formerly held in much higher esteem than it is at present: it is
wholesome, and said to be a sweetner of the blood.

CABBAGES
Are most wholesome when in their young state, as they are more tender, and
less flatulent.

The stalk, as being of the firmest texture, is the most unwholesome part,
being the hardest of digestion.

The inner part (or the heart of the cabbage, as it is called) is less windy
than the outer leaves.

TURNIPS
Are not very nutritious, but their moderate use is wholesome. -- With many
people they gently purge; hence they are good for those who are subject to be
costive.

RADISHES
Are wholesomest when scraped: they act by urine.

ASPARAGUS AND ARTICHOKES
Are nourishing, and (being but little acescent) not flatulent, but diuretic
and cleansing.

TUFFLES, MORELS AND MUSHROOMS
Are in general unwholesome, stimulating, and hard of digestion.

CARROTS AND PARSNIPS
Are nutritious, but flatulent.

LEEKS, ONIONS AND GARLIC
Are rather acrid and heating, but used moderately, are harmless to the human
body.

POTATOES
Are very innocent and safe nutriment: the mealy sort is most wholesome.

PEASE
Are of more soluble texture than BEANS, consequently less flatulent, and more
easy of digestion.

SALEP,
From its mealy quality, is rather liable to acidity; yet still it is very fit
(where acrimony abounds in the first passages, as the stomach, etc.) in the
bloody flux, etc.

SAGO
Is the pith of a certain oriental tree, which is broke down into a fine meal,
and dried in the sun.

Sago is very light and wholesome, and, though it does not afford much
nourishment, it is very proper for weak stomachs.

FRENCH BEANS,
In their young state, are tender, light, and wholesome.

ALMONDS
Are wholesomest without their skins or husks; they are cooling, healing, and
cleanse the urinary passages. But Dr. Cullen, whose opinion is scarcely to be
controverted, does not allow them to be at all wholesome, on account of the oil
they contain. In medicine, they are frequently useful. The bitter almond is
esteemed most unwholesome.

NUTS, WALNUTS AND CHESTNUTS
Partake of nearly the same qualities as almonds. They are not so hurtful as is
generally imagined. In my opinion, it is their being eaten directly after
meals, upon a full stomach, which makes them more unwholesome than they would
be if eaten at any other time. In that case, they frequently pass through the
bowels undigested.

CHOCOLATE,
Which is the cocoa-nut mixed with either flour or sugar, is very wholesome
when not boiled too much; it should only be properly dissolved, as heat, when
too great, coagulates it, and consequently makes it harder of digestion.

COFFEE and TEA.
DR. Cullen thinks the assisting digestion, relieving the stomach from a load
of aliment, from crudities, and from head-achs arising from them, promoting
urine, and perhaps perspiration, may all fairly be attributed to the warm water.

There is no doubt but the tea itself will produce tremors, and spasmodic
affections, by frequent use; though the warm water certainly assists.

Green tea is more unwholesome than bohea, and is not so proper for people of
thin hectic habits.

Strong coffee is said to relieve the headache: it certainly is more wholesome
than tea.

Coffee or tea, in most habits, weakens the tone of the stomach, and affects
more or less the whole nervous system.

Plenty of milk should generally be drank with tea or coffee, except where
plenty of wine has been drank just before, then it should be omitted for
reasons too obvious to mention.

Observe, never to drink either tea or coffee too hot.

Indeed, I cannot help thinking with Dr. Cheyne, that their chief virtue
consists in custom, and their harm in excess.

WINE, etc.
ALL wines are in some degree heating and inflammatory.

Dr. Cullen says, the same quantity of wine diluted, intoxicates sooner than
the same quantity drank in the same time without that dilution; at least, this
is a common observation of drinkers. The reason seems to be this, that the wine
by this means is applied to a larger surface in the stomach, and its dilution
causes a quicker diffusion over the system. But though wines thus diluted
sooner intoxicate, yet their effects are also sooner over.

Wine which provokes urine soonest, also sooner intoxicates, which proceeds
plainly from its being applied to a larger portion of the system.

CLARET
Is lighter, and less heating than Port.

RED WINES
Are more astringent than WHITE, owing to the red husks being thrown in, which
also give it a color.

MADEIRA AND SHERRY
Are cordial and stomachic, but, when liberally used, heating.

THE SPANISH AND PORTUGUEZE WINES
Have brandy in them, consequently are inflammatory and heating, and when
adulterated, as they too frequently are, with noxious ingredients, become a
poison to the constitution.

NEAT, GENUINE PORT
Is wholesome, but French wines are least heating.

RAISIN, ORANGE, GRAPE, CURRENT, etc. WINES,
When dry and sound, are each of them wholesome. In a state of fermentation,
they are hurtful to weak stomachs.

Good, generous wine, with meals, is very wholesome for weak stomachs,
especially in warm weather; and where we eat much fruit after dinner, a few
glasses should always be drank.

The best strong liquor we can drink, is good wine.

Good wine, mixed with water, is better than beer, for those whose stomachs are
weak, etc.

The idea that good eating requires good drinking, is a very erroneous one; for
wine, and all other strong drinks, are as hard to digest, etc. as strong food
itself. If food lies heavy upon the stomach, nothing tends to relieve so much
as a draught of warm water. Water is the original primitive beverage appointed
by Nature, and is the most wholesome of all drinks, as it quickens the
appetite, and promotes digestion.

SPIRITS
Of all kinds, as being inflammatory, are heating and pernicious. Using
ourselves to them is all a custom, and the less we observe it, the more healthy
we shall be.

Happy had it been for the race of mankind if spirits had never been introduced.

BRANDY, RUM, AND GENEVA,
Each agree differently with different constitutions, and each is nearly alike
prejudicial to the human body.

Those whose appetites and digestion are good, want no strong liquors.

Hard drinkers generally die with diseased livers, etc. etc. which evidently
show how pernicious strong drinks are to the vital parts.

BRANDY AND WATER
Is proper when an acid quality predominates in the stomach, and when persons
have flatulent, griping pains, in the stomach or bowels: beer would then
disagree, and even wines, from their tendency to acidity.

PUNCH, SHRUB, etc.
Are more unwholesome than wine, owing to their ingredients promoting
fermentation, etc. in the stomach.

Cheyne justly observes, punch, and all fermenting liquors, are highly
injurious to weakly constitutions, as is evident from those who live in the
West Indies, where (from the necessity of drinking much, because of the
violence of the heat, and from the want of proper liquors there, they are
forced to drink much punch) they are universally afflicted with palsies, dry
belly-achs, cramps, convulsions, etc. To obviate the effects of too free
living, it is well known that the Bath water is the best remedy.

BEER
Is more nutritious than wine, more acescent and laxative.

Hard stale beer is very flatulent, and improper for people of weak digestion.

New beer disorders those who have weak bowels.

Thick beer is highly improper for those afflicted with the gravel.

That beer is most wholesome which is clear, limpid, and not heady.

At all times good beer is more salutary to the constitution than bad wine.

All fermented liquors, which are too strong, hurt digestion, etc.

YORKSHIRE, NOTTINGHAM, AND OTHER STRONG ALES,
Are very feverish, and improper for weak stomachs.

PORTER
Is more nutritious than common ale, and will frequently agree with a weak
stomach when ale will not.

Bottled porter, as well as bottled ale, is more windy than when drawn from the
cask.

TOBACCO,
By taking off the saliva, which is necessary to the system, palls the
appetite, and hurts digestion: hence to lean hectic people it is very
pernicious.

CONCLUSION.
They who would wish to enjoy health, should avoid luxury and intemperance both
in eating and drinking; should eat light suppers, rise early, and use exercise.
The great secret of health, consequently of long life, consists in keeping the
blood in a proper state; to do which, nothing tends so much as an attention to
what is set forth in these few, and, I hope, not useless pages.

THE END.
WINTER EVENINGS AMUSEMENT.
TO BE HAD OF BERRY AND ROGERS, No. 35, Hanover-Square, THE FOLLOWING PLAYS:
AS it should be, a Comedy. Appearance is against them, do. All for Love, do.
Achilles, do. Albumazar, do. Alchymist, do. Ambitious Stepmother, do.
Alexander the Great, Tragedy. As you like it, Comedy. Accomplished Maid, do.
Apprentice, Farce. Arthur and Emmeline, Comedy. Almena, do. Alfred, Tragedy.
Annete and Luben, Comic Opera. Amelia, do. April-Day, do. A School for Fathers,
do. Alonzo, Tragedy. All Is Well that Ends Well, Comedy. Anthony and Cleopatra,
Tragedy. Belles Stratagem, Comedy. Bold Stroke for a Wife, do. Brothers,
Tragedy. Bon Ton, Farce. Beaux Stratagem, Comedy. Busy Body, do. Battle of
Hastings, Tragedy. Braganza, do. Busirus, King of Egypt, do. Bankrupt, Comedy.
Buthrea, Tragedy. Brothers, Comedy. Beggars Opera. Castle of Andalusia, Comic
Opera. Carmelite, Comedy. Citizen, Farce. Comus. Choleric Fathers, Comic Opera.
Country Wife, Comedy. Careless Husband, do. Committee, do. Cobbler of
Castlebury, Comic Opera. Cerusa, Queen of Athens, Tragedy. Cozenzers, Comedy.
Critic; or, a Tragedy rehearsed. Chrononhotonthologos, Tragedy. Cato, do.
Cymbeline, do. Chapter of Accidents, Comedy. Clandestine Marriage, do. City
Wives Confederacy, do. Chances, do. Captive, Comic Opera. Capture, do.
Conspiracy. Chelsea Pensioner, Comic Opera. Candidate, Farce. Calypso, do.
Commissary, Comedy. Comedy of Errors. Coreolanus. Douglass, Tragedy. Distressed
Mother, do. Disbanded Officer, Comedy. Devil upon Two Sticks, do. Devil to pay;
or, Wives Metamorphosed, Farce. Dragon of Wantley, do. Deuce is in Him, do.
Edward and Leonora, Tragedy. Eurydice, do. Earl of Essex, do. Electra, do.
Elvira, do. Every Man in his Humor, Comedy. Englishman in Paris, do. Family
Party, do. Fathers, do. Fashionable Levites, do. Farm-House, do. False
Appearance, do. Fair Quaker of Deal, do. Farmer, do. Fair Penitent, Tragedy.
Fatal Discovery, do. First Floor, Farce. Fool, do. Gentle Shepherd, Comedy.
Governess, do. Gamesters, do. George Barnewell, Tragedy. Grecian Daughter, do.
Guardian, Comedy. Gypsies, Comic Opera. Good natured Man, Comedy. Golden
Pippen, Burletta. Harvest Home, Comic Opera. Heiress, Comedy. Hypocrite, do.
Hamlet, Prince of Denmark, Tragedy. Heroine of the Cave, do. Invasion, Farce.
Inconstant; or, the Way to Win Him, Comedy. Imposter, do. Irish Widow, do. I Will
tell you what, do. Inkle and Yarico, do. Isabella; or, the Fatal Marriage,
Tragedy. Illumination; or, the Glaziers. Jealous Wife, Comedy. Jane Gray,
Tragedy. Jane Shore, do. Jovial Crew, Comic Opera. Julius Caesar. King John,
Tragedy. Knights, Comic Opera. King Richard IIId. Tragedy. King Richard IId.
do. King Charles Is It. do. King Lear, do. King Henry IVth. part first and
second. King Henry Vth. King Henry VIth. part first, second and third. King
Henry VIIIth. Look before you Leap, Comedy. Love for Love, do. Lady's last
Stake, do. Lady of the Manor, Comic Opera. Lionel and Clarissa, do. Lethe,
Frace. Lying Valet, do. Law of Lombardy, Tragedy. Love's Labors Lost. Maid of
Bath, Comedy. Man of the World, do. Measure for Measure, do. Mayor of Garret,
do. Mirror, do. Mistake, do. Merry Wives of Windsor, do. Mary, Queen of Scots,
Tragedy. Macbeath, do. Merope, do. Marianna, do. Mahomet, do. Mourning Bride,
do. Misterious Husband, do. Merchant of Venice, Comedy. Much ado about nothing,
do. Midsummer Nights Dream, do. Mutual Deception, do. Mirror: or, Harlequin
every where. Maid of the Oaks. Match for a Widow. Natural Son. No one's Enemy
but his own. New Peerage. Nabob. Oedipus, Tragedy. Orphan of China, do. Orphan;
or, Unhappy Marriage, do. Old Maid, Comedy. Old Bachelor, do. Orpheus and
Eurydice, Opera. Othello. Polly, Opera. Provoked Wife, Comedy. Patriot, do.
Phadrea and Hyppolitus, Tragedy. Philaster, do. Peeping Tom, Comic Opera. Polly
Honeycombe, Comedy. Provoked Husband, do. Percy, Tragedy. Quaker, Comic Opera.
Rule a Wife and have a Wife, Comedy. Refusal, do. Runaway, do. Richard Cover de
Lion, do. Recruiting Officer, do. Revenge, Tragedy. Royal Convert, do. Rosina,
Comic Opera. Rose and Colin, do. Romeo and Juliet, Tragedy. School for Scandal,
Comedy. Strangers at Home. Suspicious Husband. Spanish Friar. She Stoops to
Conquer; or, the Mistakes of a Night. Seduction. Spirit of Contradiction.
School for Gray Beards. Sir Thomas Oversbury. Siege of Sinope. Tancred and
Sigismunda, Tragedy. Theodosius, do. Tamerlane, do. Twelfth Night, Comedy.
Tender Husband, do. Twin Rivals, do. Tempest, do. Ton; or, Follies of Fashion,
do. Thomas and Sally, Comic Opera. Timon of Athens. Titus Andronocus, Triolus
and Cressida. Two Gentlemen of Verona. It Is Well its no Worse, Comedy. Taming
of the Shrew. Tony Lumpkin in Town, Farce. Times, Comedy. Three Weeks after
Marriage. Venice Preserved, Tragedy. Volpone, Comedy. Upholsterer, Farce.
West-Indian, Comedy. Ways of the World, do. What do you call it, Farce.
Winter's Tale. Zara, Tragedy. Zenobia, do. Zoradia.
BERRY AND ROGERS, No. 35, Hanover-Square, Have imported in the last vessels
from England, Scotland, and Ireland, An esteemed Collection of BOOKS, On the
various Branches of Literature, Amongst which are the following:
POSTLETHWAITE's Dictionary of Trade and Commerce, 2 vols. folio. Gutherie's
Geographical Grammar, 4to. Chambaud's French Dictionary, 4to. Boyer's French
Dictionary, 4to. Del Pino's Spanish and English Dictionary, folio. -- Spanish
and English Grammar, 8vo. Gordon's History of the American War, 4 vols. 8vo.
Jefferson's Notes on Virginia, 8vo. Zermerman's Political Survey, 8vo.
Sheridan's Dictionary, 2 vols. 8vo. Peter Pinder's Works. Lavater's Essays on
Physiognomy, 3 vols. 8vo. -- Aphorisms on Man. Adams on Electricity, 8vo. -- on
the Microscope, 4to. Hume's History of England, 8 vols. 8vo. Smollett's
continuation of do. 5 vols. 8vo. History of Modern Europe, 5 vols. 8vo.
Blackstone's Commentary, 4 vols. 12mo. Blair's Lectures, 3 vols. 8vo. Cruden's
Concordance, 4to. Chatteleaux's Travels in America, 2 vols. 8vo. Dictionary of
Arts and Sciences, 4 vols. 8vo. Buffoon's Natural History, 9 vols. 8vo.
Buchan's Domestic Medicine, 8vo. Powell on Devices, 8vo. -- on Power, 8vo. --
on Mortgages, 8vo. Moore's Navigation, 8vo. Moore's New Daily Assistant, 8vo.
Priestly's Charts of History and Biography, on rolers. -- Lectures on History,
8vo. Langley's Complete Builder's Assistant, 2 vols. 8vo. Cook's Voyages, 3
vols. 4to. Stern's Sermons, 3 vols. 18mo. Ferguson's Astronomy. Paley's
Philosophy, 8vo. Gillies' Greece, 3 vols. 8vo. Harrington's Oceana, 4to.
Chesterfield's Miscellaneous Works, 2 vols. 4to. Reid on the Intellectual
Powers of Man, 2 vols. 8vo. Pelew Islands. Motherby's Medical Dictionary,
folio. De Lolme on the British Constitution, 8vo. Iontin Sermons, 4 vols. 8vo.
Rolin's Ancient History, 10 vols. 12mo. -- Arts and Sciences, 3 vols. 8vo. Reid
on the Human Mind, 12mo. Becarii on Crimes and Punishments. Home's Sketches, 4
vols. 12mo. Cardinal de Retz's Memoirs, 4 vols. 12mo. Sully's Memoirs, 6 vols.
12mo. Bell's Shakespeare, 10 vols. 12mo. Robertson's Charles the 5th. 3 vols.
4to. Alexander's History of Women, 2 vols. 8vo. Seneca's Morals, 12mo. Adams's
Defense of the American Constitutions, 3 vols. 8vo.
Also, School Books, in Greek, Latin, French, and English.
Bibles and Common Prayer Books, various sizes. Watt's Psalms and Hymns.
Testaments, Spelling Books, Primmers. And a great variety of little Books for
the improvement of children.
Likewise, STATIONARY of every sort. And A great variety of MUSIC, for the
guitar, harpsichord, forte piano, violin and flute; with strings for the guitar
and violin. Where also may be had, ALMANACKS for the Year 1791, Wholesale and
retail.

LAVATER's APHORISMS ON MAN.
Just published, in a handsome volume, printed on writing paper, ornamented
with an elegant engraved Frontispiece, price 5s. neatly bound, APHORISMS ON
MAN. Translated from the original manuscript of the Rev. JOHN CASPAR LAVATER,
citizen of Zuric. Author of Essays on Physiognomy.

The Monthly Review says as follows of the above Treatise:

"Let those who wish to know themselves; those who wish to know mankind; who
study nature, and are charmed with the thoughts of a great mind; those who
admire the maxims of Rochefacault, and wish to see something better; those who
are weary with reading systems, and are delighted with masterly sketches, let
those read the Aphorisms on Man, and they shall enjoy luxuries, to vulgar minds
unknown.


