Then amidst yon Chief's retire,
Seated round the sacred fire,
Waiting for the warrior feast,
Let them hail thee as their guest.



OUABI: OR THE VIRTUES OF NATURE. AN INDIAN TALE. IN FOUR CANTOS.

BY PHILENIA, a LADY of BOSTON.

"Fierce Wars and faithful Loves shall moralize my Song."
Spenser's Fairy Queen. PRINTED AT BOSTON. BY I. THOMAS AND E. T. ANDREWS, At
FAUST's STATUE, No. 45, Newbury Street. MDCCXC.

TO THE Hon. JAMES BOWDOIN, Esquire. L. L. D. F. R. S. PRESIDENT of the AMERICAN
ACADEMY of ARTS and SCIENCES, and late GOVERNOR of the COMMONWEALTH of
MASSACHUSETTS.
SIR,
THE veneration, which your literary and public character demands, and the
esteem, which your private and domestic virtues universally receive, are a
sufficient apology for the freedom, I now take in laying the following
production, which is wholly American, at your feet; convinced, while from your
judgment and taste I have much to apprehend, from your candor and benevolence I
have every thing to hope.

I have the honor to be, with every sentiment of respect and esteem.

Sir, Your very obliged and Humble Servant, PHILENIA.

AS the Dedication was accepted, and approved, by the respectable character, to
whom it was addressed, and in the press, previous to the unfortunate event,
which deprived science and mankind of that ornament to both, the author is
induced, rather from a sentiment of propriety than vanity, to insert the
following Note, the last effort of a mind, the faculties of which were never
impaired.

"Mr. BOWDOIN this morning had the pleasure of receiving Mrs." -- 's very
polite billet, accompanied with a manuscript Poem, "entitled, "The Virtues of
Nature."

"Her intention of dedicating it to him does him great honor, and "as such he
shall accept it, as coming from the well-directed pen of "the ingenious
PHILENIA.

"In the Dedication, which he wishes as justly applied, as it is well "written,
he begs leave to reverse one sentiment, that the volume "will be so far from
needing the candor and benevolence of the "reader to recommend it, that it will
stand the test of the most critical judgment and taste.

The volume would be enlarged by that Lady's adding to it from "her budget of
poetry, such a number of pieces, as would make it "respectable, not only for
the matter, but for its size.

"Mr. BOWDOIN would propose that the manuscript should remain where it is, for
a day or two, to give Mrs. BOWDOIN and "her daughter, Lady TEMPLE, an
opportunity of reading it. In the mean time he begs leave to salute the amiable
PHILENIA with his best and most respectful compliments.

"In room of PHILENIA, he thinks it would be best the real name "of the fair
author should be substituted.

Boston, October 16 th, 1790.
INTRODUCTION.
FROM an idea of being original in my subject, I was induced to undertake the
following Tale. The manners and customs of the Aborigines of North America are
so limited and simple, that they have scarcely engaged the attention either of
the Philosopher or the Poet. Acquainted with some of their interesting
ceremonies from tradition, I became desirous of gaining further intelligence,
and gratefully acknowledge myself indebted to the obliging communications of
General LINCOLN, for most of the local rites and customs alluded to, where I
have not quoted any other authority. The opportunity his public commission, in
the late negociations between the United States and the Southern Indians, has
afforded him to acquire the best information, added to the respectability of
his character, will render his authority unquestioned.

As my principal design in attempting the Poem was to amuse my retired hours,
and to gratify a few amiable friends, it is alone in compliance with the
solicitations of those friends, that I have been prevailed upon to expose it to
the public eye; but I am led to presume that, deficient as the Poetry really
is, it will convey some information, from the collection of many particulars
which are not generally known.

The grades of human nature, and the various propensities and avocations of
mankind, in their different states and societies, must always be greatly
interesting to the view of the philosopher; and even the most trifling
production may become useful, if it serves to throw light on so important a
subject.

It may perhaps be objected, that I have given my favorite Ouabi, a degree of
insensibility, with respect to the love of Celario, incompatible with the
greatness and superiority of his character: To this I reply, that the mind,
unpracticed in deception, can never be capable of suspicion; and that not
having known the European vices, he could have no idea of their existence.

It may also be imagined, that, considering the exalted virtue and resolution
of Azakia, which could lead her even to death for the man, to whom she was
contracted, her ready compliance with the proposition of Ouabi, and the joy she
evinces on that occasion, form an unpardonable contradiction; but it must be
remembered, that from the customs and laws of every country its manners and
morals are derived. Azakia, bound to her husband by every tie, would not
deceive him; but when he expressed a wish to resign her, she could have no idea
of his insincerity; so much is truth the characteristic of a state of nature:
It then became a duty, a virtue, to pursue the first wish of her heart.

I am aware it may be considered improbable, that an amiable and polished
European should attach himself to the persons and manners of an uncivilized
people; but there is now a living instance of a like propensity. A gentleman of
fortune, born in America, and educated in all the refinements and luxuries of
Great Britain, has lately attached himself to a female savage, in whom he finds
every charm I have given my Azakia; and in consequence of his inclination, has
relinquished his own country and connections, incorporated himself into the
society, and adopted the manners of the virtuous, though uncultivated Indian.

Many of the outlines of the Fable are taken from a prose story in Mr. Carey's
entertaining and instructing Museum; but as the opening scene of that narrative
was rather deficient in decency, and the conclusion, in my opinion, very little
interesting, I have entirely changed it in those respects, and have introduced
a variety of customs, the description of battles, and many other circumstances,
which appeared essential to poetry, and necessary to the plot; still I
acknowledge myself indebted to that production for many of the events, and for
the names of the characters.

Should any be induced to think that I have given too many perfections to a
rude uncultivated savage, let them read the following apostrophe by a
celebrated French author. M. Mercier.
"I glanced my eye rapidly over the scene, and in a vast country, to us
hitherto unknown, I saw a naked Indian, having nothing but God and nature above
him, enjoying the benefits which offer, without analyzing them. His body was
supple and robust, his eye lively and piercing, his ear attentive, in his
deportment a certain air of haughtiness, of which we have no kind of idea in
our degenerate climate. He seems even more graceful and majestic when beside
his female companion, his eye is milder, his countenance more serene." But the
authority by which I have been influenced, and from which I feel myself
justified, is William Penn, founder of Pennsylvania, whose manners and
principles could not admit of exaggeration, or extravagancy of expression. In
his letters to his friends in England, he describes the North-American Indians
in the following terms. "For their persons they are generally tall, straight,
well built, and of singular proportion: they tread strong and clever, and
mostly walk with a lofty chin: the thick lip and flat nose, so frequent with
the East-Indians and blacks, are not common with them; for I have seen as
comely, European-like faces among them of both sexes, as on your side the sea.
And truly an Italian complexion has not much more of the white, and the noses
of several have as much of the Roman."

"They are great concealers of their own resentment, but in liberality they
excel; nothing is too good for their friend. Their government is by kings;
every king has his council, and that consists of all the old and wise men of
his nation; nothing of moment is undertaken without advising with them, and
what is more, with the young men too. It is admirable to consider how powerful
their kings are, and yet how they move by the breath of the people. I have had
occasion to be in council with them; while any one spoke, not a man of them was
observed to whisper or smile, the old grave, the young reverend, in their
deportment; they speak little, but fervently, and with elegance; I have never
seen more natural sagacity, considering them without the help (I was going to
say the spoil) of tradition." Sanctioned by such authorities I flatter myself,
allowing for the justifiable embellishments of poetry, that I shall not be
considered an enthusiast in my descriptions. The liberal reader will, I trust,
make many allowances for the various imperfections of the work, from a
consideration of my sex and situation; the one by education incident to
weakness, the other from duty devoted to domestic avocations. And I am induced
to hope, that the attempting a subject wholly American will in some respect
entitle me to the partial eye of the patriot; that, as a young author, I shall
be received with tenderness, and, as an involuntary one, be criticized with
candor.

AN INDIAN TALE.
CANTO I.
IT IS not the court, in dazzling splendour gay,
Where soft luxuriance spreads her silken arms,
Where gairish fancy leads the soul astray,
And languid nature mourns her slighted charms:
It Is not the golden hill, nor flowery dale,
Which lends my simple muse her artless theme;
But the black forest and uncultur'd vale,
The savage warrior, and the lonely stream.
Where MISSISIPPI Missisippi, an Indian name, signifying the great father of
rivers. It is subject to no tides, but from its source in the north of the
American Continent flows with rapid force, till it empties itself into the
Gulf of Mexico.
rolls his parent flood
With slope impetuous to the surgy main,
The desert's painted chiefs explore the wood,
Or with the thundering war-whoop War-whoop, the cry of battle, with which they
always make their onset.
shake the plain.
There the fierce sachems raise the battle's din,
Or in the stream their active bodies lave,
Or midst the flames their fearless songs begin The American Indians, after
exhausting every species of cruelty and torture upon their most distinguished
prisoners, burn them by a distant fire; who expire singing songs of glory and
defiance.
--
PAIN HAS NO TERRORS TO THE TRULY BRAVE.
There young CELARIO, Europe's fairest boast,
In hopeless exile mourned the tedious day;
Now wandering slowly over the oozy coast,
Now through the wild woods urged his anxious way.
Where the low stooping branch excludes the light,
A piercing shriek assailed his wounded ear;
Swift as the winged arrow speeds its flight,
He seeks the piteous harbinger of fear.
There a tall Huron raised his threatening arm,
While round his knees a beauteous captive clung,
Striving to move him with her matchless form,
Or charm him by the magic of her tongue.
Soon as Celario viewed the murderous scene,
Quick from his vest the deathful tube he drew;
Its leaden vengeance thundered over the green,
While from the savage hand the lingering hatchet flew.
Low at his feet the breathless warrior lies;
Still the soft captive sickens with alarms,
Calls on OUABI's name with streaming eyes,
While the young victor lives upon her charms.
Her limbs were straighter than the mountain pine,
Her hair far blacker than the raven's wing;
Beauty had lent her form the waving See Hogarth's Line of Beauty.
line,
Her breath gave fragrance to the balmy spring.
Each bright perfection opened on her face,
Her flowing garment wantoned in the breeze,
Her slender feet the glittering sandals The sandals are ornamented either with
little glistening bells, or with a great variety of shining beads and feathers.
grace,
Her look was dignity, her movement ease.
With splendid beads her braided tresses shone,
Her bending waist a modest girdle bound,
Her pearly teeth outvi'd the cygnet's down --
She spoke -- and music followed in the sound.
SHE. Great ruler of the winged hour, It is presumed that Azakia had never
before seen an European, or heard the report of a pistol, as she considers one
a deity, and the other his thunder.

AZAKIA trembles at thy power;
While from thy hand the thunders roll,
Thy charms with lightnings pierce the soul;
Ah! how unlike our sable race,
The snowy luster of thy face!
That hair of beaming Cynthia's hue,
Those shining eyes of heavenly blue!
Ah! did thou leave thy blissful land,
To save me from the murd'rer's hand?
And is Ouabi still thy care,
The dauntless chief, unknown to fear?

HE. Cease to call Ouabi's name,
Give Celario all his claim.
No divinity is here:
Spare thy praises, quit thy fear:
Bend no more that beauteous knee,
For I am a slave to thee:
Let my griefs thy pity move,
Heal them with the balm of love.
Far beyond the orient main,
By my rage a youth was slain;
He this daring arm defied,
By this arm the ruffian died:
Exiled from my native home,
Through the desert wild I roam;
But if only blessed by thee,
All the desert smiles on me.

SHE. See a graceful form arise! The Indian women of America are very chaste
after marriage, and if any person makes love to them, they answer, "The Friend
that is before my eyes, prevents my seeing you."

Now it fills my ravished eyes,
Brighter than the morning star,
It Is Ouabi, sam'd in war:
Close before my bosom spread,
Over thy presence casts a shade,
Full on him these eyes recline,
And his person shuts out thine.
Let us to his home retire,
Where he lights the social fire:
Do not through the desert roam,
Find with me his generous home;
There the Illinois obey
Great Ouabi's chosen sway.

Awed by her virtue, by her charms subdued,
Celario follows over the wid'ning plains,
Nor dares his hopeless passion to intrude,
Where constant truth, and blessed Ouabi reigns.
Now distant flames assail his dazzled eyes,
High as the clouds the curling spires ascend,
While warlike youths in circling orders At their councils and war-feasts they
seat themselves in semicircles or half moons: the King or Sachem stands, or
fixes himself in the middle, with his counselors on each side, according to
their age and rank.

See William Penn's letters to his friends in England.


rise,
And midst the green with graceful silence bend.
Far over the chieftains great Ouabi moves,
With step majestic through the boundless plain;
Thus towers the cedar over the willow-groves,
Thus shines bright Cynthia midst her starry train.
Swift to his arms the fond Azakia flies,
And often repeats the fear-embellish'd tale;
How pointed lightnings pierced her wondering eyes,
While the near thunder broke the trembling gale!
Ouabi! formed by nature's hand divine,
Whose naked limbs the sculptor's art defied,
Where nervous strength and graceful charms combine,
Where dignity with fleetness was allied.
High from his head the painted plumes arose,
His sounding bow was over his shoulder flung,
The hatchet, dreadful to insulting foes,
On the low branch in peaceful caution hung.
Adown his ears the glist'ning rings descend,
His manly arms the clasping bracelets bind,
From his broad chest the vari'd beads depend,
And all the hero tow'r'd within his mind.
His hand he yielded to the gentle youth,
Inquired his sorrows with benignant air,
And, kind as pity, unreserv'd as truth,
Soothed every grief, and proffered every care.
When young Celario, breathing many a sigh,
Disclosed the warring tumults of his breast,
Low on the ground reclined his pensive eye,
While his persuasive voice the chief addressed.
CELARIO. On these far-extended plains,
Truth and godlike justice reigns!
In my childhood's happy prime,
A warrior from this western clime,
Often the fleeting day improved,
Talking of the home he loved,
All thy glowing worth impressed
On my young enamored breast.
Banished from my native shore,
Here I turned the ready oar.
Tired of scenes, where crimes beguile,
Fond of virtue's honest smile,
From persidious vice I flee,
And devote my life to thee.
Sheltered in thy social cot,
All the glare of wealth forgot,
Let the hatchet grace my hand,
Let me bend to thy command:
May Celario claim thy care,
Lead him through the din of war,
Think not of his early age,
Try him midst the battle's rage.

OUABI. May the endless Source of Good,
Parent of yon rapid flood,
Strike me with the pangs of fear,
Midst the glories of the war,
If Ouabi does not prove
All a brother's tender love;
If his body cease to be
Still a sure defense to thee;
If his life-destroying bow
Does not seek thy treacherous foe.
Then amidst yon chiefs retire,
Seated round the sacred fire,
Waiting for the warrior-feast, The day before battle the sachems and warriors
meet together, and with great solemnity join in the war feast.

Let them hail thee as their guest:
Music reigns with soft control,
Sable bev'rage Sable beverage, which they call the black drink, is made by a
decoction of certain herbs, and is similar in appearance to coffee: It is of an
exhilarating nature, is prepared by their warriors or head men, and served
round at their councils and war feasts, with great solemnity and devotion. The
commissioners from the United States were presented with this liquor upon their
introduction.
fires the soul.
Here yon rising orb of flame
Finds each rolling hour the same;
And the star of evening glows
On each bliss, that nature knows.
Say what crimes thy realms disgrace?
Do the natives shun the chase?
Do they fear to bend the bow?
Do they dread the threatening foe?
Yet, if courage dwells with thee,
Join the Huron war with me.

CELARIO. Often the active chase they dare,
Often they join the glorious war,
It Is at home their vices grow,
There they yield to every foe;
There unnumber'd demons reign,
Led by TERROR, GUILT and PAIN;
Rash REVENGE, with eye balls rolling,
Hateful MALICE, always scowling,
Base DUPLICITY deceiving,
Cruel SLANDER, still believing,
INSOLENCE to wealth allied,
Rude, unfeeling, trampling PRIDE,
Prudish ENVY's ready sneer,
Base NEGLECT and dastard FEAR,
JEALOUSY with bitter sigh,
Low SUSPICION'S jaundiced eye,
Lying FRAUD, with treacherous smile,
Hard REPROACH, and MEANNESS vile,
AFFECTATION'S sickening form,
PASSION, always in a storm;
These are foes I leave behind,
These the TRAITORS of the mind,
Dreadful as the battle's roar,
Fearful as the conq'ror's power.

Now for the war-feast all the chiefs prepare,
The jetty draught exhausts the generous bowl,
And the fierce dance, The dance is rather an act of devotion, than of
recreation, and constitutes a part of all their public ceremonies.

See William Penn's Letters.


fit emblem of the war,
Swells the great mind, and fires the kindling soul.
Tho songs of vengeance every breast inspire,
The peaceful calumet The calumet is a highly ornamented pipe, which the
Indians smoke as a type of peace and harmony on all public occasions.
succeeds the feast,
Till livid glimmerings mark the sinking fire,
And the gem'd skies proclaim the hour of rest.
Ere the first blush of day illumes the morn,
The chiefs, impatient for the battle, rise;
With warlike arms their colored limbs adorn,
While glowing valor sparkles in their eyes.
Onward they move, by great Ouabi led,
The young Celario with the painted train,
Like white narcissus mid the tulip-bed,
Or like a swan with peacocks on the plain.
The golden ringlets of his glossy hair,
Intwin'd with beads, the towering feathers grace,
No longer floating to the amorous air,
Nor mingling with the beauties of his face.
Dressed like a sachem -- over his naked arm
With careless ease reclined his gaudy Their bows are stained with a great
variety of glaring colors, and otherwise-ornamented. For a specimen see the
Museum of the University at Cambridge.
bow,
Not bright Apollo boasts so fair a form,
Such ringlets never graced his ivory brow.
On the far field the adverse heroes join,
No dread artill'ry guards the coward side;
But dauntless strength, and courage half divine,
Command the war, and form the conq'ror's pride.
Thus before Illion's heav'n-defended towers,
Her godlike Hector raised his crimsoned arm;
Thus great Atrides led the Grecian powers,
And stern Achilles spread the loud alarm.
Where danger threats the European flies,
Eager to follow when Ouabi leads,
His feathered arrows glance along the skies,
And many a hero, many a sachem bleeds.
Now the strong hatchet hews whole nations down,
Now deathful showers of missive darts descend,
The echoing war-whoop drowns the dying groan,
And shouts of victory every bosom rend.
When by some hand's unerring force applied,
Flew a swift arrow where Celario stood,
Its darting vengeance pierced his guardless side,
And drank the living current of his blood.
While from the wound the barbed shaft is drawn,
Over his fair side the drops of crimson glow,
And seem lost rubies on a wint'ry lawn,
Adding new luster to the silv'ry snow.
The Illinois their great Ouabi hail,
No more the foe his conquering arm defies;
Over the blue mountain, through the thorny vale,
The victor follows, as the vanquished flies.
Fatigued by slaughter, every chief retires
To the loved solace of his native plain,
There still regardful of the sacred fires, It is a point of religion with the
American Indians never to suffer their fires to go out until the close of their
year, when they are totally extinguished, and others are kindled by friction of
certain wood. The policy of this act of devotion is evident, as it not only
indicates to their youth the necessity of their being constantly ready for war,
but serves as an annual school to instruct them (in all cases of emergency) in
the method of raising this necessary element into action from the objects of
nature, which surround them.

Till the loud war awakes his strength again.
By slaves The prisoners of inferior rank, taken in battle, are retained as
slaves by the rights of war; and this is the only kind of slavery known amongst
them.
supported through the mazy wood,
Celario gains the sachem's distant home,
Where mourning warriors stop the purple flood,
And for each healing plant These people are perhaps the first botanists in the
world; and from their knowledge of the properties of plants, according to
^^^liam Penn, have a remedy for almost every disease, to which they are
subject. They have certain antidotes to all venomous bites, and it is said an
infallible cure for cancers.
the weedy desert roam.
Azakia's hand the chymic juice applies,
Her constant aid the strengthening food prepares,
Her plaintive voice beguiles his closing eyes,
And sooths, his slumbers with unceasing prayers.
Now winds his ringlets round her dusky hand,
And views the contrast with enamored boast,
Now over his features bends with accents bland,
'Till every swimming sense in wonder's lost.
Thus the lorn wretch, by ignis fatuus led,
Pursues the gleam which charms his lonely way,
Nor, 'till destruction whelms his hapless head,
Suspects the dangers of the treacherous ray.
Celario gazes with renewed desires,
While kindling hopes his doting bosom move;
Yet still Ouabi's worth his soul inspires,
And much his virtue struggles with his love.
Now each new day increasing strength bestows,
And his braced limbs the limping staff resign,
His humid lip with roseate luster glows,
His lucid eyes with wonted brightness shine.
CANTO II.
WHAT time red Sirius sheds his baneful power,
And fades the verdant beauties of the grove;
When thirsty plants droop for the cooling shower,
And not a leaf the sleeping zephyrs move,
Azakia wandered from her sultry home,
Amid the stream her languid limbs to lave,
Now on the sedgy banks delights to roam,
Now her light body curls the shining wave.
While through the woods the sachem chased the deer,
Celario mourns Azakia's long delay,
Often at her absence drops the empassion'd tear,
Counting the tedious moments' leaden way.
When half the scorching day its course had run,
The wanderer seeks her loved abode again,
Nor thinks how fad existence lingers on,
Unsooth'd by love, and worn by anxious pain.
Celario greets her with a lover's care,
And sees new beauties grace her modest form,
Repeats his fond complaint, his late despair,
And dwells enraptured on each glowing charm:
Till, quite regardless of Ouabi's name,
His yielding soul to desperate love resigned,
Urged with insidious voice his daring flame,
By every art assailed her softened mind.
CELARIO. Not bright Hesper beams more fair
To the love-lorn traveller,
Than those eyes, where beauty warms,
Than that voice, where softness charms,
Than that bosom's gentle swell,
And those lips, where raptures dwell,
To this faithful heart of mine,
Truly, only, wholly thine.
Now Ouabi hunts the deer,
Love and bliss inhabit here;
Here the downy willows bend,
Elms their fringed arms extend,
While the sinking sun improves
Every scene, which fancy loves.
Let thy heart my refuge be,
And my hopes repose on thee;
Grant me all those matchless charms,
Yield the heaven within thy arms.

AZAKIA. Does the turtle learn to roam,
When her mate has left his home!
Will the be forsake her hive?
In the peopled wigwam thrive?
Can Azakia ever prove,
Guardless of Ouabi's love!
While the shivers from the tree, The marriage contract of the North American
Indians is not necessarily during life, but while the parties continue
agreeable to each other. The ceremony is performed by their mutually breaking
small shivers or sticks of wood in the presence of their friends, which are
carefully deposited in some safe place, till they wish a separation; when with
like ceremony the sticks are thrown into the sacred fires, and the marriage
consequently dissolved. Mrs. Brooks observes, that the greatest obstruction to
the conversion of the Canadian Indians to christianity, was their reluctance at
forming marriages for life.

Which the warrior broke with me,
Straight as honor, bright as fame,
Have not felt the wasting flame!
Think of all his guardian care,
How he trained thy steps to war;
How, when pressed by every harm,
Stretched his life-protecting arm;
Raised thee from the trembling ground,
Drew the arrow from thy wound,
Brought thee to his peaceful plain,
Clothed thy cheek with health again!
Shall I from such virtue part?
Must I break that generous heart?
Every pang, which kills thy rest,
Then will pierce his faithful breast,
His and thine I cannot be:
Must I break his heart for thee?

CELAIRO. All the turtle's charms are thine,
All her constant love is mine;
Every sweet, the be bestows,
On thy fragrant bosom grows:
May each bliss descend on thee,
Be thy griefs reserved for me.
Yes! I must thy choice approve;
Give Ouabi all thy love;
But with 'thee I cannot stay,
Soon, ah! soon I must away,
Where Scioto's waters flow,
Or the fiery Chactaws glow,
Or the snowy mountains rise,
Frozen by Canadian skies;
There for refuge will I fly
From the ruin of that eye;
Yet this heart with love will glow
Mid the northern mountains' snow,
On the Chactaws' southern plain
Feel the chill of cold disdain.

AZAKIA Why, ungrateful youth, ah! why
Must the poor Azakia die!
If you leave this blissful plain,
Never shall we meet again.
Though to great Ouabi true,
Yet this soul resides with you;
Still will follow all thy care,
While the body wastes to air.
Not the golden source of light,
Not the silver queen of night,
Not the placid morning dream,
Not the tree-reflecting stream,
Ever can a charm display,
When thy heavenly form's away.

Even while she spoke the great Ouabi came,
Celario's cheek betrays the conscious glow;
But chaste Azakia, pure from every shame,
Nor checks her tears, nor hides her blameless woe.
With softened accent, and expressive eye,
The faultless chief regards her quivering fear,
His gentle voice repels the swelling sigh,
His fond endearment stops the rolling tear.
Celario listens with averted mien,
Struck to the soul, by secret guilt oppressed,
In sullen silence wanders round the green,
While the soft sorrower all her grief expressed.
AZAKIA. Far from Azakia's kindly eyes
The loved, the lost Celario flies:
For other friends desires to roam,
And scorns Ouabi's liberal home!

OUABI. Dear youth, by bounteous nature blessed,
Thou chosen brother of my breast,
What other friends can claim thy care,
For who can hold thee half so dear!
Does not the chain of friendship bind
Thy virtues with Ouabi's mind!
And this warm heart's expanding flame,
Still kindle at Celario's name!
My faithful warriors all are thine,
And all thy treacherous foes are mine.
Perhaps some wrong, thy soul disdains,
Disgusts thee to these hated plains;
By yon bright ruler of the skies,
The wretch, who wronged thee, surely dies.
The strengthened foe their arms prepare,
Tomorrow leads me to the war;
This night we claim thee, as a guest,
To join the sacred warrior-feast.
While danger all my steps attend,
Let mild Azakia find a friend.

CELARIO. Native reason's piercing eye,
Melting pity's tender sigh,
Changeless virtue's living flame,
Meek contentment, free from blame,
Open friendship's generous care,
EVERY BOON OF LIFE IS HERE!
Yet this heart, to grief a prey,
Loathes the morning's purple ray,
And the azure hour of rest
Plants a scorpion in my breast;
But I Will with thee to the war,
Only solace for my care:
Though I cannot heave the blow,
Yet will bend the supple bow,
Fatal to the flying foe.

OUABI. Yes! and that great, undaunted mind,
With equal strength and vigor joined,
Would lead thee with regardless haste
Through yon illimitable waste;
But yet thy wounded body spare,
Unfit to meet the toils of war;
Unfit the ambush'd chiefs to find,
To follow swifter than the wind,
Or, if by numerous foes subdued,
To fly within the tangling wood:
With my Azakia then remain,
'Till her loved warrior comes again.

Thus great Ouabi sooths with gentle care
The guilty anguish of Celario's breast,
Dissuades his purpose from the coming war,
And calms his stormy passions into rest.
Now the brave hero seeks the distant foe,
And leads his warriors with unequalled grace,
Adorned with paint their martial bodies glow,
A firm, unconquered, unforgiving Revenge is a principle, in which they are
very careful to educate their young warriors, considering it one of their first
virtues; yet this revenge is rather a deliberate sentiment of the mind, than a
rath ebullition of passion; for they suppose that a man who always seels a
disposition to punish injuries, will not be readily inclined to commit them.

See Wm. Penn's Letters.


race.
Such as when JULIUS sought Britannia's plain,
With fearless step approached her pensile shore,
Whose naked limbs the varying colors stain,
Who dare the war, and scorn the conq'ror's power.
Mean time Azakia for her sachem mourns,
Her troubled heart to ceaseless pangs resigned;
Now to Celario's ardent love returns,
Now native virtue brightens in her mind.
Unbending honor gains her spotless breast;
Forms the resolve to guard his fatal charms,
To seek some nymph with radiant beauty blessed,
To win his love, and grace his envied arms.
On the young ZISMA all her hopes repose,
Who next herself adorned the peopled glade;
Like the green bud beneath the opening rose, Azakia is supposed to be still in
extreme youth, as among the Indians the women contract marriage at the age of
fourteen, and the men at seventeen.

With bright Azakia shone the rising maid.
To the fair stranger gentle Zisma flies,
Prevents each wish, each luxury prepares,
Dwells on his beauties with unweari'd eyes,
And lures with siren voice his froward cares.
Much he admires, and much his soul approves;
But when was love by frigid prudence swayed!
In the torn breast, which burning passion moves,
Can the cold law of reason be obeyed!
Still to Azakia all his thoughts retire,
Her slender form, her love-exciting face,
Her gentle voice, each tremb'ling nerve inspire,
And every smile robs Zisma of a grace.
Often tears of transport from his eyes distill,
Often rays of hope through dark'ning sorrows beam,
Now at her feet the subject of her will,
Now wild as loud Ontario's rushing stream.
CANTO III.
JUST as the sun awaked the dewy morn,
And rose resplendent from his watery bed,
When vari'd tints the heavenly arch adorn,
And over the meads enameled radiance spread,
At the far limits of the spangled lawn
A ghastly figure issued from the wood,
Writhing with anguish, like the wounded fawn,
Covered with darts, and stained with clotted blood.
Azakia's bosom swells with boding woes,
Yet to his aid the sweet consoler flies,
On his parched lips the cooling draught bestows,
Binds his deep wounds, and sooths his labored sighs.
When his faint voice, and wasted strength returns,
Often he attempts, often quits the fearful tale,
'Till the sad list'ner all her sorrow learns,
Whelmed in dumb grief, with chilling terrors pale.
Too soon, alas! his broken accents show,
How the great chief approached the fatal plain,
Though nations fell beneath his nervous blow,
O'erpow'r'd by numbers sunk amidst the slain.
One equal fate the victor-foes impart,
For the pure town The pure or white towns are places of refuge, in which no
blood is ever permitted to be spilt; even criminals are there protected.
in vain the vanquished bend,
The vengeful tomahawk, The tomahawk is a small hatchet, with a long handle,
which is thrown at the enemy with success at a great distance; it is
particularly fatal in a pursuit.
and hurtling dart,
Down to the shades the hapless heroes send.
While this alone, of all the routed train,
From purple heaps, where dying sachems lay,
To seek the loved Azakia's peaceful plain,
Had turned his sad, dark, solitary way.
On the far field while great Ouabi lies,
Breathless and low amid the glorious dead,
No friendly hand to close the warrior's eyes,
And shield the plumy honors "Plumy honors," alluding to their practice of
scalping.
of his head,
Ungoverned rage the young Celario fires,
He scorns his wounds, forgets the nymph he loves;
Revenge is all his swelling breast desires,
Revenge alone his furious soul approves.
In Zisma's arms, of wasting grief the prey,
The widowed mourner courts the murderous dream, It is said to have been
anciently a custom among the Indians, if in the space of forty days, a woman,
who had lost her husband, saw and conversed with him twice in a dream, to infer
from thence, that he required her presence in the land of spirits; and nothing
could dispense with her putting herself to death.

Shuns the red splendour of the rising day,
The moon's pale radiance, and the shaded stream.
Not deeper anguish rends the promised bride,
If death relentless lifts his ebon dart,
And tears her youthful lover from her side,
Just when hope warmed, and pleasure fired the heart.
Now brave Celarioseeks his scattered friends,
Who raise new powers, and neighboring tribes obtain,
Along the darkened green the host extends,
Breathing revenge, and undismayed by pain.
For the young champion all their voices rise,
He can alone their glorious chief succeed,
Who erst, beneath that matchless sachem's eyes,
Could greatly conquer, and could nobly bleed.
Ere he departs Azakia claims his care,
The youthful Zisma at her side he found,
While plunged in grief, the victim of despair,
The lovely suff'rer pressed the turfy ground.
In her cold hand the fatal draught was borne,
Of deadly Cytron's The root of the North-American cytron tree, commonly called
the candle wood, produces a juice of a most deadly poison.
poisonous root composed,
While many a tear, and many a lengthened groan,
The purpose of her steady soul disclosed.
AZAKIA. When angry spirits shake the skies,
And against the good the bad arise, The American Indians believe, that an
eclipse of the sun is occasioned by a contention, between the good and evil
spirit; and as light finally prevails, they suppose the good spirit is always
victorious.

The golden orb, which lights the day,
Withdraws its clear refulgent ray,
'Till GOODNESS gains his native throne,
And hurls the power of darkness down.
Then shines the FLAMING ORB more clear,
More ardent splendors gild the year.
Thus would this sensual form control
The glory of the immortal soul;
Would all the charms of light forego,
And chain it to the gloom of woe;
But soon the unequal contest ends,
Soon the pure soul to bliss ascends,
While through the realms of endless day
Ouabi spreads his brightened ray.
Last night the beaming warrior came,
Envelop'd in surrounding flame,
Stretched his heroic arms to me,
And raised this loit'ring heart from thee;
If once again he greets my sight,
And calls me to the realms of light,
This killing draught will waft me over
The terrors of the win'try shore,
To wander midst the blissful train,
And meet the fearless chief again.

CELARIO. How can the dead approach thy sight!
Who guides them through the shades of night!
Would that bright soul its bliss resign,
To give a lasting stab to mine!
How could the wretch, who caused thy pain,
Know when the glorious chief was slain?
Perhaps, the victors' triumph made,
He mourns beneath the silent shade,
Or the flow tortures strive in vain
His great, unconquered mind to gain:
This daring arm shall set him free,
Pledge but thy sacred oath to me,
By all the shining powers above,
By thy Celario's constant love,
'Till great Ouabi's fate is known,
Thou will not dare to touch thy own.
The foe an easy prey will be,
Now lulled to calm security:
Surprise will seize the guardless train,
And snatch the warrior-chief from pain.

AZAKIA Then by the ruler of the skies,
By young Celario's heavenly eyes,
By the soft love, those eyes express,
By all his vari'd powers to bless,
His hopeless tear, impassioned sigh,
And look of speechless sympathy,
Witness ye spirits of the dead,
That hover round this widowed head,
The fatal bowl I will not drain,
'Till the young warrior comes again,
Or 'till to great Ouabi's shade
The sad sepulchral rites are paid.

Charmed by her accents, from her sight he speeds,
Swift as the falcon darting on the prey,
With the red train The Indians style themselves "The red people."
in eager haste proceeds,
And fires their courage, as he leads their way.
Soon as they gain the region of the foe,
Some he directs the ambush'd path to guide,
Some with strong force to heave the sudden blow,
And some to bear the captur'd chiefs aside.
Returned from conquest, and to ease resigned,
The invaded tribe their hasty arms regain,
In every step an instant death to find,
Or the sad prospect of a life of pain.
In vain Celario checks the savage hand,
The helpless mother with her infant dies, These people make it a principle to
spare neither the wives nor children of their enemies; but, like the patriarchs
of old, endeavor to extirpate the whole race.

Revenge inspires his unforgiving band,
'Till all one heap of desolation lies.
Now to the town they urge their rapid way,
With equal speed the routed foe retires,
There in the midst a tortured warrior lay,
Daring the fury of the raging fires.
His mangled form the tort'rers power defies,
His changeless voice the song of death had sung,
No tear of pain pollutes his steady eyes,
No cry of mercy trembles on his tongue.
DEATH SONG.
REARED midst the war-empurpled plain,
What Illinois submits to PAIN!
How can the glory-darting fire
The coward chill of death inspire!
The sun a blazing heat bestows,
The moon midst pensive evening glows,
The stars in sparkling beauty shine,
And own their FLAMING SOURCE divine.
Then let me hail the IMMORTAL FIRE,
And in the sacred flames expire;
Nor yet those Huron hands restrain;
This bosom scorns the throbs of pain.
No griefs this warrior-soul can bow,
No pangs contract this even brow;
Not all your threats excite a fear,
Not all your force can start a tear.
Think not with me my tribe decays,
More glorious chiefs the hatchet raise;
Not unrevenged their sachem dies,
Not unattended greets the skies.
Celario listens with the ear of care,
His sinking limbs their wonted aid refuse,
He calls his warriors with distracted air,
Whose ready hands the suffering victim loose.
Around his feet the young deliv'rer clings;
It is Ouabi! greatest! first of men!
The song of death the dauntless sachem sings,
Yet clasps his loved Celario once again.
Through the deep wood they seek the healing balm,
Weep on his hand, or at his feet deplore;
Ah! how unlike Ouabi's glorious form!
Now gash'd with wounds, and bathed in streams of gore!
Snatched from the wished oblivion of the field,
Subjected to the victor's hard decree,
Struck by his form, their iron bosoms yield,
They grant a life deprived of liberty.
The indignant chief the proffered boon disdains,
Defies their rage, and scorns their threatening ire,
Demands the tortures, and their rending pains,
The lingering anguish of the tardy fire.
The Death Song echoed through the hollow wood,
Just when Celario led his warrior-train,
The affrighted foe discard the work of blood,
And fly impetuous over the arid plain.
Thus when a carcass clogs the opening vale,
And birds of prey in prowling circles throng,
If some sicrce hound approach the tainted gale,
He drives the wild relentless brood along.
Pale horror stalks, and swift destruction reigns,
Carnage and death pollute the ruined glade,
'Till nature's weari'd arm a respite gains,
When night pacific spreads her sable shade.
CANTO IV.
WHILE the bent forest drops the crystal tear,
And frozen HURON chills the shortened day.
'Till the young spring restored the blossomed year,
Racked by disease the patient sachem lay.
Over his pierced limbs, and lacerated form,
Celario binds the health-restoring leaf,
And guards his slumbers from surrounding harm,
With all the silent eloquence of grief.
'Till sovereign nature, and benignant art,
Revive each nerve, each weakened fiber brace,
And every charm, that health and youth impart,
Glows in his veins, and brightens in his face.
Still to his love, Celario's heart returns,
Full often he mourns her life-oppressing woe,
'Till great Ouabi all his soul discerns,
And views the source, from whence his sorrows flow.
In pensive thought he treads the fenny meads,
While for his native home they bend their way,
Light as the air each hurried step proceeds,
Through the slow moments of the lingering day:
'Till time, whom happy lovers formed with wings,
To his own plains the matchless chief restores;
Around his neck the wild Azakia clings,
Now weeps, now joys, now blesses, now deplores.
Another dream had racked her sleepless mind,
Where the great hero chid her long delay,
While all her tortured breast, to death resigned,
Reproached the European's faithless stay.
The chief returns in all his native grace,
Though marked with wounds, and seared with many a scar,
Yet manly charms adorn his open face,
Still formed to lead and guide the glorious war.
Celario gazes with unsated eye,
While down his cheek the tears of rapture flow,
His melting bosom heaves the breathing sigh,
And rising cares contract his polished brow.
Not unobserved the nectar'd sigh ascends,
Nor yet in vain the tears of fondness roll,
With softened look the generous sachem bends,
While heavenly music speaks his yielding soul.
OUABI. In freedom born, to glory bred,
Yet like a dastard captive led,
When sunk in blessed oblivious night,
Raised to the sorrows of the light,
The life, I scorned, they basely gave,
And dared to claim me as a slave,
To threat me with the darts of pain,
Tho born over glorious chiefs to reign;
But, taught Ouabi's soul to know,
They sought to bend that foul with woe,
By vari'd tortures vainly strove
This heav'n-directed eye to move,
When like a God Celario came,
And snatched me from the piercing flame.
From thee this arm its strength receives,
By thee this form his freedom lives;
By thee was bright Azakia's breath,
Twice rescued from the blast of death;
Each time a greater blessing gave
Than twice Ouabi's life to save; Ouabi does not simply mean to compliment
Azakia in this expression, but alludes to a custom of his country, which in
most cases admits the payment of a fine, as an expiation for murder. If the
deceased be a woman, the fine is double; and the reason they give for this
partiality for that sex, is, that they are capable of bringing warriors to the
nation.

See Wm. Penn's Letters.

This law of expiating murder by pecuniary compensation has, I believe been
observed by every uncivilized nation upon earth.



As he alone her love deserves,
Whose power her matchless charms preserves,
That love, those charms, I now resign.
With every bliss, that once was mine.
Since all her mind thy worth approves,
And all thy soul her beauty loves,
This grateful heart that hand bestows,
Which not to shun a life of woes,
Which not to gain undying fame,
To save me from the Hurons' flame,
Would this fond bleeding breast resign,
Or yield to any worth but thine.

CELARIO. First shall the sun forget to lave
His bright beams in the red'ning wave,
The Pleiades shall forsake their sphere, Celario will not be considered as
addressing the savage in too philosophical language, when it is remembered that
people in a hunting state are necessarily acquainted with the different stars
and planets, to aid their course in their excursions from, and returns to,
their places of residence. As no images can with propriety be taken from
culture or civil society in the dialogues, I am under the necessity of
frequently repeating the most striking objects of nature.

And midst the blaze of noon appear,
Or cold Bootes' car shall roll
In sultry splendour round the pole,
Ere thy Celario hails the day,
In which he tears thy soul away.
Though late -- with pointed grief I see,
And own my black'ning crimes to thee.
When torn by woes, by cares oppressed,
You clasped me to that sheltering breast,
Forbade my exiled steps to roam,
And led me to this generous home:
Regardless of thy sacred fame,
I dared to urge my guilty flame;
Though to that arm my life was due,
And every bliss derived from you,
By each perfidious art I strove
To win the bright Azakia's love,
With ceaseless passion sought to gain
Her heavenly charms -- but sought in vain.
Yet will the wandering traitor go
To distant plains, to realms of woe,
'Till absence from his breast remove
The tortures of his impious love,
'Till time with healing on his wing
Shall peace and soft oblivion bring.

OUABI. Yes! in thy guilty deeds I trace
The crimes which still thy realms disgrace;
But my Celario, yet I find
Each native worth adorns thy mind;
For heavenly beaming TRUTH is there,
Of open brow and heart sincere!
No daring vice could ever control
Azakia's unpolluted soul.
Born amidst virtue's favored race,
Her mind as faultless as her face,
Vain must each daring effort prove,
That uncorrupted breast to move;
For on the pure translucid stream
In vain the midnight lightnings beam,
It lifts its bosom to the day,
Unsullied as the solar ray.
Yet have I sworn by yon swift flood,
And by this cloud-envelop'd wood,
Never in these war-devoted arms
To clasp again her matchless charms,
Nor yet these eyes to sleep resign,
'Till all those matchless charms are thine.
The youthful Zisma's constant smile
Will every rising grief beguile.
The shivers from the lofty tree,
The gentle maid will break with me:
In time her ripening form and face
Will bloom with all Azakia's grace.
But for the war this soul was made,
I scorn the peace-encircled shade:
Revenge recals me to the plain,
To meet the Huron foe again.
No friendly calumet shall glow,
No snow-white plume Their mode of making peace is, previous to smoking the
friendly calumet, for the sachem or head-warrior to advance with a white plume,
in the form of a fan, toward the ambassadors of the rival nation, and to draw
it lightly over their foreheads; meaning to indicate, that from that moment all
former animosities are wiped away, and all passed injuries consigned to
oblivion. The whiteness of the plume being emblematical of the purity of their
intentions in the treaty they are forming.
pass over the brow,
'Till in one blaze of ruin hurled,
I sink them to the nether world:
Revenge shall every torment ease,
And even the parted soul appease.

Azakia hears the changeless chief's reply,
Now warmed with hope, now chilled with icy fear,
Nor dares to meet him with her swimming eye,
Her laboring breath, and soul-entrancing care.
Though the famed warrior ruled her faithful mind,
The young Celario every passion moved;
Even to his faults her doting heart inclined --
Ouabi was too godlike to be loved.
While the soft Zisma learns the fixed decree,
In modest silence and in pleased surprise,
To the great sachem bends her willing knee
With grateful smiles, and rapture-glancing eyes.
In vain Celario pleads his altered breast,
No Illinois his sacred word recals;
It Is fixed -- the young deliv'rer shall be blessed --
The flames ascend -- the branching cedar falls.
Ere the day close the solemn rites begin,
The broken shivers feed the hungry blaze;
While the new spires adorn the social green,
And the wild The music of the Indians, though of a wild and inharmonious kind,
is introduced at all their public festivals and solemnities.
music joins the song of praise.
To his wrapped soul Celario clasps his bride,
Thinks it a dream, some sweet delusive charm;
Wonder and joy his beating breast divide,
Dart from his eyes, and every accent warm.
Thus the young hero from victorious war,
While the thronged city swells the full acclaim,
Forgets each bleeding friend, each ghastly scar,
And every breeze wafts pleasure, wealth and fame.
Ouabi, still in matchless worth arrayed,
Betrays no grief, no soft, repentant sigh;
But like a parent guards the timid maid,
And claims her friendship with his asking eye.
Her slender limbs the matron-garb adorn,
Her locks no more in bright luxuriance flow,
From her smooth brow the maiden veil The unmarried women wear a kind of cap,
or veil, on their heads, which is taken off at the marriage ceremony.

[ William Penn's Letters.

To this, it is said, succeeds a circle of beads of various colors


is drawn,
And glist'ning beads in rainbow-beauty glow.
Joy reigns, and pleasure lights the smiling scene,
The graceful feet in mazy circles rove,
While music warbles over the peopled green,
And wafts the fond impassioned breath of love.
Swift flies the sunny morn, that gilds the spring,
Short is the shower, which bathes the summer day,
But swifter still gay pleasure's transient wing,
With fleeter haste contentment, glides away!
Even while delight expands each winning charm,
Through the wide plain the shrieks of fright arise;
The gentle Zisma swells the loud alarm,
Her great, her loved Ouabi falls -- he dies!
OH THOU, whose feeling heart, and ready sigh,
On every grief soft sympathy bestow,
Here turn thy blessed, benignant, melting eye,
Here let the tears of full compassion flow!
Down at his feet the lost Azakia lies,
Her pale Celario parts the pressing throng,
The Immortal warrior lifts his darkened eyes,
And the chok'd words fall quivering from his tongue.
OUABI. To realms where godlike valor reigns,
Exempt from ills, and freed from pains,
Where this unconquered soul will shine,
And all the victor's prize be mine,
I go -- nor vainly shed the tear,
Ouabi has no glory here;
Unfit the Illinois to guide,
No more the dauntless warriors' pride --
Since as a hapless captive led,
Racked like a slave, he basely bled,
No haughty Huron ever shall boast,
He deigned to live, when fame was lost.
Celario! thou my place sustain.
The chiefs expect thee on the plain.
Ah! never in earth The principal Indian figure made use of to express the
making peace, is "burying the hatchet."
the hatchet lay,
'Till thou have swept my foes away.

The strong convulsions shake his laboring form,
Hard, and with pain, the loit'ring blood retires;
Thus sinks the oak, when loud tornados storm,
The kingly lion with such pangs expires.
Cold to the heart, the peerless sachem falls,
No heavenly powers the fleeting breath restrain,
No human aid his parted soul recals,
Whose life was VIRTUE, and whose fate was PAIN.
Now wailing sorrow murmurs through the glade,
While to the tomb, Their tombs, or rather cemetaries, are of great extent, and
of curious construction, and to which the living pay the utmost veneration.

Governor Jefferson's Notes on Virginia.


where sleep his glorious race,
Erect, The posture in which they bury their dead is either sitting or standing
upright, believing that when they rise, they must inhabit heaven in the same
posture in which they are buried.
as when a subject tribe obeyed,
The mourned Ouabi's sacred form they place.
Thus the great soul to realms of light ascends!
Down at his feet the conquering hatchet They not only believe in the
immortality of the soul, but also of the bodies of men and animals, and even of
their warlike arms, and other inanimate things; and for this reason it is a
custom with them to bury with their chiefs, his hatchet at his feet, with the
handle perpendicular, his bow unstrung over his head, and a coin (made,
according to William Penn, of a fish's bone highly polished) in his hand.
stands,
Over his high head the spreading bow They not only believe in the immortality
of the soul, but also of the bodies of men and animals, and even of their
warlike arms, and other inanimate things; and for this reason it is a custom
with them to bury with their chiefs, his hatchet at his feet, with the handle
perpendicular, his bow unstrung over his head, and a coin (made, according to
William Penn, of a fish's bone highly polished) on his hand.
extends,
The lustral coin They not only believe in the immortality of the soul, but
also of the bodies of men and animals, and even of their warlike arms, and
other inanimate things; and for this reason it is a custom with them to bury
with their chiefs, his hatchet at his feet, with the handle perpendicular, his
bow unstrung over his head, and a coin (made, according to William Penn, of a
fish's bone highly polished) in his hand.
adorns his lifeless hands!
While to the spot, made holy by his shade,
His faithful tribe with annual care return At stated periods the Indians
revisit the sepulchers or cemetaries of their chiefs, and perform certain rites
and ceremonies not precisely known to the Anglo-Americans. Governor Jefferson,
in his Notes, gives one instance of this custom.

And, as the solemn obsequies are paid,
In pious love, and humble reverence mourn.
Each lonely Illinois, who wanders by, These sepulchers or cemetaries are
raised to a very great height above the surface of the earth, by immense piles
of stones. [ See Gov. Jefferson's Notes.] And to prevent their being levelled
by time, it is a religious duty for every one of the same nation, who
accidentally passes it, to add one stone in reverence to the pile. [ See Mr.
Noah Webster's Letters to the Rev. Ezra Stiles] -- who says, "Rowland remarks
that this custom exists among the vulgar Welsh to this day, the same kind of
mounts being scattered over the west of England and Wales."

Will with the hero's fame his way beguile,
In fond devotion bend the suppliant eye,
And add one pillar to the sacred pile.
There shall he rest! and if in realms of day,
The GOOD, the BRAVE, diffuse a light divine,
Redoubled splendour gilds the brightened ray,
Which bids Ouabi's NATIVE VIRTUES shine!
LET not the CRITIC, with disdainful eye,
In the weak verse condemn the novel plan;
But own, that VIRTUE beams in every sky,
Tho wayward frailty is the lot of man.
Dear as ourselves to hold each faithful friend,
To tread the path, which INNATE LIGHT inspires,
To guard our country's rites, her soil defend,
Is all that NATURE, all that HEAVEN requires.
LINES, Addressed to the inimitable AUTHOR of the POEMS under the Signature of
DELLA CRUSCA.
ACROSS the vast Atlantic tide,
Down Apalachia's grassy side,
What echoing sounds the soul beguile,
And lend the lip of grief a smile!
It Is DELLA CRUSCA'S heavenly song,
Which floats the western shores along,
Breathing as sweet, as soft a strain,
As kindness to the ear of pain,
Splendid as noon, as morning clear,
And chaste as ev'ning's pearly tear;
Where cold despair in music flows,
While all the FIRE OF GENIUS glows.
Still thy enchanting powers display,
Still charm me with the magic lay!
The Muses all thy soul inspire,
APOLLO tunes thy matchless lyre!
O strike the lustral string again,
And over Columbia waft the strain.
Ah! would to light my clouded days,
One ray from thy unequalled blaze,
Might through may dark'ning fortunes shine,
And grace me with a note like thine!
But no, BRIGHT BARD, for thee alone
The Muses weave the LAUREL CROWN:
Never can the timid, plaintive dove,
Soar with the DAUNTLESS BIRD OF JOVE:
Nor silv'ry Hesper's dewy ray
Beam like the GOLDEN ORB OF DAY.
PHILENIA.
