LIGHT RISING OUT OF OBSCURITY. OR, A REPLY TO FRANCIS HERR'S PAMPHLET,
ENTITLED, A short Explication of the written Word of GOD; LIKEWISE, Of the
Christian Baptism, and the peaceable Kingdom of Christ, AGAINST THE PEOPLE
CALLED QUAKERS.

BY BENJAMIN MASON.

Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the
hope that is in you, with meekness and fear. 1 Peter. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY
JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN MARKET-STREET, BETWEEN SECOND AND THIRD-STREETS. M.DCC.XC.

PREFACE.
I SHALL not make any apology for what is here offered to the public, the
importance of the subjects being sufficient to justify the investigation
thereof. On reading the forementioned pamphlet, I observed, that whatever
reasons the author had met with (which diverse worthy members of our religious
society have with christian ingenuity given thereon) they have fell short of
convincing his understanding of the rectitude of our sentiments in the respects
treated on; which is no indication of want of ability, but want of opportunity;
for it is unreasonable to suppose, that they should adapt answers to every
objection that in future might be made; or that they should do the work of
their day and ours also. An idea like this, entertained in an unbelieving
heart, has in many ages greatly retarded the reformation, which as yet has made
but little progress, for the world still lies in wickedness. I am not
insensible of the difficulty attendant on combating with popular opinions,
flowing from the influence of education, and supported by the custom of many
ages: it is immaterial whether those customs be well or ill founded, with
respect to their detention of the mind, they equally militate against things
offered not coincident therewith; many of my readers being of this class, it
would be irrational to suppose, that such will be wholly divested of
prejudices, so as to be impartial in the examination of the subjects hereafter
treated on: when the sentiments of the reader stand opposed to the matters
proposed, except he can suspend them during the consideration, he will be under
an utter incapacity of weighing things in the balance of equity. It is the
unbiassed only that can judge impartially.

As heaven is higher than the earth, so in like proportion are the things
pertaining to salvation superior to temporal considerations; of which number I
conceive the following matters to be. As to the scriptures which Francis Herr
endeavors to prove to be the everlasting Word of God, I have endeavored to
discriminate between them and the everlasting Word; but if any will have them
called the Word, they ought for distinction to (...) them the written Word, for
they are not everlasting. As to water Baptism, which F. H. endeavors to prove
to be an ordinance of Christ, commanded and enjoined by him to be perpetuated
and practiced on all Christians, I have endeavored to demonstrate it to be
John's dispensation.

As to the heavenly Baptism which Christ commanded, I believe it necessary to
be experienced by every son and daughter of Adam, ere they can enter the
kingdom of heaven. How important then must it be, to be rightly understood! Is
it not high time, that men should entertain a jealousy respecting clementary
Baptism, inasmuch as it has proved no remedy against sin, and fruitless of
salvation? To define precisely whether our Lord commanded water or the Spirit
for this purpose, is what I have principally aimed at, and shall leave the
reader to judge of my success. As to the order of time referred to, respecting
transactions mentioned in Scriptures, I have depended on its chronology. In
treating on the peaceable kingdom of Christ, I have not attempted it
objectively, except in two or three instances near the conclusion, but have
endeavored to illustrate the way and manner, by which I believe his kingdom
will be advanced in the earth, which I think is agreeable to the scripture
testimony, and the spreading of primitive Christianity. In all which my design
has been more to clear the truth from misapprehensions, and long practiced
unessential ordinances, than to exult in a victory over my opponent; therefore
I have omitted taking notice of several plain contradictions in his pamphlet.

LIGHT RISING OUT OF OBSCURITY.
CHAPTER I. Respecting the Scriptures.
IN the first place, respecting the Scriptures, our writings at large fully
exhibit our sense and approbation of them to the world; we esteem them an
historical relation, in which is included an unparalleled train of memorable
events (viz.) the majesty, power, and greatness of the Almighty, in the
production of the universe; his laws, commandments, testimonies, mercies, and
judgments, dispensed to mankind, intermixed with the moral actions and sayings
of men of various descriptions, for the space of above 4000 years.

The world abounds with histories of an inferior kind, so that few are at a
loss to know, that a history is only a description or declaration of a thing,
and not the thing itself. Therefore the Scriptures are not the everlasting
Word; for John says, "In the beginning was the Word;" John i. 1, 2, 3.
but the Scriptures were not in the beginning: "And the Word was with God:" but
the bible was not with him. "And the Word was God:" but it would be very
impious to say, that the Scriptures were God. "The same was in the beginning
with God; all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made
that was made." But the bible never made any thing, visible nor invisible. "And
the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us." John i. verse 14.
etc. but the Scriptures never became flesh. I humbly think the Apostle here
furnishes every unprejudiced reader with materials, that with indubitable
clearness discriminate between the everlasting Word and those sacred
repositories. The commandments were given for a guide to frail man; and the
law, as Paul says, "was added because of transgressions." Galatians iii. 19.
And Moses, the earliest writer that we know of, lived about 2500 years after
the beginning alluded to by the Apostle, therefore the books under notice are
not that Word, because the most ancient of them were not in the beginning; but
this Word was the same which Moses directed the attention of Israel to, when he
said, "the Word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart, that
thou may do it." Deuteronomy. xxx. 14.
This inspeaking Word not only strove with the Israelites and the
Antediluvians, but also with all the offspring of Adam, being nigh unto them in
their hearts, etc. both before and since the Scriptures were wrote. Paul says,
"The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal." 1
Cor. xx. 7.
That this could not be the Scriptures, is abundantly evident, because from the
beginning to this day, the greater part of mankind have not had the benefit of
them. David says, "Thy Word is very pure, therefore thy servant loves it."
Psalm cxix. 140.
This could not be said of any of the books then extant, because as before
hinted, there are many relations of matters and sayings included, that are
moral in their nature, and some of them speeches of impious men and women, and
consequently remote from purity; such as the speech of Lamech to his two wives,
of Joseph's mistress to her husband, of Korah in his rebellion against Moses,
also of Goliath, Saul, the Witch of Endor, Shimei, etc. This Word, which was
without beginning or end of days, the Scriptures speak largely of; but I do not
understand any of the sacred writers in the sense our author does, neither can
I find, that they designed to have them considered as the Word to which they
impute such wonderful effects, but through them to direct men to the Word for
guidance and instruction. Observe our Lord's reproof to the Jews (viz.) "Ye
have not his Word abiding in you; for whom he has sent, him ye believe not.
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are
they which testify of me, and ye will not come unto me that ye might have
life." John v. 38.
Perhaps no people in the world were more studious in the Scriptures than they
were, which is evident from their expectations through them to obtain eternal
life; yet our Lord plainly told them, that they had not his Word abiding in
them, which is a sufficient proof, that he did not call the Old Testament the
Word. The Apostle Paul tells us, that "The Sword of the Spirit, is the Word of
God." Ephesians. vi. 17.
Also, "The Word is quick and powerful, etc. sharper than any two-edged sword,
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart; neither is
there any creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked
and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do." Heb. iv. 12, 13.
Is it possible, that any enlightened man can be so ignorant, as to suppose
that the Old and New Testament is here meant, or that they have such power and
capacity of knowing, dividing asunder and discerning; surely no -- for the same
Apostle said, "Our sufficiency is of God, who also has made us able ministers
of the New Testament, not of the letter, but of the Spirit; for the letter
kills, but the Spirit gives life." 2 Cor. iii. 5, 6, 7.
"But if the ministration of death written and engraven in stones was
glorious," etc. Here the Apostle, by representing the commandments written with
the finger of God, as the ministration of death, plainly proves, that it was
the letter of the Scriptures which he meant that kills; thereby exhibiting a
caution to the believers, that they might not place their trust and dependence
on any written prescriptions, but on the Word or Spirit which only gives life.
It was through a bare adherance unto, and unwarrantable expectations from the
Scriptures, that rendered the Jews lifeless and destitute of the Word, or a
right knowledge of them; and many since them have erred on that ground. They
doubtless thought as our author and many others do, that the Scriptures were
the Word, as their high expectations evince; for nothing below that
all-creating power could administer life, therefore they remained insensible,
in a state where woeful disappointment inevitably awaited them.

Since by the Word all things were created and are sustained, visible and
invisible; and that it was that Rock and Foundation that followed and conducted
Israel in their movements in the wilderness, which the Apostle says was Christ
then it was the Word in the beginning that spoke, and said, let it be so, and
it was so. The words spoken were the words of the Word, and not the Word
itself, as some of the most remarkable passages in Scripture evince, where the
Almighty vocally uttered the commandments and statutes, etc. to Israel: he
called them the words, but not the Word (viz.) "These are the words which thou
shall speak unto the Children of Israel." Exodus xix. 6, 7.
"All these words which the Lord commanded him." "And God spoke all these
words, saying, I am the Lord thy God," Exodus xx. 1, 2.
etc. "And the Lord said unto Moses, write thou these words; for after the
tenor of these words," etc. "And he wrote upon the tables the words of the
covenant, the ten commandments." Exodus xxxiv. 27, 28.
"These are the words which the Lord has commanded," Exodus xxxv. 1.
etc. "And these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart,"
Deuteronomy. vi. 6.
etc.

Francis Herr thinks he has proved something in the following quotations (viz.)
"And this is the Word of the Lord." "Hear ye the Word of the Lord." "The Word
of the Lord came also unto me." "The Word of the Lord came unto me," etc. with
diverse more to the same import; to which I answer in the words of Christ, who
is the Word, "For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that
speaks in you." Matt. x. 20.
From which it is plain, that the Prophets and Servants of the Most High were
not mistaken, when they informed those to whom they were sent, that they had
the Word of the Lord; for his Spirit was upon them, and his power, which is the
Word, was with them. They were only purified, chosen and prepared vehicles,
through which the Word spoke: it would be equally true to say, it was not them
that spoke, but the Word that spoke through them, for the Spirit of Christ
spoke through the Prophets under the law, for "The Prophets have enquired,"
etc. "Searching what or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in
them did signify, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and
the glory that should follow." 1 Pet. i. 10, 11.


Behold in what point of view Peter and John considered the Word, "Being born
again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God which
lives and abides for ever." "But the Word of the Lord endures for ever, and
this is the Word which by the gospel is preached unto you." 1 Pet. i. 23, 25.
Which Word is Christ -- for as St. Paul says, "We preach not ourselves, but
Christ Jesus the Lord," 2 Cor. iv. 5.
etc. Again: "I have written unto you young men, because ye are strong, and the
Word of God abides in you," 1 John xi. 14.
etc. From all which it is abundantly evident, that the Saints when speaking of
the Word, did not mean any written prescriptions, however acred, but the power,
sensible presence, and Spirit of God, which they often expressed under various
appellations, which impress our minds with ideas of wonderful efficacy,
incomprehensible power, immaculate purity, and eternal existence, and not
transmutable by mortals, therefore not any thing reducible to ink and paper,
things destitute of power, and incapable of motion.

This is a clear point, that all that has ever been uttered or written for
man's instruction, from the foundation of the world; or that ever will be to
the latest period of time, are included under the denomination of records,
testimonies, or declarations of God's Spirit; and that all visible and material
things must terminate. "For the elements shall melt with fervent heat; the
earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be burnt up." 2 Peter iii. 10.
This will doubtless be verified, literally as well as mystically, but the Word
will stand and abide for ever.

These observations, however opposite to popular ideas, are I think well
founded upon, and plainly deducible from Scripture, free from any subtilty or
unwarrantable philosophy; and in my sense the inspired writers have
sufficiently distinguished the words uttered from that All-powerful Word from
whence they proceeded; and it is equally necessary for us to continue proper
distinctions, otherwise we shall confound causes with their effects, and
finally land in perplexity: and wherein are the Scriptures depreciated, by the
term of Holy writ? Holy is an high epithet; it is imputed to the Great First
Cause, and therefore cannot degrade the effects; and we think it unsafe for us,
who thus understand the Word, to give that denomination to the Scriptures, lest
we also fall into the condemnation of the Pharisaical Jews, of whom Paul
testifies, "That the children of Israel could not steadfastly look to the end
of that which is abolished -- but their minds were blinded: for until this day
remains the same vail untaken away, in the reading of the Old Testament;
which vail is done away in Christ." 2 Cor. iii. 13, 14.


CHAP. II. Concerning BAPTISM.
CONCERNING Water Baptism, Francis Herr calls it a reception into the church
and congregation of saints, and that it ought not to be called a Christian
Baptism, if it is knowingly administered unto the unconverted. Again he says,
it being then spiritual, it requires also spiritual and regenerated men, whose
hearts were changed, etc. "See! These has St. John baptized, and all such has
Jesus Christ commanded to baptize." If he means, that the administration of
water is spiritual, I must dissent from him therein, believing that spiritual
and regenerated men have already experienced an efficacious and truly spiritual
Baptism, which changes the heart, and needs not the operation of any element; a
reliance on which may subject to the same condemnation into which the Galatians
fell, who "began in the Spirit, and thought to be made perfect in the flesh."
Gal. iii. 3.
And if John the Baptist only baptized "such as were changed by the word of
truth," etc. then did he find a plentiful harvest of converted men. For Matthew
says, "Then went out to him Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the regions round
about Jordan, and were baptized of him in Jordan." Matt. iii. 5.
Mark says -- "And there went out unto him all the land of Judea, and they of
Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the river of Jordan." Mark i. 5.
Very comprehensive expressions these. Even the Publicans and Soldiers were not
refused by him: from which I infer, that those whom John baptized were
generally unconverted, such as needed repentance; and his mission was to show
them typically, by bathing or plunging into, and washing their bodies clean in
water, how Christ would by his Spirit wash, cleanse and purify their hearts and
consciences. And had those already mentioned been converted persons, they would
have known Christ (as John did) when he came with his refining and winnowing
Baptism, and not have rejected him.

But to come to the point in hand, he further says, "Such has Jesus Christ
commanded to baptize, when he says, all power is given unto me in heaven and
in earth; go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost," etc. And again -- "Go ye
into all the world, and preach the gospel unto every creature; he that
believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be
damned." Hence he would infer, that water is meant in the above commands; to
which I answer, that God is a God of order; that Christ is not the author of
confusion: if water had there been meant, would it not have been expressed?
With what precision were the rites of the law enjoined; and the dispensation of
the gospel, which is far more excellent, cannot be less complete. The contests
and confusion that have been about this simple point, for many generations,
have been almost endless. If therefore water was intended, the command appears
to be deficient without the expression thereof; and can we admit, that such an
omission escaped him who is omniscient? The end and design of Christ's coming,
was to lead men from exterior to interior things. -- The new covenant, or
gospel dispensation, is spiritual, in which without him we can do nothing to
advance his glory. It is the substance of all that was prefigured under the
law, which I conceive stood in force until he had passed through it, and
fulfilled the righteousness thereof. When on the cross, "Jesus knowing that all
things were accomplished, said I thirst. -- And when Jesus therefore had
received the vinegar, he said, it is finished." John xix. 28, 30.
This I apprehend to be the end of the typical dispensation, which was
accomplished and finished in him; "for Christ is the end of the law." Romans x. 4.
Yet notwithstanding it was for a time kept to, and taught by the Apostles, it
being reasonable to conclude, that their continuance in these things was
permitted, more through condescension to the attachments and frailty of human
nature in general, than from sensible obligation; long fixed and deep rooted
customs and prejudices not being readily separated from. For the same reasons
do I apprehend John's Baptism was practiced at the first under the gospel for a
time, by some who doubtless saw the invalidity thereof, and continued by others
superstitiously. The Apostles having been baptized by John, saw such evident
testimonies of the divine presence attending his mission, that they in an
unexperienced state, not seeing clearly the design and exit thereof, probably
thought it to have greater efficacy than they afterward found, as appears from
the sense of Peter and Paul, when in a more experienced period of their
apostleship (viz.) "The like figure whereunto Baptism does also now save us;"
(mark, he professes being saved by Baptism) "not the putting away the filth of
the flesh," (which is the utmost effect of water) "but the answer of a good
conscience toward God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ." 1 Peter iii. 21.
He who experienceth this resurrection spiritually accomplished in himself,
knows well what saving Baptism is. Christ told Peter and his brethren, when
bodily present, that when he the Spirit of Truth is come, he would guide them
into all truth, which is a gradual work. They at that time thought their
Master's intention was to restore a temporal kingdom unto Israel; Acts i. 6.
he did not undeceive them, but left their judgment to be rectified in that,
and many other things (which they could not then bear) by their promised guide.
Peter in his spiritual infancy practiced water Baptism, having quickly after
his Lord's ascension, received a commission and power to preach the gospel, and
to work miracles, by which great numbers were converted to the Christian faith.
Conversion and Spiritual Baptism are the same thing; for both imply a change
from a state of nature into a state of grace; and that power by which he
preached the gospel mixing with, or being received in true faith by the
hearers, baptized them with the Spirit and wrought their conversion; but many
who heard and believed were not so baptized, for want of faith. The above is
verified in the instance of Cornelius. "While he yet spoke these words, the
Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word." Acts x. 44.
The Apostles who had hitherto thought salvation was confined to the Jews, were
astonished because the Spirit was conferred on the Gentiles also. This appears
to be the eighth year from that miraculous effusion of the Spirit mentioned
Acts 2d. It seems on this occasion, as though some had began to doubt of water
Baptism, or else why did Peter say, "Can any man forbid that water," etc.
Nineteen years after this is the date of his epistle, in which he expressed
himself concerning Baptism; by which time we cannot doubt, but that his
understanding and judgment was fully rectisied, in that and all other things
relative to salvation.

The Apostle Paul, through whose efficacious ministry multitudes of the
Gentiles embraced the gospel, in the 24th year of his apostleship, says, "I
thank God, that I baptized none of you but Crispus and Gaius, lest any should
say, that I had baptized in mine own name." This by the context is doubtless
generally understood of water Baptism. He then proceeds, saying, "And I
baptized also the household of Stephanas; besides I know not whether I baptized
any other: for Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel. The
Apostle could not be ignorant of the command, "Go ye therefore and teach all
nations, baptizing them," etc. Had he understood water there to be meant, he
must have been very deficient in the execution of his ministerial function, and
also very presumptuous, to thank God that he had done his work so negligently.
It is highly probable, that many imagine the Apostle confined what he wrote
hereon to the Corinthians; but the contrary is demonstrable, for Stephanas was
an inhabitant of Achaia, and not of Corinth (now called Morea. It is the
southernmost part of Greece, being a peninsula almost cut off from the main by
water, and lies nearest to Achaia, they being joined by a narrow isthmus of
considerable length.
) If he had been a Coriuthian, Paul's recommendation of him would have been
unnecessary; from whence I argue, that those enumerated were not only all the
Corinthians that he had baptized with water, but all that he had so baptized
any where; but that the Spirit's Baptism had been through the gospel power
conferred on many by him, is evident: for Luke who wrote the Acts, and was
Paul's companion, says positively (when speaking of Paul's labors) "And many
of the Corinthians hearing, believed and were baptized." Acts xviii. 8.
And here F. Herr's query, respecting the twelve Ephesians (on whom the Baptism
of the Spirit was conferred by the laying on of Paul's hands) whether he
baptized them with water or no, may be answered; the text says they were
baptized, but is silent respecting water. This being three years earlier than
his epistle to the Corinthians, determines the point so far in our favor, that
we may venture to say he did not baptize them with water. Is it any greater
miracle or less possible to confer the Spirit's Baptism, than to heal the sick,
restore the lame, cast out devils, and raise the dead? surely no; with men they
are all impossible, but with God all things are possible. And there are many
instances in Scripture, where men not only performed wonders, and things
impossible as men, through his power, but also where those things are imputed
to men as their acts. And Paul professes a power to confer gifts of the Spirit,
saying, "I long to see you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift."
Romans i. 1^.


Now that water Baptism was John's Baptism, is by all granted; and that he was
the only officer divinely commissioned to administer it, is all that can be
proved. That the Spirit's Baptism is Christ's Baptism, is equally true. But if
water Baptism was also intended to be perpetuated as an ordinance of Christ,
his entire silence respecting any command thereon, must be very extraordinary.
What did John mean when he said, "I indeed baptize you with water; but one
mightier than I comes, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose;
he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire: whose fan is in his
hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor," Luke iii. 16.17.
etc. What else does his description of the purifying effects of Christ's
Baptism argue, but that in like manner as I wash, bathe, and purify your bodies
in water, so shall he who comes wash, cleanse, and purify your hearts and
consciences, in his spiritual laver? And what else did John mean, when he said,
he must increase, but I must decrease, if it was not in the administration of
their different baptismal offices? In what other point of view can we
understand it? since to increase implies a gradual spreading or prevailing, and
to decrease a gradual diminution; and whatever continues to decrease will
terminate. Again: that water is not Christ's Baptism, is clear to me on this
head (viz.) as he came to fulfill, and also to abrogate and rend the vail of
figurative performances (though originally of equal authority with water
Baptim) in order to make way for an higher dispensation; the substance of all
that was typified by the ordinances under the law, "which made nothing
perfect;" it would therefore be irrational to suppose, that he who came after
the power of an endless life, who by "the bringing in of a better hope," Heb.
vii. 19, 16.
should again devolve into shadowy and exterior things. For Paul says,
"Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as
though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances (touch not, taste not,
handle not; which are all to perish with the using) after the commandments and
doctrines of men?" Cell. ii. 20, 21, and 22.


F. Herr calls on us to answer him from Holy Writ, where our Lord has given his
disciples, etc. power, or commanded them to baptize men with the Holy Ghost; to
which I answer, when he said, "All power is given unto me in heaven and in
earth." By this he assured them, that his power was all-sufficient, and should
not be lacking: and "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to
observe all things what. soever I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world," is a positive command, with an
assurance that his presence should not fail them. Likewise, "Go ye into all the
world, and preach the Gospel to every creature; he that believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not," etc. These two texts our
author links together, and so do I, It is evident, that these two texts were
spoken at one time: Matthew says, "Behold he goes before you into Galilee,
there shall ye see him." Matthew xxxviii 7, 6.
-- Then the eleven disciples went away into Galilee, etc. Mark says, "Tell his
disciples and Peter, that he goes before you into Galilee, there shall ye see
him." Mark xvi. 17.
And the two Evangelists only mention one interview with the eleven in
consequence of this direction; the first says, some doubted; the latter, that
he upbraided them with unbelief; and it cannot be supposed, that they doubted
or disbelieved in his resurrection, after they had seen him.
supposing them both to have been written at one time. He says, this injunction
the Apostles received, as the commandment of their Lord and Master, in which
sense I also accept it, having no doubt but that the Baptism of the Spirit was
hereby commanded and enjoined; for only to have enjoined plunging, dipping, and
purifying their bodies in water, is a work that sinful men could perform
without supernatural aid, and needed not such assurance given of the never
failing presence of Almighty Power. And to me it seems demonstrable, that Water
was no more intended than expressed, which I think may thus be proved: Our Lord
positively says, "He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved." Here is
no proviso; he did not say, may be, but shall be saved; from whence I argue,
the Baptism which our Lord commanded, is absolutely a saving Baptism; and that
if water was meant, the consequence is inevitably evitably the same; it must
follow, that all who have believed, and been baptized therewith, in the name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are saved, Simon Magus not excepted, for he
believed and was baptized. Are there any among the sons of Adam so replete with
credulity as to believe, that water, however or by whomsoever administered, is
possessed of such soul redeeming efficacy? surely no; for it is a deplorable
truth, that thousands, yea tens of thousands, who have believed and been
baptized in the manner described, have lived, and do live in all the
gratifications of sensuality; and many of them believed not in the possibility
of their being delivered from them in this life, therefore far from a state of
salvation. If he that believes, and is baptized (as our Lord commanded) shall
be saved, then it was the Spirit's Baptism which he commanded his Apostles to
administer, and not water.

Another touchstone he has given for an infallible rule (viz.) Trees are known
by their fruits; "By their fruits ye shall know them;" Matt. vii. 20.
which is applicable to men or things. He that is baptized with the Spirit,
brings forth the fruits of the Spirit, which are "love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance; against such
there is no law." Gal. v. 22, 23.
The fruits or works of the flesh mentioned in the three preceding verses, are,
"Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft,
hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings,
murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like, of which I tell you, that they
who do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of God." Ver. 19, 20, 21.
If therefore the fruits of many who have been baptized with water, be such as
the flesh brings forth, then are they not in a state of salvation. Again: if
many who have believed, and been baptized with water, be not in a state of
salvation, then is the Baptism wherewith they were baptized not the Baptism
which Christ commanded.

If the first be true, that the Baptism which Christ commanded be absolutely a
saving Baptism, then is the last also true, that Water Baptism is not the
Baptism which he commanded and enjoined, because it absolutely is not a saving
Baptism.

A Baptism therefore, that cannot save or redeem men from their sins, puts them
in no better condition than they would be in if there was no Baptism at all,
since it neither makes men more holy nor less wicked: it is refuted by its own
consequences; and like circumcision or uncircumcision, it avails nothing. And
as to the capacity of Christ's Ministers, in the administration of Spiritual
Baptism, he told his Apostles, that John truly baptized them with water, but
they should be baptized with the Holy Ghost, not many days hence; (here he
represents John as the dispenser of water, and assumes no part of his mission
to himself) which promise was fulsilled in the days of Pentecost, when they
were all filled with the Holy Ghost. From which it appears, that to be filled
with the Holy Spirit, or to have it conferred, and to be baptized therewith,
are the same things. Wherefore I argue, that the Apostles did confer the Holy
Ghost, Acts viii. 17.
by the laying on of their hands; which when Simon Magus saw, he offered them
money, thinking to make gain thereby: also the twelve on whom Paul laid his
hands heretofore mentioned. Marvel not at these things, for Christ's Spirit is
the Christian's strength, which Paul experienced when he said, "I can do all
things through Christ which strengthens me," Phil. iv. 13.
and as before hinted, declared this sufficiency to be of God, who had made
them able Ministers of the Spirit, and not of the letter; therefore he that
ministereth the Spirit, conferreth the Spirit; and he that conferreth the
Spirit, baptizeth with the Spirit. Christ said, "Without me ye can do nothing,"
but through him they could do all things. Without him it was, and is equally
impossible for them, or any now, to preach the gospel ("which is the power of
God unto salvation" Romans i. 16.
) to the edification of the church and God's glory; therefore whoever attempts
to officiate as a Gospel Minister, without being sensibly called of God, and on
every such occasion renewedly qualisied and put forth by the aid of his power,
experiencing his Spirit to give utterance as the Apostles did, cannot profit
the people; for he who depends on the Scriptures only for doctrine, and not
on the Spirit, is a minister of the letter, and not of the Spirit: such were
they who taught for doctrine the precepts of men; and he that has "not the
Spirit of Christ is none of his;" Romans viii. 9.
and he who abides not in the doctrine of Christ, cannot be his Minister,
however eloquent or coherent his doctrines may be: therefore, whatever such do
in that line, it being without him, is presumption and worse than nothing.

The above may be considered as a digression, but as it tends to elucidate the
subject under notice, I have inserted it; apprehending that I have been
enabled, in a good degree, to demonstrate that Christ has not only commanded,
but also given power to his Disciples and Apostles to administer the Baptism of
the Holy Spirit; and I may add, not unto them only who heard him utter the
command, but to all that should go forth in his name to the end of the world.

F. Herr tells us of Water Baptism being a proof or seal of regeneration. This
is transferring it from being a type of good things to come, to be an ensign or
evidence that they are come; but as it leaves no visible nor distinguishable
mark or impression on the body, nor makes any material change, so as to produce
different fruits; and the idea being without foundation in reason, or precept
from Holy Writ, it may be rejected as being merely imaginary in its effects,
and destitute of any real consequence; therefore, with other legal rites, it
may now be deemed but a useless ordinance. The best seal or proof of having
been regenerated, are the fruits of the Spirit heretofore mentioned, which are
unto holiness, and the end everlasting life. And if any want a distinguishable
badge of being Members of Christ's Church, Love is the criterion which he
proposed for that end, saying, "By this shall all men know that ye are my
disciples, if ye have love one to another." John xiii. 35.


We are charged by F. Herr with insinuating, that Water Baptism was derived
from the law, and he calls on us to prove where it began. In the first place it
will be right to define what is Water Baptism; is it not to dip, plunge, bathe,
or wash, so as to cleanse the body? or as Peter has it, to put away the filth
of the flesh? This I take to be what properly constitutes Water Baptism, when
performed on a religious account; any words or ceremony uttered during the
operation, does not make it more or less so. We do not find that John the
Baptist had any fixed ceremony, except it was to preach the doctrine of
repentance; therefore, if to wash, cleanse, and purify the body, be what
properly constitutes Water Baptism, in the original sense of the word, then was
Water Baptism often on religious accounts practiced by the Israelites under the
law. Levit. xv. from verse 5th to 27th -- and Number. xix. from 8th to 21st.
But we do not say that John derived his commission from the law, but
immediately from heaven: yet if John's Baptism had not had a near affinity with
the washings and purifications common among the Jews (which in fact were
Baptisms) it is highly probable it would not have found such universal
reception amongst that people, who were very tenacious of the customs delivered
by Moses. This was abundantly verified; for when Christ came, who had greater
testimony than John, his doctrine so contradicted their prejudices, that they
almost universally rejected and disowned him.

The following are quotations from the works of Isaac Pennington, a worthy
member of our society, who lived in the last century, and had experienced both
elementary and Spiritual Baptism. He says, IId Vol. Page 417.
"It is said, go teach baptizing, but it is not said baptizing with water, but
in the name, or rather (as the Greek is) into the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

"Now to baptize with water is one thing, and to baptize into the name is
another; as they who experience the Spiritual Baptism know it to be: for the
word of faith turns men from Satan to the power of life; and then as they
receive the power, and are made partakers of the power, they are baptized into
the power and virtue of life; and so they are buried (so far as they come into
Christ) by the power of his Spirit, into this Heavenly Baptism, into death unto
sin, and by the same power are made alive unto righteousness; and so the name
of the Lord, the name of the Father, Son, and Spirit, comes over them, and they
rise up in it unto life and righteousness, and so are dead unto sin, and alive
unto God. Now any outward circumcising or washing, can be but a figure of this;
but the inward circumcising and washing is the thing itself. For Christ sent
not his able Ministers of the New Testament to minister the letter, or to
minister the figures of things, but to minister the Spirit (else how were they
able Ministers of the Spirit?) to minister the substance; not to minister a
circumcision or Baptism which might be shaken and pass away, as outward and
elementary, but to minister the circumcision and Baptism which cannot be
shaken, which is the circumcision and Baptism of the gospel; the circumcision
and Baptism of the kingdom, which is never to be shaken and pass away as
elementary, but to stand and abide for ever. -- Read, Heb. xii. 26, 27, 28, and
consider how all elementary and outward things, which could be shaken, were to
be shaken and pass away, that those things which were of an higher nature, even
of the nature of the kingdom, might remain and be established in their stead."

He says, Page 421.
"The Greek word is not (...), which signifies in; but (...) which signifies
into: So that the Baptism here commanded is to baptize into the Name, into the
Father's Name, into the Son's Name, into the Spirit's Name, by turning them
from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God, and then the power and
life of God's Holy Spirit comes over their hearts and minds, and breaks the
power of Satan, and washes their consciences from that which is dead, and
plungeth or dippeth them into that which is living."

CHAP. III. Concerning the peaceable KINGDOM of CHRIST.
CONCERNING the peaceable kingdom of the Messiah, we are instructed by many
prophecies in Scripture, respecting its spreading and prevalence; and that in
process of time, the kingdoms of this world will become the kingdoms of our
Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. Rev. xi. 15.
Isaiah says, "And it shall come to pass in the last days (that is, the gospel
days) that the mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of
the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow
unto it; and many people shall go and say, come ye, and let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of
his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the
law, etc. and he shall judge among the nations, and rebuke many people; and
they shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears into
pruning hooks; nation shall not lift up the sword against nation, neither shall
they learn war any more." Isaiah ii. 2, 3, 4. Micah iv. 1, 2, 3.
Also, "Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the government
shall be upon his shoulder; and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor,
the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; of the increase of
his government and peace there shall be no end." Isaiah ix. 6, 7.
"They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, for the earth shall
be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." -- xi. 9.


Hosea says, "And in that day will I make a covenant for them with the beasts
of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the creeping things of the
ground; and I will break the bow, and the sword, and the battle out of the
earth, and will make them to lie down safely." Hosea ii. 18.


Zechariah says, "And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim, and the horse
from Jerusalem, and the battle bow shall be cut off; and he shall speak peace
unto the Heathen, and his dominion shall be from sea even to sea, and from the
river even to the ends of the earth." Zechariah ix. 10.


The 60th chapter of Isaiah seems all to the like import; and the Prophet
personating the Almighty, says, "I the Lord will hasten it in his time."

These recited predictions may suffice to evince -- that a time of more
universal happiness than has hitherto been, awaits mankind; but in what manner
shall so great a revolution be brought to pass? Do we look for it to be an
instantaneous work, while we remain idle spectators thereof? What is the
kingdom of Christ, and wherein does it consist? What says the Scripture
thereon? "For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost." Romans xiv. 17.
"My kingdom (said our blessed Lord) is not of this world; if my kingdom were
of this world, then would my servants fight," John xviii. 36.
etc. And further, "Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." Matt. iv. 17.
"Be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you." Luke x.
11 -- xi 29.
"No doubt the kingdom of God is come upon you." And when he was demanded of
the Pharisees, when the kingdom of God should come, he answered them and said,
"The kingdom of God comes not with observation; for behold, the kingdom of God
is within you." Luke xvii. 20, 21.
If therefore his kingdom be not of this world, and yet within or in the heart,
then it must be in the hearts of those who are led and governed by his Spirit.
"For no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater,
has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God." "For because of
these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience." Ephesians.
v. 5, 6.
From whence it is evident, that a great change must be effected, before the
kingdoms of this world become the kingdom of Christ; for behold on the right
hand and on the left, in city and country, how these fruits of the flesh,
together with wrath, strife, envyings, drunkenness, revellings, and such like
abound. The world yet lies in wickedness; and in that state stands excluded. It
is only as men become his disciples and followers in the regeneration, that
they can become subjects of his heavenly kingdom: And the terms of discipleship
are plain -- "He that takes not his cross, and follows after me, is not
worthy of me." Matt. x. 38.
Again: "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross daily, and follow me." -- And "Whosoever does not bear his cross, and
come after me, he cannot be my disciple." Luke xix. 29 -- xiv. 27.
These first rudiments of Christianity are strongly inculcated, as being
indispensably necessary to constitute a disciple and subject of his peaceable
kingdom. Yet no compulsive means are used, only the power of love; if we expect
to be compelled by any other power, our hope will be in vain. All his
invitations are perfectly consistent with free agency: "If any man will come
after me let him," etc. all that will come may come. The will is free; good and
evil are set before us in unreserved terms, without distinction or respect of
persons, either for their learning, wisdom, eloquence, or preferments. They are
by nature all (placed on a level) children of wrath. "For there is no
difference between the Jew and the Greek, for the same Lord over all, is rich
unto all that call upon him." Romans x. 12.
With him "there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision,
Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free, but Christ is all, and in all." Colos. iii.
11.
Therefore, since God is no respecter of persons, it necessarily follows, that
all who are willing to lay hold on the terms of salvation, through
perseverance, will be saved. It was by a strict compliance therewith, that the
gospel and kingdom of Christ made glorious advances in the Apostle's days; and
doubtless by the same appointed means will be effected the fulfilling of the
prophecies heretofore recited; for the completion whereof, it seems that some
of the primitive Christians were looking: -- against which the Apostle Paul
forewarned them, saying, "We beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, that ye be not soon
shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter,
as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. Let no man deceive you by any
means: for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and
that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition: Who opposes and exalts
himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God
sits in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God. And now ye know
what withholdeth that he might be revealed in his time: for the mystery of
iniquity does already work; only he who now lets will let until he be taken
out of the way, and then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall
consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of
his coming. even him whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all
power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceiveableness of
unrighteounsness in them that perish, because they received not the love of the
truth, that they might be saved," 2 These. ii. from the 1st to the 10th verse.
etc. -- which was abundantly verified in after ages; a great falling away, and
a dark night of Apostasy came over the first Christian Churches, and eclipsed
the brightness thereof, in which the mystery of iniquity, which had already
begun, did mightily work in all the deceiveableness of unrighteousness; and
here the man of sin, the sinful part, or transgressing nature in man, which is
called the birth after the flesh, or the old man with his deeds, or man
unconverted, not changed from nature into grace, had the pre-eminence; in which
state or nature Satan has his dominion, and doubtless did mightily work
through men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth; "Having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof:" 2 Timothy iii. 5.
from such the Apostle said, turn away -- who also said, "The time will come,
when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they
heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn away
their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables." Chap. iv. 3, 4.
All which has literally come to pass, by departing from the faith once
delivered to the Saints; and by ceasing to live and to walk in the spirit, they
came not to have the deeds of the body mortified, nor to experience the
renovating effects thereof, whereby they came not to witness Christ revealed in
their hearts, nor to "put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness." Ephesians. i. 24.
And having departed from this fountain of purity, they committed the two evils
complained of by the Prophet (viz.) "They have forsaken me the fountain of
living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no
water." Jerem. ii. 13.
They could no longer draw water from thence; therefore, to supply the want of
those sanctified vessels, through whom the church had been refreshed and
edified, they hewed out other sources; they substituted literature, vain
philosophy, and the traditions of men, in lieu of those heavenly endowments. --
Christ called, qualified, and sent forth his own ministers; and on observing
the work to be great, and the laborers but few, he directed them to pray unto
him who is Lord of the harvest, that he might send forth more laborers,
without delegating any part of the power respecting their call and
qualifications, to any man or body of men; he did not direct that they should
be equipped with languages, and other rudiments of this world, but in common
preferred such as were destitute of those accomplishments, being less replete
with self-sufficiency, and having no other source to depend on, could confide
entirely on him for every necessary supply; knowing that "every good gift, and
every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights,
with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning." James i. 17.
Paul, who appeared the most learned of the Apostles, declared, that his
"preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of
the Sprit, and of power:" he adds, "that your faith should not stand in the
wisdom of men, but in the power of God; howbeit, we speak wisdom among them
that are perfect, yet not the wisdom of this world, nor of the princes of this
world that come to naught; but we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even
the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world unto our glory, which
none of the princes of this world knew." Cor. ii. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
The knowledge of which mysteries, wisdom, and things of God, he further
asserts, cannot be acquired, but by the revelation of the Spirit of God. But
how opposite have the pursuits of the professed followers of Christ been, since
the Apostles days, to acquire the requisite qualifications for the ministry!
Man's wisdom devises shining and formidable accountrements, to effect God's
purposes, not having faith to depend on the aid of his Spirit, and the armoury
thereof; they have had recourse to means adapted to the ideas of the wise, the
learned, and the princes of this world; reverse to the Apostle's description as
recited, not considering, that "the world by wisdom knows not God." 1 Cor. i.
21.
The Apostle clearly invalidates all human acquirements in things pertaining to
salvation and godliness, saying, where is the wise? where is the scribe? where
is the disputer of this world? has not God made foolish the wisdom of this
world? -- And the means by which God chooses to effect his purposes, are often
weak and contemptible in the eyes of men, that the boaster may be excluded; for
he will not give his glory unto men. At the founding of ram's horns, the walls
of Jericho were thrown down; with the jaw bone of an ass, Sampson slew a
thousand men; with a sling and smooth stones David killed the Philistine giant;
and through unlearned men, destitute of scholastic acquirements, did the
Savior of man destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to naught the
understanding of the prudent, confounding both Jews and Greeks, and introduced
a spiritual system, in opposition to the powers, policy, and spirit of this
world. He called into his service, "not many wise men after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many noble, but God has chosen the foolish things of this world to
confound the wise; and God has chosen the weak things of the world, to
confound the things which are mighty, and base things of the world, and things
which are despised, has God chosen; yea, and things which are not, to bring to
naught things that are, that no flesh should glory in his presence." Cor. i.
26, 27, 28, 29.
By means of this sort great purposes were effected, and the world as it were
turned upside down: light invaded the regions of darkness, and the kingdom of
Christ made great advances in the earth, through the aid of his Spirit; but by
departing therefrom, they lost this efficacious power -- not all at once, but
gradually. For we have reason to believe, that many pious men, during several
centuries after the Apostles' days, beheld with regret, and with all their
might opposed the torrent of corruptions which invaded the churches, but were
overborne by corrupt men, who had crept in under specious pretenses, and often
condemned the truth, and established error by a majority of voices. Here the
learned, the wise, and great men of this world, gained the superiority over the
simple-hearted, who often had to wrestle with principalities, and with powers,
and with the rulers of the darkness of this world, and with spiritual
wickedness in high places, loving not their lives unto death, were grievously
persecuted, and many sealed their testimony with their blood. So in process of
time, great obscurity prevailed, insomuch that little more than the shell of
Christianity was left, and that clouded with superstition and Heathenish
innovations, so as not to resemble the original. It was in these dark ages,
that preaching for hire was introduced, which in process of time became a
lucrative trade to live by, and carnal weapons came in use among Christians,
which had been wholly renounced in purer ages preceding. It was in the gloomy
aeras of apostasy, that Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, became the primary
qualifications of men inducted into the ministerial office, without which none
could otherwise be admitted. This was circumscribing the Holy One of Israel,
excluding him in whom the sovereign right centered, and Pilate like, placing or
writing those Oriental languages over his head. Thus having quenched the
Spirit, and swerved from the foundation whereon Christ builded his church,
which is the revelation of the divine will, against which the gates of hell
could not prevail, it is no wonder that darkness covered the earth, and gross
darkness the people.

Having briefly traced the steps of degeneracy, and the means by which
Antichrist, the God of this world, through the medium of men whose stations
rendered them conspicuous, and who sought more to establish their own
consequence, than the government and gospel of Christ, subverted the faith; I
shall now leave this part of the subject, and endeavor, as I may be
abilitated, to point out by what means we may expect the gospel in its
primitive, soul-saving efficacy, to spread and prevail, to the fulfilling of
those prophesies respecting its universality.

If therefore the kingdom of heaven be within, as Christ declared, then it is
in the heart that we must wait for its appearance; it is recommended to us in
Scripture under various appellations, as the word nigh in the heart, the new
covenant, the law written in the heart, the Spirit of God, the Spirit of Truth,
the Comforter, a light shining in a dark place, the grace of God, the
anointing, etc. which operates in the heart where it is received, as the
"leaven which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole
was leavened." Matt. xiii. 33.
It sanctifies body, soul, and spirit. It is "like the refiners fire, and like
a fullers soap, and shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and
silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness." Mal.
iii. 2, 3.
This only is the preparation of heart, by which Christ qualifies ministers for
the promulgation of his gospel and kingdom; and this renovation of heart is not
only necessary for those whom he sends forth to preach the glad tidings of the
gospel, but equally so to all the offspring of Adam; for we have all sinned and
come short of the glory of God: and as Christ came to restore and redeem man
out of the fall, up into the image or similitude of God, we cannot doubt his
power fully to execute his glorious design, if we through an evil heart of
unbelief refuse not to entertain him in his spiritual appearance, who said,
"Behold I stand at the door and knock; if any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me." Rev. iii.
20.
Here is the communion of saints; here is a partaking of the Lord's Supper
essentially experienced, and here his office is "to finish the transgression,
and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquities, and to
bring in everlasting righteousness." Dan. ix. 24.
His coming into the heart may at the first be small, even as a grain of
mustard seed. Many have denied him admittance in his spiritual or second
coming, because it was not with irresistible power, and wonderful revelations,
but in a lowly, humble appearance, and in secret reproves evil thoughts, evil
deeds, and all unfruitful works of darkness. But unto as many as received him
(the Apostle said) he gave power to become the sons of God: and all this is
possible to every rational creature; for Christ gave himself a ransom for the
sins of the whole world; and he who will not believe in the possibility of
being ransomed, and set free from sin in this life, is an unbeliever, and is
not benefited by his coming. To such he said, if ye die in your sins, where I
go ye cannot come: -- these oppose and retard the advancement of his peaceable
kingdom: the daily cross, that great stumbling stone, and rock of offense,
stands in the way, and as a flaming sword guardeth the entrance into the
kingdom; so that the unconverted, the unsanctified, nor any unholy or unclean
thing can ever enter; consequently can never be his subjects: for "except ye be
converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom
of heaven: whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the
same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven." Matthew xviii. 3, 4.
This is mortifying work, thus to be humbled, and to have all our acquirements
and consequence laid in the dust, and to be reduced into the simplicity,
innocence, and similitude of a little child; a state absolutely necessary to be
experienced by every man and woman. It is the new birth, which Nicodemus
marvelled at, though a master in Israel. Are there not many who are learned and
wise, and as masters among the people, to whom this doctrine is equally
strange? It is a being created anew in Christ Jesus. And these that are born of
the Spirit, are children of the kingdom; and as they persevere in the heavenly
race, they will experience a growth from the state of a child to that of a
young man, and to a strong man, and an elder in Christ. And these being
redeemed from the corruptions ruptions of nature, and from the maxims,
friendship, and spirit of the world, and being crucified to the world, and the
world unto them, having put off the old man with his deeds, their affections
are set on things above; counting all things as dross, and as dung, that they
may win Christ. Being guided and governed by his Spirit, which breathes peace
on earth, and good will to men, they cannot lift up a sword, nor any carnal
weapon against any man, being well persuaded, that the nature and design of the
gospel spirit is to save mens' lives, and not to destroy them: the ground of
wars and fighting, which stands in the natural and fallen estate, being taken
away, they can love their enemies, and those who despitefully use and persecute
them: they feel great compassion and love to flow toward them; and their
prayers often mentally, and sometimes vocally ascend to the God of the Spirits
of all flesh, that he may hasten his sacred purposes, and cause the glorious
light of the gospel more eminently to be displayed, and to break forth on the
right hand, and on the left, that the mountain of the Lord's house may be
established in the top of the mountains, that all nations may flow unto it,
that they may beat their swords into plow shares, and learn war no more.

And every man and woman, who through grace comes to experience this glorious
translation out of darkness into the light of the Lord, enjoys internally the
privileges which the gospel and government of the Prince of Peace promises;
for "eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of
man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him." 1 Cor. (...)
But outwardly these are often abridged in their privileges, and persecuted by
the men of this world, because the life of a follower of Christ is reverse to
the spirit thereof: "for he that is born after the flesh, persecuteth him that
is born after the Spirit." Tribulations are attendant on the gospel; and he
"that will live godly in this world must suffer persecution." This has been the
lot and portion of the followers of Christ through many generations, and will
doubtless, in a greater or lesser degree, continue to be so, until by a more
general effusion of gospel light, that prophecy be fulfilled (viz.) "He will
destroy in this mountain, the face of the covering cast over all people, and
the vail that is spread over all nations, and he will swallow up death in
victory; and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces, and the
rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the earth." Isaiah xxv. 7,
8.
What is this mountain which the Prophet frequently mentions, but the
profession of the truth substantially experienced, and not literally held in an
impure conscience, which shall rise above the mountains and hills of empty and
lifeless profession? What is this covering cast over all people, and the vail
that is spread over all nations, but the prejudices, the unbelief and darkness,
that is over the hearts of the people, so that they grope as at noon day, and
receive not the truth? What is the rebuke of his people, but the rod of
persecution which has stained the history of many generations? -- And what is
the death that shall be swallowed up in victory, but dead and unsubstantial
forms, and a profession of the truth held in unrighteousness? that brings not
to the knowledge of the only true God, and of Jesus Christ whom he has sent,
whom to know is life eternal. This is not a literal knowledge only, but a
knowledge revealed in the heart, the essence and substance of all religion.
Those who attain this knowledge are Jews in spirit; they are of the
circumcision, who worship God in Spirit. By these, through the aid of his
omnipotence, will the coming of the day of Christ be accelerated, when the
knowledge of the Lord shall cover the earth, as the waters cover the sea. But
as the declension from primitive gospel righteousness was gradual, so may we
expect the return thereof the be, and so has it been for several centuries;
there has been a breaking forth of light in pious men, who according to the
degrees of it manifested to them, were faithful and valiant in opposing the
superstition and idolatry of the Romish Church, for which they endured a great
fight of afflictions, and many finished their course in the flames; and in the
generations succeeding, down to the present time, light has increased and risen
higher and higher, insomuch that the spirit of persecution in several nations
is held in abhorrence; and as this divine principle of light and grace is
admitted to operate, it will disseminate and spread into the dark corners of
the earth, and by its efficacy penetrate through the covering, and rend the
vail of prejudices and unbelief, whereby the hidden things of darkness will be
manifested, and that busy, active part in man, which has had the pre-eminence
since the Apostle's days in preaching, praying, singing, and a round of
exteriors, will be seen to be the first nature, exercised in a fruitless toil.

We have reason to believe, that in the coming and spreading of this peaceable
government, that prophecy will be as plentifully verified, as in the first ages
of the gospel (viz. "And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out
my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, and
your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men shall see visions; and also
upon the servants, and upon the handmaids in those days, will I pour out my
Spirit." Joel ii. 28, 29.
Doubtless many of these will have to run to and fro, and knowledge will
increase, until his righteousness go forth as brightness, and his salvation
thereof as a lamp that burns.

If therefore the Lord's hand be not shortened, nor his ear heavy; if there be
no variableness nor shadow of turning in him; and if it be iniquity that
separates between the people and their God, and sin that hides his face from
them, then in repenting and returning unto him, with full purpose of heart, he
will return unto them; for "the Lord will give grace and glory; no good thing
will he with hold from them that walk uprightly." Psalm. lxxxiv. 11.
If so, then doubtless his church and people, as they adhere to his inspeaking
word, will be replenished with all necessary gifts for edification, for
building one another up in the faith, for the promulgation of righteousness and
peace, for the propagation of the gospel among the Heathens, in order that the
bow, and the sword, and the battle may be broke out of the earth, and the
kingdoms of this world become the kingdom of our Lord, and of his Christ, that
he may reign for ever and ever.

In treating on this subject, I have not hitherto taken any notice of my
opponent; what he has wrote thereon appearing to militate but little against
us, except in two cases. In speaking of the peaceable constitution of Christ's
kingdom, wherein he seems to approve our conduct and sentiments respecting war,
he queries of us where war is more strictly forbid than going to law --
charging us with making use of the law as much as any other people, wherein I
am satisfied he is mistaken, as our religious society, from its first rise, has
manifested a great concern to discourage contentious and litigious
dispositions, and as much as possible to avoid going to law, especially with
our own members, with whom they are not allowed that liberty, except in
extraordinary cases; and in order thereto, any who have differences respecting
interests or property, are directed by our discipline to proceed in an orderly,
christian-like manner; first by going, or writing if at a distance, one to the
other, in a friendly way; and if they fail of success, then to take one or two
suitable and judicious Friends, when the injured is in like manner to make his
claim, and those acompanying are to give their utmost assistance, to have the
matter justly and speedily ended: if living at too great a distance, they are
otherwise to proceed by writing; but if the matter appears too difficult for
them, they are to advise the parties to choose referees, and engage themselves
to abide their determination. But if either of the said parties refuse such
advice or endeavors, they are to be complained of to the monthly meeting; of
which complaint he or she is to be notified, and requested to attend; and the
parties are there at liberty, or rather advised to nominate as before, and the
meeting may add one or more, if the occasion appears to require it; but if the
parties refuse to attend, and to nominate, then the meeting is to appoint a
sufficient number of Friends to hear and determine the same, as speedily as the
nature of the case will admit. But if either of the parties refuse to attend
the arbitrators, and submit the case, or to abide by the judgment or
determination of the Friends so chosen or appointed, such are to be dealt with
as disorderly persons, that regard not peace, and that slight the order and
unity of the brethren; and after due admonition, if he or she persists therein,
such are to be disowned and testified against by the meeting. But if any find
themselves aggrieved by such determination, they have a right to a re-hearing,
except where bonds are entered into; and if such still are dissatisfied, they
are allowed the privilege of an appeal to a superior meeting. But where there
are cases so circumstanced, that the fore mentioned orderly proceeding cannot
be complied with, without a manifest damage to the creditor or claimant, that
monthly meeting, upon due enquiry finding them to be truly so, are to allow
such to have the matter tried at law, with this caution, that the parties on
both sides do behave toward each other in brotherly love; and in asserting
their apprehended right, that it be done with decency and moderation, without
anger or animosity, lest thereby they occasion the truth to be evil spoken of.

And as it is our duty to seek peace with all men, and to avoid giving just
offense to any, our members are advised to avoid going to law with others not
of our persuasion, angrily or in a passion, or without due consideration, and
having first in a friendly way shown his opponent the justness of his cause,
and having offered to put the matter to a neighbourly reference, so that no
just occasion be given to such to go to law with them; but to show a
willingness and readiness to settle it peaceably between themselves, or to
submit to a reference; whereby it will appear, that the intention of our
discipline is to discourage and prevent lawsuits as much as possible, which
our religious society as a body endeavors to maintain inviolate: but as our
members are dispersed in various parts, some of them remote from the care of
their brethren, we cannot account for their conduct individually; but when it
comes to our knowledge, that they act repugnant to the good order of the
society, we labor to reclaim them; and after due forbearance, if they prove
refractory, we separate them from us, as persons unworthy of Christian
Fellowship.

He further observes, respecting the addresses we present to Kings and Princes,
saying, that he can see no other motive in it, than that they are meant to
flatter, and to obtain applause and honor before the world -- which I think is
an uncharitable reflection. To find them expressed in decent and becoming
language, is no error: the design of them in general is, to manifest our good
will, loyalty, and peaceable demeanor as subjects; to express public
acknowledgments of cur gratitude to them, for the quiet enjoyment of our
religious and civil liberties; carefully ascribing the honor unto God, who had
dispose their hearts to moderation, and to assure them, that while we adhere to
our principles, they have nothing to fear from us; in the doing of which, we
hold up a testimony for the peaceable kingdom and government of Christ.

Now having in this essay (though not minutely particular taken notice of the
most material parts of F. Herr's publication, especially wherein he objects to
our principles and practice, in which I apprehend the rest is generally
included, except where he speaks of Noah becoming a Preacher of Righteousness,
in a manner that to me is mysterious and unintelligible. I should not have
supposed it improbable, if he had represented him really, rather than
figuritively so; and that it consists abundantly more with the long-suffering
of a gracious and merciful God, previous to the building of the ark, to command
Noah to preach repentance to the depraved Antideluvians, and to forewarn them
of the impending judgment, except they repented of their wickedness, than to
cause the flood of waters to destroy them without such warning; in which case
he would really be a Preacher of Righteousness. And as Chronologers place the
command given him to build the ark 100 years before the flood came, it
furnishes suslleient ground to suppose, that Noah was employed much of that
time in some benevolent work of that nature, which entitled him to the
denomination of a Preacher of Righteousness.

And now reader, having according to ability received, endeavored to pomote
thy instruction, edification, and advancement heavenward: if nevertheless
human frailty should be presented to thy view, impute that to the author, to
whom belongs blushing and confusion of face; but if any thing herein contained
should, through the divine blessing, tend to enlighten and excite in thee a
hunger and a thirst after righteousness, ascribe that unto God only wise, who
is the fountain of all goodness, and source of every blessing, the Lord of
Lords, and King of Kings, to whom belongs all glory, honor, and praise, now
and for ever more.

I am thy friend and well-wisher, BENJAMIN MASON.

FINIS.

