RUDIMENTS OF TASTE, IN A SERIES OF LETTERS FROM A MOTHER TO HER DAUGHTERS TO
WHICH ARE ADDED, MAXIMS ADDRESSED TO YOUNG LADIES, BY THE COUNTESS DOWAGER OF
(...)

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY WILLIAM SPOTSWOOD.

M DCC XC.

Just Published, [PRINTED BY W. SPOTSWOOD] Price sewed in blue paper 1S. 6d.
SIR MATTHEW HALE's Affectionate EPISTLES to his CHILDREN. With DIRECTIONS
concerning the RELIGIOUS OBSERVATION of the LORD's DAY.

TO WHICH IS ADDED THE LIFE OF THE AUTHOR. A NEW EDITION.

THE Editor, in presenting this work to the public, avails himself of the
prevalent good sense of parents, and a consciousness of the importance of
putting books of virtuous tendency in the hands of youth in general: in this
view, to doubt approbation -- would perhaps be ignorance. He professes himself
influenced by no motive, but the satisfaction and desire of pointing to that
which is good.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
CORNELIA, daughter of Scipio Africanus, and mother of the Gracchi, was not
more distinguished by the nobility of her rank, than by the luster of those
virtues which adorned her character -- a most amiable trait of which shines in
that little incident recorded to her immortal honor. A lady of Ionia coming one
day to visit her, impatiently expected (...) be shown the splendour and
magnificence of he^ toilette, which she supposed, from her rank and fortune, to
be very superb. The illustrious Roman prolonged the conversation till her
children were at hand, and then introducing them to her visitor: -- "These,
says she, are my jewels."

The writer of these letters had so great a veneration for the domestic
character of that lady, that she thinks she cannot do better than give them to
the public, under the the signature of Cornelia. And whatever their other
defects may be, they have this at least to recommend them, that the same
sentiments of maternal tenderness which influenced the Roman Matron, gave rise
to these epistles, and prompted a fond mother to become an Author.

RUDIMENTS OF TASTE.
LETTER I.
A DESIRE of happiness is the first propensity of the heart. -- It is born with
us, and to attempt its suppression were equally fruitless and wrong; for the
Author of Nature has done nothing in vain, and the happiness he has imprinted
on the mind so clear an idea of, has somewhere an existence.

Hitherto you have obeyed the impulse of nature in the artless pursuits of
childhood; but the time is at hand, when this sweet tranquillity will be
interrupted by the bustle of the world, which will not longer permit you to
repose in the simple amusements of dressing dolls, pursuing butterflies, or
plucking daisies. Sweet dear delights of innocence; on which, as you climb the
rugged heights of life, you will look back with fond regret.

But we are not born for ourselves alone; and therefore have duties to perform,
obligations to discharge, and difficulties to encounter; in the course of
which, many a severe check is given to this happiness which we all so ardently
seek: yet the desire of it will even acquire strength by the repulse, and there
was never yet a wretch who had found it diminished by misfortune. I wish the
success of this passion could be shown as demonstrable as its existence.

But the truth is, all mankind are running after the same object, though in
such opposite directions, that if it were not for their concurrent testimony,
it would be scarce credible that they had each the same view. Yet it is the
fate of most of them to sit down at last in the very same disposition which
Solomon was in when he complained, rather peevishly it must be owned, that all
was vanity and vexation of spirit. Man walks indeed in a vain shadow, and it is
pitiable to reflect that a being of so transient a duration should yet waste
the trifling portion of time allotted him in vain and fruitless pursuits, and
after all the schemes of the sanguine, and the labors of the active, to find
the desired attainment as far off as ever.

But this has been the case of millions, and I am afraid will still continue to
be so, at least till we are unanimous in deciding on that grand point wherein
this good, of which we have all so high an idea, consists: an agreement from
which, alas, we are at the farthest distance imaginable. And here, my dearest
girls, lies the whole of the mistake. The Creator has not been wanting to
provide a happiness exalted as the mind itself can conceive, but man himself
errs in the pursuit of it; some placing it in riches, some in power, scarcely
on in an age supposing it to be where it really is -- in the practice of virtue.

But while the human heart is set on acquirements, in which it can find no
satisfaction if attained, the span of life must necessarily be passed in
restless anxieties and melancholy disappointment. It was the aim of philosophy,
to draw just estimates of things, and to prevent its pupils from being dazzled
with the splendour of wealth and power: it taught that the sovereign good was to
be found in rectitude of will. It would be a shame for us to be at a loss on
such an important subject, who have received lessons from a much better master
than ever gave lectures in the schools of Athens.

Rest assured that in the exercise of social and religious duties, the mind
will find her solid happiness. Wandering in restless search, like Noah's dove,
it is here she finds at length the welcome olive, the branch whose verdure
blooms for immortality. Should you doubt the assertion, be prevailed on at
least to try the experiment.

Yours, etc. CORNELIA.

LETTER II.
PLEASURE has something so alluring in the very name, that it is not surprising
it finds so great a number of votaries. On no account would I have you
insensible to its attractions, but rather lead you to its flowery paths, and
conduct you to the most refined delights. These however you can never obtain,
except you are guided in the choice by taste and judgment. A taste in pleasure
is necessary for the selection of such as are above the enquiries of the
vulgar, suitable to delicate and refined minds, and correspondent to the
noblest sentiments: of course dependant more on intellectual, than on corporeal
faculties. Taste never fails to reject whatever is gross and sensual; yet even
among the more refined pleasures, a found judgment is wanted, to discriminate
the solid and rational, from the frivolous and fastidious. The elegant hand of
fashionable dissipation has often given a polish to what, in its own nature,
can never deserve the name of pleasure.

Under this head must be comprehended the various species of fashionable
amusements, which are injurious either to health or fortune. One would scarcely
suppose such pursuits as these should ever be dignified with the name of
pleasure. Yet when numbers are daily seen hazarding, not only extravagant sums,
but peace of mind also, at the gaming-table. -- When the order of nature is
inverted, and the refreshments of repose are bartered for midnight routs, we
must conclude that such valuable sacrifices are not made but with the
expectation of some supreme pleasure to reward them: how seldom (...) rewards
are found, can best be determined by the testimony of the dissipated and gay,
who after they have wasted the most valuable blessings of life, as time,
health, spirits, etc. will generally confess that they have never found the
satisfactions they sought after.

To be able to divest real enjoyment from the false glosses the world has put
upon it, is a piece of wisdom becoming a philosopher; but it is a piece of
wisdom, you, any dear girls, must also acquire, if you expect to be happy.
Fashion has arrogated to itself the prerogative of fixing the criterion of
pleasure; but fashion is often a dangerous director, and is at best an
imperfect one; for who has a power of effectually biassing the natural
disposition of another: if therefore what is called amusement, be not agreeable
to the real-turn of the mind, it ceases to be viewed in that light, and can
only be considered as an irksome conformity to the tastes of others.

Yet, abject as such a submission undoubtedly is, there are thousands who
voluntarily yield to it, who are content to live, move, and act, not as they
like themselves, but as the polite world thinks fit to dictate. I am no
advocate for affected singularity in things merely indifferent; but when the
idol fashion breaks in upon the rules of virtue (as it too often does) or the
true enjoyment of life, this is so mean a slavery that a rational being might
be expected to despise it.

When therefore reason and religion have given the clue to your pleasures,
resolve always to have them of your own choosing, and not of other people's.
The sanction of numbers is the cause that draws youth from virtue and
happiness: reason, when aided by a proper education, would if left to herself,
point out the way to both.

There are pleasures, my dear girls, to be met with in this journey of life,
pure and sublime ones too, if we look for them through the medium of unvitiated
taste. Did you ever discharge a social duty, but upon looking into your heart,
you there perceived a glow of satisfaction? But if you aim at more exalted,
more rapturous sensations, give full scope to the impulses of benevolence: try
what it is to heal the brokenhearted: diffuse joy through the mansions of
sorrow, and rescue merit from the pressure of indigence and misfortune. --
These employments are capable of yielding pleasures suitable to the most
exalted capacities, boundless as the most sanguine imagination can paint them.

But if so vast a multitude has erred in the pursuit of pleasure, through
levity, not an inconsiderable number, of a very opposite temper, are at equally
as great a distance from it: these are the morose and cynical, who will not
condescend to the sober satisfactions that are to be found in a domestic
circle, where the social affections are cultivated; if the gay and volatile
mistake the nature of pleasure, these seem to question its very existence, and
pass through life without stooping to pick up one of the fair blossoms which
nature has scattered in the way.

Ever be your hearts open to the sweet emotions of social love, and you will
not have cause to complain that the path of human life affords nothing but
briars and thorns.

Nor is it from the relative duties alone we can derive happiness: the amusing,
the interesting book of nature is open to all who can read it: here you meet
with eternal variety, order, and beauty; a thousand charms await the mind which
possesses a taste for simple pleasures; to such the whole creation is a
boundless source of rational amusements. Happy, ineffably happy, they who can
be pleased with artless nature, and contemplate with delight, the noble imagery
with which she abounds. For my part, I should desire no greater proof of the
purity and elegance of your taste, than to hear you speak in raptures of the
graceful foliage of a wood, the beauty of a lawn, or any of those charming
rural scenes which are so often overlooked for the far less nobler productions
of art.

Esteem me ever the most affectionate of your friends.

CORNELIA.

LETTER III.
EVERY one knows that human life is exposed to various miseries; but every one
does not know, at least does not consider, that the far greater part of these
miseries spring from the passions: yet the passions, you reply, are implanted
in us by nature -- we cannot eradicate them.

That is true; you cannot eradicate the passions, nor is it expedient you
should; for as we are the workmanship of Infinite Wisdom, so doubtless the
propensities He has formed us with, are in themselves very good: but then their
good or ill tendency must be determined by this single question, Whether they
govern us, or we govern them? In the latter case they resemble those salutary
breezes, which waft health and sweetness on their wings: in the former they may
be compared to certain hurricanes, which tear up all before them, and deform
the beauteous aspect of the most luxuriant climates. There is more felicity to
be found in the world than is often supposed; but never let us pretend to look
for it before we have silenced the passions, the perpetual contention we must
have with them will else interrupt our successful search.

Pride, my dear girls, is a vice that springs up in the mind, almost without
her attending to it: its character are an immoderate self-love, conce^^^^ness,
an arrogance, with a profound contempt of every other person; ever insatiable
in its desire of respect, extremely susceptible of the slightest affronts, and
jealous of the least tribute of applause paid to another. Persons of this cast
cannot in the nature of things be happy, as they may be said to live in a state
of hostility with all the world: like Ishmael, they have their hands against
every man, and every man's hand is against them.

Ambition condemns its wretched votary to forego the sweets of content and
present case, for the uneasy dreams of rank and and power. It is happy for the
world, when fate denies to the ambitious that power to which their desires are
perpetually aspiring. Innumerable are the horrid deeds, which the historic page
records, that have been perpetrated by the impulse of this restless passion;
yet if in pity to mankind, its direful effects are restrained, ^^ill the bosom
where it rages, must be a prey to inexpressible agonies.

Envy is a natural attendant on pride and ambition: it has very aptly been
compared to a vulture preying on the vitals, and there could not possib^^ have
been devised a more expressive ^^^^tude. That mind which is capable of
regarding with the least degree of regret, the more fortunate acquirements of
another, has a perpetual source of disquietude, and must for ever pine beneath
the inexpressible misery, which is both the consequence and the punishment of
so base a propensity: as envy is the meanest of all the pas^ions, so in its own
nature it is the most opposite to happiness.

Covetousness is a vice that absorbs every finer feeling of the soul. Whatever
sordid satisfaction the miser may feel in amassing his treasures, yet the cares
which unavoidably attend it, and the solicitude the preservation of it demands,
more than balance the selfish gratification. -- He knows nothing of the sweet
emotions of charity and benevolence, and must be ever a stranger to the noble
sensations they excite. It is well if the suggestions of his boundless avarice
do not prompt him beyond the bounds of integrity. The honesty of a covetous
person can be but doubtful at the best.

A revengeful disposition is as dreadful to society as burdensome to itself: it
is the whirlwind of the soul, which under its dominion resembles a fury of the
infernal regions. What sad catastrophes have been effected by revenge! what
inexpressible torment overwhelms the heart, where that dreadful venom operates!

It is easy to perceive by the slightest glance, that every one of the passions
here enumerated are totally destructive of peace: there can be no such thing as
tranquillity in the breast which they inhabit: let it then be the care of my
dearest girls, to guard against the fatal ascendancy of either of them. There
cannot be a more lamentable object than a human being who submits to become the
sport of passions: a bark in a storm driven by winds, and shattered by the
tempest, exhibits but a faint picture of such a wretch, whose days pass in
continual anguish; he looks for peace, but finds despair; casts oblique
reflections on the wisdom and goodness of Providence; distrusts his attributes;
curses his own being, and dies if possible more wretched than he lived.

The infinitely wise and good Creator saw the abundant evils that would accrue
to mankind from the degeneracy of the passions, and therefore in his goodness
determined at an appointed time to promulgate a religion, the aim of which
should be to regulate the passions, and direct them to their proper channel:
such is the christian revelation; in its end and nature an antidote to moral
evil.

Perhaps the natural passions of the human mind may be reduced to two -- the
love of pleasure and the love of praise, and from the corruptions of these may
be traced every irregular affection of the heart -- when men no longer knew the
true source from whence to look for happiness, or approbation, it is not much
wonder it should be fought in power, riches, and pre-eminence; nor that the
love of these should branch into self-love, vain glory, and all the other evil
passions, which cause so much misery in the world.

The regulation of the heart and its desires, is a point then of the utmost
importance, since on it depends your present peace and eternal glory. "Keep thy
heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life." And when you
have repelled the approach of any passion, guard still more effectually against
its entrance, by endeavoring to establish in your mind the contrary virtue; --
as for instance, subdue pride and cherish humility; guard against the desire of
power and riches, by attaining that poverty of spirit which is content with
little, and desires no applause but that of Heaven.

Never lose sight of this truth -- that there is no happiness adequate to the
capacities of the human soul, but what is found in the exercise of piety and
virtue; nor any praise worthy her regard, but what results immediately
therefrom. Adieu,

CORNELIA.

LETTER IV.
THE most glorious conquest you can possibly obtain is that of yourselves.
Solomon was of opinion, that he who could govern his own spirit, had attained a
much higher point of dominion, than if he should rule a kingdom. It is
certainly much easier to give wise and upright laws to others, than to obey
them ourselves; and when you can control your own inclination, you will have
learned the whole essence of moral philosophy.

But a negative virtue is not all that is to be attained, although thousands
content with it, maintain through life the character of good sort of people.
The epithet, however, contains no very high eulogium, those good kind of folks
seldom getting above a mediocrity in goodness. It certainly is not sufficient
to abstain from evil, a christian must be distinguished by active virtue.

The christian religion is a beautiful comment on the moral law. The priest who
passed by the wounded Jew, was for aught we are told to the contrary, a very
good sort of man, and had some sentiments of compassion, for he went and looked
on the poor creature, and no doubt kindly wished it had been in his power to
relieve him; but the good, the benevolent Samaritan, was the generous, active
friend, whose character will never be read without being admired. The Lawyer
also possessed a tolerable share of negative merit, having always kept the
commandments; yet says our Savior, thou lackest one thing -- that heroic
benevolence, which disregards all attention to selfish gratification, in the
noble ardour with which it contributes to the necessities of mankind.

These instances are fine illustrations of the Mosaic dispensation, and
eminently tend to exalt human nature to the highest possible perfection. Is it
not enough, say the gospel tenets, that ye refrain from actual violence to any
one -- you shall love your enemies, and do good to those that hate you. Severe
injunction! -- yet you see by it, to how refined a pitch the virtue of a
christian must aspire.

Do not then rest satisfied with being as just or kind as the letter of the law
exacts -- be actively good, and seek occasions of exercising your kindness and
charity -- to administer as far as we are able to the wants of our fellow
creatures -- to reclaim the vicious -- to vindicate the character of the
injured -- assert the claims of the friendless and oppressed -- reconcile
differences, and be indefatigable in the promotion of peace and happiness to
all within the compass of our ability, are employments worthy of a rational
being.

There are many cases that occur in life, wherein those who will obey only the
rules of legal justice, must fall short of those notions of honesty, which
natural reason and conscience suggest; as a good mind wants not the bonds of
human laws, so on some occasions it rises to a generosity that is superior to
their narrow limits. Obey the innate ideas of rectitude which God himself has
stamped on the human soul -- and think it not sufficient to be just, except you
are generous also.

Let your conduct be regulated by the nicest rules of propriety and prudence;
and let your bosoms glow with the enthusiasm of virtue, that you may ever shine
forth the steady zealous friend, the benevolent active neighbor, and the truly
useful member of society; considering yourselves as citizens of the world,
whose only business in it, is to do good.

Adieu, CORNELIA.

LETTER V.
BUT so exalted and refined a turn of sentiment is never the production of
ignorance. It is only in cultivated minds we must look for it; for the prime
fruits of virtue grow not in the soil that has never been broken up by moral
instruction. A virtuous and intelligent friend is perhaps the most valuable
acquisition a young person can make; but as one of this description may never
fall to your lot, supply the want thereof, as well as you can, by books.

By all means cultivate a taste for reading, but take care that your taste be a
just one -- that is, be more desirous of instruction than amusement, or you
will profit but little by literary pursuits. Those who read merely to please
the imagination, may be sure of not reading to advantage, and do seldom acquire
a relish for works of solid merit and utility. I have never known a young
person who was fond of novels capable of relishing any thing superior to them.
For my own part, I had rather see a girl wholly ignorant of the alphabet, than
attached to that species of writing; for I am convinced that infinitely more
have erred in the conduct of life from that cause, than from any other. The
sentiments and ideas they impress, are fatal illusions to mislead the poor
reader, who, after wasting days and years in the study, is still an utter
stranger to the world she lives in -- and, what is worse, inspired with the
most erroneous notions of it, which commonly lead to some false step, or
ill-judged connection, that secures her a wretch for life. It cannot be
otherwise -- for the scenes, characters, and incidents, these books describe,
are to be found no where but in the author's romantic fancy. They have nothing
to do with the real knowledge of the world; and, consequently, those who think
to steer through it by such guides, must, in the end, find themselves mistaken.
Just as well may a traveller think to make the tour of Europe by a chart of
Asia.

If curiosity must be amused, and the imagination pleased, why may not the
understanding be improved at the same time? This is very practicable, for there
are many works of genius extremely well calculated to answer each of these
ends; but they are not the histories of Sir such-a-one, Miss what do you call ^m,
or any of those futile productions, which the press daily emits, to vitiate the
taste, and corrupt the principles of the age.

There is a certain mental vigor necessary to virtue as well as ^o happiness,
but modern novels, under the specious mask of refined sentiments, introduce a
dangerous softness that has often destroyed both. True refinement is the glory
of a rational creature, but whatever enervates the mind, must debase it.
Lycurgus thought so, I suppose, when he banished the poets from his
commonwealth; yet surely he lived near enough to Athens to have learned (...)
draw a proper line between ferocity and effeminacy.

The passion for novelty, so inherent in youth, may be abundantly gratified, by
the study of history. Here you meet with new and uncommon events -- become
acquainted with a variety of characters, and are enabled to form a just
estimate of mankind; for, except allowing for a few local customs or
prejudices, human nature was the same two thousand years ago as at this time.
There is something extremely agreeable to the mind in weighing and examining
the actions of celebrated p^^^onages, who, in their day, made the mighty
tremble -- in marking the rise or fall of empires, and to be able to determine
the secret causes of those revolutions which once astonished the world.

The ages appear as inconsiderable points, to those who are acquainted with
history -- they see the various nations of the earth pass in review before
them, and trace a more than human power busy in the affairs of men -- by taking
in at one comprehensive view so vast a tract of time, they discern the nice
connections of that scheme (...) Providence, which often appears broken and
irregular, when contemplated only through the medium of a few years.

It is almost impossible to be well versed in the characters of the politer
nations of antiquity, without catching something of that magnanimity which
distinguished them; and I know not why an acquaintance with their manners
should not be thought as necessary in the system of female education, as it
usually is in that of the other sex. If the Greek and Roman veterans displayed
qualities which the heroes of the present day would be proud to imitate, their
wives and daughters were often patterns of such virtues, as would be allowed to
dignify a lady of the eighteenth century.

Read modern history as well as ancient -- the knowledge of the nations who
inhabit the globe as well as yourselves, is amusing and interesting -- the
heart, too, may be the better for it -- narrow prejudices are removed, and the
better mankind become acquainted with each other, the more the divine principle
of philantropy must be extended. National enmity has no other parent but
ignorance -- the enlightened, the philosophic mind, even through (...) veil of
different tongues and customs, (...) discern a kindred being a member of (...)
universal family, whose head is the Deity.

Next to traveling itself, nothing tends more to enlarge the ideas than
journals of travels and voyages, if the writers have been faithful and
accurate; and you will read them with pleasure, if you have been careful to
acquire a knowledge of geography. This renders you familiar with the countries
you read of -- You recollect their soil, climate, and productions-know their
respective boundaries, and can readily mark out their place on the globe.

Having thus, my dear girls, pointed out to you so exhaustless a source of
amusement, I will only for the present add, that I am, etc.

CORNELIA.

LETTER VI.
AS long as curiosity continues a leading feature in the human character,
biography will form a favorite species of ^^^ding. Every body is eager to pry
into (...) private character of a celebrated per^^^age, and are better pleased
to know, how such an one acts in domestic life, than in the senate, or the
field. And, indeed, it is there that the best estimate of the real description
can be formed.

The private lives of famous persons afford much edification to the reader; the
vice or meanness too often there displayed, teaches us not to be dazzled by the
blaze of popularity or power; and to contemn that virtue which is built on the
desire of fame alone. If on the other hand, by following these darlings of fame
to the closet, or the fireside* (...) discover the same nobleness of heart
that distinguishes them with the multitude, justly they become patterns for our
example; the mind rejoices to find something about them that is imitable, for
though few are called forth as distinguished actors on the theater of the world,
all may, if they please, be great in private life; that is, may acquire those
amiable qualities of mind, which can only constitute real greatness; without
which the hero is no more than a hypocrite, and even the robe of royalty, but a
tinsel ornament to cover real meanness.

Your chief aim should be the knowledge of the human heart, and that is in
general more fully discovered in trifling traits and circumstances, than by
important actions performed under the public eye. But you no where find human
nature so impartially delineated, as in the sacred writings. There the
historians neither influenced by passion or prejudice, relate both actions and
their secret springs with unerring candor; never calumniating enemies, or
stooping to flatter the favorites of their nation.

The Jewish writers had the fairest opportunities imaginable for exaggerating
the virtues of their heroes, considering the miraculous powers so often exerted
in their behalf. Such an adventure as that of David with Goliath, would have
been thought by a pagan writer, sufficient grounds for exalting his favorite
to a God; yet the inspired Biographer has drawn that Prince with all his
frailties about him; all the inequality of humanity; sometimes glowing with the
rapturous devotion of a Seraphim; -- at others, enslaved by the meanest
passions. Such instances of candor, considered with the national pride of the
Jews, leave no room to doubt the veracity of the sacred penman on any occasion.

The scriptures also finely illustrate many parts of profane history: we are
told of embattled armies, and cities levelled with the dust; but it is only in
holy writ we find those armies prophetically marshalled, and that destruction
denounced perhaps an hundred years before the event. These are instances which
impress the mind with reverence for the sacred records, and fill it with august
ideas of the eternal Providence.

The works of our best moralists will not be unentertaining to you, if your
taste for reading be as good as I wish it. Amongst the productions of this kind
are the Spectator and the Rambler; as conspicuous for the elegance of their
language, as the soundness of their morality. But there are no better rules for
the moral conduct of life, than are found in the writings of Solomon, and the
Son of Sirach; which, though composed so many ages ago, may yet be read to much
advantage, by those who would pass through life happily and respected.

If you are fond of poetry, be careful to read only what is good of it. There
is a kind of versification that tends to de^^^^ the mind; -- wherever
immorality or indelicacy is found, such must ever be the effect. Elegance of
numbers, though a requisite, is yet the lowest recommendation of good poetry;
-- its characteristics are dignity of thought, purity of expression, and, above
all, the best principles of piety and morality. For this reason, those poetical
pieces extant in the Bible are by good judges allowed to be truly sublime.
Poetry in its original state, being only the harmonious effusions of a mind
glowing with elevated sentiments of generosity, gratitude and devotion. Many of
the Psalms are noble compositions, and neither for beauty of figure, or energy
of expression, have ever been excelled.

Natural history affords a delightful study -- it is not however expected that
you should have a systematic idea of every vegetable, animal, or infect; but it
is unpardonable, for one who (...) blessed with leisure and opportunity, (...) to
have at least a general knowledge of the most conspicuous of Nature's works; --
to be ignorant of the beauty and properties of those, is to wander over the
fair creation, as Thomson ex^^^sses it, "with brute unconscious gaze." (...)
curious and intelligent spectator finds the variegated face of nature, a source
of rational amusement, and reads in glowing characters the wisdom of the Deity.
It is not in such pursuits that the human mind acquires those illiberal
sentiments which so often disgrace it; -- all it here finds is noble and
beneficent, worthy that Divine Author, whom to know and adore, is the proper
glory of an intelligent being.

Akenside has so elegantly expressed the pleasures attending a taste for the
study and beauties of nature, that I will relieve you from the tediousness of
this epistle, by transcribing a few of his admired lines.

O! blessed of Heaven, whom not the languid songs
Of luxury, the siren! not the bribes
Of sordid wealth, nor all the gaudy spoils
Of pageant honor, can seduce to leave
Those ever blooming sweets, which from the store
Of Nature, fair Imagination culls
To charm the enlivened soul! What, though not all
Of mortal offspring can attain the height
Of envied life; though only few possess
Patrician treasures, or imperial state;
Yet Nature's care to all her children just,
Endows at large whatever happy man
Will deign to use them.
-- For him the spring
Distills her dews, and from the silken gem
Its lucid leaves unfolds; for him the hand
Of Autumn tinges every fertile branch
With blooming gold, and blushes like the morn*
Each passing hour sheds tribute from her wings;
And still new beauties meet his lonely walk,
And loves unfelt attract him. -- Not a breeze
Flies over the meadow, not a cloud imbibes
The setting sun's effulgence, not a strain
From all the tenants of the warbling shade
Ascends, but whence his bosom can partake
Fresh pleasure unreprov'd: -- nor then partakes
Fresh pleasure only; for the attentive mind,
By this harmonious action on her powers,
Becomes herself harmonious; wont so often
In outward things to meditate the charm
Of sacred order, soon she seeks at home
To find a kindred order, to exert
Within herself this elegance of love,
This fair inspired delight; her tempered powers
Refine at length, and every passion wears
A chaster, milder, more attractive mien.
-- Thus the men
Whom Nature's works can charm, with God himself
Hold converse; grow familiar day by day
With his conceptions; act on his plan;
And form to his the relish of their souls.
Believe, dear girls, that I am ever the most affectionate of your friends,

CORNELIA.

LETTER VII.
AMONGST the accomplishments necessary to the female character, I think
needle work may claim the first place, it having so close a connection with
neatness, which is indisputably requisite to render you comfortable to
yourselves, or amible in the esteem of others. The ladies of the last century
certainly held needle work in much greater estimation than those of the
present; witness the many laborious performances that yet remain as proofs of
their amazing industry in this respect -- but the world is ever prone to
extremes, and because this art was then pursued to the exclusion of every
intellectual accomplishment, there are many in our days who seem to thin^ (...)
beneath their study or ambition.

The Mahomet an sentiment which prevailed some years ago, of the inferiority of
the female mind, seems exploded in this age (...) universal refinement; and a
woman of cultivated understanding is (...) longer a ph^enonomenon. The path^ of
knowledge are rendered accessible -- (...) of (...) stooped from (...) to
accelerate the improvements (...) the other sex (...) they (...), explain for
their assistance (...) in polite literature.

Make all the use you possibly can of such advantages, and be convinced that
the cultivation of the mind will exalt you in the estimation of rational beings
-- will open to you exhaustless sources of amusement and delight, of which the
ignorant can have no conception -- yet be careful my dear girls, never to
overlook one feminine grace or accomplishment. There is a line of character
drawn between the sexes, which neither can pass without becoming contemptible.
It is not to make you despise those acquirements which have ever been
appropriated to the female sex, that you are incited to mental seize, but
to render you still more valuable as women; and the better your minds are
cultivated, the more you will see the propriety of attending to those minutiae
which become the condition in which Providence has placed you.

I do not see how you can acquit yourself tolerably in domestic life, without a
knowledge of needle work; but granting your rank and fortune may pla^^ you
above the absolute necessity of learning that part of it which is called
plain-work -- yet consider how far the ornamental kinds may be of use to amuse
the intervals of pleasures, or other pursuits, as well as to promote the
display of an elegant taste. Even our innocent amusements require variation,
and the mind may be agreeably relieved, by imitating with the needle the
beautiful productions of nature -- but there is something which places a skill
in needle work in a much more important point of view, and that is, the
inconstancy of fortune, which in her capricious moods has been often known to
compel those, whom once she smiled on, to procure their subsistence by those
very arts which were acquired only for amusement. Whatever may be a resource
against that mutability which marks all human affairs, becomes an object of
importance.

A proficiency in the arts of domestic management and economy, ought justly to
be ranked among the accomplishments of a young lady. You must be unacquainted
with nothing that appertains to good housewifery. Some girls have I known
profess so violent an attachment to literary pursuits, that they are content to
remain ignorant of common seize. This shows a pitiable weakness --
elevated minds are attentive to every thing; and, believe me, it is very
possible to possess a competent knowledge of polite literature, and be well
versed in the methods of well governing a house at the same time -- the latter
qualifications have of themselves constituted many an useful character in
female life, which is more than can be said of the former. Blend therefore, my
beloved girls, polite with useful acquirements, and you will be what I wish you.

In writing, acquire, if possible, a good hand; yet that is not so essentially
necessary as the being able to write grammatically -- the violation of the
common rules of grammar is an indisputable mark of low breeding; and although
my Lord Chesterfield sarcastically said, that bad spelling was only allowable
in a woman, it certainly is not in any one, who pretends to an education above
the vulgar. Could you write as fine a hand as even A -- n himself, bad spelling
would disgrace the whole. The substituting have for has, are for is, etc.
infallibly sinks you in the estimation of well bred persons. In order to avoid
errors of this kind, habit is to be particularly guarded against. If in your
early years you are not careful to write and spell correctly, it is a thousand
to one if you ever do. You see, therefore, of what consequence it is that you
pay a present attention to these points.

I reckon among the useful seize, the ability of penning an epistle with
propriety and elegance -- many fortunate circumstances in life may be
facilitated thereby -- a well wrote letter has often effected what verbal
requests have sought in vain -- besides this consideration, how greatly must
the sweet intercourse of friendship be improved by a free and intelligent
correspondence! Two friends, though placed at the extremities of the globe, may
thus enjoy all the pleasures of such a connection; but except you attain the
desirable habit of expressing your sentiments without embarrassment, hope not
to enjoy any thing of so delicate a satisfaction. Letters should be the
pictures of the soul; and so they always would be, if people acquired only the
knack of expressing their thoughts just as they arise. Write as you would
speak, were the persons you address immediately before you. There is no more
than this necessary to establish that easiness of style which is the chief
beauty of epistolary correspondence. That good breeding which I hope will be
habitual to you, will dictate those terms and forms of address the condition of
those you write to require -- We do not always find the most learned people
write the most agreeable letters -- perhaps for no other reason than that they
take too much trouble about it, and like the good Archbishop of Benevento,
reject the first thought that occurs. Some that I have known indite an epistle
in such a stiff and formal style, and load it so disgustfully with tautology,
that one would almost take it for an act of parliament. When you write a
letter, my dear girls, forget the idea of pen, ink, and paper -- suppose only
you are speaking to the person, and you will write an agreeable, if not a fine
letter -- to effect the latter, something must have been done by dame Nature --
howewer, this I know, that the most elevated sentiments would not look graceful
in such compositions, except accompanied by perfect ^ase and expression, and
have the appearance of flowing spontaneously from the heart. Many excellent
models of epistolary writing have been recommended to young proficients. You
cannot have better than those ascribed to Pope Ganganelli; -- whoever was the
author, he has certainly ^it on that ease, sprightliness, and elegance, which
it is my earnest wish may characterise whatever falls from your pen. -- Would
to Heaven that all the world possessed the same candor and liberality of
sentiment which breathes through every one of those elegant epistles.

Adieu, CORNELIA.

LETTER VIII.
WHEN you compare the awkward motions of a rustic, with the genteel and
graceful movement of a person of education, you cannot but be assured of the
utility of dancing: but it should never be forgotten, that to give this
superiority of mien and air is the chief end of that polite accomplishment; --
to lose sight of this idea is to take away the real worth of that branch of
genteel education; -- to reduce it to an unimportant, if not pernicious
attainment. However a knowledge of dancing may sometimes conduce to social
pleasure, and in that light be esteemed an agreeable and innocent recreation, I
cannot help thinking, that the same application that is requisite to form an
opera dancer, may very well be dispensed with in a young lady of a different
character. The extravagant leaps and gestures of some fashionable females, make
me think of the speech of Philip of Macedon to his son, on another occasion --
I am ready to ask if they "are not ashamed to dance so well."

There is scarce a human soul, however apparently dead to sensibility, but is
in some measure alive to the extatic charms of music. The story of Orpheus is
more than a fable -- minds almost as inert and inanimate as trees themselves,
have been moved by the power of harmonious sounds; -- why else does the gaping
rustic follow with such manifest delight the itinerant musician? and why, but
that the effect of music on the passions is so incontestibly proved, has the
army adopted the sons of Apollo with those of Mars? -- Since then this science
has so great an influence on the feelings of the soul, is it not surprising
that the polite world should not be more ambitious of enjoying those sublime
sensations, which the best pieces are so abundantly capable of exciting, and
not rest poorly satisfied with the l^ke warm pleasures of sing-song, while the
noble compositions of great masters, lie by totally disregarded. Indulge, my
dear girls, a turn for music, if nature has given you such; but do not permit a
song (...), or an opera air, to be the limits of your excellence in that
enchanting science.

Drawing, painting, etc. justly form a part of polite education, because they
furnish an agreeable, as well as rational amusement. They lead to a familiarity
with the beauties of nature, and that can scarcely fail to advance the mind a
degree higher, even to the contemplation of her Divine Author. But if it had
not this happy tendency, drawing is still a laudable amusement, because an
innocent one; and whatever furnishes a recreation of that nature, may certainly
be deemed an auxiliary to virtue.

An acquaintance with the languages of polite nations greatly enlarges the
mind. It is the property of ignorance to esteem nothing valuable that a foreign
country produces; and scarcely to allow that its inhabitants are human. Nothing
tends more immediately to remove such illiberal prejudices, than studying the
language of the people thus despised. The supercilious contemner is surprised
to find them rational, and expressing similar ideas with those of his own
country.

If necessity or inclination ever leads you from your native land, a previous
acquaintance with the language of those you reside among, would much facilitate
your pleasure and convenience; would open to you the avenues of social love and
friendship, and take off much from those comfortless sensations the mind is apt
to feel in the idea of being amongst a people it knows not. For this end,
perhaps it may be sufficient to acquire the knowledge of the French tongue,
that being generally understood by intelligent persons of every European
nation. But there is another advantage attending this branch of polite
education, and which probably to you, my dear girls, will be the most useful --
I mean the being able to read in their original, those beautiful compositions
which lose many of their excellencies by translation. For this reason become
acquainted also with the Italian; but Homer and Virgil, you tell me, have
beauties that can never be translated -- true, yet these I fancy you must be
content to taste as pure as the labors of the learned afford them; the Greek
and Latin tongues, forming no part in the polite system of female education at
present, nor certainly ever can in the useful.

Arithmetic is a dry study, yet certainly a very useful one, to those who would
manage their affairs with economy and prudence; -- a thorough knowledge of the
four first rules is sufficient to enable you to do it.

From a total ignorance of letters in female life, we are advanced to an age
which requires every girl to be made a grammarian; yet it unfortunately
happens, that of the numbers who profess to have studied the grammar of their
native tongue, few speak or write it with that accuracy which could be wished;
indeed the progress that women usually make in that science, is seldom of
itself sufficient to give an habitual elegance of expression; they are more
indebted for it to frequent reading of the best authors, and the conversation
of those who have themselves acquired it perfect. What you can, acquire of
grammar by such assistances as these. There is an indispensable necessity for
you to write and speak English correctly: acquire that qualification as easily
as you can, but nothing will more facilitate it, than the methods I have
mentioned.

Geography is a study that will please you an hundred times better, -- this is
not like the former, a set of dry rules, but almost every advance you make
therein, will abundantly repay your pains by the novelty of the information it
produces. Besides, I cannot imagine, how the frequent relations that occur in
common discourse, will be intelligible, without some acquaintance with this
study. I am sure if you are no geographer, even a newspaper will be as
inexplicable as an Egyptian hieroglyphic. Attain a competent knowledge of the
globe on which you live, that your apprehension of infinite wisdom may be
enlarged; which, it will be in a much higher degree, if you take care to
acquire a general idea of the structure of the universe. It is not expected you
should become adepts in astronomy, but a knowledge of its leading principles,
you may, and ought to obtain. The French, with their usual attention to the
sex, have procured them a gentleman usher, if I may so speak, to the planetary
orbs -- Fontenelle introduces them to an acquaintance with that brilliant
assembly -- it is not the first instance, in which our agreeable neighbors
have blended the researches of the scholar, with the politeness of a fine
gentleman.

Avail yourselves of such ingenious assistances, and be all your Cornelia
wishes.

LETTER IX.
AN accomplished character has so many charms, that nothing needs be said to
induce you to wish, at least, for its attainment. Yet painful application must
render that wish effectual -- a reflection however that should excite your
emulation, rather than despondency -- trivial acquirements may content the
indolent and timid, but the arduous and difficult are the proper aim of
elevated minds. Courage belongs not to the warrior alone, -- it is as often
found in the closet, as the field.

That resolution which is necessary for every valuable purpose of life, is the
fruit only of active minds, and was never found with indolence and sloth; --
determine therefore to conquer every tendency to an inactive temper. Whenever
you feel in yourselves an inaptitude for doing what necessarily ought to be
done, rouse that moment, or you will give ground to an enemy the most
destructive to happiness and virtue; and who once entrenched is hard to be
dislodged. Never defer to the next hour, that which should be the business of
the present. "Whatever thy hand finds to do, do it, with all thy might," said
a very wise man many hundred years ago; indeed there is no precept throughout
the sacred writings, inculcated with greater energy than this of diligence. It
is the soul of virtue -- the foundation of honor and affluence.

Many a bright and shining talent lies hid in a napkin, for want of activity to
unfold it; nor do we unfrequently meet with persons struggling with distresses,
which require only their own exertions to remove. Indolence takes hold of the
disposition much oftener than is acknowledged; it is possible to be wholly
under its dominion, and yet suspect nothing of it: and, what is yet more
strange, to believe one^s self to be the most diligent person in the world at
the very time. You have seen numbers of budling people, who are always in a
hurry, and so perplexed do they appear with (...), as never to be able to enjoy
a friend or themselves. It would seem hard at first sight to accuse them of
indolence, and yet they are of all people most commonly under its power; for an
habitual diligence would so comfortably arrange the affairs of life, that none
would be found to intrude on another. Consider the surprising dispatch with
which some in public stations, manage a multiplicity of the most important
concerns; -- to contemplate them, one would almost conclude nothing too
extensive for the compass of the human mind; -- diligence is the charm which
effects it all.

In that dismal catalogue of diseases which imbitter mortality, not a few owe
their existence to indolence. The indigent labourer who toils for daily bread,
knows nothing of that sad train of nervous disorders which render life itself
burdensome to the wealthy. In some cases, poverty might justly be called a
blessing. Great are the achievements which resolution and diligence can
effect: -- in nothing is their power more conspicuously seen, than in the
cultivation of the mind: to reflect on the progress of the human understanding
-- to compare the refinements of philosophy with a state of savage nature -- a
Newton, with an inhabitant of New Holland -- we should almost conclude some
supernatural power must have contributed to give the former so infinite a
superiority in the scale of beings. Without the quality I have recommended, it
could never have been attained, for though much be owing to accidental
advantages, such as the being born in an enlightened kingdom affords, yet no
inconsiderable portion of diligence is required to render these advantages
personally effectual. It is this, my dear girls, that makes them yours, and
without it, the soul will remain as uninformed as if destined to a land where
science never darts a cheering beam.

It may seem strange to tell you of old age, before you have scarce passed your
infancy; yet I must not conceal from you, that a period will arrive, when
exterior attractions will be no more; -- when mental acquirements will prove
your highest luster and sublimest comfort. However despicable an ignorant woman
appears at any part of her life, in the decline of it she is sure to become far
more contemptible; at that time, it is the improvements she has made in early
days, that give dignity of character. An old age of cards necessarily succeeds
a youth of folly. Pope could not have said any thing more destructive of the
insignificancy of those ancient habits, than he has expressed in that concise
satire. If you would avoid the contempt which never fails to attend a frivolous
old age, you must pass a youth of diligence and application.

But then the pleasures resulting from it surpass description; the
satisfactions of a rich cultivated mind are only fully known to the happy
possessor; one of them, we are assured, is a noble independence, which creates,
if I may so speak, its own happiness; is not indebted to dissipation, or the
caprice of others; but can derive from itself exhaustless resources for
solitude or society. Ordinary persons are obliged to fly from Ennui to the
regions of amusement, but superior beings, who have traversed the fields of
useful and polite knowledge, can from themselves select materials for the most
exquisite enjoyment.

Do you think this an acquisition worth desiring -- then never forget that it
can be obtained only by diligence and active industry. Habits of indolence are
destructive of every valuable attainment, and they are as much so of happiness,
as they are known to be of virtue.

Adieu, CORNELIA.

LETTER X.
CULTIVATED minds have pleasures which surpas^ the vulgar apprehension. They
have their pa^^^ as well -- for there is an evil peculiar to refined feeling,
which the untaught rustic is happily ignorant of. This happens when refinement,
or at least the affectation of it, is carried to such an extreme, that it
degenerates into false delicacy. The symptoms of the malady are a kind of
secret dissatisfaction with every thing -- the common blessings of life are
despised, as inadequate to the refinement of their ideas, and every petty
slight augmented by such a quickness of perception, as leads them to see
affronts, when none perhaps have been intended. And this peevish irritable
temper they are pleased to dignify with the name of sensibility, and pique
themselves on a disposition that disqualifies them for social virtue, or social
happiness. What pity that a quality meant to heighten every real blessing,
should be ascribed to the ^mere chimera of a sickly brain! Never may you, my
girls, by indulging these fictitious feelings, refine away the felicity which a
kind Providence scatters in your path of life. Nourish in your bosoms humility
and goodnature -- these will teach you to make the best of your lot, whatever
it be, and give a relish to every enjoyment -- all is serene where they reside.
Humility, by arrogating nothing to herself, remains unhurt at the supercilious
scorn of ignorance or pride; and goodnature, by casting a veil over the
foibles of others, presents to our view the best side of this motley scene.

Without doubt, superior minds have a quicker sense of what is beautiful in
nature, or desirable in life, than a peasant, whose ideas extend not beyond his
daily occupations perhaps they feel more acutely the evils of their condition;
yet the persons who suffer most by this affected sensibility are not they who
have the greatest share of afflictive events, but the idly speculative, who
being employed to no good purpose, have time to nourish those artificial
feelings which Nature knows nothing of.

Sensibility! -- What is it? -- Is it not that delicate (...) natural and moral
beauty, which the Creator has implanted in the soul to exalt its happiness, and
awaken its noblest passions? How greatly, then do they err, who substitute in
the room of this best gift of Heaven, that which is the very weakness of
humanity, pride and peevishness!

It is paying a very poor compliment to literary pursuits, to suppose they are
productive of that softness which unfits the mind for enduring the common
accidents of life. And those seize are of little value that serve no
better purpose than to barb the arrows of misfortune with stings which the
enlightened never feel. But probably they who dream of such effects are the
superficial, who never dived beyond the surface of literature, and whose feeble
intellects are unable to digest even the little they have imbibed.

If you have really made any advancement in mental improvement, it will
invigorate the powers of the soul, and inspire her with that magnanimity which
is certainly necessary to the happiness of a being, who is every moment exposed
to sorrow and disappointment. Value not yourselves on any refinements that are
short of this effect.

Some, I know, are even restrained from the exercise of benevolence by this
affectation of sensibility; their feelings are too tender to bear with scenes
of distress, and too refined for the duties of social life; they therefore keep
at an unfriendly distance from society, lest the ignorance or rudeness they
there may meet with, should wound their excessive delicacy; but how is this
obeying the injunction of the Apostle, who exhorts us to be kindly affectioned
one to another, bearing with each others infirmities?

In fine, my dear girls, come to the feast of social life, accompanied by the
virtues of humility and charity, and you will not arise dissatisfied from the
entertainment.

Yours, CORNELIA.

LETTER XI.
I have often thought that the great prevalence of vice arises chiefly from a
culpable weakness of temper -- for there is nothing so amiable in it, that it
should be followed for its own sake. It is the mere want of resolution that
betrays such numbers into the dreadful abyss of sin and misery.

The world's dread laugh
Scarce even the firm Philosopher can bear.
But, in my opinion, he must be a poor philosopher who cannot, and would have
made but a sorry figure in the Portico or Lyceum.

It is not meant to inculcate to you a boisterous, imperious carriage. May my
girls possess every feminine grace and virtue: but these cannot be supported
without some portion of resolution. There is a proper firmness, without which
neither virtue, happiness, or dignity of character, can be long maintained.
Distrust those who extol the soft irresolution of the sex -- it is the very
^ock on which thousands of deluded females have been lost.

Be possessed of the true principles of honor and rectitude, and dare to adhere
to them in spite of solicitation, or that still more powerful means of
temptation, ridicule. Establish your opinions on truth and reason, and maintain
them, when necessary, with firmness; -- some people give up both their faith
and their friends, for want of resolution to defend them -- Too weak to think,
too indolent to choose.


In business, and the affairs of life, a proper firmness is indispensably
necessary. Those who can be influenced by every adviser or intimidated at every
appearance of difficulty, must of course be desultory and unsettled. They
effect nothing of consequence, because they know not how to persevere in any
undertaking. Obstacles will attend the best concerted schemes, and mankind will
ever think differently about them; but the truly wise will await with steady
patience the issue of those measures they have been careful to found in
prudence and the moral fitness of things. Some will undertake nothing, till
they see the path smooth before them, and attain almost a certainly of success.
Such will find their lives waste, before they have determined on the plan of
it. Those who best know the state of humanity, will be convinced, that to
design prudently and act firmly, is all that can be done by mortals.

Without resolution, it will sometimes be impossible to act agreeably to the
dictates of right reason, and virtue; for these are not always the ton; and
when that is the case, no inconsiderable share of fortitude is requisite to
repel the attacks of ridicule or amusement -- nor can the treasures of
knowledge be explored, without a portion of it -- for "there is nothing truly
valuable to be attained without pains and labor." Dismayed at the prospect,
the indolent, as described by Solomon, cry, "a lio^ is in the street." --
Rather may my dear girls be animated with a noble ardour, to surmount every
difficulty which would retard their acquisition of merit and felicity.
Parnassus itself was a craggy rock, but then the Muses dwelt on its top.

But if resolution be necessary to the attaining whatever is valuable or
desirable in life, it is no less so to the supporting us under a deprivation of
it. The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong -- hence it
follows, that the wisest measures do not always meet with success, nor can
virtue itself prevent the encroachments of affliction -- in such circumstances
fortitude gives a dignity to suffering, and tends also to alleviate the weight
of it. Every one knows the sentiment of the Philosopher -- that a good man
struggling with adversity, is a sight on which the Gods themselves might look
down with delight. However that be, it is certain that such a character never
fails to command the respect and veneration of mankind. Magnanimity, of all the
qualities of the mind, seems most secure of admiration. The Savior of the
world inculcated it, when having forewarned his disciples of their approaching
sufferings, he enjoined them to possess their souls in patience. Patience is
amongst the Christian duties, what magnanimity is in the list of heroic
virtues. They are synonymous terms -- both imply that calm, unshaken fortitude,
which is at once characteristic of the hero and the Christian.

But do not conclude this firmness of mind -- this laudable resolution, i^
calculated only to be admired. It is of the highest actual service to the
unfortunate, not only by enabling them to sustain the burden of their
sufferings, but by opening a way to better prospects. The timid and irresolute
sink, at the approach of adversity, into a despondency the most unfriendly to
their affairs, by precluding that courageous industry which might render them
more tolerable; and therefore, by the nature of things, augment the very evils
of which they complain.

Cultivate in all circumstances this innate constancy -- it will aid you in the
attainment of every good and valuable end, -- in prosperity, will secure you
from the corruptions of vanity, -- impart dignity and serenity to adversity. In
fine, you cannot, I think, but be steady in the practice of virtue, if you are
firm in the expectation of its rewards.

Rest assured that I am ever your friend,

CORNELIA.

LETTER XII.
MY epistles to you, my dear girls, are written without the least attention to
method; their respective subjects have more the appearance of chance, than
design; and therefore, may be justly called cursory thoughts on various
subjects. Young folks, I know, do not love precise rules, and perhaps you deem
the irregularity of my letters their chief merit. Allow them, however, one more
-- that of sincerity: and believe that the sentiments they contain, flow from
the heart; I believe, I need not add the word spontaneously.

As I disclaim all methodical arrangement of my subjects, I will here give you
my thoughts on that very important part of female study, dress. Be not afraid
that I am about to confine you to a primitive plainness, though probably, such
a mode may be found more advantageous to beauty and elegance, than modern
finery; yet I shall recommend that which is at once agreeable to fashion, and
your own rank and circumstances. To reconcile these three conditions, is no
easy task, yet herein lies a chief perfection of the female character; few
women possess the happy art; -- yet those who do, must be allowed a very
superior degree of merit. It is no inconsiderable trait in the character of an
amiable young lady, that she knows how to support a genteel appearance; and yet
pay a just regard to the frugality, which probably her limited circumstances
require.

A fantastical and expensive turn in dress, is the certain mark of a little
mind; but that attention to it, which principally regards neatness, is
undoubtedly extremely laudable. Resolve to be always neat, or you can never be
well-dressed; -- a dirty ruffle, a torn apron, etc. are sufficient to disgrace
the most splendid apparel. Neatness is always within your power, and will
always render you respectable in whatever rank of life you are placed; but
finery, without it, is nothing more than a ridiculous glare, which is never
seen but with disgust.

Fashion has imposed some general rules, which may innocently be followed under
the restrictions I have mentioned. Your clothes may be made according to the
mode, though the materials which compose them, be less costly than if they
belonged to a Duchess. An uncouth, ill-fashioned habit, derogates even from
the importance of a philosopher; and it is not till after a near acquaintance,
that merit is discovered through a shabby garment -- so much are mankind
governed by appearance.

"Prithee good Xenocrates (said Plato to his pupil) sacrifice to the graces."
That great man knew how much the mental accomplishments might be illustrated
and adorned by a polished exterior; -- a wise person, it is true, would not
make this altogether the criterion of merit, yet perhaps, would not readily
look for worth beneath an ungraceful exterior.

After all, my dear girls, esteem the frivolous, though often troublesome arts
of dress, but as a tax you are in some sort obliged to pay to the folly of the
age. Remember on all occasions, that external ornaments cannot make you better
or happier women. Great minds, however they may have judged it necessary to
conform to insignificant customs, have always regarded them in their proper
light. The attention such are seen to show to the idol fashion, is only a good
natured condescension to the weakness of mankind, in points they judge of an
indifferent nature, and much too trifling to become the objects of their
serious cares. The silly and ignorant are they who love dress for its own sake.

I am, etc. CORNELIA.

LETTER XIII.
NEXT to our own principles, we are to regard those of our companions; for they
are almost of as much importance to us, as by long and intimate acquaintance
they generally become our own. Virtuous habits are strengthened by example --
so are vicious ones, but in a much higher degree; nothing therefore can be a
point of greater consequence than the choice of companions.

A great deal has been written on the subject, and every one who has the care
of youth, fails not to inculcate the keeping good company; -- the only
misfortune is, that the term has seldom been sufficiently explained, and the
young mind is left to annex to it the ideas of birth and fortune, till by
degrees the expression is supposed to imply both these qualifications.

The result has been the disturban^^^ all order in social life; -- each class
of (...) quitting their own sphere to (...) with those of superior ^ank; and
(...) again, inspired by the same sentiment^ (...) with scorn the ambitious
attempt (...) only to attract the notice of (...) greater folks than
themselves. Thus in the room of that social amity with which the human heart
should overflow, it is unhappily divided between the throbbings of ambition,
and the pangs of offended pride.

It is evident, that in this bustle, greater attention is paid to the
accidental circumstances of rank and affluence, than to real merit; we should
not else so often see people of the middling rank, when flattered by the notice
of a superior, so elated with the honor of keeping, what they call good
company; when perhaps, that superior is conspicuous for almost every vice and
meanness. This is a grand mistake surely -- as fatal to happiness as to morals.

Good company can only mean persons of noble sentiments, refined manners, and
enlightened understandings. But these qualities are not to be expected, where
the scantiness of fortune has absolutely excluded the means of education; for
the human mind becomes every thing by culture. It is therefore found, that in
the lower ranks of society, where poverty has denied time and abilities for
that happy employ, the worst habits, and most depraved morals prevail; for this
reason you are not to choose companions from such a class.

In fine, your associates must be those of a liberal and virtuous education. It
may happen you may find a friend of this desciption, whose relative or
necessary connections may not be eligible for you. In this case she is by no
means a proper companion, as her own merit, however great, will not compensate
for the danger you incur in frequently mingling with persons of improper
character.

A cultivated mind is the proper soil for every moral and social virtue -- it
is most likely to be found where Heaven has bestowed an easy fortune,
consequently the genteeler ranks of life will be most likely to afford you
proper companions. But here let merit alone, and not adventitious
circumstances, influence your selection -- despise that contemptible weakness
which piques itself on the rank, rather than the mental value of an
acquaintance; and never let a principle of vanity lead you to the servile
imitation of vice or folly, however sanctioned by wealth or titles. Little
minds are ever dazzled by show and splendor -- it is the property of the
enlightened only to distinguish personal worth from external advantages. I
should think you disgraced by an acquaintance with an empress, if she was not
as much distinguished by virtue as power.

Be careful not to form an acquaintance too hastily -- many a virtuous girl has
sunk for ever in the esteem of the world, by being seen in company with those
of doubtful reputation. In vain she declares her ignorance of the real
character of her companions. She having admitted them to her society, without
the requisite investigation of that point, infallibly renders her own prudence
suspected.

A very extensive acquaintance is not necessary to social happiness. A few
select friends will most conduce to that end; and it is among these, that The
free full converse of the friendly heart flows with uninterrupted delight --
unfeigned cheerfulness and re^^ enjoyment exist much oftener in these little
circles, than in large and ceremonious assemblies. But should your station in
life render (...) large acquaintance unavoidable, you will observe to all, a
free unrestrained politeness, without admitting every one indiscriminately to
your confidence. Be ever frank and easy, without revealing your own secrets, or
those of your friends, and make none your intimates, but those of worth and
honor.

Much, very much of human happiness depends on the proper choice of
acquaintance -- an ill-chosen friend has power to mar our felicity as much as
an amiable and faithful one contributes to it. The heart is formed for social
intercourse; and when that intercourse is founded on the moral and religious
virtues, it gives a zest to the other enjoyments of life.

I am, my dear girls, etc. CORNELIA.

LETTER XIV.
THERE are certain restrictions necessary to render the gift of speech what the
great Creator designed it -- a (...) means of happiness to his rational (...).
The first of these is an habitual care never to violate the laws of truth. The
pleasures resulting from mutual conversation vanish entirely, when no
dependence can be placed in the speaker's veracity. Those who speak merely from
the suggestions of imagination, or, what is worse, malignity, are justly
chargeable with half the strife that disturbs the peace of society. Such
persons are the most dangerous companions, and need only be known to be
generally despised and avoided. Indeed so high a regard veracity obtains among
people of refinement, that you cannot offer a more gross affront than to accuse
them of the violation of it.

Of all that has been said in admiration of Cato's character, nothing reflects
so great a luster on it, as that striking, though tacit eulogium, bestowed on
him in one of the Roman courts of judicature, where a cause being to be tried
which required two witnesses, and one only appearing, the judge declared he
could not dispense with the law, even though Cato himself were the witness.

Besides, as Archbishop Tillotson finely observes, a constant adherence to
truth has the least trouble and difficulty in it, it sits always upon the lips;
whereas a lie is troublesome, and needs a great many more to make it good.

Next to the character of a liar, that of the detractor is the most odious -- a
habit of traducing the reputation of others, by speaking all the ill we have
heard of them, or putting the worst constructions on their actions, is totally
opposite to the spirit of Christianity, which breathes nothing but candor and
charity. There is also something extremely mean in the practice, as the accused
persons have seldom an opportunity of refuting the charge. The cruel aspersion
is borne on the wings of scandal from circle to circle, nor perhaps reaches the
injured party till the wound given to his reputation is too deep for cure.

Barbarous as such a custom is, I need not say how greatly it prevails in
almost all companies. I have, however, the charity to believe it does not
always proceed from malice or envy. W^^^ no knowledge has been treasured up in
the mind -- no useful information acquired, conversation cannot receive aid
from intellectual stores -- what then, must become of it? -- must it flag, and
silence -- dreadful silence reign? -- No, something must re-kindle it; and when
no rational subject arises, that something must be scandal. This, though it may
may be a palliation of the crime, is yet no excuse; for the wounds given by
unmeaning ignorance are as deep as those inflicted by premeditated rancour. How
shameful is it that an impertinent eagerness for talking should thus wantonly
explore the secret recesses of domestic life, and presume to judge of actions,
the motives of which cannot be scanned by these ignorant prattlers!

The most ^^^ectual way to secure yourselves from the commission of this vice,
will be the adorning your minds with such acquisitions of knowledge, and useful
intelligence, as will enable you to furnish subjects for conversation, without
descending to frivolity or detraction. But should you not be so happy as to
possess these desirable resources, I hope you will have so much candor and
goodnature, as to be content with being accounted dull and lifeless
companions, rather than indulge an eagerness for talking at the expense of
other people's good name.

Detraction is not only a violation of the rules of religion, but it is also so
impolitic a crime, as no one who wishes to be well received in the world would
ever commit; -- for a person who is addicted to scandal, is a terror to
society; the respect he receives, resembles the homage the Indians are said to
pay to the Devil, rather to evade his malignity, than to procure his love. And
however curiosity may, for a while, listen to an ill-natured anecdote, yet, be
assured, the relator is regarded with a secret disgust by every benevolent
person, who naturally expects to meet the same censorious fate, when
opportunity serves.

Good policy will therefore correct a censorious disposition; yet, I trust,
your restraint will be derived from a superior motive, namely, the obligations
of religion, which forbid to speak evil of any, or to judge uncharitably of
another. The consciousness of having always obeyed these divine injunctions,
will afford the best consolation, under the pain you may perhaps feel from the
unjust aspersions of others -- for such, probably (...) will meet with in your
journey of life, as no innocence can always be a defense from unmerited
censure; and when this chances to be your case, you will derive unspeakable
comfort, from the reflection of having treated the world more generously than
it has treated you.

Whatever you say, should be meant for the entertainment or instruction of the
company, rather than the gratification of vanity. Many are so much actuated by
self-love, that they never speak or act, but to be applauded. Hence arises
affectation -- the most disgusting quality in nature. Deliver your sentiments
as they occur, without affecting more graces in your tone or gestures than are
your own -- these, well managed, will be enough to render you amiable. All may
be agreeable in their natural sphere, but when they innovate on that of others,
the attempt is commonly frustrated.

Above all, never affect that kind of wit which aims at severe retorts and
repartee -- it has generally ill nature for its basis, and seldom makes a sally
but it procures an enemy, if it does not lose a friend. There is nothing in it
to be admired but the readiness of thought, which gi^^ ^ts birth -- but when
the quality seems aimed at, rather than possessed, it is absolutely
contemptible.

In fine -- sincerity, candor, and good sense, must be the ornaments of your
conversation. Politeness will give an agreeable luster to these qualities: but
remember, it can never be a substitute for them.

CORNELIA.

LETTER XV.
"HAIL politeness, power divine!" says the sonnet, and surely no unnecessary
invocation; for politeness, dear girls, is the friend of social happiness and
domestic peace; if it was the fashion, in this age, to have household gods, I
would surely give it a pre-eminent place amongst them.

I know not how it happens, but people seem to think, they are obliged to be
polite every where, but at home -- and there it is they are most required to be
so; for the refined satisfactions of social intercourse cannot long subsist
without it. I am convinced, that domestic quarrels and disgusts, would much
seldom^ arise, if the parties were always as polite as affectionate.

But what is politeness? -- is it the law of fashion, or a system of rules? --
No -- it is the divine principle of benevolence, branched into a thousand
little channels, and flowing through all the minutiae of human life. Education
may improve, but can never give it, for it must be founded in the soul, or is
never seen in full perfection. A painter may learn the rules of design, and the
compendium of colors; but if he possesses not the enthusiasm of the art, his
pictures will be lifeless and insipid.

Politeness is that amiable disposition, which delights in the happiness of
others -- consults their ^ase -- prevents their wants -- and yields them every
possible convenience. This is the source of those civilities and attentions,
which distinguish a well bred person -- without it, etiquette dwindles to
unmeaning ceremony.

You perceive then, that not only an attention to external graces, but a
regulation of the disposition is necessary to constitute a polite person.
Acquire the amiable temper I have described, and you will infallibly please
with that native ^ase which is thought so requisite to be attained, that the
world has substituted (...) its room its wretched resemblance, effrontery; --
but no more like the amiable original, than an ordinary statue to the Venus of
Medicis.

I have often thought, that the best Christian is likely to be the most polite
person. This is an assertion you have not been used to hear, yet may well
enough be warranted by the tenor of the gospel precepts, which inculcate the
being tender of another's weakness -- to prefer each other in honor -- to give
respect where due -- with others to the like purpose. Now if these excellent
lessons contain (as I think will be allowed) the substance of what, at this
day, is termed good breeding, St. Paul must be a better teacher than my Lord
Chesterfield himself, since he breathes the enlivening spirit, without which
the ceremonial code is a lifeless system, calculated perhaps to disguise the
heart, but not to add one iota to the real happiness of social life. --

Without ceremony, believe m^ your friend,

CORNELIA.

LETTER XVI.
NOTHING is more talked of than religion -- nothing less understood. Without
comprehending what it really is, the spirit of bigotry would arrogate the
whole, nor allow of its being without the contracted pale of a particular sect.

I have juster notions of religion -- see it as i^ ^s -- not a mode of
ceremonies, but a divine principle influencing the whole moral conduct; its
simple, fixed and determinate sense, is briefly love of God, and good will to
mankind. This, dear girls, is the sum of all religion; without it, vain were
the oblations of the Jewish church -- vain are the ceremonials of the Christian.

The "love of God," is an expression, that of late years has been as grossly
abused, as the word religion. Strange as it may appear, there have been those,
who leading the most immoral lives, have styled themselves lovers of the God of
purity -- whose tongues could utter a pious ejaculation, while their hands were
committing the most flagitious crimes. But be not deceived -- this exalted
character belongs neither to bigotry nor enthusiasm. The love of God is not a
passion, but a rational principle; it is those sentiments of reverence and
gratitude, which naturally arise in a generous mind* when reflecting on one
supreme beneficent power, who is the immediate author of all good, and the
fountain of all perfection. This conviction is the parent of unaffected piety;
the soul cannot but adore the Being she believes to be all wise, all mighty,
and eternal; -- she cannot but love him who is the source of unnumbered
blessings; -- nor choose, but dread to offend him whose nature she believes to
be holiness. Hence the source of moral virtue -- sin is avoided, because
displeasing to the will of the Deity; and virtuous are dispositions are
acquired, because agreeable to a power who is able to reward every endeavor to
please him, with eternal and unspeakable happiness.

Such a filial rational love, must be the fruit of every mind that is not
ignorant of the being and attributes of God; -- or that has not received from
bigotry or superstition, any mistaken notions of him. To prevent being
disturbed by the spiritual pride of hypocritical fanatics, remember there is an
invariable test by which you may know if you have the love of God. Ask your own
heart, if it seeks the favor of the Deity above every other consideration? if
it values this more than its dearest interests, and even life itself, a ready
affirmative puts the question out of all doubt.

I have been always of opinion, that religion owes the abuses that have been
put on her, more to the weakness than the knavery of mankind; perhaps it would
be no hard task to prove, that all the absurd doctrines which at this day
disgrace her in certain sects, originated with persons, the warmth of whose
imagination exceeded the strength of their understanding; but waving whatever
tends to controversy, I shall only hint that the practice of piety has received
considerable injury by devotees of the abovementioned class. Forgetful of what
was just now advanced, that religion is not a passion, but a principle, th^se
people have made it all consist in incoherent rhapsodies, and senseless jargon
of devout impulses -- holy consolations, and such like, which I believe they
are more indebted for to particular tempers and constitutions than any
revolution of divine favor. Persons of solid sense, have with reason been
disgusted at this affected piety -- but (...) world loves to run into extremes,
and therefore it happens, that because the cant of hypocrisy (...), has been
judged injurious to the dignity of religion -- modern manners disclaim any
acquaintance with (...).

But be assured, my dear girls, that nothing so highly elevates and adorns the
human character, as a steady rational piety -- nor is any thing capable of
yielding so pure and exalted a happiness to the soul, as an habit of devotion.
No one who has experienced the vicissitude of sublunary things, but must highly
value the privilege of possessing a friend that would at all times be
acceptable -- ready to hear the complaints of affliction, and all powerful to
relieve them.

Such a friend you may enjoy in the Divine Being; of what consequence is it
then that you acquire a taste for the exercises of devotion; -- that you
cultivate a friendship with Heaven, and accustom your hearts to to talk with
God! This is an emphatical expression of David, and gives you an idea of
rational and sincere prayer -- which consists not in formal addresses, but is
the genuine language of the heart. Such a divine intimacy, has something in it
extremely suitable to the noblest sensations of the soul; and therefore may
well be sought after as a source of refined and exquisite felicity. In trouble
you will find it more precious than the balm of Gilead -- it will shed a ray of
sacred peace, when the dark clouds of adversity obscure your path -- in death.
But here my pen must s^op -- there can be no doubt but at that final, that
awful period, the divine attachment breaks forth into a seraphic flame.

I am, more than I can say, Your friend, CORNELIA.

LETTER XVII.
THE generality of people style themselves christians, without understanding
the value or the necessity of christianity; and perhaps, neither the one or the
other, can be seen in a proper light, without taking a comparative view of the
human soul before and after the fall.

It is not for my humble pen to illustrate the excellency of a system which has
God himself for its author -- nor is it my design to attempt a task so far
above my abilities; yet that you may not wholly take your religion upon trust,
I would call your attention to what man was when first created.

But a little inferior to angels -- his reason was clear, his soul all purity,
and his mind all intelligence -- ^it companion for natures wholly spiritual,
and enjoying the most familiar intercourse with them. That grand question which
has since agitated the schools of philosophy, of what was the chief good of
man, was all apparent to the first of the human race: -- he saw perfectly
clear, that it consisted in the entire assimilation of his will to that of the
Deity -- and in the pursuit found a f^ll unmixed felicity. But he was created
with the power of doing otherwise, or where would have been the merit of
obedience? The duty of (...) agency, must be far preferable to that which
arises from blind necessity.

Adam continued a happy being as long as his will remained consonant to that of
his Maker; but at the instant it deviated therefrom, her fell from happiness
and perfection. The conciseness of the scripture history, leaves unthinking
minds in doubt as to the nature of Adam's transgression, but undoubtedly it
originated in the mere desire of doing contrary to the divine command; -- he
forgot that the Deity was his happiness, and he sought it in his own will. It
was herein he sinned, and not simply by eating the forbidden fruit, for at the
very moment Adam became capable of imagining there might be a good abstract
from the favor of God -- that moment he fell.

The Creator saw at one comprehensive view, the miseries which would accrue to
mankind, from the voluntary perversion of the intellectual and moral powers; --
then was the scheme of Christianity devised, as an effectual means of restoring
human nature to the happiness and perfection it originally possessed. -- The
purposed blessing was graciously announced in that prediction, that the
posterity of Eve should crush the serpent's head.

The human reason thus clouded, it is almost surprising to reflect by what
rapid steps the world bec^me immersed in the worst of ignorance and vice. Those
who still retained some idea of the Sovereign Creator, had recourse to a
visible symbol of his Majesty; for their intellectual faculties were too gross
to apprehend an immaterial Deity -- it soon happened that the symbol itself was
made the object of divine worship; and hence, doubtless, the origin of
idolatry, which in the time of Abraham had so generally spread over the earth,
that it appeared necessary to the Supreme Governor of the Universe to call that
good man from his country and his kindred to ordain him the father of a nation;
who being by numerous and peculiar laws, separated from the rest of the world,
might preserve, incorrupt the knowledge of the Divine Nature. The Bible will
convince you how ineffectual, not only these laws, but the frequent and signal
manifestations of Almighty Power were to secure that people from the grossest
idolatry, the rites of which were now become so terrible to the imagination,
that they even burnt their children alive, in sacrifices to their horrid idols.

What a picture is here of human nature! that nature which once so nearly
approached the angelic! Do you not begin to see the necessity of a Redeemer?
Let us pursue the thread of history, and take a superficial view of the most
celebrated nations which peopled the earth before the glorious era of his
appearance.

The Egyptians were very early esteemed for learning, laws and arts -- they
were a numerous, powerful, and wealthy people, but so grossly idolatrous, that
they not only worshipped images, but beasts, insects, and even vegetables. The
manufactures and extensive commerce of Phoenicia, suppose some advance in
refinement -- but national intercourse in those wretched times served but to
promulgate national idolatries. Babylon, that mighty seat of empire, surpassed
most other nations in the superb materials of her Gods. Astronomers there
observed the motions of the Heavens, and bowed in adoration to the splendid
hosts that adorned them. Cyrus, who erected the Persian on the ruins of the
Babylonish Monarchy, knew nothing of the Almighty Being, who named him, an age
before he had existence, as the instrument of liberty to his captive people.
Alexander, who in his turn subverted this extensive empire, could only blend
his Grecian idols with the Persian -- for dark, deplorably dark, was every
corner of the habitable earth, except the inconsiderable land of Judea, where
only a few despised, enfeebled tribes, possessed the light of sacred knowledge.

What a spectacle for the Father of the Universe! who produced a world to know
him and be happy! How much must his divine compassion be excited, on
contemplating his glorious work in ruins! -- to redeem it was an effort worthy
of himself.

We now come to the enlighted ages of Greece and Rome -- a period when I fancy
I see the human soul like a brilliant gem, illustrious in the dust. What noble
struggles did then the human reason make to free itself from the incumbent load
of darkness and error! Then lived those numerous worthies, whose names are yet
precious to posterity. What greatness of soul -- what a taste for solid glory
-- what elevated sentiments did they not discover? Yet these men, so far
superior to the rest of their species, acknowledged a multiplicity of Deities,
whose moral characters were infinitely inferior to their own, and to whom they
scrupled not to ascribe actions which themselves would have blushed to
acknowledge. Every passion of the human mind was personified, and deified;
statues graced every corner of their streets. Yet were there not wanting some
among them who made bold advances in search of better information -- like
benighted travelers they followed the most distant gleam of light, yet all
they could obtain was doubt and obscurity.

At th^^ period, when reason had done all it could do to regain its native
rights and privileges -- the Savior of the world appeared, at whose sacred
presence idolatry ^^ed, and the knowledge of the one true God began to
enlighten mankind. They were no longer compelled to enquire "Where is God our
Maker?" They knew him, and were instructed in his divine worship. The doctrines
which the divine Messiah taught, eminently tended to restore human nature to
the rectitude and happiness it had lost -- they were calculated to harmonize
the passions -- regulate the affections, and exalt the soul to a sense of her
own dignity, by revealing, in the clearest terms, the immortality of her nature
-- a point which philosophy had long ^ought to explore through the dim veil of
probable conjecture.

A cursory view of the tenets of Christianity is sufficient to evince, that
they are designed to establish the happiness of mankind even in the present
life. Consider the benevolence and charity they inculcate -- the patience,
meekness, moderation, contempt of worldly pleasures and enjoyments, the
generous clemency to enemies; with the rest of that bright assemblage of
virtues they enjoin, and you will confess it a matter of wonder that the
felicity of Eden is not already restored to those countries where the religion
of Christ is professed -- and the reason it is not so can be no other than that
of the thousands who daily mak^ profession of it, so few have a competent
knowledge of its nature and design. Born in a Christian land, they think such a
scrutiny superfluous. Thus they call themselves Christians without having any
thing of the spirit of Christ. -- And thus the human race is still obnoxious to
a thousand miseries, for want of applying to themselves the remedy which alone
could put an end to moral evil.

May you, my dear girls, be effectually convinced of the inestimable value of
this divine dispensation, and think with Dr. Young, that A Christian is the
highest style of man.

There are no virtuous dispositions -- no generous affections -- no truly noble
sentiments, that are not comprised in that sublime character. Possess it, my
young friends, for no higher distinction, or greater felicity, can possibly be
wished you by*

CORNELIA.

Just Published, [PRINTED BY W. SPOTSWOOD.] Price sewed in blue paper (...). 6d.
The DEATH of (...), IN FIVE BOOKS. -- By a LADY.

-- To wing
The imagination to the realms of light.
-- MILTON. The generality of those who have perused that beautiful and
much-admired production of Mr. Gessner's, the DEATH OF ABEL, have regretted the
unfinished state, in which the author seems to have left the piece; as, in
their opinion, he has given us only the first part of the tragedy, and
neglected to do poetical justice to the principal characters concerned. For the
satisfaction of such readers -- and every reader of taste and judgment must be
classed in this number -- the editor is happy to gratify their wishes, by
presenting them with the conclusion of the piece, successfully executed by one
of those lively imaginations, so generally remarked in writers of the fair sex.
The universal approbation, which her elegant performance has deservedly
obtained from the best judges in Britain -- and the rapid and extensive sale of
the numerous editions already printed there, will, it is hoped, prove a
sufficient recommendation to the candid American reader.

MAXIMS ADDRESSED TO YOUNG LADIES, ON THEIR FIRST ESTABLISHMENT IN THE WORLD.

BY THE COUNTESS DOWAGER OF CARLILSE.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY WILLIAM SPOTSWOOD.

M,DCC,XC.

Introduction.
I Undertake this little work, under the supposition, that those for whose
benefit I write it, have been well educated; if it shall fall into the hands of
such as are unblessed with this advantage, I will still presume to hope, the
counsels it contains, may in some degree correct, if not totally eradicate,
such errors as are the fruits of early neglect. On the other hand those to whom
their parents, guardians, or distant relations, shall have acquitted themselves
of this first of important duties, will find my precepts more easy to pursue.
The subject has been so frequently and so ably treated. I am conscious that
with inferior talents, it carries an appearance of temerity in me, to attempt
to point out something new, in so ^eaten a path of instruction. But it is my
intention to treat of such minute follies and blemishes, on the first entrance
of young persons into the great and critical world, as are the less avoidable,
as their consequences do not strike at first sight. There are, among these
mistakes, (they do not all merit a sharper epithet) some so blended with
engaging qualities that they too often attract and dazzle the eyes of
innocence, so as to excite a desire of imitation; and thus, by their pleasing,
but false colors, insensibly prove dangerous and fatal examples. These maxims
have been written at different periods, and were originally destined for the
perusal of a few, either relations, or acquaintances, on whose indulgence I
presumed to dep^^^* beyond that line they may appear frivolous, but experience
and observation has ^aught me, that every species of affectation, awkward
habits, and even involuntary omissions, when cast up by the strict hand of
censure and nice criticism, have so swelled the account, that persons guilty of
no capital indiscretion, have been, in the decline of youth, and its attendant
char^^^, treated with a severity unexpected by those accustomed to a lenity
that beauty, prosperity, and fashion had obtained from the public.

MAXIMS.
HABITUATE yourself to that way of life, most agreeable to the person, to whom
you are united; be content in retirement, or with society, with the town, or
the country.

If he should prefer the country during your earlier years, a period when
diversions are most attractive, it may at first be painful: you may be sensible
of the privation; but your chance for durable happiness is infinitely greater
there, than where each side is surrounded with continual dangers to domestic
tranquillity.

Make choice of such amusements, as will attach him to your company; study such
occupations, as will render you of consequence to him -- such as the management
of his fortune, and the conduct of his house; yet, without assuming a
superiority unbecoming your sex.

If his turn of mind leads him to the inspection and care of his estate, avoid
to interfere with a branch of government, not properly your sphere.

Should he be neglectful of his family interests, supply his place with
redoubled attention.

If public employment demand frequent absences from home, make his supposed
intentions there to be as much respected, as if he were present, by your own
deference to them.

If the contagion of example gain too strong an empire over him, if misled by
pleasures, or hurried by passion, let not your impatience prevent his return to
reason.

Let an early examination of his temper, prepare you to bear with inequalities,
to which all are more or less subject.

Do not attempt to destroy his innocent pleasures, by pretexts of economy;
retrench rather your own expenses, to promote them.

Should he sometimes delight in trivial occupations, treat such with
complaisance; as few, but the idle, have leisure to be very ill-tempered.

Disturb not the hours he may have allotted for amusement, with the recital of
domestic grievances.

Watch for, and profit of such moments of his leisure, as will allow him,
without pain or chagrin, to redress them.

Let your attentions be so continued, accompanied by no affectation, yet so
easy, as may prove they flow from the heart.

The least appearance of (...) mingled with assiduity, conveys a suspicion of
interest.

If absolute necessity, or free choice, call him often from home, (suppose it
to be (...) often) when he shall ^e visit that (...) make it so agreeable, that
it shall (...) acquire the preference.

Show the greatest respect to his near relations; observe a constant civility
toward the more distant; let there be no ma^k^d distinction between these, on
either side, in your own breast; natural affection may, nay ought to prevail.

Should you be so unfortunate as to be connected with a family, divided by
dissentions, or of various tempers, by studying them early, you will
distinguish such among them, as merit cultivation, and are open to friendship
-- you will consequently be acquitted by the world, for want of success, with
that part, to whom kindness would prove ineffectual.

During the education of men in schools, colleges, academies, friendships are
formed, perhaps too early sometimes to be judicious, but equally hard to
dissolve: -- if in consequence, you behold such with pain, do not attempt to
break them with precipitation.

When a person shall see his friends coolly received in his own house, he will
naturally seek occasions to meet them abroad; -- maintain therefore your
interest with him, by a polite behavior to those he so prefers, though you may
not.

From the moment you shall have formed an indissoluble engagement, avoid every
path which leads to jealousy; harbor not the dangerous guest with you; and, by
every prudent caution, suffer it not to fix near you.

Unbounded demonstrations of tenderness, though authorized by sacred ties, are
often as productive of inconveniences, as the most unwarrantable aversions.

Should you have too just cause for suspicion of a change of affection, and its
diversion to another object, let a ready and obliging indulgence attempt the
work of reformation; -- it promises better success, than discontent and
clamorous grief.

Jealously is often ideal; it is capricious; its dictates inconsiderate; its
suggestions fatal to mutual repose.

The allowed superiority of the other sex -- the liberties of their education
-- demand abundance of allowances from ours; if we aspire at esteem and
influence.

It would be equally mean to dissemble in a manner, that could increase the
con-contempt of those, who are the cruel cause of your sufferings, by hurting
your fortune, or by bereaving you of a friend.

If you discover, on the other side, a disposition to this unhappy passion;
treat the phantom as if it were a reality; try to remove the apparent cause, by
every sacrifice in your power, were it even to appear ridiculous in the eyes of
the world.

The most dangerous position for a young person to be thrown into, is for the
world to be apprized of her harsh treatment; it exposes her to every mode of
seduction, that interested pity can devise; and requires infinite virtue and
fortitude, to guard her against its insinuations.

The delicate, but firm counsels, of a friend, religion, and if possible, a
speedy retreat for a while, are the safest remedies against the artful, but
soothing attentions of real, or seeming admirers, at moments when the mind is
irritated by reproach, or the severities inflicted by unjust suspicions.

If a rooted aversion shall appear to be directed to any one object, abandon
the connection with decency and good breeding, in order that it may escape
observation; and, at the same time, exert all your endeavors, to erase that
object from your own memory.

Should your union be attended with greater felicity th^n is the usual lot of
our sex, govern your just affections to preserve it; -- by too much anxiety,
you may destroy it.

It is natural, in our uncertain state, to dread th^^ the changes it is liable
to; but our apprehensions, should be seldom repeated; as to easy natures it is
painful, to a harsher turn importunate.

Sufficient are the real difficulties we have each to encounter, in the course
of our lives; create none therefore; use your reason in combating the former;
and be silent, if the weakness of your frame prevents an entire suppression of
fictitious ones.

If afflicted with bad health, avoid complaint; -- it (...) an increasing
habit, affording no essential relief to the sufferer, and apt to make the lives
of others as irksome as your own.

You will contract indelicacy by description of your infirmities; -- you may
perhaps excite compassion from an humane disposition, but you risk a diminution
of affection.

The satisfaction of those on whom you depend, requires now and then some
degree of self-denial in you; -- amongst the happiest connexions, there will be
diversity of opinions; and it has of old been decreed, that those of the female
part of the creation should give way to their superiors.

Whatever dissentions may arise, how much soever your conduct and understanding
may justify the part you take in them, suffer the interference of no third
person, especially if you suppose their partiality would lead them to decide in
your favor.

Do not permit your nearest intimates to disturb your peace at home, by oblique
insinuations; check their first approaches with severity, or ^light them by
silence.

Female friendships are but too frequently bars to domestic peace; they are
more (...) by the communication of mutual (...) the desire of amending them.

(...) to obtain a clear insight into (...) of those persons of your sex, (...)
may incline you to wish to (...) with them, before you (...) unlimitted
confidence.

In making a just estimation of the extreme value, and extensive duties, the
sacred name of friendship demands, you will not too precipitately embark in
such an engagement.

The friendships between two very young women; early produced in the theater of
the great world, and both equally engaged in all the frivolities of fashion,
are usually but slightly cemented, and they are as briefly dissolved.

In the choice of a friend, prefer a person less young than yourself; -- her
experience will supply your ignorance, and a single word of seasonable advice,
skreen you from the blame of multitudes.

If your friendship can hold good against the superiority of beauty and
talents, that friendship will deserve its name.

Suffer not any, unauthorized by affinity, to be frequently repeating the
criticisms of the world on your conduct; -- on trifling occasions it is seldom
corrective, but it never fails to ^our the temper.

There are but too many, who seek rather to gratify their own malignity, under
the cloak of friendship, by the circulation of sarcasm, than to operate your
reformation.

Be, on your side, as little liberal of your counsels, as you are patient in
receiving them.

But if convinced, that, to impart your opinion is to save your friend, set
complaisance^ interest, and policy aside; your impartiality will ensure success.

(...) confidences are, in general, better avoided; but if you be entrusted
with important secrets, endure every reproach, even the world's censure, rather
than reveal them.

Various are the artifices, employed, for the gratification of curiosity,
against the young and unguarded, according to the dispositions; the pride of
some, the generosity of others, is worked on; and ^^^etimes, the desire of
convincing the ^^eming incredulous produces the wished ^ffect.

Listen neither to the suggestions of pleasure nor interest, where the felicity
or security of a friend is concerned.

There are favorable moments, that active friendship may seize, which present
themselves in the course of almost every one's life, never to be recovered, if
once lost sight of.

Half the worthy intentions, flowing from a good but unexperienced heart, are
rendered ineffectual by procrastination, or the interposition of alluring
trifles.

Do not say to yourself, 'I write tomorrow; I will even supplicate the next
week in behalf of a friend;' if you can actually and usefully employ the
present hour in the same service.

If, from your situation in life, you are destined to pass it among those who
are called fashionable, bon ton, etc. arm yourself with a strong preparation of
reason and resolution.

Adopt as few as possible of the modish follies this state will expose you to.

Endeavor, however, to avoid incurring the epithets of severe, of prudish,
(...) of envious, by arrogant censure: -- by your conduct alone mark your
disapprobation.

Let no indirect adulation involve you in any singularity of dress, manners, or
opinions: -- the first, who would thus misl^^^ will be the first to ridicule
you in future.

It is almost impossible to escape the influence of some prejudices, from the
continual adherence to the same society: -- such have a mutual interest in
defending (...) failings; -- it were therefore safer to be more diffusive,
perhaps to be less pleased, but certainly less calumniated.

It is more advantageous to live with our superiors or equals, than with those
of an inferior (...) it being less the interest of such to flatter our foibles.

Let no such expression fall from your lips, as low company, no body, because
your rank in life may separate you in general from society of lower degree, but
perhaps possessing superior merit to that you are connected with

Be extremely cautious in the choice of those who are to be your attendants.
Let none in your service be permitted a levity or licentiousness of behavior,
however insinuating in speech.

Shut your ears against every prejudice, which the long services of persons
about you may encourage them to attempt inspiring you with.

Do not suffer your partiality to one domestic to occasion a harsh treatment of
the rest. We daily experience, that the want of education, among those even in
your own sphere, is productive of numberless errors; it will of course be our
own fault, if we delegate too much power to such as have not judgment to use it.

Rule, as far as you are able, with an even hand; and steer between pride and
familiarity.

Let our own example discountenance small irregularities, that they may not
augment.

Treat no kind of misconduct among your friends with indifference, much less
with mirth or applause, in the hearing of your servants; as they will not fail
to take an advantage of it at some moment or other.

Scorn to employ them, at any juncture, in mean researches for the
gratification of your curiosity: -- it will entitle them to indulge their own
at your expense. Teach them, by your own steady adherence to truth, and a
becoming abhorrence of the least deviation from it, a strict observance of its
dictates.

On the first discovery of a fault, obstruct not a free confession of it, by
excessive severity.

Prevent your servants from interfering with or revealing the embroilments in
other families.

Wherever your influence shall be established, let not a word or look
contribute to the distress or disgrace of dependent persons: save them, if your
humane interposition can effect a work of such justice.

Incline ever to the merciful side, in reproof or condemnation of your
domestics: if the offender shall be lost to repentance, afterward you will
have nothing to reproach yourself with.

There are moments of uneasiness, from which none on earth can always be
exempt; but let it not fall, in sallies of peevishness, on your servants.

If hurried, by a natural harshness of temper, into some sudden passionate
expression, be not ashamed, on due reflection, to apologize for it: -- few
minds are so base, as not to feel the condescension.

It is a justifiable pride, if any may be deemed such, to conceal our joys or
our sorrows from those who are incapable of understanding their causes.

Allow your servants certain hours of innocent relaxation, when their daily
task is well performed.

Rigorously correct all propensity to gaming; but, to enforce the precept,
observe it yourself.

Furnish them with a constant series of occupation; pay their acquirement of a
useful talent, if you shall perceive their disposition toward learning; if
inclined to read, give them books adapted to their capacity; and prohibit such
as may endanger their principles.

Take care that they diligently perform their religious duties, even if of a
different persuasion from your own. It is impossible that those, who neglect
the first of all services, should serve you well.

Take tender care of them in sickness: give them suitable consolation in
distress; and, at such periods, put away the superior, to assume the Christian
alone.

Demonstrate, by the justice of your orders, your perfect knowledge of all that
concerns your family affairs.

You will in no wise demean yourself by examining minutely into all the detail^
of your household at proper seasons.

Your sudden and unexpected appearance will awaken that diligence among your
servants, which too frequent and familiar communication will lay asleep.

Inspections, diligently and judiciously made, will maintain probity among your
agents; but a suspicious temper will only encourage hypocrisy, and teach craft
and treachery.

Conceal, from the indifferent spectator, the secret springs, which move,
regulate, and perfect the arrangements of your household.

A good manager and a notable woman proves but too often to be a very
unpleasant being in society. These duties should be performed in the circle of
their own domestic sphere, and are never to be boasted of out of it.

If your fortune be moderate, economy is absolutely necessary: if
considerable, method and prudence will render it doubly beneficial.

Observe the utmost regularity in the keeping of your household accounts: -- it
is tranquillity to you, and justice to your dependants.

Young persons, unacquainted with the vicissitudes of fortune, live mostly
according to the nominal, not the effective value of their estates. But those,
who allow themselves hours of reflection, must expect changes, and prepare for
accidents.

Suffer not avaricious principles to deceive you in the shape of economy, nor
a desire of augmenting your fortune to render you oppressive.

Exert the powers of persuasion on the person you depend on, to make those, who
depend on you, happy.

By examples of pity in your own breast, prevent and discourage the unfeeling
though warranted pursuits of rapacious emissaries in collecting your due from
your estate.

If, in order to live yourself, you are compelled to trouble the existence of
others, endeavor, by some (...) of lenity and charity, to compensate for ^^eir
present distress.

The luxury of this age exacts from the mistress of a great house, or indeed a
smaller, some attention to a table. Disdain not therefore to give a proper
application to that study.

Neatness and elegance should be joined to each other: -- ostentation and
profusion are in general equally united, and equally to be avoided.

Those, who suddenly arrive at affluence in dependent stations, are subject to
neglect the interests of their superiors.

The pretext of doing you honor is the common excuse for extravagance, among
such as are attached to you only from motives of interest.

Superfluities in a great family, well directed, would save a multitude of
objects from distress: -- devote them therefore only to that worthy purpose.

Let your attention at your table (...) universal; nor sit down to it, like a
manger, yourself.

There should be no marked preferences shown, where popularity may essentially
contribute to the welfare of a family.

It is not hypocrisy, to conceal just dislike at certain periods.

Avoid whispering in mixed societies: -- it is alarming to the suspicious,
mortifying to the humble, and, in itself, a habit of great impropriety.

Loud speaking, and excessive laughter, the latter either pointed or unmeaning,
are both unbecoming. These unguarded customs, contracted among intimates, are
never pardoned by the world.

Assume no masculine airs. To support necessary fatigue is meritorious; but
real robustness, and superior force, is denied you by nature -- its semblance,
denied you by the laws of decency.

On no occasion relax in the article of cleanliness regarding your own person;
nor suffer indolence or sickness to destroy a habit, which is as much connected
with health, as it is with decorum.

With regard to dress, do not aspire to be a leader in fashions, nor excessive
in point of ornament.

Follow fashions at a moderate distance; nor blindly adopt such as may expose
you to ridicule; for servile imitation makes no distinctions.

Age, beauty, and fortune, should be similar to make the same ornaments
suitable to different persons: pursue therefore your own path of propriety, and
consult your reason more than your glass.

Give up every favorite opinion, in point of dress, (...) that of those whom it
is your duty to please.

While young, you have little need of ornaments -- when old, they are
ineffectual.

Attempt not to attract the eye of the public, by singularity; censure will
silence applause, however flattery may have encouraged you in the enterprise.

Those of our sex, endowed with rare talents, are sometimes too negligent of
personal advantages. Science and neatness are no natural opponents.

A superior understanding will exclude the little vanities habitual to our sex:
but it must not extinguish that complaisance, due to the customs of a world we
are destined to live with, provided it leads us not beyond the limits of our
fortune.

There are societies so critical in dress, as to render their access terrible
to sensible and modest persons; whose consciousness of their bodily defects, or
of the smallness of their revenues, ill prepare them to encounter contemptuous
examination.

Should those you are the most intimate with, fall inadvertantly into mistakes
that may expose their dress or manner to ridicule, it will be as kind to give
them private admonition, as it would be inhuman to join in the public censure.

It is evident, that the graces of the person give favorable impressions of the
mind -- which reflection should be a monitor to correct all awkward habits and
gestures.

Too great a degree of timidity is productive of the very inconveniences that
real modesty would urge us to avoid: look around in society, on the conceited
and ignorant; and cease to blush and tremble among them.

Be neither vain of your birth, nor your present rank: they are accidents, not
always acquired by merit; perhaps, in the issue, to be lamented.

If elevated by alliance beyond your expectance, endeavor to support that
advantage by the dignity of your actions.

Give no one, by arrogance, or ill-timed haughtiness, title to enquire into
your origin, or to wish your return to that station you have been elevated from.

Let no unexpected exaltation abate your love or veneration for your parents.

Dare to testify public respect to perhaps obscure relations, whom fortune has
neglected, while she has smiled on you.

Let neither time, change of place, nor prosperity, diminish your gratitude
toward those from whom you have once received an obligation.

There is a certain forced humility, as offensive to delicate feelings, as a
revealed pride; in acting this part, you may deceive yourself, but you will not
those whose good will you would wish to conciliate.

Should accident throw in your way some former acquaintance of your youth, whom
misfortune has pursued, and whom afflictions have driven from your more flowery
path of life, endeavor to obliterate their humiliating remembrance of those
happier times, by unaffected kindness.

Redouble even your attention to the unfortunate; avoid every subject that may
awaken or increase distress.

Let no false shame induce you to check an exertion of pity, nor think it great
to seem unfeeling.

Sustain patiently a very common, but false imputation of a want of
understanding, rather than avow a want of good nature.

Be undauntedly courageous in the defense of your neighbor's character, when
you have just foundation to think (...) injured.

Be sparing of censure at all times, and liberal of applause.

Guard your tongue and your pen against bitterness; above all, when the object
may ever have offended you.

The strongest proof we can give of the excellency of our principles, is the
pardon of injuries, as it is that of our victory over our passions.

During your youth, be cautious of your manner of speaking of the beauty of
your own sex; of their characters, when you grow old.

Should heaven have bestowed much personal perfection on you, take redoubled
care of your mind.

Consider a more than ordinary share of beauty, rather as a trial than a gift.

You have only to contemplate the scenes this world daily presents you with* of
the fragility and brevity of youth and beauty, to prevent all comparisons from
hurting you.

Exert your candor, and show your compassion toward those, whose beauty may
have exposed them to error and misfortunes.

If sure of your own conduct, you can (...) to protect unhappy victims of
slander, you risk to incur your portion of censure; but guarded by conscience,
and directed by humanity, these arrows will only glance, and not wound you.

There is a distinction to be observed between countenance and pity.

Be never lukewarm in the praise of cotemporaries. It is surely a pleasing task
to being that merit to light, which has bee^ obscured by adversity, or
concealed by modesty.

There is a style of praise so blended with Buts, and Ifs, that it loses its
energy before it reaches the object.

From your manner of joining in commendation of the absent, your sincerity will
be judged, and discernment will penetrate the veil of reluctant approbation.

Call on your pride, to suppress those emotions of envy, that charity cannot
canquer.

Reflect on the perpetual vicissitudes, the most beautiful, the most prosperous
are subject to: you will soon exchange the look of disdain, for that of pity,
and the murmurs of comparison, for expressions of gratitude, on your security
from similar accidents.

Let the virtues and graces of those of your own age serve as incentives to
your emulation.

Shut your eyes to the personal blemishes of your acquaintance, and open your
ear to the sound of their virtues.

At that age when vanity reigns the most despotically, call generosity and
goodnature to your aid: at least prevent its ill^^ects on others, if you
yourself cannot entirely guard against its attacks.

Should there, among your connexions, ^e some one, from inevitable and remote
causes, plunged into distress, or even from misconduct; deny yourself a
superfluous ornament privately, to relieve them.

Should a plentiful fortune enable you to indulge a disposition to give,
complete the happiness of the receivers by the manner of bestowing.

The language of contempt, flowing from a conscious superiority, arises from
the mistake, that accidental gifts of fortune are the portion of merit: avoid
ever to use it to an unhappy inferior.

There is a particular grace appropriated to the exertion of each virtue; and
charity has its claim: you may bestow millions with awkwardness and
insensibillity; refuse, yet not displease.

You will hardly be able to compensate, by a long expected gift, the (...) your
hesitation may have occasioned.

If ever you should have been a sufferer from ingratitude, (and who has not
more or less?) do not permit the recollection to ha^den your heart.

Of all the delicate sensations the mind is capable of, none perhaps will
surpass (...) which attends the relief of an avowed enemy.

Be fearless of the effects of revenge, (...) you are compelled, by the
worthlessness (...) an object, to refuse your assistance.

Let not your love of popularity impose on your innate principles of justice,
so far as to let you countenance dishonor, to purchase adulation.

Attend to the age and character of those who solicit your favors; encourage
youth in industry; procure the aged repose.

Observe a constant respect toward the advanced in age of every condition;
excuse their infirmities, indulge their fancies, and mitigate the pains of
decay.

Suffer no harsh expression to mark your impatience, ocasioned by the
misapprehension of decayed faculties.

Do not consider, during your youth, the aged, as distinct beings from
yourself: your journey, if you live, will be more speedy, than you imagine, to
the same period, an^ render you equally dependant on the compassion and
patience of a younger race.

It is not always necessary for different ages to assort with each other; but
when circumstances demand it, be assured, the ^enefit will be on the younger
side, whose knowledge must be inferior, and consequently their power of amusing
less.

You will reap more satisfaction from conferring obligations on persons of a
certain age, than on those on a younger date; there is a certain attendant
pride on hope, at the beginning of life, that experience, on the decline of it,
contributes to suppress.

It is not an ostentatious gift, that will excite real gratitude.

A friendly word, a seasonable recommendation may, at some juncture, procure as
much advantage, as a pecuniary kindness at another.

Be mindful to avoid making rash promises: your professions, without reason to
imagine you can render them effectual, are an injustice time must reveal.

It is better to occasion an agreeable surprise than a painful disappointment:
a modest activity will produce the one, a presumptuous confidence the other.

When you shall contemplate necessity struggling with modesty: endeavor to
oblige, in a manner that shall meet the wish halfway, and save the blush of
request.

Let not your delicacy repose at the moment of conferring a benefit: continue
to employ it in restraining the vanity of a recital, or even of a remoter hint
of that action, which the laws of religion and morality prescribe, to all
Christians particularly.

Do not expect an equivalent for a^ kindness, where there shall be the means;
for generosity ceases to merit the name, (...) it is to become an exchange.

Make no person wait, who is dependant on you. The loss of time, to all who
have to live by the careful employment of it, is the loss of their bread.

Of all the pernicious customs, to which the unthinking opulent are subject,
that of suffering trades-people to languish at your door, or in your
ante-chamber, is one of the most insolent and prejudicial.

Content yourself, in making purchases, with less than the exact return, rather
than to be eternally disputing for more: on the other hand, it is unjust to
yourself and your connexions, to allow of glaring impositions.

There is no practice more mean and trifling, than that of displacing,
unfolding, and trespassing on useful occupations, by comments on merchandise
you have previously resolved not to buy.

If you really do not find that which you have sought for -- if you shall have
been obliged to take up the time and disappoint the hopes of humble industry --
endeavor to show your regret, by the acquisition of some trifle you may not
instantly want.

But above all, do not attempt to depreciate a work of real merit, either
because your faculties deny your acquirement of it, or that it corresponds not
with your ideas of perfection.

If your choice and taste meet with approbation, let those, who have executed
your designs in furniture, dress, or equipage, share the praise and profit of
the world's opinion, by a circulation of their talents.

You will consult your own interest, in treating the persons, with whom you
have any business to transact, with due politeness.

Weigh, in the scale of humanity, the in-clemencies of the weather, the fatigue
of distance, which those may be exposed to suffer, whom you shall employ.

Lay aside your dignity and a parade of opulence, for a moment sometimes, to
place yourself in that inferior station, which providence has been pleased, for
wise ends, to have separated you from, and exempted from its humiliation, for a
very, very short space.

To be punctual to your engagements, and civil in your intercourse with persons
of every degree, will derogate neither from riches, beauty, or knowledge.

Nothing, which is blended with the good of society, should be treated with
indifference.

In no other light, but that of decency and modesty, at public diversions, seek
to be conspicuous.

Avoid coming late into a theater or an assembly. Your right to disturb an
audience, however secured by personal advantage, may be disputed you very
disagreeably at some period or other.

Loud speech, affected laughter, must ever be censured, as ill-bred toward
superiors, troublesome to the public.

There are some, who seek diversions, yet carry thither a discontented
countenance: but do you have the courage to express satisfaction at what is
designed to please.

Refuse not to join in the general praise of those whose talents have been
devoted to the entertainment of the public: though your single suffrage may
prove of little weight, yet, added to that of the multitude, it will at least
imply an humane intention.

Beware of bestowing public applause, but by attention and smiles: -- it is the
province of the other sex to declare their sentiments by acclamation.

If your birth or connexions shall bring you often into the presence of the
still greater, observe a due respect, but avoid low adulation.

Let no gracious familiarity, from the indulgence of superiors, take you off
your guard, or produce a momentary omission of attentive duty: -- these are
scarcely ever forgotten, and seldom pardoned.

Permit no foolish insinuations or ill-bred examples ever to involve you in the
disgrace of improper behavior in public or in private.

To be exact in the rules of good breeding, is, in the eyes of fools of
fashion, deemed awkwardness and ignorance. Sustain these interpretations
without emotion; and persist intrepidly, with your usual politeness, to keep
impertinence at a distance.

If an uncommon portion of favor fall to your share, show you merit the
distinction by your moderation.

Be certain you will hereafter be called (...) a strict account of the use you
shall have made of those advantages, which providence shall have bestowed upon
you.

Should that hand, which gave, take away, let the recollection of your worthy
employ of power or riches, while in possession of them, console you for the
privation.

Suffer no degree of elevation to engage you too far in the exertion of power.
Those, whom you are obliged to refuse, will longer remember the disobligation,
than those, whom you shall have gratified, the benefits conferred on them.

Avoid warmth on political subjects: however clear your judgment, your sex is a
bar to the belief of it.

Party fascinates the eyes and prejudices the understandings even of men: but
partialities in our sex will be attributed to want of education and want of
discernment.

It is nothing unusual to see young persons flattered by the set they live in,
into a persuasion of their power to influence in matters utterly beyond their
sphere.

A beauty, with some share of talents, is apt to persuade herself, that her
arguments will prove as irresistible as her eyes, and that teasing will lose
the appearance of importunity, in those of an admirer. If she gain success but
once, she will ^oon be convinced how dangerous the repetition will prove.

Obstinacy in dispute becomes habitual: -- beware of it: -- it will insensibly
degenerate into passion; and passion degrades a woman.

If present at altercations among your friends, and you shall be appealed to,
avoid making a decision -- certain of creating one enemy in the condemned
person.

If you shall be subdued rather than convinced by argument, retain no sullen
remembrance of your defeat.

If, on your return from society, you find you have resisted the first impulse
of your temper by checking the impatience of answer, your silence will afford
you a pleasant remembrance.

In mixed conversation, do not engross more than a small portion of it.

There are many, who will better bear an injury, than an interruption.

Do not take upon you the task of correcting the vanity of others: -- it is a
delight mixed with some degree of malice.

Avoid the introduction of your knowledge into general conversation (according
to the just but vulgar term) by the head and shoulders.

Embark not too far on subjects you do ^ot completely possess.

Let not your vivacity carry you too far, even in the line of truth.

Adapt your discourse to that of your company. An affected superiority is
seldom the attendant on a refined understanding.

Despise no one, nor any innocent mode of being or acting, because not adopted
by your circle or coterie.

Too often it happens, that the motive, for engaging constantly with any one set,
is derived from pride; and risks either to offend, or to be offended by the
excluded.

If you wish to persuade and convince, do not prescribe or dictate. An innate
love of liberty, among all degrees, will infallibly excite the spirit of revolt
against all dictatorial sentiments.

Curiosity is a foible, I fear, not unjustly attributed to our sex: -- while it
remains merely as a guide in the read of instruction, it is useful; but when
stretched into an impertinent enquiry, it is odious.

Question with caution and politeness, if obliged to it, from a just desire of
information. An habitual questioner rarely waits for an answer.

When you discover a studied intention to ^^^ceal events and their causes from
you, be assured it proceeds from a suspicion of your indiscretion.

You cannot inflict a juster punishment on the mistrustful or malicious, than
to resist your wish for explanation of mysterious insinuations.

Intermix no peevishness with your answer to idle and improper questions. A
distant complaisance will sooner protect you against repeated attacks of that
nature, than impatience.

Endeavor to correct a disposition to absence of mind -- its effects are
various -- some amusing, some ridiculous, but all unprofitable.

Absence of mind has, in some instances, been contracted from a desire of
imitating persons, whose ^ame in other respects has veiled their errors.

By permitting your reflections to carry you from your society, you expose
yourself to very hazardous mistakes.

From the moment you cease to be present to your company, you may lose ^ig^t of
their connexions, misfortunes, or defects; and become cruelly personal, by
unheeded observations and recitals.

At the close of each day, try to recapitulate the part you have acted in it.
An impartial scrutiny may cost you some uneasy moments; but if may prevent
future indiscretion.

If you can accuse yourself of having touched some tender string by an
unguarded ^ally, make the earliest atonement you can.

Do not ever allow yourself to exaggerate in praise or in censure.

Truth is sometimes outrun by an ambition to shine; this throws the speaker
into the superlative, and leaves reality behind.

In relating an event, confine yourself to facts and simplicity.

By sacrificing vanity to veracity, you will, for a moment's humiliation,
secure a lasting credit.

Above all, when your personal interest comes i^ question, lay aside pride,
avarice and revenge.

Be on your guard against misrepresentation, and be certain before you hazard
repetition.

Take care how you sacrifice those who may have furnished you with
intelligence, or who may have incautiously sought to amuse an uneasy hour,
without foreseeing the injury that may result from the circulation.

Be not prone to imagine, that the arrows of sarcasm, so often and so
heedlessly thrown out in mixed companies, are always pointed at you It is
absolutely necessary to assume a decent courage in numerous societies; for too
(...) a sensibility deprives the owner of any degree of defense against insult
and arrogance.

Do not embitter the cheerfulness of conversation by gloomy reflections.

Whether from momentary or lasting causes you labor under uneasiness of mind,
society must not share it.

It is wrong to diminish innocent satisfaction by coffeehouse and gloom.
Seek and nourish content when it approaches; nor suffer yesterday or tomorrow
to poison the present moment.

Were we to dive too deeply into the sources and motives of the most laudable
actions, we may, by tarnishing their luster, deprive ourselves of a pleasure.

If you shall happen to receive more civility than your modesty will permit you
to allow you are entitled to, let no sordid suspicion cause you to attribute it
to low design, unless marked indeed.

Adulation is easily to be distinguished from universal complaisance and good
humor.

Be well assured of the strength of your own mind, and calmness of your temper,
before you consult any one, on matters of consequence to yourself.

In telling the truth, and exposing facts, you may excite and even merit
contradiction. Examine previously, how far you are prepared to bear it.

Seek the company of those, whose lights, from every known advantage, are
superior to your own.

Supposing that satire should be gilded with all the splendour of wit and
learning, that will attract present applause, be well aware, that you may
indeed be first the idol, but finally the victim, of the satirist.

Where taciturnity and cold reserve is absolutely necessary, it is at the
moment, when raillery, however genteel, and criticism equally brilliant, shall
be the favorite topic of conversation.

The only real benefit to be derived from poignant censure, is the application
to the errors our conscience shall accuse us of; never to the condemnation of
others.

The characteristics of real virtue are humility, compassion, and benevolence:
the assumed, are pride, hardness to the world's imperfections, blindness to our
own.

We are somewhat prone to make rash reflections on misfortunes or misconduct.
Avoid this injustice -- ignorance is often the cause -- (...) the effect.

If ambitiously disposed, turn that passion toward the improvement of your
mind: every other motion will end in disappointment.

Seek to gain, early in life, such perfections as are adapted to your situation
in present, or your prospect in future.

There are acquirements, which, at the first view, do not occur to be so
necessary, as in a series of time (...) may prove. Treasure them up for the day
of retr^^t or the ^our of sorrow.

If neither a numerous family, nor a limited fortune, demands the entire and
continued use of you^ faculties toward the care of the one, or the
preservation of the other, employ the remains of your leisure in profitable
studies.

In every situation it is proper to pay due attention to your family concerns.
That du^y acquitted, consider all supernumerary employment, as relaxation.

Despise no occupation, as vulgar or trifling, that can contribute to any
general benefit.

There have been, and there still exist, many sensible persons, who lead the
life of romance, that can stoop to no vulgar cares. But you will, by pursuing
such examples, hurt your fortune, neglect your children, and finally risk to be
awakened from your fairy dream by some sad but common event.

Do not mistake the omission of any proper attention, for elevation of
sentiment.

If possessed of a certain facility in the acquirement of language or science,
avoid an impertinent display of knowledge.

Nothing more dangerous than the misapplication of talents: vanity is the
source, and ridicule will be the consequence.

Though modestly convinced of your great distance from perfection, it is a
becoming mark of resolution, to persist in the pursuit of it.

Endeavor to restrain your ideas from wandering, when all your application
becomes requisite.

Be not repulsed by the first difficulties in learning. The roughness of the
^oad to any science will insensibly decrease, as you approach the summit.

If, on strict scrutiny, you shall discover you have ^ot a real turn to a
particular accomplishment, which sometimes an undiscerning mode of education
has compelled you to aspire after, lay such aside on the conviction, and pursue
those your own taste directs you to.

Adapt your studies to your circumstances: there are some attended with much
expense, and which may cause your family to lament your knowledge.

If your talents be such as can contribute to the entertainment of your
friends, weary them not, by affected noncompliance in exerting them.

If your genius direct you to the study of music, treat it as a repose from
business, not as the business of your life

If you shall perceive, that music exalts your sentiments increases your
devotion, and harmonizes your mind, you may be assured of your vocation.

Avoid the raptures and the prejudices, sometimes the attendant follies on an
unbounded love of music.

If you can listen with complaisance to, and join sincerely in, the praise of
those of your acquaintance, who shall excel in the performance of music, you
are, in all probability, not far remote from perfection yourself.

When you shall have once conquered the difficulties attendant on execution,
let not accidental interruption render them useless.

Let not ill-timed timidity get the better of your hand or your voice, as is
frequently the case; nor too much assurance, on the other hand, urge you to
force the attention of superior proficients to yourself.

If you have in early youth acquired a fine hand, preserve it with care.

Much business, or much indolence, is equally destructive to a fine hand.

An elegant hand, expressing elegant sentiments, (...) like a favorable light
to a good picture.

In pursuing the dictates of your heart toward the persons, who are the
nearest, and ought to (...) the dearest to you, your letters will of course be
persuasive, (...) l^ss you are unhappily connected with hearts of steel.

Let your letters on business be plain, concise, (...) civil -- they should
ever be written twice over.

In letters of mere ceremony, it will be well to turn them over; and when
either error or obscurity shall be observed, to correct, nay, change their
style once more though usually a trial to female patience.

Preserve a copy of every letter you write or receive This exactitude will
secure you against future accusations and misinterpretation

In addressing parents or others of your relations, mingle your expressions of
duty and regard with as much ^ase as they will admit of.

In most extremes of passion, when they would speak, and reflection is mute, we
are disposed to write exactly when and what we should not.

In answering a letter of insult or provocation, be sure of possessing
yourself, before you reply; for a rash expression may rise one day in judgment
against you, and when you have even forgotten the quarrel and the cause.

It is so great a present satisfaction to write a smart thing, that you may
perhaps be unconscious it is inhuman.

Adopt no style but your own, in writing. No imitations will surpass, in
energy, real feelings.

Rigorously weigh, in the scale of truth, whatever assertions you shall commit
to paper.

Your word once passed to keep a letter secret, (...) no temptation prompt you
to reveal its contents.

I^ writing to the afflicted, be extremely delicate and tender in the choice of
your language.

Of all difficult tasks, none can be more so, than (...) of the attempt to
console on a recent misfortune. On such an emergency, let your pen be solely
guided (...) your feelings.

An abundance of reasoning, on some subjects, employs more eloquence than
sentiment.

Spell well, if you can: -- we begin with that lesson; -- we often forget it
early. There is a want of harmony in ill spelling, which prejudices you against
the sense of a letter.

Encourage and pursue an inclination to reading, early in life: it is laying up
a treasure for the latter part of it, provided you collect it from such authors
as may guard and guide your steps in it.

Prefer, on the subject of pretty, the plainest lessons, and what is written to
your heart, and not your head.

Throw not away your time on metaphysics. Your faith once settled, let no
specious fabulist shake it.

Read with constancy the new testament, that your memory may be furnished with
sure but cheerful admonition.

Choose all that is consolatory in religion. The first approaches of pious
sentiments are often repelled by an unjust dread of all-pitying providence.

Let your prayers be humble, short, but energic.

If unhappily turned toward severity on the nonobservance of religious
precepts by others, an impartial examination of your own conduct will be your
most effectual corrector.

If abundance of leisure shall allow you to extend your studies, let
arithmetic, geography, chronology, and natural history, compose the principal
part.

Observe to begin your day with reading of some serious nature.

The reading of elegant authors will insensibly polish your language; but
adhere not to the beauty of ^ounds, and the brilliancy of images alone.

The early part of female education has sometimes accustomed the mind to
credulity, from the pleasure that the mavelous then afforded.

Endeavor, by solidity of reading, to overthrow phantoms that may disturb your
peace in latter days.

Exclude all trifles, while any part of your time can be usefully employed in
the article of reading

Romances of a moral tendency may not prove unuseful, in their effects on a
mind fatigued by unavoidable application.

An excessive love of romance will make you expect to lead the life of one, and
will place common cares too low in your estimation, for you to attend to them.

A melancholy turn may render the tragic muse grateful to such sensations; but
it is dangerous to indulge it too far, unless accompanied by religious
submission.

If naturally blessed with a good memory, exercise it continually.

Rest not contented with the plea of a bad memory; it is but another name for
negligence, among young persons.

There are certainly degrees of memory, some more feeble, some more perfect
than others; for the one, there are many helps; the other must be supported
properly.

Resolution and perseverance are correctives to an indolent memory.

Repeat to yourself, or transcribe what is necessary to retain for your
instruction.

When you seriously wish for, and seek information, and would avoid those
mistakes which are the result of ignorance, return to the passages you found
difficult to comprehend, and by writing them down, they will remain fixed in
your memory.

If you venture to hazard your opinions on past events, be sure of the dates
and names; for inaccuracies in these, are mistakes imputed to our sex

It will not degrade you, if you modestly interrogate those, whose characters
for learning and principle are established in the world; lights from such will
clear your way in the path of knowledge.

An exact memory will skreen you from public ridicule or anger, by making you
silent on particular occurrences; or keep your place, if you have any, or
prevent your encroachments on that of those who are superior to you.

An extensive and tenacious memory should be allied to found judgment, that it
may not be a storehouse of minutes and useles^, epochas.

Materials, which memory shall collect, ought to be of the benevolent kind; and
when re-produced, let discretion and charity distribute them.

Employ the powers of memory, in the recollection of the favors of Providence,
of the blessings and escapes we have received from that all giving hand.

You should apply to the succor of memory, when trouble inclines you to fix
your eye too closely on the present.

Endeavor to set the remembrance of former kindness, against the sense of
recent injury.

It is a happy and laudable memory, that is willing to return the good offices
of those who are no longer in a state to serve you.

There exists sometimes, and too much among the weak of our sex (...) certain
malicious kind of memory, that can call forth the defects or errors of
cotemporaries, or some family blemish, at the moment when good nature, is
bestowing its encomium on the object.

Unless it be to give assistance in some material point, which may concern the
interests or happiness of your acquaintance, it becomes often necessary to
restrain quotations or recitals, which your memory may furnish you with,
particularly in mixed assemblies.

A female traveller should be doubly cautious in the communication her memory
may urge her to make of her observations; as they minutest mistakes in
geography, ancient history, etc. will expose her to just, though perhaps
envious criticism.

To preserve a memory long, good hours are requisite: for its decay usually
keeps pace with that of the body.

The hours you can steal from the idle, must secure your superiority over them;
and, in rising early, you will find, you have been able to bestow a due portion
of time on religion, worldly business, and the cultivation of your mind.

Your health, your spirits, and your interests, will all finally be sufferers,
by the fashionable habit of keeping late hours.

The only reparation you can make to your own conscience, or your friends and
family, for the throwing away of irrevocable time, will be your redoubled
endeavors to employ the remainder well.

When you shall rise in a morning, with strength of body, and an unrepenting
heart, you will be ^imply recompensed for your resistance to fashion, and for
having been one of the earliest in quit^^^^ (...) ball, or the card table.

If the love of admiration, in your youthful days, shall bear no part in your
attachment to the amusements of the theater, there are none more instructive,
none more eligible for relaxation.

When you can fix your mind on the scenes before you, when the eye shall not
wander to, nor the heart flutter at, the surrounding objects of the spectacle,
you will return home instructed and improved.

The great utilities you may reap from well acted tragedy, are the exciting
your compassion to real sufferings, the suppression of your vanity in
prosperity, and the inspiring you with heroic patience in adversity.

In comedy you will receive continual correction, delicately applied to your
errors and foibles Be impartial in the application, and divide it humbly with
your acquaintance and friends, and even your enemies.

Let nothing, termed diversion, absorb all your leisure; it will pall finally
on your taste, and become insipid from frequency.

Endeavor to check an early propensity to play, beyond what is merely
requisite to keep up society.

Moderate play, at seasonable hours, proves sometimes a happy interposition,
when it silences the voice of slander, and stops the volubility of tongue.

If, from connexions and complaisance, you are obliged constantly to play, let
moderation be your leading rule.

Great sensibility at play will, on some occasions, carry the same appearance
as avarice; you must therefore endeavor to subdue it.

Avoid the exclamations and gestures of joy or sorrow, so common at the (...)
table, and so ridiculous to the uninterested spectator.

Weary not the ears of your society with the recapitulation of your own losses,
and the mistakes of your partners.

If you are known to be unfortunate at play, there will be many in hopes of
profiting of your disasters, and as many who will blame you for playing at all.

Support with decency every provocation, that ill breeding and avarice may give
you at play; but you will merit a repetition of that behavior, if you ever
play again with such persons; the one is maintaining, the other will be
lessening, your dignity.

Listen with patience to the criticisms of superior players to yourself; you
may retire with the reflection of having bestowed less of your time on a
frivolous science, than they.

Should good luck enable you to add something to your expense, apply a portion
of it to the relief of distress; it is a kind of retribution for dissipation.

It has happened that, in order to maintain useful connexions, persons of
limited fortunes have been compelled to dress, or play beyond their faculties;
if such come in your way, endeavor to soften the pain of their subjection to
custom, by not profiting of your advantages over them, and which your better
fortune may have offered you.

When time, sorrow, or other causes, shall have abated your love of diversion,
make your retreat silently, and without censure on the taste of others.

If you desire to continue agreeably in the world, in the latter season of your
life, rather promote, than restrain, the innocent amusements of younger
persons; that the echo of cheerfulness may reach your ears.

Prepare yourself for durable solitude and retreat, by some transient (...)
from time to time.

Be thoroughly assured of the constancy of your disposition, and the solidity
of your motives, before you totally engage in retirement.

It is not a recent loss, nor a sudden disgust, that should urge you to take a
step, that should be attended by perseverance, to be respectable.

If envy, pride, severity, or a lurking love of the world's amusements, haunt
your solitude, your vocation is false.

We have, to almost every one of us, some part allotted in the chain of
society, that will not permit us to detach ourselves entirely from it.

Supposing your retreat authorized by your position, obey each call of
friendship or duty, that may demand you to abandon it for a time.

If you shall be conscious you have well acquitted yourself in the world whilst
you were connected with it, your retirement will be doubly pleasant.

A degree of knowledge in gardening and farming, with due attention to
economy, will ^ave you from weariness of mind, and preserve your health of
body.

Let no servile imitations of fashions in the world corrupt the modes of a
country life, and subvert its end, which should be that of preparation for
another.

Rather prefer some hours of solitude, to the passing them with a set of
people, who would either despise your regularity, or, by forcing you out of it,
destroy your happiness.

Keep up your politeness -- your neatness: -- contract no formality; but pursue
the rules you have laid down, with firmness, yet with case.

Receive your inferior neighbors with good humor and complacency, nor sigh nor
sicken at conversation that situation must furnish.

An unpolished expression or an unfashionable dress should never excite anger
or contempt in you, pro^^^ded the hearts of your society are untainted.

Put yourself, as much as you can, on a level wi^^ your neighbors, nor draw
the younger part, who^^ fortunes will not admit of it, into frivolous expenses,
and idle imitation of changeable fashions.

Do not continually quote the magnificence (...) earlier days, nor those
pleasures impossible to share in your present situation.

Consider, your judgment of persons and their qualities, may be somewhat
influenced by age, sickness, or disappointments; imperfection did, and will
exist, as long as this world shall last.

Your society will more respect you for your propriety of conduct, after all
the vicissitudes of fortune you may have experienced, than for the vain
descriptions of beauty or of grandeur that are past.

Listen to the distresses, attend to the maladies of the poor; endeavor to
mitigate the one, and heal the other.

Not only administer to the health of poor people, but encourage their industry

Superintend the instruction of the poorer sort; intermix nothing of
magnificence in your support of them.

Encourage reading among the younger poor, no farther than as it shall inform
them of their duty to God and man.

A very few precepts, and much good example, to persons without education, are
the surest methods of encouraging virtue among them.

Let your pecuniary aids be distributed with discretion.

In the payment of labor, consider the limits of ^^^ers' fortune, should your
own be superior.

Let none share your bounty, whose conduct and ^^^racter do not merit it; but
abandon them not, (...) you can hope for their reformation.

There is a pious kind of anger, that does sometimes so blend itself with
female charity, as is a ^heck to gratitude, even in the acceptance of gifts.

Experience in the use of drugs may much contribute to the safety of poor
objects, above all, those who have slight indispositions; but a smattering in
physic is rather a dangerous tool in female hands.

Apply to the mind, as well as body, of such indigent persons who shall implore
your assistance: examine into the causes of their unhappy state; a small
donation and a kind expression will save many a sufferer from sickness and
despair.

Let each year, which shall steal a charm or a grace, the companions of your
youth, add a virtue in return.

The decay of beauty is perhaps one of the most sensible trials that female
temper can experience; ^early endeavor to prevent its consequences, by
throwing your thoughts on mental acquirements.

Substitute extreme neatness to ornament, in advanced age, gentleness to
vivacity, humility to vanity.

The beauties of nature, a healthful walk, a rising and setting fun, the
prosperity and perfections of your descendants, will amply replace, in your
mind, the pleasures and pursuits of your younger years, too (...) checked by
misfortune, and destroyed by disappointments.

Let those hands, once perhaps too much occupied in arranging and placing
personal ornam^^^ busy themselves in forming raiment for the (...) in spinning
and knitting for such ends, consolat^^^ reflections will attend your labors.

Encourage every innocent amusement among those yet capable of tasting them;
exclude (...) music or the dance from your society, particular in the country.

Be sparing of your reflections in youthful societies they are often
misinterpreted, and ascribed to regret and envy.

When ready to censure the present day call over your own conduct in a former
one; and candid^^ examine your title to decisive condemnation of trifling
indiscretion.

Persuasion will hang on the voice of good nature and benevolence: employ no
other means to influence and lead young persons to prudence and virtue.

Render yourself the confidant, and not the tyrant, of your acquaintance; they
will fly from severity: humanity will attract them.

If in any wise entitled to counsel, or to correct, make use of some recent and
forcible example, which are the production of almost every day.

Be not arbitrary on the point of dress among your female society: it suffices,
if you observe a proper decorum yourself in that article.

Lament not the desertion of certain persons, whose friendship and opinion you
once relied on; you are better without them, if their former attentions were
derived from your opulence or connexions.

That too common and illiberal behavior, among the young and unthinking,
toward the old and unhappy, which, in large companies, it may be your (...) to
encounter, is only to be avoided, by contract^^^ the circle of your
acquaintance; and surely (...) cannot be deemed a hardship by good sense and
experience.

Do not shun the afflicted; there are dispositions (...) the world, who,
looking on sorrow as contagious, ^^come inhuman through fear.

Listen to tales of woe, with gratitude on your own ^ccount, compassion for the
sufferers.

Profit of others misfortunes or mistakes, as a correction to your pride, and a
guard to your steps.

Abstain from all uncharitable comments on the reports of the misconduct of the
world; be grateful to that Providence which has conducted you into the
harbor; and commiserate the storms your fellow creatures are exposed to.

Endeavor to put a favorable interpretation on all uncertain rumors, when to
the disadvantage of ^^temporaries: in such obscurity, it appertains only to
omniscience to discover, omnipotence to judge.

Use your strongest efforts, to detach yourself from, and, in a certain degree,
to abate in your affections toward all perishable objects.

Vanity, in declining years, is often substituted to ^^ndere^ passions: support
of family, the pride of name, are shadows that will dissolve and vanish like
yourself.

When real affection reigns, no mode of reasoning will be more prevailing for
consolation, than this of the certainty, that the object of it is doomed to
submit to the general laws of God, and nature.

To young persons, the death of cotemporaries is the most speaking lesson they
can receive

If you lose your companions late in life, if they shall have merited the
esteem of good people, pursue their paths in order to rejoin them.

During such afflictions as are confined to yourself seek not relief from the
dissipated and unfeeling world; nor, till you can control your sorrows, expose
them to insensibility, if not derision.

The most probable diversion to acute afflicted will be your exertions in the
service of your fellows creatures.

Suffer no peevishness to intermix itself with trouble; it is a species of
revolt against the decrees of Providence.

Betray no kind of impatience at the awkward efforts of unskilful acquaintance,
in the article of consolation.

You will meet, among indifferent spectators of misfortune, a certain hard and
prying look, which seems to seek for such causes of it, as may save their
compassion, and authorize their censure.

The only disappointment you can inflict on impertinent curiosity, is the
concealment of your sensations.

Mention death neither with horror nor contempt.

By beginning early to permit the intrusion of the subject of mortality some
few moments in each day, you will meet death with more serenity.

It is great temerity to be calling for that, the sudden approach of which may
not find you prepared, or obstruct your preparation.

To wish for a cessation of pain, or mental misery, is surely allowable; but it
is presumption to use importunity in requesting it.

It is too customary, with the soothing voice of (...), and among the
companions of youth, to (...) silent on a subject that cannot continue a
secret, (...) of which too sudden a revealment must strike (...) redoubled
terror.

^^are the deceased of your acquaintance, if even, ^^ing their lives, they may
have merited, your resentment.

Collect together each virtue of the dead; and, when the remembrance of their
faults will arise, think of your own.

If conviction and conscience will not allow of (...), keep silence.

When it is in your power to soften the harsh co^^^ wont to be bestowed by
cowardly minds (...) characters of the dead, pursue the dictates (...)
Christianity with firmness, should they have (...) merely acquaintance.

When the reputation of a worthy and departed ^^nd shall be attacked, repel the
assault with co^^^^; those have, alas! few champions, who can (...) longer
reward, no longer punish.

If it were ever justifiable, a breach of promise ^^^uld become so, which would
release you from ^^^ing any circumstances a secret in the life of a (...)
friend, which their modesty had exacted (...) you to conceal, but which could
erase suspicion, (...) wipe away reproach by revealment.

Extend your kindness, and continue your affection to all that shall remain of
those you loved; if worthy, it is the only sure mode of consolation you ^an
have recourse to.

That natural repugnance, which attends the thoughts of death, has surely been
(...) our minds, in order to inspire us with prudent (...) in the conduct of
our lives: accompany your attention to the one, by a calm submission to the
other.

When you, in your day, shall be compelled (...) submit to the universal law,
the recollection (...) having contributed to mitigate others sufferings (...)
soften your own.

In grief, sickness, and danger, make your (...) and constant application to
that power, which al^^^ can relieve and save.

Let your conduct be such to all around you, (...) shall lead them to the same
path without (...).

If your strength of mind subsists, during your malady, if it gives you time
for the exertion of rational power, let it check, as much as possible those
encroaching indulgencies which sickness (...) exact.

The ceremonies, which friendly zeal usually observes, and respectful decency
requires about the sick, are often as terrific as the sickness itself; those of
religion excepted, which will prove your only safe support and consolation.

Be assured, that when able to exert your cheerfulness, it is in no wise
contrary to the precepts of religion.

Let your counsels to children or friends, at such a period, be tempered with
gentleness and charity.

Let the patience of your behavior, in the hour (...) to your dependants and
servants, for (...) your situation have occasioned them.

(...) your (...) habitually on immortality, to pass (...) through the pangs of
mortality.

(...) and, humble resignation will secure (...) most awful of moments, that of
(...) dissolution.

FINIS.

